DAWN OF THE DEAD ( 2004 FILM )
Dawn of the Dead is a 2004 American action horror film directed by Zack Snyder ( in his feature film directorial debut ) , produced by Richard P. Rubinstein , Marc Abraham and by Eric Newman and the screenplay written by James Gunn with the special effects for the film were done by Heather Langenkamp and David LeRoy Anderson , who co - own AFX Studio .
It is the remake of George A. Romero 's 1978 film , and stars Sarah Polley , Ving Rhames , Jake Weber , and Mekhi Phifer .
Its plot centers on a handful of human survivors living in a shopping mall located in the fictional town of Everett , Wisconsin , surrounded by swarms of zombies .
Ty Burrell , Michael Kelly , Kevin Zegers , and Lindy Booth play supporting roles ; the original 's cast members Ken Foree , Scott Reiniger , and Tom Savini appear in cameos .
The film was released by Universal Pictures on March 19 , 2004 .
The film grossed $ 102 million worldwide against a budget of $ 26 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After finishing a long shift as a nurse , Ana returns to her suburban neighborhood and her husband , Luis .
Caught up in a scheduled date night , they miss an emergency news bulletin .
The next morning , a neighborhood girl enters their bedroom and kills Luis , who immediately reanimates as a zombie and attacks Ana .
She flees in her car , crashes , and passes out .
Upon waking , Ana joins police sergeant Kenneth Hall , electronics salesman Michael , petty criminal Andre and his pregnant wife , Luda .
They break into a nearby mall and are attacked by a zombified security guard , who scratches Luda .
Three living guards — C.J. , Bart , and Terry — make them surrender their weapons in exchange for refuge .
They split into groups to secure the mall .
On the roof , they see another survivor , Andy , who is stranded in his gun store across the zombie - infested parking lot .
The next day , a delivery truck carrying more survivors enters the lot , pursued by zombies .
C.J. and Bart wish to turn them away but are overruled and disarmed .
The newcomers include Norma , Steve , Tucker , Monica , Glen , Frank and his daughter , Nicole .
Another woman is too ill to walk ; she is wheeled inside via wheelbarrow , only to die and reanimate .
After she is killed , the group determines the disease is passed by bites .
Andre leaves to see Luda , who has kept her scratch hidden from the group .
They realize that Frank has been bitten and is a potential threat .
After some debate , Frank elects to be isolated .
When he dies and turns , Kenneth shoots him .
Kenneth and Andy start a friendship by way of messages written on a whiteboard ; romance also buds between Ana and Michael , and Nicole and Terry .
When the power goes out , CJ , Bart , Michael and Kenneth go to the parking garage to activate the emergency generator ; they find a friendly dog and worry about a breach .
Zombies attack and kill Bart , forcing the others to douse the zombies in gas and set them ablaze .
Meanwhile , Luda — tied up by Andre — gives birth and dies .
She reanimates as Norma checks on the couple .
When Norma kills the zombified Luda , Andre snaps ; they exchange gunfire and both are killed .
The others arrive to find a zombie baby , which they kill immediately .
The group decides to fight their way to the local marina and travel on Steve 's yacht to an island on Lake Michigan .
They reinforce two shuttle buses from the parking garage for their escape .
To rescue Andy , the group straps supplies onto the dog , Chips , and lower him into the parking lot ; the zombies have no interest in him .
Chips enters Andy 's store safely , but a zombie follows through the dog door .
Nicole , fond of Chips , crashes the delivery truck into the gun store , where she is trapped by a zombified Andy .
Kenneth , Michael , Tucker , Terry , and C.J. reach the gun store via the sewers , kill Andy , and rescue Nicole .
They grab ammunition and go back to the mall ; along the way , Tucker breaks his legs , and C.J shoots him out of mercy .
Once inside , they are unable to lock the door , forcing an evacuation via the buses .
While navigating through the city , Glen loses control of a chainsaw , accidentally killing himself and Monica ; blood splatters on the windshield , causing their bus to crash .
Steve tries to flee on his own , but is ambushed by a zombie .
While C.J. , Kenneth , and Terry look for survivors , Ana kills the zombified Steve and retrieves his boat keys .
At the marina , C.J sacrifices himself so the others can escape .
Michael , after revealing a bite wound , kills himself as Ana , Kenneth , Nicole , Terry , and Chips flee on the yacht .
Footage from a camcorder found on the boat shows Steve 's escapades before the outbreak and concludes as the group runs out of supplies , arrives at an island , and is attacked by a swarm of zombies .
The camcorder drops , leaving their fate unknown .
CAST * Sarah Polley as Ana Clark
* Ving Rhames as Kenneth Hall
* Jake Weber as Michael * Mekhi Phifer as Andre * Lindy Booth as Nicole * Kevin Zegers as Terry
* Michael Kelly as C.J.
* Ty Burrell as Steve Marcus * Kim Poirier as Monica
* R. D. Reid as Glen
* Inna Korobkina as Luda
* Michael Barry as Bart * Jayne Eastwood as Norma
* Boyd Banks as Tucker * Matt Frewer as Frank * Bruce Bohne as Andy * Louis Ferreira as Luis Clark
* Hannah Lochner as Vivian * Ermes Blarasin as Bloated Woman
* Ken Foree as TV Evangelist
* Tom Savini as Sheriff Cahill
* Scott Reiniger as The General PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Plans to remake George A. Romero 's 1978 cult horror film
Dawn of the Dead was conceived by producer Eric Newman .
A fan of the original film , Newman offered Strike Entertainment 's Marc Abraham to produce the remake with him , which Abraham accepted .
He and Abraham secured the rights to the film after it was handed over by Richard P. Rubinstein , the original 's producer .
Rubinstein stated that he finally agreed to grant the rights after several years because he was worried " that somewhere along the way a studio would sanitize Newman 's vision for producing a version with ' attitude ' , " as Romero 's film was independently produced .
In addition , the producer was impressed by Abraham 's " long track record in keeping the creative integrity of the studio distributed films he has produced intact " .
Newman and Abraham said that the new Dawn of the Dead is more of a " re - envisioning " of Romero 's film which is geared toward younger audiences who had not seen the original .
Newman stated that the production 's goal is " to make the old fans happy and make a lot of new fans .
Because that 's the only reason we are doing it . "
He cited his favorite classic horror films Invasion of the Body Snatchers ( 1978 ) , The Thing ( 1982 ) , and The Fly ( 1986 ) as cinematic influences , explaining that these had " some amazing updates " which " add to rather than diminish the original films " .
In search of a screenwriter , Rubinstein hired James Gunn , an avid fan of the original , who began writing a draft .
Michael Tolkin and Scott Frank were brought in for rewriting after Gunn left the project to concentrate on ( 2004 ) .
Rubinstein stated that Tolkin further developed the characters while Frank provided some of the bigger , upbeat action scenes .
FILMING AND DESIGN Section::::Filming and design .
Principal photography lasted nearly three months , in the period from June 9 to September 6 , 2003 , on location in various parts of Toronto , Ontario , Canada .
Director Zack Snyder storyboarded the film extensively .
Andrew Neskoromny supervised the production design , which included the construction of the fictional mall dubbed as " Crossroads Mall " .
Neskoromny researched malls that were scheduled to be demolished in such countries as Romania , Japan , and the United Kingdom , but yielded no results .
In Canada , however , the crew had located the defunct Thornhill Square shopping mall in Thornhill , Ontario , the area of which measured approximately , and eventually used this location .
The crew completely renovated the structure over an eight - week period ; the remodeled mall included , among other things , an expensive water feature near the entrance , 14 individually designed stores , parking structures and warehouse areas .
According to Snyder , the stores had to be renamed as Starbucks and numerous other corporations refused to let their names be used ( save for Roots and Panasonic ) : " People were like '
do we want to be in this movie where blood gets sprayed all over our thing ?
I do n't think so . '
" Some of these names were references to the 1978 version ; the upscale department store Gaylen Ross was named after its co - star Gaylen Ross , while Wooley 's Diner echoes Jim Baffico 's character role Wooley . RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In the United Kingdom , Dawn of the Dead and Shaun of the Dead were originally scheduled to be released the same week , but due to the similarity in the names of the two films and plot outline , UIP opted to push back Shaun release by two weeks .
It was screened out of competition at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival .
The film grossed $ 59 million at the US box office and $ 102 million worldwide .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes offers the film a 75 % approval rating from 185 critics and an average rating of 6.7/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " A kinetic , violent and surprisingly worthy remake of George Romero 's horror classic that pays homage to the original while working on its own terms . "
The film also has a score of 59 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 37 critics indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore during opening weekend gave the film an average grade of " B " on a scale ranging from A+ to F. Roger Ebert
said the film " works and it delivers just about what you expect when you buy your ticket " but felt that it " lacks the mordant humor of the Romero version " and the " plot flatlines compared to the 1978 version , which was trickier , wittier and smarter . "
Scott Foundas of Variety described it as an unnecessary remake that will appeal mostly to young adult audiences who have not seen the original film .
Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that the film " has no patience for such subtleties " as Romero 's thematic concerns or suspense - building .
Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times wrote , " Mr. Snyder 's blood feast is strictly by the numbers : this second - rater could be the world 's most expensive Troma film . "
Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Good zombie fun , the remake of George A. Romero 's " Dawn of the Dead " is the best proof in ages that cannibalizing old material sometimes works fiendishly well . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote , " Instead , the new " Dawn of the Dead " satirizes itself and satirizes its genre , and , on its own unambitious terms , the movie succeeds .
It 's silly , witty and good - natured , not scary so much as icky , and not horrifying or horrible but consistently amusing . "
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly rated it " A " and wrote , " Commercial director Zack Snyder , making a killer feature debut , trades homemade cheesiness for knowing style , revels in the sophistication of modern special effects , and stomps off with the best remake – er , " re - envisioning " – of a horror classic in memory .
"
Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club wrote that the remake streamlines the original film " by discarding everything special about it in favor of pure visceral effect " .
Bloody Disgusting ranked the film eighth in their list of the " Top 20 Horror Films of the Decade " , with the article saying " Truly , you can analogize the two films [ original and remake ] based on their zombies alone – where Romero 's lumbered and took their time ( in a good way ) ,
Snyder 's came at us , fast , with teeth bared like rabid dogs .
"
Rolling Stone ranked it # 3 in their " Top 10 Best Zombie Movies " .
It was third in Dread Central 's " Best Horror Films of the Decade " .
George A. Romero said , " It was better than I expected . ...
The first 15 , 20 minutes were terrific , but it sort of lost its reason for being .
It was more of a video game .
I 'm not terrified of things running at me ; it 's like Space Invaders .
There was nothing going on underneath . "
South Park parodied the film in the episode , " Night of the Living Homeless " .
The show 's creators , Trey Parker and Matt Stone , called the film " amazing " in the episode 's DVD commentary .
COMPARISONS TO THE ORIGINAL Section::::Comparisons to the original .
In the original film , the zombies moved very slowly and were most menacing when they collected in large groups .
In the remake , the zombies are fast and agile .
Many admirers of the original , as well as Romero himself , protested this change , feeling that it limited the impact of the undead .
This is somewhat borne out by the fact that the remake has almost no close - up shots of zombies that last more than a second or two .
Snyder mentions this in the commentary track of the remake 's DVD , pointing out that they seem too human when the camera lingers upon them for longer .
However , it was for this change that Wizard Magazine ranked the zombies # 5 on their " 100 Greatest Villains Ever " list .
The original had a smaller cast than the remake , allowing more screen time for each character .
Many fans and critics criticized the resulting loss of character development .
In the original version , the story unfolds over several months , indicated by the advancing stages of Fran 's pregnancy .
In the remake , the events transpire within approximately one month , as evidenced by the supplemental feature
The Lost Tape : Andy 's Terrifying Last Days Revealed , located on the DVD in the special features section .
Another big change from the original is that unlike Romero , Snyder treats zombification more like a disease , pointing to the bites as the source , instead of anyone who is dead turning into a zombie .
Three actors from the original film have cameos in the remake , appearing on the televisions the survivors watch : Ken Foree , who played Peter from the original , plays an evangelist who asserts that God is punishing mankind ; Scott H. Reiniger , who played Roger in the original , plays an army general telling everyone to stay at home for safety ; and Tom Savini , who did the special effects for many of Romero 's films and played the motorcycle gang member Blades in the original Dawn of the Dead , plays the Monroeville Sheriff explaining the only way to kill the zombies is to " shoot 'em in the head " .
Monroeville is also the location of the mall used in the 1978 film .
In addition , a store shown in the mall is called " Gaylen Ross " , an obvious tribute to actress Gaylen Ross , who played Francine in the original film .
In the beginning of the film , a helicopter that is very similar to the one in the original flies across the screen .
In The Zombie Encyclopedia , Volume 2 , academic Peter Dendle said that the original film " served as a bridge between the talky , slow - paced 1970s horror and the fast - paced splatter to come in the 1980s " , whereas the 2004 remake " generally forsakes slow - mounting suspense in favor of frenetic action " .
CANCELLED SEQUEL
Section::::Cancelled sequel .
A sequel was planned but was later cancelled .
Zack Snyder stated that he would only be producing the sequel instead of reprising his role as the director due to working on Watchmen when he announced the film .
The script of Army of the Dead was written by Zack Snyder and Joby Harold .
Filming for Army of the Dead was to start once they got a director as the producing studios had approved the script .
Also according to Deborah Snyder , the film was set in Las Vegas , and the town had to be contained to stop the outbreak of zombies .
The film 's producing studios were Universal Studios ( who released the first ) and Warner Bros. Entertainment ( who have released all of Snyder 's films starting with 300 ) and the film was set to be directed by Matthijs van Heijningen Jr. , director of The Thing , the 2011 prequel to John Carpenter 's 1982 cult classic of the same name .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS