ST .
BERNARD ( DOG )
The St. Bernard or St Bernard ( , ) is a breed of very large working dog from the western Alps in Italy and Switzerland .
They were originally bred for rescue by the hospice of the Great St Bernard Pass on the Italian - Swiss border .
The hospice , built by and named after Italian monk Bernard of Menthon , acquired its first dogs between 1660 and 1670 .
The breed has become famous through tales of alpine rescues , as well as for its enormous size .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
The St. Bernard is a giant dog .
The average weight of the breed is between or more , and the approximate height at the withers is .
The coat can be either smooth or rough ; the smooth coat being close and flat while the rough is dense , flat , and more profuse around the neck and legs .
The colour is typically a red shade with white , or a mahogany brindle with white .
Black shading is usually found on the face and ears .
The tail is long and heavy , hanging low .
Eyes are usually brown , but sometimes can be icy blue , and should have naturally tight lids , with haws only slightly visible .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The ancestors of the St. Bernard share a history with the Sennenhunds .
The St. Bernard , also called Alpine Mountain Dogs or Alpine Cattle Dogs , are the large farm dogs of the farmers and dairymen of most notably the French Alps , livestock guardians , herding dogs , and draft dogs as well as hunting dogs , search and rescue dogs , and watchdogs .
These dogs are thought to be descendants of molosser type dogs brought into the Alps by the ancient Romans , and the St. Bernard is recognized internationally today as one of the Molossoid breeds .
The earliest written records of the St. Bernard breed are from monks at the Great St Bernard Hospice at the Great St. Bernard Pass in 1707 , with paintings and drawings of the dog dating even earlier .
The first evidence that the dogs were in use at the monastery is in two paintings dating to 1690 by Italian artist Salvator Rosa .
The most famous St. Bernard to save people at the pass was Barry ( sometimes spelled Berry ) , who reportedly saved somewhere between 40 and 100 lives .
There is a monument to Barry in the Cimetière des Chiens , and his body was preserved in the Natural History Museum in Berne .
Another famous dog was Rutor , the faithful companion of the Italian priest , who was named after the peak Tête du Rutor located above the Little St Bernard pass .
The classic St. Bernard looked very different from the St. Bernard of today because of cross - breeding .
Severe winters from 1816 to 1818 led to increased numbers of avalanches , killing many of the dogs used for breeding while they were performing rescues .
In an attempt to preserve the breed , the remaining St. Bernards were crossed with Newfoundlands brought from the Colony of Newfoundland in the 1850s , and so lost much of their use as rescue dogs in the snowy climate of the alps because the long fur they inherited would freeze and weigh them down .
The dogs never received any special training from the monks .
Instead , younger dogs would learn how to perform search and rescue operations from older dogs .
The Swiss St. Bernard Club was founded in Basel on 15 March 1884 .
The St. Bernard was the very first breed entered into the Swiss Stud Book in 1884 , and the breed standard was finally approved in 1888 .
Since then , the breed has been a Swiss national dog .
The dogs at the St Bernard hospice were working dogs that were smaller than today 's show St Bernard 's dogs .
Originally about the size of a German Shepherd Dog , the St Bernard grew to the size of today 's dog as kennel clubs and dog shows emphasized appearance over the dog 's working ability , along with a closed stud book .
An open stud book would have allowed breeders to correct such errors by breeding in Working dogs of other dog breeds .
NAMING
Section::::Naming .
The name " St. Bernard " originates from the Great St. Bernard Hospice , a traveler 's hospice on the often treacherous Great St. Bernard Pass in the Western Alps , between Switzerland and Italy .
The pass , the lodge , and the dogs are named for Bernard of Menthon , the 11th century Italian monk who established the station .
" St. Bernard " was not in widespread use until the middle of the 19th century .
The dogs were called " Saint Dogs " , " Noble Steeds " , " Alpenmastiff " , or " Barry Dogs " before that time .
RELATED BREEDS
Section::::Related breeds .
The breed is strikingly similar to the English Mastiff , with which it shares a common ancestor known as the Alpine Mastiff .
The modern St. Bernard breed is radically different than the original dogs kept at the St. Bernard hospice , most notably by being much larger in size and build .
Since the late 1800s , the St. Bernard breed has been ever refined and improved using many different large Molosser breeds , including the Newfoundland , Great Pyrenees , Greater Swiss Mountain Dog , Bernese Mountain Dog , Great Dane , English Mastiff , and possibly the Tibetan Mastiff and Caucasian Ovcharka .
Other breeds such as the Rottweiler , Boxer , and English Bulldog may have contributed to the St. Bernard 's bloodline as well .
It is suspected that many of these large breeds were used to redevelop each other to combat the threat of their extinction after World War II , which may explain why all of them played a part in the creation of the St. Bernard as seen today .
The four Sennenhund breeds , the Grosser Schweizer Sennenhund ( Greater Swiss Mountain Dog ) , the Berner Sennenhund , ( Bernese Mountain Dog ) , the Appenzeller Sennenhund , ( Appenzeller ) , and the Entlebucher Sennenhund ( Entlebucher Mountain Dog ) are similar in appearance and share the same location and history , but are tricolor rather than red and white .
The Russian army kennels crossbreed St Bernards with Caucasian Ovcharka to produce the Moscow Watchdogs that are still used as military service dogs in Russia today .
St Bernards have in common many characteristics of other Mountain dog breeds .
KENNEL CLUB RECOGNITION Section::::Kennel Club recognition .
The St. Bernard is recognised internationally by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale as a Molosser in Group 2 , Section 2 .
The breed is recognised by The Kennel Club ( UK ) , the Canadian Kennel Club , and the American Kennel Club in the Working Dog breed group .
The United Kennel Club in the United States places the breed in the Guardian Dog Group .
The New Zealand Kennel Club and the Australian National Kennel Council place the breed in the Utility Group MODERN ACTIVITIES - GREAT ST BERNARD & LITTLE ST BERNARD PASS Section::::Modern activities - Great St Bernard & Little St Bernard Pass .
St. Bernard dogs are no longer used for Alpine rescues , the last recorded instance of which was in 1955 .
As late as 2004 , the Great St Bernard Hospice still retained 18 of the dogs for reasons of tradition and sentiment .
In that year the Barry Foundation created breeding kennels for the breed at the town of Martigny down the Great Saint Bernard Pass , and purchased the remaining dogs from the Hospice .
During the summer months each year a number of the animals are temporarily relocated from Martigny to the Hospice for viewing by tourists .
An annual celebration of the breed takes place on the Little Saint Bernard Pass and at the town of Rosières - Montvalzan on the French side .
Saint Bernard dog enthusiasts and breeders gather for a dog show and parades .
The animals bred by the Foundation are trained to participate in a variety of dog sports including carting and weight pulling .
The dogs at the Barry Foundation are reportedly smaller than the average St Bernard .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
The very fast growth rate and the weight of a St. Bernard can lead to very serious deterioration of the bones if the dog does not get proper food and exercise .
Many dogs are genetically affected by hip dysplasia or elbow dysplasia .
Osteosarcoma ( bone cancer ) has been shown to be hereditary in the breed .
They are susceptible to eye disorders called entropion and ectropion , in which the eyelid turns in or out .
The breed standard indicates that this is a major fault .
The breed is also susceptible to epilepsy and seizures , a heart disease called dilated cardiomyopathy , and eczema .
US and UK breed clubs put the average lifespan for a St. Bernard at 8–10 years .
A 2003 Danish breed survey ( 35 dogs ) puts the median lifespan at 9.5 years while a UK breed survey in 2004 ( 53 dogs ) puts the median lifespan at 7 years .
In the UK survey about one in five lived to > 10 years with the longest lived dog at 12 years and 9 months .
A study of genetically related polyneuropathy in the breed was conducted .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
Known as a classic example of a Gentle Giant , the Saint Bernard is calm , patient and sweet with adults , and especially children .
However St. Bernards , like all very large dogs , must be well socialized with people and other dogs in order to prevent fearfulness and any possible aggression or territoriality .
The biggest threat to small children is being knocked over by this breed 's larger size .
Overall they are a sweet , gentle , calm , loyal and affectionate breed , and if socialized are very friendly .
Because of its large adult size , it is essential that proper training and socialization begin while the St. Bernard is still a puppy , so as to avoid the difficulties that normally accompany training large dogs .
An unruly St. Bernard may present problems for even a strong adult , so control needs to be asserted from the beginning of the dog 's training .
While generally not instinctively protective , a St. Bernard may bark at strangers , and their size makes them good deterrents against possible intruders .
The Saint Bernard was bred to be a working companion and to this day the St . Bernard lives to please its master and is an amiable yet hard worker .
St .
Bernards have retained their natural ability for scent work and depending on the skill of the trainer and the talents of the dog , St. Bernards can participate in tracking events or even become involved in search and rescue work .
NOTABILITY
RECORD SIZE
Section::::Notability .
Section::::Record size .
St. Bernards were exported to England in the mid-19th century , where they were bred with mastiffs to create an even larger dog .
Plinlimmon , a famous St. Bernard of the time , was measured at 95 kg ( 210 lbs ) and 87.5 cm ( 34ins ) , and was sold to an American for $ 7000 .
Commercial pressure encouraged breeding ever larger dogs until " the dogs became so gross that they had difficulties in getting from one end of a show ring to another " .
An 1895 New York Times report mentions a St. Bernard named Major F. measuring in length , who , if the claims are true , would be the longest dog in history .
Another St. Bernard named Benedictine V Schwarzwald Hof ( Pierson , Michigan - USA )
also reached , which earned a place in the 1981 edition of the Guinness Book of World Records .
IN MEDIA Section::::In media .
St. Bernards are often portrayed , especially in old live action comedies such as Swiss Miss , the TV series Topper , and classic cartoons , wearing small barrels of brandy around their necks .
Avalanche victims supposedly drank the brandy to stay warm while awaiting rescue , although this is medically unsound .
The monks of the St. Bernard Hospice deny that any St. Bernard has ever carried casks or small barrels around their necks ; they attribute the image to an 1820 painting by Edwin Landseer , perhaps Alpine Mastiffs Reanimating a Distressed Traveler ( which became a popular engraving in 1831 by Charles Landseer ) .
The monks did keep casks around for photographs by tourists .
There was apparently at least one dog that really did carry brandy .
In The Percy Anecdotes , by Thomas Byerley , published in 1823 , the following anecdote appears , and was often quoted in other books in the 19th century :
The breed of dogs kept by the monks to assist them ... has been long celebrated for its sagacity and fidelity .
All the oldest and most tried of them were lately buried , along with some unfortunate travellers , under a valanche [ sic ] ; but three or four hopeful puppies were left at home in the convent , and still survive .
The most celebrated of those who are no more , was a dog called Barry .
This animal served the hospital for the space of twelve years , during which time he saved the lives of forty individuals .
His zeal was indefatigable .
Whenever the mountain was enveloped in fogs and snow , he set out in search of lost travellers .
He was accustomed to run barking until he lost breath , and would frequently venture on the most perilous places .
When he found his strength was insufficient to draw from the snow a traveller benumbed with cold , he would run back to the hospital in search of the monks … .
When old age deprived him of strength , the Prior of the Convent pensioned him at Berney , by way of reward .
After his death , his hide was stuffed and deposited in the museum of that town .
The little phial , in which he carried a reviving liquor for the distressed travellers whom he found among the mountains , is still suspended from his neck .
A Punch magazine cartoon from 1949 depicts a man with a St. Bernard and several puppies , all of which are wearing neck casks .
The man explains , " Of course , I only breed them for the brandy . "
A frequent joke in old MGM and Warner Brothers shorts is to depict the dogs as compulsive alcoholics who engage in frequent nips from their own casks .
FAMOUS ST .
BERNARDS
* Bachelor , Resident Dog , The Ritz - Carlton , Bachelor Gulch
* Burtonswood ( Bossy Boots ) .
English and Irish Crufts Supreme Champion ( 1974 ) , Breeder was the late Miss Marjorie Hinds .
* Bamse , a Norwegian dog honoured for exploits during World War II on memorial statue in Montrose , Scotland where he died in 1944 .
Also awarded the PDSA Gold Medal for animal bravery
* Barry , famous Alpine rescue dog
* Bernie , mascot of the Colorado Avalanche * Bernie " Saint " Bernard , mascot of the saints in Dubuque * Bernie , mascot of the Northampton Saints
* Gumbo , team mascot for the New Orleans Saints * Porthos , J.M. Barrie 's dog
* Schnorbitz , on - stage partner of British comedian Bernie Winters during his later career
* Schotzie & Schotzie " 02 " , beloved pets and mascots of Cincinnati Reds ' owner * Scipio Saint Bernard of Orville Wright(Wayback Machine )
* Shirley Temple and a St. Bernard friend
* Wallace ( currently Wallace VI ) , mascot of The Canadian Scottish Regiment
( Princess Mary 's ) FICTIONAL DOGS * Båtsman , a St. Bernard in Astrid Lindgren 's story
Vi
på Saltkråkan *
Beethoven ( from the movie series of the same name )
The 1992 comedy film Beethoven features a large , friendly but troublesome St. Bernard and , in later sequels , his mate and their brood of unruly pups .
According to the producers of the sequel Beethoven 's 2nd , the St. Bernards used in the film grew so fast during filming that over 100 St. Bernard puppies were cast to portray the sequel 's four puppies ( Tchaikovsky , Chubby , Dolly , and Mo ) and a mother St. Bernard named Missy .
* Bolivar a / k / a Bornworthy and Bernie , Donald Duck 's non - anthropomorphic pet , and Bolivar 's son , Behemoth * Buck , from Jack London 's 1903 novel , The Call of the Wild , is described as half St. Bernard and half " Scotch shepherd dog " , but was rendered as full St. Bernard in at least one of the six movie versions .
* Cujo , a dog who had his friendly demeanor ruthlessly taken from him by rabies and becomes crazed , terrorizing the residents of the fictional town of Castle Rock , Maine from the 1981 Stephen King novel Cujo and the 1983 film of the same name .
* George , from the 1971 movie and its 1972–74 spinoff television series .
* Josef , from the Japanese anime series Heidi , Girl of the Alps ( Alps no Shoujo Heidi ) .
* Nana , in the Disney and Columbia Pictures Peter Pan movies ( but a Newfoundland in J.M. Barrie 's original play and novel )
* Neil , the martini - slurping St. Bernard of George and Marion Kerby in the 1950s television series Topper .
This was a follow up to Topper , Topper Takes a Trip , and Topper Returns.\
* Sumo , a St. Bernard belonging to Lt .
Hank Anderson in the video game .
* Unnamed " faithful hound " who discovers the frozen body of a traveller bearing " a banner with a strange device " attempting to cross the Saint Bernard Pass in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's poem " Excelsior " .
LEGEND Section::::Legend .
The famous St. Bernard dog Barry found a small boy in the snow and persuaded the boy to climb on his back , and then carried the boy to safety .
SEE ALSO
* Dog sports
BIBLIOGRAPHY
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
* Hyde , W. W. , ' The Great St. Bernard Pass and its Hospice ' , in Isis , vol .
27 , 1937 , pp .
306–320 , Available on JStor EXTERNAL LINKS