DINERS CLUB
INTERNATIONAL Diners Club International ( DCI ) , founded as Diners Club , is a charge card company owned by Discover Financial Services .
Formed in 1950 by Frank X. McNamara , Ralph Schneider , Matty Simmons , and Alfred Bloomingdale , it was the first independent credit card company in the world , and it established the concept of a self - sufficient company producing credit cards for travel and entertainment .
Diners Club International and its franchises service individuals from around the globe with operations in 59 countries .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
The idea for Diners Club was conceived at the Majors Cabin Grill restaurant in New York City in 1949 .
Diners Club cofounder Frank McNamara was dining with clients and realized he had left his wallet in another suit .
His wife paid the tab , and McNamara thought of a multipurpose charge card as a way to avoid similar embarrassments in the future .
He discussed the idea with the restaurant owner at the table , and the following day with his lawyer Ralph Schneider and friend Alfred Bloomingdale .
McNamara returned to the same restaurant the following February , in 1950 , and paid for his meal using a cardboard charge card and a signature .
The story became well - known , Diners Club official history referring to this meal as " The First Supper " even though , as stated following , some disputed accounts refer to it actually having been a lunch , and is credited by historians as the beginnings of contemporary credit .
Various versions of the story differ about whether it was a lunch or dinner at which McNamara forgot his wallet , and whether the bill was paid on loan or McNamara waited for his wife to drive his wallet to him .
Some journalists later credited Alfred Bloomingdale with the idea for Diners Club .
McNamara and his attorney , Ralph Schneider , founded Diners Club International on February 8 , 1950 , with $ 1.5 million in initial capital .
Alfred Bloomingdale joined briefly , then started a competing venture in California before merging his California - based Dine and Sign with Diners Club .
Diners Club International was named for being a " club of diners " that would allow patrons to settle their bill at the end of each month through their credit account .
When the card was first introduced , Diners Club listed 27 participating restaurants , and 200 of the founders 's friends and acquaintances used it .
Diners Club had 20,000 members by the end of 1950 and 42,000 by the end of 1951 .
At the time , the company was charging participating establishments seven percent and billed cardholders $ 5 a year .
In 1952 , McNamara sold his interest in Diners Club to his partners for $ 200,000 .
The first plastic Diners Club card was introduced in 1961 ; by the mid-1960s , Diners Club had 1.3 million cardholders .
Diners Club International was acquired by Citigroup in 1981 and by Discover Financial Services in April 2008 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Diners Club 's monopoly was short - lived , as American Express and Carte Blanche ( which later partnered with Diners Club ) began to compete with Diners Club in the travel and entertainment ( T&E ) card market .
American Express now dominates the " member card " arena , providing millions of customers with cards that require the monthly balance to be paid in full .
Towards the end of the 1960s , Diners Club also faced competition from banks that issued revolving credit cards through Bank of America 's BankAmericard ( later renamed Visa ) , and Interbank Master Charge ( later renamed MasterCard ) .
Diners Club began early on to allow franchises of the Diners Club name , at first in Europe and later throughout the world , for many years eclipsing the BankAmericard or Interbank Master Charge networks abroad .
Starting in 1968 , the American Oil Company , better known publicly as Amoco , also issued , for a time , its own co - branded Diners Club cards called American Torch Club ( later renamed Amoco Torch Club ) , and Sun Oil Company issued its version called Sun Diner Club Card starting in 1977 .
In 1981 , Citibank , a unit of Citigroup , acquired Diners Club International , the franchisor that holds rights to the Diners Club trademark , and many of the largest franchises worldwide .
A majority of the franchises abroad remain independently owned .
The credit card is closing down its services in the Nordic countries on 31 May 2019 .
FRANCHISING INTERNATIONAL FRANCHISE
Section::::Franchising .
Section::::International franchise .
In a transaction completed July 1 , 2008 , Discover Financial Services purchased Diners Club International from Citibank for $ 165 million .
The deal was announced in April 2008 and approved by the U.S. government in May 2008 .
By merging the North American Discover Network with the international Diners Club Network , Discover created a global payment processing system .
Discover Bank has no plans to issue Diners Club - branded cards , which continue to be issued by Diners Club International licensees .
In 2011 , Discover began putting its logo on Diners Club cards .
Some payment processors , like PayPal , can process only new Diners Club cards , bearing the Discover logo .
NORTH AMERICAN FRANCHISE
MASTERCARD ALLIANCE Section::::North American franchise .
Section::::MasterCard alliance .
In 2004 , Diners Club announced an agreement with MasterCard .
Diners Club cards issued in the United States and Canada then featured a MasterCard logo and 16-digit account number on the front , and could be used wherever MasterCards were accepted .
Cards from other countries continued to bear a 14-digit account number on the front , with the MasterCard logo on the back .
However , since the takeover of Diners Club International by Discover Financial Services , these cards have had the Discover logo on the back .
CARTE BLANCHE Section::::Carte Blanche .
Carte Blanche began in 1958 when the Hilton Hotels travel & entertainment card was renamed .
Hilton sold Carte Blanche to First National City Bank in 1966 .
Regulatory challenges forced First National City Bank to sell Carte Blanche to Avco in 1968 .
In 1978 , Citicorp ( parent company of First National City Bank which was renamed Citibank ) reacquired Carte Blanche without regulatory opposition .
The 1960s- and 1970s - era
Carte Blanche cards were considered more prestigious worldwide than their competition , the American Express and Diners Club cards , though its small cardmember base hindered its success .
Carte Blanche was the first to implement a " Gold Card " program , as a means to recognize cardholders who were frequent users and paid their bills on time .
In 1981 , Citicorp acquired the Diners Club card , and by the mid-1990s the Carte Blanche card was being phased out in favor of Diners Club .
Parent company Citigroup ( also known as " Citi " ) was formed in 1998 with the merger of Citicorp and the Travelers Group .
Citi issued a premium Diners Club card in 2000 , naming it the Diners Club Carte Blanche card .
It was an upper - level charge card on par with the American Express Platinum Card .
The card carries a US$ 300 annual fee as of April 2015 and offers an extensive menu of perks .
Diners Club requires payment from individual cardholders in full within 30 days ; corporate accounts can pay within 60 days without penalty .
By 2005 , the classic Carte Blanche card had been phased out , and only the Diners Club Carte Blanche card remained .
ENROUTE Section::::enRoute .
Diners Club expanded its customer base in Canada by acquiring the enRoute credit card from Air Canada in 1992 .
It marketed the card under the combined name for a period of time as the " Diners Club / enRoute Card " .
The enRoute business was valued at over $ 300 million at the time of acquisition .
Diners Club remains a minor player in Canada .
ACQUISITION
BY BMO Section::::Acquisition by BMO .
In November 2009 , Citibank announced that Diners Club International 's North American franchise has been sold to Bank of Montreal ( BMO ) .
The deal gives BMO exclusive rights to issue Diners cards in the U.S. and Canada .
At the time , BMO said the Diners Club fits well with its existing commercial card business , adding that commercial cards are one of the fastest growing segments in the credit card business .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
In December 2010 , Russian Standard Bank and Diners Club International entered into an agreement for settlement of transactions in Russia .
Under the agreement , Russian Standard Bank will process settlement transactions of other banks acting as acquirers of Diners Club in Russia .
SWITZERLAND AND GERMANY FRANCHISE Section::::Switzerland and Germany franchise .
In a transaction that closed on August 6 , 2010 , Citibank sold the Switzerland and Germany franchises to a private investment group headed by Anthony J. Helbling .
UNITED ARABS EMIRATES Section::::United Arabs Emirates .
Diners Club UAE UAE , Egypt , Lebanon and Jordan is owned and operated by Network International subsidiary of Emirates Bank .
UNITED KINGDOM AND IRELAND FRANCHISE Section::::United Kingdom and Ireland franchise .
On August 7 , 2012 , Citigroup , Inc. announced the sale of its Diners Club franchise in the United Kingdom and Ireland to Affiniture Cards Ltd. , a private investor group .
SLOVENIAN SCANDAL Section::::Slovenian scandal .
In 2013 , Tomaž Lovše , who owned Diners Club Slovenia , was one of three people investigated in Slovenia regarding unpaid debts that his franchise owed to merchants .
In May , the Central Bank of Slovenia revoked Diners Club Slovenia 's license for payment services , which meant 80,000 local members could not use their card .
Diners Club International transferred the franchise to a subsidiary of Austria 's Erste Bank group , Erste Card Club , and agreed to repay the franchise 's debt to merchants .
An Erste press release in August 2013 stated that Diners Club services were once again available in Slovenia .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
In 1963 , the film The Man from the Diner 's Club was released , and the Ideal Toy Company created the board gamed titled The Diners ' Club Credit Card Game .
In the movie Planes , Trains , and Automobiles , the main character mentions that he owns a Diners Club card while trying to book hotel rooms .
SEE ALSO
* Diners Club Arena * Hyundai Card REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Diners Club International * Diners Club USA * Diners Club Canada
* Discover gets antitrust OK for Diners Club buy , Reuters