HOCKEY HELMET
A hockey helmet is worn by players of ice hockey , inline hockey , and bandy to help protect the head from potential injury when hit by the puck , sticks , skates , boards , other players , or the ice .
The shell of a hockey helmet is generally made of a substance called vinyl nitrile that disperses force from the point of contact , while the liner may be made of either vinyl nitrile foam , expanded polypropylene foam , or other material to absorb the energy , to reduce the chances of concussion .
Hockey helmets grip the head from inside by cupping the back of head , or the occipital protuberance .
Helmet manufacturers will have a chart that relates their helmet sizes to head measurements .
Most helmets have tool - free adjustments , but on older models , the helmet size is adjusted by loosening the screws on the side to slide the front portion forward or back .
VISORS AND SHIELDS Section::::Visors and shields .
A visor or face shield in ice hockey is a device attached to the front of a helmet to reduce potential of injury to the face .
Visors cover the upper half of the face , while full face shields cover the entire face .
A series of eye injuries , most notably that to Bruce Fogarty , have led to a call from many to enforce their wearing .
, 94 % of NHL players wear visors .
Many other leagues around the world mandate the use of visors .
Visors and shields , made of a high impact - resistant plastic , offer better overall vision than the wire cages available , which can obscure vision in certain areas .
The face shield provides excellent straight ahead and peripheral vision , but does not provide as good air flow as a cage .
The American Hockey League , the top minor league in North America required all players to wear a visor prior to the start of the 2006–07 season .
The NHL " strongly recommends " the use of visors .
In 2013 , the NHL began requiring all players with less than 25 games of experience to wear visors .
The hockey visor was first invented by Kenneth William Clay when he lost vision in his left eye to a high stick while playing for the Vanderhoof Bears .
After a month in hospital in Vancouver , Clay created the first documented clear face shield in January 1964 .
The invention caused quite a stir , with announcers calling it a " fish bowl " and a " wrap - around windshield " .
While the original shield and helmet were lost in the fire that consumed the Vanderhoof Arena a few years later , the newspaper clippings still attest to the dates and facts .
FULL FACIAL PROTECTION Section::::Full facial protection .
A cage in ice hockey is a device attached to the front of a helmet to reduce potential of injury to the face .
It consists of a metal or composite mesh that covers the entire face , although some half cages do exist ( to protect the eyes while allowing full airflow ) .
The bars , or cage , are spaced far enough apart to allow seeing through to the action but are close enough to stop pucks and sticks from getting through to injure the face .
A variant of the full - face shield , made from clear polycarbonate that features a face shield on the top half , with either the standard metal / composite mesh shield or a polycarbonate cage on its bottom half is also available .
Some manufacturers now offer the best of both designs — a plastic face shield to protect the eyes and upper part of the face , and a cage to cover the lower jaw and to add ventilation .
Full facial protection is mandatory in many amateur leagues and in North America , full face cages , full shields , or shield and cage combination are mandatory in high school hockey , college hockey , and for all players under the age of 18 .
NHL player George Parsons was forced to retire due to career - ending eye injury in 1939 .
He became involved with CCM hockey , helping to develop helmets and facial protection that would be safer for players .
By early 1976 , CCM had developed a hockey helmet complete with eye and face shield and lower face protector that was both approved by the Canadian Standards Association and endorsed by the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association .
FACIAL PROTECTION RESEARCH Section::::Facial protection research .
In 2002 , the British Journal of Sports Medicine published a study identifying the protection offered against concussions between the half - face shield and the full - face shield .
The use of a full - face shield compared with half - face shield significantly reduced the playing time lost because of concussion , suggesting that concussion severity may be reduced by the use of a full - face shield .
HELMETS IN THE NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE Section::::Helmets in the National Hockey League .
The first player to regularly wear a helmet for protective purposes was George Owen , who played for the Boston Bruins in 1928–29 .
In 1927 , Barney Stanley presented a prototype of a helmet at the NHL 's annual meeting .
It was quickly rejected .
Helmets appeared after the Ace Bailey – Eddie Shore incident on December 12 , 1933 , as a result of which Bailey almost died and Shore suffered a severe head injury .
After that , Art Ross engineered a new helmet design and when the Boston Bruins took to the ice in a game against the Ottawa Senators , most of the players donned the new helmet .
Most Bruins players did n't wear the helmet after the game , with the exception of Eddie Shore , who wore it the rest of his career .
In the 1930s , the Toronto Maple Leafs players were ordered to add helmets to their equipment .
A few minutes into the first game with the new helmets , the popular King Clancy famously flung his off .
The helmets were generally unpopular with fans , media , and other players .
A few players , such as Des Smith , Bill Mosienko , Dit Clapper , and Don Gallinger continued to don helmets .
During the Original Six era , Maurice Richard and Elmer Lach briefly wore helmets .
Jack Crawford wore a helmet to hide his bald head and Charlie Burns wearing one to protect the metal plates in his head from an injury incurred in playing junior ice hockey , predating his NHL career .
The death of Bill Masterton from a brain injury in a January 13 , 1968 game between the Minnesota North Stars and Oakland Seals started to change perceptions surrounding helmets .
Helmet use began to gradually increase during the 1970s , with Ted Green being the first Bruins player since Shore to wear one as a result of his NHL career , for the 1970 - 71 NHL season and onwards for the same reason that Charlie Burns had worn a helmet , until Green 's retirement from pro hockey in 1979 .
The 1972 Summit Series showcased an entirely helmet clad Soviet Union team , with Paul Henderson , Stan Mikita , and Red Berenson being the only Canadians to sport a helmet .
Usage increased to the point that 70 % of NHL players were wearing them by 1979 .
In August 1979 , the then - President of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , John Ziegler , announced that protective helmets would become mandatory for incoming players in the NHL .
" The introduction of the helmet rule will be an additional safety factor , " he said .
The rule allowed players who signed professional contracts prior to June 1 , 1979 who were already not wearing helmets to continue to do so for the rest of their careers provided a liability waiver was signed , if they so desired .
The last player to play without a helmet was Craig MacTavish , who played his final game during the 1996–97 season for the St. Louis Blues .
The last referee to not wear a helmet was Mick McGeough , who began wearing a helmet in the 2006–07 season and retired after the following season .
BRANDS
* Bauer Hockey ( including Mission Hockey , Itech , and Cascade )
* Easton Hockey *
Oakley * Reebok RBK ( including CCM / Koho / Jofa ) SEE ALSO
* Goaltender mask * Impact monitor REFERENCES