COMPETITIVE INHIBITION
Competitive inhibition is interruption of a chemical pathway owing to one chemical substance inhibiting the effect of another by competing with it for binding or bonding .
Any metabolic or chemical messenger system can potentially be affected by this principle , but several classes of competitive inhibition are especially important in biochemistry and medicine , including the competitive form of enzyme inhibition , the competitive form of receptor antagonism , the competitive form of antimetabolite activity , and the competitive form of poisoning ( which can include any of the aforementioned types ) .
This article examines the enzymatic class .
In competitive inhibition of enzyme catalysis , binding of an inhibitor prevents binding of the target molecule of the enzyme , also known as the substrate .
This is accomplished by blocking the binding site of the substrate – the active site – by some means .
The V indicates the maximum velocity of the reaction , while the K is the amount of substrate needed to reach half of the V. K also plays a part in indicating the tendency of the substrate to bind the enzyme .
Competitive inhibition can be overcome by adding more substrate to the reaction ; therefore , increasing the chances of the enzyme and substrate binding .
As a result , this alters only the K , leaving the V the same .
This can be demonstrated using enzyme kinetics plots such as the Michaelis - Menten or the Lineweaver - Burk plot .
Once the inhibitor is bound to the enzyme , the slope will be affected , as the K either increases or decreases from the original K of the reaction .
Most competitive inhibitors function by binding reversibly to the active site of the enzyme .
As a result , many sources state that this is the defining feature of competitive inhibitors .
This , however , is a misleading oversimplification , as there are many possible mechanisms by which an enzyme may bind either the inhibitor or the substrate but never both at the same time .
For example , allosteric inhibitors may display competitive , non - competitive , or uncompetitive inhibition .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
In competitive inhibition , an inhibitor that resembles the normal substrate binds to the enzyme , usually at the active site , and prevents the substrate from binding .
At any given moment , the enzyme may be bound to the inhibitor , the substrate , or neither , but it can not bind both at the same time .
During competitive inhibition , the inhibitor and substrate compete for the active site .
The active site is a region on an enzyme which a particular protein or substrate can bind to .
The active site will only allow one of the two complexes to bind to the site therefore either allowing for a reaction to occur or yielding it .
In competitive inhibition the inhibitor resembles the substrate therefore taking its place and binding to the active site of an enzyme .
Increasing the substrate concentration would diminish the " competition " for the substrate to properly bind to the active site and allow a reaction to occur .
When the substrate is of higher concentration than that of the competitive inhibitor , it is more likely that the substrate will come into contact with the enzyme 's active site than the inhibitor .
Competitive inhibitors are commonly used to make pharmaceuticals .
For example , methotrexate is a chemotherapy drug that acts as a competitive inhibitor .
It is structurally similar to the coenzyme , folate , which binds to the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase .
This enzyme is part of the synthesis of DNA and RNA , and when methotrexate binds the enzyme , it renders it inactive , so it can not synthesize DNA and RNA .
Thus , the cancer cells are unable to grow and divide .
Another example involves prostaglandins which are made in large amounts as a response to pain and can cause inflammation .
Essential fatty acids form the prostaglandins and when this was discovered , it turned out that these were actually very good inhibitors to prostaglandins .
These fatty acids inhibitors have been used as drugs to relieve pain because they can act as the substrate , and bind to the enzyme , and block prostaglandins .
An example of non - drug related competitive inhibition is in the prevention of browning of fruits and vegetables .
For example , tyrosinase , an enzyme within mushrooms , normally binds to the substrate , monophenols , and forms brown o - quinones .
Competitive substrates , such as 4-substituted benzaldehydes for mushrooms , compete with the substrate lowering the amount of the monophenols that bind .
These inhibitory compounds added to the produce keep it fresh for longer periods of time by decreasing the binding of the monophenols that cause browning .
This allows for an increase in produce quality as well as shelf life .
Competitive inhibition can be reversible or irreversible .
If it is reversible inhibition , then effects of the inhibitor can be overcome by increasing substrate concentration .
If it is irreversible , the only way to overcome it is to produce more of the target ( and typically degrade and/or excrete the irreversibly inhibited target ) .
In virtually every case , competitive inhibitors bind in the same binding site ( active site ) as the substrate , but same - site binding is not a requirement .
A competitive inhibitor could bind to an allosteric site of the free enzyme and prevent substrate binding , as long as it does not bind to the allosteric site when the substrate is bound .
For example , strychnine acts as an allosteric inhibitor of the glycine receptor in the mammalian spinal cord and brain stem .
Glycine is a major post - synaptic inhibitory neurotransmitter with a specific receptor site .
Strychnine binds to an alternate site that reduces the affinity of the glycine receptor for glycine , resulting in convulsions due to lessened inhibition by the glycine .
In competitive inhibition , the maximum velocity ( formula_1 ) of the reaction is unchanged , while the apparent affinity of the substrate to the binding site is decreased ( the formula_2 dissociation constant is apparently increased ) .
The change in formula_3 ( Michaelis - Menten constant ) is parallel to the alteration in formula_2 , as one increases the other must decrease .
When a competitive inhibitor is bound to an enzyme the formula_3 increases .
This means the binding affinity for the enzyme is decreased , but it can be overcome by increasing the concentration of the substrate .
Any given competitive inhibitor concentration can be overcome by increasing the substrate concentration .
In that case , the substrate will reduce the availability for an inhibitor to bind , and , thus , outcompete the inhibitor in binding to the enzyme .
BIOLOGICAL EXAMPLES
Section::::Biological examples .
After an accidental ingestion of a contaminated opioid drug desmethylprodine , the neurotoxic effect of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine ( MPTP ) was discovered .
MPTP is able to cross the blood brain barrier and enter acidic lysosomes .
MPTP is biologically activated by MAO - B , an isozyme of monoamine oxidase ( MAO ) which is mainly concentrated in neurological disorders and diseases .
Later , it was discovered that MPTP causes symptoms similar to that of Parkinson 's disease .
Cells in the central nervous system ( astrocytes ) include MAO - B that oxidizes MPTP to 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ( MPP+ ) , which is toxic .
MPP+ eventually travels to the extracellular fluid by a dopamine transporter , which ultimately causes the Parkinson 's symptoms .
However , competitive inhibition of the MAO - B enzyme or the dopamine transporter protects against the oxidation of MPTP to MPP+ .
A few compounds have been tested for their ability to inhibit oxidation of MPTP to MPP+ including methylene blue , 5-nitroindazole , norharman , 9-methylnorharman , and menadione .
These demonstrated a reduction of neurotoxicity produced by MPTP .
Sulfa drugs also act as competitive inhibitors .
For example , sulfanilamide competitively binds to the enzyme in the dihydropteroate synthase ( DHPS ) active site by mimicking the substrate para - aminobenzoic acid ( PABA ) .
This prevents the substrate itself from binding which halts the production of folic acid , an essential nutrient .
Bacteria must synthesize folic acid because they do not have a transporter for it .
Without folic acid , bacteria can not grow and divide .
Therefore , because of sulfa drugs ' competitive inhibition , they are excellent antibacterial agents .
An example of competitive inhibition was demonstrated experimentally for the enzyme succinic dehydrogenase , which catalyzes the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the Krebs cycle .
Malonate is a competitive inhibitor of succinic dehydrogenase .
The binding of succinic dehydrogenase to the substrate , succinate , is competitively inhibited .
This happens because malonate 's chemistry is similar to succinate .
Malonate 's ability to inhibit binding of the enzyme and substrate is based on the ratio of malonate to succinate .
Malonate binds to the active site of succinic dehydrogenase so that succinate can not .
Thus , it inhibits the reaction .
EQUATION Section::::Equation .
The Michaelis - Menten Model can be an invaluable tool to understanding enzyme kinetics .
According to this model , a plot of the reaction velocity ( V ) associated with the concentration [ S ] of the substrate can then be used to determine values such as V , initial velocity , and K ( V/2 or affinity of enzyme to substrate complex ) .
Competitive inhibition increases the apparent value of the Michaelis - Menten constant ,
formula_6 , such that initial rate of reaction , formula_7 , is given by
where formula_9 , formula_10 is the inhibitor 's dissociation constant and formula_11 is the inhibitor concentration .
formula_1 remains the same because the presence of the inhibitor can be overcome by higher substrate concentrations .
formula_6 , the substrate concentration that is needed to reach formula_14 , increases with the presence of a competitive inhibitor .
This is because the concentration of substrate needed to reach formula_1 with an inhibitor is greater than the concentration of substrate needed to reach formula_1 without an inhibitor .
DERIVATION Section::::Derivation .
In the simplest case of a single - substrate enzyme obeying Michaelis - Menten kinetics , the typical scheme E + S < =
>
[ k_1][k_{-1 } ]
ES ->[k_2 ]
E + P is modified to include binding of the inhibitor to the free enzyme : EI + S < =
>
[ k_{-3}][k_3 ]
E + S
+
I < =
>
[ k_1][k_{-1 } ]
ES + I
->[k_2 ]
E + P
+ I Note that the inhibitor does not bind to the ES complex and the substrate does not bind to the EI complex .
It is generally assumed that this behavior is indicative of both compounds binding at the same site , but that is not strictly necessary .
As with the derivation of the Michaelis - Menten equation , assume that the system is at steady - state , i.e. the concentration of each of the enzyme species is not changing .
Furthermore , the known total enzyme concentration is formula_18 , and the velocity is measured under conditions in which the substrate and inhibitor concentrations do not change substantially and an insignificant amount of product has accumulated .
We can therefore set up a system of equations : where [ S ] ,
[ I ] and [ E]_0 are known .
The initial velocity is defined as formula_19 , so we need to define the unknown [ ES ] in terms of the knowns [ S ] ,
[ I ] and [ E]_0 .
From equation ( ) , we can define E in terms of ES by rearranging to Dividing by formula_21 gives As in the derivation of the Michaelis - Menten equation , the term formula_23 can be replaced by the macroscopic rate constant formula_3 : Substituting equation ( ) into equation ( ) , we have Rearranging , we find that At this point , we can define the dissociation constant for the inhibitor as formula_27 , giving At this point , substitute equation ( ) and equation ( ) into equation ( ): Rearranging to solve for ES , we find Returning to our expression for formula_7
, we now have : Since the velocity is maximal when all the enzyme is bound as the enzyme - substrate complex , formula_33 .
Replacing and combining terms finally yields the conventional form :
To compute the concentration of competitive inhibitor
[ I ] that yields a fraction formula_34 of velocity formula_7 where formula_36 : NOTES AND REFERENCES SEE ALSO * Schild regression for ligand receptor inhibition
* Non - competitive inhibition