FROZEN CUSTARD Frozen custard is a cold dessert similar to ice cream , but made with eggs in addition to cream and sugar .
It is usually kept at a warmer temperature compared to ice cream , and typically has a denser consistency .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Egg yolks have been integrated into ice creams since at least the 1690s , though there are several notable invention stories that are associated with modern commercializations of this practice .
One early commercialization of frozen custard was in Coney Island , New York in 1919 , when ice cream vendors Archie and Elton Kohr found that adding egg yolks to ice cream created a smoother texture and helped the ice cream stay cold longer .
In their first weekend on the boardwalk , they sold 18,460 cones .
A frozen custard stand at the 1933 World 's Fair in Chicago introduced the dessert to a wider audience .
Following the fair , the dessert 's popularity spread throughout the Midwest ; Milwaukee , Wisconsin , in particular , became known as the " unofficial frozen custard capital of the world " .
Per capita , Milwaukee has the highest concentration of frozen custard shops in the world and the city supports a long - standing three - way competition between Kopp 's Frozen Custard ,
Gilles Frozen Custard and Leon 's Frozen Custard .
Frozen custard chains in the United States include Culver 's , headquartered in Prairie du Sac , Wisconsin , with outlets in 20 states ; Freddy 's Frozen Custard & Steakburgers , based in Wichita , Kansas , with more than 300 locations nationwide ; Andy 's Frozen Custard , based in Springfield , Missouri , with over 30 locations ; Ted Drewes Frozen Custard in St. Louis , Rita 's in Southern California and Abbott 's Frozen Custard , in Rochester , New York .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
In the U.S. , the Food and Drug Administration requires products marketed as frozen custard to contain at least 10 percent milkfat and 1.4 percent egg yolk solids .
If it has a smaller percentage of egg yolk solids , it is considered ice cream .
True frozen custard is a very dense dessert .
Soft serve ice creams may have an overrun as large as 100 % , meaning half of the final product is composed of air .
Frozen custard , when made in a continuous freezer will have an overrun of 15–30 % depending on the machine manufacturer ( an overrun percentage similar to gelato ) .
Air is not pumped into the mix , nor is it added as an " ingredient " but gets into the frozen state by the agitation of liquid similar to whisking a meringue .
The high percentage of butterfat and egg yolk gives frozen custard a thick , creamy texture and a smoother consistency than ice cream .
Frozen custard can be served at −8 ° C ( 18 ° F ) , warmer than the −12 ° C ( 10 ° F ) at which ice cream is served , in order to make a soft serve product .
Another difference between commercially produced frozen custard and commercial ice cream is the way the custard is frozen .
The mix enters a refrigerated tube and , as it freezes , blades scrape the product cream off the barrel walls .
The now frozen custard is discharged directly into containers from which it can be served .
The speed with which the product leaves the barrel minimizes the amount of air in the product but more importantly ensures that the ice crystals formed are very small .
SEE ALSO * Custard , the basic egg and dairy preparations
* Soft serve , a soft form of ice cream * Frozen yogurt , the cultured and frozen milk product
* Gelato , the Italian style of ice cream
* Ice cream
* List of custard desserts * List of frozen custard companies * Semifreddo , the partially frozen type of desserts , sometimes a custard mixed with whipped cream REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * FDA Standards for Frozen Desserts