EPIC GAMES Epic Games , Inc. ( formerly Potomac Computer Systems and later Epic MegaGames , Inc. ) is an American video game developer based in Cary , North Carolina .
The company was founded by Tim Sweeney as Potomac Computer Systems in 1991 , originally located in his parents ' house in Potomac , Maryland .
Following his first commercial video game release , ZZT ( 1991 ) , the company became Epic MegaGames in early 1992 , and brought on Mark Rein , who is the company 's vice president to date .
Moving their headquarters to Cary in 1999 , the studio 's name was simplified to Epic Games .
Epic Games develops the Unreal Engine , a commercially available game engine which also powers their internally developed video games , such as Fortnite and the Unreal , Gears of War and Infinity Blade series .
In 2014 , Unreal Engine was named the " most successful videogame engine " by Guinness World Records .
Epic Games owns video game developer Chair Entertainment and cloud - based software developer Cloudgine , and operates eponymous sub - studios in Seattle , England , Berlin , Yokohama and Seoul .
Key personnel at Epic Games include chief executive officer Tim Sweeney , lead programmer Steve Polge and art director Chris Perna .
Tencent acquired a 40 % stake in the company in 2012 , after Epic Games realized that the video game industry was heavily developing towards the games as a service model .
HISTORY POTOMAC COMPUTER SYSTEMS ( 1991–1992 ) Section::::History .
Section::::Potomac Computer Systems ( 1991–1992 ) .
Potomac Computer Systems was founded by Tim Sweeney in 1991 .
At the time , Sweeney was studying mechanical engineering at the University of Maryland .
Though he lived in a dorm located in Potomac , Maryland , he frequently visited his parents , who lived in the same town , where his personal computer , used for both work and leisure , was situated .
Out of this location , Sweeney started Potomac Computer Systems as a computer consulting business , but later figured that it would be too much work he would have to put into keeping the business stable , and scrapped the idea .
After finishing his game ZZT in October 1991 , Sweeney opted to re - use the Potomac Computer Systems name to release the game to the public .
It was only with the unexpected success of ZZT , caused in most part by the easy modifiability of the game using Sweeney 's custom ZZT - oop programming language , that made Sweeney consider turning Potomac Computer Systems into a video game company .
ZZT was sold through bulletin board systems , while all orders were fulfilled by Sweeney 's father , Paul Sweeney .
The game sold several thousand copies as of May 2009 , and Paul Sweeney still lived at the former Potomac Computer Systems address at the time , fulfilling all orders that eventually came by mail .
The final copy of ZZT was shipped by Paul Sweeney in November 2013 .
EPIC MEGAGAMES ( 1992–1999 )
Section::::Epic
MegaGames ( 1992–1999 ) .
In early 1992 , Sweeney found himself and his new - found video game company in a business where larger studios , such as Apogee Software and i d Software , were dominant , and he had to find a more serious name for his .
As such , Sweeney came up with " Epic MegaGames " , a name which incorporated " Epic " and " Mega " to make it sound like it represented a fairly large company ( such as Apogee Software ) , although he was its only employee .
Sweeney soon underwent searching for a business partner , and eventually caught up with Mark Rein , who previously quit his job at i d Software and moved to Toronto , Ontario .
Rein worked remotely from Toronto , and primarily handled sales , marketing and publishing deals ; business development that Sweeney found to have significantly contributed to the company 's growth .
Some time this season , the company soon had 20 employees consisting of programmers , artists , designers and composers .
Among them was the 17-year old Cliff Bleszinski , who joined the company after submitting his game Dare to Dream to Sweeney .
The following year , they had over 30 employees .
In 1996 , Epic MegaGames produced a shareware isometric shooter called Fire Fight , developed by Polish studio Chaos Works .
It was published by Electronic Arts .
By 1997 , Epic MegaGames had 50 people working for them worldwide .
In 1998 , Epic MegaGames released Unreal , a 3D first - person shooter co - developed with Digital Extremes , which expanded into a series of Unreal games .
The company also began to license the core technology , the Unreal Engine , to other game developers .
EPIC GAMES ( 1999–PRESENT ) UNREAL AND PERSONAL COMPUTER GAMING
( 1999–2006 ) Section::::Epic Games ( 1999–present ) .
Section::::Unreal and personal computer gaming ( 1999–2006 ) .
In February 1999 , Epic MegaGames announced that they had moved their headquarters to a new location in Cary , North Carolina , and would henceforth be known as simply Epic Games .
Rein explained that " Unreal was first created by developers who were scattered across the world , eventually , the team came together to finish the game and that 's when the real magic started .
The move to North Carolina centralizes Epic , bringing all of the company 's talented developers under one roof . "
Furthermore , Sweeney stated that the " Mega " part of the name was dropped because they no longer wanted to pretend to be a big company , as was the original intention of the name when it was a one - man team .
The follow - up game , Unreal Tournament , shipped to critical acclaim the same year , at which point the studio had 13 employees .
The company launched the Make Something Unreal competition in 2004 , aiming to reward video game developers who create mods using the Unreal game engine .
Tripwire Interactive won US$ 80,000 in cash and computer hardware prizes over the course of the contest in the first contest in 2004 .
GEARS OF WAR AND CONSOLE GAMING ( 2006–2012 )
Section::::Gears of War and console gaming ( 2006–2012 ) .
Around 2006 , the personal computer video game market was struggling with copyright infringement in the form of software piracy , and it became difficult to make single - player games , elements which had been part of Epic 's business model to that point .
The company decided to shift focus into developing on console systems , a move which Rein called the start of the third major iteration of the company , " Epic 3.0 " .
In 2006 , Epic released the Xbox 360 shooter Gears of War , which became a commercial success for the company , grossing about off a budget .
A year later , the company released Unreal Tournament 3 for PC and acquired a majority share in People Can Fly .
In 2008 , Epic Games acquired Utah based Chair Entertainment and released Gears of War 2 , selling over three million copies within the first month of its release .
Summer 2009 saw the launch of Chair Entertainment 's Shadow Complex , an adventure game inspired by the Metroid series .
Epic Games released on September 1 , 2010 Epic Citadel as a tech demo to demonstrate the Unreal Engine 3 running on Apple iOS , within Adobe Flash Player Stage3D and using HTML5 WebGL technologies .
It was also released for Android on January 29 , 2013 .
Epic Games worked on an iOS game , Infinity Blade , which was released on December 9 , 2010 .
The third game in the series , Gears of War 3 , came out in 2011 .
In 2011 , Epic 's subsidiary Titan Studios was dissolved .
At the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards , Epic Games announced their new game Fortnite .
In June 2012 , Epic announced that it is opening up a new studio , Epic Baltimore , made up of members of 38 Studios ' Big Huge Games .
Epic Baltimore was renamed to Impossible Studios in August 2012 .
However , the studio ended up closing its doors in February 2013 .
Epic alongside People Can Fly made one last game in the Gears of War series that served as a prequel to the other games , , which was released in 2013 .
At this point , Epic had considered developing a fourth main title for Gears of War , but estimated that its budget would be at least .
Additionally , they had suggested the idea of a multiplayer - only version of Gears of War that featured improved versions of maps based on user feedback , similar to the concept behind Unreal Tournament , but Microsoft rejected this idea .
Epic recognized the troubles of being held to the business objectives of a publisher , and began to shift the company again .
GAMES
AS A SERVICE AND TENCENT ACQUISITION ( 2012–PRESENT )
Section::::Games as a Service and Tencent acquisition ( 2012–present ) .
Coupled with their desire to move away from being beholden to a publisher , Epic Games observed that the video game industry was shifting to a games as a service model ( GaaS ) .
Sweeney stated " There was an increasing realization that the old model was n't working anymore and that the new model was looking increasingly like the way to go . "
In an attempt to gain more GaaS experience , they made an agreement with Chinese Tencent , who had several games under their banner ( including Riot Games ' League of Legends ) operating successfully as games as a service .
In exchange for Tencent 's help , Tencent acquired approximately 48.4 % of Epic then issued share capital , equating to 40 % of total Epic — inclusive of both stock and employee stock options , for $ 330 million in June 2012 .
Tencent Holdings has the right to nominate directors to the board of Epic Games and thus counts as an associate of the Group .
However , Sweeney stated that Tencent otherwise has very little control on the creative output of Epic Games .
Mark Rein considered the partial acquisition by Tencent as the start of " Epic 4.0 " , the fourth major iteration of the company , allowing the company to be more agile in the gaming marketplace .
Around this point , Epic had about 200 employees .
A number of high - profile staff left the company months after the Tencent deal was announced for various reasons .
Some notable departures included : * Cliff Bleszinski , then the design director , announced he was leaving Epic Games in October 2012 after 20 years with the company .
His official reason was " It 's time for a much needed break " .
Bleszinski later stated that he had become " jaded " about the gaming industry in the lead - up to Tencent 's involvement .
After Tencent 's investment , Bleszinski attempted to renegotiate his contract , but failed to come to terms , making him think about retirement instead .
He opted to stop coming into work , spending his time at his beach house , eventually leading Sweeney to come down and have a heart - to - heart discussion with Bleszinski on the new direction Epic was going , and asking him to make a firm decision regarding his commitment to Epic .
Bleszinski opted to write his resignation letter the next day .
After about two years , Bleszinski later started Boss Key Productions in 2014 .
* President Mike Capps announced his retirement in December 2013 , and cited the reasons as the arrival of a baby boy he was having with his wife and his plans to be a stay - at - home dad .
He subsequently announced his departure of his advisory role as well as his affiliation with the company in March 2013 .
* Rod Fergusson , who had been a lead developer for the Gears of War series , left Epic in August 2012 .
Fergusson stated that he had seen the direction that the Tencent acquisition would have taken the company , and was not interested in the free - to - play style of games but instead wanted to continue developing a " AAA , big - narrative , big - story , big - impact game " .
Fergusson briefly joined Irrational Games , owned by 2 K Games , to help complete BioShock Infinite .
While there , Fergusson talked with 2 K about potentially continuing the Gears of War series , leading to talks between 2 K Games , Epic , and Microsoft .
As a result , Microsoft acquired the rights to Gears of War on January 27 , 2014 , eventually assigned those to Microsoft Game Studios ; Fergusson moved to Black Tusk Studios , owned by Microsoft Game Studios , to take on lead development for a new Gears title , with the studio being rebranded as The Coalition .
The first game since the acquisition , Gears of War 4 , was released in October 2016 .
* Adrian Chmielarz , the founder of People Can Fly and who joined Epic when his studio was acquired earlier in 2012 , decided to leave after Tencent 's acquisition , stating that he and other former People Can Fly members did not believe the free - to - play , games as a service direction fit their own personal vision or direction they wanted to go .
Chmielarz and these others left Epic in late 2012 to form The Astronauts .
* Lee Perry , a lead designer on both Unreal and Gears of War series , who felt that Epic has started to grow too large to maintain a role as an eccentric game developer .
Coupled with the studio 's need for more management to support the games as a service model , Perry felt that their creative freedom would become limited .
He and five other senior people left Epic to form a new studio , Bitmonster .
Epic continued on its goal to deliver games as a service following these departures .
Fortnite was to serve as their testbed for living games , but with the shifts in staff , as well as shifting its engine from Unreal Engine 3 to 4 , its release suffered some setback .
Epic started additional projects ; the free - to - play and community - developed Unreal Tournament , first announced in 2014 , and the free - to - play multiplayer online battle arena game Paragon , launched in 2016 for Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 4 .
Epic also released a remastered version of Shadow Complex for newer consoles and computers in 2015 , and their first foray into virtual reality with the release of Robo Recall for the Oculus Rift .
The investment infusion from Tencent allowed Epic Games to relicense the Unreal Engine 4 engine in March 2015 to be free for all users to develop with , with Epic taking 5 % royalties on games developed with the engine .
In June 2015 , Epic agreed to allow Epic Games Poland depart the company and sold its shares in the studio ; the studio reverted to their former name , People Can Fly .
The Bulletstorm IP was retained by People
Can Fly who has since launched a remastered version called Bulletstorm : Full Clip Edition on April 7 , 2017 , published by Gearbox Software .
By July 2017 , Fortnite was finally in a state for public play .
Epic launched the title through a paid early access then , with a full free - to - play release expected in 2018 .
Following on the popularity of PlayerUnknown 's Battlegrounds , a battle royale game released earlier in 2017 , Epic developed a variant of Fortnite called Fortnite Battle Royale , which was released in September 2017 as a free - to - play title across computer , console , and mobile platforms .
Fortnite Battle Royale quickly gained an audience , amassing over 125 million players by May 2018 with estimates of having earned over by July 2018 through microtransactions .
Epic Games , which had been valued at around at the time of Tencent 's acquisition , was estimated to be worth in July 2018 due to Fortnite Battle Royale , and expected to surpass by the end of 2018 with projected growth of the game .
Due to the success of Fortnite , Epic announced it would be ending support for Paragon , its other free - to - play title , to focus on supporting Fortnite .
Epic Games was one of eleven companies selected to be part of the Disney Accelerator program in 2017 , providing Epic equity investment and access to some of Disney 's executives , and potential opportunity to work with Disney in the future .
Disney had selected both Epic and aXiomatic as potential leads in the growing esports arena .
In January 2018 , it was announced that Epic had acquired Cloudgine , a developer of cloud - based gaming software .
The company also announced the acquisition of Kamu , a firm that offered anti - cheat software , in October 2018 .
Epic announced in October 2018 that it had acquired in investment from seven firms : KKR , ICONIQ Capital , Smash Ventures , aXiomatic , Vulcan Capital , Kleiner Perkins , and Lightspeed Venture Partners .
The firms join Tencent , Disney , and Endevour as minority shareholders in Epic , which is still controlled by Sweeney .
With the investment , Epic Games was estimated to have a nearly valuation .
PRODUCTS VIDEO GAMES Section::::Products .
Section::::Video games .
Epic Games is known for games such as ZZT developed by founder Tim Sweeney , various shareware titles including Jazz Jackrabbit and Epic Pinball , the Unreal video game series , which is used as a showcase for its Unreal Engine , the Gears of War series which is now owned by The Coalition and Microsoft Game Studios , Infinity Blade , Shadow Complex , Bulletstorm , and Fortnite .
UNREAL ENGINE Section::::Unreal Engine .
Epic is the proprietor of four successful game engines in the video game industry .
Each Unreal Engine has a complete feature set of graphical rendering , sound processing , and physics that can be widely adapted to fit the specific needs of a game developer that does not want to code its own engine from scratch .
The four engines Epic has created are the Unreal Engine 1 , Unreal Engine 2 ( including its 2.5 and 2.X releases ) , Unreal Engine 3 , and Unreal Engine 4 .
Epic also provides support to the Unreal marketplace , a digital storefront for creators to sell Unreal assets to other developers .
EPIC GAMES
STORE Section::::Epic Games Store .
Epic announced its own Epic Games Store , an open digital storefront for games , on December 4 , 2018 , which launched a few days later with The Game Awards 2018 presentation .
In contrast to Valve 's Steam storefront , which takes a 30 % cut of revenues from sale of a game , the Epic Game Store will only take 12 % , as well as foregoing the normal 5 % cut for games developed in the Unreal Engine , anticipating that the lower cut will draw developers to it .
SUBSIDIARIES AND DIVISIONS CURRENT
* Chair Entertainment in Salt Lake City , Utah ; established in 2005 , acquired in 2008 .
* Cloudgine in Edinburgh , Scotland ; established in 2012 , acquired in 2018 .
* Epic Games Germany GmbH ( doing business as Epic Games Berlin ) in Berlin , Germany ; established in 2016 .
* Epic Games Korea in Seoul , South Korea ; established in 2009 .
* Epic Games Japan in Yokohama , Japan ; established in 2010 .
* Epic Games Seattle in Seattle , Washington , U.S. ; opened in 2012 .
* Epic Games Stockholm in Stockholm , Sweden ; opened in 2018 .
* Epic Games UK in Guildford , Sunderland and Leamington Spa , England ; formed in 2014 upon the acquisition of Pitbull Studio , which was founded in 2010 .
* Kamu in Helsinki , Finland ; established in 2013 , acquired in 2018 .
* Epic Games New Zealand / Australia ( location TBD ) ; formed in 2018 as a new studio to be led by Anthony Reed , formerly the CEO of the Game Developers ' Association of Australia .
FORMER Section::::Subsidiaries and divisions .
Section::::Former .
Epic had acquired Polish studio People Can Fly in 2012 , rebranding them to Epic Games Poland .
In 2015 , the studio regained its independence from Epic , reverting to the People
Can Fly name as well as retaining the IP rights to Bulletstorm .
LITIGATION WITH
SILICON KNIGHTS
Section::::Litigation with Silicon Knights .
On July 19 , 2007 , Canadian game studio Silicon Knights sued Epic Games for failure to " provide a working game engine " , causing the Ontario - based game developer to " experience considerable losses " .
The suit alleged that Epic Games was " sabotaging " Unreal Engine 3 licensees .
Epic 's licensing document stated that a working version of the engine would be available within six months of the Xbox 360 developer kits being released .
Silicon Knights claimed that Epic not only missed this deadline , but that when a working version of the engine was eventually released , the documentation was insufficient .
The game studio also claimed Epic had withheld vital improvements to the game engine , claiming they were " game specific " , while also using licensing fees to fund development of its own titles rather than the engine itself .
In August 2007 , Epic Games counter - sued Silicon Knights , alleging the studio was aware when it signed on that certain features of Unreal Engine 3 were still in development and that components would continue to be developed and added as Epic completed work on Gears of War .
Therefore , in a statement , Epic said that " SK knew when it committed to the licensing agreement that Unreal Engine 3 may not meet its requirements and may not be modified to meet them " .
Additionally , the counter - suit claimed that Silicon Knights had " made unauthorized use of Epic 's Licensed Technology " and had " infringed and otherwise violated Epic 's intellectual property rights , including Epic 's copyrighted works , trade secrets , know how and confidential information " by incorporating Unreal Engine 3 code into its own engine , the Silicon Knights Engine .
Furthermore , Epic asserted the Canadian developer broke the contract when it employed this derivative work in an internal title and a second game with Sega , a partnership for which it never received a license fee .
On May 30 , 2012 , Epic Games defeated Silicon Knights ' lawsuit , and won its counter - suit for $ 4.45 million on grounds of copyright infringement , misappropriation of trade secrets , and breach of contract , an injury award that was later doubled due to prejudgment interest , attorneys ' fees and costs .
Consistent with Epic 's counterclaims , the presiding judge , James C. Dever III , stated that Silicon Knights had " deliberately and repeatedly copied thousands of lines of Epic Games ' copyrighted code , and then attempted to conceal its wrongdoing by removing Epic Games ' copyright notices and by disguising Epic Games ' copyrighted code as Silicon Knights ' own " .
Dever stated that evidence against Silicon Knights was " overwhelming " , as it not only copied functional code but also " non - functional , internal comments Epic Games ' programmers had left for themselves " .
As a result , on November 7 , 2012 , Silicon Knights was directed by the court to destroy all game code derived from Unreal Engine 3 , all information from licensee - restricted areas of Epic 's Unreal Engine documentation website , and to permit Epic Games access to the company 's servers and other devices to ensure these items have been removed .
In addition , the studio was instructed to recall and destroy all unsold retail copies of games built with Unreal Engine 3 code , including Too Human , X - Men Destiny , The Sandman , The Box / Ritualyst , and Siren in the Maelstrom ( the latter three titles were projects never released , or even officially announced ) .
On May 16 , 2014 , Silicon Knights filed for bankruptcy and a Certificate of Appointment was issued by the office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy , with Collins Barrow Toronto Limited being appointed as trustee in bankruptcy .
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS