PRIVACY ACT OF 1974
The Privacy Act of 1974
( , ) , a United States federal law , establishes a Code of Fair Information Practice that governs the collection , maintenance , use , and dissemination of personally identifiable information about individuals that is maintained in systems of records by federal agencies .
A system of records is a group of records under the control of an agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual or by some identifier assigned to the individual .
The Privacy Act requires that agencies give the public notice of their systems of records by publication in the Federal Register .
The Privacy Act prohibits the disclosure of information from a system of records absent of the written consent of the subject individual , unless the disclosure is pursuant to one of twelve statutory exceptions .
The Act also provides individuals with a means by which to seek access to and amendment of their records and sets forth various agency record - keeping requirements .
Additionally , with people granted the right to review what was documented with their name , they are also able to find out if the " records have been disclosed " .. and are also given the rights to make corrections .
PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVACY ACT CONDITIONS OF DISCLOSURE Section::::Provisions of the Privacy Act .
Section::::Conditions of disclosure .
The Privacy Act states in part :
There are specific exceptions to the Act that allow the use of personal records .
Examples of these exceptions are : *
For statistical purposes by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics * For routine uses within a U.S. government agency *
For archival purposes " as a record which has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the United States Government " * For law enforcement purposes * For congressional investigations * Other administrative purposes
The Privacy Act mandates that each United States Government agency have in place an administrative and physical security system to prevent the unauthorized release of personal records .
To protect the privacy and liberty rights of individuals , federal agencies must state " the authority ( whether granted by statute , or by Executive order of the President ) which authorizes the solicitation of the information and whether disclosure of such information is mandatory or voluntary " when requesting information .
( ) This notice is common on almost all federal government forms which seek to gather information from individuals , many of which seek personal and confidential details .
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Section::::Department of Justice .
Subsection " U " requires that each agency have a Data Integrity Board .
Each agency 's Data Integrity Board is supposed to make an annual report to OMB , available to the public , that includes all complaints that the Act was violated , such as use of records for unauthorized reasons or the holding of First Amendment Records and report on — … " ( v ) any violations of matching agreements that have been alleged or identified and any corrective action taken " .
Former Attorney General Dick Thornburg appointed a Data Integrity Board but since then , the USDOJ has not published any Privacy Act reports .
COMPUTER MATCHING AND PRIVACY
PROTECTION
ACT Section::::Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act .
The Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 ,
P.L. 100–503 , amended the Privacy Act of 1974 by adding certain protections for the subjects of Privacy Act records whose records are used in automated matching programs .
These protections have been mandated to ensure : * procedural uniformity in carrying out matching programs ; * due process for subjects in order to protect their rights , and * oversight of matching programs through the establishment of Data Integrity Boards at each agency engaging in matching to monitor the agency 's matching activity .
The Computer Matching Act is codified as part of the Privacy Act .
ACCESS TO RECORDS Section::::Access to records .
The Privacy Act also states : * upon request by any individual ... permit him ... to review the record and have a copy made of all or any portion thereof in a form comprehensible to him ...
* * permit the individual to request amendment of a record pertaining to him ...
* ISSUES OF SCOPE Section::::Issues of scope .
The Privacy Act does apply to the records of every " individual , " defined as " a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence " but the Privacy Act only applies to records held by an " agency " .
Therefore the records held by courts , executive components , or non - agency government entities are not subject to the provisions in the Privacy Act and there is no right to these records .
On January 25 , 2017 , President Trump signed an executive order that eliminates Privacy Act protections for foreigners .
Section 14 of Trump 's " Enhancing Public Safety " executive order directs federal agencies to " ensure that their privacy policies exclude persons who are not United States citizens or lawful permanent residents from the protections of the Privacy Act regarding personally identifiable information " to the extent consistent with applicable law .
EXEMPTIONS Section::::Exemptions .
Following the controversial Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) agreement signed with the European Union ( EU ) in 2007 , the Bush administration provided an exemption for the Department of Homeland Security and the Arrival and Departure Information System ( ADIS ) from the U.S. Privacy Act .
ADIS is intended to authorize people to travel only after PNR and API ( Advance Passenger Information ) data has been checked and cleared through a US agency watchlist .
The Automated Targeting System is also to be exempted .
The Privacy Act does not protect non - US persons , which is problematic for the exchange of Passenger Name Record information between the US and the European Union .
SEE ALSO
* Data privacy * Digital identity
* Privacy * Civil liberties
* Information privacy law * Federal Records Act * Data Act ( Sweden )
* Bundesdatenschutzgesetz REFERENCES SOURCES Section::::Sources .
This article uses material from the public domain source : EXTERNAL LINKS * Privacy Act of 1974 ( 5 USC Sec .
552a )
* Privacy Office at the Department of Homeland
Security
* OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the E - Government Act of 2002
* DOD CIO re Privacy Impact Assessments
* US NSF re Privacy Impact Assessments