GEICO
The Government Employees Insurance Company ( GEICO ) is an American auto insurance company with headquarters in Chevy Chase , Maryland .
It is the second largest auto insurer in the United States , after State Farm .
GEICO is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway that provides coverage for more than 24 million motor vehicles owned by more than 15 million policy holders as of 2017 .
GEICO writes private passenger automobile insurance in all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia .
The insurance agency sells policies through local agents , called GEICO Field Representatives , over the phone directly to the consumer , and through their website .
Its mascot is a gold dust day gecko with a Cockney accent , voiced by English actor Jake Wood .
GEICO is well known in popular culture for its advertising , having made a large number of commercials intended to entertain viewers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
GEICO was founded in 1936 by Leo Goodwin Sr . and his wife Lillian Goodwin to provide auto insurance directly to federal government employees and their families .
Since 1925 , Goodwin had worked for USAA as an insurer who specialized in insuring only military personnel .
He decided to start his own company after rising as far as a civilian could go in USAA 's military - dominated hierarchy .
Based on Goodwin 's experience at USAA , GEICO 's original business model was predicated on the assumption that federal employees , as a group , would constitute a less risky and more financially stable pool of insureds compared to the general public .
Despite the presence of the word " government " in its name , GEICO has always been a private corporation not affiliated with any U.S. government organization .
In 1937 , the Goodwins relocated GEICO from San Antonio , Texas to Washington , D.C. and reincorporated the company as a D.C. corporation after realizing that their business model would work best in the place with the highest concentration of federal employees .
An important figure in GEICO 's history is David Lloyd Kreeger , who became president of the company in 1964 and helped steer it into a major insurance enterprise .
In 1948 , he formed a group of investors who bought into GEICO right before it went public that year .
He became senior vice president and general counsel of the company .
Six years after becoming president of GEICO , Kreeger was named chairman and chief executive officer .
He retained those titles until he retired in 1975 .
Kreeger continued his role as chairman of the executive committee until 1979 , when he was named honorary chairman .
In 1974 under Kreeger 's leadership , GEICO began to insure the general public after real - time access to computerized driving records became available throughout the United States .
At this time , GEICO was briefly the fifth - largest U.S. auto insurer .
By 1975 , it was clear that GEICO had expanded far too rapidly ( during the 1973–75 recession ) when it reported a $ 126.5 million USD loss .
To prevent GEICO from collapsing , a consortium of 45 insurance companies agreed to take over a quarter of its policies , and it was forced to issue a stock offering ( thus diluting existing stockholders ) to raise money to pay claims .
It took five years ( during which the company shrank significantly ) and a massive reorganization to set GEICO on the path to recovery .
GEICO has also offered other types of insurance besides auto , including homeowner 's insurance from 1962 to 1996 .
A sister company , the Government Employees Life Insurance Company ( GELICO ) , offered life insurance from 1975 to 1985 .
Although GEICO has since focused on its core auto insurance competency ( selling GELICO to Legal & General ) , it uses its established direct sales infrastructure to market homeowner 's and other types of insurance underwritten by other companies .
In 1996 , after many years as a publicly traded firm , GEICO became a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway .
GEICO generally deals directly with consumers via telephone and internet ; however , the local agent program has more than 150 offices across the United States .
GEICO is now the second - largest writer of private auto insurance in the country .
After several years of denying claims and even canceling policies for policyholders that used their personal car for ridesharing companies such as Uber and Lyft , GEICO began offering rideshare coverage in select states in 2015 , including in high - population states such as Texas , Pennsylvania , Ohio , and Georgia .
The policy , which is issued through GEICO 's commercial department , has received praise from insurance experts and quickly launched GEICO as the largest insurance provider for TNC drivers .
In 2016 , J.D. Power rated the company # 20 out of 24 for overall purchase experience , with a 2/5 score .
ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS
Section::::Advertising campaigns .
GEICO has many well - known ad campaigns .
In 2012 GEICO spent over $ 1.1 billion USD in advertising , or 6.8 % of its revenue .
All campaigns are made and produced by The Martin Agency in Richmond , Virginia .
GEICO ads have featured several well - known mascots , including : *
The GEICO Gecko is the most prevalent spokesperson mascot and speaks with a Cockney accent .
*
The GEICO Cavemen ( from ads claiming using their website is " so easy , a caveman could do it " ) .
* Maxwell , the GEICO " Piggy " who shouts a long " Whee " and appears in more radio and TV commercials .
* Actor Mike McGlone , who uses film noir - style narration to compare the ease of GEICO to things , famous people , or idioms .
( " Could switching to GEICO really save you 15 % or more on car insurance? ...
Is having a snowball fight with pitching great Randy Johnson a bad idea ? "
)
The scene is then acted out , with typically humorous results .
In addition to Johnson , other ads have included Charlie Daniels , Andrés Cantor , Foghorn Leghorn , Elmer Fudd , R. Lee Ermey , and Ed " Too Tall " Jones among others .
* The " money savers " campaign enlisted actors to portray average consumers who have resorted to various humorous extremes in order to save money , such as teaching a dog to sing or teaching a group of Guinea pigs to row a boat and perform some mundane task for the consumer , and then presented switching to GEICO as an easy alternative to such endeavors with the common line "
... there 's an easier way to save money . "
* The " Happier Than ... " duo features
Jimmy ( actor Timothy Ryan Cole ) and Ronnie ( musician Alex Harvey ) playing a guitar and a mandolin , respectively , on a small portable stage .
They comment on a fictitious preceding event , such as a man dressed in 15th - century attire laughing as he leads a trio of speed boats with the painted names Nina , Pinta , and Santa Maria .
After cutting to the duo , one says to the other , " You know , folks who save hundreds of dollars by switching to GEICO sure are happy .
"
The other then replied , " How happy are they , ( Jimmy / Ronnie ) ?
" and in the case above , the response is " Happier than Christopher Columbus with speedboats ! "
* Kash , the stack of cash that represents the money you could have saved by switching to GEICO .
There are also GEICO ads that feature stories from GEICO customers about situations in which the company assisted them , but are translated by celebrities like Little Richard and Joan Rivers .
Film trailer announcer Don LaFontaine appeared in one such ad , shortly before his death .
The tag announcer for these spots was D. C. Douglas .
GEICO is also an official sponsor of the National Hockey League and themed commercials that always feature members of the hometown Washington Capitals .
MOTORSPORTS
Section::::Motorsports .
GEICO has long been involved in motorsports sponsorships .
Since 2008 , the company has sponsored the Germain Racing team , first in the NASCAR Nationwide Series with Mike Wallace , and later in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series with Max Papis and Casey Mears .
Ty Dillon , grandson of racing legend Richard Childress , began driving the # 13 GEICO Chevrolet in the 2017 season .
COMPETITION Section::::Competition .
GEICO 's major competitors include Amica Mutual Insurance , Liberty Mutual Insurance , State Farm , Allstate , 21st Century Insurance , Reliance Partners , Progressive , Nationwide Insurance , and United Services Automobile Association .
LAWSUITS Section::::Lawsuits .
In December 2016 , a federal Miami jury awarded $ 2.7 million USD to a family who sued the company , claiming the company acted in bad faith .
In November 2015 , a jury in Miami awarded a family $ 14.5 million USD after suing the company for bad faith .
In October 2015 , the Consumer Federation of California successfully sued the company for $ 6 million USD after alleged discrimination based on occupation , education level , and other personal characteristics .
In October 2015 , the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit upheld a verdict against the company for over $ 700,000 USD in a breach of contract suit .
In 2013 , Tony Dane of Las Vegas successfully sued GEICO for breach of contract following the theft of his car in which GEICO denied his claim , accused him of stealing his own vehicle , and put a private investigator on him .
He feared he may have lost custody of his children .
Dane 's original attorney dropped him , so he pursued the case pro se and won , gaining a verdict from a jury .
In December 2010 , the family of John Potts , a man who was killed in a traffic accident by a GEICO customer , successfully sued the company for $ 8.48 million USD after the company refused to pay an adequate settlement following the crash .
SEE ALSO
* List of United States insurance companies REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS