COLLEGE BOARD College Board is an American not - for - profit organization that was formed in December 1899 as the College Entrance Examination Board ( CEEB ) to expand access to higher education .
While College Board is not an association of colleges , it runs a membership association of institutions , including over 6,000 schools , colleges , universities and other educational organizations .
College Board develops and administers standardized tests and curricula used by K–12 and post - secondary education institutions to promote college - readiness and as part of the college admissions process .
College Board is headquartered in New York City .
David Coleman has been the president of College Board since October 2012 .
He replaced Gaston Caperton , former Governor of West Virginia , who had held this position since 1999 .
In addition to managing assessments for which it charges fees , College Board provides resources , tools , and services to students , parents , colleges and universities in the areas of college planning , recruitment and admissions , financial aid , and retention .
It is partly funded by grants from various foundations , such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation until 2009 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The College Entrance Examination Board ( CEEB ) was founded at Columbia University on December 22 , 1899 , by representatives of 12 universities and three high school preparatory academies .
These were : * Columbia University
* Colgate University * University of Pennsylvania * New York University * Barnard College
* Union College * Rutgers University
* Vassar College * Bryn Mawr College
* Women 's College of Baltimore ( now Goucher College )
* Princeton University * Cornell University * Newark Academy * Mixed High School , New York
* Collegiate Institute , New York
The organization 's intent was to " adopt and publish a statement of the ground which should be covered and of the aims which should be sought by secondary school teaching in each of the following subjects ( and in such others as may be desirable ) , and a plan of examination suitable as a test for admission to college :
Botany , Chemistry , English , French , German , Greek , History , Latin , Mathematics , Physics , Zoology " .
CEEB CODE Section::::CEEB code .
College Board maintains a numbered registry of countries , college majors , colleges , scholarship programs , test centers , and high schools .
In the United States , this registry is borrowed by other institutions as a means of unambiguous identification ; thus , a student might give his or her guidance department not only a college 's name and address , but also its CEEB code , to ensure that his or her transcript is sent correctly .
There exists a similar set of ACT codes for colleges and scholarships , centers , and high schools ; however , these codes are less widely used outside ACT , Inc. TESTS AND PROGRAMS SAT AND SAT
SUBJECT TESTS Section::::Tests and programs .
Section::::SAT and SAT Subject Tests .
The SAT is a fee - based standardized test for college admissions in the United States first administered in 1926 .
Tests begin at $ 46 and go up to $ 60 for an additional essay .
In addition , there are various fees that can accumulate .
Registering later results in a $ 29 fee , registering by phone results in a $ 15 fee and changing a test date , center , or test type results in a $ 29 fee .
The waitlist testing fee is $ 49 and every additional score report is $ 12 .
As a result , student testing fees can often run up to $ 200 or more for a single test .
The SAT is administered by College Board in the United States and is developed , published , and scored by the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) .
The SAT covers writing , reading , and mathematics .
SAT scores range from 400 to 1600 , with each of the two sections worth up to 800 points .
Most students take the test during their junior or senior year of high school .
In the marketplace , the SAT competes with the ACT , another standardized college admissions test .
The SAT Subject Tests are intended to measure student performance in specific areas , such as mathematics , science , and history .
On March 5 , 2014 , College Board announced that a redesigned version of the SAT would be administered for the first time in 2016 .
The exam reverted to the 1600-point scale , the essay is now optional , and students have three hours to take the exam plus 50 additional minutes to complete the essay .
In that same announcement , College Board also revealed that they would be partnering Khan Academy to make available , from spring 2015 , free test preparation materials for the redesigned SAT .
The preparation software will help students practice and help them identify their areas of improvement at a low cost .
Hundreds of unreleased practice problems , with videos demonstrating their step - by - step solutions , will also be made available immediately .
By doing so , the intention is to enable all students to succeed at the assessment .
On May 13 , 2015 , College Board announced the release of a new credential initiative to get students more interested in careers focused in STEM with a Project Lead the Way partnership .
PSAT / NMSQT Section::::PSAT / NMSQT .
The PSAT / NMSQT is a fee - based standardized test that provides firsthand practice for the SAT for a cost of $ 16 .
It also functions as a qualifying test for the National Merit Scholarship Corporation 's scholarship programs .
ADVANCED PLACEMENT PROGRAM Section::::Advanced Placement Program .
The College Board 's Advanced Placement Program is an extensive program that offers high school students the chance to participate in what College Board describes as college - level classes for a fee , reportedly broadening students ' intellectual horizons and preparing them for college work .
It also plays a large part in the college admissions process , showing students ' intellectual capacity and genuine interest in learning .
The program allows many students to gain college credit for high performance on the AP exams , much in the same manner as the CLEP .
Granting credit , however , is at the discretion of the college .
There are 2,900 colleges that grant credit and/or advanced standing .
Critics of the Advanced Placement Program charge that courses and exams emphasize breadth of content coverage instead of depth .
COLLEGE LEVEL EXAMINATION PROGRAM Section::::College Level Examination Program .
The College Level Examination Program ( CLEP ) provides students of any age including high schoolers , college students , homeschooled students , adults , senior citizens , children , and exceptional toddlers with the opportunity to demonstrate college - level achievement through a program of exams in undergraduate college courses .
There are 2,900 colleges that grant credit for passing CLEP exams .
ACCUPLACER Section::::Accuplacer .
The College Board 's Accuplacer test is a computer - based placement test that assesses reading , writing and math skills .
The Accuplacer test includes reading comprehension , sentence skills , arithmetic , elementary algebra , college - level mathematics and the writing test , Writeplacer .
The Accuplacer test is used primarily by more than 1,000 high schools and colleges to determine a student 's needed placement .
Often community colleges have specific guidelines for students requiring the Accuplacer test .
The Accuplacer Companion paper - and - pencil tests allows for students with disabilities to take the test through its braille , large print and audio tests .
The biggest benefit of the Accuplacer and Accuplacer Companion tests are their ability to be scored immediately through an online scoring system and taken in remote locations .
While there are normally no fees for taking the test , some institutions may charge a fee to retake the test .
Note that if a testing institution is not local , an examinee may be required to arrange a proctor for the test .
If so , a local library may be willing to serve as proctor as there are not many other options for individuals in this case .
Most schools will only test their own admissions candidates .
SPRINGBOARD
Section::::SpringBoard .
SpringBoard is a pre - Advanced Placement program created by College Board to prepare students who intend to take AP courses or college - level courses in their scholastic career .
Based on Wiggins and McTighe 's " Understanding by Design " model , the SpringBoard program attempts to map knowledge into scholastic skill sets in preparation for Advanced Placement testing and college success .
Units of instruction are titrated to students within and across all school grades , providing a vertically articulated curriculum framework that scaffolds learning skills and subject test knowledge .
Implicit in the course curriculum , the program embeds pre - AP and AP teaching and learning strategies across grade school levels and classwork .
The curriculum is applicable to grades 6 through 12 .
Teachers are provided with formative assessments , professional training , and a variety of teaching tools to track student progress .
The instructional framework is integrated in the curriculum content and subject materials .
SpringBoard also provides other Web 2.0 resources aimed at making the program more community oriented .
CSS / FINANCIAL
AID PROFILE
Section::::CSS
/ Financial Aid PROFILE .
College Board also offers the CSS / Financial Aid PROFILE , a financial aid application service that many institutions use in determining family contribution and financial assistance packages .
This is a fee - based service to institutions .
Ironically , students also must pay a fee to submit it to a school .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Since at least the late 1970s , College Board has been subject to criticism from students , educators , and consumer rights activists .
College Board owns the SAT and many students must take SAT exams for admission to competitive colleges such as Ivy League institutions .
Although the ACT is usually accepted as an alternative to the SAT , some colleges require students to take the SAT Subject Tests .
Some colleges also require students submit a College Board " CSS / Financial Aid PROFILE " when applying for financial aid .
As there are no broadly accepted alternatives to College Board 's AP , SAT Subject Test , and CSS / Financial Aid products , the company is often criticized as exploiting its monopoly on these products .
FairTest , an organization that advocates against over - dependence on standardized tests in school admissions , maintains that the SAT often underestimates the aptitude of African - American students and others .
FairTest maintains a list of SAT - optional colleges on its website .
The consumer rights organization Americans for Educational Testing Reform
( AETR ) has criticized College Board for violating its non - profit status through excessive profits and exorbitant executive compensation ; nineteen of its executives make more than $ 300,000 per year , with CEO Gaston Caperton earning $ 1.3 million in 2009 ( including deferred compensation ) .
AETR also claims that College Board is acting unethically by selling test preparation materials , directly lobbying legislators and government officials , and refusing to acknowledge test - taker rights .
EXAM FEES Section::::Exam fees .
The SAT Reasoning Test with essay costs $ 64.50 ( $ 93.50 if late ) , the AP exams cost US $ 94 , and taking AP exams is often a requirement for students taking AP classes .
The SAT Subject Tests cost a baseline of $ 26 with a $ 22 fee for each test .
Furthermore , there are numerous other services that can be added to the basic costs , including late registration , score verification services , and various answering services that are available .
SAT score reports cost $ 12 per college for 1–2-week electronic delivery , or 2–4-week paper or disk delivery , depending on what method the school requires ( $ 31 extra for two - day processing ) .
College Board allows high school administrators to authorize fee waivers for some services to students from low - income families , generally those meeting National School Lunch Act criteria .
In addition , due to the competitive nature of the test , many students find it necessary to take preparatory courses or to have SAT tutoring , which can cost hundreds , sometimes thousands , of dollars .
Even College Board 's College Scholarship Service Profile ( CSS ) , a college financial aid application meant to help students pay for college , requires a fee .
For the 2018–19 school year , the price is $ 25 for the first report sent and an additional $ 16 for each additional college to receive the information .
In 2006 , College Board had $ 582.9 million of revenue but spent only $ 527.8 million , leaving a $ 55.1 million surplus .
Budget surpluses persist despite market - leading compensation packages for College Board executives – in 2009 College Board paid out a $ 1.3 million / year package for CEO Caperton , more than the head of the American Red Cross or Harvard University .
It paid nineteen executives more than $ 300,000 each per year .
MIT STUDY Section::::MIT study .
In 2005 , MIT Writing Director Les Perelman plotted essay length versus essay score on the new SAT from released essays and found a high correlation between them .
After studying 23 graded essays he found that the longer the essay was , the higher the score it was given .
Perelman found that he could accurately determine the score of an essay without even reading the essay .
In his study , he discovered that several of these essays were full of factual inaccuracies .
The College Board does not claim to grade for factual accuracy .
Perelman , along with the National Council of Teachers of English also criticized the 25-minute writing section of the test for damaging standards of writing taught in the classroom .
They say that writing teachers training their students for the SAT will not instill revision , depth and accuracy , but will instead guide them to produce long , formulaic , and wordy pieces .
" You 're getting teachers to train students to be bad writers " , concluded Perelman .
ADVANCED PLACEMENT ( AP ) CLASSES Section::::Advanced Placement ( AP ) classes .
Some teachers have criticized AP classes as restrictive in the nature of their curriculum and yet indispensable due to the importance of AP classes in the college admissions process .
College Board is effectively able to control every aspect of AP classes directly or indirectly .
The $ 94 fee , which is noted critically above , results only in a score report with the test name and grade .
No details are given on how this scoring was reached nor are individuals given access to this information from College Board .
Additionally , starting with a pilot program in 2018 and officially rolling out to all schools in 2019 , the College Board will require students to sign up for AP tests during the fall , before early - round college decisions are out .
While the College Board has stated that this is to ensure students commit to learning the material at the beginning of the year , many students have complained about it , stating that because they will not know whether or not the college they end up attending will grant credit for the test , the new , early registration deadline forces students to pay for tests that they will receive no benefit from .
The College Board also charges $ 15 if a student does not sit for a test that he or she did not sign up for , meaning that many students who signed up for tests that would not grant them any credit still have to sit for those tests or pay the $ 15 fee .
REPORTING ERRORS
Section::::Reporting errors .
In March 2006 , it was discovered that College Board had mis - scored several thousand tests taken in October 2005 .
Although the Board was aware of the error as early as December , it waited months to respond , and in late March , schools still did not have correct details .
Within days of the first announcement , the Board corrected upward the number of affected students .
Many colleges use the SAT score to decide acceptance and scholarships .
The late reporting of errors upset many high - profile colleges .
The dean of admissions at Pomona College commented , " Everybody appears to be telling half - truths , and that erodes confidence in College Board ...
It looks like they hired the people who used to do the books for Enron " .
SALE OF STUDENT DATA Section::::Sale of student data . , College Board charges $ 0.45 per name for access to student information .
Investigation by the New York Civil Liberties Union revealed that one of College Board 's customers was JAMRS , a military recruitment program run by the United States Department of Defense .
College Board and ACT have been sued over the use of this information .
RECYCLING SAT
EXAMS Section::::Recycling SAT exams .
On August 25 , 2018 , the SAT test given in America was discovered to be a recycled October 2017 international SAT test given in China .
The leaked PDF file was on the internet before the August 25 , 2018 exam .
SEE ALSO
* ACT , a test by ACT , Inc. , the main competitor to College Board 's SAT * College admissions in the United States * IB Diploma Programme , a pre - university educational program administered by the International Baccalaureate , the main competitor to College Board 's Advanced Placement ( AP ) Program
* Writing assessment
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * About College Board * College Board 's tests