STREET SIGN
THEFT
Street sign theft occurs when street signs are stolen , often to be used as decorations , but also sometimes to avoid obeying the law by claiming later the sign was not there .
Although the theft often seems arbitrary , signs with unusual or amusing names tend to be stolen more frequently .
Sometimes considered to be a prank by the perpetrators , the theft is often costly and inconvenient ( and can possibly be dangerous ) for the municipality or agency that owns the sign .
In the United States , each street sign generally costs between $ 100 and $ 500 to replace .
IN
LAW Section::::In law .
In most jurisdictions , the theft of traffic signage is treated like any other theft with respect to prosecution and sentencing .
If , however , the theft leads to an injury , then the thieves may be found criminally liable for the injury as well , provided that an injury of that sort was a foreseeable consequence of such a theft .
In one notable United States case , three people were found guilty of manslaughter for stealing a stop sign and thereby causing a deadly collision .
This was publicized in the novel Driver 's Ed by Caroline B. Cooney .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Some jurisdictions place stickers on street signs warning of the legal punishment for their theft .
Some cities ( e.g. Toronto ) use specially designed bolts to attach signs and prevent removal .
With some of the more popular street names such as Liverpool 's famous " Penny Lane " , authorities gave up the practice of constantly replacing signs and simply resorted to painting the name of the street on the walls .
Other jurisdictions offer replica street signs for sale to discourage theft .
For route markers or mile markers that contain numbers with suggestive meanings , such as 69 , 420 , or 666 , the number may be changed to avoid sign theft .
EXAMPLES
* The sign for South Park Street in Lawrence , Kansas has been stolen on several occasions , prompting the city to install theft - proof bolts on the sign .
* Brickyard Road , Lakeside , Florida .
Fans repeatedly stole the road sign because Lynyrd Skynyrd lead singer Ronnie Van Zant was living there before his death in 1977 and his brother , Johnny Van Zant , released an album and single called Brickyard Road in 1990 .
The county eventually erected a concrete pillar with the street name painted on it , as opposed to a traditional road sign .
* Leganés , Spain dedicated some streets to rock groups like AC / DC , Iron Maiden and Rosendo .
The AC / DC sign was stolen days after inauguration .
Leganés authorities now offer identical signs for sale .
* State , provincial or federal highways in many countries may face sign theft issues if their route number has popular culture connotations .
Numbers especially prone to theft include 69 because of its use as a slang term for simultaneous oral sex , 420 because of its connection to marijuana culture , and 666 because of its association with the Biblical Number of the Beast .
Three highways numbered 69 in the United States had to be renumbered due to sign theft :
Route 69 in New Jersey was renumbered to Route 31 in 1967 , State Highway 69 in Texas was renumbered to State Highway 112 in 1992 , and State Route 69 in Utah was renumbered to State Route 38 in 1994 .
However , Interstate 69 and US-69 have not been altered .
Sign theft was also a factor that led to the renumbering of U.S. Route 666 to U.S. Route 491 in 2003 , with a majority of the US 666 signs stolen following the announcement of the renumbering .
In addition , County Route 666 in Morris County , New Jersey was renumbered to County Route 665 due to sign theft .
* Signs for mile marker 66.6 on the New Jersey Turnpike and Garden State Parkway were frequently stolen due to the Satanic associations with the number 666 , prompting officials to consider changing the mile marker to 66.61 .
* Signs for mile marker 420 along Interstate 70 in Colorado were often stolen due to the marijuana reference , probably especially because of its legalization of marijuana , leading the Colorado Department of Transportation to change the mile marker to 419.99 .
The states of Washington and Idaho have also since begun implementing the same solution in response to incidents of " mile 420 " sign theft .
Idaho replaced mile marker 420 along U.S. Route 95 with 419.9 .
* Richard Bong State Recreation Area , a state park in Wisconsin , also suffers from sign theft due to the association of the word " bong " with marijuana culture .
* U.S. Route 66 in the United States , the subject of a famous 1940s pop song , also sees frequent sign theft — signs are so often stolen that in some places it can be difficult to navigate without knowing the route ; furthermore , US 66 signage has not been maintained since the route was decommissioned from the U.S. Highway System in 1985 .
* Often in the United States and Canada , the sign for streets called " High St. " are stolen , also for its connection to marijuana culture .
In an episode of the TV series That ' 70s Show , several of the characters attempt to steal a High St. sign to give to Steven Hyde for his birthday .
This is less common in the United Kingdom , as the term " high street " is a general term for a town 's main shopping district , equivalent to Main Street in North America .
* Ragged Ass Road in Yellowknife , Northwest Territories , Canada saw such frequent sign thefts that the city welded the sign to the post and began to sell replica street signs .
*
Similarly , in the southernmost urbanized portion of Anchorage , Alaska , near the Seward Highway , a neighborhood street was called Jackass Lane .
The sign at its intersection with Huffman Road , a major thoroughfare in Anchorage , was stolen so frequently during the 1970s and 1980s that the city government renamed the street to Silver Fox Lane .
* Signs leading to Bolinas , California were often stolen or wrongly placed by its reclusive residents as a means to make it difficult for tourists to locate the beachside town .
*
The signs on Abbey Road in London , England were often stolen by Beatles fans until the city council mounted them on buildings .
* The entry sign in Intercourse , Pennsylvania has been stolen or vandalized on more than one occasion .
* Street signs on Butt Hole Road in England were stolen over time , because of the use of butt hole as a slang term for " anus " .
The street was eventually renamed to Archers Way in 2009 .
*
After frequent thefts of its welcome sign at the town boundary , the Austrian village of Fucking installed theft - resistant signs in 2005 .
*
The village of Shitterton in the United Kingdom saw its welcome sign stolen so often that in 2007 the local council stopped replacing it .
The village 's residents eventually contributed funds to buy a one - and - a - half - tonne stone slab with the town 's name engraved on it as a permanent replacement .
*
All the signs of the Dutch village Maaskantje were stolen since the New Kids comedy sketch show on Comedy Central ( which is situated in the village )
became popular ( in the Netherlands , Belgium and Germany ) .
The municipality of Maaskantje decided not to replace the stolen signs .
*
In the early 1990s , during the popularity of the movie Batman Returns , many signs that said " Bat Cave Fire District " were stolen around the town of Bat Cave , North Carolina .
So many signs were taken that the local volunteer fire department stopped putting them back up .
*
The sign for Blue Jay Way is said to be the most - stolen street sign in Los Angeles , because of its association with the Beatles song written by George Harrison .
The city eventually gave up on a metal sign and painted the street 's name on the curb .
* Most street signs in West Hartford , Connecticut are mounted on low signposts ; the sign for Stoner Drive , however , is mounted high on a utility pole behind a guardrail .
* Sweden 's distinctive warning sign for moose is noted for its tendency to be stolen .
The sign " Grovare 6 " , pointing to the small village Grovare in Sweden , 6 km from the sign , was often stolen .
" Grovare " means " rougher " in Swedish with slightly wrong grammar , and the number 6 is spelt " sex " .
The new sign says " Grovare 5 " , even though it is still 6 km .
*
Due to the heavy metal festival that is named after the place , the small hamlet of Wacken in Northern Germany had to deal with street sign theft .
*
Climax and Hell , Michigan have this problem .
* Reassurance markers for highway M-22 in Michigan .
The highway is nationally popular for its scenery , taking drivers around the Leelanau Peninsula and eastern shore of Lake Michigan .
It also runs along the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore , named the " Most Beautiful Place in America " by ABC News .
A local kiteboarding company also released a line of merchandise with the highway marker on it , branding them as " M-22 " .
Signs along M-22 have been repeatedly stolen since 2003 .
The Michigan Department of Transportation has replaced stolen signs without the letter " M " on it .
SEE ALSO
*
Manhole cover theft
*
Traffic cone
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Daily Nebraskan article * Bill Breeden article in Owen County news * Kansas State University Collegian article