LIST OF METRO - NORTH RAILROAD STATIONS Metro - North Railroad ( MNCR ) is a commuter railroad system serving two of the five boroughs of New York City ( Manhattan and the Bronx ) , Westchester , Putnam , Dutchess , Rockland , and Orange Counties in New York , as well Fairfield and New Haven Counties in Connecticut .
It was established by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in 1983 to acquire operation of all commuter rail service in New York and Connecticut from Conrail , which itself had been formed in 1976 through the merging of a number of financially troubled railroads , and previously operated commuter railroad service under contract from the MTA .
STATION ORIGINS Section::::Station origins .
As with many commuter railroad systems of the late-20th Century in the United States , the stations exist along lines that were inherited from other railroads of the 19th and early 20th Centuries .
Stations on the east side of the Hudson River were originally part of either New York Central Railroad or New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad , both of which became part of Penn Central Railroad in 1968 and 1969 respectively .
Stations on lines on the west side of the Hudson River were originally part of Erie Railroad which was merged into the Erie Lackawanna Railroad in 1960 .
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION OF STATIONS Section::::Historical preservation of stations .
Dozens of active stations that serve Metro - North are listed on the National Register of Historic Places , the most notable of which is Grand Central Terminal which is also a National Historic Landmark and a New York City Landmark .
The majority of protected stations are on the New Haven Line , including two of the three branches .
Four of the northern termini of each line contains stations that are on NRHP , but the only one that serves Metro - North trains is Poughkeepsie station .
The New Haven Line has been terminating northeast of the historic New Haven Union Station at State Street station since 2002 .
The Danbury Branch , Waterbury Branch , and Port Jervis Lines stop at platforms just short of former stations that are listed on NRHP .
Some stations , such as are contributing properties to historic districts on NRHP .
Other structures related to the railroad are listed on NRHP , but are not stations , such as the Housatonic River , Norwalk River , and Saugatuck River Railroad Bridges .
STATION LIST Section::::Station list .
This is a list of train stations served by Metro - North Railroad .
This includes stations shared with NJTransit , but only those within New York State .
Stations are listed in alphabetical order .
Stations along the Pascack Valley Line from Hoboken , NJ to Montvale , NJ and along the Main Line and Bergen County Line from Hoboken , NJ to Mahwah , NJ are operated solely by New Jersey Transit . !
Station !
Line !
Municipality !
County !
Former railroad !
Opened !
Notes 1841 FORMER STATIONS Section::::Former stations .
NOTE :
This list is for stations closed by Metro - North only .
Any stations closed by New York Central Railroad , Penn Central Railroad , New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad , Erie Railroad , Erie - Lackawanna Railroad , Conrail , or the MTA before 1983 will not be included on this list . !
Station !
Line !
Municipality !
County !
Former railroad !
Opened !
Closed !
Notes DIVISIONS
NO LONGER IN SERVICE * Putnam Division ( New York and Putnam Railroad )
* Beacon Division ( Beacon Line )
* Upper Harlem Division ( New York Central Railroad ) REFERENCES