TREACLE
Treacle ( ) is any uncrystallised syrup made during the refining of sugar .
The most common forms of treacle are golden syrup , a pale variety , and a darker variety known as black treacle .
Black treacle , or molasses , has a distinctively strong , slightly bitter flavour , and a richer colour than golden syrup .
Golden syrup treacle is a common sweetener and condiment in British cookery , found in such dishes as treacle tart and treacle sponge pudding .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Historically , the Middle English term treacle was used by herbalists and apothecaries to describe a medicine ( also called theriac or theriaca ) , composed of many ingredients , that was used as an antidote treatment for poisons , snakebites , and various other ailments .
Triacle comes from the Old French triacle , in turn from ( unattested and reconstructed ) Vulgar Latin triacula , which comes from Latin theriaca , the latinisation of the Greek θηριακή ( thēriakē ) , the feminine of θηριακός ( thēriakos ) , " concerning venomous beasts " , which comes from θηρίον ( thērion ) , " wild animal , beast " .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Treacle is made from the syrup that remains after sugar is refined .
Raw sugars are first treated in a process called affination .
When dissolved , the resulting liquor contains the minimum of dissolved non - sugars to be removed by treatment with activated carbon or bone char .
The dark - coloured washings are treated separately , without carbon or bone char .
They are boiled to grain ( i.e. until sugar crystals precipitate out ) in a vacuum pan , forming a low - grade massecuite ( boiled mass ) which is centrifuged , yielding a brown sugar and a liquid by - product — treacle .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
A traditional Cornish fisherman 's celebratory drink is " Mahogany " , made from two parts local gin — now usually Plymouth Gin — mixed with one part black treacle .
In chapter 7 of Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , the Dormouse tells a story of Elsie , Lacie , and Tillie living at the bottom of a well , which confuses Alice , who interrupts to ask what they ate for sustenance .
"
The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it , and then said , ' It was a treacle - well . '
" This is an allusion to the so - called " treacle well " , the curative St. Margaret 's Well at Binsey , Oxfordshire . SEE ALSO
* Caramelisation * Treacle mining
* Treacle protein * Treacle sponge pudding
* Venice treacle , also known as Treacle of Andromachus : see REFERENCES CITATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
Old ' Recipes4us ' page " Treacle Origin " * CSR Sugar company of Australia –
Treacle
* Sugar Australia website – refiner and marketer for CSR limited .