RAY CHAPMAN
Raymond Johnson Chapman ( January 15 , 1891 – August 17 , 1920 ) was an American baseball player , spending his entire career as a shortstop for the Cleveland Indians .
Chapman was hit in the head by a pitch thrown by Yankees pitcher Carl Mays , and died 12 hours later .
He remains the only Major League Baseball player to have died from an injury received during an MLB game .
His death led to Major League Baseball establishing a rule requiring umpires to replace the ball whenever it became dirty , and it was partially the reason — along with sanitary concerns — that the spitball was banned after the 1920 season .
Chapman 's death was also one of the examples used to emphasize the need for wearing batting helmets ( although the rule was not adopted until over 30 years later ) .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Chapman was born in Beaver Dam , Kentucky , and raised in Herrin , Illinois .
He broke into the Major Leagues in 1912 with the Cleveland team , then known as the Naps .
Chapman led the American League in runs scored and walks in 1918 .
A top - notch bunter , Chapman is sixth on the all - time list for sacrifice hits and holds the single season record with 67 in 1917 .
Only Stuffy McInnis has more career sacrifices as a right - handed batter .
Chapman was also an excellent shortstop who led the league in putouts three times and assists once .
He batted .300 three times , and led the Indians in stolen bases four times .
In 1917 , he set a team record of 52 stolen bases , which stood until 1980 .
He was hitting .303 with 97 runs scored when he died .
He was one of the few players whom Ty Cobb considered a friend .
There was conjecture that 1920 was going to be Chapman 's last year as a pro baseball player .
Shortly before the season began , Chapman married Kathleen Daly , who was the daughter of a prominent Cleveland businessman .
Chapman had indicated he was going to retire to devote himself to the family business into which he was marrying , as well as to begin a family .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
At the time of Chapman 's death , part of every pitcher 's job was to dirty up a new ball the moment it was thrown onto the field .
By turns , they smeared it with dirt , licorice , and tobacco juice ; it was deliberately scuffed , sandpapered , scarred , cut , even spiked .
The result was a misshapen , earth - colored ball that traveled through the air erratically , tended to soften in the later innings , and , as it came over the plate , was very hard to see .
This practice is believed to have contributed to Chapman 's death .
He was struck with a pitch by Carl Mays on August 16 , 1920 , in a game against the New York Yankees at the Polo Grounds .
Mays threw with a submarine delivery , and it was the top of the fifth inning , in the late afternoon .
Eyewitnesses recounted that Chapman never moved out of the way of the hit , presumably unable to see the ball .
" Chapman did n't react at all , " said Rod Nelson of the Society of American Baseball Research .
" It was at twilight and it froze him .
" The sound of the ball smashing into Chapman 's skull was so loud that Mays thought it had hit the end of Chapman 's bat , so he fielded the ball and threw to first base .
Mike Sowell , in his book The Pitch That Killed , states that first baseman Wally Pipp caught Mays 's throw to first and then realized something was very wrong .
Chapman never took any steps , but rather slowly collapsed to his knees and then to the ground with blood pouring out of his left ear .
The umpire quickly called for doctors in the stands to come to Chapman 's aid .
Eventually Chapman was able to stand and to try to walk off the field , but mumbled when he attempted to speak .
As he was walking off the field , his knees buckled and he had to be assisted the rest of the way .
He was replaced by Harry Lunte for the rest of the game , which the Indians won 4–3 .
Chapman died 12 hours later in a New York City hospital , at about 4:30 a.m.
Thousands of mourners were present for Chapman 's funeral at the Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist in Cleveland .
In tribute to Chapman 's memory , Cleveland players wore black armbands , with manager Tris Speaker leading the team to win both the pennant and the first World Series championship in the history of the club .
Rookie Joe Sewell took Chapman 's place at shortstop , and went on to have a Hall of Fame career ( which he coincidentally concluded with the Yankees ) .
Ray Chapman is buried at Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland , Ohio , not far from where his new home was being built on Alvason Road in East Cleveland .
He and his wife had visited the home as it was being built several hours before he departed for New York on his final road trip .
HONORS Section::::Honors .
Not long after Chapman died , a bronze plaque was designed in his honor , funded by donations from fans .
The plaque features Chapman 's bust framed by a baseball diamond and flanked by two bats , one of which is draped with a fielder 's mitt .
At the bottom of the tablet is the inscription , " He lives in the hearts of all who knew him " .
The plaque was dedicated and hung at League Park and was moved to Cleveland Stadium in 1946 when the Indians moved to that stadium .
Sometime in the early 1970s , however , it was taken down for unknown reasons .
The plaque was rediscovered while the Indians were moving from Cleveland Stadium to Jacobs Field after the 1993 season .
Jim Folk , the Indians ' vice president of ballpark operations , said , " It was in a store room under an escalator in a little nook and cranny .
We did n't know what we were going to do with it , but there was no way it was just going to stay there when we moved to Jacobs Field .
We had it crated up and put on a moving truck and it came over along with our file cabinets and all the other stuff that came out of the stadium .
"
After the move , it was lost and forgotten once again .
" It just kind of got forgotten about , to be honest , " Folk said .
In February 2007 , workers discovered the plaque while cleaning out a storage room at Progressive Field .
Covered by thirteen years of dust and dirt , the bronze surface had oxidized a dark brown and the text was illegible .
The plaque was refurbished and made part of Heritage Park at Progressive Field , an area that opened soon after in April 2007 and includes the Cleveland Indians Hall of Fame and other exhibits from the team 's history .
Chapman had previously been inducted into the team hall of fame in July 2006 , part of the first new induction class since 1972 .
SEE ALSO
* List of baseball players who died during their careers REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Vigil , Vicki Blum ( 2007 ) .
Cemeteries of Northeast Ohio : Stones , Symbols & Stories .
Cleveland , OH :
Gray & Company , Publishers .
*
The book The Pitch That Killed , by Mike Sowell , is a history of the Chapman - Mays tragedy .
*
The historical novel , The Curse of Carl Mays , by Howard Camerik , also recounts the Chapman - Mays incident .
*
The Dan Gutman novel Ray & Me , tells the story of the Chapman incident with a fictional touch as the main character Joe Stoshack travels back in time to try to prevent his death .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Death of Ray Chapman – New York Times , August 18 , 1920