LAND O'LAKES Land O'Lakes , Inc. is a member - owned agricultural cooperative based in the Minneapolis - St .
Paul suburb of Arden Hills , Minnesota , focusing on the dairy industry .
The co - op has 1,959 direct producer - members , 751 member - cooperatives , and about 10,000 employees who process and distribute products for about 300,000 agricultural producers ; handling 12 billion pounds of milk annually .
It is ranked third on the National Cooperative Bank Co - op 100 list of mutuals and cooperatives .
The co - op is one of the largest producers of butter and cheese in the United States through its dairy foods business ; serves producers , animal owners and their families through more than 4,700 local cooperatives , independent dealers and other large retailers through its Purina Animal Nutrition business ; and delivers seed , crop protection products , agricultural services and agronomic insights to 1,300 locally owned and operated cooperative and independent agricultural retailers and their grower customers through its WinField United business .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Land O'Lakes was founded on July 8 , 1921 in Saint Paul , Minnesota , by representatives from 320 co - op creameries as the Minnesota Cooperative Creameries Association .
This organization aimed to improve marketing and quality of butter , and thus increase the profitability of dairying .
The Association developed and implemented the systematic inspection , grading and certification of butter from member creameries , resulting in greater uniformity of product .
The improved quality and uniformity , and the reliability of its grading system , were touted in advertising materials .
In 1924 , the uniformly graded sweet cream butter was given the name " Land O'Lakes " after a contest , and the certificate forms used by the Association included the " Land O Lakes " marketing name ( Minnesota 's state nickname is " Land of 10,000 Lakes " ) .
The name became so popular that the organization 's public identity was often confused with its product name ; thus , in 1926 , the organization itself adopted the name " Land O'Lakes Creameries ,
Inc. " and became eponymous with its product .
The co - op was often accused of unfair competition and false advertising in its early years , and compelled to defend its inspection and certification processes .
Eventually , however , the sweet butter marketing strategy drove competitors either to match the quality of butter produced under the Land O'Lakes name or see their sales decline .
Many competitors in the dairy products business copied the Land O'Lakes approach , and the certification of quality became a proven marketing technique in other product lines as well .
In the 1960s and 1970s , Land O'Lakes and Lake to Lake ( which later merged into Land O'Lakes ) had a rivalry with the National Farmers Organization over the practice of withholding milk from market .
One member was expelled from Lake to Lake for recruiting other farmers into NFO .
RECENT HISTORY Section::::Recent history .
The Land O'Lakes co - op has grown through numerous acquisitions , and now has a large business in farm supply in addition to dairy .
In 2001 , it paid $ 360 million - and assumed $ 130 million in debt - to take over animal feed producer Purina Mills , once part of Ralston Purina .
Purina Mills ' new owner planned to merge the company with its Land O'Lakes Farmland Feed division but would keep the Purina name and logo .
In 1978 , Land O'Lakes got into the meatpacking business with the purchase of Spencer Beef .
It sold Spencer Beef in 1983 to Excel , now Cargill Meat Solutions .
A federal court in 2002 ordered Land O'Lakes to pay $ 3 million for patent infringement to Dr William Pordy , the inventor of a type of dairy creamer .
An appeal court later overturned that ruling .
Land O'Lakes took an ownership stake in egg producer MoArk in 1999 ; it took full ownership of the company in 2006 .
In August 2012 , Land O'Lakes purchased refrigerated desserts manufacturer Kozy Shack Enterprises for an undisclosed sum .
In December , 2013
Land O '
Lakes acquired Geosys , an international satellite imagery and remote sensing service provider headquartered in Toulouse , France and having offices in São Paulo , Brazil , Melbourne , Australia , and Plymouth , Minnesota .
Geosys continues to work with WinField to develop a web - based decision making tool enabling its members to view remote sensing maps based on Normalized Difference Vegetative Index ( NDVI ) , a measure of green biomass .
Users of the web - based platform can see , at the field level , the health of their crop and make decisions regarding crop inputs , as well as the ability to use precision farming ( variable rate application ) techniques .
Geosys offers additional products and services globally .
In June 2016 Land O'Lakes acquired the Thousand Oaks , California - based biofuels firm Ceres ,
Inc. In July 2018 Land O'Lakes named Beth Ford as its first female CEO .
Ford 's role became effective August 1 .
At the time , she was the third openly gay woman CEO to run a Fortune 500 company .
CORPORATE AFFAIRS Section::::Corporate affairs .
The company 's headquarters is in Arden Hills , Minnesota in suburban Minneapolis - St .
Paul .
DAIRY FOODS
* Land O Lakes ( the apostrophe is sometimes removed in product branding )
*
Alpine Lace
*
Land O'Lakes Food Service * Kozy Shack * Vermont Creamery
ANIMAL FEED
* Purina Animal Nutrition *
Mazuri * Land O'Lakes Feed SEED / CROP PROTECTION
*
WinField United ( merged with United Suppliers in Spring 2016 ) BUTTER PACKAGING Section::::Butter packaging .
The Land O'Lakes Indian maiden , named Mia , holding the butter box was painted in 1928 by Brown & Bigelow illustrator Arthur C. Hanson .
According to Land O'Lakes , the original Indian maiden , Mia , was " simplified and modernized " in 1939 by Jess Betlach and has undergone many minor modifications since as the enduring logo of the co - op .
Red Lake Ojibwe artist Patrick DesJarlait updated Mia 's image in the 1950s .
The package image is an example of the infinite - loop motif or Droste effect , in which the image is repeated , in theory infinitely , within itself .
ALLEGATIONS OF ANIMAL MISTREATMENT BY SUPPLIER Section::::Allegations of animal mistreatment by supplier .
In September 2009 , People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) released an undercover video allegedly depicting animal abuse of dairy cows at a Pennsylvania supplier for Land O'Lakes ,
Inc. The video showed unclean conditions in the barn and milking parlor and cows with infections and illness .
The supplier 's employee was found not guilty of animal cruelty charges resulting from this incident and an investigation by veterinarians hired by Land O'Lakes revealed no mistreatment of animals , but the veterinarians suggested that bedding , hygiene , ventilation and animal disposal practices be improved .
Land O'Lakes states that it is supportive of the dairy industry 's National Dairy F.A.R.M. :
Farmers Assuring Responsible Management ( FARM ) animal care standards .
In May 2017 , the animal rights organization Compassion Over Killing released undercover footage of cruelty to animals at DFA supplier Mason Dixon Farms , which documented " cows being kicked in the face , punched in their sensitive udders , excessively shocked with an electric prod , jabbed with a pens andor elbows , and having their tails twisted or bent by workers .
" The footage resulted in the firing of one employee .
LICENSING Section::::Licensing .
Since August 2012 , WhiteWave Foods has licensed the Land O'Lakes name and sold coffee creamers and fluid dairy products under the brand .
SEE ALSO
* List of dairy product companies in the United States REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Land O'Lakes Corporate Website .
* Kenneth D. Ruble .
Men to Remember : How 100,000 Neighbors Made History .
( Lakeside Press , 1947 ) , a company - sponsored history of the early years of Land O ' Lakes ( 1921–1945 ) .
See especially pp .
163–167 and 181 - 184 , concerning the evolution of the name of the product into the company name .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official consumer site
* Company site * WinField United -- A Land O'Lakes company *
Land O'Lakes Food Service
*
Alpine Lace
*
*
Kozy Shack * Purina Mills