POINT GUARD
The point guard ( PG ) , also called the one or point , is one of the five positions in a regulation basketball game .
A point guard has perhaps the most specialized role of any position .
Point guards are expected to run the team 's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time .
Above all , the point guard must totally understand and accept their coach 's game plan ; in this way , the position can be compared to a quarterback in American football or a playmaker in association football ( soccer ) .
While the point guard must understand and accept the coach 's gameplan , they must also be able to adapt to what the defense is allowing , and they also must control the pace of the game .
A point guard , like other player positions in basketball , specializes in certain skills .
A point guard 's primary job is to facilitate scoring opportunities for his / her team , or sometimes for themselves .
Lee Rose has described a point guard as a coach on the floor , who can handle and distribute the ball to teammates .
This involves setting up plays on the court , getting the ball to the teammate in the best position to score , and controlling the tempo of the game .
A point guard should know when and how to instigate a fast break and when and how to initiate the more deliberate sets .
Point guards are expected to be vocal floor leaders .
A point guard needs always to have in mind the times on the shot clock and the game clock , the score , the numbers of remaining timeouts for both teams , etc .
Among the taller players who have enjoyed success at the position is Ben Simmons , who at 6 ' 10 " won the 2018 National Basketball Association Rookie of the Year Award .
Behind him is Magic Johnson , who at 6 ' 9 " ( 2.06 m ) won the National Basketball Association Most Valuable Player Award three times in his career .
Other point guards who have been named NBA MVP include Russell Westbrook , Bob Cousy , Oscar Robertson , Allen Iverson , Derrick Rose and two - time winners Steve Nash and Stephen Curry .
In the NBA , point guards are usually about 6 ' 4 " ( 1.93 m ) or shorter , and average about 6 ' 2 " ( 1.88 m )
whereas in the WNBA , point guards are usually 5 ' 9 " ( 1.75 m ) or shorter .
Having above - average size ( height , muscle ) is considered advantageous , although size is secondary to situational awareness , speed , quickness , and ball handling skills .
Shorter players tend to be better dribblers since they are closer to the floor , and thus have better control of the ball while dribbling .
After an opponent scores , it is typically the point guard who brings the ball down court to begin an offensive play .
Passing skills , ball handling , and court vision are crucial .
Speed is important ; a speedy point guard is better able to create separation and space off the dribble , giving him / herself room to work .
Point guards are often valued more for their assist totals than for their scoring .
Another major evaluation factor is Assist - to - Turnover ratio , which reflects the decision - making skills of the player .
Still , a first - rate point guard should also have a reasonably effective jump shot .
OFFENSE Section::::Offense .
The point guard is positioned on the perimeter of the play , so as to have the best view of the action .
This is a necessity because of the point guard 's many leadership obligations .
Many times , the point guard is referred to by announcers as a " coach on the floor " or a " floor general " .
In the past , this was particularly true , as several point guards such as Lenny Wilkens served their teams as player - coaches .
This is not so common anymore , as most coaches are now solely specialized in coaching and are non - players .
Some point guards are still given a great deal of leeway in the offense .
Even point guards who are not given this much freedom , however , are still extensions of their coach on the floor and must display good leadership skills .
Along with leadership and a general basketball acumen , ball - handling is a skill of great importance to a point guard .
Generally speaking , the point guard is the player in possession of the ball for the most time during a game and is responsible for maintaining possession of the ball for his team in the face of any pressure from the opponents .
Point guards must be able to maintain possession of the ball in crowded spaces and in traffic and be able to advance the ball quickly .
A point guard that has enough ball - handling skill and quickness to be able to drive to the basket in a half - court set is also very valuable and considered by some to be a must for a successful offense .
After ball - handling , passing and scoring are the most important areas of the game for a point guard .
As the primary decision - maker for a team , a point guard 's passing ability determines how well a point guard is able to put his decision into play .
It is one thing to be able to recognize the player that is in a tactically advantageous position , but it is another thing entirely to be able to deliver the ball to that player .
For this reason , a point guard is usually , but not always , more skilled and focused on passing than shooting .
However , a good jump shot and the ability to score off a drive to the basket are still valuable skills .
A point guard will often use his ability to score in order to augment his effectiveness as a decision maker and play maker .
In addition to the traditional role of the point guard , modern teams have found new ways to utilize the position .
Notably , several modern point guards have used a successful style of post play , a tactic usually practiced by much larger centers and forwards .
Working off of the fact that the opposing point guard is in all probability an undersized player with limited strength , several modern point guards have developed games close to the basket that include being able to utilize the drop step , spin move , and fade away jump shot .
In recent years , the sport 's shift from a fundamental style of play to a more athletic , scoring - oriented game resulted in the proliferation of so - called combo guards at the point guard position .
More explosive and athletic point guards focus on scoring as opposed to play - making , forgoing assists and ball - movement , and often defense , for higher scoring numbers .
Young players who are relatively short are now developing the scoring aspects of their skill - sets , whereas previously these players would find it difficult to enter the NBA without true point guard skills .
These combo point guards can surprise defenses .
Instead of passing after bringing up the ball they quickly drive to the basket or step back for an outside shot .
There are some disadvantages to this style of play .
A point guard often controls the offense and he also controls who gets the ball and who does n't , as this type of controlling style of play is necessary to control the tempo of a game .
Scoring point guards typically look to score first , thus preventing teammates from getting the ball .
This can cause other players to become dis - involved in the offense .
Even so , combo guards still require above - average passing skill , but not as much as possessed by " pure " point guards ( which is what those in the traditional mold of a point guard are referred to ) .
A point guard primarily defends on the perimeter , just as he primarily plays on the perimeter on offense .
On defense , the point guard is tasked with making the opposing point guard as ineffective as possible .
A defensive point guard will try to accomplish this with constant pressure on the ball , making it difficult to maintain possession .
A defensive point guard will also pressure opponents in passing lanes in an attempt to generate steals and scoring opportunities for his own team .
SEE ALSO
* Bob Cousy Award – An annual award given to the nation 's top NCAA male point guard * Nancy Lieberman Award – The counterpart to the Cousy Award ; given to the top NCAA female point guard REFERENCES
* The Basketball Handbook ( pg 14 ) ( 2004 ) .
Lee H. Rose
EXTERNAL LINKS
* , accessed 2008 - 02 - 09