GROUP MARRIAGE Group marriage ( a form of polyfidelity ) is a nonmonogamous marriage - like arrangement between more than two people , where three or more adults live together , all considering themselves partners , sharing finances , children , and household responsibilities .
The term does not refer to bigamy as no claim to being married in formal legal terms is made .
Group marriage reentered popular consciousness in 1974 with the publication of Group Marriage : a study of contemporary multilateral marriage by Larry Constantine and Joan Constantine .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Depending on the sexual orientation and activity of the members , all adults in the family may be sexual partners .
For instance , if all members are heterosexual , all the women may have sexual relationships with all the men .
If members are bisexual or pansexual , they may have evolved sexual relationships with either sex .
Group marriage implies a strong commitment to be faithful by only having sex within the group and staying together longterm .
The group may be open to taking on new partners , but only if all members of the family agree to accept the new person as a partner .
The new person then moves into the household and becomes an equal member of the family .
Currently , the most common form of group marriage is a triad of two women and one man , or two men and one woman .
There are also polyfidelitous families formed by two heterosexual couples who become a foursome and live together as a family .
LEGAL ASPECTS
Section::::Legal aspects .
In most countries , it is not explicitly illegal for three or more people to form and share a sexual relationship ( subject sometimes to laws against homosexuality ) , though such relational forms risk running afoul of state or local ordinances banning unmarried cohabitation .
No Western country permits statutory marriage between more than two people .
Nor do they give strong and equal legal protection ( e.g. , of rights relating to children ) to non - married partners — the legal regime is not comparable to that applied to married couples .
Individuals involved in polyamorous relationships are considered by the law to be no different from people who live together or date under other circumstances .
NON - EUROPEAN CULTURES
*
Among the Ancient Hawaiians , the relationship of punalua involved " the fact that two or more brothers with their wives , or two or more sisters with their husbands , were inclined to possess each other in common " .
Friedrich Ratzel in The History of Mankind reported in 1896 that in Hawaii a kind of incipient polyandry arose by the addition to the marriage establishment of a cicisbeo , known as Punalua .
*
In some parts of Melanesia , there are " sexual relations between a group of men formed by the husband 's brothers and a group of women formed by the wife 's sisters " .
* Women of Nair community , a caste in Kerala , India , used to practice polyandry .
* Toda people , who live on the isolated Nilgiri plateau of Southern India practiced adelphic polyandry for centuries , but no longer do so .
Adelphic polyandry occurs when brothers share the same wife or wives .
Such arrangements have been common in Himalayan tribes until recently .
Section::::Non
- European cultures .
The following instances are cited in Thomas 1906 .
*
In North America there is " group marriage as existing among the Omahas … adelphic polygyny . "
*
Among the Dieri of Australia exist forms of spouse - sharing known as pirrauru , in two categories " according to whether or not the man has or has not a tippa - malku wife .
In the first case it is , taken in combination with the tippa - malku marriage , a case of bilateral dissimilar adelphic ( M. and F. ) polygamy .
In the latter case it is dissimilar adelphic ( tribal ) polyandry " .
The pirrauru " relation arises through the exchange by brothers of their wives " .
* Among the Kurnandaburi of Australia , " a group of men who are own or tribal brothers are united … in group marriage " .
* Among the Wakelbura of Australia , there is " adelphic polyandry . "
* Among the Kurnai of Australia , " unmarried men have access to their brothers ' wives . " IN MODERN U.S. PRACTICES Section::::In modern U.S. practices .
Group marriage occasionally occurred in communal societies founded in the 19th and 20th centuries .
A long - lived example was the Oneida Community founded by John Humphrey Noyes in 1848 .
Noyes taught that he and his followers , having reached 200 in number , had thus undergone sanctification ; that is , it was impossible for them to sin , and that for the sanctified , marriage ( along with private property ) was abolished as an expression of jealousy and exclusiveness .
The Oneida commune lived together as a single large group and shared parental responsibilities .
Any given male - female combination in the group was free to have sex , usually upon the man 's asking the woman , and this was the common practice for many years .
The group began to falter about 1879–1881 , eventually disbanding after Noyes fled arrest .
Several dozen pairs of Oneidans quickly married in traditional fashion .
The Kerista Commune practiced group marriage in San Francisco from 1971 to 1991 , calling their version polyfidelity .
It is difficult to estimate the number of people who actually practice group marriage in modern societies , as such a form of marriage is not officially recognized or permitted in any jurisdiction in the U.S. , and de jure illegal in many .
It is also not always visible when people sharing a residence consider themselves privately to be a group marriage .
PORTRAYAL IN LITERATURE Section::::Portrayal in literature .
Group marriage has been a literary theme , particularly science fiction , especially later novels of Robert A. Heinlein , such as Stranger in a Strange Land , Friday , Time Enough for Love , and The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress .
Stranger in a Strange Land describes a communal group much like the Oneida Society .
*
The Moon Is
a Harsh Mistress describes line marriage in detail .
The characters argue that the line family creates economic continuity and parental stability in an unpredictable , dangerous environment .
Manuel 's line marriage is said to be over 100 years old .
The family is portrayed as economically comfortable because improvements and investments made by previous spouses compounded , rather than being lost between generations .
* Line marriage is also commonly practiced in Joe Haldeman 's 1981 novel Worlds .
Haldeman describes how individual families joined forces to avoid inheritance taxes .
* A passing reference is made in David Brin 's Infinity 's Shore , where a sapient bottlenose dolphin crewmember is noted as belonging to a " line marriage , one of the Heinlein forms " .
* A domestic partnership consisting of four people who are all married to each other features in Vonda N. McIntyre 's Starfarers series .
* Group marriages of three partners ( called triples ) are described as commonplace in the 1966 novel Babel-17 by Samuel R. Delany .
The novel 's protagonist , a female starship captain Rydra Wong , once lived in a triple , until one member died and another was put in stasis for an incurable illness .
Other crew members , especially those who worked in close three - person teams , are noted for this type of relationship .
* Group marriage is advocated in Robert Rimmer 's 1968 novel Proposition 31 , the story of two middle - class suburban California couples who turn to a four - person marriage to deal with their multiple infidelities as an alternative to divorce .
* Group marriage is a central plot element in Donald Kingsbury 's 1982 novel Courtship Rite .
A six - partner group marriage ( three male , three female ) is considered the ideal norm in the alien society described in the novel ; the main characters are in a five - partner group marriage , and much of the dramatic tension hinges on there being more than one candidate for the sixth position .
* Group marriage is briefly addressed in the 1989 Star Trek novel Star Trek : The Lost Years , by J. M. Dillard .
A minor character , Lt . Nguyen , enters into a group marriage , and this is portrayed as a relatively normal occurrence .
*
In , the alien Dr. Phlox comes from a world where such relationships are the norm .
* William H. Keith , Jr. , under his pseudonym Ian Douglas , describes line marriage as the norm , with large family clans extending through many generations , in his Heritage Trilogy , and its two sequels Legacy Trilogy and Inheritance Trilogy .
These three trilogies are about the US Marine Corps battling aliens over a period of a thousand years .
*
In the television series Caprica , the character Sister Clarice is a participant in a group marriage .
* Several short stories by Ursula K. Le Guin take place on the planet O , where a four - person marriage , called a sedoretu , is common .
The sedoretu consists of both a man and a woman from each of two moieties ; since it considered incest to have sex with someone of the same moiety , each participant in the marriage has a sexual relationship with only two out of the three other participants .
* Poul Anderson , in his novel Three Worlds to Conquer , depicts an alien species ( on Jupiter ) for whom a kind of group marriage is a fundamental biological imperative .
A female of that species can only conceive by mating with two different males within a few hours of each other ; thus , every individual has a mother and two fathers , and every family is composed of a female and two males .
*
In The Wheel of Time series by Robert Jordan , the main protagonist ( Rand al'Thor ) ends up becoming involved with three women , one of whom is an Aiel , where such relationships are accepted .
Also , among the Green Ajah of the Aes Sedai , it is common for a Sister to have two or more , usually up to four , Warders .
*
In Isaac Asimov 's novel
The Gods Themselves , the other - dimensional beings enter into a three - way relationship between Rationals ( " lefts " ) , Emotionals ( " mids " ) , and Parentals ( " rights " ) .
This comes out of their nature , rather than out of any social construct ; without such a three - way pairing , they do not reproduce .
SEE ALSO
* Cohabitation in the United States * POSSLQ
* Samenlevingscontract * Types of marriages REFERENCES NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Murdock , George P. " Ethnographic Atlas Codebook " , derived from Ethnographic Atlas