ICING ( ICE HOCKEY )
Icing is an infraction in the sport of ice hockey .
It occurs when a player shoots the puck across both the centre red line and the opposing team 's goal line , and the puck remains untouched .
However , it is not icing if the puck is shot from behind the halfway line into the goal ; if the puck crosses the goal line completely , the goal is counted .
A major exception is when a team is shorthanded .
A team trying to eliminate a penalty ( commonly known as a " penalty kill " ) may legally " ice the puck " .
A team on a power play , however , must still follow the icing rules .
When icing occurs , a linesman stops play .
Play is resumed with a faceoff in the defending zone of the team that committed the infraction .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
The icing rule has three variations : * touch icing * no - touch or automatic icing
* hybrid icing TOUCH ICING
Section::::Touch icing .
In touch icing , a player on the opposing team other than the goaltender must touch the puck to cause the stoppage of play .
If the puck is first touched by the goaltender or a player on the team that iced the puck , icing is waved off ( cancelled ) and play continues .
The icing rule can lead to high - speed races for the puck .
While an icing call is pending , the linesman raises an arm to indicate that a potential icing call may be made .
If the icing is waved off , the official lowers his arm and gives the washout signal ( extending both arms sideways from the body at shoulder height , similar to the " safe " sign in baseball but typically delivered from a less - crouched or fully upright position ) .
NO - TOUCH OR
AUTOMATIC
ICING Section::::No - touch or automatic icing .
Most amateur leagues worldwide use no - touch or automatic icing , where play is stopped for icing immediately once the puck crosses the goal line.https://www.usahockeyrulebook.com/page/show/1084675-rule-624-icing-the-puck HYBRID ICING
Section::::Hybrid icing .
International IIHF rules , the National Hockey League , American Hockey League , NCAA college hockey , European professional leagues , and several minor North American leagues ( ECHL , Central Hockey League and SPHL ) use hybrid icing .
Play is stopped immediately if the player on the opposing team reaches the faceoff dot first , instead of skating all the way across the goal line to touch the puck .
This type of icing is intended to reduce the number of collisions along the boards during touch icing , but still allowing the team that iced the puck to get to it first to wave off the icing .
In instances where the puck is shot around the end boards , travels down the ice and comes out the other end , the linesman has to determine who would have touched the puck first .
If it 's the defending player , he calls an automatic icing , but if it 's the attacking player he lets the play continue .
The NHL adopted the hybrid icing variation as its rule beginning with the 2013–14 season , after several decades of using touch icing .
The IIHF adopted the hybrid icing rule in 2014 after a few decades of using no - touch icing .
EXCEPTIONS Section::::Exceptions .
Icing is always waved off in the following situations :
* The team committing the icing is shorthanded , i.e. penalty killing .
*
The linesman believes a player on the opposing team ( other than the goaltender ) could have played the puck before it crossed the goal line .
*
The puck enters the goal .
*
The puck is iced directly from a player participating in a face - off .
*
The goaltender leaves his goal crease and moves in the direction of the puck ( except under USA Hockey rules ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The icing rule was passed in September 1937 by the National Hockey League ( NHL ) .
It was done to eliminate a common delaying tactic used by teams to protect a winning margin .
A November 18 , 1931 , game is cited as one extreme example that led to the ban on the practice .
The New York Americans , protecting a 3–2 lead over the Boston Bruins at Boston Garden , iced the puck over 50 times .
The crowd became incensed and threw debris onto the ice , causing a delay while the teams were sent to their dressing rooms .
When the teams met again that December 3 in New York , the Bruins iced the puck 87 times in a scoreless draw .
The rule was amended in June 1951 , whereby if the goaltender touched the puck , the infraction was nullified .
For the 1990–91 season , the league amended it to nullify the infraction if the puck passed through or touched the goal crease when the goaltender had been removed for an extra attacker .
The rule was later amended by the NHL to nullify icing if the goaltender moved towards the puck as it approached the goal line .
The 1970s - era World Hockey Association never adopted the NHL rule of allowing shorthanded teams to ice the puck .
In 2009 , USA Hockey considered eliminating the shorthanded icing rule , having tested its elimination in Massachusetts and Alaska in the 2007 - 2009 seasons .
The IIHF adopted the no - touch icing rule after an incident in the Czechoslovak First Ice Hockey League in 1990 , when Luděk Čajka , rushing to get to the puck in an icing situation , crashed into the boards , suffered severe spinal injuries , and died a few weeks later .
After some teams in need of a line change ( player substitution ) began deliberately icing the puck to stop play , and as part of a group of important rules changes following the 2004–05 NHL lockout , the NHL supplemented the icing rule prior to the 2005–06 season by not allowing the offending team to substitute players before the next faceoff , except to replace an injured player or when the goaltender must return to the net following an icing call .
This change was made in an effort to speed up game play by reducing icing infractions , as well as to encourage teams to work the puck up the ice rather than taking the opportunity to rest their players .
In some Junior leagues ( such as the WHL ) , the offending team is permitted to substitute players after an icing only if the puck was shot from the neutral zone ( between the defensive blue line and the red line ) .
If the violation occurs in the defensive zone , substitution is prohibited .
The NHL began using hybrid - icing rules in the 2013–14 season , after several decades of using touch icing .
The IIHF also switched to hybrid after the conclusion of the 2014 World Championship .
On June 13 , 2017 , USA Hockey adopted a rule change which eliminated the shorthanded icing exception .
The rule change establishes that when a shorthanded team ices the puck a subsequent icing infraction will be enforced ; play will stop and a face off will occur in the offending team 's zone .
The rule change is effective starting with the 2017 - 18 regular season , impacting 14U and younger age groups .
For the 2017 - 18 NHL season , offending teams are not allowed to take a timeout after an icing .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS