THE OUTSIDERS ( NOVEL )
The Outsiders is a coming - of - age novel by S. E. Hinton , first published in 1967 by Viking Press .
Hinton was 15 when she started writing the novel but did most of the work when she was 16 and a junior in high school .
Hinton was 18 when the book was published .
The book details the conflict between two rival gangs divided by their socioeconomic status : the working - class " greasers " and the upper - class " Socs " ( pronounced — short for Socials ) .
The story is told in first - person perspective by teenaged protagonist Ponyboy Curtis .
The story in the book takes place in Tulsa , Oklahoma , in 1965 , but this is never explicitly stated in the book .
A film adaptation was produced in 1983 , and a little - known short - lived television series appeared in 1990 , picking up where the movie left off .
A stage adaptation was written by Christopher Sergel and published in 1990 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Ponyboy Curtis , a teenaged member of a loose gang of " greasers " , is leaving a movie theater when he is jumped by " Socs " , the greasers ' rival gang .
Several greasers , including Ponyboy 's two older brothers — the paternal Darry and the popular Sodapop — come to his rescue .
The next night , Ponyboy and two greaser friends , the hardened Dally and the quiet Johnny , meet Cherry and Marcia , a pair of Soc girls , at a drive - in movie theater .
Cherry spurns Dally 's rude advances , but Ponyboy ends up speaking civilly with Cherry , emotionally connecting with a Soc for the first time in his life .
Afterward , Ponyboy , Johnny , and their wisecracking friend Two - Bit begin to walk Cherry and Marcia home , when they are stopped by Cherry 's boyfriend Bob , who badly beat up Johnny a few months back .
Bob and the greasers exchange taunts , but Cherry prevents a fight by willingly leaving with Bob .
Ponyboy gets home at two in the morning , enraging Darry until he suddenly slaps Ponyboy .
Pony runs out the door and meets up with Johnny , expressing his anger at Darry 's increasing coldness in the wake of his parents ' recent deaths in a car crash .
Running away from home , Ponyboy and Johnny wander into a park , where Bob and four other Socs surround them .
After some heated talk , Ponyboy spits at the Socs , prompting them to attempt to drown him in a nearby fountain , but Johnny stabs Bob , killing him and dispersing the rest .
Terrified of what to do next , Ponyboy and Johnny rush to find Dally , who gives them money and a loaded gun , directing them to hide in an abandoned church in Windrixville .
During their stay there , Pony cuts and dyes his hair as a disguise , reads Gone with the Wind to Johnny , and , upon viewing a beautiful sunrise , recites the poem
" Nothing Gold Can Stay " by Robert Frost . Days later , Dally comes to check on them , revealing that violence between the greasers and Socs has escalated since Bob 's death into all - out city - wide warfare , with Cherry acting out of guilt as a spy for the greasers .
Johnny decides to turn himself in and Dally agrees to take the boys back home .
As they attempt to leave , they notice the church has caught fire and several local schoolchildren have become trapped inside .
The greasers run inside the burning church to save the children , but Ponyboy is rendered unconscious by the fumes .
At the hospital he discovers that he and Dally are not badly injured , but a piece of the church roof fell on Johnny and broke his back .
Sodapop and Darry come to the hospital ; Darry breaks down and cries .
Ponyboy then realizes that Darry cares about him , and is only hard on him because he loves him and cares about his future .
The following morning the newspapers declare Pony and Johnny heroes , but Johnny will be charged with manslaughter for Bob 's death .
Two - Bit tells them that the greaser – Soc rivalry is to be settled in a final rumble .
Ponyboy and Two - Bit are approached by a Soc named Randy , Bob 's best friend , who expresses remorse for his involvement in the gang war , lacks confidence about the rumble ending the feud , and says he will not participate .
Later , Ponyboy visits Johnny at the hospital , where he is in critical condition .
On their way home , Pony spots Cherry and they talk .
Cherry says she is unwilling to visit Johnny in the hospital because he killed her boyfriend .
Pony calls her a traitor , but after she explains herself they end on good terms .
After escaping the hospital , Dally shows up just in time for the rumble .
The greasers win the brutal fight .
Afterward , Pony and Dally hurry back to the hospital to see Johnny , but he dies moments later and a maniacal Dally runs out of the room .
Pony returns home that night feeling confused and disoriented .
Dally calls the house to say that he has robbed a store and is running from the police .
The greasers find Dally deliberately pointing an unloaded gun at the police , causing them to shoot and kill him .
Overwhelmed , Ponyboy faints and is sick in bed for many days due to the resulting concussion from the rumble .
When the hearing finally comes , the judge frees Ponyboy from responsibility for Bob 's death and allows Pony to remain at home with Darry and Soda .
Ponyboy returns to school , but his grades drop .
Although he is failing English , his teacher , Mr. Syme , says he will pass him if he writes a decent theme .
In the copy of Gone with the Wind that Johnny gave him before dying , Ponyboy finds a letter from Johnny describing how he will die proudly after saving the kids from the fire .
Johnny also urges Ponyboy to " stay gold " .
Ponyboy decides to write his English assignment about the recent events , and begins his essay with the opening line of the novel : " When I stepped out into the bright sunlight from the darkness of the movie house , I had only two things on my mind :
Paul Newman and a ride home ... "
MAJOR
CHARACTERS
GREASERS
* Ponyboy Curtis : Narrator and the youngest Curtis brother , 14 years old , who gets good grades and runs track .
* Sodapop " Soda " Curtis : The middle Curtis brother , 16 years old , a high school dropout who works at a gas station .
* Darrel " Darry " Curtis :
The oldest Curtis brother , 20 years old , who has been caring for his brothers since their parents died in a car crash .
He is the unofficial leader of the gang .
*
Johnny Cade : Ponyboy 's best friend , 16 years old , who is extremely quiet and lives with his alcoholic and abusive mother and father .
* Dallas " Dally " Winston : A 17-year - old juvenile delinquent , he is the roughest of the greasers .
He lived on the streets of New York City for three years .
* Keith " Two - Bit " Mathews : A wise - cracking kleptomaniac .
* Steve Randle :
Sodapop 's best friend since grade school .
* Timothy " Tim " Shepard : Leader of another greaser gang : an organized downtown one .
He is also a friend of Dally 's .
* Curly Shepard : Tim Shepard 's younger brother , mentioned as a friend of Ponyboy 's .
* Sandy : Sodapop 's girlfriend .
SOCS
* Sherri " Cherry " Valance : Bob 's girlfriend , attends the same high school as Ponyboy .
* Robert " Bob " Sheldon : Cherry 's boyfriend who is stabbed and killed by Johnny .
* Randy Adderson : A friend of Bob 's and Marcia 's boyfriend .
* Marcia : Cherry 's best friend and Randy 's girlfriend .
* Paul Holden :
Darry 's old friend from high school .
* David : A member of the Socs who tried to drown Ponyboy in the fountain .
OTHER CHARACTERS * Jerry Wood :
The schoolteacher responsible for the children who were in the seemingly abandoned church .
*
Mr. Syme : Ponyboy 's English teacher who assigns him a theme to write that becomes the story of the novel itself .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The Outsiders was a controversial book at the time of its publication ; it is still currently challenged and debated .
It was ranked # 38 on the American Library Association 's Top 100 Most Frequently Challenged Books of 1990–1999 .
This book has been banned from some schools and libraries because of the portrayal of gang violence , underage smoking and drinking , strong language / slang , and family dysfunction .
However , in many U.S. schools , the book is part of the English curriculum at the middle- or high - school level .
SEE ALSO
* The Outsiders House Museum
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS *
S.E. Hinton 's Website * " ' The Outsiders ' : 40 Years Later " By Dale Peck
The New York Times September 23 , 2007