PAY IT FORWARD ( FILM )
Pay It
Forward is a 2000 American romantic drama film based on the novel of the same name by Catherine Ryan Hyde .
It is set in Las Vegas , and it chronicles 12-year - old Trevor McKinney 's launch of a goodwill movement known as ' pay it forward ' .
Directed by Mimi Leder and written by Leslie Dixon , it stars Haley Joel Osment as Trevor , Helen Hunt as his alcoholic single mother Arlene McKinney , and Kevin Spacey as his physically and emotionally scarred social studies teacher Eugene Simonet .
The film was released on October 20 , 2000 to mixed reviews , with most critics praising the acting , writing , music and cinematography but criticizing the story and accusing it of excessive emotional manipulation , particularly in its ending .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Trevor ( Haley Joel Osment ) begins 7th grade in Las Vegas , Nevada .
His social studies teacher Eugene Simonet ( Kevin Spacey ) gives the class an assignment to devise and put into action a plan that will change the world for the better .
Trevor 's plan is a charitable program based on the networking of good deeds .
He calls his plan " pay it forward " , which means the recipient of a favor does a favor for three others rather than paying the favor back .
However , it needs to be a major favor that the recipient can not complete themselves .
Trevor does a favor for three people , asking each of them to " pay the favor forward " by doing favors for three other people , and so on , along a branching tree of good deeds .
His first good deed is to let a homeless man named Jerry ( Jim Caviezel ) live in his garage , and Jerry pays the favor forward by doing car repairs for Trevor 's mother .
Trevor 's efforts appear to fail when Jerry relapses into drug addiction , but Jerry pays his debt forward later by talking to a suicidal woman , who is about to jump off a bridge .
Meanwhile , Trevor 's mother Arlene ( Helen Hunt ) confronts Eugene about Trevor 's project after discovering Jerry in their house .
Trevor then selects Eugene as his next " pay it forward " target and tricks Eugene and Arlene into a romantic dinner date .
This also appears to fail until Trevor and Arlene argue about her love for Ricky , her alcoholic ex - husband , and she slaps him in a fit of anger .
The two adults are brought together again when Trevor runs away from home and Arlene asks Eugene to help her find him .
After finding Trevor , Arlene begins to pursue Eugene sexually .
Eugene has deep burn marks visible on his neck and face , and he initially resists Arlene 's overtures out of insecurity .
When they finally sleep together , he is seen to have extensive scarring all over his torso .
Arlene accepts Eugene 's physical disfigurement and forms an emotional bond with him , but quickly abandons their relationship when Ricky ( Jon Bon Jovi ) returns to her , claiming to have given up drinking .
His return and her acceptance of it angers Eugene , whose own mother had a habit of taking his abusive , alcoholic father back .
When Arlene attempts to explain to Eugene that she believes Ricky has changed for good , Eugene explains that his father intentionally burned him by knocking him unconscious , then pouring gasoline over him and igniting it .
He berates Arlene for being " one of those women " and warns her of Ricky 's potential to abuse Trevor .
When Ricky drinks again and resumes his abusive behavior , Arlene realizes her mistake and forces him to leave .
Trevor 's school assignment marks the beginning of the story 's chronology , but the opening scene in the film shows one of the later favors in the " pay it forward " tree , in which a man gives a car to Los Angeles journalist Chris Chandler ( Jay Mohr ) .
As the film proceeds , Chris traces the chain of favors back to its origin as Trevor 's school project .
After her date with Eugene , Arlene paid Jerry 's favor forward by forgiving her own mother , Grace ( Angie Dickinson ) , for her mistakes in raising Arlene , and Grace , who is homeless , helps a gang member escape from the police .
The gang member then saves a girl 's life in a hospital , and the girl 's father gives Chris his new car .
Chris finally identifies Trevor as the originator of " pay it forward " and conducts a recorded interview in which Trevor describes his hopes and concerns for the project .
Eugene , hearing Trevor 's words , realizes that he and Arlene should be together .
As Eugene and Arlene reconcile with an embrace , Trevor notices his friend , Adam , being bullied by gangster - like children , as he has several times before .
He pays it forward to Adam by rushing into the scene and fighting the bullies while Eugene and Arlene rush to stop him .
One of the bullies takes a switchblade out of his pocket and stabs Trevor in the abdomen with it .
The bullies run away and Trevor is taken to the hospital , where he dies from his injuries .
This news is reported on television as well as the fact that the movement is spreading across the country ; Arlene and Eugene are soon visited by hundreds of people who have participated in or heard of the " Pay It Forward " movement by gathering in a vigil to pay Trevor their respects .
CAST
* Kevin Spacey as Eugene Simonet .
He is Trevor 's social studies teacher , and an emotionally and physically scarred man .
As a teenager , he suffered abuse from his father ( including lighting him on fire ) and still has burns visible on his face and torso .
He begins the film as a shy recluse , self - conscious about his deformities , but eventually he enters a relationship with Trevor 's mother Arlene and overcomes his fears .
He sets an assignment to Trevor 's class , asking them to change the world for the better .
He is significantly changed from the novel , where he was an African - American man named Reuben St. Clair who had been injured in the Vietnam War .
* Helen Hunt as Arlene McKinney .
She is Trevor 's alcoholic , single mother who works at both a casino and a strip club .
She has a past history of abusive relationships , especially with her mostly absent husband Ricky .
She eventually enters a relationship with Eugene , and with his and Trevor 's help manages to overcome her alcoholism and abuse .
* Haley Joel Osment as Trevor McKinney .
He is a 12-year - old boy who is troubled by his mother 's alcoholism and his father 's abuse and absence .
He starts the " Pay It Forward " movement .
He initially believes that the movement was not successful , and does not feel much pride towards it , stating that he was acting to improve the world - not to receive recognition .
He is stabbed and killed while trying to pay it forward to his bullied friend , Adam .
* Jay Mohr as Chris Chandler .
He is a reporter who traces the " Pay it Forward " movement from Los Angeles back to Trevor .
He interviews Trevor and writes a magazine column on the movement after Trevor 's death .
* James Caviezel as Jerry .
He is a homeless drug addict who Trevor attempts to help as part of the " Pay it Forward " movement .
Although Trevor believes his attempts have failed once Jerry relapses into drug use , Jerry eventually pays it forward by saving a woman who was about to kill herself on a bridge .
* Angie Dickinson as Grace .
She is Arlene 's mother and Trevor 's grandmother .
Although she was a negligent parent to Arlene , almost forcing them to live on the street , Arlene eventually forgives her as part of the " Pay it Forward " movement .
* Jon Bon Jovi as Ricky McKinney .
He is Trevor 's abusive and alcoholic father who has since left the family .
Arlene often allows him to return to the family despite the abuse , however she learns throughout the film to reject him and protect Trevor and herself from violence .
* Marc Donato as Adam .
He is Trevor 's friend who has been bullied his whole life at school .
Trevor pays it forward to him by preventing him from being bullied , however he is stabbed in the process .
* David Ramsey also stars as Sidney Parker , an African - American man involved in the " Pay it Forward " movement , as does Gary Werntz ( director Mimi Leder 's real - life husband ) as Mr. Thorsen .
Kathleen Wilhoite also stars as Bonnie , Arlene 's sponsor and mentor .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Leslie Dixon adapted the screenplay from the book of the same name by Catherine Ryan Hyde , which was available as an open writing assignment .
Dixon struggled with the adaptation of the book in part because of multiple narrative voices within it .
Specifically , the reporter , the central character in the film , does not show up until halfway through the novel .
Stuck , Dixon considered returning the money she was paid for the assignment .
She eventually hit upon the idea to start with the reporter and trace the events backwards .
Dixon presented the idea to Hyde who in turn liked it so much that she decided to change the then unpublished novel 's plot structure to mirror the film 's .
In the novel , the character of Eugene Simonet was originally an African - American man named Reuben St. Clair .
The role was offered to Denzel Washington , but he turned it down .
Kevin Spacey was contacted next and accepted the role .
On November 19 , 1999 , it was announced that Osment had been cast as Trevor McKinney .
The film was shot from February 14 until April 18 , 2000 .
Filming took place on location in Las Vegas , Nevada and on studio in Los Angeles , California , with additional shooting ( for the bridge scene ) taking place in Portland , Oregon .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's soundtrack was composed by Thomas Newman and was released by Varèse Sarabande on October 7 , 2000 ( around two weeks before the film 's release ) .
The soundtrack was generally praised by critics , and is considered to be fitting with the theme of the film .
The track listing of the soundtrack is : * Possibility ( 02:34 ) * Car Trouble ( 01:08 )
* Washer Vodka ( 01:53 )
* Cereal Bum ( 01:04 ) * Come Out Jerry ( 01:10 )
* Fixture Vodka ( 01:37 )
* Rat Bastard ( 00:57 )
* One Kiss ( 01:47 )
* Tardiness ( 02:11 ) *
In
Recovery ( 01:03 ) * Jaguar ( 01:04 )
* Dumpster ( 01:11 )
* Sleepover ( 04:33 ) * Cosmic Aristotle ( 01:56 ) * Euphemism ( 01:06 ) * Pay it
Forward ( 01:06 ) * Night and Day and Night ( 01:09 )
* Asthma ( 00:59 ) * Powers of Three ( 01:03 ) * Desert Drive ( 01:35 ) * Wasted Air ( 01:42 ) * The Bad Thing ( 00:51 )
* Gasoline ( 01:40 ) * Velocity Organ ( 01:27 )
* I Forgive You ( 02:26 )
In addition , the song " Calling All Angels " by Jane Siberry is played in the film and is included on the soundtrack .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film opened at # 4 in the North American box office making $ 9,631,359 USD in its opening weekend , behind Remember the Titans , Bedazzled and Meet the Parents , which was on its third week at number one .
The film received mixed reviews , although the performances of Spacey , Hunt , and Osment were universally praised .
Rotten Tomatoes rated the film with 40 % based on 127 reviews with a consensus saying , " Pay It Forward has strong performances from Spacey , Hunt , and Osment , but the movie itself is too emotionally manipulative and the ending is bad . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 2.5 stars out of a possible 4 stating , " With a cleaner story line , the basic idea could have been free to deliver .
As it is , we get a better movie than we might have , because the performances are so good :
Spacey as a vulnerable and wounded man ; Hunt as a woman no less wounded in her own way , and Osment , once again proving himself the equal of adult actors in the complexity and depth of his performance .
I believed in them and cared for them .
I wish the movie could have gotten out of their way . "
Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum gave it a " D " grade , calling it " reprehensible " for using " shameless cliches of emotional and physical damage " and then " blackmailing audiences into joining the let's - be - nice ' movement ' " in order to be transparent Oscar bait .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS