DERMOID CYST
A dermoid cyst is a teratoma of a cystic nature that contains an array of developmentally mature , solid tissues .
It frequently consists of skin , hair follicles , and sweat glands , while other commonly found components include clumps of long hair , pockets of sebum , blood , fat , bone , nails , teeth , eyes , cartilage , and thyroid tissue .
As dermoid cysts grow slowly and contain mature tissue , this type of cystic teratoma is nearly always benign .
In those rare cases wherein the dermoid cyst is malignant , a squamous cell carcinoma usually develops in adults , while infants and children usually present with an endodermal sinus tumor .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
Due to its classification , a dermoid cyst can occur wherever a teratoma can occur .
VAGINAL AND OVARIAN DERMOID
CYSTS Section::::Vaginal and ovarian dermoid cysts .
Ovaries normally grow cyst - like structures called follicles each month .
Once an egg is released from its follicle during ovulation , follicles typically deflate .
Sometimes fluid accumulates inside the follicle , forming a simple ( containing only fluid ) cyst .
The majority of these functional cysts resolve spontaneously .
While all ovarian cysts can range in size from very small to quite large , dermoid cysts are not classified as functional cysts .
Dermoid cysts originate from totipotential germ cells ( which are present at birth )
that differentiate abnormally , developing characteristics of mature dermal cells .
Complications exist , such as torsion ( twisting ) , rupture , and infection , although their incidence is rare .
Dermoid ovarian cysts which are larger present complications which might require removal by either laparoscopy or laparotomy ( traditional surgery ) .
Rarely , a dermoid cyst can develop in the vagina .
PERIORBITAL DERMOID
CYSTS Section::::Periorbital dermoid cysts .
Dermoid cysts can appear in young children , often near the lateral aspect of the eyebrow ( right part of the right eyebrow or left part of the left eyebrow ) .
Depending on the perceived amount of risk , these are sometimes excised or simply kept under observation .
An inflammatory reaction can occur if a dermoid cyst is disrupted , and the cyst can recur if it is not completely excised .
Sometimes complete excision is not practical if the cyst is in a dumbbell configuration , whereby it extends through a suture line in the skull .
If dermoid cysts appear on the medial aspect , the possibility of an encephalocele becomes greater and should be considered among the differential diagnoses .
Dermoid cysts develop during pregnancy .
They occur when skin cells and things like hair , sweat glands , oil glands or fatty tissue get trapped in the skin as a baby grows in the womb .
Dermoid cysts are present at birth ( congenital ) and are common .
It can be months or years before a dermoid cyst is noticed on a child because the cysts grow slowly .
Dermoid cyst symptoms are minor and the cysts are usually painless .
They are not harmful to a child 's health .
If they become infected , the infection must be treated and the cyst should be removed .
It is easier to remove cysts and prevent scars if the cyst is removed before it gets infected .
SPINAL DERMOID
CYSTS Section::::Spinal dermoid cysts .
Spinal dermoid cysts are benign ectopic growths thought to be a consequence of embryology errors during neural tube closure .
Their reported incidence is extremely rare , accounting for less than 1 % of intramedullary spinal cord tumours .
It has been proposed that a possible 180 cases of spinal dermoid tumours have been identified over the past century in the literature .
Dermoid cysts more often involve the lumbosacral region than the thoracic vertebrae and are extramedullary presenting in the first decade of life .
Various hypotheses have been advanced to explain the pathogenesis of spinal dermoids , the origin of which may be acquired or congenital .
* Acquired or iatrogenic dermoids may arise from the implantation of epidermal tissue into the subdural space i.e. spinal cutaneous inclusion , during needle puncture ( e.g. lumbar puncture ) or during surgical procedures on closure of a dysraphic malformation .
* Congenital dermoids , however , are thought to arise from cells whose position is correct but which fail to differentiate into the correct cell - type .
The long - time held belief was that the inclusion of cutaneous ectodermal cells occurred early in embryonic life , and the displaced pluripotent cells developed into a dermoid lesion .
Spinal abnormalities , e.g. intramedullary dermoid cysts may arise more frequently in the lumbosacral region ( quite often at the level of the conus medullaris ) and may be seen with other congenital anomalies of the spine including posterior spina bifida occulta as identified by the neuroradiological analysis .
DIAGNOSIS DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Section::::Differential diagnosis .
A small dermoid cyst on the coccyx can be difficult to distinguish from a pilonidal cyst .
This is partly because both can be full of hair .
A pilonidal cyst is a pilonidal sinus that is obstructed .
Any teratoma near the body surface may develop a sinus or a fistula , or even a cluster of these .
Such is the case of Canadian Football League linebacker Tyrone Jones , whose teratoma was discovered when he blew a tooth out of his nose .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Treatment for dermoid cyst is complete surgical removal , preferably in one piece and without any spillage of cyst contents .
Marsupialization , a surgical technique often used to treat pilonidal cyst , is inappropriate for dermoid cyst due to the risk of malignancy .
The association of dermoid cysts with pregnancy has been increasingly reported .
They usually present the dilemma of weighing the risks of surgery and anesthesia versus the risks of untreated adnexal mass .
Most references state that it is more feasible to treat bilateral dermoid cysts of the ovaries discovered during pregnancy if they grow beyond 6 cm in diameter .
SEE ALSO * Dermoid sinus , more commonly known as a pilonidal cyst
* Proliferating trichilemmal cyst
* List of cutaneous conditions REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS