EDWARD SMITH ( SEA CAPTAIN )
Edward John Smith , RD ( 27 January 1850 – 15 April 1912 ) was a British Merchant Navy officer .
He served as master of numerous White Star Line vessels .
He is best known as the captain of the , who perished when the ship sank on its maiden voyage .
Raised in a working environment , he left school early to join the Merchant Navy and the Royal Naval Reserve .
After earning his master 's ticket , he entered the service of the White Star Line , a prestigious British company .
He quickly rose through the ranks and graduated in 1887 .
His first command was the .
He served as commanding officer of numerous White Star Line vessels , including the ( which he commanded for nine years ) and attracted a strong and loyal following amongst passengers .
In 1904 , Smith became the commodore of the White Star Line , and was responsible for controlling its flagships .
He successfully commanded the , and the .
In 1912 , he was the captain of the maiden voyage of the RMS Titanic , which struck an iceberg and sank on 15 April 1912 ; over 1,500 perished in the sinking , including Smith , who went down with the ship .
For his stoicism and fortitude in the face of adversity , Smith became an icon of British " stiff upper lip " spirit and discipline .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Edward John Smith was born on 27 January 1850 on Well Street , Hanley , Staffordshire , England to Edward Smith , a potter , and Catherine Hancock , born Marsh , who married on 2 August 1841 in Shelton , Staffordshire .
His parents later owned a shop .
Smith attended the Etruria British School until the age of 13 , when he left and operated a steam hammer at the Etruria Forge .
In 1867 , aged 17 he went to Liverpool in the footsteps of his half - brother Joseph Hancock , a captain on a sailing ship .
He began his apprenticeship on Senator Weber , owned by A Gibson & Co. of Liverpool .
MARRIAGE AND CHILDREN Section::::Marriage and children .
On 13 January 1887 , Smith married Sarah Eleanor Pennington at St Oswald 's Church , Winwick , Lancashire .
Their daughter , Helen Melville Smith , was born in Waterloo , Liverpool on 2 April 1898 .
The family lived in a red brick , twin - gabled house , named " Woodhead " , on Winn Road , Highfield , Southampton , Hampshire .
CAREER
EARLY COMMANDS
Section::::Career .
Section::::Early commands .
Edward Smith joined the White Star Line in March 1880 as the Fourth Officer of .
He served aboard the company 's liners to Australia and to New York City , where he quickly rose in status .
In 1887 , he received his first White Star command , the .
In 1888 , Smith earned his Extra Master 's Certificate and joined the Royal Naval Reserve , receiving a commission as a Lieutenant , which entitled him to add the letters " RNR " after his name .
This meant that in a time of war he could be called upon to serve in the Royal Navy .
Smith retired from the RNR in 1905 with the rank of Commander .
His ship had the distinction of being able to fly the Blue Ensign of the RNR ; British merchant vessels generally flew the Red Ensign .
BIGGER COMMANDS Section::::Bigger commands .
Smith was s captain for nine years commencing in 1895 .
When the Boer War started in 1899 , Majestic was called upon to transport troops to Cape Colony .
Smith made two trips to South Africa , both without incident , and in 1903 , for his service , King Edward VII awarded him the Transport Medal , showing the " South Africa " clasp .
Smith was regarded as a " safe captain " .
As he rose in seniority , he gained a following amongst passengers with some only sailing the Atlantic on a ship he captained .
Smith even became known as the " Millionaires ' Captain " .
From 1904 on , Smith commanded the White Star Line 's newest ships on their maiden voyages .
In 1904 , he was given command of what was then the largest ship in the world , the .
Her maiden voyage from Liverpool to New York , sailing 29 June 1904 , went without incident .
After three years with Baltic , Smith was given his second new " big ship , " the .
Once again , the maiden voyage went without incident .
During his command of Adriatic , Smith received the long service Decoration for Officers of the Royal Naval Reserve ( RD ) .
OLYMPIC CLASS COMMAND Section::::Olympic class command .
As one of the world 's most experienced sea captains , Smith was called upon to take first command of the lead ship in a new class of ocean liners , the – again , the largest vessel in the world at that time .
The maiden voyage from Southampton to New York was successfully concluded on 21 June 1911 , but as the ship was docking in New York harbour , a small incident took place .
Docking at Pier 59 under the command of Captain Smith with the assistance of a harbour pilot , Olympic was being assisted by twelve tugs when one got caught in the backwash of Olympic , spun around , collided with the bigger ship , and for a moment was trapped under Olympic 's stern , finally managing to work free and limp to the docks .
THE HAWKE INCIDENT Section::::The Hawke incident .
On 20 September 1911 , Olympics first major mishap occurred during a collision with a British warship , , in which the warship lost her prow .
Although the collision left two of Olympics compartments filled and one of her propeller shafts twisted , she was able to limp back to Southampton .
At the resultant inquiry , the Royal Navy blamed Olympic , finding that her massive size generated a suction that pulled Hawke into her side .
Captain Smith had been on the bridge during the events .
The Hawke incident was a financial disaster for White Star , and the out - of - service time for the big liner made matters worse .
Olympic returned to Belfast and , to speed up the repairs , Harland and Wolff was forced to delay Titanics completion , in order to use one of her propeller shafts and other parts for Olympic .
Back at sea in February 1912 , Olympic lost a propeller blade and once again returned to her builder for emergency repairs .
To get her back to service immediately , Harland and Wolff again had to pull resources from Titanic , delaying her maiden voyage from 20 March to 10 April .
RMS TITANIC Section::::RMS Titanic .
Despite the past trouble , Smith was again appointed to be in command of the newest ship in the Olympic class when the RMS Titanic left Southampton for her maiden voyage .
Although some sources state that he had decided to retire after completing Titanics maiden voyage , an article in the Halifax Morning Chronicle on 9 April 1912 stated that Smith would remain in charge of Titanic " until the Company ( White Star Line ) completed a larger and finer steamer .
"
On 10 April 1912 , Smith came aboard Titanic at 7 am to prepare for the Board of Trade muster at 8:00 am .
He immediately went to his cabin to get the sailing report from Chief Officer Henry Wilde .
After departure at noon , the huge amount of water displaced by Titanic as she passed caused the laid - up New York to break from her moorings and swing towards Titanic .
Quick action from Smith helped to avert a premature end to the maiden voyage .
The first four days of the voyage passed without incident , but on 14 April 1912 , Titanics radio operators received six messages from other ships warning of drifting ice , which passengers on Titanic had begun to notice during the afternoon .
Although the crew was thus aware of ice in the vicinity , they did not reduce the ship 's speed , and continued to steam at , only short of her maximum speed of .
Titanics high speed in waters where ice had been reported was later criticised as reckless , but it reflected standard maritime practice at the time .
According to Fifth Officer Harold Lowe , the custom was " to go ahead and depend upon the lookouts in the crow 's nest and the watch on the bridge to pick up the ice in time to avoid hitting it " .
The North Atlantic liners prioritised time - keeping above all other considerations , sticking rigidly to a schedule that would guarantee their arrival at an advertised time .
They were frequently driven at close to their full speed , treating hazard warnings as advisories rather than calls to action .
It was widely believed that ice posed little risk ; close calls were not uncommon , and even head - on collisions had not been disastrous .
In 1907 , , a German liner , had rammed an iceberg and suffered a crushed bow , but was still able to complete her voyage .
That same year , Titanics future captain , Edward Smith , declared in an interview that he could not " imagine any condition which would cause a ship to founder .
Modern shipbuilding has gone beyond that . "
Shortly after 11:40 pm on 14 April , Smith was informed by First Officer William Murdoch that the ship had just collided with an iceberg .
It was soon apparent that the ship was seriously damaged ; designer Thomas Andrews reported that all of the first five of the ship 's watertight compartments had been breached and that Titanic would sink in under two hours .
There are conflicting reports about Smith 's actions during the evacuation .
Some say that he did all in his power to prevent panic and did his best to assist in the evacuation ; Major Arthur Godfrey Peuchen of the Royal Canadian Yacht Club said " He was doing everything in his power to get women in these boats , and to see that they were lowered properly .
I thought he was doing his duty in regard to the lowering of the boats " .
Robert Williams Daniel , a first class passenger , also said : Other sources say that that he was very ineffective and inactive in preventing loss of life .
Captain Smith was an experienced seaman who had served for 40 years at sea , including 27 years in command .
This was the first crisis of his career , and he would have known that even if all the boats were fully occupied , more than a thousand people would remain on the ship as she went down with little or no chance of survival .
As Smith began to grasp the enormity of what was about to happen , he appears to have become paralysed by indecision .
He had ordered passengers and crew to muster , but from that point onward , he failed to order his officers to put the passengers into the lifeboats ; he did not adequately organise the crew ; he failed to convey crucial information to his officers and crew ; he sometimes gave ambiguous or impractical orders and he never gave the command to abandon ship .
Even some of his bridge officers were unaware for some time after the collision that the ship was sinking ; Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall did not find out until 01:15 , barely an hour before the ship went down , while Quartermaster George Rowe was so unaware of the emergency that after the evacuation had started , he phoned the bridge from his watch station to ask why he had just seen a lifeboat go past .
Smith did not inform his officers that the ship did not have enough lifeboats to save everyone .
He did not supervise the loading of the lifeboats and seemingly made no effort to find out if his orders were being followed .
Just minutes before the ship started its final plunge , Smith was still busy releasing Titanic 's crew from their duties ; he went to the Marconi operators room and released Junior Marconi Officer Harold Bride and senior wireless operator John " Jack " Phillips from their duties .
He then carried out a final tour of the deck , telling crew members : "
Now it 's every man for himself . "
At 2:10 a.m. , Steward Edward Brown saw the captain approach with a megaphone in his hand .
He heard him say " Well boys , do your best for the women and children , and look out for yourselves .
"
He saw the Captain walk onto the bridge alone .
This was the last reliable sighting of Smith .
A few minutes later Trimmer Samuel Hemming found the bridge apparently empty .
Five minutes later , the ship disappeared beneath the ocean .
Smith perished that night along with around 1,500 others , and his body was never recovered .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
There are conflicting accounts of Smith 's death .
Some survivors said they saw Smith enter the ship 's wheelhouse on the bridge , and die there when it was engulfed .
The New York Herald in its 19 April 1912 edition quoted Robert Williams Daniel , who jumped from the stern immediately before the ship sank , in its 19 April 1912 edition as having claimed to have witnessed Captain Smith drown in the ship 's wheelhouse .
" I saw Captain Smith on the bridge .
My eyes seemingly clung to him .
The deck from which I had leapt was immersed .
The water had risen slowly , and was now to the floor of the bridge .
Then it was to Captain Smith 's waist .
I saw him no more .
He died a hero . "
Captain Smith himself made statements hinting that he would go down with his ship if he was ever confronted with a disaster .
A friend of Smith 's , Dr. Williams , asked Captain Smith what would happen if the Adriatic struck a concealed reef of ice and was badly damaged .
" Some of us would go to the bottom with the ship , " was Smith 's reply .
A boyhood friend , William Jones said , " Ted Smith passed away just as he would have loved to do .
To stand on the bridge of his vessel and go down with her was characteristic of all his actions when we were boys together .
"
Because of these factors as well as the accounts of Smith going inside the wheelhouse , this has remained the iconic image which has remained of Smith and has been perpetuated by film portrayals .
When working to free Collapsible B , Junior Marconi Officer Harold Bride said he saw Captain Smith dive from the bridge into the sea just as Collapsible B was levered off the roof of the officers ' quarters , a story which was corroborated by first class passenger Mrs Eleanor Widener , who was in Lifeboat No.4 ( the closest to the sinking ship ) at the time .
Also second class passenger William John Mellors , who survived aboard collapsible B , stated that Smith jumped from the bridge .
Tim Maltin , author of 101 Things
You Thought You Knew About The Titanic -
But Did n't !
affirms that the witnesses " could here be mistaking Captain Smith for Lightoller , who we know did exactly this at this time , first swimming towards the crow 's nest . "
Several accounts say that Smith may have been seen in the water near the overturned Collapsible B during or after the sinking .
Colonel Archibald Gracie reported that an unknown swimmer came near the capsized and overcrowded lifeboat , and that one of the men on board told him " Hold on to what you have , old boy .
One more of you aboard would sink us all , " ; in a powerful voice , the swimmer replied " All right boys .
Good luck and God bless you . " .
Gracie did not see this man , nor was able to identify him , but some other survivors later claimed to have recognised this man as Smith .
Another man ( or possibly the same ) never asked to come aboard the boat , but instead cheered its occupants saying " Good boys !
Good lads ! "
with " the voice of authority " .
One of the Collapsible B survivors , fireman Walter Hurst , tried to reach him with an oar , but the rapidly rising swell carried the man away before he could reach him .
Hurst said he was certain
this man was Smith .
Some of these accounts also describe Smith carrying a child to the boat .
Harry Senior , one of Titanic 's stokers , and second class passenger Charles Eugene Williams , who both survived aboard Collapsible B , stated that Smith swam with a child in his arms to Collapsible B , which Smith presented to a steward , after which he apparently swam back to the rapidly foundering ship .
Williams ' account differs slightly , claiming that , after Smith handed the child over to the steward , he asked what had become of First Officer Murdoch .
Upon hearing news of Murdoch 's demise , Smith " pushed himself away from the lifeboat , threw his lifebelt from him and slowly sank from our sight .
He did not come to the surface again .
" These accounts are almost certainly apocryphal , according to historians featured in the A&E Documentary .
Lightoller who survived on Collapsible B never reported seeing Smith in the water or receiving a child from him .
There is also no way in which survivors on Collapsible B would have been able to verify the identity of the individual concerned under such dimly lit and chaotic circumstances .
It is more likely based upon wishful thinking that the person they saw was the Captain .
Captain Smith 's fate will probably remain uncertain .
For many years , there were also conflicting accounts of Smith 's last words .
Newspaper reports said that as the final plunge began , Smith advised those on board to " Be British boys , be British ! "
Although this is engraved on his memorial and portrayed in the 1996 TV miniseries , it is a myth popularised by the British press at the time .
If Smith had said these words to anyone , it would have been to the crew , but not one of the surviving crew members claimed he did .
Because Steward Brown 's account of Smith giving orders before walking onto the bridge was the last reliable sighting , this would make Smith 's last words simply " Well boys , do your best for the women and children , and look out for yourselves . "
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
A statue , sculpted by Kathleen Scott , wife of Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott , was unveiled in July 1914 at the western end of the Museum Gardens in Beacon Park , Lichfield .
The pedestal is made from Cornish granite and the figure is bronze .
Lichfield was chosen as the location for the monument because Smith was a Staffordshire man and Lichfield
was the centre of the diocese .
The statue originally cost £ 740 ( £ with inflation ) raised through local and national contributions .
For his stoicism — the " stiff upper lip " self - discipline , fortitude and remaining calm in the face of adversity , which popular culture rendered into a British character trait , the plaque below his memorial statue states ; Capt . of R.M.S. Titanic
In 2010 , as part of the ' Parks for People ' programme , the statue was restored and the green patina removed from its surface at a cost of £ 16,000 .
In 2011 an unsuccessful campaign was started to get the statue moved back to Captain Smith 's home town of Hanley .
Smith had already been commemorated in Hanley 's Town Hall with a plaque reading :
The plaque was removed in 1961 , given to a local school and then returned to the Town Hall but remounted in the interior of the building in 1978 .
The Titanic Brewery in Burslem , Stoke - on - Trent is in honour of him .
DECORATIONS Section::::Decorations .
As a member of the Royal Naval Reserve , Smith wore his two decorations when in uniform : the Decoration for Officers of the Royal Naval Reserve and the Transport Medal .
FAMILY Section::::Family .
Smith 's mother , Catherine Hancock , lived in Runcorn , Cheshire , where Smith himself intended to retire .
She died there in 1893 .
Smith 's half - sister Thyrza died in 1921 and his widow , Sarah Eleanor Smith , was hit and killed by a taxi in London in 1931 .
Their daughter , Helen Melville , married and gave birth to twins , Simon and Priscilla .
Simon , a pilot in the Royal Air Force , was killed in World War II .
Priscilla died from polio three years later ; neither of them had children .
Helen died in 1973 .
PORTRAYALS * Otto Wernicke ( 1943 ) ( Titanic )
* Brian Aherne ( 1953 )
( Titanic )
* Clarence Derwent ( 1956 ) ( Kraft Television Theatre )
( A Night to Remember )
* Laurence Naismith ( 1958 )
( A Night to Remember )
* Michael Rennie ( 1966 ) ( The Time Tunnel , episode Rendezvous With Yesterday ) ( fictionalised as " Captain Malcolm Smith " )
* Harry Andrews ( 1979 ) ( S.O.S. Titanic ) ( TV Movie )
*
Hugh Reilly ( 1983 ) ( Voyagers ! )
( Voyagers of the Titanic )
* George C. Scott ( 1996 )
( Titanic ) ( TV Miniseries )
* John Cunningham ( 1997 ) ( Titanic ) ( Broadway Musical )
* Bernard Hill ( 1997 )
( Titanic ) * Kenneth Belton ( 2001 ) ( ) ( Animated Film )
* John Donovan ( 2003 ) ( Ghosts of the Abyss ) ( Documentary )
* Alan Rothwell ( 2005 )
( Titanic : Birth of a Legend )
( TV Documentary )
* Malcolm Tierney ( 2008 ) ( Who Sank the Titanic ?
aka
The Unsinkable Titanic )
( TV Documentary )
* Christian Rodska ( 2011 )
( Curiosity , episode : " What Sank Titanic ? " )
( TV episode )
* David Calder ( 2012 ) ( Titanic )
( TV series/4 episodes )
* Philip Rham ( Titanic - The Musical ) ( Southwark Playhouse , 2013 , and Charing Cross Theatre , London , 2016 ) BIBLIOGRAPHY * Titanic Captain : The Life of Edward John Smith , G.J. Cooper , The History Press Ltd , 2011
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* One of Stoke - on - Trent Museums ' Local Heroes
* Captain Smith on Titanic - Titanic.com