THREE - STRIKES LAW
In the United States , habitual offender laws ( commonly referred to as three - strikes laws ) were first implemented on March 7 , 1994 and are part of the United States Justice Department 's Anti - Violence Strategy .
These laws require a person guilty of committing both a severe violent felony and two other previous convictions to serve a mandatory life sentence in prison .
The purpose of the laws is to drastically increase the punishment of those convicted of more than two serious crimes .
Twenty - eight states have some form of a " three - strikes " law .
A person accused under such laws is referred to in a few states ( notably Connecticut and Kansas ) as a " persistent offender " , while Missouri uses the unique term " prior and persistent offender " .
In most jurisdictions , only crimes at the felony level qualify as serious offenses ; however , misdemeanor and/or wobbler offenses can qualify for application of the three - strikes law in California , whose harsh application has been the subject of controversy .
The three - strikes law significantly increases the prison sentences of persons convicted of a felony who have been previously convicted of two or more violent crimes or serious felonies , and limits the ability of these offenders to receive a punishment other than a life sentence .
The expression " Three strikes and
you are out " is derived from baseball , where a batter against whom three strikes are recorded strikes out .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The practice of imposing longer prison sentences on repeat offenders ( versus first - time offenders who commit the same crime ) is nothing new , as judges often take into consideration prior offenses when sentencing .
However , there is a more recent history of mandatory prison sentences for repeat offenders .
For example , New York State had a long - standing Persistent Felony Offender law dating back to the early 20th century ( partially ruled unconstitutional in 2010 , but reaffirmed en banc shortly after ) .
But such sentences were not compulsory in each case , and judges had much more discretion as to what term of incarceration should be imposed .
The first true " three - strikes " law was passed in 1993 , when Washington voters approved Initiative 593 .
California passed its own in 1994 , when their voters passed Proposition 184 by an overwhelming majority , with 72 % in favor and 28 % against .
The initiative proposed to the voters had the title of Three Strikes and You 're Out , referring to de facto life imprisonment after being convicted of three violent or serious felonies which are listed under California Penal Code section 1192.7 .
The concept swiftly spread to other states , but none of them chose to adopt a law as sweeping as California 's .
By 2004 , twenty - six states and the federal government had laws that satisfy the general criteria for designation as " three - strikes " statutes — namely , that a third felony conviction brings a sentence of 20 to life where 20 years must be served before becoming parole eligible .
After the hype leading to the institution of these laws across the country , it soon became apparent that they were not bringing the results the public expected .
Data shows that the laws did n't necessarily reduce violent crime , but instead , in states such as California where a " strike " did not have to be a violent felony , put away more " criminals " for non - violent and petty crimes , dramatically raising the prison population .
This led to the drastic reduction of the power of the Three - Strikes Law in California in 2012 by approval of Proposition 36 .
Three - strikes laws have been cited as an example of the McDonaldization of punishment , in which the focus of criminological and penological interest has shifted away from retribution and treatment tailored to the individual offender and toward the control of high - risk groups based on aggregations and statistical averages .
A three - strikes system achieves uniformity in punishment of criminals in a certain class ( viz . , three - time offenders ) in a way that is analogous to how a fast food restaurant achieves uniformity of its product .
ENACTMENT
BY STATES Section::::Enactment by states .
The following states have enacted three - strikes laws :
* New York has employed a habitual felon statute since 1797 .
* Maryland has had a habitual felon statute for violent offenders since 1975 .
The law was amended in 1994 , meaning that a fourth conviction for a crime of violence mandates a sentence of life imprisonment without parole .
* Delaware has had a three - strikes law providing up to life imprisonment for serious felonies since 1973 , when the Delaware Criminal Code , contained under Part I , Title 11 of the Delaware Code , became effective .
* Texas has had a three - strikes with mandatory life sentence since at least 1952 .
*
In Rummel v. Estelle ( 1980 ) , the US Supreme Court upheld Texas ' statute , which arose from a case involving a refusal to repay $ 120.75 paid for air conditioning repair that was , depending on the source cited , either considered unsatisfactory or not performed at all , where the defendant had been convicted of two prior felony convictions , and where the total amount involved from all three felonies was around $ 230 .
*
In 1993 : Washington
* In 1994 : California , Colorado , Connecticut , Indiana , Kansas , Maryland , New Mexico , North Carolina , Virginia , Louisiana , Wisconsin , Tennessee , and Georgia *
In 1995 : Arkansas , Florida , Montana , Nevada , New Jersey , North Dakota , Pennsylvania , South Carolina , Utah , and Vermont *
In 2006 :
Arizona
*
In 2012 : Massachusetts APPLICATION Section::::Application .
The exact application of the three - strikes laws varies considerably from state to state , but the laws call for life sentences for at least 25 years on their third strike .
In the state of Maryland , any person who receives their fourth strike for any crime of violence will automatically be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole .
Most states require one or more of the three felony convictions to be for violent crimes in order for the mandatory sentence to be pronounced .
Crimes that fall under the category of " violent " include : murder , kidnapping , sexual abuse , rape , aggravated robbery , and aggravated assault .
Some states include additional , lesser offenses that one would not normally see as violent .
For example , the list of crimes that count as serious or violent in the state of California is much longer than that of other states , and consists of many lesser offenses that include : firearm violations , burglary , simple robbery , arson , and providing hard drugs to a minor , and drug possession .
As another example , Texas does not require any of the three felony convictions to be violent , but specifically excludes certain " state jail felonies " from being counted for enhancement purposes .
One application of a three - strikes law was the Leonardo Andrade case in California in 2009 .
In this case , Leandro Andrade attempted to rob $ 153 in videotapes from two San Bernardino K - Mart stores .
He was charged under California 's three - strikes law because of his criminal history concerning drugs and other burglaries .
Because of his past criminal records , he was sentenced 50 years in prison with no parole after this last burglary of K - Mart .
Although this sentencing was disputed by Erwin Chemerinsky , who represented Andrade , as cruel and unusual punishment under the 8th Amendment , the Supreme Court ruled in support for the life sentencing .
In 1995 , Sioux City , Iowa native Tommy Lee Farmer , a professional criminal who had served 43 years in prison for murder and armed robbery was the first person in the United States to be convicted under the federal three - strikes law when he was sentenced to life in prison for an attempted robbery at an eastern Iowa convenience store .
The sentencing was considered so significant that President Bill Clinton interrupted a vacation to make a press statement about it .
Another example of the three - strikes law involves Timothy L. Tyler who , in 1992 at age 24 , was sentenced to life in prison without parole when his third conviction ( a federal offense ) triggered the federal three - strikes law , even though his two prior convictions were not considered violent , and neither conviction resulted in any prison time served .
EFFECTS UNITED STATES Section::::Effects .
Section::::United States .
Some states , such as California , have seen dramatic drops in their crime rates since the enactment of the Three-
Strikes Law .
In 2011 , Los Angeles , California reported crime had decreased by half of the current amount since 1994 , which is the same year the Three-
Strikes Law was put into place .
Although this decrease in crime might be attributed to the enactment of stricter sentences , Los Angeles officials speculate the drop in crime might also be related to better relationships within the community and better crime - predicting tools .
In 2004 , The Effect of Three-
Strikes Legislation on Serious Crime in California study analyzed the effect of the Three- Strikes legislation as a means of deterrence and incapacitation .
The study found that the Three- Strikes Law did not have a very significant effect on deterrence of crime , but also that this ineffectiveness may be due to the diminishing marginal returns associated with having pre - existing repeat offender laws in place .
A study , Does Three Strikes Deter ?
A Non - Parametric Estimation , published by researches at George Mason University found that arrest rates in California were up to 20 % lower for the group of offenders convicted of two - strike eligible offenses , compared to those convicted of one - strike eligible offenses .
The study concluded that the three - strikes policy was deterring recidivists from committing crimes .
A study written by Robert Parker , director of the Presley Center for Crime and Justice Studies at UC Riverside , states that , violent crime began falling almost two years before California 's three - strikes law was enacted in 1994 .
The study argues that the decrease in crime is linked to lower alcohol consumption and unemployment .
A 2007 study from the Vera Institute of Justice in New York examined the effectiveness of incapacitation under all forms of sentencing .
The study estimated that if US incarceration rates were increased by 10 per cent , the crime rate would decrease by at least 2 % .
However , this action would be extremely costly to implement .
Another study , I 'd rather be Hanged for a Sheep than a Lamb :
The Unintended Consequences of ' Three - Strikes ' Laws , released by the National Bureau of Economic Research found that three - strikes laws discourage criminals from committing misdemeanors for fear of a life prison sentence .
Although this deters crime and contributes to lower crime rates , the laws may possibly push previously convicted criminals to commit more serious offenses .
The study 's author argues that this is so because under such laws , felons realize that they could face a long jail sentence for their next crime , and therefore they have little to lose by committing serious crimes rather than minor offenses .
Through these findings , the study weighs both the pros and cons for the law .
A 2015 study found that three - strikes laws were associated with a 33 % increase in the risk of fatal assaults on law enforcement officers .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In 2010 , New Zealand enacted a similar three - strikes law called the Sentencing and Parole Reform Act 2010 .
The bill was sponsored by Police and Corrections Minister Judith Collins from the ruling National Party .
It was passed into law by the National and ACT parties but was opposed by the opposition Labour and Green parties , and National 's support partner , the Māori Party .
While the Sentencing and Parole Act was supported by conservative groups such as the Sensible Sentencing Trust , critics attacked the law for promoting penal populism and disproportionately targeting the Māori community .
In early June 2018 , an attempt by the Labour - led coalition government to overturn the Sentencing and Parole Act was blocked by Labour 's support partner New Zealand First and the opposition National and ACT parties .
NZ First had indicated its opposition to overturning the three - strikes bill , prompting Justice Minister Andrew Little to abandon the attempt .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Some criticisms of three - strikes laws are that they clog the court system with defendants taking cases to trial in an attempt to avoid life sentences , and clog jails with defendants who must be detained while waiting for these trials because the likelihood of a life sentence makes them a flight risk .
Life imprisonment is also an expensive correctional option , and potentially inefficient given that many prisoners serving these sentences are elderly and therefore both costly to provide health care services to , and statistically at low risk of recidivism .
Dependents of prisoners serving long sentences may also become burdensome on welfare services .
Prosecutors have also sometimes evaded the three - strikes laws by processing arrests as parole violations rather than new offenses , or by bringing misdemeanor charges when a felony charge would have been legally justified .
Likewise , there is potential for witnesses to refuse to testify , and juries to refuse to convict , if they want to keep a defendant from receiving a life sentence ; this can introduce disparities in punishments , defeating the goal of treating third - time offenders uniformly .
Three - strikes laws have also been criticized for imposing disproportionate penalties and focusing too much on street crime rather than white - collar crime .
SEE ALSO * 10 - 20-Life * Armed Career Criminal Act
* Baumes law ,
1926 four strike law
* Ricardo Alfonso Cerna , a 47-year - old man who committed suicide in 2003 after being arrested for attempted murder , which would have been his third strike
* Deterrence * Habitual offender laws , a comparison of similar laws in several countries
* Habitual Criminals Act
* HADOPI law * Incapacitation ( penology )
* Indefinite prison sentence
* Mandatory sentencing
* One strike , you 're out
* Prison - industrial complex *
Recidivism *
Stanford Law School Criminal Defense Clinic
* United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines REFERENCES