SAM 'S CLUB Sam 's West , Inc.
( doing business as Sam 's Club and stylized as Sam 's CLUB ) is an American chain of membership - only retail warehouse clubs owned and operated by Walmart Inc. , founded in 1983 and named after Walmart founder Sam Walton .
, Sam 's Club chain serves 47 million U.S. ( including Puerto Rico ) members and is the 8th largest U.S. retailer .
, Sam 's Club ranks second in sales volume among warehouse clubs with $ 56.828 billion in sales ( in fiscal year 2016 )
behind rival Costco Wholesale .
Sam 's Club had sales of $ 57.157 billion in FY 2014 .
It reported a 0.3 % sales increase in 2014 , 4.1 % in 2013 , and 8.4 % sales increase in 2012 .
This is significantly higher growth than Walmart U.S. stores , which have not had higher than 2 % growth since 2010 .
Its major competitors are Costco Wholesale and BJ 's Wholesale Club .
, Sam 's Club operates 597 membership warehouse clubs in 44 U.S. states .
Alaska , Massachusetts , Oregon , Rhode Island , Vermont , and Washington are the only states where Sam 's Club does not operate , as is the case for the District of Columbia .
Walmart International also operates Sam 's Club stores in Mexico and China .
It has 163 locations in Mexico , and 22 in China ..
Walmart Brazil , which was de - consolidated from Walmart in August 2018 , also operates Sam 's Clubs in Brazil .
Locations generally range in size from , with an average club size of approximately .
There were also Sam 's Club locations in Canada , six located in Ontario , in which the last location closed in 2009 .
On January 11 , 2018 , Sam 's Club announced the permanent closure of select stores .
In a number of cases , employees showed up to work and found the doors locked and a notice saying that the store would be soon liquidated .
Walmart eventually told Business Insider that 63 Sam 's Club stores would begin liquidating across the country , including in Arizona , California , Illinois , New York , Ohio and Texas .
According to Business Insider , the Sam 's Club closings and plans to convert some stores into e - commerce fulfillment centers as announced in January 2018 are part of Walmart 's growing commitment to online retailing that will allow it to better compete with its rival Amazon .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first Sam 's Club opened on April 7 , 1983 , in Midwest City , Oklahoma in the United States .
In 1987 , Sam 's Club made its first acquisition by purchasing West Monroe , Louisiana - based SuperSaver Wholesale Warehouse Club ; the purchase expanded the chain by 24 locations .
The stores were owned by Alton Howard and his son John .
In 1989 , Sam 's Club entered New Jersey with a club in Delran in a former Two Guys / Jefferson Ward store .
This was Walmart 's first expansion into the Northeast .
The first Walmart discount store ( now expanded into a Supercenter ) in New Jersey opened in 1991 in Turnersville .
The company entered the Pennsylvania market in 1990 .
In 1993 , Walmart acquired PACE Membership Warehouse from Kmart and converted many ( but not all ) PACE locations into Sam 's Clubs .
Sam 's Club entered the Canadian market in Ontario in 2003 .
The latest flagship club opening , was in Fayetteville , Arkansas .
The largest Sam 's Club is located in Pineville , North Carolina with of retail space that was formerly an Incredible Universe .
On September 24 , 2006 , Sam 's Club received a new logo .
The new logo has an updated serif font and features a green and blue diamond inside the big blue diamond found above the word ' Sam 's ' .
Sam 's Club 's previous slogan was " We Are In Business For Small Business " until 2006 ; the decision to remove the slogan comes as Sam 's Club attempts to remove itself from serving just small businesses and open up to more individual customers .
In December 2007 , Sam 's Club launched a new slogan , " Enjoy the Possibilities " .
Since then it became an official advertising slogan , mentioned in television and radio advertisements , but it is not mentioned on its website .
, the " Enjoy the Possibilities " slogan was no longer in use .
Sam 's Club launched their latest slogan " Savings Made Simple " in the fourth quarter of 2009 .
Starting in April 2007 , there was speculation of a possible sale or spinoff of Sam 's Club from parent company Wal - Mart Stores ,
Inc. At Walmart 's 2007 annual shareholder 's meeting in June , management said that Sam 's Club is not for sale , although they did not say they are not considering a spinoff .
On February 26 , 2009 , Walmart Canada announced that it would be closing all six of its Canadian Sam 's Club locations .
This was part of Walmart Canada 's decision to shift focus towards supercentres , but some industry observers suggested that the operation was struggling in competition with Costco and the non - membership
The Real Canadian Superstore ( known as Maxi & Cie in Quebec ) , that had a well - established history in the country .
Sam 's Club also rebranded the two as yet unopened locations as new Walmart Supercentres .
In January 2010 , it was announced that ten clubs would be closing , including four in California .
At the same time , Sam 's opened six new clubs at various locations in the United States .
On January 24 , 2010 , it was announced that approximately 11,200 Sam 's Club employees would be laid off .
The layoffs resulted from the decision to outsource product sampling duties to an outside company ( Rogers , Arkansas - based Shopper Events , which already performs in - store product demonstrations for Walmart ) and to eliminate New Business Membership Representative positions throughout the chain .
Most of the laid - off employees were part - time and represented about 10 % of the total Sam 's Club workforce .
Rosalind Brewer was named as the new CEO for Sam 's Club , a change that came into effect on February 1 , 2012 .
On January 24 , 2014 , it was announced that Walmart will cut 2,300 jobs at the underperforming Sam 's Club locations .
On February 1 , 2017 , John Furner replaced Brewer as CEO of Sam 's Club .
On January 11 , 2018 , Walmart announced that 63 Sam 's Club locations in cities including Memphis , Houston , Seattle , and others would be closing .
Some of the stores had already liquidated , without notifying employees ; some employees learned by a company - wide email delivered January 11 .
All of the 63 stores were gone from the Sam 's Club website as of the morning of January 11 .
Walmart said that ten of the stores will become e - commerce distribution centers and employees can reapply to work at those locations .
Business Insider magazine calculated that over 11,000 workers will be affected .
On the same day , Walmart announced that as a result of the new tax law , it would be raising Walmart starting wages , distributing bonuses , expanding its leave policies and contributing toward the cost of employees ' adoptions .
Doug McMillon , Walmart 's CEO , said , " We are early in the stages of assessing the opportunities tax reform creates for us to invest in our customers and associates and to further strengthen our business , all of which should benefit our shareholders . "
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Like other warehouse clubs , Sam 's Club sells most of its merchandise in bulk and directly off pallets .
The clubs are arranged much like warehouses , with merchandise stocked in warehouse - style steel bins .
Products sold include jewelry , designer goods , sunglasses , crystal and collectibles , electronics , floral , apparel , food , and meats .
Most locations have Pharmacy , Tire and Battery , Photo , Bakery , Optical , Café and Floral departments .
Sam 's Club markets items under the private labels
Simply Right , Member 's Mark , Bakers & Chefs , Daily Chef , and Sam 's Club — including products by Richelieu Foods , a private label manufacturer of frozen pizza , salad dressing , sauces , marinades , condiments and deli salads .
Sam 's Club does not sell the Sam 's Choice or Great Value brands that are available in Walmart stores .
However , Sam 's Club is changing some of the Member 's Mark items to the name
Simply Right .
The Member 's Mark Deli products are also changing names to Artisan Fresh .
SAM 'S BUSINESS CENTER Section::::Sam 's Business Center .
Sam 's Club opened their first Business Center in Houston , Texas , in August 2008 .
Converted from an existing Sam 's location , the Business Center is similar in concept to Costco 's Business Centers .
In January 2010 , the company announced it would be closing its Business Center , along with nine other clubs across the United States .
OTHER RETAIL FORMATS
Section::::Other retail formats .
In Houston , Sam 's Club opened Más Club in August 2009 , a club geared towards the Hispanic population .
Membership in Más Club was separate from membership in Sam 's Club .
The store eventually began a liquidation sale in December 2013 , and was closed in February 2014 .
In October 2018 , Sam 's Club opened Sam 's Club Now , a " mobile - first " retail store where customers use the Sam 's Club Now mobile app to scan and pay for merchandise .
Customers can also order items ahead of time with same - day curbside pickup at the store .
The first Sam 's Club Now store is located in Dallas , TX .
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
Membership is required to purchase at Sam 's Club ( except at the cafe , eye exams in optical , and pharmacy where federal law prohibits sales of prescription drugs to members only , as well as liquor and gasoline in some states ) ; however , a one - time 60-day pass may be obtained from many Walmart newspaper ads .
A 10 % surcharge is added ( except where forbidden by local laws , such as in Elmsford , NY , CA , SC ) to the prices for non - members , except for pharmacy , cafe , or alcohol items where available .
All memberships fees are 100 % guaranteed at any point of time in the membership tenure .
Renewal of memberships can be done via the internet , through the mail , in - club at the Membership Services desk , any cash register , and also at new ATM
/ Membership kiosks ( the latter only available in select locations ) .
In the United States , Sam 's Club memberships are divided into two categories : Sam 's Club and Sam 's Plus , each with an annual fee .
Sam 's Plus is the most comprehensive membership plan , that includes Cash Rewards , extra savings in Pharmacy and Optical centers , and free shipping on items purchased from their website .
PAYMENT OPTIONS AND STORE CREDIT PRODUCTS
PAYMENT OPTIONS
Section::::Payment options and store credit products .
Section::::Payment options .
Sam 's Club locations , as well as their online storefront , accept Sam 's Club ( online and in - store ) and Walmart credit cards ( in - store only ) , Discover Card , Visa , MasterCard , American Express , debit cards ( PIN - based , except MasterCard and Discover , which also can be signature - based ) , Walmart and Sam 's Club gift cards , cash , or checks .
, EBT SNAP benefits are accepted in - store .
In the past , Visa credit cards were not accepted , except at gas stations because of the high processing fees compared with Walmart 's discounted rates with MasterCard .
In 2016 , Sam 's Club rolled out a mobile application that allows users to scan items while they shop and pay for them , skipping the checkout line .
, the app can be used at all locations in the United States .
SAM 'S CLUB CREDIT Section::::Sam 's Club credit .
Sam 's Club offers store credit lines to individuals and businesses linked to the member 's membership card .
As of June 2014 , Sam 's Club discontinued offering the Sam 's Discover card and now offers a Sam 's Club MasterCard that can be used at Sam 's Club and anywhere MasterCard is accepted .
Sam 's Club MasterCard offers a cash back program of 5 % ( Up to $ 6,000 a year then 1 % thereafter ) on gasoline , 3 % on dining and travel and 1 % on all other purchases .
Sam 's Club is also the first merchant in the United States to offer EMV ( Europay / MasterCard / Visa ) chip - enabled cards .
SEE ALSO * BJ 's Wholesale Club – competitor in eastern US
* Costco Wholesale – national US competitor
*
Más Club * Walmart Inc. –
owner * Warehouse club REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS