OLYMPIC STADIUM Olympic Stadium is the name usually given to the main stadium of an Olympic Games .
An Olympic stadium is the site of the opening and closing ceremonies .
Many , though not all , of these venues actually contain the words Olympic Stadium as part of their names .
Olympic Stadium may also be named a multi - purpose stadium which hosts Olympic sports .
In the case of the Summer Olympic Games , athletics competitions and the football final are traditionally held in the Olympic Stadium .
Exceptions to this have occurred though at the 1900 , 1996 and 2016 Summer Olympics as well as at the 2010 and 2018 Summer Youth Olympic Games .
Early Winter Olympic Games often used figure skating venues as focal points .
These were often designated as the Olympic Stadium , usually hosting the opening and closing ceremonies .
A number of stadiums have been used in more than one Olympics , in those cities that have held the Games more than once .
Lysgårdsbakken was the main stadium of a Winter Olympics and a Winter Youth Olympic Games ( YOG ) .
Bergiselschanze was the main stadium of two Winter Olympics and one Winter YOG .
Olympiahalle jointly shared the Olympic Stadium role with Bergiselschanze during the two Winter Olympics , but not during the Winter YOG .
Only one stadium , the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , has been the main stadium of two Summer Olympics ( and it will be a main stadium a third time during the 2028 games ) .
In addition to the inaugural Summer Olympics , Panathinaiko Stadio was also the main stadium of the only Intercalated Games held .
In 2022 Beijing National Stadium will join these in being the main stadium at two Olympics , but with a special distinction : it will become the only stadium to have been such at both a Summer and a Winter Olympics .
A number , including both the Panathinaiko Stadio and the Vélodrome de Vincennes , have hosted events at subsequent Olympics .
The London Games of 2012 were not opened and closed at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium , the site of the 1948 Olympic Stadium , but instead at a new stadium in Stratford .
Wembley was , however , the venue for some 2012 Olympic football matches .
Likewise , the Melbourne Cricket Ground , which was the centrepiece stadium for the 1956 games , later hosted the first games of the Sydney 2000 football tournament .
Lake Placid 's 1930 Olympic Stadium was utilized in the 1980 Lake Placid games as the speed skating venue .
Olympiahalle hosted figure skating and short - track speed skating during the 2012 Winter Youth Olympics .
Stockholm Olympic Stadium hosted equestrian events for the 1956 Summer Olympics ( while the 1956 games were held in Melbourne , Australia , quarantine restrictions prevented equestrian events from being held domestically , thus Stockholm , Sweden hosted the 1956 equestrian competitions ) .
STADIA OTHER MAJOR EVENTS HELD AT OLYMPIC STADIUMS
Section::::Other major events held at Olympic Stadiums . !
Venue ! !
City ! !
Events
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Olympic Past and
Future Stadiums - BALLPARKS.com * Summer Olympic Stadiums ( Stadia )
1896 - ( 2020 )
on Google Maps ( select " Sat View " )