BOATSWAIN
A boatswain ( , ) , bo's'n , bos'n , or bosun , also known as a Petty Officer or a qualified member of the deck department , is the seniormost rate of the deck department and is responsible for the components of a ship 's hull .
The boatswain supervises the other members of the ship 's deck department , and typically is not a watchstander , except on vessels with small crews .
Additional duties vary depending upon ship , crew , and circumstances .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The word boatswain has been in the English language since approximately 1450 .
It is derived from late Old English batswegen , from bat ( boat ) concatenated with Old Norse sveinn ( swain ) , meaning a young man , apprentice , a follower , retainer or servant .
Directly translated to modern Norwegian it would be båtsvenn , while the actual crew title in Norwegian is båtsmann ( " boats - man " ) .
While the phonetic spelling bosun is reported as having been observed since 1868 , this latter spelling was used in Shakespeare 's The Tempest written in 1611 , and as Bos'n in later editions .
ROYAL NAVY Section::::Royal Navy .
The rank of boatswain is the oldest rank in the Royal Navy , and its origins can be traced back to the year 1040 .
In that year , when five English ports began furnishing warships to King Edward the Confessor in exchange for certain privileges , they also furnished crews whose officers were the master , boatswain , carpenter and cook .
Later these officers were " warranted " by the British Admiralty .
They maintained and sailed the ships and were the standing officers of the navy .
The Royal Navy 's last official boatswain , Commander E W Andrew OBE , retired in 1990 .
NAVAL CADETS Section::::Naval cadets .
The rank of cadet boatswain , in some schools , is the second highest rank in the combined cadet force naval section that a cadet can attain , below the rank of coxswain and above the rank of leading hand .
It is equivalent to the rank of colour sergeant in the army and the royal marines cadets ; it is sometimes an appointment for a senior petty officer to assist a coxswain .
JOB DESCRIPTION Section::::Job description .
The boatswain works in a ship 's deck department as the foreman of the unlicensed ( crew members without a mate 's licence ) deck crew .
Sometimes , the boatswain is also a third or fourth mate .
A bosun must be highly skilled in all matters of marlinespike seamanship required for working on deck of a seagoing vessel .
The bosun is distinguished from other able seamen by the supervisory roles : planning , scheduling , and assigning work .
As deck crew foreman , the boatswain plans the day 's work and assigns tasks to the deck crew .
As work is completed , the boatswain checks on completed work for compliance with approved operating procedures .
Outside the supervisory role , the boatswain regularly inspects the vessel and performs a variety of routine , skilled , and semi - skilled duties to maintain all areas of the ship not maintained by the engineering department .
These duties can include cleaning , painting , and maintaining the vessel 's hull , superstructure and deck equipment as well as executing a formal preventive maintenance program .
A boatswain 's skills may include cargo rigging , winch operations , deck maintenance , working aloft , and other duties required during deck operations .
The boatswain is well versed in the care and handling of lines , and has knowledge of knots , hitches , bends , whipping , and splices as needed to perform tasks such as mooring a vessel .
The boatswain typically operates the ship 's windlasses when letting go and heaving up anchors .
Moreover , a boatswain may be called upon to lead firefighting efforts or other emergency procedures encountered on board .
Effective boatswains are able to integrate their seafarer skills into supervising and communicating with members of deck crew with often diverse backgrounds .
Originally , on board sailing ships the boatswain was in charge of a ship 's anchors , cordage , colours , deck crew and the ship 's boats .
The boatswain would also be in charge of the rigging while the ship was in dock .
The boatswain 's technical tasks were modernised with the advent of steam engines and subsequent mechanisation .
A boatswain also is responsible for doing routine pipes using what is called a boatswain 's call .
There are specific sounds which can be made with the pipe to indicate various events , such as emergency situations or notifications of meal time .
NOTABLE BOATSWAINS Section::::Notable boatswains .
A number of boatswains and naval boatswains mates have achieved fame .
Reuben James and William Wiley are famous for their heroism in the Barbary Wars and are namesakes of the ships USS Reuben James and USS Wiley .
Medal of Honor recipients Francis P. Hammerberg and George Robert Cholister were U.S. Navy boatswain 's mates , as was Navy Cross recipient Stephen Bass .
Victoria Cross recipients John Sheppard , John Sullivan , Henry Curtis , and John Harrison were Royal Navy boatswain 's mates .
There are also a handful of boatswains and boatswain 's mates in literature .
The boatswain in William Shakespeare 's The Tempest is a central character in the opening scene , which takes place aboard a ship at sea , and appears again briefly in the final scene .
Typhoon by Joseph Conrad has a nameless boatswain who tells Captain MacWhirr of a " lump " of men going overboard during the peak of the storm .
Also , the character Bill Bobstay in Gilbert and Sullivan 's musical comedy H.M.S. Pinafore is alternatively referred to as a " bos'un " and a " boatswain 's mate . "
Another boatswain from literature is Smee from Peter Pan .
Lord Byron had a Newfoundland dog named Boatswain .
Byron wrote the famous poem " Epitaph to a Dog " and had a monument made for him at Newstead Abbey .
SCOUTING
Section::::Scouting .
Quartermaster is the highest rank in the Sea Scouts , BSA , an older youth ( 13 - 21 ) co - ed programme .
The youth can also elect a youth leader , giving that youth the title " boatswain " .
A Boatswain ( Bootsman ) is in the Netherlands the patrol leader of a Sea Scout patrol ( Bak ) , in Flanders it is the assistant patrol leader of a Sea Scout patrol ( Kwartier ) .
SEE ALSO
* Boatswain 's mate ( United States Coast Guard )
* Boatswain 's mate ( United States Navy )
* Bootsmann
* Bosun 's chair
* Buffer ( navy ) * Deck department * Merchant Navy ( United Kingdom ) * Seafarer 's professions and ranks * Serang ( disambiguation )
* Ship transport * United States Merchant Marine NOTES Section::::Notes .
This article incorporates text from public - domain sources , including the Naval Historical Center and/or other U.S. Government websites .
For specific sources of text , see notes .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* CorPun website on corporal punishments
* Boatswain at OccupationalInfo.org