TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS
Torres Strait Islanders ( ) are the indigenous people of the Torres Strait Islands , part of Queensland , Australia .
They are distinct from the Aboriginal people of the rest of Australia , and are generally referred to separately .
There are also two Torres Strait Islander communities on the nearby coast of the mainland at Bamaga and Seisia .
POPULATION Section::::Population .
There are 6,800 Torres Strait Islanders who live in the area of the Torres Strait , and 42,000 others who live outside the area , mostly in the north of Queensland , particularly in Townsville and Cairns .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
The indigenous people of the Torres Strait have a distinct culture which has slight variants on the different islands where they live .
They are a seafaring people , and they trade with people of Papua New Guinea .
The culture is complex , with some Australian elements , some Papuan elements , and Austronesian elements , just like the languages .
The Islanders seem to have been the dominant culture for many centuries , and neighbouring Aboriginal and Papuan cultures show some Island influence in religious ceremonies and the like .
Archaeological , linguistic and folk history evidence suggests that the core of Island culture is Papuo - Austronesian .
Unlike the indigenous peoples of mainland Australia , but like those of neighbouring Papua , islanders are agriculturalists as well as engaging in hunting and gathering .
Dugong , turtle , crayfish , crabs , shellfish , reef fish and wild fruits and vegetables were traditionally hunted and collected and remain an important part of their subsistence lifestyle .
Traditional foods play an important role in ceremonies and celebrations even when they do not live on the islands .
Dugong and turtle hunting as well as fishing are seen as a way of continuing the Islander tradition of being closely associated with the sea .
Their more recent , post - colonization history has seen new cultural influences , most notably the place of Christianity ( particularly of the Baptist and Anglican strains ) which caused major shifts in cultural paradigms , as well as subtler additions through the influence of Polynesians , particularly Samoan and Rotuman sea workers and missionaries who worked in the area in the 19th Century .
ART Section::::Art .
The Torres Strait Islands , particularly since the 1970s , have produced some outstanding and successful artists , in particular printmakers , sculptors and mask - makers , and dancers .
The Islands have a long tradition of woodcarving , creating masks and drums , and carving decorative features on these and other items for ceremonial use .
The modern and portable art form of printmaking , particularly linocut and etching has been a natural progression for island artists many of whom grew up learning carving , especially in wood .
The College of Technical and Further Education on Thursday Island was a starting point for young islanders to pursue studies in art .
Many went on to further art studies , especially in printmaking , initially in Cairns and later at the Australian National University in what is now the School of Art and Design , then called the Canberra Institute of the Arts .
Linocut prints in particular are now a favoured medium , and striking prints are produced with black ink on white paper .
Prints tell the stories of spiritual beings , island life , the environment , and the range of creatures central to Torres Strait Island life .
The prints often incorporate extensive background patterning , some of which has been rediscovered after research in anthropological collections in overseas and local museums .
Artists such as Laurie Nona , Brian Robinson , Alick Tipoti , Dennis Nona , Billy Missi , David Bosun , and more recently Glen Mackie , Joemen Nona , Daniel O'Shane and Tommy Pau produce vibrant and energetic prints which are held in local and overseas collections .
At around the same time as these artists were beginning studies in art , there was underway a significant re - connection to traditional myths and legends .
Many of these had been all but forgotten when Margaret Lawrie 's significant publications , Myths and Legends of the Torres Strait and Tales from the Torres Strait were published in 1970 and 1972 respectively .
While some of these stories had been written down by Alfred Cort Haddon after his anthropological expedition to the Torres Strait in 1898 , in the years after his publications up to perhaps World War 2 , dispersal of the islanders and lack of any further written records meant there was a real danger that the material culture of the islands was being lost .
The artists found a new direction in interpreting and presenting these traditional stories in prints .
Prints not only served as a vehicle for interpreting stories to their own people , but have found a new and increasingly large Australian and international audience with their striking imagery .
Artists have produced prints that are up to 8 metres in length , foregrounding a narrative with exquisitely detailed patterned backgrounds .
The imagery fuses the myths and legends with the maritime perspective of the Torres Strait Islands , and depicts spirit figures and human elements , in the sea , on the land and under the stars , surrounded by the dugongs , turtles , fish , crocodiles and birds that are part of the islands ' environment .
Not all Torres Strait Islander printmakers work exclusively in myths and legends .
Some include a range of contemporary iconography , including , western art references and pop culture images such as comic book characters , either to add depth of meaning to or comparisons with local cultural chronicling .
Others represent day to day life and the environment , such as the dugong and her calf swimming together , or turtles or jellyfish with traditional patterning on their bodies or as background .
Several of these artists also produce sculptures , and carved and decorated masks and headdresses .
Dance performances have been a constant expression of Torres Strait Islands culture throughout the twentieth century .
Head decorations , masks , costumes and mechanical dance machines are created to use in traditional ceremonies and performances .
Modern day masks can be simple carved faces or more elaborate decorated pieces .
Headdresses or dhari ( see the Torres Strait Islands flag , above right ) and dance machines ( hand held mechanical objects ) constructed of a mix of traditional and contemporary materials , bring colour and movement to performances .
Like much of the art of the Torres Strait , dharis and masks are essentially spiritual , but have taken on the ability to reflect stories and historical and contemporary events , using modern materials of metal and plywood but also more traditional feathers , human hair , bamboo , bean pods and shell .
Masks , drumming and chanting are often combined with dance performances for exhibitions such as : Alick Tipoti 's Zugubal .
Ancestral Spirits at the Cairns Regional Gallery in July 2015 .
Artists and artworks are assisted by several local art centres in the Torres Strait Islands .
These centres provide support and training for artists and future artists , show examples of current work , programs and projects , detail artist biographies and list exhibitions .
Links to these centres are provided below .
Prominent among these is wame ( alt .
wameya ) , many different string figures ( a particular string figure game played by two or more participants that generates several string figures is familiar to people of many cultures under the name Cat 's cradle ) , some extremely elaborate and beautiful , and ' string catches ' ( games in which strings are wrapped around fingers then removed quickly with a single pull ) .
LANGUAGES
Section::::Languages .
The Western - central Torres Strait Language , or Kalaw Lagaw Ya , is spoken on the southwestern , western , northern and central islands .
It is a member of the Pama - Nyungan family of languages of Australia .
Meriam Mir is spoken on the eastern islands .
It is one of the four Eastern Trans - Fly languages , the other three being spoken in Papua New Guinea .
ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
The Torres Strait Islanders have been administered by a system of elected councils .
This is a system based partly on traditional pre - Christian local government and partly on the introduced mission management system .
NOTABLE TORRES STRAIT
ISLANDERS
* Patty Mills - NBA player for the San Antonio Spurs
* Sam Powell - Pepper – Australian Football League player for Port Adelaide
* Albert Proud – Australian Football League player for Brisbane Lions * Cynthia Lui – the first Torres Strait Islander elected to the Parliament of Queensland
*
Sam Thaiday - an Australia National Rugby League player for the Brisbane Broncos .
*
Christine Anu - an Australian pop singer and actress .
She gained popularity with the release of her song " My Island Home " .
Anu has been nominated for 17 ARIA Awards .
SEE ALSO * Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts
( ACPA )
* Indigenous Australians
* List of Indigenous Australian firsts * Papuan people
* Torres Strait Islander Flag REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Torres Strait Regional Authority
* Church of Torres Strait * Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders ' virtual books – held by the State Library of Queensland .
* Contemporary stories by and about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
* Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner , Social Justice Reports 1993–2015 and Native Title Reports 1994–2015 for more information about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs .
* Torres Strait Islander Art from Badu Island
* Art of Mua Island Torres Strait
* Darnley Island Arts Centre
* Alick Tipoti artist *
Gab Titui Cultural Centre