KIT KAT Kit Kat is a chocolate - covered wafer bar confection created by Rowntree 's of York , United Kingdom , and is now produced globally by Nestlé , which acquired Rowntree in 1988 , and closed it in 2006 , with the exception of the United States where it is made under license by H.B. Reese Candy Company , a division of The Hershey Company .
The standard bars consist of two or four pieces composed of three layers of wafer , separated and covered by an outer layer of chocolate .
Each finger can be snapped from the bar separately .
There are many different flavours of Kit Kat , including milk , white , and dark chocolate .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Use of the name Kit Kat or Kit Cat for a type of food goes back to the 18th century , when mutton pies known as a Kit - Kat were served at meetings of the political Kit - Cat Club in London owned by pastry chef Christopher Catling .
The origins of what is now known as the Kit Kat brand go back to 1911 , when Rowntree 's , a confectionery company based in York in the United Kingdom , trademarked the terms Kit Cat and Kit Kat .
The names were not used immediately and Kit Kat first appeared in the 1920s , when Rowntree 's launched a brand of boxed chocolates entitled Kit Cat .
This continued into the 1930s , when Rowntree 's shifted focus and production onto its Black Magic and Dairy Box brands .
With the promotion of alternative products the Kit Cat brand decreased and was eventually discontinued .
The original four - finger bar was developed after a worker at Rowntree 's York Factory put a suggestion in a recommendation box for a snack that " a man could take to work in his pack " .
The bar launched on 29 August 1935 , under the title of Rowntree 's Chocolate Crisp ( priced at 2d ) , and was sold in London and throughout southern England .
Rowntree 's Chocolate Crisp was renamed Kit Kat Chocolate Crisp in 1937 , the same year that Kit Kat began to incorporate " Break " into its recognisable advertising strategy
The colour scheme and first flavour variation to the brand came in 1942 , owing to World War II , when food shortages prompted an alteration in the recipe .
The flavour of Kit Kat was changed to dark chocolate ; the packaging abandoned its Chocolate Crisp title , and was coloured blue .
After the war the name became Kit Kat , with the original milk chocolate recipe and red packaging .
Following its success in the United Kingdom , in the 1940s Kit Kat was exported to Canada , South Africa , Ireland , Australia , and New Zealand .
In 1958 , Donald Gilles , the executive at JWT Orland , created the iconic advertising line " Have a Break , Have a Kit Kat " .
The brand further expanded in the 1970s when Rowntree created a new distribution factory in Germany to meet European demand , and established agreements to distribute the brand in the US through the Hershey company , and in Japan through Fujiya .
In June 1988 , Swiss company Nestlé acquired Kit Kat through the purchase of Rowntree 's , giving Nestlé global control over the brand , except in the US , and production and distribution increased with new facilities in Japan and additional manufacturing operations set up in Malaysia , India and China .
The Hershey Company has a licence to produce Kit Kat bars in the United States which dates from 1970 , when Hershey executed a licensing agreement with Rowntree which allowed Hershey to retain the Kit Kat licence so long as Hershey was not sold .
Nestlé , which has a substantial presence in the US , had to honour the licensing agreement when it bought Rowntree in 1988 .
As Kit Kat is one of Hershey 's top five brands in the US market , the Kit Kat licence was a key factor in Hershey 's failed attempt to attract a serious buyer in 2002 .
Variants in the traditional chocolate bar first appeared in 1996 when Kit Kat Orange , the first flavour variant , was introduced in the United Kingdom .
Its success was followed by several varieties including mint and caramel , and in 1999 Kit Kat Chunky was launched and received favourably by international consumers .
Variations on the traditional Kit Kat have continued to be developed since then .
In 2000 Nestlé acquired Fujiya 's share of the brand in Japan , and also expanded its marketplace in Japan , Russia , Turkey , and Venezuela , in addition to markets in Eastern and Central Europe .
Throughout the decade Kit Kat introduced dozens of flavours and line extensions within specific consumer markets .
It celebrated its 75th anniversary on 10 October 2009 .
The traditional bar has four fingers which each measure approximately by .
A two - finger bar was launched in the 1930s , and has remained the company 's best - selling biscuit brand ever since .
The 1999 Kit Kat Chunky ( known as Big Kat and Kit Kat Extra Crispy in the US ) has one large finger approximately wide .
Kit Kat bars contain varying numbers of fingers depending on the market , ranging from the half - finger sized Kit Kat Petit in Japan , to the three - fingered variants in Arabia , and the twelve - finger family - size bars in Australia and France .
Kit Kat bars are sold individually and in bags , boxes and multi - packs .
In Ireland , France , the UK and America Nestlé also produces a Kit Kat ice cream , and in Australia and Malaysia , Kit Kat Drumsticks .
In 2010 , a new £ 5 million manufacturing line was opened by Nestlé in York , to produce more than a billion Kit Kat bars each year .
GLOBAL
CONFECTION Section::::Global confection .
Kit Kat bars are produced in 16 countries by Nestlé : Brazil , Mexico , United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Germany , Russia , Japan , China , Malaysia , Thailand , India , Turkey , United Arab Emirates , Bulgaria and Algeria .
Kit Kat bars in the United States are produced under licence by The Hershey Company , a Nestlé competitor , due to a prior licensing agreement with Rowntree .
The year 2003 was a turning point for the Kit Kat bar as well as the confectionery industry in general .
The popularity of low carb diets , and the push to healthier eating stifled sales growth in many parts of the world .
In addition , fierce competition from Cadbury 's newly formed Dairy Milk superbrand also contributed to Kit Kat sales decreasing considerably in its home market of the UK , and threatened to depose it from its No.1 position .
The solution adopted by Nestlé and others was to increase dramatically the number of new and unique variations of their confections and market them as limited or special editions , usually only available for a few months at a time so as not lose sales of their standard products .
The strategy initially reversed the decline of the Kit Kat and has been adopted worldwide by Nestlé , Hershey , Mars , and others with similar success .
This has resulted in many new flavours and varieties of the Kit Kat and other confections appearing globally since then .
While some flavours succeeded , many failed , alienating some consumers in the process , causing Nestlé to scale back on new releases .
In September 2006 , Nestlé announced that they would be cutting 645 jobs in their York factory and moving all Smarties production to their Hamburg factory , which had already been producing two - thirds .
They stated that this move would allow for a £ 20 million investment to modernise the antiquated York factory and improve Kit Kat production .
As dark chocolate has seen increased demand and favour worldwide because of its purported health benefits , in September 2006 the four - finger Kit Kat Fine Dark was launched in the United Kingdom as a permanent product , and packaging for the entire brand was changed .
Hershey had sold the four - finger Kit Kat Dark in the US several years previously as a limited edition , and began doing so again .
Nestlé now manufactures two - finger Kit Kats with natural flavourings , and for the first time , Kit Kats in this format are suitable for vegans .
It is not known at this date whether or not other varieties will follow suit .
In 2014 , Kit Kat was ranked the third best selling chocolate bar in the United Kingdom , after Dairy Milk and Galaxy .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
When first introduced , the original Rowntree 's Chocolate Crisp bar had a red wrapper , which briefly became blue between 1945–1947 .
As a result of milk shortages after the end of World War II , dark chocolate was used instead of milk chocolate during that period .
Since its introduction in the 1970s , the Hershey 's Kit Kat packaging and advertising in the United States differed from the branding used in every other country where it was sold .
In 2002 , Hershey Kit Kats adopted the slanted ellipse logo used worldwide by Nestlé , though the ellipse was red and the text white .
The US version of " Kit Kat Chunky " is known as " Big Kat " .
In the United Kingdom , the product was traditionally wrapped in silver foil and an outer paper band .
In 2001 this was changed to flow wrap plastic .
Foil and paper wrapping is still used for Kit - Kats sold as part of a multipack .
MARKETING AND PROMOTION Section::::Marketing and promotion .
After launching in the 1930s , Rowntree 's Chocolate Crisp was originally advertised as " the biggest little meal " and " the best companion to a cup of tea " .
During World War II , Kit Kat was depicted as a valuable wartime foodstuff , with the slogan " what active people need " . '
Kitty the Kat ' arrived in the late 1940s to emphasise the " rich full cream milk " qualities of the bar and , thanks to contemporary improvements in production methods , also highlighted the new and improved ' snap ' by responding to a biscuit being broken off screen .
The first Kit Kat poster appeared in 1951 , and the first colour TV advertisement appeared in 1969 .
Since 1958 , the slogan for the Kit Kat in the UK and elsewhere has been " Have a break ... have a Kit Kat " .
However , in 1995 , Nestlé sought to trademark the " Have a break " portion .
After a ten - year legal battle , which was contested by rival Mars , the European Court of Justice ruled on 7 July 2005 to send the case back to the British courts .
In 2004 , Nestlé UK used the slogan " Make the most of your break " , but later returned to the original slogan .
The United States also used the short - lived slogan , " Tastes So Good , You 'll Roar " , in the early 1980s .
The TV commercial most known from this slogan involves a young man biting into one of the Kit Kat bars in a grocery store , and roaring like a lion so loudly the whole store shakes violently , knocking items from the shelves .
Another short - lived US slogan was " That 's What You Want " , whose television adverts showed people pulling unlikely foodstuffs from their pockets or purses , before rejecting them in favour of a Kit Kat .
The " classic " American version of the " Gimme a Break " Kit Kat jingle ( in use in the US since 1986 ) was written by Ken Shuldman ( copy ) and Michael A. Levine ( music ) for the DDB Advertising Agency .
Versions of the original have been covered by Carrie Underwood , Shawn Colvin , and many studio singers , as well as people who have appeared on - camera in the commercials .
The jingle was cited in a study by University of Cincinnati researcher James J. Kellaris as one of the top ten " earworms " – bits of melody that become stuck in your head .
Another version of the advertising jingle ' Gimme a break ' created for Kit Kat " Factory " commercial in the US was an original recording by Andrew W.K. W.K. was hired to write a new musical version for their " Gimme a break " slogan .
Variations on the Andrew W.K. advertisement included executive dance routines in corporate offices and a network newsroom .
However , the " classic " song has also been used again since the newer version first aired in 2004 .
A 1989 United Kingdom advertisement for Kit Kat , in which a zoo photographer " takes a break " from waiting for pandas to appear in an enclosure and misses them performing a dance routine , came in 30th in Channel 4 's " 100 Greatest Adverts " poll in 2000 .
The Maltese tour boat MV Lady Davinia had a distinctive red and white Kit Kat paint scheme before she sank in 2008 .
In late 2004 through to the end of 2006 , Nestlé Rowntree sponsored the English football club York City F.C ..
As a result , the club 's home - ground , Bootham Crescent , was renamed to KitKat Crescent .
In a 2012 advertising campaign in the UK and Ireland , several new flavours of Chunky Kit Kat were marketed , with consumers being asked to vote for their favourite .
Selecting from white chocolate , double chocolate , peanut butter , and orange , Peanut butter was the winner by having 47 % of votes .
A similar campaign occurred in 2013 with mint , coconut , hazelnut and chocolate fudge .
ASSOCIATION WITH ANDROID Section::::Association with Android .
In September 2013 , it was announced that version 4.4 of Google 's Android mobile operating system would be named " KitKat " .
Google licensed the name from Nestlé , with no money changing hands .
A promotion ran in numerous countries with specially branded Android Kit Kat bars to win Nexus 7 devices and Google Play Store credit .
FAIRTRADE Section::::Fairtrade .
In December 2009 , it was announced that the four - finger variety of Kit Kat would use Fairtrade chocolate ( at least in Britain and Ireland ) from January 2010 .
The Fairtrade Kit Kat promotion was extended to the finger edition in January 2010 .
GOLDEN TICKET DRAW Section::::Golden ticket draw .
During the first three weeks of Big Brother Series 7 , Channel 4 conducted a promotion in conjunction with Nestlé to distribute 100 " golden tickets " randomly throughout Kit Kats , in a style reminiscent of the story Charlie and the Chocolate Factory .
Members of the public finding these tickets were permitted to use them to give themselves a chance to become a Big Brother housemate and bypass the standard auditions process .
Golden ticket holders were invited to a television show where one of them , Susie Verrico , was chosen to enter the House by Aisleyne Horgan - Wallace , picking a ball out of a machine at random .
This contest caused some controversy , with the Advertising Standards Authority saying that the terms and conditions of the draw should have been made clearer in related advertisements , and that an independent adjudicator should have been present before and during the draw .
VARIETIES FLAVOURS Section::::Varieties .
Section::::Flavours .
Many varieties of Kit Kat have existed , either permanently or as limited editions , such as those sold to commemorate festivals such as St. Valentine 's Day .
In Japan , Nestlé has introduced over 200 different flavours since 2000 , including ginger ale , soy sauce , creme brulee , green tea , sake , and banana .
The flavours are designed to appeal to younger buyers , and are often bought as good - luck gifts as the brand name echoes the Japanese phrase " Kitto Katsu " , roughly translating as " surely win . "
The Kit Kat Orange was the first flavour variant to be introduced in the United Kingdom , in 1996 and 1998 in Ireland .
It was followed in 1997 by the Kit Kat Dark and Kit Kat Mint .
All three were available as permanent editions of the two - finger multipack in the United Kingdom , along with the Kit Kat Original , the Kit Kat White , and from 2012 the Kit Kat Cookies & Cream .
A wide variety of promotional items exist , ranging from traditional merchandise ( such as mugs , pens , oven gloves and tea - towels ) to less common items such as coats for small dogs .
Recently in Japan , Kit Kats have come packaged with CD singles , and a special limited edition double pack of Kit Kat Crispy Monogatari came bundled with a mini book featuring six short stories , one of which was written by Koji Suzuki , author of the Ring cycle series .
In Japan , Kit Kats are also available in jars that are dispensed from vending machines .
FORMS Section::::Forms .
The ' standard ' Kit Kat finger bars can come in a variety of presentations and nutritional values .
The bars can come in a miniature form of two finger mini bars , or a larger standard four , or in some cases , three , fingered bars .
The standard size has been upgraded in several cases up to a ' monster Size ' bar , which can include up to five or eight fingers .
Large single - fingered " Chunky Kit Kats " were launched in the United Kingdom in 1998 and have been sold in a variety of flavours .
The market for Chunky Kit Kats has also expanded to Canada .
Other forms and shapes include " Choc'n'Go " individually wrapped fingers in France , a twelve - finger " Family Block " available in New Zealand and Australia , round bite - sized " Pop Choc " pieces , square " Kubes " , praline - filled " Senses " , a yoghurt with Kit Kat pieces , and a Kit Kat ice cream cone .
In the 1980s , a Kit Kat with five shorter fingers was sold in vending machines in the UK .
The Japanese Bake ' N Tasty Mini Kit Kats Custard Pudding Flavour was launched in 2014 .
The bar must be baked in an oven before consumption , and the surface sugar caramelises in the process .
In 2015 , a new luxury and giftable variant of Kit Kat called Kit Kat Rubies was launched in Malaysia .
Comes with the box of 20 small bars , the Kit Kat Rubies bar made with the premium chocolate truffle cream and imported roasted hazelnut pieces .
As of 2017 , U.S. variants include the standard and king - size four - finger bars , standard bars covered with white or dark chocolate , snack - size orange - covered bars for Halloween , bagged wrapped one - finger miniatures ( original and assorted ) , unwrapped minis , a redesigned Big Kat , and a king - size Big Kat ( two of the new Big Kat bars ) . CHOCOLATORY MELBOURNE Section::::Chocolatory Melbourne .
Kit Kat has opened a Chocolatory in the Melbourne Central Shopping Centre in Melbourne , Australia .
The shop allows customers to use touch screens to create their own Kit Kat from a selection of chocolates and ingredients ; they are made while the customers wait .
CRITICISM AND CONTROVERSY Section::::Criticism and controversy .
In March 2010 , Kit Kat was targeted for a boycott by Greenpeace for using palm oil , which the environmental organisation claimed resulted in destruction of forest habitats for orangutans in Indonesia .
A YouTube video by Greenpeace went viral and Nestlé announced a partnership with The Forest Trust to establish " responsible sourcing guidelines " and ensure that its products did not have a deforestation footprint .
They aimed to achieve a fully sustainable method of palm oil harvesting by 2015 .
Nestlé state that 58 % of palm oil purchased in 2017 was responsibly sourced .
Kit Kat Milk Chocolate is made for the North American market with the ingredient PGPR ( polyglycerol polyricinoleate , E476 , AKA Palsgaard PGPR 4150 ) , which is used to reduce the amount of cocoa butter needed and as an emulsifier .
The FDA has determined it to be safe for humans in amounts up to 7.5 milligrams per kilogram of body weight . "
Liver and kidney enlargement was noticed at much higher doses . "
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Original Kit Kat ingredients unless otherwise stated , listed by decreasing weight : milk chocolate ( sugar , milk ingredients , cocoa butter , cocoa mass , whey powder , lactose , soya lecithin , polyglycerol polyricinoleate , natural flavour ) , wheat flour , sugar , modified palm oil , cocoa , sodium bicarbonate , soya lecithin , yeast , and natural flavour .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Milk chocolate ( 66 % )
( sugar , cocoa butter , cocoa mass , dried whole milk , cocoa mass , lactose and proteins from whey , whey powder , emulsifier ( sunflower lecithin ) , butterfat , flavouring ) , wheat flour , sugar , vegetable fat , cocoa mass , yeast , raising agent ( sodium bicarbonate ) , salt , emulsifier ( soya lecithin ) , flavourings .
In 2006 , the UK four - finger Kit Kat contained 233 dietary calories ( kcal ) ( 975 kilojoules ) .
In 2009 , the two - finger Kit Kat contained 107 calories .
In 2013 , the UK Kit Kat Chunky contained 247 calories which reduced to 207 calories in 2015 .
This correlated to a reduction in weight by 19 % from 48 g to 40 g.
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Hershey 's Kit Kat Crisp Wafers in Chocolate contain sugar , wheat flour , cocoa butter , nonfat milk , chocolate , refined palm kernel oil , lactose ( milk ) , milk fat , contains 2 % or less of : soy lecithin , PGPR ( emulsifier ) , yeast , artificial flavor , salt , and sodium bicarbonate .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Milk chocolate ( sugar , modified milk ingredients , cocoa butter , cocoa mass , whey powder , lactose , soya lecithin , polyglycerol polyricinoleate , natural flavour ) , wheat flour , sugar , modified palm oil , cocoa , sodium bicarbonate , soya lecithin , yeast , Natural Flavour .
Dark chocolate ( sugar , unsweetened chocolate , cocoa butter , milk ingredients , soya lecithin , salt , artificial flavour ) , wheat flour , sugar , modified palm oil , unsweetened chocolate or cocoa powder , sodium bicarbonate , soya lecithin , artificial flavour .
May contain salt and/or yeast .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
In Japan , Kit Kats are produced at Nestlé - owned factories in Himeji and Kasumigaura .
The milk chocolate used for Kit Kats is made from whole - milk powder and Nestlé
buys most of its cacao beans from West Africa .
Nestlé has factories in various locations in China , to supply to China and Hong Kong .
During the 2008 Chinese milk scandal , where melamine was found to have tainted some milk suppliers in China , importers in Hong Kong chose to import bars manufactured in the United Kingdom .
SEE ALSO * Kit Kats in Japan
* Kvikk Lunsj REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Nestlé : Kit Kat
* The Hershey Company :
Kit Kat