CONGO ( NOVEL )
Congo is a 1980 science fiction novel by Michael Crichton .
The novel centers on an expedition searching for diamonds and investigating the mysterious deaths of a previous expedition in the dense rain forest of Congo .
Crichton calls Congo a lost world novel in the tradition founded by Henry Rider Haggard 's King Solomon 's Mines , featuring the mines of that work 's title .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The novel starts in 1979 , with an abrupt end to an expedition sent by Earth Resource Technology Services Inc. in the dense rain forests of the Virunga region of the Congo , when the team is attacked and killed by unknown creatures and all contact with them is lost .
The expedition , searching for deposits of valuable diamonds , discovered the legendary Lost City of Zinj .
A video image taken by a camera there , and transmitted by satellite to the base station in Houston , shows a peculiar race of grey - haired gorillas to be responsible for the murders .
Another expedition , led by Karen Ross , is launched to find out the truth and to find the Lost City of Zinj , where there are believed to be deposits of a certain diamond , type IIb , which are naturally boron - doped and thus useful as semiconductors , though worthless as gemstones .
This time the searchers bring along the famous White African mercenary Charles Munro , as well as a female gorilla named Amy , who has been trained to communicate with humans using sign language , and her trainer Peter Elliot .
Time is of the greatest essence , as a rival consortium from corporations in Japan , Germany , and Holland are also searching for the diamonds , turning the entire expedition into a race to the city of Zinj .
Unfortunately for Ross and her team , the American expedition encounters many delays along the way , including plane crashes , native civil wars , and jungle predators .
Eventually , Ross and her expedition reach the Lost City of Zinj and discover the consortium 's camp , like the original expedition 's camp , in ruins and devoid of life .
Ross and her team lose contact with the ERTS HQ due to a massive solar flare , then encounter the killer gorillas and are attacked .
A brief battle ensues and several gorillas are killed .
After studying the corpses and performing a rudimentary field autopsy , it is concluded the animals are not " true " gorillas by modern biological standards , nor kakundakari ( an African primate cryptid ) , but gorilla - chimpanzee - human hybrids : their mass and height is closer to humans than gorillas , their skull is greatly malformed ( the " ridge " that makes gorilla heads look " pointy " is nearly nonexistent ) as well as their pigmentation is on the border of albinism :
light gray fur and yellow eyes .
In addition , they exhibit different behavior : they are highly aggressive , ruthless and partially nocturnal .
Unlike normal gorillas , the grey animals are also extremely social , a troop consisting of over a hundred , compared to a normal troop of a dozen animals .
Elliot intends to name them Gorilla elliotensis after himself .
Afterwards , Ross , Elliot , and Munro explore the ruins and discover that the killer gorillas were bred by the ancient inhabitants of Zinj to serve as guards to protect the diamond mines from intruders .
After several more attacks , Elliot , with the help of Amy , finds a way to translate the language of the new gorillas ( she refers to them as " bad gorillas " ) and piece together three messages
( " go away " , " do n't come " , " here bad " ) ; they stop fighting the humans and become confused , leaving the camp .
Their victory is cut short by the eruption of the nearby volcano , accelerated by explosives placed by Ross for her geological surveys , that buries the city , the diamond fields and all proof of the " new " species under 800 meters of lava .
Ross , Elliot , Munro , and the rest of the team 's survivors are forced to run for their lives .
The team then manages to find a hot air balloon in a crashed consortium cargo aircraft and uses it to escape .
In an epilogue , it is revealed that Munro was able to retrieve a few hundred carats of the valuable diamonds and sold them to Intel for use in a revolutionary new computer processor , while Amy was reintroduced into the wild and was later observed teaching her offspring sign language .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Crichton wanted to do a modern - day version of King Solomon 's Mines .
He pitched the idea to 20th Century Fox who bought the film rights before the story had been even written .
This resulted in Crichton being blocked and unable to start the novel .
He spent time in an isolation tank .
Crichton received a $ 1.5 million advance for the novel , screenplay and as a directing fee .
He had never worked that way before , usually writing the book then selling it .
He eventually managed to finish the book and it became a best seller .
Crichton started writing the screenplay in 1981 after completing the film Looker .
He had enjoyed working with Sean Connery on The Great Train Robbery and wrote Congo hoping to make the film version with Connery in the lead and Crichton to direct .
In 1987 he was still hoping to make the film with Connery and Crichton himself directing but this did not eventuate .
In 1995 , a film version of Congo was released , directed by Frank Marshall and starring Laura Linney , Dylan Walsh , Ernie Hudson , Tim Curry , Grant Heslov , Joe Don Baker , and Shayna Fox as the voice of Amy .
The version received negative reviews from critics , and was nominated for several Golden Raspberry Awards including Worst Picture .
Despite this , the film had a successful box office performance , grossing $ 152 million worldwide .
In 1984 Telarium released a graphic adventure based on Congo .
Because Crichton had sold all adaptation rights to the novel , he set the game — named Amazon — in South America , and Amy the gorilla became Paco the parrot .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
The use of language by gorillas was inspired in part by the efforts of Dr. Penny Patterson to teach American Sign Language to Koko ( gorilla ) .
REFERENCES