PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY Peripheral neuropathy ( PN ) is damage to or a disease affecting nerves , which may impair sensation , movement , gland or organ function , or other aspects of health , depending on the type of nerve affected .
Common causes include systemic diseases ( such as diabetes or leprosy ) , hyperglycemia - induced glycation , vitamin deficiency , medication ( e.g. , chemotherapy , or commonly prescribed antibiotics including metronidazole and the fluoroquinolone class of antibiotics ( Ciprofloxacin , Levaquin , Avelox etc . ) ) , traumatic injury , including ischemia , radiation therapy , excessive alcohol consumption , immune system disease , coeliac disease , or viral infection .
It can also be genetic ( present from birth ) or idiopathic ( no known cause ) .
In conventional medical usage , the word neuropathy ( neuro- , " nervous system " and -pathy , " disease of " ) without modifier usually means peripheral neuropathy .
Neuropathy affecting just one nerve is called " mononeuropathy " and neuropathy involving nerves in roughly the same areas on both sides of the body is called " symmetrical polyneuropathy " or simply " polyneuropathy " .
When two or more ( typically just a few , but sometimes many ) separate nerves in disparate areas of the body are affected it is called " mononeuritis multiplex " , " multifocal mononeuropathy " , or " multiple mononeuropathy " .
Peripheral neuropathy may be chronic ( a long - term condition where symptoms begin subtly and progress slowly ) or acute ( sudden onset , rapid progress , and slow resolution ) .
Acute neuropathies demand urgent diagnosis .
Motor nerves ( that control muscles ) , sensory nerves , or autonomic nerves ( that control automatic functions such as heart rate , body temperature , and breathing ) may be affected .
More than one type of nerve may be affected at the same time .
Peripheral neuropathies may be classified according to the type of nerve predominantly involved , or by the underlying cause .
Neuropathy may cause painful cramps , fasciculations ( fine muscle twitching ) , muscle loss , bone degeneration , and changes in the skin , hair , and nails .
Additionally , motor neuropathy may cause impaired balance and coordination or , most commonly , muscle weakness ; sensory neuropathy may cause numbness to touch and vibration , reduced position sense causing poorer coordination and balance , reduced sensitivity to temperature change and pain , spontaneous tingling or burning pain , or skin allodynia
( severe pain from normally nonpainful stimuli , such as light touch ) ; and autonomic neuropathy may produce diverse symptoms , depending on the affected glands and organs , but common symptoms are poor bladder control , abnormal blood pressure or heart rate , and reduced ability to sweat normally .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Peripheral neuropathy may be classified according to the number and distribution of nerves affected ( mononeuropathy , mononeuritis multiplex , or polyneuropathy ) , the type of nerve fiber predominantly affected ( motor , sensory , autonomic ) , or the process affecting the nerves ; e.g. , inflammation ( neuritis ) , compression ( compression neuropathy ) , chemotherapy ( chemotherapy - induced peripheral neuropathy ) .
MONONEUROPATHY Section::::Mononeuropathy .
Mononeuropathy is a type of neuropathy that only affects a single nerve .
Diagnostically , it is important to distinguish it from polyneuropathy because when a single nerve is affected , it is more likely to be due to localized trauma or infection .
The most common cause of mononeuropathy is physical compression of the nerve , known as compression neuropathy .
Carpal tunnel syndrome and axillary nerve palsy are examples .
Direct injury to a nerve , interruption of its blood supply resulting in ( ischemia ) , or inflammation also may cause mononeuropathy .
POLYNEUROPATHY Section::::Polyneuropathy .
" Polyneuropathy " is a pattern of nerve damage that is quite different from mononeuropathy , often more serious and affecting more areas of the body .
The term " peripheral neuropathy " sometimes is used loosely to refer to polyneuropathy .
In cases of polyneuropathy , many nerve cells in various parts of the body are affected , without regard to the nerve through which they pass ; not all nerve cells are affected in any particular case .
In distal axonopathy , one common pattern is that the cell bodies of neurons remain intact , but the axons are affected in proportion to their length ; the longest axons are the most affected .
Diabetic neuropathy is the most common cause of this pattern .
In demyelinating polyneuropathies , the myelin sheath around axons is damaged , which affects the ability of the axons to conduct electrical impulses .
The third and least common pattern affects the cell bodies of neurons directly .
This usually picks out either the motor neurons ( known as motor neuron disease ) or the sensory neurons ( known as sensory neuronopathy or dorsal root ganglionopathy ) .
The effect of this is to cause symptoms in more than one part of the body , often symmetrically on left and right sides .
As for any neuropathy , the chief symptoms include motor symptoms such as weakness or clumsiness of movement ; and sensory symptoms such as unusual or unpleasant sensations such as tingling or burning ; reduced ability to feel sensations such as texture or temperature , and impaired balance when standing or walking .
In many polyneuropathies , these symptoms occur first and most severely in the feet .
Autonomic symptoms also may occur , such as dizziness on standing up , erectile dysfunction , and difficulty controlling urination .
Polyneuropathies usually are caused by processes that affect the body as a whole .
Diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance are the most common causes .
Hyperglycemia - induced formation of advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) is related to diabetic neuropathy .
Other causes relate to the particular type of polyneuropathy , and there are many different causes of each type , including inflammatory diseases such as Lyme disease , vitamin deficiencies , blood disorders , and toxins ( including alcohol and certain prescribed drugs ) .
Most types of polyneuropathy progress fairly slowly , over months or years , but rapidly progressive polyneuropathy also occurs .
It is important to recognize that at one time it was thought that many of the cases of small fiber peripheral neuropathy with typical symptoms of tingling , pain , and loss of sensation in the feet and hands were due to glucose intolerance before a diagnosis of diabetes or pre - diabetes .
However , in August 2015 , the Mayo Clinic published a scientific study in the Journal of the Neurological Sciences showing " no significant increase in ... symptoms ... in the prediabetes group " , and stated that " A search for alternate neuropathy causes is needed in patients with prediabetes . "
The treatment of polyneuropathies is aimed firstly at eliminating or controlling the cause , secondly at maintaining muscle strength and physical function , and thirdly at controlling symptoms such as neuropathic pain .
MONONEURITIS MULTIPLEX Section::::Mononeuritis multiplex .
Mononeuritis multiplex , occasionally termed polyneuritis multiplex , is simultaneous or sequential involvement of individual noncontiguous nerve trunks , either partially or completely , evolving over days to years and typically presenting with acute or subacute loss of sensory and motor function of individual nerves .
The pattern of involvement is asymmetric , however , as the disease progresses , deficit(s ) becomes more confluent and symmetrical , making it difficult to differentiate from polyneuropathy .
Therefore , attention to the pattern of early symptoms is important .
Mononeuritis multiplex also may cause pain , which is characterized as deep , aching pain that is worse at night and frequently in the lower back , hip , or leg .
In people with diabetes mellitus , mononeuritis multiplex typically is encountered as acute , unilateral , and severe thigh pain followed by anterior muscle weakness and loss of knee reflex .
Electrodiagnostic medicine studies will show multifocal sensory motor axonal neuropathy .
It is caused by , or associated with , several medical conditions :
AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY Section::::Autonomic neuropathy .
Autonomic neuropathy is a form of polyneuropathy that affects the non - voluntary , non - sensory nervous system ( i.e. , the autonomic nervous system ) , affecting mostly the internal organs such as the bladder muscles , the cardiovascular system , the digestive tract , and the genital organs .
These nerves are not under a person 's conscious control and function automatically .
Autonomic nerve fibers form large collections in the thorax , abdomen , and pelvis outside the spinal cord .
They have connections with the spinal cord and ultimately the brain , however .
Most commonly autonomic neuropathy is seen in persons with long - standing diabetes mellitus type 1 and 2 .
In most — but not all — cases , autonomic neuropathy occurs alongside other forms of neuropathy , such as sensory neuropathy .
Autonomic neuropathy is one cause of malfunction of the autonomic nervous system , but not the only one ; some conditions affecting the brain or spinal cord also may cause autonomic dysfunction , such as multiple system atrophy , and therefore , may cause similar symptoms to autonomic neuropathy .
The signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy include the following : * Urinary bladder conditions : bladder incontinence or urine retention
* Gastrointestinal tract : dysphagia , abdominal pain , nausea , vomiting , malabsorption , fecal incontinence ,
gastroparesis , diarrhoea , constipation * Cardiovascular system : disturbances of heart rate ( tachycardia , bradycardia ) , orthostatic hypotension , inadequate increase of heart rate on exertion
* Respiratory system : impairments in the signals associated with regulation of breathing and gas exchange ( central sleep apnea , hypopnea , bradypnea ) .
* Other areas : hypoglycemia unawareness , genital impotence , sweat disturbances NEURITIS Section::::Neuritis .
Neuritis is a general term for inflammation of a nerve or the general inflammation of the peripheral nervous system .
Symptoms depend on the nerves involved , but may include pain , paresthesia ( pins - and - needles ) , paresis ( weakness ) , hypoesthesia ( numbness ) , anesthesia , paralysis , wasting , and disappearance of the reflexes .
Causes of neuritis include : SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Those with diseases or dysfunctions of their nerves may present with problems in any of the normal nerve functions .
Symptoms vary depending on the types of nerve fiber involved .
In terms of sensory function , symptoms commonly include loss of function ( " negative " ) symptoms , including numbness , tremor , impairment of balance , and gait abnormality .
Gain of function ( positive ) symptoms include tingling , pain , itching , crawling , and pins - and - needles .
Motor symptoms include loss of function ( " negative " ) symptoms of weakness , tiredness , muscle atrophy , and gait abnormalities ; and gain of function ( " positive " ) symptoms of cramps , and muscle twitch ( fasciculations ) .
In the most common form , length - dependent peripheral neuropathy , pain and parasthesia appears symmetrically and generally at the terminals of the longest nerves , which are in the lower legs and feet .
Sensory symptoms generally develop before motor symptoms such as weakness .
Length - dependent peripheral neuropathy symptoms make a slow ascent of leg , while symptoms may never appear in the upper limbs ; if they do , it will be around the time that leg symptoms reach the knee .
When the nerves of the autonomic nervous system are affected , symptoms may include constipation , dry mouth , difficulty urinating , and dizziness when standing .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The causes are grouped broadly as follows : DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Peripheral neuropathy may first be considered when an individual reports symptoms of numbness , tingling , and pain in feet .
After ruling out a lesion in the central nervous system as a cause , diagnosis may be made on the basis of symptoms , laboratory and additional testing , clinical history , and a detailed examination .
During physical examination , specifically a neurological examination , those with generalized peripheral neuropathies most commonly have distal sensory or motor and sensory loss , although those with a pathology ( problem ) of the nerves may be perfectly normal ; may show proximal weakness , as in some inflammatory neuropathies , such as Guillain – Barré syndrome ; or may show focal sensory disturbance or weakness , such as in mononeuropathies .
Classically , ankle jerk reflex is absent in peripheral neuropathy .
A physical examination will involve testing the deep ankle reflex as well as examining the feet for any ulceration .
For large fiber neuropathy , an exam will usually show an abnormally decreased sensation to vibration , which is tested with a 128-Hz tuning fork , and decreased sensation of light touch when touched by a nylon monofilament .
Diagnostic tests include electromyography ( EMG ) and nerve conduction studies ( NCSs ) , which assess large myelinated nerve fibers .
Testing for small - fiber peripheral neuropathies often relates to the autonomic nervous system function of small thinly- and unmyelinated fibers .
These tests include a sweat test and a tilt table test .
Diagnosis of small fiber involvement in peripheral neuropathy may also involve a skin biopsy in which a 3 mm - thick section of skin is removed from the calf by a punch biopsy , and is used to measure the skin intraepidermal nerve fiber density ( IENFD ) , the density of nerves in the outer layer of the skin .
Reduced density of the small nerves in the epidermis supports a diagnosis of small - fiber peripheral neuropathy .
Laboratory tests include blood tests for vitamin B-12 levels , a complete blood count , measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone levels , a comprehensive metabolic panel screening for diabetes and pre - diabetes , and a serum immunofixation test , which tests for antibodies in the blood .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The treatment of peripheral neuropathy varies based on the cause of the condition , and treating the underlying condition can aid in the management of neuropathy .
When peripheral neuropathy results from diabetes mellitus or prediabetes , blood sugar management is key to treatment .
In prediabetes in particular , strict blood sugar control can significantly alter the course of neuropathy .
In peripheral neuropathy that stems from immune - mediated diseases , the underlying condition is treated with intravenous immunoglobulin or steroids .
When peripheral neuropathy results from vitamin deficiencies or other disorders , those are treated as well .
MEDICATIONS Section::::Medications .
A range of medications that act on the central nervous system has been found to be useful in managing neuropathic pain .
Commonly used treatments include tricyclic antidepressants ( such as nortriptyline or amitriptyline ) , the serotonin - norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor ( SNRI ) medication duloxetine , and antiepileptic therapies such as gabapentin , pregabalin , or sodium valproate .
Few studies have examined whether nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs are effective in treating peripheral neuropathy .
Symptomatic relief for the pain of peripheral neuropathy may be obtained by application of topical capsaicin .
Capsaicin is the factor that causes heat in chili peppers .
The evidence suggesting that capsaicin applied to the skin reduces pain for peripheral neuropathy is of moderate to low quality and should be interpreted carefully before using this treatment option .
Evidence supports the use of cannabinoids for some forms of neuropathic pain .
MEDICAL DEVICES Section::::Medical devices .
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation therapy may be effective and safe in the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy .
A recent review of three trials involving 78 patients found some improvement in pain scores after 4 and 6 , but not 12 weeks of treatment and an overall improvement in neuropathic symptoms at 12 weeks .
Another review of four trials found significant improvement in pain and overall symptoms , with 38 % of patients in one trial becoming asymptomatic .
The treatment remains effective even after prolonged use , but symptoms return to baseline within a month of cessation of treatment .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
A 2008 literature review concluded that , " based on principles of evidence - based medicine and evaluations of methodology , there is only a ' possible ' association [ of celiac disease and peripheral neuropathy ] , due to lower levels of evidence and conflicting evidence .
There is not yet convincing evidence of causality . "
Stem - cell therapy is also being looked at as a possible means to repair peripheral nerve damage .
SEE ALSO
* Scrambler therapy
*
Giant axonal neuropathy REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Peripheral Neuropathy from the US NIH
* Neuropathy : Causes , Symptoms and Treatments from Medical News Today
* Peripheral Neuropathy at the Mayo Clinic