LASER HAIR REMOVAL
Laser hair removal is the process of hair removal by means of exposure to pulses of laser light that destroy the hair follicle .
It had been performed experimentally for about twenty years before becoming commercially available in 1995 and 1996 .
One of the first published articles describing laser hair removal was authored by the group at Massachusetts General Hospital in 1998 .
Laser hair removal is widely practiced in clinics , and even in homes using devices designed and priced for consumer self - treatment .
Many reviews of laser hair removal methods , safety , and efficacy have been published in the dermatology literature .
R. Rox Anderson and Melanie Grossman discovered that it was possible to selectively target a specific chromophore with a laser to partially damage basal stem cells inside the hair follicles .
This method proved to be successful , and was first applied in 1996 .
In 1997 the United States Food and Drug Administration approved this tactic of hair removal .
As this technology continued to be researched , laser hair removal became more effective and efficient ; thus , it is now a common method in removing hair for long periods of time .
HOW IT WORKS Section::::How
it works .
The primary principle behind laser hair removal is selective photothermolysis ( SPTL ) , the matching of a specific wavelength of light and pulse duration to obtain optimal effect on a targeted tissue with minimal effect on surrounding tissue .
Lasers can cause localized damage by selectively heating dark target matter , melanin , thereby heating up the basal stem cells in the follicle which causes hair growth , the follicle , while not heating the rest of the skin .
Light is absorbed by dark objects but reflected by light objects and water , so laser energy can be absorbed by dark material in the hair or skin , with much more speed and intensity than just the skin without any dark adult hair or melanin .
Melanin is considered the primary chromophore for all hair removal lasers currently on the market .
Melanin occurs naturally in the skin and gives skin and hair their color .
There are two types of melanin in hair .
Eumelanin gives hair brown or black color , while pheomelanin gives hair blonde or red color .
Because of the selective absorption of photons of laser light , only hair with color such as black , brown , or reddish - brown hair or dirty blonde can be removed .
White hair , light blonde and strawberry blonde hair does not respond well .
Laser works best with dark coarse hair .
Light skin and dark hair are an ideal combination , being most effective and producing the best results , but lasers such as the are able to target black hair in patients with dark skin with some success .
Hair removal lasers have been in use since 1997 and have been approved for " permanent hair reduction " in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) .
Under the FDA 's definition , " permanent " hair reduction is the long - term , stable reduction in the number of hairs regrowing after a treatment regime .
Indeed , many patients experience complete regrowth of hair on their treated areas in the years following their last treatment .
This means that although laser treatments with these devices will permanently reduce the total number of body hairs , they will not result in a permanent removal of all hair .
Laser hair removal has become popular because of its speed and efficacy , although some of the efficacy is dependent upon the skill and experience of the laser operator , and the choice and availability of different laser technologies used for the procedure .
Some will need touch - up treatments , especially on large areas , after the initial set of 3 - 8 treatments .
COMPARISONS WITH OTHER REMOVAL TECHNIQUES
COMPARISON WITH INTENSE PULSED LIGHT Section::::Comparisons with other removal techniques .
Section::::Comparison with intense pulsed light .
A 2006 review article in the journal Lasers in Medical Science compared intense pulsed light ( IPL ) epilators and both alexandrite and diode lasers .
The review found no statistical difference in short term effectiveness , but a higher incidence of side effects with diode laser based treatment .
Hair reduction after 6 months was reported as 68.75 % for alexandrite lasers , 71.71 % for diode lasers , and 66.96 % for IPL .
Side effects were reported as 9.5 % for alexandrite lasers , 28.9 % for diode lasers , and 15.3 % for IPL .
All side effects were found to be temporary and even pigmentation changes returned to normal within 6 months .
IPL , though technically not containing a laser , is sometimes incorrectly referred to as " laser hair removal " .
IPL - based methods , sometimes called " phototricholysis " or " photoepilation " , use xenon flash lamps that emit full spectrum light .
IPL systems typically output wavelengths between 400 nm and 1200 nm .
Filters are applied to block shorter wavelengths , thereby only using the longer , " redder " wavelengths .
IPLs offer certain advantages over laser , principally in the pulse duration .
While lasers may output trains of short pulses to simulate a longer pulse , IPL systems can generate pulse widths up to 250 ms , which is useful for larger diameter targets .
Some current IPL systems have proven to be more successful in the removal of hair and blood vessels than many lasers .
COMPARISON WITH ELECTROLYSIS Section::::Comparison with electrolysis .
Electrolysis is another hair removal method that has been used for over 135 years .
Like newer laser technology used properly and with several treatments , electrolysis can be used to remove 100 % of the hair from an area and is effective on hair of all colors , if used at an adequate power level with proper technique .
But the treatment is slow and tedious compared with typical newer laser hair removal .
More hair may grow in certain areas that are prone to hormone - induced growth ( e.g. a woman 's chin and neck ) based on individual hormone levels or changes therein , and one 's genetic predisposition to grow new hair .
A study conducted in 2000 at the ASVAK Laser Center in Ankara , Turkey comparing alexandrite laser and electrolysis for hair removal on 12 patients concluded that laser hair removal was 60 times faster , less painful and more reliable than electrolysis .
It is important to note that the type of electrolysis performed in the study was galvanic electrolysis , rather than thermolysis or a blend of the two .
Galvanic current requires 30 seconds to more than a minute to release each hair whereas thermolysis or a blend can require much less .
This study thus did not test the capability of all forms of modern electrolysis .
COMPARISON WITH SHAVING Section::::Comparison with shaving .
Shaving is a technique in which one removes hair from the skin with a razor .
Shaving has been popular as a temporary hair removal technique since at least the 1700s .
In 1895 King Gillette invented a razor blade that was sharp , thin , disposable , and cheap to make .
This system was a widespread success and has evolved into the modern disposable razor .
Shaving , however , is only temporary and can lead to irritation of the shaved area .
COMPARISON WITH WAXING Section::::Comparison with waxing .
Waxing is another option for hair removal .
This method is an efficient way of removing hair ; it is longer - lasting than shaving but not permanent .
The ancient Egyptians developed a similar mechanism , sugaring , in which one would mix oil and honey then apply it to the skin .
As waxing has evolved , there are two types of waxing .
In one , the strips are already ready to use , and one can apply it to the skin and peel it off in the direction opposite to the hair growth .
Another one involves heating up the wax , applying it to the skin , and then placing a cloth on it and pulling away from the hair growth .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
In some countries , including the U.S. , hair removal is an unregulated procedure that anyone can do .
In some places , only doctors and doctor - supervised personnel can do it , while in other cases permission extends to licensed professionals , such as regular nurses , physician assistants , estheticians , and/or cosmetologists .
In Florida , the use of lasers , laser - like devices and intense pulsed light devices is considered medicine , and requires they be used only by a physician ( D.O. or M.D. ) , a physician assistant under the supervision of a physician , or an advanced registered nurse practitioner under a protocol signed by a physician .
An electrologist working under the direct supervision and responsibility of a physician is also allowed to perform laser hair removal in the state of Florida .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Several wavelengths of laser energy have been used for hair removal , from visible light to near - infrared radiation .
These lasers are characterized by their wavelength , measured in nanometers ( nm ) :
Laser Used Wavelength ( nm ) Light Source Type of Skin used on Argon 488 nm or 514.5 nm Turquoise / Cyan or Green No longer used Ruby 694.3 nm
Deep red Pale Alexandrite 755 nm Near - infrared
All skin types Pulsed diode array 810 nm Near - infrared Pale to medium 1064 nm Infrared Darker complexion
Intense pulsed light ( IPL is not a laser)Fluence or energy density is another important consideration .
Fluence is measured in joules per square centimeter ( J / cm² ) .
It 's important to get treated at high enough settings to heat up the follicles enough to disable them from producing hair .
Epidermal cooling has been determined to allow higher fluences and reduce pain and side effects , especially in darker skin .
Three types of cooling have been developed : *
Contact cooling : through a window cooled by circulating water or other internal coolant .
This type of cooling is by far the most efficient method of keeping the epidermis protected since it provides a constant heat sink at the skin surface .
Sapphire windows are much more conductive than quartz .
* Cryogen spray : sprayed directly onto the skin immediately before and/or after the laser pulse
* Air cooling : forced cold air at -34 ° C
In essence , the important output parameter when treating hair ( and other skin conditions ) is power density – this is a combination of energy , spot diameter and pulse duration .
These three parameters determine what actually happens when the light energy is absorbed by the tissue chromophore
be it melanin , hemoglobin or water , with the amount of tissue damaged being determined by the temperature / time combination .
NUMBER OF SESSIONS Section::::Number of sessions .
Hair grows in several phases ( anagen , telogen , catagen ) and a laser can only affect the currently active growing hair follicles ( early anagen ) .
Hence , several sessions are needed to damage the hair in all phases of growth and force it to revert to a vellus non - colored small hair .
Multiple treatments depending on the type of hair and skin color have been shown to provide long - term reduction of hair .
Most patients need a minimum of eight treatments .
Current parameters differ from device to device but manufacturers and clinicians generally recommend waiting from three to eight weeks between sessions , depending on the area being treated .
The number of sessions depends on various parameters , including the area of the body being treated , skin color , coarseness of hair , reason for hirsutism , and sex .
Coarse dark hair on light skin is easiest to treat .
Certain areas ( notably men 's faces ) may require considerably more treatments to achieve desired results .
Laser does not work well on light - colored hair , red hair , grey hair , white hair , as well as fine hair of any color , such as vellus .
For darker skinned patients with black hair , the long - pulsed with a cooling tip can be safe and effective when used by an experienced practitioner .
Typically the shedding of the treated hairs takes about two to three weeks .
These hairs should be allowed to fall out on their own and should not be manipulated by the patient for certain reasons , chiefly to avoid infections .
Pulling hairs after a session can be more painful as well as counteract the effects of the treatment .
SIDE EFFECTS AND RISKS Section::::Side effects and risks .
Some normal side effects may occur after laser hair removal treatments , including itching , pink skin , redness , and swelling around the treatment area or swelling of the follicles ( follicular edema ) .
These side effects rarely last more than two or three days .
The two most common serious side effects are acne and skin discoloration .
Some level of pain should also be expected during treatments .
Numbing creams are available at most clinics , sometimes for an additional cost .
Some numbing creams are available over the counter .
Use of strong numbing creams over large skin areas being treated at one time must be avoided , as this has seriously harmed , and even killed , patients .
Typically , the cream should be applied about 30 minutes before the procedure .
Icing the area after the treatment helps relieve the side effects faster .
Ibrahimi and Kilmer reported a study of a novel device of diode handpiece with a large spot size which used vacuum - assisted suction to reduce the level of pain associated with laser treatment .
Unwanted side effects such as hypo- or hyper - pigmentation or , in extreme cases , burning of the skin call for an adjustment in laser selection or settings .
Risks include the chance of burning the skin or discoloration of the skin , hypopigmentation ( white spots ) , flare of acne , swelling around the hair follicle ( considered a normal reaction ) , scab formation , purpura , and infection .
These risks can be reduced by treatment with an appropriate laser type used at appropriate settings for the individual 's skin type and treatment area .
Some patients may show side effects from an allergy to either the hair removal gel used with certain laser types or to a numbing cream , or to simply shaving the area too soon in relation to the treatment .
SEE ALSO
* Depilatory * Electrology *
Hair removal *
Shaving REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Laser Facts ( US Food and Drug Administration )
* Additional Information on Removing Hair Safely * American Academy of Dermatology , Public Resource Center , Laser Hair Removal * American Society for Dermatologic Surgery : " Laser Hair Removal Fact Sheet " * National Laser Institute : " Laser Hair Removal Fact Sheet "