TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT Termination of employment is an employee 's departure from a job and the end of an employee 's duration with an employer .
Termination may be voluntary on the employee 's part , or it may be at the hands of the employer , often in the form of dismissal ( firing ) or a layoff .
Dismissal or firing is typically thought to be the fault of the employee , whereas a layoff is generally done for business reasons ( for instance a business slowdown or an economic downturn ) outside the employee 's performance .
Firing carries a stigma in many cultures , and may hinder the jobseeker 's chances of finding new employment , particularly if they have been terminated from a previous job .
Jobseekers sometimes do not mention jobs from which they were fired on their resumes ; accordingly , unexplained gaps in employment , and refusal or failure to contact previous employers are often regarded as " red flags " .
DISMISSAL
Section::::Dismissal .
Dismissal is when the employer chooses to require the employee to leave , usually for a reason which is the fault of the employee .
The most common colloquial terms for dismissal in the United States are " getting fired " or " getting canned " whereas in the United Kingdom the terms " getting the sack " or " getting sacked " are also used .
LAYOFF Section::::Layoff .
A less severe form of involuntary termination is often referred to as a layoff ( also redundancy or being made redundant in British English ) .
A layoff is usually not strictly related to personal performance , but instead due to economic cycles or the company 's need to restructure itself , the firm itself going out of business or a change in the function of the employer ( for example , a certain type of product or service is no longer offered by the company and therefore jobs related to that product or service are no longer needed ) .
One type of layoff is the aggressive layoff ; in such a situation , the employee is laid off , but not replaced as the job is eliminated .
In an economy based on at - will employment , such as that of the United States , a large proportion of workers may be laid off at some time in their life , and often for reasons unrelated to performance or ethics .
Employment termination can also result from a probational period , in which both the employee and the employer reach an agreement that the employer is allowed to lay off the employee if the probational period is not satisfied .
Often , layoffs occur as a result of " downsizing " , " reduction in force " or " redundancy " .
These are not technically classified as firings ; laid - off employees ' positions are terminated and not refilled , because either the company wishes to reduce its size or operations or otherwise lacks the economic stability to retain the position .
In some cases , a laid - off employee may eventually be offered their old position again by their respective company , though by this time they may have found a new job .
Some companies resort to attrition ( voluntary redundancy ) as a means to reduce their workforce .
Under such a plan , no employees are forced to leave their jobs .
However , those who do depart voluntarily are not replaced .
Additionally , employees are given the option to resign in exchange for a fixed amount of money , frequently a few years of their salary .
Such plans have been carried out by the United States Federal Government under President Bill Clinton during the 1990s , and by the Ford Motor Company in 2005 .
However , " layoff " may be specifically addressed and defined differently in the articles of a contract in the case of unionised work .
TERMINATION
BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT Section::::Termination by mutual agreement .
Some terminations occur as a result of mutual agreement between the employer and employee .
When this happens , it is sometimes debatable if the termination was truly mutual .
In many of these cases , it was originally the employer 's wish for the employee to depart , but the employer offered the mutual termination agreement in order to soften the firing ( as in a forced resignation ) .
But there are also times when a termination date is agreed upon before the employment starts ( as in an employment contract ) .
Some types of termination by mutual agreement include : *
The end of an employment contract for a specified period of time ( such as an internship ) * Mandatory retirement .
Some occupations , such as commercial airline pilots , face mandatory retirement at a certain age .
* Forced resignation CHANGES OF CONDITIONS Section::::Changes of conditions .
Firms that wish for an employee to exit of their own accord but do not wish to pursue firing or forced resignation , may degrade the employee 's working conditions , hoping that they will leave " voluntarily " .
The employee may be moved to a different geographical location , assigned to an undesirable shift , given too few hours if part time , demoted ( or relegated to a menial task ) , or assigned to work in uncomfortable conditions .
Other forms of manipulation may be used , such as being unfairly hostile to the employee , and punishing him or her for things that are deliberately overlooked with other employees .
Often , these tactics are done so that the employer wo n't have to fill out termination papers in jurisdictions without at - will employment .
In addition , with a few exceptions , employees who voluntarily leave generally can not collect unemployment benefits .
Such tactics may amount to constructive dismissal , which is illegal in some jurisdictions .
PINK SLIP Section::::Pink slip .
Pink slip refers to the American practice , by a human resources department , of including a discharge notice in an employee 's pay envelope to notify the worker of their termination of employment or layoff .
The " pink slip " has become a metonym for the termination of employment in general .
According to an article in The New York Times , the editors of the Random House Dictionary have dated the term to at least as early as 1910 .
The phrase most likely originated in vaudeville .
When the United Booking Office ( established in 1906 ) would issue a cancellation notice to an act , the notice was on a pink slip .
Another possible etymology is that many applications ( including termination papers ) are done in triplicate form , with each copy on a different color of paper , one of which is typically pink .
In the 1958 Chilly Willy cartoon , " Little Televillain " Mr. Stoop tells Smedley that if he 's disturbed while reading show scripts , he would be forced to pink slip him .
Smedley indicates that he does n't know the meaning of a " pink slip " , so Mr. Stoop yells at him : " It means ... you will be fired ! "
In the UK and Ireland , the equivalent of a pink slip is a P45 ; in Belgium the equivalent is known as a C4 .
REHIRE FOLLOWING
TERMINATION Section::::Rehire following termination .
Depending on the circumstances , a person whose employment has been terminated may not be able to be rehired by the same employer .
If the decision to terminate was the employee 's , the willingness of the employer to rehire is often contingent upon the relationship the employee had with the employer , the amount of notice given by the employee prior to departure , and the needs of the employer .
In some cases , when an employee departed on good terms , she / he may be given special priority by the employer when seeking rehire .
An employee who was fired by an employer may not be eligible for rehire by the same employer , although in some cases it is usually related to staffing issues .
Employment can be terminated without prejudice , meaning the fired employee may be rehired for the same job in the future .
This is usually true in the case of layoff .
Conversely , a person 's employment can be terminated with prejudice , meaning an employer will not rehire the former employee for the same job in the future .
This can be for many reasons : incompetence , policy violation , misconduct ( such as dishonesty or " zero tolerance " violations ) , insubordination or " attitude " ( personality clashes with peers or bosses ) .
Termination forms ( " pink slips " ) routinely include a set of check boxes where a supervisor can indicate " with prejudice " or " without prejudice " .
For example , public school teachers in New York who are laid off are placed on a Preferred Eligible List for employment in the school district where they were laid off for seven years from the date of layoff .
If a teacher who was laid off applies to fill a job opening , they are given priority over other applicants .
SEE ALSO
* Employee exit management
* Labour law
* Letter of resignation
* Turnover ( employment )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development resources on dismissal in the UK