HETEROCHROMIA IRIDUM
Heterochromia is a difference in coloration , usually of the iris but also of hair or skin .
Heterochromia is determined by the production , delivery , and concentration of melanin ( a pigment ) .
It may be inherited , or caused by genetic mosaicism , chimerism , disease , or injury .
It occurs in humans and certain breeds of dogs and cats .
Heterochromia of the eye is called heterochromia iridum or heterochromia iridis .
It can be complete or sectoral .
In complete heterochromia , one iris is a different color from the other .
In sectoral heterochromia , part of one iris is a different color from its remainder .
In central heterochromia , there is a ring around the pupil or possibly spikes of different colors radiating from the pupil .
Though multiple causes have been posited , the scientific consensus is that a lack of genetic diversity is the primary reason behind heterochromia .
This is due to a mutation of the genes that determine melanin distribution at the 8-HTP pathway , which usually only become corrupted due to chromosomal homogeneity .
Eye color , specifically the color of the irises , is determined primarily by the concentration and distribution of melanin .
The affected eye may be hyperpigmented ( hyperchromic ) or hypopigmented ( hypochromic ) .
In humans , an increase of melanin production in the eyes indicates hyperplasia of the iris tissues , whereas a lack of melanin indicates hypoplasia .
The term is from Ancient Greek : , meaning different and , meaning color .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Heterochromia is classified primarily by onset : as either genetic or acquired .
Although a distinction is frequently made between heterochromia that affects an eye completely or only partially ( sectoral heterochromia ) , it is often classified as either genetic ( due to mosaicism or congenital ) or acquired , with mention as to whether the affected iris or portion of the iris is darker or lighter .
Most cases of heterochromia are hereditary , caused by certain diseases and syndromes .
Sometimes one eye may change color following disease or injury .
SECTORAL OR PARTIAL HETEROCHROMIA Section::::Sectoral or partial heterochromia .
In sectoral heterochromia , sometimes referred to as partial heterochromia , areas of the same iris contains two completely different colors .
It is unknown how rare sectoral heterochromia is in humans .
ABNORMAL IRIS DARKER
* Lisch nodules – iris hamartomas seen in neurofibromatosis .
* Ocular melanosis – a condition characterized by increased pigmentation of the uveal tract , episclera , and anterior chamber angle .
* Oculodermal melanocytosis ( nevus of Ota ) * Pigment dispersion syndrome – a condition characterized by loss of pigmentation from the posterior iris surface which is disseminated intraocularly and deposited on various intraocular structures , including the anterior surface of the iris .
* Sturge – Weber syndrome – a syndrome characterized by a port - wine stain nevus in the distribution of the trigeminal nerve , ipsilateral leptomeningeal angiomas with intracranial calcification and neurologic signs , and angioma of the choroid , often with secondary glaucoma .
ABNORMAL IRIS LIGHTER * Simple heterochromia – a rare condition characterized by the absence of other ocular or systemic problems .
The lighter eye is typically regarded as the affected eye as it usually shows iris hypoplasia .
It may affect an iris completely or only partially .
* Congenital Horner 's syndrome – sometimes inherited , although usually acquired * Waardenburg syndrome – a syndrome in which heterochromia is expressed as a bilateral iris hypochromia in some cases .
A Japanese review of 11 children with albinism found that the condition was present .
All had sectoral / partial heterochromia .
* Piebaldism – similar to Waardenburg 's syndrome , a rare disorder of melanocyte development characterized by a white forelock and multiple symmetrical hypopigmented or depigmented macules .
* Hirschsprung 's disease – a bowel disorder associated with heterochromia in the form of a sector hypochromia .
The affected sectors have been shown to have reduced numbers of melanocytes and decreased stromal pigmentation .
* Incontinentia pigmenti * Parry – Romberg syndrome ACQUIRED HETEROCHROMIA Section::::Acquired heterochromia .
Acquired heterochromia is usually due to injury , inflammation , the use of certain eyedrops that damages the iris , or tumors .
ABNORMAL IRIS DARKER
* Deposition of material
* Siderosis – iron deposition within ocular tissues due to a penetrating injury and a retained iron - containing , intraocular foreign body .
* Hemosiderosis – long standing hyphema ( blood in the anterior chamber )
following blunt trauma to the eye may lead to iron deposition from blood products
* Certain eyedrops – prostaglandin analogues ( latanoprost , isopropyl unoprostone , travoprost , and bimatoprost ) are used topically to lower intraocular pressure in glaucoma patients .
A concentric heterochromia has developed in some patients applying these drugs .
The stroma around the iris sphincter muscle becomes darker than the peripheral stroma .
A stimulation of melanin synthesis within iris melanocytes has been postulated .
* Neoplasm – Nevi and melanomatous tumors .
* Iridocorneal endothelium syndrome *
Iris ectropion syndrome ABNORMAL IRIS LIGHTER * Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis – a condition characterized by a low grade , asymptomatic uveitis in which the iris in the affected eye becomes hypochromic and has a washed - out , somewhat moth eaten appearance .
The heterochromia can be very subtle , especially in patients with lighter colored irides .
It is often most easily seen in daylight .
The prevalence of heterochromia associated with Fuchs has been estimated in various studies with results suggesting that there is more difficulty recognizing iris color changes in dark - eyed individuals .
* Acquired Horner 's syndrome – usually acquired , as in neuroblastoma , although sometimes inherited .
* Neoplasm – Melanomas can also be very lightly pigmented , and a lighter colored iris may be a rare manifestation of metastatic disease to the eye .
* Parry – Romberg syndrome – due to tissue loss .
Heterochromia has also been observed in those with Duane syndrome .
* Chronic iritis
* Juvenile xanthogranuloma * Leukemia and lymphoma CENTRAL HETEROCHROMIA Section::::Central heterochromia .
Central heterochromia is an eye condition where there are two colors in the same iris ; the central ( pupillary ) zone of the iris is a different color than the mid - peripheral ( ciliary ) zone , with the true iris color being the outer color .
It is estimated that only 200,000 Americans have central heterochromia , around 0.05 % of the population .
Eye color is determined primarily by the concentration and distribution of melanin within the iris tissues .
Although the processes determining eye color are not fully understood , it is known that inherited eye color is determined by multiple genes .
Environmental or acquired factors can alter these inherited traits .
The human iris can be seen in a number of various colors .
There are three true colors in human eyes that determine the outward appearance : brown , yellow , and grey .
The amount of each color an individual has determines the appearance of the eye color .
Central heterochromia appears to be prevalent in irises containing low amounts of melanin .
A famous case of a person with central heterochromia was Baroness Rózsika Edle von Wertheimstein , whose daughter wrote : "
She was a very beautiful woman ...
She had dark , dark brown eyes , but each eye had a purple ring to it , about a quarter of an inch of purple around these dark brown eyes . " IN OTHER ANIMALS Section::::In other animals .
Although infrequently seen in humans , complete heterochromia is more frequently observed in other species , where it almost always involves one blue eye .
The blue eye occurs within a white spot , where melanin is absent from the skin and hair ( see Leucism ) .
These species include the cat , particularly breeds such as Turkish Van , Turkish Angora , Khao Manee and ( rarely ) Japanese Bobtail .
These so - called odd - eyed cats are white , or mostly white , with one normal eye ( copper , orange , yellow , green ) , and one blue eye .
Among dogs , complete heterochromia is seen often in the Siberian Husky and few other breeds , usually Australian Shepherd and Catahoula Leopard Dog and rarely in Shih Tzu .
Horses with complete heterochromia have one brown and one white , gray , or blue eye — complete heterochromia is more common in horses with pinto coloring .
Complete heterochromia occurs also in cattle and even water buffalo .
It can also be seen in ferrets with Waardenburg syndrome , although it can be very hard to tell at times as the eye color is often a midnight blue .
Sectoral heterochromia , usually sectoral hypochromia , is often seen in dogs , specifically in breeds with merle coats .
These breeds include the Australian Shepherd , Border Collie , Collie , Shetland Sheepdog , Welsh Corgi , Pyrenean Shepherd , Mudi , Beauceron , Catahoula Cur , Dunker , Great Dane , Dachshund and Chihuahua .
It also occurs in certain breeds that do not carry the merle trait , such as the Siberian Husky and rarely , Shih Tzu .
There are example of cat breeds that have the condition such as Van cat .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photograph of Radial Reddish Sunburst Pattern in Right Eye of Bluish Hazel Eyed Woman