BOSTON TERRIER
The Boston Terrier is a breed of dog originating in the United States of America .
This " American Gentleman " was accepted in 1893 by the American Kennel Club as a non - sporting breed .
Color and markings are important when distinguishing this breed to the AKC standard .
They should be either black , brindle or seal with white markings .
Bostons are small and compact with a short tail and erect ears .
The AKC says they are highly intelligent and very easily trained .
They are friendly and can be stubborn at times .
The average life span of a Boston is around 11 to 13 years , though some can live well into their teens .
The American Kennel Club ranked the Boston Terrier as the 21st most popular breed in 2016 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Boston terrier breed originated around 1870 , when Robert C. Hooper of Boston , purchased from Edward Burnett a dog named Judge ( known later as Hooper 's Judge ) , which was of a Bull and Terrier type lineage .
Hooper 's Judge is either directly related to the original Bull and Terrier breeds of the 19th and early 20th centuries , or Judge is the result of modern English Bulldogs being crossed into terriers created in the 1860s for show purposes , like the White English Terrier .
The American Kennel Club cites Hooper 's Judge as the ancestor of almost all true modern Boston Terriers .
Judge weighed over .
The offspring interbred with one or more French Bulldogs , providing the foundation for the Boston Terrier .
Bred down in size from fighting dogs of the Bull and Terrier types , the Boston Terrier originally weighed up to ( Olde Boston Bulldogge ) .
The breed was first shown in Boston in 1870 .
By 1889 the breed had become sufficiently popular in Boston that fanciers formed the American Bull Terrier Club , the breed 's nickname , " roundheads " .
Shortly after , at the suggestion of James Watson ( a noted writer and authority ) , the club changed its name to the Boston Terrier Club and in 1893 it was admitted to membership in the American Kennel Club , thus making it the first US breed to be recognized .
It is one of a small number of breeds to have originated in the United States .
The Boston Terrier was the first non - sporting dog bred in the US .
In the early years , the color and markings were not very important .
By the 20th century the breed 's distinctive markings and color were written into the standard , becoming an essential feature .
The Boston Terrier has lost most of its aggressive nature , preferring the company of humans , although some males will still challenge other dogs if they feel their territory is being invaded .
Boston University 's mascot is Rhett the Boston Terrier .
The Boston Terrier is also the mascot of Wofford College in Spartanburg , S.C. DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Boston Terrier is a compactly built , well - proportioned dog .
It has a square - looking head with erect ears and a slightly arched neck .
The muzzle is short and generally wrinkle - free , with an even or a slightly undershot bite .
The chest is broad and the tail is short .
According to international breed standards , the dog should weigh no more than .
Boston Terriers usually stand up to 15 - 17 inches at the withers .
The American Kennel Club divides the breed into three classes : under 15 pounds , 15 pounds and under 20 pounds , 20 pounds and not exceeding 25 pounds .
COAT AND COLOR Section::::Coat and color .
The Boston Terrier is characteristically marked with white in proportion to either black , brindle , seal ( color of a wet seal , a very dark brown that looks black except in the bright sun ) , or a combination of the three .
Any other color is not accepted as a Boston Terrier by the American Kennel Club , as they are usually obtained by crossbreeding with other breeds and the dog loses its characteristic " tuxedo " appearance .
According to the American Kennel Club , an ideal Boston Terrier should have white that covers its chest , muzzle , band around the neck , halfway up the forelegs , up to the hocks on the rear legs , and a white blaze between ( but not touching ) the eyes .
For conformation showing , symmetrical markings are preferred .
Due to the Boston Terrier 's markings resembling formal wear , in addition to its refined and pleasant personality , the breed is commonly referred to as the " American Gentleman . " NOTABLE FEATURES Section::::Notable features .
The Boston Terrier 's large , prominent pair of eyes is a distinguishable feature .
The breed 's round eyes are set widely apart , are large in size , and located squarely in the skull .
The breed 's genetic makeup produces a short tail .
These short tails can take the shape of a corkscrew , or curl , or they can be straight .
Generally , Boston Terriers ' tails do not exceed two inches in length .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Boston is a gentle breed that typically has a strong , happy - go - lucky , and friendly personality with a merry sense of humour .
Bostons are generally eager to please their owner and can be easily trained .
They can be very protective of their owners , which may result in aggressive and territorial behavior toward other pets and strangers .
The breed requires only a minimal amount of grooming .
While originally bred for fighting as well as hunting rats in garment factories , they were later down bred for companionship .
They are not considered terriers by the American Kennel Club , however , but are part of the non - sporting group .
Both females and males are generally quiet and bark only when necessary , though early training in this regard is essential .
Their usually sensible attitude towards barking makes them excellent choices for apartment dwellers .
They enjoy being around people , get along well with children , the elderly , other canines , and non - canine pets , if properly socialized .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Curvature of the back , called roaching , might be caused by patella problems with the rear legs , which in turn causes the dog to lean forward onto the forelegs .
This might also just be a structural fault with little consequence to the dog .
Due to their shortened muzzles , many Boston Terriers can not tolerate excessively hot or cold weather and demanding exercise under such conditions can cause them harm .
A sensitive digestive system is also typical of Boston Terriers with flatulence commonly being associated with poor diet in the breed .
Their large and prominent eyes make Boston Terriers prone to corneal ulcers .
Due to the breed being characterized by a short muzzle paired with a large pair of eyes , their eyes are susceptible to injury when making contact with sand , dust , debris , or sharp objects , such as plants with thorns .
Bostons are brachycephalic breeds .
The word comes from Greek roots " Brachy , " meaning short and " cephalic , " meaning head .
This anatomy can cause tiny nostrils , long palates and a narrow trachea .
Bostons may be prone to snoring and reverse sneezea rapid and repeated forced inhalation through the noseaccompanied by snorting or gagging sounds used to clear the palate of mucus , which does not harm the dog in any way .
Brachycephalic dogs may be prone to complications with general anesthesia .
Bostons frequently require caesarean section to give birth , with over 90 % of litters in a UK Kennel Club survey delivered this way .
GROOMING Section::::Grooming .
With a short , shiny , smooth coat , Boston Terriers require few grooming needs .
Bostons produce light shedding , and weekly brushing of their fine coat is effective at removing loose hair .
Brushing promotes the health of the coat because it distributes skin oils , and it also encourages new hair growth .
Occasional bathing is suitable for the low - maintenance breed .
The nails of Boston Terriers require regular trimming .
Overgrown nails not only have the potential to inflict pain on the breed , but they can also make walking difficult or tear off after getting snagged on something .
Similarly to nail trimming , teeth brushing should also be done regularly to promote good oral health .
The risk of the breed developing oral pain , gum infection , or bad breath can be decreased with regular teeth brushing that removes plaque buildup and other bacteria .
PURPOSES BEYOND COMPANIONSHIP
Section::::Purposes beyond companionship .
In the past , Bostons were primarily pit - fighting dogs , but with their friendly and happy temperament , they became companion dogs .
In modern days , aside from being an excellent companion , the Boston Terrier also excels in all sorts of canine sports .
The breed is increasingly popular in dog agility competitions , obedience training , rally obedience , tracking , dock diving , flyball , weight - pulling , barn hunt and lure coursing .
Being such a versatile breed and with their outgoing personality and eagerness to meet new acquaintances , the Boston Terrier is a popular therapy dog .
POPULAR BOSTON TERRIERS Section::::Popular Boston Terriers .
In 2012 , a high school student named Victoria Reed took the advice of her veterinarian and submitted a photo of her Boston Terrier , Bruschi , to Guinness World Records .
With each eye being 1.1 inches , or 28 mm , in diameter , Bruschi is recognized by Guinness to be the dog with the largest eyes .
In 1921 at a ceremony to commemorate the United States ' 102nd Infantry , the U.S. Army awarded a gold medal to an honorable war dog : Sergeant Stubby .
The Bull Terrier , possessing three service stripes and one wound stripe , was given rank in the U.S. Army - making him the first dog to ever earn it .
The comforting , protective war dog was also rewarded a medal by France .
Sergeant Stubby died in 1926 with the legacy of being the United States ' " greatest war dog . "
SEE ALSO
* Olde Boston Bulldogge
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Bulanda , Susan ( 1994 ) .
Boston Terriers .
Barron 's Educational Series , Inc. . EXTERNAL LINKS
* Boston Terrier Club of America , Inc. * Boston Terrier Club of Canada *
( First published 1910 )
* Boston Terrier Photos , Videos and Informations