EXTRATERRESTRIAL SKIES
In astronomy , an extraterrestrial sky is a view of outer space from the surface of an astronomical body other than Earth .
The only extraterrestrial sky that has been directly observed and photographed by astronauts is that of the Moon .
The skies of Titan , Mars , and Venus have been observed by space probes designed to land on the surface and transmit images back to Earth .
Characteristics of extraterrestrial skies appear to vary substantially due to a number of factors .
An extraterrestrial atmosphere , if present , has a large bearing on visible characteristics .
The atmosphere 's density and chemical composition can contribute to differences in colour , opacity ( including haze ) and the presence of clouds .
Astronomical objects may also be visible and can include natural satellites , rings , star systems and nebulas and other planetary system bodies .
For skies that have not been directly or indirectly observed , their appearance can be simulated based on known parameters , such as the position of astronomical objects relative to the surface and atmospheric composition .
LUMINOSITY AND ANGULAR DIAMETER OF THE SUN Section::::Luminosity and angular diameter of the Sun .
The Sun 's apparent magnitude changes according to the inverse square law , therefore , the difference in magnitude as a result of greater or lesser distances from different celestial bodies can be predicted by the following formula : Where " distance " can be in km , au , or any other appropriate unit .
To illustrate , since Pluto is 40 au away from the Sun on average , it follows that the parent star would appear to be 1,600 times dimmer than it is on Earth .
Though a terrestrial observer would find a dramatic decrease in available sunlight in these environments , the Sun would still be bright enough to cast shadows even as far as the hypothetical Planet Nine , possibly located 1,200 AU away , and would still outshine the full Moon .
The change in angular diameter of the sun with distance is illustrated in the diagram below :
The angular diameter of a circle whose plane is perpendicular to the displacement vector between the point of view and the centre of said circle can be calculated using the formula in which formula_3 is the angular diameter , and
formula_4 and formula_5 are the actual diameter of and the distance to the object .
When formula_6 , we have formula_7 , and the result obtained is in radians .
For a spherical object whose actual diameter equals formula_8 and where formula_5 is the distance to the centre of the sphere , the angular diameter can be found by the formula
The difference is due to the fact that the apparent edges of a sphere are its tangent points , which are closer to the observer than the centre of the sphere .
For practical use , the distinction is only significant for spherical objects that are relatively close , since the small - angle approximation holds for formula_11 : HORIZON Section::::Horizon .
On terrestrial planets and other solid celestial bodies with negligible atmospheric effects , the distance to the horizon for a " standard observer " varies as the square root of the planet 's radius .
Thus , the horizon on Mercury is 62 % as far away from the observer as it is on Earth , on Mars the figure is 73 % , on the Moon the figure is 52 % , on Mimas the figure is 18 % , and so on .
For smaller , non - spherical objects , the observer 's height must be taken into account when calculating the distance to the horizon .
MERCURY Section::::Mercury .
Because Mercury has little or no atmosphere , a view of the planet 's skies would be no different from viewing space from orbit .
Mercury has a southern pole star , α Pictoris , a magnitude 3.2 star .
It is fainter than Earth 's Polaris ( α Ursae Minoris ) .
THE SUN FROM MERCURY Section::::The Sun from Mercury .
On average , the visible diameter of the Sun on Mercury is 2.5 times as large as it appears from Earth , and its total brightness is more than 6 times as great .
Because of the planet 's eccentric orbit , the Sun 's apparent diameter in the sky would vary from 2.2 times that from Earth at aphelion ( with total brightness 4.8 times as great ) , to 3.2 times at perihelion ( with total brightness 10.2 times as great ) .
Mercury has a 3:2 spin – orbit resonance .
This means that although a sidereal day ( the period of rotation ) lasts around 58.7 Earth days , a solar day ( the length between two meridian transits of the Sun ) lasts around 176 Earth days .
( In contrast , the difference between Earth 's sidereal and solar days is only 4 minutes . )
The large eccentricity of Mercury 's orbit coupled with the long length of a Mercurian day results in an unusual effect in which the Sun appears to briefly reverse its usual east - to - west motion once every Mercurian year .
The on - sky distance over which the Sun appears to be travelling in this reversed ( west - to - east ) direction is slightly larger than the apparent size of the Sun itself .
Thus , while the effect is visible wherever one happens to be on Mercury , there are certain points on Mercury 's surface where an observer would be able to see the Sun rise , reverse and set , and then rise again , all within the same Mercurian day .
The apparent motion reverses because approximately four ( Earth ) days prior to perihelion , the angular speed of Mercury 's orbit exactly equals its rotational velocity , so that the Sun 's apparent motion ceases .
At perihelion , Mercury 's orbital angular velocity slightly exceeds the rotational velocity , so the Sun appears to be retrograde .
Four days after perihelion , the Sun 's normal apparent motion resumes .
Because of its spin – orbit resonance , Mercury presents one of two spots of its surface to the Sun on alternate perihelia .
One of these subsolar points is Caloris Planitia ( " hot basin " ) , appropriately named because an observer near its centre would see the Sun loop around the zenith once per Mercurian day , and hence experience a very hot day indeed .
OTHER PLANETS SEEN FROM MERCURY
Section::::Other planets seen from Mercury .
After the Sun , the second - brightest object in the Mercurian sky is Venus , which is much brighter there than for terrestrial observers .
The reason for this is that when Venus is closest to Earth , it is between the Earth and the Sun , so we see only its night side .
Indeed , even when Venus is brightest in the Earth 's sky , we are actually seeing only a narrow crescent .
For a Mercurian observer , on the other hand , Venus is closest when it is in opposition to the Sun and is showing its full disk .
The apparent magnitude of Venus is as bright as −7.7 .
The Earth and the Moon are also very prominent , their apparent magnitudes being about −5 and −1.2 , respectively .
The maximum apparent distance between the Earth and the Moon is
about 15′. All other planets are visible just as they are on Earth , but somewhat less bright at opposition .
The zodiacal light is probably more prominent than it is from Earth .
VENUS Section::::Venus .
The atmosphere of Venus is so thick that the Sun is not distinguishable in the daytime sky , and the stars are not visible at night .
Color images taken by the Soviet Venera probes suggest that the sky on Venus is orange .
If the Sun could be seen from Venus 's surface , the time from one sunrise to the next ( a solar day ) would be 116.75 Earth days .
Because of Venus 's retrograde rotation , the Sun would appear to rise in the west and set in the east .
An observer aloft in Venus 's cloud tops , on the other hand , would circumnavigate the planet in about four Earth days and see a sky in which Earth and the Moon shine brightly ( about magnitudes −6.6 and −2.7 , respectively ) at opposition .
Mercury would also be easy to spot , because it is closer and brighter , at up to magnitude −2.7 , and because its maximum elongation from the Sun is considerably larger ( 40.5 ° ) than when observed from Earth ( 28.3 ° ) .
THE MOON Section::::The Moon .
The Moon 's atmosphere is negligibly thin , essentially vacuum , so its sky is always black , as in the case of Mercury .
However , the Sun is so bright that it is impossible to see stars during the daytime , unless the observer is well shielded from sunlight ( direct or reflected from the ground ) .
The Moon has a southern polar star , δ Doradus , a magnitude 4.34 star .
It is better aligned than Earth 's Polaris ( α Ursae Minoris ) , but much fainter .
THE SUN FROM THE MOON Section::::The Sun from the Moon .
The Sun looks the same from the Moon as it does from Earth 's orbit , somewhat brighter than it does from the Earth 's surface , and colored pure white , due to the lack of atmospheric scattering and absorption .
Since the Moon 's axial tilt relative to its orbit around the Sun is nearly zero , the Sun traces out almost exactly the same path through the Moon 's sky over the course of a year .
As a result , there are craters and valleys near the Moon 's poles that never receive direct sunlight , and there may exist mountains and hilltops that are never in shadow ( see Lunar south pole and Peak of eternal light ) .
THE EARTH FROM THE MOON Section::::The Earth from the Moon .
Among the most prominent features of the Moon 's sky is Earth .
Earth 's angular diameter ( 1.9 ° ) is four times the Moon 's as seen from Earth , although because the Moon 's orbit is eccentric , Earth 's apparent size in the sky varies by about 5 % either way ( ranging between 1.8 ° and 2.0 ° in diameter ) .
Earth shows phases , just like the Moon does for terrestrial observers .
The phases , however , are opposite ; when the terrestrial observer sees the full Moon , the lunar observer sees a " new Earth " , and vice versa .
Earth 's albedo is three times as high as that of the Moon ( due in part to its whitish cloud cover ) , and coupled with the wider area , the full Earth glows over 50 times brighter than the full Moon at zenith does for the terrestrial observer .
This Earth light reflected on the Moon 's un - sunlit half is bright enough to be visible from Earth , even to the unaided eye – a phenomenon known as earthshine .
As a result of the Moon 's synchronous rotation , one side of the Moon ( the " near side " ) is permanently turned towards Earth , and the other side , the " far side " , mostly can not be seen from Earth .
This means , conversely , that Earth can only be seen from the near side of the Moon and would always be invisible from the far side .
If the Moon 's rotation were purely synchronous , Earth would not have any noticeable movement in the Moon 's sky .
However , due to the Moon 's libration , Earth does perform a slow and complex wobbling movement .
Once a month , as seen from the Moon , Earth traces out an approximate oval 18 ° in diameter .
The exact shape and orientation of this oval depend on one 's location on the Moon .
As a result , near the boundary of the near and far sides of the Moon , Earth is sometimes below the horizon and sometimes above it .
ECLIPSES FROM THE MOON Section::::Eclipses from the Moon .
Earth and the Sun sometimes meet in the lunar sky , causing an eclipse .
On Earth , one would see a lunar eclipse , when the Moon passes through the Earth 's shadow ; meanwhile on the Moon , one would see a solar eclipse , when the Sun goes behind the Earth .
Since the apparent diameter of the Earth is four times as large as that of the Sun , the Sun would be hidden behind the Earth for hours .
Earth 's atmosphere would be visible as a reddish ring .
During the Apollo 15 mission , an attempt was made to use the Lunar Roving Vehicle 's TV camera to view such an eclipse , but the camera or its power source failed after the astronauts left for Earth .
Terrestrial solar eclipses , on the other hand , would not be as spectacular for lunar observers because the Moon 's umbra nearly tapers out at the Earth 's surface .
A blurry dark patch would barely be visible .
The effect would be comparable to the shadow of a golf ball cast by sunlight on an object away .
Lunar observers with telescopes might be able to discern the umbral shadow as a black spot at the center of a less dark region ( penumbra ) traveling across the full Earth 's disk .
It would look essentially the same as it does to the Deep Space Climate Observatory .
In summary , whenever an eclipse of some sort is occurring on Earth , an eclipse of another sort is occurring on the Moon .
Eclipses occur for observers on both Earth and the Moon whenever the two bodies and the Sun align in a straight line , or syzygy . MARS Section::::Mars .
Mars has only a thin atmosphere ; however , it is extremely dusty and there is much light that is scattered about .
The sky is thus rather bright during the daytime and stars are not visible .
The Martian northern pole star is Deneb ( although the actual pole is somewhat offset in the direction of Alpha Cephei ) .
THE COLOR OF THE MARTIAN SKY Section::::The color of the Martian sky .
Generating accurate true - color images from Mars 's surface is surprisingly complicated .
To give but one aspect to consider , there is the Purkinje effect : the human eye 's response to color depends on the level of ambient light ; red objects appear to darken faster than blue objects as the level of illumination goes down .
There is much variation in the color of the sky as reproduced in published images , since many of those images have used filters to maximize their scientific value and are not trying to show true color .
For many years , the sky on Mars was thought to be more pinkish than it is now believed to be .
It is now known that during the Martian day , the sky is a butterscotch color .
Around sunset and sunrise , the sky is rose in color , but in the vicinity of the setting Sun it is blue .
This is the opposite of the situation on Earth .
Twilight lasts a long time after the Sun has set and before it rises because of the dust high in Mars 's atmosphere .
On Mars , Rayleigh scattering is usually a very weak effect ; the red color of the sky is caused by the presence of iron(III )
oxide in the airborne dust particles .
These particles are larger in size than gas molecules , so most of the light is scattered by Mie scattering .
Dust absorbs blue light and scatters longer wavelengths ( red , orange , yellow ) .
THE SUN FROM MARS Section::::The Sun from Mars .
The Sun as seen from Mars appears to be the angular diameter as seen from Earth ( 0.35 ° ) , and sends 40 % of the light , approximately the brightness of a slightly cloudy afternoon on Earth .
On June 3 , 2014 , the Curiosity rover on Mars observed the planet Mercury transiting the Sun , marking the first time a planetary transit has been observed from a celestial body besides Earth .
MARS 'S MOONS
AS SEEN FROM MARS Section::::Mars 's moons as seen from Mars .
Mars has two small moons : Phobos and Deimos .
From the Martian surface , Phobos has one - third to one - half the angular diameter of the Sun while Deimos is barely more than a dot ( only 2′ angular diameter ) .
The orbital period of Phobos is so much shorter than the Martian day that the apparent motion of Phobos is in reverse : it rises in the west and sets in the east .
Phobos orbits so close ( in a low - inclination equatorial orbit ) that it can not be seen north of 70.4 ° N or south of 70.4 ° S latitude ; high - latitude observers would also notice a decrease in Phobos 's apparent size , the additional distance being non - negligible .
Phobos 's apparent size varies by up to 45 % as it passes overhead , due to its proximity to Mars 's surface .
For an equatorial observer , for example , Phobos is about 0.14 ° upon rising and swells to 0.20 ° by the time it reaches the zenith .
It crosses the sky swiftly , in about 4.24 hours , every 11.11 hours .
Deimos rises in the east and sets in the west , like a " normal " moon , although its appearance to the naked eye would be starlike ( angular diameter between 1.8′ and 2.1′ ) .
Its brightness would vary between that of Venus and of the star Vega ( as seen from Earth ) .
Being relatively close to Mars , Deimos can not be seen from Martian latitudes greater than 82.7 ° .
Finally , Deimos 's orbital period of about 30.3 hours exceeds the Martian rotation period ( of about 24.6 hours ) by such a small amount that it rises every 5.5 days and takes 2.5 days between rising and setting for an equatorial observer .
Thus Phobos crosses the Martian sky nearly 12 times in the time it takes Deimos to cross it just once .
Phobos and Deimos can both eclipse the Sun as seen from Mars , although neither can completely cover its disk and so the event is in fact a transit , rather than an eclipse .
For a detailed description of such events see the articles Transit of Phobos from Mars and Transit of Deimos from Mars .
EARTH FROM MARS Section::::Earth from Mars .
The Earth is visible from Mars as a double star ; the Moon would be visible alongside it as a fainter companion .
The maximum visible distance between the Earth and the Moon would be about 25′ , at inferior conjunction of the Earth and the Sun ( for the terrestrial observer , this is the opposition of Mars and the Sun ) .
Near maximum elongation ( 47.4 ° ) , the Earth and Moon would shine at apparent magnitudes −2.5 and +0.9 , respectively .
VENUS FROM MARS Section::::Venus from Mars .
Venus as seen from Mars
( when near the maximum elongation from the Sun of 31.7 ° ) would have an apparent magnitude of about −3.2 .
THE OUTER PLANETS Section::::The outer planets .
Compared with their view from Earth , the outer planets ( Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus and Neptune ) would appear slightly brighter during opposition , but slightly dimmer during conjunction .
This effect is most noticeable for Jupiter , and results from Mars ' larger orbit compared with that of Earth causing larger variations of interplanetary distance .
THE SKIES OF MARS 'S MOONS Section::::The skies of Mars 's moons .
From Phobos , Mars appears 6,400 times larger and 2,500 times brighter than the full Moon as seen from Earth , and appears as a sphere of angular diameter roughly 42 ° —taking up a quarter of the width of a celestial hemisphere .
From Deimos , Mars appears 1,000 times larger and 400 times brighter than the full Moon as seen from Earth , and appears as a sphere of angular diameter roughly 16.5 ° —taking up an eleventh of the width of a celestial hemisphere .
THE ASTEROID BELT Section::::The Asteroid Belt .
The asteroid belt is sparsely populated and most asteroids are very small , so that an observer situated on one asteroid would be unlikely to be able to see another without the aid of a telescope .
Occasional " close approaches " do occur , but these are spread out over aeons .
Some asteroids that cross the orbits of planets may occasionally get close enough to a planet or asteroid so that an observer from that asteroid can make out the disc of the nearby object without the aid of binoculars or a telescope .
For example , in September 2004 , 4179 Toutatis came about four times the distance from the Earth that the Moon does .
At the closest point in its encounter , the Earth would have appeared about the same size as the Moon appears from Earth .
The Moon would also be easily visible as a small shape in Toutatis 's sky at that time .
Asteroids with unusual orbits also offer a lot to the imagination .
For instance , the asteroid ( or more likely , extinct comet ) 3200 Phaethon has one of the most eccentric orbits : its distance from the Sun varies between 0.14 and 2.4 AU .
At perihelion , the Sun would loom over 7 times larger than it does in our sky , and blast the surface with over 50 times as much energy ; at aphelion , the Sun would shrink to less than half its apparent diameter on Earth , and give little more than a sixth as much illumination .
87 SYLVIA AND ITS MOONS ROMULUS AND REMUS Section::::87 Sylvia and its moons Romulus and Remus .
The asteroid 87 Sylvia is one of the largest main - belt asteroids and the first asteroid observed to have two moons .
These moons , Romulus and Remus , would appear roughly the same size .
Romulus , the farther one , would be about 0.89 ° across , slightly bigger than the closer but smaller Remus , which would be about 0.78 ° across .
Because Sylvia is far from spherical , these values can vary by about a little more than 10 % , depending on where the observer is on Sylvia 's surface .
Since the two asteroidal moons appear to orbit ( as best we can tell ) in the same plane , they would occult each other once every 2.2 days .
When the season is right , twice during Sylvia 's 6.52 year orbital period , they would eclipse the Sun , which , at 0.15 ° across , is much smaller than when seen from Earth ( 0.53 ° ) .
From Remus , the inner moon , Sylvia is huge , roughly 30 ° ×18 ° across , while its view of Romulus varies between 1.59 and 0.50 ° across .
From Romulus , Sylvia measures 16 ° ×10 ° across , while Remus varies between 0.62 ° and 0.19 ° . 243 IDA AND ITS MOON DACTYL
Section::::243 Ida and its moon Dactyl .
The asteroid 243 Ida was visited by the Galileo spacecraft on its way to Jupiter .
It discovered a small moon named Dactyl .
Although the exact orbital characteristics of Dactyl are not fully known , it was 90 kilometers from Ida when Galileo passed by .
This would mean that from Ida , Dactyl would appear as large as 1.76 degrees across , which is huge for such a small moon ( 1.4 km ) .
JUPITER Section::::Jupiter .
Although no images from within Jupiter 's atmosphere have ever been taken , artistic representations typically assume that the planet 's sky is blue , though dimmer than Earth 's , because the sunlight there is on average 27 times fainter , at least in the upper reaches of the atmosphere .
The planet 's narrow rings might be faintly visible from latitudes above the equator .
Further down into the atmosphere , the Sun would be obscured by clouds and haze of various colors , most commonly blue , brown , and red .
Although theories abound on the cause of the colors , there is currently no unambiguous answer .
From Jupiter , the Sun appears to cover only 5 arcminutes , less than a quarter of its size as seen from Earth .
JUPITER 'S MOONS
AS SEEN FROM JUPITER Section::::Jupiter 's moons as seen from Jupiter .
Aside from the Sun , the most prominent objects in Jupiter 's sky are the four Galilean moons .
Io , the nearest to the planet , would be slightly larger than the full moon in Earth 's sky , though less bright , and would be the largest moon in the Solar System as seen from its parent planet .
The higher albedo of Europa would not overcome its greater distance from Jupiter , so it would not outshine Io .
In fact , the low solar constant at Jupiter 's distance ( 3.7 % Earth 's ) ensures that none of the Galilean satellites would be as bright as the full moon is on Earth ; from Io to Callisto their apparent magnitudes would be : −11.2 , −9.7 , −9.4 , and −7.0 . Ganymede , the largest moon and third from Jupiter , is almost as bright as Io and Europa , but appears only half the size of Io .
However , its great size means that it appears about 2″ larger than Europa .
Also , a triple conjunction of Io , Europa and Ganymede would be impossible , because the Laplace resonance that they share prevents this .
When two of the Galilean moons are aligned , the third is never less than 90 degrees to the left or right of these moons in its orbit .
Callisto , still further out , would appear only a quarter the size of Io .
None of the surface features on Jupiter 's moons would appear as prominent as the lunar maria do when the Moon is viewed from Earth .
Dark and light patches would be visible on Io 's surface due to the coloration of sulfur that covers Io , and the largest volcanoes would be designated by dark points , but the lack of large , contrasting features results in a poor view of it .
Europa , however , would appear as a completely featureless white disc .
Even when viewed from nearby , most spacecraft images use contrast enhancements to clearly show the cracks in the Europan ice , which are only about 10–15 percent darker than the rest of the surface .
Vague dark and light patches would be visible on Ganymede , whereas Callisto is much too distant for any features to be made out .
All four Galilean moons stand out because of the swiftness of their motion , compared to the Moon .
They are all also large enough to fully eclipse the Sun .
Because Jupiter 's axial tilt is minimal , and the Galilean moons all orbit in the plane of Jupiter 's equator , solar eclipses are quite common .
Jupiter 's small inner moons appear only as starlike points except Amalthea , which can occasionally appear as large as Callisto .
However , they would all be brighter than any star , ranging from magnitudes −1.5 to −4.9 .
The outer moons would be invisible except for Himalia , which would appear as a dim , starlike point to the naked eye ( magnitude +5.5 ) only under favorable circumstances ( if its periapsis happens to coincide exactly with its full phase ) .
THE SKIES OF JUPITER 'S MOONS Section::::The skies of Jupiter 's moons .
None of Jupiter 's moons have more than traces of atmosphere , so their skies are black or very nearly so .
For an observer on one of the moons , the most prominent feature of the sky by far would be Jupiter .
For an observer on Io , the closest large moon to the planet , Jupiter 's apparent diameter would be about 20 ° ( 38 times the visible diameter of the Moon , covering 1 % of Io 's sky ) .
An observer on Metis , the innermost moon , would see Jupiter 's apparent diameter increased to 68 ° ( 130 times the visible diameter of the Moon , covering 18 % of Metis 's sky ) .
A " full Jupiter " over Metis shines with about 4 % of the Sun 's brightness ( light on Earth from a full moon is 400 thousand times dimmer than sunlight ) .
Because the inner moons of Jupiter are in synchronous rotation around Jupiter , the planet always appears in nearly the same spot in their skies ( Jupiter would wiggle a bit because of the non - zero eccentricities ) .
Observers on the sides of the Galilean satellites facing away from the planet would never see Jupiter , for instance .
From the moons of Jupiter , solar eclipses caused by the Galilean satellites would be spectacular , because an observer would see the circular shadow of the eclipsing moon travel across Jupiter 's face .
SATURN Section::::Saturn .
The sky in the upper reaches of Saturn 's atmosphere is blue ( from imagery of the Cassini mission at the time of its September 2017 demise ) , but the predominant color of its cloud decks suggests that it may be yellowish further down .
Observations from spacecraft show that seasonal smog develops in Saturn 's southern hemisphere at its perihelion due to its axial tilt .
This could cause the sky to become yellowish at times .
As the northern hemisphere is pointed towards the sun only at aphelion , the sky there would likely remain blue .
The rings of Saturn are almost certainly visible from the upper reaches of its atmosphere .
The rings are so thin that from a position on Saturn 's equator , they would be almost invisible .
However , from anywhere else on the planet , they could be seen as a spectacular arc stretching across half the celestial hemisphere .
Saturn 's moons would not look particularly impressive in its sky , as most are fairly small , and the largest are a long way from the planet .
Even Titan , the largest moon of Saturn , appears only half the size of Earth 's moon , and only grows as bright as −7 .
In fact , Titan is the dimmest of Saturn 's large moons due to its great distance and low albedo ; Mimas , Enceladus , Tethys , Dione , and Rhea are all brighter , at magnitudes −7.8 , −7.9 , −8.8 , −8 , and −7.8 , respectively .
Here are the approximate angular diameters of the main moons ( for comparison , Earth 's moon has an average angular diameter of 31′ )
: Mimas : 7–11′ , Enceladus : 7–9′ , Tethys : 12–15′ ,
Dione : 10–12′ , Rhea : 8–11′ ,
Titan : 14–15′ , Iapetus : 1′.
Most of the inner moons would appear as bright , starlike points ( with the exception of Janus , which would appear 7 arcseconds across at its zenith ) , although most would shine brighter than any star ; for example , Janus and Epimetheus would both shine as bright as magnitude −6 .
Meanwhile , none of the outer moons would be visible except Phoebe , which nears the naked eye limit ( 6.2–6.6 ) even at full phase .
Saturn has a southern polar star , δ Octantis , a magnitude 4.3 star .
It is much fainter than Earth 's Polaris ( α Ursae Minoris ) .
THE SKIES OF SATURN 'S MOONS Section::::The skies of Saturn 's moons .
Since the inner moons of Saturn are all in synchronous rotation , the planet always appears in the same spot in their skies .
Observers on the sides of those satellites facing away from the planet would never see Saturn .
In the skies of Saturn 's inner moons , Saturn is an enormous object .
For instance , Saturn seen from Pan has an apparent diameter of ~50 ° , 104 times larger than our Moon and occupying 11 % of Pan 's sky .
Because Pan orbits along the Encke division within Saturn 's rings , they are visible from anywhere on Pan , even on its side facing away from Saturn .
THE RINGS FROM SATURN 'S MOONS Section::::The rings from Saturn 's moons .
Saturn 's rings would not be prominent from most of the moons .
This is because the rings , though wide , are not very thick , and most of the moons orbit almost exactly ( within 1.5 ° ) in the planet 's ring plane .
Thus , the rings are edge - on and practically invisible from the inner moons .
From the outer moons , starting with Iapetus , a more oblique view of the rings would be available , although the greater distance would make Saturn appear smaller in the sky ; from Phoebe , the largest of Saturn 's irregular moons , Saturn would appear only as big as the full Moon does from Earth .
The play of distance and angle is quite sensitive to the values used , but calculations show the best view of the rings would be achieved from the inner moon Mimas , which lies a full 1.5 ° off Saturn 's equatorial plane and is fairly near the rings .
At their widest opening , when Mimas is at its maximum distance from Saturn 's equatorial plane , the edges of the rings ( from B to A ) would be separated by 2.7 degrees .
The co - orbitals Epimetheus and Janus would also get a good view , with maximum opening angles ranging between 1.5 and 2.9 ° .
Tethys gets the next best view , with nearly half a degree .
Iapetus achieves 15.47 ° , which is more than any of the outer moons can claim .
THE SKY OF TITAN Section::::The sky of Titan .
Titan is the only moon in the solar system to have a thick atmosphere .
Images from the Huygens probe show that the Titanean sky is a light tangerine color .
However , an astronaut standing on the surface of Titan would see a hazy brownish / dark orange color .
As a consequence of its greater distance from the Sun and the opacity of its atmosphere , the surface of Titan receives only about of the sunlight Earth does – daytime on Titan is thus only as bright as twilight on the Earth .
It seems likely that Saturn is permanently invisible behind orange smog , and even the Sun would only be a lighter patch in the haze , barely illuminating the surface of ice and methane lakes .
However , in the upper atmosphere , the sky would have a blue color and Saturn would be visible .
With its thick atmosphere and methane rain , Titan is the only celestial body other than Earth upon which rainbows could form .
However , given the extreme opacity of the atmosphere in visible light , the vast majority would be in the infrared .
THE SKY OF ENCELADUS Section::::The sky of Enceladus .
Seen from Enceladus , Saturn would have a visible diameter of almost 30 ° , sixty times more than the Moon visible from Earth .
Moreover , since Enceladus rotates synchronously with its orbital period and therefore keeps one face pointed toward Saturn , the planet never moves in Enceladus 's sky ( albeit with slight variations coming from the orbit 's eccentricity ) , and can not be seen from the far side of the satellite .
Saturn 's rings would be seen from an angle of only 0.019 ° and be almost invisible , but their shadow on Saturn 's disk would be clearly distinguishable .
Like our own Moon from Earth , Saturn itself would show regular phases .
From Enceladus , the Sun would have a diameter of only 3.5 minutes of arc , one - ninth that of the Moon as seen from Earth .
An observer located on Enceladus could also observe Mimas ( the biggest satellite located inside Enceladus 's orbit ) transit in front of Saturn every 72 hours , on average .
Its apparent size would be at most 26 minutes of arc , about the same size as the Moon seen from Earth .
Pallene and Methone would appear nearly star - like ( maximum 30 seconds of arc ) .
Tethys , visible from Enceladus 's anti - Saturnian side , would reach a maximum apparent size of about 64 minutes of arc , about twice that of the Moon as seen from the Earth .
URANUS Section::::Uranus .
Judging by the color of its atmosphere , the sky of Uranus is probably a light blue , i.e. cyan color .
It is unlikely that the planet 's rings can be seen from its surface , as they are very thin and dark .
Uranus has a northern polar star , Sabik ( η Ophiuchi ) , a magnitude 2.4 star .
Uranus also has a southern polar star , 15 Orionis , an unremarkable magnitude 4.8 star .
Both are fainter than Earth 's Polaris ( α Ursae Minoris ) , although Sabik only slightly .
Uranus is unusual in that the obliquity of its ecliptic is 82 ° ( angle between the orbital and rotational poles ) .
The North Pole of Uranus points to somewhere near η Ophiuchi ( in Earth 's southern celestial hemisphere ) , about 15 ° northeast of Antares , and its South Pole halfway between Betelgeuse and Aldebaran .
Uranus 's " tropics " lie at 82 ° latitude and its " Arctic circles " at 8 ° latitude .
On December 17 , 2007 , the Sun passed the Uranian celestial equator to the North and in 2029 the North Pole of Uranus will be nearly pointed at the Sun .
None of Uranus 's moons would appear as large as a full moon on Earth from the surface of their parent planet , but the large number of them would present an interesting sight for observers hovering above the cloudtops .
The angular diameters of the five large moons are as follows ( for comparison , Earth 's moon measures on average 31′ for terrestrial observers ) :
Miranda , 11–15′ ; Ariel , 20–23′ ; Umbriel , 15–17′ ; Titania , 11–13′ ; Oberon , 8–9′.
Unlike on Jupiter and Saturn , many of the inner moons can be seen as disks rather than starlike points ; the moons Portia and Juliet can appear around the size of Miranda at times , and a number of other inner moons appear larger than Oberon .
Several others range from 6′ to 8′.
The outer irregular moons would not be visible to the naked eye .
However , the low light levels at such a great distance from the sun ensure that the moons appear very dim ; the brightest , Ariel , would only shine at magnitude −7.4 , more than 100 times dimmer than the moon as seen from Earth .
Meanwhile , the outer large moon Oberon would only be as bright as magnitude −4.9 , about the same as Venus despite its proximity .
NEPTUNE Section::::Neptune .
Judging by the color of its atmosphere , the sky of Neptune is probably an azure or sky blue , similar to Uranus ' .
As in the case of Uranus , it is unlikely that the planet 's rings can be seen from its surface , as they are very thin and dark .
Aside from the Sun , the most impressive object in Neptune 's sky is its large moon Triton , which would appear slightly smaller than a full Moon on Earth .
It moves more swiftly than our Moon , because of its shorter period ( 5.8 days ) compounded by its retrograde orbit .
The smaller moon Proteus would show a disk about half the size of the full Moon .
Surprisingly , Neptune 's small inner moons all cover , at some point in their orbits , more than 10′ in Neptune 's sky .
At some points , Despina 's angular diameter rivals that of Ariel from Uranus and Ganymede from Jupiter .
Here are the angular diameters for Neptune 's moons ( for comparison , Earth 's moon measures on average 31′ for terrestrial observers ) : Naiad , 7–13′ ; Thalassa , 8–14′ ; Despina , 14–22′ ; Galatea , 13–18′ ; Larissa , 10–14′ ; Proteus , 12–16′ ; Triton , 26–28′. An alignment of the inner moons would likely produce a spectacular sight .
Neptune 's large outer satellite , Nereid , is not large enough to appear as a disk from Neptune , and is not noticeable in the sky , as its brightness at full phase varies from magnitude 2.2–6.4 , depending on which point in its eccentric orbit it happens to be .
The other irregular outer moons would not be visible to the naked eye , although a dedicated telescopic observer could potentially spot some at full phase .
As with Uranus , the low light levels cause the major moons to appear very dim .
The brightness of Triton at full phase is only −7.11 , despite the fact that Triton is more than 4 times as intrinsically bright as our moon and orbits much closer to Neptune .
THE SKY OF TRITON Section::::The sky of Triton .
Triton , Neptune 's largest moon , has an atmosphere , but it is so thin that its sky is still black , possibly with some pale haze at the horizon .
Because Triton orbits with synchronous rotation , Neptune always appears in the same position in its sky .
Triton 's rotation axis is inclined 130 ° to Neptune 's orbital plane and thus points within 40 ° of the Sun twice per Neptunian year , much like Uranus 's .
As Neptune orbits the Sun , Triton 's polar regions take turns facing the Sun for 82 years at a stretch , resulting in radical seasonal changes as one pole , then the other , moves into the sunlight .
Neptune itself would span 8 degrees in Triton 's sky , though with a maximum brightness roughly comparable to that of the full moon on Earth it would appear only about as bright as the full moon , per unit area .
Due to its eccentric orbit , Nereid would vary considerably in brightness , from fifth to first magnitude ; its disk would be far too small to see with the naked eye .
Proteus would also be difficult to resolve at just 5–6 arcminutes across , but it would never be fainter than first magnitude , and at its closest would rival Canopus .
TRANS - NEPTUNIAN
OBJECTS Section::::Trans - Neptunian Objects .
A trans - Neptunian object is any minor planet in the Solar System that orbits the Sun at a greater average distance ( semi - major axis ) than Neptune , 30 astronomical units ( AU ) .
PLUTO AND CHARON Section::::Pluto and Charon .
Pluto , accompanied by its largest moon Charon , orbits the Sun at a distance usually outside the orbit of Neptune except for a twenty - year period in each orbit .
From Pluto , the Sun is point - like to human eyes , but still very bright , giving roughly 150 to 450 times the light of the full Moon from Earth ( the variability being due to the fact that Pluto 's orbit is highly elliptical , stretching from just 4.4 billion km to over 7.3 billion km from the Sun ) .
Nonetheless , human observers would find a large decrease in available light .
Pluto 's atmosphere consists of a thin envelope of nitrogen , methane , and carbon monoxide gases , all of which are derived from the ices of these substances on its surface .
When Pluto is close to the Sun , the temperature of Pluto 's solid surface increases , causing these ices to sublimate into gasses .
This atmosphere also produces a noticeable blue haze that is visible at sunset and possibly other times of the Plutonian day .
Pluto and Charon are tidally locked to each other .
This means that Charon always presents the same face to Pluto , and Pluto also always presents the same face to Charon .
Observers on the far side of Charon from Pluto would never see the dwarf planet ; observers on the far side of Pluto from Charon would never see the moon .
Every 124 years , for several years it is mutual - eclipse season , during which Pluto and Charon each alternatively eclipse the Sun for the other at intervals of 3.2 days .
50000 QUAOAR AND ITS MOON WEYWOT
Section::::50000
Quaoar and its moon Weywot .
The asteroid Quaoar is a Kuiper belt object with a circular orbit and moderate inclination .
From its surface and at the average distance between its perihelion and aphelion the Sun would have an angular diameter of 44.2″ ( arcseconds ) comparable to the maximum diameter of Venus of 63.0″ ; the human eye has a resolution of 72″ , so the Sun from Quaoar 's surface would appear as a point .
The Sun 's apparent magnitude would be −18.56 , in comparison the magnitude of the Moon at full phase is −12.74 , so the Sun would appear on Quaoar as a point of light 212 times brighter than a full Moon on Earth .
The amount of light depends on the atmosphere : if present the amount of light received at noon would be similar to the light at dusk or dawn on Earth .
Quaoar 's moon Weywot has an angular diameter of 15.9′ ( arcminutes ) at apoapsis and 21.4′
at periapsis , in comparison the Moon 's angular diameter varies between 29.4′
and 33.5′.
In comparison to the size of the Sun from Quaoar 's surface Weywot would appear much bigger : 15.9′ is equal to 954″ or 21.6 times the diameter of the Sun as seen from Quaoar .
Most solar eclipses would be total and a partial eclipse would be extremely rare .
At full phase Weywot 's visual magnitude is −3.24 somewhere between Jupiter 's maximum magnitude ( −2.94 ) and Venus 's minimum magnitude ( −3.82 ) , in comparison the Moon at full phase is 6,301 times brighter than Weywot .
Quaoar 's umbra extends 5,180,390 km and at the distance of Weywot 's apoapsis it would have a diameter of 1,106.5 km or 15 times Weywot 's diameter .
In comparison , Earth 's umbra at the Moon 's position is 2.65 times wider .
Weywot 's inclination is not determined yet , it 's either 14 ° or 30 ° , if we assume the smaller value then Weywot 's center at apoapsis can be up to 4,121 km above or below Quaoar 's equatorial plane , this mean for most of the time Weywot is outside of the umbra completely .
COMETS Section::::Comets .
The sky of a comet changes dramatically as it nears the Sun .
During perihelion , a comet 's ices begin to sublime from its surface , forming tails of gas and dust , and a coma .
An observer on a comet nearing the Sun might see the stars slightly obscured by a milky haze , which could create halo effects around the Sun and other bright objects .
EXTRASOLAR
PLANETS
BASICS
Section::::Extrasolar planets .
Section::::Basics .
For observers on extrasolar planets , the constellations would differ depending on the distances involved .
The view of outer space of exoplanets can be extrapolated from open source software such as Celestia or Stellarium , and it appears that due to parallax , distant stars change their position less than nearby ones .
For alien observers , the Sun would be visible to the naked human eye only at distances below 20 – 27 parsec ( 60–90 ly ) .
Whenever the sun is observed from another star , it always appears on the opposite coordinates in the sky .
Thus an observer located near a star with RA at 4 hr and declination −10 would see the sun located at RA : 16 hr , dec : +10 .
A consequence of observing the universe from other stars is that stars that may appear bright in our own sky may appear dimmer in other skies and vice versa .
VIEW FROM NEARBY STARS ( 0 – 10 LY )
Section::::View from nearby stars ( 0 – 10 ly ) .
If the Sun were to be observed from the Alpha Centauri system , the nearest star system to ours , it would appear to be a 0.46 magnitude star in the constellation Cassiopeia , and would create a " /W " shape instead of the " W " as seen from Earth .
Due to the proximity of the Alpha Centauri system , the constellations would , for the most part , appear similar .
However , there are some notable differences with the position of other nearby stars ; for example , Sirius would appear about one degree from the star Betelgeuse in the constellation Orion .
Also , Procyon would appear in the constellation Gemini , about 13 degrees below Pollux .
A planet around either α Centauri A or B would see the other star as a very bright secondary .
For example , an Earth - like planet at 1.25 astronomical units from α Cen A ( with a revolution period of 1.34 years ) would get Sun - like illumination from its primary , and α Cen B would appear 5.7 to 8.6 magnitudes dimmer ( −21.0 to −18.2 ) , 190 to 2,700 times dimmer than α Cen A but still 150 to 2,100 times brighter than the full Moon .
Conversely , an Earth - like planet at 0.71 AU from α Cen B ( with a revolution period of 0.63 years ) would get Sun - like illumination from its primary , and α Cen A would appear 4.6 to 7.3 magnitudes dimmer ( −22.1 to −19.4 ) , 70 to 840 times dimmer than α Cen B but still 470 to 5,700 times brighter than the full Moon .
In both cases the secondary sun would , in the course of the planet 's year , appear to circle the sky .
It would start off right beside the primary and end up , half a period later , opposite it in the sky ( at " full " ) .
After another half period , it would complete the cycle .
Other planets orbiting one member of a binary system would enjoy similar skies .
The angular separation between the two stars would not be exactly the same after one orbit of the planet however , because during that time the parent star will have completed part of its orbit around the other star in the system .
VIEW FROM MORE DISTANT STARS ( 10 LY – )
Section::::View from more distant stars ( 10 ly – ) .
From 40 Eridani , 16 light years away , the Sun would be an average looking star of about apparent magnitude 3.3 in the constellation Serpens Caput .
At this distance most of the stars nearest to us would be in different locations to those in our sky , including Alpha Centauri , Sirius , and Procyon .
From a planet orbiting Aldebaran , 65 light years away , our Sun would be seen as an insignificant 6.4 magnitude star between Ophiuchus and Scorpius ( more specifically , it would in the vicinity of Phi Ophiuchi and 24 Scorpii ) .
Constellations made of bright , distant stars would look somewhat similar ( such as Orion and Scorpius ) but much of the night sky would seem unfamiliar to someone from Earth .
Even Orion would appear somewhat different ; viewed from this position , Alnilam and Mintaka would appear to be on top of each other , only 15 arcminutes apart , thus reducing the belt to two stars .
Also Bellatrix would be much closer to the belt , making the " chest " somewhat smaller .
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Recent developments .
In May 2017 , glints of light from Earth , seen as twinkling from an orbiting satellite a million miles away , were found to be reflected light from ice crystals in the atmosphere .
The technology used to determine this may be useful in studying the atmospheres of distant worlds , including those of exoplanets .
SEE ALSO
* Exosphere * Large Magellanic Cloud#View from the LMC
*
Sky
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Astronauts on the planets
* Essay on the possible sky colours of alien worlds .
* JPL Solar System Simulator
* Phases of Charon as seen from Pluto
* The Starry Universe – Life Magazine ( December 20 , 1954 ) .