9×19MM PARABELLUM
The 9×19 mm Parabellum is a firearms cartridge that was designed by Georg Luger and introduced in 1902 by the German weapons manufacturer Deutsche Waffen und Munitionsfabriken ( DWM ) ( German Weapons and Munitions Factory ) for their Luger semi - automatic pistol .
For this reason , it is designated as the 9 mm Luger by the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers ' Institute ( SAAMI ) , and the 9 mm Luger by the Commission Internationale Permanente pour l'Epreuve
des Armes à Feu Portatives ( CIP ) .
The name Parabellum is derived from the Latin : Si vis pacem , para bellum ( " If you seek peace , prepare for war " ) , which was the motto of DWM .
Under STANAG 4090 , it is a standard cartridge for NATO forces as well as many non - NATO countries .
According to the 2014 edition of Cartridges of the World , the 9×19 mm Parabellum is " the world 's most popular and widely used military handgun and submachinegun cartridge . "
In addition to being used by over 60 % of police in the U.S. , Newsweek credits 9×19 mm Parabellum pistol sales with making semiautomatic pistols more popular than revolvers .
The popularity of this cartridge can be attributed to the widely held conviction that it is effective in police and self - defense use .
Its low cost and wide availability contribute to the caliber 's continuing popularity .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Georg Luger developed the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge from his earlier 7.65×21 mm Parabellum round , which itself was derived from the original 7.65×25 mm Borchardt cartridge in the Borchardt C-93 pistol .
Shortening the length of the cartridge case used in the Borchardt pistol allowed him to improve the design of the toggle lock and to incorporate a smaller , angled grip .
Luger 's work on the Borchardt design evolved into the Luger pistol , first patented in 1898 and chambered in 7.65×21 mm Parabellum .
Demand from Germany for a larger caliber in their military sidearm led Luger to develop the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge for the eventual P08 pistol .
This was achieved by removing the bottleneck shape of the 7.65×21 mm Parabellum case , resulting in a tapered rimless cartridge encasing a bullet that was 9 mm in diameter .
In 1902 , Luger presented the new round to the British Small Arms Committee , as well as three prototype versions to the U.S. Army for testing at Springfield Arsenal in mid-1903 .
The Imperial German Navy adopted the cartridge in 1904 and in 1908 the German Army adopted it as well .
The ogive of the bullet was slightly redesigned in the 1910s to improve feeding .
To conserve lead during World War II in Germany , the lead core was replaced by an iron core encased with lead .
This bullet , identified by a black bullet jacket , was designated as the 08 mE ( — " with iron core " ) .
By 1944 , the black jacket of the 08 mE bullet was dropped and these bullets were produced with normal copper - colored jackets .
Another wartime variation was designated the 08 sE bullet and identified by its dark gray jacket , and was created by compressing iron powder at high temperature into a solid material ( — " sintered iron " ) .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
After World War I , acceptance of the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge increased , and 9×19 mm
Parabellum pistols and submachine guns were adopted by military and police users in many countries .
The 9×19 mm Parabellum has become the most popular caliber for U.S. law enforcement agencies , primarily due to the availability of compact pistols with large magazine capacities that use the cartridge .
Worldwide , the 9×19 mm Parabellum is one of the most popular pistol cartridges where it is legal ( some countries ban civilian use of weapons that chamber current or former military service cartridges ) , and cartridges in this caliber are generally available anywhere pistol ammunition is sold .
From the early 1980s to the mid-1990s , a sharp increase occurred in the popularity of semiautomatic pistols in the U.S. , a trend foreshadowed by the adoption of the Smith & Wesson Model 39 by the Illinois State Police in 1968 .
In addition , the Beretta M9 ( a military version of the Beretta Model 92 ) was adopted by the U.S. Army in 1985 .
Previously , most American police departments issued .38 Special caliber revolvers with a six - shot capacity .
The .38 Special was preferred to other weapons such as variants of the M1911 because it offered low recoil , was small and light enough to accommodate different shooters , and was relatively inexpensive .
The 9 mm cartridge is ballistically superior to the .38 Special revolver cartridge , is shorter overall , and being an autoloader cartridge , it is stored in flat magazines , as opposed to cylindrical speedloaders .
This , coupled with the advent of the so - called " wonder nines " , led to many U.S. police departments exchanging their revolvers for some form of 9 mm semiautomatic handguns by the 1980s .
In 2013 a chart of popular calibers that was released by the website Luckygunner.com showed 9 mm x 19 mm Parabellum as having 21.4 % of the entire cartridge market followed by the .223 Rem at 10.2 % ( with 5.56 mm included this is 15.7 % ) .
The next most popular caliber was .45 ACP .
With selecting the SIG Sauer P320 as the winner of the XM17 Modular Handgun System competition , the United States Army and United States Air Force chose the 9×19 mm again as the cartridge for their new service pistol .
CARTRIDGE DIMENSIONS Section::::Cartridge dimensions .
The 9×19 mm Parabellum has 0.86 ml ( 13.3 grains HO ) of cartridge case capacity .
9×19
mm
Parabellum maximum CIP cartridge dimensions
: All sizes are given in millimeters ( mm ) .
The cartridge headspaces on the mouth of the case : The common rifling twist rate for this cartridge is 250 mm ( 1 in 9.84 in ) , six grooves , ø lands = 8.82 mm , ø grooves = 9.02 mm , land width = 2.49 mm and the primer type is small pistol .
According to CIP rulings , the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge case can handle up to P piezo pressure .
In CIP - regulated countries every pistol cartridge combination has to be proofed at 130 % of this maximum CIP pressure to certify for sale to consumers .
This means that 9×19 mm Parabellum chambered arms in CIP regulated countries are currently ( 2014 ) proof tested at PE piezo pressure .
The SAAMI pressure limit for the 9×19 mm Parabellum is set at piezo pressure .
The SAAMI pressure limit for the 9×19 mm
Parabellum + P is set at piezo pressure .
An empty case with primer weighs about .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
The round was originally designed to be lethal to 50 meters , but is still lethal at longer ranges .
The 9 mm cartridge combines a flat trajectory with moderate recoil .
According to the 1986 book Handloading : " the modern science of wound ballistics has established beyond reasonable doubt that the 9 mm cartridge is highly effective . "
In 2014 , the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) released a report detailing the potential combat effectiveness of the 9 mm cartridge when compared to other calibers such as the .45 ACP and the .40 S&W cartridge that was specifically developed for use by the FBI .
The report indicated that the new powders and more advanced bullet designs used in current 9 mm defensive loads allowed for the caliber to deliver almost similar performance to other calibers , like the .45 ACP , and .40
S&W.
In addition to this , the lower recoil , less wear , cheaper ammunition and higher capacity were all reasons that the report cited for the recent surge in orders of the ammunition from various police agencies .
With a wider selection of officers being able to shoot handguns chambered in 9×19 mm , many departments choose this caliber so they can standardize around a single firearm and loading , making logistics and supply easier .
Due to all of these factors , law enforcement orders of 9 mm ammo from all major ammunition manufacturers have spiked significantly .
The FBI report made it clear that the more consistent accuracy of 9 mm in the hands of their less experienced shooters was a factor in their returning to 9 mm as their standard handgun caliber .
It was also made clear that the almost same effectiveness of 9 mm compared to .40 S&W and .45 ACP was due to the high quality of 9 mm ammunition available .
IMPROVEMENTS AND VARIATIONS Section::::Improvements and variations .
In addition to the traditional pressure values for this cartridge , two main variants offer different pressure standards than the SAAMI or CIP requirements .
COMMONWEALTH STANDARD
Section::::Commonwealth standard .
The Cartridge S.A. Ball 9 m / m Mark Iz ( 9 m / m BALL MK 1z ) was the standard Imperial 9 mm Parabellum round in World War II and was produced from December 1941 to 1944 .
It was meant for use in semiautomatic pistols like the Inglis Browning Hi - Power .
Bullet weight was .
Velocity was at .
It is noted by its purple annulus around a standard gold - colored primer .
The higher - powered Cartridge S.A. Ball 9 m / m Mark IIz ( 9m / m Ball MK 2z ) was in production from September 1943 until 1988 , and was graded as NATO standard in 1962 .
It was designed for use in submachine guns such as the Lanchester , Sten , and Sterling .
Bullet weight is over a charge of of Du Pont SR.4898 or Dynamit - Nobel Parabellum Powder .
Velocity is at .
It can be distinguished from the 9-mm Ball MK 1z by its purple annulus around a silver primer .
India and Pakistan manufactured 9 mm Parabellum ammunition to this standard after independence .
Canada 's Cartridge S.A. Ball 9 m / m CDN Mark
I ( 9-mm Ball CDN MK 1 ) , made since 1955 , has similar ballistics .
Bullet weight is .
Nominal muzzle velocity is .
NATO STANDARD
Section::::NATO standard .
The cartridge has been manufactured by , or for , more than 70 different countries and has become a standard pistol caliber for NATO and other military forces around the world .
Its official nomenclature among NATO members is " 9 mm NATO " .
Standard bullet weight is to .
9 mm NATO can be considered an overpressure variant of the 9×19 mm Parabellum that is defined by NATO standards .
The service pressure P of the 9 mm NATO is rated at where CIP rates the 9 mm Luger P somewhat lower at .
The proofing test pressure used in the NATO 9 mm proof test , however , equals the proofing test pressure used in the 9 mm Luger CIP proof test .
While the NATO standards do not specify the type of bullet to be used , Declaration III of the Hague Convention of 1899 prohibits the use of expanding ammunition in warfare by signatories , so official NATO 9 mm ammunition is FMJ " ball " bullets .
Declaration III does not apply in conflicts involving nonsignatories to the Hague Convention , including paramilitary and other nongovernmental fighting forces .
SWEDISH M/39 Section::::Swedish m/39 .
9 mm Parabellum entered Swedish service as m/39 with the import of the Kulsprutepistol m/39 from Austria , with a bullet weight of .
During the Congo Crisis , the Swedish UN - contingent issued complaints about the performance of the m/39 cartridge ( regular 9 mm Parabellum ) used , which resulted in a commission of the Swedish Army establishing in 1962 that a new round was needed for the Carl Gustav m/45 .
The resulting m/39B had a tombac - plated steel jacket surrounding the lead core .
While the lands of the barrel can cut into the tombac , the steel jacket resists deformation , thus causes the gas pressure to rise higher than the previous soft - jacketed m/39 , giving the bullet a Vₒ of and an impact energy of 600 joules .
The mantle also acts like a penetrator when striking a target , going through up to 50 layers of kevlar , 7 cm bricks or 25 cm of wood , allowing the bullet to defeat body armour up to Type IIIA .
The downside is the higher wear on the weapon , ultimately causing the service pistol m/40 to be withdrawn from service .
The m/39 is also available as a " gallery round " – kammarpatron m/39 – black with blue tip , for indoor gallery shooting , and as a blank round – lös patron m/39 – which has the metal bullet replaced with one in red , hard plastic intended to disintegrate into dust when fired .
+ P VARIANT Section::::+P variant .
Attempts to improve ballistics of the cartridge came in the early 1990s with the widespread availability of high - pressure loadings of the 9 mm cartridge .
Such overpressure cartridges are labeled " + P " or , in the case of very high pressure loadings , " + P+ " .
Ballistic performance of these rounds was moderately improved over the standard loadings .
In addition , improvements in jacketed hollow - point bullet technology have produced bullet designs that are more likely to expand and less likely to fragment than earlier iterations , giving a 9 mm bullet better terminal effectiveness .
SESAMS
Section::::SESAMS .
The United States Military uses red and blue marking rounds in the 9 mm caliber known as Special Effects Small Arms Marking Systems ( SESAMS ) .
Commonly used for training simulations , these rounds are comparable in function to the paintballs used in paintball markers , except they are fired with a powder charge , and can be shot in Beretta M9 service pistols with only a barrel modification ( The Glock 19 pistol , common among police departments , has a similar available modification ) .
The 9 mm SESAMS rounds are fired from specially modified pistols , as well as M16 and M4 rifles , which are incapable of chambering standard live ammunition .
SESAMS weapons or components are normally painted blue or otherwise clearly marked , to denote their inert status and avoid a potentially catastrophic mixup with live - fire weapons .
This allows the armed forces to train with nearly identical equipment as used in real - life situations .
The brand name for this ammunition , which is sold commercially and to law enforcement , is Simunition .
RUSSIAN MILITARY OVERPRESSURE VARIANTS
Section::::Russian military overpressure variants .
The Russian military has developed specialized 9×19 mm cartridges that use relatively light bullets at high muzzle velocities for both pistols and submachine guns to defeat body armour .
Besides enhanced penetration capabilities , these overpressure variants offer a flatter trajectory and lessened recoil .
The increase in service pressure causes a rise in bolt thrust , so the use of this overpressure ammunition induces more stress on critical weapon parts during firing .
After initial research , conducted since the late 1980s under the codename " Grach " , the Russian armed forces adopted two specialized 9×19 mm variants .
The 7N21
( Cyrillic : 7Н21 )
9×19
mm overpressure variant features an armour - piercing bullet and generates a peak pressure of .
The 7N21 bullet features a hardened ( subcaliber ) steel penetrator core , enclosed by a bimetal jacket .
The space between the core and jacket is filled with polyethylene , and the tip of the penetrator is exposed at the front of the bullet , to achieve better penetration .
The penetration range for body armor is specified at up to 40 m.
The MP-443 Grach and GSh-18 pistols and PP-19 - 01 , PP-90M1 and PP-2000 submachine guns were designed for use with this overpressure cartridge .
Jane 's Infantry Weapons stated in 2003 that the 7N21 cartridge combines the 9×19 mm Parabellum dimensions with a 9×21 mm Gyurza bullet design and was developed specifically for the penetration of body armor and for the MP-443 Grach pistol , the latest Russian service pistol .
The 7N31 ( Cyrillic : 7Н31 ) /
PBP 9×19 mm overpressure variant uses the same concept with a similar but lighter bullet that achieves higher muzzle velocity .
The penetration of an 8 mm - thick steel plate is specified at up to 10 m.
The 7N31 cartridge was developed in the late 1990s for the GSh-18 pistol .
The 7N31 was adopted for the PP-90M1 and PP-2000 submachine guns .
Its maximum service pressure remains unclear .
The method of construction of the two rounds allows them to be effective against both unarmored and armored targets .
If the bullet strikes an unarmored target , it holds together to produce a wide wound channel .
If the bullet strikes an armored target , the sleeve is stripped away and the core penetrates alone .
The disadvantage of the rounds is that high impact velocities are needed for them to work effectively , so the bullets are relatively light to maximize their muzzle velocity .
This means they lose velocity relatively quickly , limiting their effective range .
OTHER VARIANTS
Section::::Other variants .
VBR - B produces specialized bullets for this cartridge , a two - part controlled fragmenting projectile and an armor - piercing bullet that features a brass sabot and a hardened steel penetrator .
These are designed for increasing the content of the permanent wound cavity and double the chance to hit a vital organ .
U.S. DATA Section::::U.S. data .
The energy delivered by most 9 mm loads allows for significant expansion and penetration with premium hollow - point bullets .
Illinois State Police , Border Patrol , Federal Air Marshals , and United States Secret Service favored and used + P+ 9 mm loads at for years with excellent results .
Massad Ayoob has stated that the " Tried , Tested , and True " + P or + P+ is the best self - defense load in this caliber .
Proponents of the hydrostatic shock theory contend that the energy of the 9 mm cartridge is capable of imparting remote wounding effects known as hydrostatic shock , in human - sized living targets .
The table below shows common performance parameters for several 9×19 mm loads .
Bullet weights ranging from are common .
Loads are available with energies from just over to , and penetration depths from to over are available for various applications and risk assessments . !
Manufacturer !
Load !
Bullet Mass !
Velocity !
Energy !
Expansion !
Penetration !
PC !
TSC
Key : Expansion :
expanded bullet diameter ( ballistic gelatin ) .
Penetration :
penetration depth ( ballistic gelatin ) .
PC : permanent cavity volume ( ballistic gelatin , FBI method ) .
TSC : temporary stretch cavity volume ( ballistic gelatin ) .
SYNONYMS
* 9×19 * 9 mm * 9 mm Luger * 9 mm NATO * 9×19 mm
* 9 mil * 9×19 mm NATO * 9 mm
Parabellum
* 9 mm Para * 9 mm
P SEE ALSO * 9 mm caliber
* List of firearms * List of handgun cartridges * List of rifle cartridges * NATO EPVAT testing
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Article on 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge collecting including history with photos and descriptions of variations including headstamps
* Ballistics By The Inch 9×19 mm Parabellum Results .
* Data on the Russian ammo ( in Russian )