BRASS KNUCKLES Brass knuckles , also sometimes called knuckles , knucks , brass knucks , knucklebusters , knuckledusters , an English punch or a classic , are weapons used in hand - to - hand combat .
Brass knuckles are pieces of metal shaped to fit around the knuckles .
Despite their name , they are often made from other metals , plastics or carbon fibers .
Designed to preserve and concentrate a punch 's force by directing it toward a harder and smaller contact area , they result in increased tissue disruption , including an increased likelihood of fracturing the victim 's bones on impact .
The extended and rounded palm grip also spreads across the attacker 's palm the counter - force that would otherwise be absorbed primarily by the attacker 's fingers , reducing the likelihood of damage to the attacker 's fingers .
HISTORY AND VARIATIONS Section::::History and variations .
Metal ring and knuckle style weapons date back to ancient times and have been used all over the world for many hundreds of years .
The Nihang Sikhs used an early variant called Sher Panja in the 18th century .
Cast iron , brass , lead , and wood knuckles were made in the United States during the American Civil War ( 1861–1865 ) .
Soldiers would often buy cast iron or brass knuckles .
If they could not buy them , they would carve their own from wood , or cast them at camp by melting lead bullets and using a mold in the dirt .
Some brass knuckles have rounded rings , which increase the impact of blows from moderate to severe damage .
Other instruments ( not generally considered to be " brass knuckles " or " metal knuckles " per se ) may have spikes , sharp points and cutting edges .
These devices come in many variations and are called by a variety of names , including " knuckle knives . "
By the late 19th century , knuckledusters were incorporated into various kinds of pistols such as the Apache revolver used by criminals in France in the late 19th to early 20th centuries .
During World War I the US Army issued two different knuckle knives , the US model 1917 and US model
1918
Mark I trench knives .
Knuckles and knuckle knives were also being made in England at the time and purchased privately by British soldiers .
By World War II , knuckles and knuckle knives were quite popular with both American and British soldiers .
The Model 1918 trench knives were reissued to American paratroopers .
British Commandos even had their very own " Death 's Head " knuckle knife , featuring a skull - shaped brass knuckle handle .
A notable knuckle knife still in use is the Cuchillo de Paracaidista , issued to Argentinian paratroopers .
Current - issue models have an emergency blade in the crossguard .
LEGALITY AND DISTRIBUTION Section::::Legality and distribution .
Brass knuckles are illegal in Austria , Belgium , Canada , Bosnia , Croatia , Cyprus , Finland , Germany , Greece , Hungary , Israel , the Republic of Ireland , Malaysia , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Russia ( " кастет " , from French " casse - tête " , which means " head - breaker " ) , Spain , Turkey , Singapore , Taiwan .
and the United Kingdom .
Import of knuckle dusters into Australia is illegal unless a government permit is obtained ; permits are only available for limited purposes , such as police and government use , or use in film productions .
They are prohibited weapons in the state of New South Wales .
In Brazil , brass knuckles are legal and freely sold .
They are called " Soco Inglês , " which means " English Punch . "
In Canada , brass knuckles , or any similar devices , are listed as prohibited weapons ; possession of such weapon is a criminal offence under the Criminal Code .
Plastic knuckles have been determined to be legal in Canada .
Similar legislation has been instituted in Russia and Australia .
In France , brass knuckles have been illegal for twenty years .
They can be bought as a " collectable " ( provided one is over 18 ) , but it is forbidden to carry or use one , whatever the circumstance , self - defense included .
The French term is " poing américain " , which literally means " American fist " .
In Italy and Mexico , brass knuckles are legal and freely sold to people of legal age ( over 18 years old ) , but carrying them is forbidden .
In Sweden , brass knuckles are legal to purchase and own ( for people over 18 years old ) , but are not legal to sell or carry in public .
The carrying of brass knuckles carry the same penalty as carrying a knife , and falls under the same law .
They are called " knogjärn " , literally " knuckle iron " .
In Serbia , knuckles are legal to purchase and own ( for people over 16 years old ) but are not legal to carry in public .
They are called " боксер " literally " boxer " .
In Taiwan , according to the Law of Taiwan , possession and sales of brass knuckles are illegal .
Under regulation , brass knuckles are considered weapons .
Without the permission of the central regulatory agency , it is against the law to manufacture , sell , transport , transfer , rent , or have them in collection or on display .
In the United States , brass knuckles are not significantly regulated at the federal level , but various state , county and city laws prohibit their purchase and/or possession .
Some state laws require purchasers to be 18 or older .
Most states have statutes regulating the carrying of weapons , and many specifically prohibit brass knuckles or " metal knuckles .
" Where they are legal , brass knuckles can normally be purchased online or at flea markets , swap meets , and at some sword and weapon shops .
Some companies manufacture belt buckles or novelty paper weights that function as brass knuckles and are sold " for entertainment purposes only " .
Brass knuckles made of hardened plastic , rather than metal , have been marketed as " undetectable by airport metal detectors .
" A number of states that ban brass knuckles also ban plastic knuckles .
New York 's criminal law statutes list both " metal knuckles " and " plastic knuckles "
as prohibited weapons but provide no definition for either .
SEE ALSO
*
Bagh naka
*
Cestus
* Mark I trench knife
* Tekko * Weighted - knuckle gloves REFERENCES