CONGENITAL INSENSITIVITY TO PAIN Congenital insensitivity to pain ( CIP ) , also known as congenital analgesia , is one or more rare conditions in which a person can not feel ( and has never felt ) physical pain .
The conditions described here are separate from the HSAN group of disorders , which have more specific signs and cause .
Because feeling physical pain is vital for survival , CIP is an extremely dangerous condition .
It is common for people with the condition to die in childhood due to injuries or illnesses going unnoticed .
Burn
injuries are among the more common injuries .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
For people with this disorder , cognition and sensation are otherwise normal ; for instance , patients can still feel discriminative touch ( though not always temperature ) , and there are generally no detectable physical abnormalities .
Because children with the disorder can not feel pain , they may not respond to problems , thus being at a higher risk of more severe diseases .
Children with this condition often sustain oral cavity damage both in and around the oral cavity ( such as having bitten off the tip of their tongue ) or fractures to bones .
Unnoticed infections and corneal damage due to foreign objects in the eye are also seen .
There are generally two types of non - response exhibited : * Insensitivity to pain means that the painful stimulus is not even perceived : a patient can not describe the intensity or type of pain .
* Indifference to pain means that the patient can perceive the stimulus , but lacks an appropriate response : they do not flinch or withdraw when exposed to pain .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
It may be that the condition is caused by increased production of endorphins in the brain .
In this case , naloxone may be a treatment , but it does not always work .
In all cases , this disorder can be in the voltage - gated sodium channel SCN9A
( Na1.7 ) .
Patients with such mutations are congenitally insensitive to pain and lack other neuropathies .
There are three mutations in SCN9A :
W897X , located in the P - loop of domain 2 ; I767X , located in the S2 segment of domain 2 ; and S459X , located in the linker region between domains 1 and 2 .
This results in a truncated non - functional protein .
Na1.7 channels are expressed at high levels in nociceptive neurons of the dorsal root ganglia .
As these channels are likely involved in the formation and propagation of action potentials in such neurons , it is expected that a loss of function mutation in SCN9A leads to abolished nociceptive pain propagation .
PRDM12 gene is normally switched on during the development of pain - sensing nerve cells .
People with homozygous mutations of the PRDM12 gene experience congenital insensitivity to pain ( CIP ) .
Developmental disabilities such as autism can include varying degrees of pain insensitivity as a sign .
However , since these disorders are characterized by dysfunction of the sensory system in general , this specific condition is not in itself an indicator of any of these conditions .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The opioid antagonist naloxone allowed a woman with congenital insensitivity to pain to experience it for the first time .
Similar effects were observed in Na1.7 null mice treated with naloxone .
As such , opioid antagonists like naloxone and naltrexone may be effective in treating the condition .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Congenital insensitivity to pain is found in Vittangi , a village in Kiruna Municipality in northern Sweden , where nearly 40 cases have been reported .
Some Americans also have it .
SEE ALSO
* Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
* Familial dysautonomia * Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis
* Hypoalgesia
*
Pain asymbolia
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Hazards of Growing Up Painlessly By JUSTIN HECKERT , New York Times , November 15 , 2012 .
Profile of Ashlyn Blocker , 13 , who has congenital insensitivity to pain .