ONCE UPON A TIME IN MEXICO
Once Upon a Time in Mexico ( also known as Desperado 2 ) is a 2003 American contemporary western action film written , directed , produced , photographed , scored , and edited by Robert Rodriguez .
It is the third and final film in Rodriguez 's Mexico Trilogy , and is a sequel to El Mariachi and Desperado .
The film features Antonio Banderas in his second and final performance as El Mariachi .
In the film , El Mariachi is recruited by CIA agent Sheldon Sands ( Johnny Depp ) to kill Armando Barillo ( Willem Dafoe ) , a Mexican drug lord who is planning a coup d'état against the President of Mexico .
At the same time , El Mariachi seeks revenge against a corrupt general responsible for the death of his wife , Carolina ( Salma Hayek ) .
It was Rodriguez ' first big budget film to be shot in digital HD .
Once Upon a Time in Mexico received positive reviews but was criticized for reducing its protagonist to an almost secondary character in his own trilogy and for having a convoluted plot .
In the special features of the film 's DVD , Rodriguez explained this was intended , as he wanted this to be The Good , the Bad and the Ugly of the trilogy .
Once Upon a Time in Mexico grossed $ 98 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
El Mariachi is recruited by CIA agent Sheldon Jeffrey Sands to kill General Emiliano Marquez , a corrupt Mexican Army officer who has been hired by Mexican drug lord Armando Barillo to assassinate the President of Mexico and overthrow the government .
Many years before , El Mariachi and his wife Carolina confronted Marquez in a shootout and wounded the general ; in retaliation , Marquez took the lives of Carolina and their daughter in an ambush .
In addition to El Mariachi , Sands persuades former FBI agent Jorge Ramírez to come out of retirement and kill Barillo , who had murdered his partner Archuleta in the past .
Furthermore , AFN operative Ajedrez is assigned by Sands to tail Barillo .
While monitoring Barillo 's activities , Ramírez meets Billy Chambers , an American fugitive who has been living under the protection of Barillo , but can no longer stomach the horrible tasks he 's been forced to carry out for him .
Ramírez convinces Chambers he will provide him protection in exchange for getting closer to Barillo by tagging Chambers ' pet chihuahua with a hidden microphone , and Chambers agrees to complete the deal by surrendering to U.S. authorities once Barillo has been taken down .
Sands ' assistant , Cucuy , originally hired to keep an eye on El Mariachi , instead tranquilizes El Mariachi and turns him over to Barillo , also offering to reveal the details of Sands 's plan .
Cucuy , however , is promptly killed by Chambers while El Mariachi escapes from captivity and calls his friends Lorenzo and Fideo to assist him in his mission .
While monitoring Barillo 's activity outside a hospital , Ramírez notices armed men storming the building and follows suit .
He discovers that a group of doctors have been gunned down and Barillo has bled to death as a result of a botched facial reconstruction , but realizes that the corpse on the operating table is a body double before he is knocked out and kidnapped by the real Barillo and Ajedrez , who reveals herself to be Barillo 's daughter .
Sands realizes his mission has been compromised , but is too late , as he is captured by Barillo and Ajedrez — who drill out his eyes before sending him out .
Despite his blindness , he manages to gun down a hitman tailing him with the aid of a chiclet boy .
As the village celebrates the Day of the Dead during the President 's visit , Marquez and his army storm in and attack the presidential palace .
Marquez 's troops , however , are met with resistance from not only the President 's bodyguards , but the villagers and the Mariachis .
Sands had instructed El Mariachi to allow the President to be killed before attacking Marquez , but the Mariachis , agreeing that the President is a good man , intervene early and protect him .
Marquez enters the presidential palace , only to once again confront El Mariachi , who shoots out his kneecaps before finishing him off with a headshot .
Ramírez , who was released from captivity by Chambers , faces Barillo .
After Barillo guns down Chambers , Ramírez and El Mariachi kill the drug lord .
Sands manages to shoot the sadistic Ajedrez dead outside the presidential palace .
Ultimately , Lorenzo and Fideo walk away with the cash that Barillo was using to pay Marquez , and escort the president to safety .
Ramírez says goodbye to Sands and walks away , having avenged his partner 's death .
El Mariachi then gives his share of the cash to his village before walking into the sunset .
CAST * Antonio Banderas as El Mariachi * Salma Hayek as Carolina
* Johnny Depp as Sheldon Jeffrey Sands
* Mickey Rourke as Billy Chambers
* Eva Mendes as Ajedrez Barillo * Danny Trejo as Cucuy * Enrique Iglesias as Lorenzo * Marco Leonardi as Fideo * Cheech Marin as Belini * Rubén Blades as Jorge Ramírez * Willem Dafoe as Armando Barillo
* Pedro Armendáriz , Jr. as President * Tony Valdes as Chicle
Boy
* Gerardo Vigil as General Marquez * Miguel Couturier as Dr. Guevera * Julio Oscar Mechoso as Nicholas Section::::Cast .
In a 2003 issue of Rolling Stone , Depp was named as one of its " People of the Year " , and gave an interview in which he briefly discussed his role as Sands :
The idea behind him is there was this guy I used to know in Hollywood , in the business , who on the outside was very charming – soft - spoken and almost hypnotic in the rhythm he used to speak .
He refused to call me Johnny – always called me John .
You knew this guy was aiming to fuck you over , but somehow you stuck around because he was just so fascinating to watch .
Depp also said in an Entertainment Weekly article that he " imagine[d ] this guy wore really cheesy tourist shirts " , that he had a " sideline obsession with Broadway " , and that he favored strange , obvious disguises – all three qualities can be observed in the film .
It was also revealed in the director 's commentary on the DVD that Depp himself came up with the character 's first and middle names .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Made on a US$ 29 million budget , the film was shot in May 2001 before ( 2002 ) and ( 2003 )
in order to avoid a potential Screen Actors Guild strike .
Shooting took place over seven weeks in Querétaro , San Miguel de Allende and Guanajuato , Mexico .
It was the first big budget film to be shot in high definition digital video .
Rodriguez chose to shoot on digital after George Lucas , who was shooting , showed him early footage shot digitally .
Impressed , Rodriguez chose to shoot digitally , but he knew he did not have enough time to shoot Spy Kids 2 .
Instead , he pitched a sequel to Desperado to Miramax and wrote a script in six days .
The initial draft was 65 pages long , which he padded with a subplot borrowed from an unproduced short film .
When Miramax expressed hesitation over the added subplot , he readily removed it .
His primary influence was Sergio Leone 's Dollars Trilogy , specifically The Good , The Bad , and The Ugly .
Rodriguez said shooting digitally saved time and money , simplified the filming process , and rendered 35 mm film obsolete for him .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's score includes songs composed by director Robert Rodriguez and performed by a group of musicians gathered specifically for the soundtrack recording .
Tracks performed by the group includes " Malagueña " with guitar by Brian Setzer and " Siente Mi Amor " , with singing by Salma Hayek .
Track 9 , " Sands ' Theme " , credited to " Tonto 's Giant Nuts " , was written by Johnny Depp .
Additional music includes Juno Reactor 's " Pistolero " , " Me Gustas Tú " by Manu Chao , and " Cuka Rocka " by Rodriguez ' own rock band , Chingon .
On the DVD director commentary , Robert Rodriguez states that he requested that each of the main actors give him four or eight notes of a melody for their character , but Depp presented him with the entire track .
* " Malagueña " ( Brian Setzer ) – 4:22
* * " Traeme Paz " ( Patricia Vonne ) – 2:56
* * " Eye Patch " ( Alex Ruiz ) – 1:51
* * " Yo Te Quiero " ( Marcos Loya ) – 3:48
* * " Guitar Town " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 2:04
* * " Church Shootout " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 1:38 * * " Pistolero " ( Juno Reactor ) – 3:38
*
* " Me Gustas Tú " ( Manu Chao ) – 3:49
*
* " Sands ( Theme ) " ( Tonto 's Giant Nuts ) – 3:24
* * " Dias de Los Angeles " ( Rick Del Castillo ) – 5:08
* * " The Man with No Eyes " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 2:09
*
* " Mariachi vs. Marquez " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 1:33
*
* " Flor del Mal " ( Tito Larriva & Steven Hufsteter ) – 3:13
* * " Chicle Boy " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 1:30
* * " Coup de Etat " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 3:02
* * " El Mariachi " ( Robert Rodriguez ) – 1:22
* * " Siente Mi Amor " ( Salma Hayek ) – 4:24
* * " Cuka Rocka " ( Chingon ) – 1:44
* TELEVISION ADAPTATION Section::::Television adaptation .
Sony 's AXN channel confirmed that it will be airing a TV series adaptation of El Mariachi franchise .
The series was to have premiered on March 20 , 2014 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Once Upon a Time in Mexico was released on September 12 , 2003 in 3,282 theaters with an opening weekend gross of US$ 23.4 million .
It went on to make $ 56.4 million in North America and $ 41.8 in the rest of the world for a combined total of $ 98.2 million on a $ 29 million budget .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes reports that 68 % of 163 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating is 6.3/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " Violent , pulpy , loopy fun , with Depp stealing the show . "
Metacritic rated it 56/100 based on 34 reviews .
Chicago Sun - Times film critic Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars and wrote , " Like Leone 's movie , the Rodriguez epic is more interested in the moment , in great shots , in surprises and ironic reversals and closeups of sweaty faces , than in a coherent story . "
A. O. Scott wrote in his review for The New York Times , " But in the end , the punched - up editing and vibrant color schemes start to grow tiresome , and Mr. Rodriguez , bored with his own gimmickry and completely out of ideas , responds by pushing the violence to needlessly grotesque extremes . "
In her review for USA Today , Claudia Puig wrote , " In Mexico , Rodriguez has fashioned a swaggering fantasy that pays homage to spaghetti Westerns such as Sergio Leone 's The Good , the Bad and the Ugly .
Plenty of blood is shed , lots of powerful artillery is fired , and action sequences provide astounding car crashes and fiery explosions .
"
Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " B " rating and praised Depp 's performance with its " winking grace notes of Brandoesque flakery ... is as minimal and laid - back as his Pirates of the Caribbean turn was deep - dish theatrical " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS