BOOK OF JASHER ( BIBLICAL REFERENCES )
The Book of Jasher ( also , Jashar ) or the Book of the Upright or the Book of the Just Man (; transliteration : sēfer hayyāšār ) is an unknown book mentioned in the Hebrew Bible .
The translation " Book of the Just Man " is the traditional Greek and Latin translation , while the transliterated form " Jasher " is found in the King James Bible , 1611 .
BIBLICAL REFERENCES Section::::Biblical references .
The book appears to be referenced from around the reign of David .
* 2 Samuel 1:18 states : David 's lament for Jonathan immediately follows .
The King James Version of the English Bible has the inclusion " the use of " in italics , material its translator(s ) added to render the text into what they considered understandable and comfortable English .
In other versions , such as the English Standard Version , David taught his Judaians The Bow , a hypothesised poetic lament of the deaths of Saul and Jonathan .
If that interpretation offered in the ESV footnote is accepted , then such a Bow was a lament or a tune contained in the Book of Jashar or which that book also says was taught to the Judaians .
*
The Septuagint translation renders sefer hayashar in both cases as ' Book of the Just ' .
It also misses the reference to the bow .
It reads :
* Joshua 9 cites it amid its depiction of Joshua 's military exploits in the land of Canaan , specifically after Adonizedek , king of Jerusalem , and his allies attacked the people of Gibeon for allying with Israel following which Joshua and the Israelites came to its aid .
When " YHWH gave the Amorites over to the sons of Israel " , Joshua told the sun to stand still over Gibeon and the moon to stand still over Valley of Aijalon ( ) .
*
Joshua 10:13 states :
The presence of this event in a book of poetry has been interpreted as a poetic description of the prolonged battle .
According to the Medieval Jewish scholar Rashi , Sefer HaYashar refers to the Pentateuch , as a fulfillment of Jacob 's prophecy regarding Ephraim — "
His seed will fill the nations " ( Gen. 48:19 ) — and that this prophecy refers to Joshua 's renown after the miracle of the standing of the sun .
SEE ALSO
* Book of Jasher ( Pseudo - Jasher ) - an 18th - century literary forgery which purports to be an English translation of the lost Book of Jasher .
* Sefer haYashar ( midrash ) - a Hebrew midrash , also known as The Book of Jasher , named after the lost Book of Jasher .
REFERENCES