INTERNAL BLEEDING Internal bleeding ( also called internal hemorrhage ) is a loss of blood that occurs from the vascular system into a body cavity or space .
It is a serious medical emergency but the extent of severity depends on bleeding rate and location of the bleeding ( e.g. heart , brain , stomach , lungs ) .
It can cause death and cardiac arrest if proper medical treatment is not received quickly .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
A number of medical conditions may lead to internal bleeding .
Common causes include trauma , various pathological conditions and complications of medical therapy .
Common locations include the gastrointestinal tract , the aorta and intracranial hemorrhage .
A bruise is a form of internal bleeding .
Bruises occur most often when blunt force trauma breaks small blood vessels inside the body , causing blood to leak out into surrounding tissue .
If the blood leaks into tissue that is near the surface of the skin , this bleeding is visible as a discoloration of the skin called a bruise or contusion .
Bruises are among the most common injuries and they are often minor , but bruises can sometimes be very severe in the case of serious injuries .
TRAUMA Section::::Trauma .
Internal bleeding can be caused by blunt trauma such as high speed deceleration in an automobile accident , or by penetrating trauma such as a ballistic or stab wound .
PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS AND DISEASE Section::::Pathological conditions and disease .
A number of pathological conditions and diseases can lead to internal bleeding .
These include blood vessel rupture as a result of high blood pressure , aneurysms , esophageal varices or peptic ulcers .
Another common cause of internal bleeding is carcinoma ( cancer ) , either of the gastro - intestinal tract , of the lung , or more rarely of other organs such as the prostate , pancreas or kidney .
Other diseases linked to internal bleeding include scurvy , hepatoma , liver cancer , Autoimmune Thrombocytopenia , ectopic pregnancy , malignant hypothermia , ovarian cysts , Vitamin K Deficiency , and hemophilia and malaria .
Some viruses may cause a type of internal bleeding called viral hemorrhagic fever , such as the Ebola , Dengue or Marburg viruses , but these are rare .
HEALTH CARE
CAUSED Section::::Health care caused .
Internal bleeding could be an iatrogenic artifact as a result of complications after surgical operations or medical treatment .
Some medication effects may also lead to internal bleeding , such as the use of anticoagulant drugs or antiplatelet drugs in the treatment of coronary artery disease .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Internal bleeding is serious for two reasons :
* the excess blood can compress organs and cause their dysfunction ( as can occur in hematoma )
* when the bleeding does not stop spontaneously , the loss of blood will cause hemorrhagic shock , which can lead to brain damage and death .
If there is pressure , it may lead to death or a brain hemorrhage .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Cases of internal bleeding are usually termed as hemorrhage , even though the term is general to all kinds of bleeding .
A minor case of internal bleeding results in ecchymosis , or a bruise : blood expands under the skin , causing discoloration .
NOTES