FRAMESHIFT MUTATION
A frameshift mutation ( also called a framing error or a reading frame shift ) is a genetic mutation caused by indels ( insertions or deletions ) of a number of nucleotides in a DNA sequence that is not divisible by three .
Due to the triplet nature of gene expression by codons , the insertion or deletion can change the reading frame ( the grouping of the codons ) , resulting in a completely different translation from the original .
The earlier in the sequence the deletion or insertion occurs , the more altered the protein .
A frameshift mutation is not the same as a single - nucleotide polymorphism in which a nucleotide is replaced , rather than inserted or deleted .
A frameshift mutation will in general cause the reading of the codons after the mutation to code for different amino acids .
The frameshift mutation will also alter the first stop codon ( " UAA " , " UGA " or " UAG " ) encountered in the sequence .
The polypeptide being created could be abnormally short or abnormally long , and will most likely not be functional .
Frameshift mutations are apparent in severe genetic diseases such as Tay –
Sachs disease ; they increase susceptibility to certain cancers and classes of familial hypercholesterolaemia ; in 1997 , a frameshift mutation was linked to resistance to infection by the HIV retrovirus .
Frameshift mutations have been proposed as a source of biological novelty , as with the alleged creation of nylonase , however , this interpretation is controversial .
A study by Negoro et al ( 2006 ) found that a frameshift mutation was unlikely to have been the cause and that rather a two amino acid substitution in the active site of an ancestral esterase resulted in nylonase .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The information contained in DNA determines protein function in the cells of all organisms .
Transcription and translation allow this information to be communicated into making proteins .
However , an error in reading this communication can cause protein function to be incorrect and eventually cause disease even as the cell incorporates a variety of corrective measures .
CENTRAL DOGMA
Section::::Central dogma .
In 1956 Francis Crick described the flow of genetic information from DNA to a specific amino acid arrangement for making a protein as the central dogma .
For a cell to properly function , proteins are required to be produced accurately for structural and for catalytic activities .
An incorrectly made protein can have detrimental effects on cell viability and in most cases cause the higher organism to become unhealthy by abnormal cellular functions .
To ensure that the genome successfully passes the information on , proofreading mechanisms such as exonucleases and mismatch repair systems are incorporated in DNA replication .
TRANSCRIPTION AND TRANSLATION Section::::Transcription and translation .
After DNA replication , the reading of a selected section of genetic information is accomplished by transcription .
Nucleotides containing the genetic information are now on a single strand messenger template called mRNA .
The mRNA is incorporated with a subunit of the ribosome and interacts with an rRNA .
The genetic information carried in the codons of the mRNA are now read ( decoded ) by anticodons of the tRNA .
As each codon ( triplet ) is read , amino acids are being joined together until a stop codon ( UAG , UGA or UAA ) is reached .
At this point the polypeptide ( protein ) has been synthesised and is released .
For every 1000 amino acid incorporated into the protein , no more than one is incorrect .
This fidelity of codon recognition , maintaining the importance of the proper reading frame , is accomplished by proper base pairing at the ribosome A site , GTP hydrolysis activity of EF - Tu a form of kinetic stability , and a proofreading mechanism as EF - Tu is released .
Frameshifting may also occur during prophase translation , producing different proteins from overlapping open reading frames , such as the gag - pol - env retroviral proteins .
This is fairly common in viruses and also occurs in bacteria and yeast
( Farabaugh , 1996 ) .
Reverse transcriptase , as opposed to RNA Polymerase II , is thought to be a stronger cause of the occurrence of frameshift mutations .
In experiments only 3–13 % of all frameshift mutations occurred because of RNA Polymerase II .
In prokaryotes the error rate inducing frameshift mutations is only somewhere in the range of .0001
and .00001 .
There are several biological processes that help to prevent frameshift mutations .
Reverse mutations occur which change the mutated sequence back to the original wild type sequence .
Another possibility for mutation correction is the use of a suppressor mutation .
This offsets the effect of the original mutation by creating a secondary mutation , shifting the sequence to allow for the correct amino acids to be read .
Guide RNA can also be used to insert or delete Uridine into the mRNA after transcription , this allows for the correct reading frame .
CODON - TRIPLET IMPORTANCE Section::::Codon - triplet importance .
A codon is a set of three nucleotides , a triplet that code for a certain amino acid .
The first codon establishes the reading frame , whereby a new codon begins .
A protein′s amino acid backbone sequence is defined by contiguous triplets .
Codons are key to translation of genetic information for the synthesis of proteins .
The reading frame is set when translating the mRNA begins and is maintained as it reads one triplet to the next .
The reading of the genetic code is subject to three rules the monitor codons in mRNA .
First , codons are read in a 5 ' to 3 ' direction .
Second , codons are nonoverlapping and the message has no gaps .
The last rule , as stated above , that the message is translated in a fixed reading frame .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
Frameshift mutations can occur randomly or be caused by an external stimulus .
The detection of frameshift mutations can occur via several different methods .
Frameshifts are just one type of mutation that can lead to incomplete or incorrect proteins , but they account for a significant percentage of errors in DNA .
GENETIC OR ENVIRONMENTAL Section::::Genetic or environmental .
This is a genetic mutation at the level of nucleotide bases .
Why and how frameshift mutations occur are continually being sought after .
An environmental study , specifically the production of UV - induced frameshift mutations by DNA polymerases deficient in 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity was done .
The normal sequence 5′ GTC GTT TTA CAA 3′ was changed to GTC GTT T TTA CAA ( MIDT ) of GTC GTT C TTA CAA ( MIDC ) to study frameshifts .
E. coli
pol
I Kf and T7 DNA polymerase mutant enzymes devoid of 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity produce UV - induced revertants at higher frequency than did their exonuclease proficient counterparts .
The data indicates that loss of proofreading activity increases the frequency of UV - induced frameshifts .
DETECTION
FLUORESCENCE Section::::Detection .
Section::::Fluorescence .
The effects of neighboring bases and secondary structure to detect the frequency of frameshift mutations has been investigated in depth using fluorescence .
Fluorescently tagged DNA , by means of base analogues , permits one to study the local changes of a DNA sequence .
Studies on the effects of the length of the primer strand reveal that an equilibrium mixture of four hybridization conformations was observed when template bases looped - out as a bulge , i.e. a structure flanked on both sides by duplex DNA .
In contrast , a double - loop structure with an unusual unstacked DNA conformation at its downstream edge was observed when the extruded bases were positioned at the primer – template junction , showing that misalignments can be modified by neighboring DNA secondary structure .
SEQUENCING Section::::Sequencing .
Sanger sequencing and pyrosequencing are two methods that have been used to detect frameshift mutations , however , it is likely that data generated will not be of the highest quality .
Even still , 1.96 million indels have been identified through Sanger sequencing that do not overlap with other databases .
When a frameshift mutation is observed it is compared against the Human Genome Mutation Database ( HGMD ) to determine if the mutation has a damaging effect .
This is done by looking at four features .
First , the ratio between the affected and conserved DNA , second the location of the mutation relative to the transcript , third the ratio of conserved and affected amino acids and finally the distance of the indel to the end of the exon .
Massively Parallel Sequencing is a newer method that can be used to detect mutations .
Using this method , up to 17 gigabases can be sequenced at once , as opposed to limited ranges for Sanger sequencing of only about 1 kilobase .
Several technologies are available to perform this test and it is being looked at to be used in clinical applications .
When testing for different carcinomas , current methods only allow for looking at one gene at a time .
Massively Parallel Sequencing can test for a variety of cancer causing mutations at once as opposed to several specific tests .
An experiment to determine the accuracy of this newer sequencing method tested for 21 genes and had no false positive calls for frameshift mutations .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A US patent ( 5,958,684 ) in 1999 by Leeuwen , details the methods and reagents for diagnosis of diseases caused by or associated with a gene having a somatic mutation giving rise to a frameshift mutation .
The methods include providing a tissue or fluid sample and conducting gene analysis for frameshift mutation or a protein from this type of mutation .
The nucleotide sequence of the suspected gene is provided from published gene sequences or from cloning and sequencing of the suspect gene .
The amino acid sequence encoded by the gene is then predicted .
FREQUENCY Section::::Frequency .
Despite the rules that govern the genetic code and the various mechanisms present in a cell to ensure the correct transfer of genetic information during the process of DNA replication as well as during translation , mutations do occur ; frameshift mutation is not the only type .
There are at least two other types of recognized point mutations , specifically missense mutation and nonsense mutation .
A frameshift mutation can drastically change the coding capacity ( genetic information ) of the message .
Small insertions or deletions ( those less than 20 base pairs ) make up 24 % of mutations that manifest in currently recognized genetic disease .
Frameshift mutations are found to be more common in repeat regions of DNA .
A reason for this is because of slipping of the polymerase enzyme in repeat regions , allowing for mutations to enter the sequence .
Experiments can be run to determine the frequency of the frameshift mutation by adding or removing a pre - set number of nucleotides .
Experiments have been run by adding four basepairs , called the +4 experiments , but a team from Emory University looked at the difference in frequency of the mutation by both adding and deleting a base pair .
It was shown that there was no difference in the frequency between the addition and deletion of a base pair .
There is however , a difference in the end result of the protein .
Huntington 's disease is one of the nine codon reiteration disorders caused by polyglutamine expansion mutations that include spino - cerebellar ataxia ( SCA )
1 , 2 , 6 , 7 and 3 , spinobulbar muscular atrophy and dentatorubal - pallidoluysianatrophy .
There may be a link between diseases caused by polyglutamine and polyalanine expansion mutations , as frame shifting of the original SCA3 gene product encoding CAG / polyglutamines to GCA / polyalanines .
Ribosomal slippage during translation of the SCA3 protein has been proposed as the mechanism resulting in shifting from the polyglutamine to the polyalanine - encoding frame .
A dinucleotide deletion or single nucleotide insertion within the polyglutamine tract of huntingtin exon 1 would shift the CAG , polyglutamineen coding frame by +1 ( +1 frame shift ) to the GCA , polyalanine - encoding frame and introduce a novel epitope to the C terminus of Htt exon 1 ( APAAAPAATRPGCG ) .
DISEASES Section::::Diseases .
Several diseases have frameshift mutations as at least part of the cause .
Knowing prevalent mutations can also aid in the diagnosis of the disease .
Currently there are attempts to use frameshift mutations beneficially in the treatment of diseases , changing the reading frame of the amino acids .
CANCER Section::::Cancer .
Frameshift mutations are known to be a factor in colorectal cancer as well as other cancers with microsatellite instability .
As stated previously , frameshift mutations are more likely to occur in a region of repeat sequence .
When DNA mismatch repair does not fix the addition or deletion of bases , these mutations are more likely to be pathogenic .
This may be in part because the tumor is not told to stop growing .
Experiments in yeast and bacteria help to show characteristics of microsatellites that may contribute to defective DNA mismatch repair .
These include the length of the microsatellite , the makeup of the genetic material and how pure the repeats are .
Based on experimental results longer microsatellites have a higher rate of frameshift mutations .
The flanking DNA can also contribute to frameshift mutations .
In prostate cancer a frameshift mutation changes the open reading frame ( ORF ) and prevents apoptosis from occurring .
This leads to an unregulated growth of the tumor .
While there are environmental factors that contribute to the progression of prostate cancer , there is also a genetic component .
During testing of coding regions to identify mutations , 116 genetic variants were discovered , including 61 frameshift mutations .
There are over 500 mutations on chromosome 17 that seem to play a role in the development of breast and ovarian cancer in the BRCA1 gene , many of which are frameshift .
CROHN 'S
DISEASE Section::::Crohn 's disease .
Crohn 's disease has an association with the NOD2 gene .
The mutation is an insertion of a Cytosine at position 3020 .
This leads to a premature stop codon , shortening the protein that is supposed to be transcribed .
When the protein is able to form normally , it responds to bacterial liposaccharides , where the 3020insC mutation prevents the protein from being responsive .
CYSTIC FIBROSIS Section::::Cystic fibrosis .
Cystic fibrosis ( CF ) is a disease based on mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) gene .
There are over 1500 mutations identified , but not all cause the disease .
Most cases of cystic fibrosis are a result of the ∆F508 mutation , which deletes the entire amino acid .
Two frameshift mutations are of interest in diagnosing CF , CF1213delT and CF1154-insTC .
Both of these mutations commonly occur in tandem with at least one other mutation .
They both lead to a small decrease in the function of the lungs and occur in about 1 % of patients tested .
These mutations were identified through Sanger sequencing .
HIV Section::::HIV .
CCR5 is one of the cell entry co - factors associated with HIV , most frequently involved with nonsyncytium - inducing strains , is most apparent in HIV patients as opposed to AIDS patients .
A 32 base pair deletion in CCR5 has been identified as a mutation that negates the likelihood of an HIV infection .
This region on the open reading frame ORF contains a frameshift mutation leading to a premature stop codon .
This leads to the loss of the HIV - coreceptor function in vitro .
CCR5 - 1 is considered the wild type and CCR5 - 2 is considered to be the mutant allele .
Those with a heterozygous mutation for the CCR5 were less susceptible to the development of HIV .
In a study , despite high exposure to the HIV virus , there was no one homozygous for the CCR5 mutation that tested positive for HIV .
TAY – SACHS DISEASE Section::::Tay – Sachs disease .
Tay –
Sachs disease is a fatal disease affecting the central nervous system .
It is most frequently found in infants and small children .
Disease progression begins in the womb but symptoms do not appear until approximately 6 months of age .
There is no cure for the disease .
Mutations in the β - hexosaminidase A ( Hex A ) gene are known to affect the onset of Tay - Sachs , with 78 mutations of different types being described , 67 of which are known to cause disease .
Most of the mutations observed ( 65/78 ) are single base substitutions or SNPs , 11 deletions , 1 large and 10 small , and 2 insertions .
8 of the observed mutations are frameshift , 6 deletions and 2 insertions .
A 4 base pair insertion in exon 11 is observed in 80 % of Tay - Sachs disease presence in the Ashkenazi Jewish population .
The frameshift mutations lead to an early stop codon which is known to play a role in the disease in infants .
Delayed onset disease appears to be caused by 4 different mutations , one being a 3 base pair deletion .
SMITH – MAGENIS SYNDROME
Section::::Smith – Magenis syndrome .
Smith –
Magenis syndrome ( SMS ) is a complex syndrome involving intellectual disabilities , sleep disturbance , behavioural problems , and a variety of craniofacial , skeletal , and visceral anomalies .
The majority of SMS cases harbor an ~3.5 Mb common deletion that encompasses the retinoic acid induced-1 ( RAI1 ) gene .
Other cases illustrate variability in the SMS phenotype not previously shown for RAI1 mutation , including hearing loss , absence of self - abusive behaviours , and mild global delays .
Sequencing of RAI1 revealed mutation of a heptamericC - tract ( CCCCCCC ) in exon 3 resulting in frameshift mutations .
Of the seven reported frameshift mutations occurring in poly C - tracts in RAI1 , four cases ( ~57 % ) occur at this heptameric C - tract .
The results indicate that this heptameric C - tract is a preferential recombination hotspot insertion / deletions ( SNindels ) and therefore a primary target for analysis in patients suspected for mutations in RAI1 .
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY Section::::Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden death in young people , including trained athletes , and is caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins of the cardiac sarcomere .
Mutations in the Troponin C gene ( TNNC1 ) are a rare genetic cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
A recent study has indicated that a frameshift mutation ( c.363dupG or p . Gln122AlafsX30 ) in Troponin C was the cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ( and sudden cardiac death ) in a 19-year - old male .
CURES Section::::Cures .
Finding a cure for the diseases caused by frameshift mutations is rare .
Research into this is evident .
One example is a primary immunodeficiency ( PID ) , an inherited condition which can lead to an increase in infections .
There are 120 genes and 150 mutations that play a role in primary immunodeficiencies .
The standard treatment is currently gene therapy , but this is a highly risky treatment and can often lead to other diseases , such as leukemia .
Gene therapy procedures include modifying the zinc fringer nuclease fustion protein , cleaving both ends of the mutation , which in turn removes it from the sequence .
Antisense - oligonucleotide mediated exon skipping is another possibility for Duchenne muscular dystrophy .
This process allows for passing over the mutation so that the rest of the sequence remains in frame and the function of the protein stays intact .
This , however , does not cure the disease , just treats symptoms , and is only practical in structural proteins or other repetitive genes .
A third form of repair is revertant mosaicism , which is naturally occurring by creating a reverse mutation or a mutation at a second site that corrects the reading frame .
This reversion may happen by intragenic recombination , mitotic gene conversion , second site DNA slipping or site - specific reversion .
This is possible in several diseases , such as X - linked severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome , and Bloom syndrome .
There are no drugs or other pharmacogenomic methods that help with PIDs .
A European patent ( EP1369126A1 )
in 2003 by Bork records a method used for prevention of cancers and for the curative treatment of cancers and precancers such as DNA - mismatch repair deficient ( MMR ) sporadic tumours and HNPCC associated tumours .
The idea is to use immunotherapy with combinatorial mixtures of tumour - specific frameshift mutation - derived peptides to elicit a cytotoxic T - cell response specifically directed against tumour cells .
SEE ALSO
* Translational frameshift *
Mutation * Transcription ( genetics ) * Translation ( biology ) *
codon * protein * reading frame
* point mutation *
Crohn 's disease
* Tay – Sachs disease
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* NCBI dbSNP database — " a central repository for both single base nucleotide substitutions and short deletion and insertion polymorphisms " * Wise2 - aligns a protein against a DNA sequence allowing frameshifts and introns * FastY - compare a DNA sequence to a protein sequence database , allowing gaps and frameshifts * Path - tool that compares two frameshift proteins ( back - translation principle ) * HGMD - Human Genome Mutation Database