OREGON BOTTLE BILL
The Oregon Bottle Bill is a container - deposit legislation passed in the U.S. state of Oregon in 1971 and amended in 2007 and 2011 .
It requires glass , plastic or metal cans or bottles of all beverages except wine , liquor , dairy or plant - based milk , meal replacement beverages , and infant formula sold in Oregon to be returnable with a minimum refund value ( 10 cents as of July 1 , 2017 ) .
It is administered and enforced by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission .
The law is credited with reducing litter and increasing container recycling .
As a result , items which used to make up around 40 % of roadside litter now represent about 6 % .
With return rates averaging 90 % , another major benefit is in waste reduction and resource conservation , particularly for aluminum .
By comparison , states without similar bills recycle on average 33 % of their containers .
Beverage distributors retain all deposits not reclaimed by consumers .
Oregon 's 1971 Beverage Container Act ( ORS 459A.700 to 459A.740 ) was the first such legislation passed in the United States .
It went into effect on October 1 , 1972 .
APPLICABILITY Section::::Applicability .
Any beverage of the following kinds , 3 liters or less , sold in Oregon is required to carry a deposit , which as of July 1 , 2017 is 10 cents per container .
* Water and flavored water * * Beer or other malt beverages *
* Mineral waters , soda water and similar carbonated soft drinks .
*
Starting January 1 , 2018 , any other beverage ( including juice , coffee , nutritional supplements , sports drinks and energy drinks ) more than or equal to and less than equal to 1½ liters sold in Oregon is required to carry a deposit , is 10 cents per container .
Excepted are :
* distilled liquor
* * wine , including mead and hard cider over 8.5 % ABV
* * dairy milk , including chocolate milk , cultured milk such as kefir and buttermilk , and lactose free milk * * plant - based milks , including coconut milk ( but not coconut juice )
* * meal replacement beverages , like Boost and Ensure * * infant formula
* * vinegar ( except drinking vinegar )
* * flavoring and condiments , including juices not normally drunk without mixing , like lemon and lime juice
*
* concentrates and syrup * Deposit is initially collected by the manufacturer and charged at each transaction .
Unclaimed deposit is kept by the distributors .
RETAILER REQUIREMENTS Section::::Retailer requirements .
Retailers are required to refund deposit to consumer when they present containers .
The requirements are divided into two categories .
Retailers over 5,000 square feet and retailers under 5,000 square feet .
Retailers over 5,000 square feet , which include most supermarkets and thrift stores are legally required to redeem up to 144 cans per person per day provided that containers are from kinds of beverage they sell .
Kind means beer / malt beverage and soda , water / flavored water .
So , a sporting goods store that sells water and soda , but not beer , does not have to take beer cans .
Retailers under 5,000 square feet ( small shop , convenience stores and like ) are allowed to limit the quantity to 50 containers per person per day .
They can also limit them to the brand and size they sell .
Within these limitations , retailers are required to accept containers all hours they 're open for business
and it is unlawful for retailers to refuse containers unless : Bottle return machines are provided for retailers ' convenience .
Even when machines are broken , retailers continue to have legal obligations to accept containers even if they have to hand count them
A recent trend in many markets in Oregon has been for stores that were previously required to accept returns to remove bottle return machines and instead refer customers to " Bottle Drop " facilities while refusing to accept returns .
Many of these return facilities are located in remote industrial parks .
This has eliminated the retailer 's role in returns and freed up floor space in stores , but has had the result of many customers simply throwing containers away rather than contending with the expense and time commitment to drive them to a return facility .
CONTEXT Section::::Context . !
States first enactinga Bottle Bill !
year ! !
state Deposits on refillable glass bottles were the norm well before the 1930s , at which time the disposable steel beverage can began to slowly displace glass .
By 1960 , almost half of U.S. beer was in cans , while only five percent of soft drinks were not in bottles .
Vermont passed the first " bottle bill " in 1953 , but it only banned non - refillable bottles and did not introduce a deposit system .
It expired in 1957 after beer industry lobbying .
British Columbia enacted North America 's oldest beverage deposit system in 1970 .
Beverage containers constitute as much as 58 % of litter .
States which have adopted bottle deposits have reduced litter as much as 64 % .
The container deposit system cost averages 1.53 cents per container ( versus 1.25 cents for other collection systems ) and are more than two and a half times more effective at recycling containers .
Oregon 's bottle bill inspired similar laws in eight other states between 1972 and 1983 .
California activists attempted to pass a bottle bill beginning in the late 1970s but were blocked by recycling organizations .
A modified bill passed in 1986 .
In 1991 , Germany enacted an entirely different method which taxes manufacturers on the basis of the amount of packaging .
Many German packagers now participate in the Green Dot program as a result of this .
By 1968 , beer and soda companies were responsible for 173 million bottles and 263 million cans each year in Oregon .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before the formal 1971 Oregon Bottle Bill , Oregon had already set up a less formal bottle return system that most stores and some of the public cooperated with .
Inspired by the early Vermont bottle return system before it was repealed , Oregon 's limited system paid 1 cent for beer bottles and cans and 3 cents for soda bottles and cans , and was started in the mid-1950s , and lasted through the rest of the 50s , throughout the 1960s and into the early 70s until the more formal and expanded Bottle Bill was enacted .
The emphasis was on bottles , as bottlers were washed and re - used for fresh product sold to the public before health laws were enacted that stopped the re - wash system .
And because of the low payout for the return of bottles and cans , and in spite of various anti - litter PSA advertising campaigns on Oregon television , only a relatively small percentage of Oregonians participated in the return of bottles and cans , and thus many bottles and cans still littered Oregon 's highways and scenic areas throughout this entire early bottle - can recycling period .
Richard Chambers , a logging equipment salesman , collected litter during his hiking , climbing , and kayaking throughout the state .
In 1968 , he called Oregon State Representative Paul Hanneman , whom Chambers knew well , after he was inspired by a small newspaper article about British Columbia wanting to ban non - refundable bottles and cans .
Chambers wanted a deposit on bottles and cans to encourage people to return them to the store .
Chambers began a letter - writing campaign , using non - ordinary stationery and stamps to draw the attention of his intended audience .
Oregon House Bill 1157 was introduced and assigned to the House State and Federal Affairs Committee .
Chambers brought in people to testify for the bill , including a river guide to testify about the amount of beverage package litter in the water , and a farmer who lost four cows because of ingestion of glass and metal shards from beverage containers .
Beverage container materials companies and bottling companies fought the bill .
Hanneman offered the compromise of not banning non - returnables but instead requiring a five - cent deposit as an incentive for return .
By a 5 to 4 vote , the bill was sent to the House floor , where it fell 3 votes short of passage , with 27 of 60 members voting for it .
Governor Tom McCall had already offered his support for the bill , so Hanneman asked McCall to help sway the House 's vote in favor of passage .
McCall refused , advising that he did not want a Bottle Bill in that legislative session .
McCall planned to endorse the anti - littering campaign espoused by the Keep America Beautiful non - profit in 1970 and wait until 1971 to support the Bottle Bill .
It has been written that this delay was intentional on McCall 's part to make the bill his .
After its defeat , Chambers continued his letter writing campaign .
After McCall refused to back the Bottle Bill in 1969 , he sponsored the formation of non - profit SOLV — Stop Oregon Litter and Vandalism .
In 1971 , it was reported that 75 % of SOLV 's budget was derived from organizations opposing the bottle bill .
SOLV also received state funds .
In 1970 , McCall initiated his own campaign for the Bottle Bill .
Bill Chambers and Don Waggoner ( 1935–2016 ) worked to get the bill approved .
Among opponents of the bill were grocery stores who feared financial strains with the processing of returns .
John Piacentini , the owner of Plaid Pantry convenience stores , challenged people to return soda and beer bottles to his stores for a half cent .
Piacentini said he hoped to be buried in litter ; within two weeks , 150,000 cans were returned and McCall ordered National Guard troops to take the bottles and cans away .
This helped allay grocery stores ' fears .
The new bill , House Bill 1036 , banned non - returnables and placed a five - cent deposit on bottles and cans containing beer , malt beverage , mineral and soda waters and carbonated soft drinks .
More than 20 corporations sent lobbyists ( some from the eastern United States ) to fight the bill , and rumors of bribing state legislators circulated .
Oregon legislators were put off by what they considered condescending Eastern tactics .
One senator detailed her offer of a bribe while speaking on the Senate floor , which helped strengthen support for the Bottle Bill .
The law into effect on October 1 , 1972 .
In 1974 , the state reported that litter of beverage containers had been by reduced by 83 percent .
RECENT HISTORY Section::::Recent history .
In 1996 , voters rejected a ballot measure that would have extended the bottle bill .
In 2005 , Republican Party Representative Vicki Berger ( daughter of Chambers ) introduced another bill to extend the bottle bill , but it was defeated in the Senate .
On June 7 , 2007 , Governor Ted Kulongoski signed Senate Bill 707 into law , which added water bottles to the refund law .
The law went into effect January 1 , 2009 .
Of the nine states that had bottle bill laws at that time , only Maine , California , and Hawaii included water bottles .
The 2007 legislature also created a task force , charged with making recommendations for further updating of the Bottle Bill to the 2009 legislature .
Updates under consideration in the late 2000s included adding products like wine and juice bottles , and increasing the refund amount from 5 cents .
The Container Recycling Institute estimates that 125 million disposable water bottles were sold in Oregon in 2005 , more than the number of soft drink bottles , and the recycling rate for water bottles was 32 percent , compared with 82 percent for beer and soft drink bottles .
In 2016 , the Oregon Liquor Control Commission ( OLCC ) announced that the redemption value would be increased to 10 cents in April 2017 , the first - ever increase .
The change was triggered by a provision of state law enacted by the legislature in 2011 , which says that the redemption value must be increased to 10 cents if the return rate for containers falls below 80 percent for two consecutive years .
The return rate was 64.5 % in 2015 and 68.3 % in 2014 .
The next change came into effect in January 2018 , when almost all beverages were required to have a deposit .
Environmental groups are lobbying Oregon State lawmakers for the eventual inclusion of hard liquor and wine bottles .
SEE ALSO * Container - deposit legislation in the United States * Environment of the United States
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* State of Oregon 's website about the law
* Photo of Chambers Receiving an Environmental Award from McCall in 1974 * https://web.archive.org/web/20080910085315/http://www.deq.state.or.us/lq/pubs/factsheets/sw/ExpandedBottleBill.pdf