SITUS INVERSUS Situs inversus ( also called situs transversus or oppositus ) is a congenital condition in which the major visceral organs are reversed or mirrored from their normal positions .
The normal arrangement of internal organs is known as situs solitus while situs inversus is generally the mirror image of situs solitus .
Although cardiac problems are more common than in the general population , most people with situs inversus have no medical symptoms or complications resulting from the condition , and until the advent of modern medicine it was usually undiagnosed .
Situs inversus is found in about 0.01 % of the population , or about 1 person in 10,000 .
In the most common situation , situs inversus totalis , it involves complete transposition ( right to left reversal ) of all of the abdominal organs .
The heart is not in its usual position in the left chest , but is on the right , a condition known as dextrocardia ( literally , right - hearted ) .
Because the relationship between the organs is not changed , most people with situs inversus have no medical symptoms or complications , although they should wear a medical identification tag to warn emergency medical staff that the patient 's internal organs are reversed from normal so they can act accordingly , e.g. by listening for a heartbeat on the right rather than left side of the chest .
In rarer cases such as situs ambiguus or heterotaxy , situs can not be determined .
In these patients , the liver may be midline , the spleen absent or multiple , and the bowel malrotated .
Often , structures are duplicated or absent altogether .
This is more likely to cause medical problems than situs inversus totalis .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
In the absence of congenital heart defects , individuals with situs inversus are phenotypically normal , and can live normal healthy lives , without any complications related to their medical condition .
There is a 5–10 % prevalence of congenital heart disease in individuals with situs inversus totalis , most commonly transposition of the great vessels .
The incidence of congenital heart disease is 95 % in situs inversus with levocardia .
Many people with situs inversus totalis are unaware of their unusual anatomy until they seek medical attention for an unrelated condition , such as a rib fracture or a bout of appendicitis .
The condition may also be discovered during the administration of certain medicines or during tests such as a barium meal or enema .
The reversal of the organs may then lead to some confusion , as many signs and symptoms will be on the atypical side .
For example , if an individual with situs inversus develops appendicitis , they will present to the physician with lower left abdominal pain , since that is where their appendix lies .
Thus , in the event of a medical problem , the knowledge that the individual has situs inversus can expedite diagnosis .
People with this rare condition should inform their doctors before an examination , so the doctor can redirect their search for heart sounds and other signs .
Wearing a medical identification tag can help inform health care providers in the event the person is unable to communicate .
Situs inversus also complicates organ transplantation operations as donor organs will more likely come from situs solitus ( normal ) donors .
As hearts and livers are chiral , geometric problems arise placing an organ into a cavity shaped in the mirror image .
For example , a person with situs inversus who requires a heart transplant needs all the vessels to the transplant donor heart reattached to their existing ones .
However , the orientation of these vessels in a person with situs inversus is reversed , necessitating steps so that the blood vessels join properly .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Situs inversus is generally an autosomal recessive genetic condition , although it can be X - linked or found in identical " mirror image " twins .
About 25 % of individuals with situs inversus have an underlying condition known as primary ciliary dyskinesia ( PCD ) .
PCD is a dysfunction of the cilia that manifests itself during the embryologic phase of development .
Normally functioning cilia determine the position of the internal organs during early embryological development , and so embryos with PCD have a 50 % chance of developing situs inversus .
If they do , they are said to have Kartagener syndrome , characterized by the triad of situs inversus , chronic sinusitis , and bronchiectasis .
Cilia are also responsible for clearing mucus from the lung , and the dysfunction causes increased susceptibility to lung infections .
Kartagener syndrome can also manifest with male infertility as functional cilia are required for proper sperm flagella function .
EFFECT
ON ANATOMY Section::::Effect on anatomy .
The condition affects all major structures within the thorax and abdomen .
Generally , the organs are simply transposed through the sagittal plane .
The heart is located on the right side of the thorax , the stomach and spleen on the right side of the abdomen and the liver and gall bladder on the left side .
The heart 's normal right atrium occurs on the left , and the left atrium is on the right .
The lung anatomy is reversed and the left lung has three lobes while the right lung has two lobes .
The intestines and other internal structures are also reversed from the normal , and the blood vessels , nerves , and lymphatics are also transposed .
If the heart is swapped to the right side of the thorax , it is known as " situs inversus with dextrocardia " or " situs inversus totalis " .
If the heart remains on the normal left side of the thorax , a much rarer condition ( 1 in 2,000,000 of the general population ) , it is known as " situs inversus with levocardia " or " situs inversus incompletus " .
Situs inversus of the optic disc may occur unilaterally or bilaterally , associated with reduced binocularity and stereoacuity resembling monofixation syndrome .
It is characterized by emergence of the retinal vessels in an anomalous direction ( from the nasal rather than the temporal aspect ) with dysversion ( tilt ) of the optic disc .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Diagnosis of situs inversus can be made using common radiographic imaging techniques such as ultrasound , computed tomography ( CT ) , and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
No treatment needed , as the subject is otherwise healthy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Dextrocardia ( the heart being located on the right side of the thorax ) was first seen and drawn by Leonardo da Vinci in 1452–1519 , and then recognised by Marco Aurelio Severino in 1643 .
However , situs inversus was first described more than a century later by Matthew Baillie .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term situs inversus is a short form of the Latin phrase " situs inversus viscerum " , meaning " inverted position of the internal organs " .
NOTABLE CASES Section::::Notable cases .
Notable individuals with documented cases of situs inversus include : * Enrique Iglesias , a Spanish singer , songwriter , actor and record producer .
* Catherine O'Hara , Canadian - American actress , writer and comedian .
*
Donny Osmond , American singer , actor and former teen idol .
He famously had his appendicitis originally misdiagnosed due to his reversed organs .
* Randy Foye , an American basketball player in the NBA .
He has suffered no discernible complications , and the condition is not expected to jeopardize his career as a professional athlete , as all his organs are in reverse .
* Tim Miller , director of the Ashtanga Yoga Center in Carlsbad , California . SEE ALSO * Situs solitus
* Situs ambiguus
*
Ectopia cordis
* Asplenia * Polysplenia * Chirality ( mathematics ) * Johann Friedrich Meckel , the Elder * List of fictional characters with situs inversus REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
this book was the 2003 Aventis winner and has a description of the history behind the discovery of this medical condition .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Chest X - ray & CT scan Radiology Teaching File