FOUR - LEAF CLOVER
The four - leaf clover is a rare variation of the common three - leaf clover .
According to traditional superstition , such clovers bring good luck , though it is not clear when or how that superstition got started .
The earliest mention of " Fower - leafed or purple grasse " is from 1640 and simply says that it was kept in gardens because it was " good for the purples in children or others " .
A description from 1869 says that four - leaf clovers were " gathered at night - time during the full moon by sorceresses , who mixed it with vervain and other ingredients , while young girls in search of a token of perfect happiness made quest of the plant by day " .
The first reference to luck might be from an 11-year - old girl , who wrote in an 1877 letter to St. Nicholas Magazine , " Did the fairies ever whisper in your ear , that a four - leaf clover brought good luck to the finder ? "
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
It is claimed that there are approximately 10,000 three - leaf clovers for every four - leaf clover .
However , an actual survey of over 5 million clovers found the real frequency to be closer to 5,000 to 1 , double the said probability .
Even so , this probability has not deterred collectors who have reached records as high as 170,000 four - leaf clovers in a lifetime .
However , the world record for four - leaf clovers in a single day is at least 166 , with the record for one hour being 166 , set by an American named Katie Borka on June 23 , 2018 .
Clovers can have more than four leaves .
Five - leaf clovers are less commonly found naturally than four - leaf clovers ; however , they , too , have been successfully cultivated .
Some four - leaf clover collectors , particularly in Ireland , regard the five - leaf clover , known as a rose clover , as a particular prize .
In exceptionally rare cases , clovers are able to grow with and more in nature .
The most leaves ever found on a single clover stem ( Trifolium repens L. ) is 56 and was discovered by Shigeo Obara of Hanamaki City , Iwate , Japan , on 10 May 2009 .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
It is debated whether the fourth leaf is caused genetically or environmentally .
Its relative rarity ( 1 in 5,000 clovers ) suggests a possible recessive gene appearing at a low frequency .
Alternatively , four - leaf clovers could be caused by somatic mutation or a developmental error of environmental causes .
They could also be caused by the interaction of several genes that happen to segregate in the individual plant .
It is possible all four explanations could apply to individual cases .
This means that multiple four - leaf clovers could be found in the same clover plant .
Researchers from the University of Georgia have reported finding the gene that turns ordinary three - leaf clovers into the coveted four - leaf types .
Masked by the three - leaf gene and strongly influenced by environmental condition , molecular markers now make it possible to detect the presence of the gene for four - leaves and for breeders to work with it .
The results of the study , which also located two other leaf traits in the white - clover genome , were reported in the July / August 2010 edition of Crop Science , published by the Crop Science Society of America .
The other leaf traits , the red fleck mark and red midrib , a herringbone pattern that runs down the center of each leaflet in a bold red color , were mapped to nearby locations , resolving a century - old question as to whether these leaf traits were controlled by one gene or two separate genes .
White clover has many genes that affect leaf color and shape , and the three in the study were very rare .
These traits can be quite attractive , particularly if combined with others , and can turn clover into an ornamental plant for use in flower beds .
There are reports of farms in the US which specialize in four - leaf clovers , producing as many as 10,000 a day ( to be sealed in plastic as " lucky charms " ) by introducing a genetically engineered ingredient to the plants to encourage the aberration ( there are , however , widely available cultivars that regularly produce leaves with multiple leaflets – see below ) .
These are associated to Saint Patricks Day .
MULTI - LEAVED CULTIVARS Section::::Multi - leaved cultivars .
There are some cultivars of white clover ( Trifolium repens ) which regularly produce more than three leaflets , including purple - leaved T. repens " Purpurascens Quadrifolium " and green - leaved T. repens " Quadrifolium " .
Some clovers have more spade shape leaves , rather than the usual rounded ones .
This may be another plant , or another genetic mutation .
Some genetic mutations in clovers include spade - like shaped leaves or a dotted rusty colour on the leaves .
Trifolium repens " Good Luck " is a cultivar which has three , four , or five green , dark - centered leaflets per leaf .
OTHER SPECIES
Section::::Other species .
Other plants may be mistaken for , or misleadingly sold as , " four - leaf clovers " ; for example , Oxalis tetraphylla is a species of wood sorrel with leaves resembling a four - leaf clover .
Other species that have been sold as " four - leaf clovers " include Marsilea quadrifolia .
SYMBOLIC USAGE * Italian automobile maker Alfa Romeo used to paint a four - leaf clover , or quadrifoglio , on the side of their racing cars .
This tradition started in the 1923 Targa Florio race , when driver Ugo Sivocci decorated his car with a green clover on a white background .
* Los Angeles - based space exploration company SpaceX includes a four - leaf clover on each space mission embroidered patch as a good luck charm .
Inclusion of the clover has become a regular icon on SpaceX 's flight patches ever since the company 's first successful Falcon 1 rocket launch in 2008 , which was the first mission to feature a clover " for luck " on its patch .
* Celtic Football Club , an association football team from Glasgow , Scotland , have used the four leaf clover as the club 's official badge for over 40 years .
* Former Japanese game developer studio Clover Studio used a four - leaf clover as their logo .
* Several businesses and organisations use a four - leaf clover in their logos to signify Celtic origins .
*
The global network of youth organizations 4-H uses a green four - leaf clover with a white H on each leaf .
* The logo of the New Jersey Lottery features an outline of the state in white on a green four - leaf clover printed on a lottery draw machine ball .
MEANINGS Section::::Meanings .
Some folk traditions assign a different attribute to each leaf of a clover .
The first leaf represents hope , the second stands for faith , the third is for love and the fourth leaf brings luck to the finder .
A fifth leaf represents money , but there is no meaning as yet for the sixth leaf and above .
Some reports claim six to be fame and seven to be longevity , though the notions ' origination is unknown .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How to Find a Four Leaf Clover