DOCKING ( DOG )
Docking is the removal of portions of an animal 's tail .
While docking and bobbing are more commonly used to refer to removal of the tail , the term cropping is used in reference to the ears .
Tail docking occurs in one of two ways .
The first involves constricting the blood supply to the tail with a rubber ligature for a few days until the tail falls off .
The second involves the severance of the tail with surgical scissors or a scalpel .
The length to which tails are docked varies by breed , and is often specified in the breed standard .
At least 170 dog breeds have naturally occurring bobtail lines .
These appear similar to docked dogs but are a distinct naturally occurring phenotype .
HISTORY PURPOSE Section::::History .
Section::::Purpose .
Historically , tail docking was thought to prevent rabies , strengthen the back , increase the animal 's speed , and prevent injuries when ratting , fighting , and baiting .
In early Georgian times in the United Kingdom a tax was levied upon working dogs with tails , so many types of dog were docked to avoid this tax .
The tax was repealed in 1796 but that did not stop the practice from persisting .
Tail docking is done in modern times either for prophylactic , therapeutic , or cosmetic purposes .
For dogs that work in the field , such as some hunting dogs , herding dogs , or terrier dogs , tails can collect burrs and foxtails , causing pain and infection and , due to the tail 's wagging , may be subject to abrasion or other injury while moving through dense brush or thickets .
Bones in the tail can be broken by impact in the field , causing spinal injury to the tail , or terriers can become stuck underground , necessitating being pulled out by the tail , in which case the docked tail protects the dog from spinal injury or trauma .
MODERN PRACTICE Section::::Modern practice .
Docking of puppies younger than 10 to 14 days old is routinely carried out by both breeders and veterinarians without anesthesia .
Opponents of these procedures state that most tail dockings are done for aesthetic reasons rather than health concerns and are unnecessarily painful for the dog .
They point out that even non - working show or pet dogs are routinely docked .
As a result , tail defects that docking proponents claim makes docking necessary in the first place are perpetuated in the breeds .
They point to the many breeds of working dogs with long tails that are not traditionally docked , including English Pointers , Setters , Herding dogs , and Foxhounds .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Robert Wansborough argued in a 1996 paper that docking tails puts dogs at a disadvantage in several ways .
First , dogs use their tails to communicate with other dogs ( and with people ) ; a dog without a tail might be significantly handicapped in conveying fear , caution , aggression , playfulness , and so on .
Certain breeds use their tails as rudders when swimming , and possibly for balance when running , so active dogs with docked tails might be at a disadvantage compared to their tailed peers .
In 2007 , Stephen Leaver , a graduate student at the University of Victoria , published a paper on tail docking which found that tail length was important in the transmission of social cues .
The study found that dogs with shorter tails ( docked tails ) would be approached with caution , as if the approaching dog was unsure of the emotional state of the docked dog .
The study goes on to suggest that dogs with docked tails may grow up to be more aggressive .
The reasoning postulated by Tom Reimchen , UVic Biologist and supervisor of the study , was that dogs who grew up without being able to efficiently transmit social cues would grow up to be more anti - social and thus more aggressive .
Wansborough also investigated seven years of records from an urban veterinary practice to demonstrate that undocked tails result in less harm than docked tails .
INFLUENCE OF KENNEL CLUBS
Section::::Influence of kennel clubs .
Critics point out that kennel clubs with breed standards that do not make allowance for uncropped or undocked dogs put pressure on owners and breeders to continue the practice .
Although the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) says that it has no rules that require docking or that make undocked animals ineligible for the show ring , standards for many breeds put undocked animals at a disadvantage for the conformation show ring .
The American breed standard for boxers , for example , recommends that an undocked tail be " severely penalized . "
The AKC position is that ear cropping and tail docking are " acceptable practices integral to defining and preserving breed character and/or enhancing good health , " even though the practice is currently opposed by the American Veterinary Medical Association .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
Today , many countries ban cropping and docking because they consider the practices unnecessary , painful , cruel or mutilation .
In Europe , the cropping of ears is prohibited in all countries that have ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Pet Animals .
Some countries that ratified the convention made exceptions for tail docking .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Show dogs are no longer docked in the United Kingdom .
A dog docked before 28 March 2007 in Wales and 6 April 2007 in England may continue to be shown at all shows in England , Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland throughout its life .
A dog docked on , or after , the above dates , regardless of where it was docked , may not be shown at shows in England and Wales where the public is charged a fee for admission .
Where a working dog has been docked in England and Wales under the respective regulations , however , it may be shown where the public is charged a fee , so long as it is shown " only to demonstrate its working ability " .
It will thus be necessary to show working dogs in such a way as to demonstrate their working ability and not conformity to a standard .
A dog legally docked in England , Wales , Northern Ireland , or abroad may be shown at any show in Scotland or Northern Ireland .
In England and Wales , ear cropping is illegal , and no dog with cropped ears can take part in any Kennel Club event ( including agility and other non - conformation events ) .
Tail docking is also illegal , except for a few working breeds ; this exemption applies only when carried out by a registered veterinary surgeon .
The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons ( RCVS ) , the regulatory body for veterinary surgeons in the United Kingdom , has stated they consider tail docking to be " an unjustified mutilation and unethical unless done for therapeutic or acceptable prophylactic reasons " .
In 1995 a veterinary surgeon was brought before the RCVS disciplinary council for " disgraceful professional conduct " for carrying out cosmetic docking .
The surgeon claimed that the docking was performed to prevent future injuries , and the case was dismissed for lack of evidence otherwise .
Although cosmetic docking is still considered unacceptable by the RCVS , no further disciplinary action has been taken against vets performing docking .
The Animal Welfare Act 2006 makes the docking of dogs ' tails a criminal offence , except for working dogs such as those used by the police force , the military , rescue services , pest control , and those used in connection with lawful animal shooting .
Three options were presented to Parliament in March 2006 with Parliament opting for the second :
* An outright ban on docking dogs ' tails ( opposed by a majority of 278 to 267 ) * A ban on docking dogs ' tails with an exception for working dogs ( supported by a majority of 476 to 63 )
* Retention of the status quo .
Those convicted of unlawful docking are liable to a fine of up to £ 20,000 , up to 51 weeks of imprisonment or both .
In Northern Ireland legislation known as Welfare of Animals Act ( Northern Ireland ) 2011 made tail docking illegal except for certain working dogs . .
In Scotland docking of any breed is illegal .
The Animal Health and Welfare ( Scotland ) Act 2006 contains provisions prohibiting the mutilation of domesticated animals .
However , the Scottish Government has carried out a consultation on this issue and have declared that they intend to legislate to bring the law in Scotland in line with the law in England and Wales , meaning that there will be an exemption for certain breeds of working dogs .
This is due to the increase in serious spinal trauma reported in field dogs with undocked tails .
LEGAL STATUS OF DOG TAIL DOCKING AND EAR
CROPPING BY COUNTRY
Section::::Legal status of dog tail docking and ear cropping by country . !
Country !
Status !
Ban / restriction
date(if applicable )
Canada has no federal law banning pet cosmetic surgery .
The Canadian Veterinary Medical Association opposes all cosmetic practices .
Two provinces have provincial legislation against tail docking , ear cropping , and most cosmetic surgeries :
* Illegal since 2015 in Prince Edward Island
* Illegal in Newfoundland and Labrador under the Newfoundland and Labrador Regulation 35/12 on 2 May 2012 .
Three provincial veterinary associations have bans on their veterinarians performing tail docking , ear cropping , and most cosmetic surgeries : * Since 2008 by the New Brunswick Veterinary Medical Association ( NBVMA ) * Since 2010 by the Nova Scotia Veterinary Medical Association ( NSVMA ) * To take effect first of January 2017 , a total ban on cosmetic surgery , by the Ordre des médecins vétérinaires du Québec ( OMVQ ) Three Provincial veterinary associations with ear cropping bans are open to a future ban of tail docking :
*
Since 2013 the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association banned cosmetic ear cropping ( bylaw 33.6 )
*
Since 2015 the College of Veterinarians of British Columbia ( CVBC ) )
*
Since 2012 , Bylaw 31 , by Manitoba Veterinary Medical Association ( MVMA ) 1 October 2018 SEE ALSO
* Debeaking
* Dubbing ( poultry )
* Declawing
* Natural bobtail REFERENCES Section::::References .
EFRA -
A.D.A. submission https://web.archive.org/web/20110126050347/http://www.anti-dockingalliance.co.uk/page_18.htm
EXTERNAL LINKS
SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
*
Leaver , S. and T. E. Reimchen .
2008 .
Behavioural responses of dogs to different tail lengths on a robotic dog replica : testing the effects of tail docking .
Behaviour 145 : 377 - 390 .
* Artelle , K. A. , L. K. Dumoulin and T. E. Reimchen .
2010 .
Behavioural responses of dogs to asymmetrical tail - wagging of a robotic dog replica .
Laterality : Asymmetries of Body , Brain and Cognition , 2010 PRO - DOCKING ORGANIZATIONS
* Association for the Preservation of Purebred Dogs * The Council for Dock Breeds
* BC Cropping Coalition ANTI - DOCKING ORGANIZATIONS
* Anti - Docking Alliance - A.D.A.