LOFOTEN
Lofoten ( ) is an archipelago and a traditional district in the county of Nordland , Norway .
Lofoten is known for a distinctive scenery with dramatic mountains and peaks , open sea and sheltered bays , beaches and untouched lands .
Though lying within the Arctic Circle , the archipelago experiences one of the world 's largest elevated temperature anomalies relative to its high latitude .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Lofoten ( ) was the original name of the island Vestvågøya .
The first element is ló ( i.e. , " lynx " ) and the last element is derived from Norse fótr ( i.e. , " foot " ) , as the shape of the island must have been compared with that of a lynx 's foot .
( The old name of the neighbouring island Flakstadøya was Vargfót , " wolf 's foot " , from vargr " wolf " .
See also Ofoten . )
HISTORY Section::::History .
" There is evidence of human settlement extending back at least 11,000 years in Lofoten , and the earliest archaeological sites ... are only about 5,500 years old , at the transition from the early to late Stone Age . "
Iron Age agriculture , livestock , and significant human habitation can be traced back to The town of Vågan ( Norse Vágar ) is the first known town formation in northern Norway .
It existed in the early Viking Age , maybe earlier , and was located on the southern coast on eastern Lofoten , near today 's village Kabelvåg in Vågan municipality .
However , the Lofotr Viking Museum with the reconstructed 83-meter - long longhouse ( the largest known ) is located near Borg on Vestvågøy , which has many archeological finds from the Iron Age and Viking Age .
The islands have for more than 1,000 years been the centre of great cod fisheries , especially in winter , when the cod migrates south from the Barents Sea and gathers in Lofoten to spawn .
Bergen in southwestern Norway was for a long time the hub for further export south to different parts of Europe , particularly so when trade was controlled by the Hanseatic League .
In the lowland areas , particularly Vestvågøy , agriculture plays a significant role , as it has done since the Bronze Age .
Lofotr was originally the name of the island of Vestvågøy only .
Later it became the name of the chain of islands .
The chain of islands with its pointed peaks looks like a lynx foot from the mainland .
In Norwegian , it is always a singular .
Another name one might come across , is " Lofotveggen " or the Lofoten wall .
The archipelago looks like a closed wall when seen from elevated points around Bodø or when arriving from the sea , some long , and high .
In March , 1941 the islands were raided by British Commandos during Operation Claymore , and in a subsequent diversionary attack to support the Vaagso raid in December .
As of 2017 , the islands attract one million tourists a year .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Lofoten is located at the 68th and 69th parallels north of the Arctic Circle in North Norway .
It is known for its natural environment within Norway .
Lofoten encompasses the municipalities of Vågan , Vestvågøy , Flakstad , Moskenes , Værøy , and Røst .
The principal islands , running from north to south are : * Southern tip of Hinnøya .
* Southern 60 % ( approx . )
of Austvågøy ( in total ) * Gimsøya ( ) * Vestvågøy ( ) * Flakstadøya ( ) * Moskenesøya ( )
Further to the south are the small and isolated islands of Værøy ( ) and
Røst ( ) .
The total land area amounts to , and the population totals 24,500 .
Many will argue that Hinnøya , the northern part of Austvågøy and several hundred smaller islands , skerries and rocks to the east of Austvågøy are also part of the Lofoten complex .
Historically , the territorial definition of Lofoten has changed significantly .
Between the mainland and the Lofoten archipelago lies the vast , open Vestfjorden , and to the north is Vesterålen .
The principal towns in Lofoten are Leknes in Vestvågøy and Svolvær in Vågan .
The Lofoten Islands are characterised by their mountains and peaks , sheltered inlets , stretches of seashore and large virgin areas .
The highest mountain in Lofoten is Higravstinden ( in Austvågøy ; the Møysalen National Park just northeast of Lofoten has mountains reaching .
The famous Moskstraumen ( Malstrøm ) system of tidal eddies is located in western Lofoten , and is indeed the root of the term maelstrom .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
Geologically , Lofoten is considered part of the Western Gneiss Region of Norway .
The high relief and irregular surfaces of Lofoten has been attributed to etching that took place during the Mesozoic Era .
Evidence of this would be the kaolinite found at some locations .
To the northwest the Lofoten archipelago is bounded by the NE – SW - trending West Lofoten Border Fault .
This is a normal fault whose fault scarp has been eroded forming a strandflat .
The sea around Lofoten is known to host significant oil reserves .
The reserves amount to 1.3 bn barrels .
Oil extraction in the Lofoten area is however prohibited .
WILDLIFE Section::::Wildlife .
The sea is rich with life , and the world 's largest deep water coral reef , called the Røst Reef , is located west of Røst .
Approximately 70 % of all fish caught in the Norwegian and Barents seas use its islands ' waters as a breeding ground .
Lofoten has a high density of sea eagles and cormorants , and millions of other sea birds , among them the colourful puffin .
It has mainland Europe 's largest seabird colony .
Otters are common , and there are moose on the largest islands .
There are some woodlands with downy birch and rowan .
There are no native conifer forests in Lofoten , but some small areas with private spruce plantations .
Sorbus hybrida ( Rowan whitebeam ) and Malus sylvestris occur in Lofoten , but not further north .
The animals mistaken for the extinct great auk turned out to be some of the nine king penguins released around Norway 's Lofoten Islands in August 1936 , there until at least 1944 .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Lofoten features a subpolar oceanic climate ( Cfc ) under the Köppen climate classification .
Winter temperatures in Lofoten are very mild considering its location north of the Arctic Circle – Lofoten has the largest positive temperature anomaly in the world relative to latitude .
This is a result of the Gulf Stream and its extensions : the North Atlantic Current and the Norwegian Current .
Røst and Værøy are the most northerly locations in the world where average temperatures are above freezing all year .
May and June are the driest months , while October has three times as much precipitation .
The warmest recording in Svolvær is .
Strong winds can occur in late autumn and winter .
Snow and sleet are not uncommon in winter , the mountains can have substantial amounts of snow , and in some winters , avalanches might come down from steep mountain slopes .
Two of the top ten deadliest rainstorms ever recorded passed through Lofoten .
In Svolvær , the sun is above the horizon continuously ( " midnight sun " ) from 25 May to 17 July , and in winter the sun does not rise from 4 December to 7 January .
In Leknes , the sun is above the horizon from 26 May to 17 July , and in winter the sun does not rise from 9 December to 4 January .
The temperature in the sea has been recorded since 1935 .
At depth in the sea near Skrova , water temperatures varies from a low of in March to in August , some years peaking above .
November is around .
At a depth of , the temperature is near all year .
SPORT MOUNTAINEERING AND ROCK
CLIMBING Section::::Sport .
Section::::Mountaineering and rock climbing .
Lofoten offers many rock climbing and mountaineering opportunities .
It has 24 hours of daylight in the summer and has Alpine - style ridges , summits and glaciers , but at a height of less than .
The main centre for rock climbing is Henningsvær on Austvågøya .
The main areas for mountaineering and climbing are on Austvågøy and Moskenesøya .
Moskenesøya features remote and serious mountaineering whereas Austvågøy is very popular area for rock climbing .
For more information , see the walking guide by Dyer and the rock climbing guidebook by Craggs and Enevold ( see references ) .
SURFING
Section::::Surfing .
Unstad is one of its better known locations for surfing .
CYCLING Section::::Cycling .
There is a well marked cycling route that goes from Å in the south and continues past Fiskebøl in the north .
The route is part public road , part cycle - path with the option to bypass all of the tunnels by either cycle - path ( tunnels through mountains ) or boat .
Traffic is generally light , although in July there may be a lot of campervans .
Some of the more remote sections are on gravel roads .
There is a dedicated cycling ferry which sails between Ballstad and Nusfjord , allowing cyclists to avoid the long , steep Nappstraum tunnel .
The route hugs the coastline for most of its length where it is generally flat .
As it turns inland through the mountain passes there are a couple of climbs .
The Lofoten Insomnia Cycling Race takes place every year around midsummer , possible in the midnight sun , but surely in 24-hr daylight , along the whole Lofoten archipelago .
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Transportation .
The European road E10 connects the larger islands of Lofoten with bridges and undersea tunnels .
The E10 road also connects Lofoten to the mainland of Norway through the Lofast road connection , which was officially opened on December 1 , 2007 .
There are several daily bus services between the islands of Lofoten and between Lofoten and the mainland along E10 .
Lofoten is also served by a number of small airports :
* Leknes Airport ( 101,757 passengers in 2014 )
* Svolvær Airport , Helle ( 74,496 passengers in 2014 )
* Røst Airport ( 9,889 passengers in 2014 ) , which mainly offers flights to Bodø .
*
A heliport at Værøy ( 9,420 passengers in 2014 )
* Stokmarknes Airport , Skagen ( 93,782 passengers in 2016 ) is located in Vesterålen .
* Harstad / Narvik Airport , Evenes has direct flights to Oslo and Trondheim .
Bodø is often used as a hub for travel to Lofoten .
In addition to air travel there is a ferry connecting Bodø to Moskenes .
There is also a ferry connecting Svolvær to Skutvik in Hamarøy , with road connection east to E6 .
Hurtigruten calls at Stamsund and Svolvær .
IN POPULAR
CULTURE LITERATURE * Edgar Allan Poe 's short story " A Descent into the Maelström " tells the story of a man who survived his ship being drawn into and swallowed by Moskstraumen .
* Jules Verne 's novel Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea ( 1870 ) concludes with the Nautilus fallen into the Maelström , and Prof. Aronnax , Conseil and Ned Land , who had been attempting to escape when the Nautilus began its fall , washed up on an island in the Lofotens .
* Johan Bojer 's novel
The Last of the Vikings ( 1922 ) tells the story of the Lofoten cod fishermen .
*
In Nikos Kavvadias 's poem
" The pilot Nagel " , pilot Nagel 's birthplace was the Lofoten islands .
*
In Angela Green 's novel The Colour of Water , much of the action takes place in Å i Lofoten and climaxes at the Maelstrom .
*
In Ole Edvart Rølvaag 's novel Giants in the Earth , the Norwegian protagonists settling in Dakota Territory are immigrants from Lofoten .
*
In Thomas Campbell 's poem Ode to Winter FILMS
*
In the film Maelström , Lofoten is where the ashes of Annstein Karson are distributed .
PAINTINGS Section::::In popular culture .
Section::::Paintings .
The islands of the Lofoten archipelago are known for their natural environment .
The area has rugged landscape and unique lighting .
Consequently , the islands have long served as an inspiration for artists .
Norwegian painter , Gunnar Berg was known for his paintings of his native Lofoten .
He principally painted scenes of the everyday life of the local fishermen .
Other artists whose work has been associated with Lofoten include Adelsteen Normann , Otto Sinding , Christian Krohg , Theodor Kittelsen , and Lev Lagorio .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In 2004 , Nurse with Wound broadcast 24 unexpected radio transmissions from the Lofoten Islands , whose sounds were sourced from the environment and objects found in Lofoten .
These recordings are included on their three releases entitled Shipwreck Radio .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
In the 2015 video game , , a village is named Lofoten within the Norse / Celtic inspired archipelago , Skellige .
GALLERY
PHOTOGRAPHS
LOFOTEN IN ART SEE ALSO
* Atlantic cod *
Stockfish *
" A Descent into the Maelström " , story by
Edgar Allan Poe
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The first Lofoten website ( 1996 ) with special emphasis on the islands of Moskenes and Flakstad .
* Unesco World Heritage – Lofoten archipelago on the tentative list
* Hiking and trekking portal of the Lofoten Islands