MY OLD MAN 'S
A DUSTMAN
" My Old Man 's a Dustman " is a song first recorded by the British skiffle singer Lonnie Donegan .
It reached number one in the British , Irish , Australian , Canadian , and New Zealand singles charts in 1960 .
The chorus of the song is : COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
The song was written by Lonnie Donegan , Peter Buchanan ( Donegan 's manager between 1956 and 1962 ) , and Beverly Thorn ; Thorn was not credited on the original release .
According to his autobiography , Beverley Thorn was a pseudonym of Leslie Bricusse , the songwriter who wrote hit shows with Anthony Newley .
It probably has its origins in "
My Father Was a Fireman " , a song sung by
British World War I troops .
The two songs share a lyrical similarity in their reference to " gorblimey trousers " .
A song beginning with the line
" My old man 's a dustman " , but otherwise sharing no lyrics with Donegan 's , is recorded as a playground song in the 1956 novel My Old Man 's a Dustman by Wolf Mankowitz .
This song tells of the exploits of the protagonist at the Battle of Mons .
A version concerning a football game and beginning " My old man 's a scaffie [ dustman or street - sweeper , from scavenger]/He wears a scaffie 's hat " ( echoing the first two lines of Donegan 's song ) is recorded as a Scottish playground song during the 1950s .
A very similar song , beginning " My old man 's a baker " , is recorded in Chester - le - Street in 1967 .
All of these songs share the same metric structure .
The melody is borrowed from Stravinsky 's Petrushka .
The song represented a change in style for Donegan , away from American folk and towards British music hall .
SINGLE RELEASE
Section::::Single release .
On 16 March 1960 , through Pye Records in the UK , Donegan released a version of the song recorded live at the Gaumont cinema in Doncaster just a few weeks earlier , on 20 February .
The B - side was a version of the English folk song " The Golden Vanity " .
The single reached number one in the UK Singles Chart on 31 March and maintained that position for four weeks .
It also reached number one in Ireland , Australia and New Zealand and on the Canadian CHUM Chart , selling over a million copies in total .
COVER VERSIONS
Section::::Cover versions .
In 1960 , a Dutch version was released by Toby Rix .
The song was performed by the Bee Gees on the Australian TV show Bandstand in 1963 .
Also in 1963 , a parody version , " My Old Man 's An All - Black " , was released in New Zealand by the Howard Morrison Quartet and , in the US , the Smothers Brothers included a parody based on the song on their LP Think Ethnic .
In 1966 , The Irish Rovers included a version of the song on their LP
The First of the Irish Rovers .
A version titled " My Old Man 's a Provo " became one of the most popular Irish republican rebel folk songs in the latter part of the twentieth century .
REFERENCES