KENTUCKY COFFEETREE
The Kentucky coffeetree , Gymnocladus dioicus , is a tree in the subfamily Caesalpinioideae of the pea family Fabaceae , native to the Midwest and Upper South of North America .
The seed may be roasted and used as a substitute for coffee beans ; however , unroasted pods and seeds are toxic .
The wood from the tree is used by cabinetmakers and carpenters .
From 1976 to 1994 the Kentucky coffeetree was the state tree of Kentucky , after which the tulip poplar was returned to that designation .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The tree varies from 18 to 21 meters ( 60–70 feet ) high with a spread of 12–15 meters ( 40–50 feet ) and a trunk up to one meter ( 3 feet ) in diameter .
The tree grows at a medium rate with height increases of anywhere from 12 " to 24 " per year .
A 10-year - old sapling will stand about 4 meters ( 13 feet ) tall .
It usually separates 3 to 4½ meters ( 10–15 feet ) from the ground into three or four divisions which spread slightly and form a narrow pyramidal head ; or when crowded by other trees , sending up one tall central branchless shaft to the height of 15–21 m ( 50–70 ft ) .
Branches are stout , pithy , and blunt ; roots are fibrous .
The Kentucky coffeetree is a moderately fast - growing tree , and male trees are often grown in parks and along city streets for ornamental purposes .
The tree is typically fairly short - lived , healthy trees living from 100 to 150 years .
The Kentucky coffeetree sheds its leaves early during the fall and appears bare for up to 6 months .
The naked appearance of the tree is reflected through the Kentucky coffeetree 's Greek genus name , which means " naked branch " .
Like the Sumac , branches are absent of fine spray ; smaller branches are thick and lumpish .
Because of the absence of smaller branches and its later leafing , the French in Canada named it Chicot , " stubby " .
The expanding leaves are conspicuous because of the varied colors of the leaflets ; the youngest are bright pink , while those which are older vary from green to bronze .
The bark is ash - gray and scaly , flaking similarly to black cherry , but more so .
The trees are dioecious , and the fruit is a hard - shelled bean in heavy , woody , thick - walled pods filled with sweet , thick , gooey pulp .
Pod length ranges from ; unfertilized female trees may bear miniature seedless pods .
The beans contain the toxin cytisine .
*
Bark :
Tan or dark gray , deeply fissured , surface scaly , often with prominent narrow ridges .
Branchlets at first coated with short reddish down .
*
Wood :
Light brown ;
heavy , strong , coarse - grained ; durable in contact with the ground , takes a fine polish .
Specific gravity , 0.6934 ; weight of cubic foot , .
* Winter buds : Minute , depressed in downy cavities of the stem , two in the axil of each leaf , the smaller sterile .
Bud scales two , ovate , coated with brown tomentum and growing with the shoot , become orange green , hairy and about one inch long , before they fall .
* Leaves : Alternate , bipinnately compound , ten to fourteen pinnate , lowest pinnae reduced to leaflets , the other seven to thirteen foliate .
One to three feet long , eighteen to twenty - four inches broad , by the greater development of the upper pairs of pinnae .
Leaf stalks and stalks of pinnae , are terete , enlarged at base , smooth when mature , pale green , often purple on the upper side .
Leaflets ovate , two to two and one - half inches long , wedge - shaped or irregularly rounded at base , with wavy margin , acute apex .
They come out of the bud bright pink , but soon become bronze green , smooth and shining above .
When full grown are dark yellow green above , pale green beneath .
In autumn turn a bright clear yellow .
Stipules leaf - like , lanceolate , serrate , deciduous .
* Flowers : June .
Dioecious by abortion , terminal , greenish white .
Staminate flowers in a short raceme - like corymb three to four inches ( 75–100 mm )
long , pistillate flowers in a raceme ten to twelve inches ( 250–300 mm ) long .
* Calyx :
Tubular , hairy , ten - ribbed , five - lobed ; lobes valvate in bud ,
acute , nearly equal .
* Corolla : Petals five , oblong , hairy , spreading or reflexed , imbricate in bud .
* Stamens : Ten , five long and five short , free , included ; filaments thread - like ; anthers orange colored , ; in the pistillate flower small and sterile .
* Pistil : Ovary superior , sessile , hairy , contracted into a short style , with two stigmatic lobes ; ovules in two rows .
* Fruit : Legume , six to ten inches ( 150–250 mm )
long , one and one - half to two inches wide , somewhat curved , with thickened margins , dark reddish brown with slight glaucous bloom , crowned with remnant of the styles .
Stalks and inch or two long .
Seeds six to nine , surrounded by a thick layer of dark , sweet pulp .
* Rooting Habit , " Tap Root in proportion like a carrot " .
A seedling tree grows many times in root length to its growth upward in height .
The Kentucky coffee tree is not commonly offered in the nursery trade because the taproot makes the tree somewhat difficult to transplant .
Being in the Legume family the roots fix nitrogen in the soil .
The Kentucky coffeetree is believed to be an example of evolutionary anachronism .
The tough , leathery seed pods are too difficult for many animals to chew through ( in addition to being poisonous ) and they are too heavy for either wind or water dispersal .
It is thus believed that the tree would have been browsed upon by now - extinct mammoths and mastodons which ate the pods and nicked the seeds with their large teeth , aiding in germination .
This behavior is seen among African elephants eating Fabaceae relatives in Africa .
Because of this , its prehistoric range may have been much larger than it has been in historical times .
Today , in the wild , it only grows well in wetlands , and it is thought that only in such wet conditions can the seed pods rot away to allow germination in the absence of large herbivores .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Gymnocladus is derived from the Ancient Greek ( kládos ) " branch " and ( gumnós ) " naked " and refers to the stout branchlets unclothed with small twigs .
It is one of three species in the genus Gymnocladus , the other two being native to eastern Asia .
These are Chinese coffeetree Gymnocladus chinensis in central China , and Burmese coffeetree Gymnocladus burmanicus in Burma .
The name is sometimes hyphenated as ' coffee - tree ' ; the form ' coffeetree ' here is as used officially by the United States Forest Service .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
The Kentucky coffeetree is considered a rare tree species .
"
Rare species are those that are so uncommon that they should be monitored to determine whether their populations are becoming threatened .
" It is widely distributed , but rare .
The tree 's native range is limited , occurring from Southern Ontario , Canada and in the United States from Kentucky ( where it was first encountered by Europeans ) and western Pennsylvania in the east , to Kansas , eastern Nebraska , and southeastern South Dakota in the west , to southern Wisconsin and Michigan in the north , and to northern Louisiana in the south .
It is planted as an urban shade tree across the United States and eastern Canada , including California .
This tree usually occurs as widely dispersed individuals or small colonial groups with interconnected root systems .
This tree is found in floodplains and river valleys but is also sometimes seen on rocky hillsides and limestone woods .
In the northeastern part of its range , seemingly natural groves of this tree are actually associated with known prehistoric village sites .
In some parts of its range , this tree may be used as an indicator of the presence of limestone or of calcareous soils .
USES CULTIVATION Section::::Uses .
Section::::Cultivation .
Gymnocladus dioicus is cultivated by specialty tree plant nurseries as an ornamental tree for planting in gardens and parks .
The peculiarly late - emerging and early - dropping leaves , coupled with the fact that the large leaves mean few twigs in the winter profile , make it a tree that is ideal for urban shading where winter sunlight is to be maximized ( such as in proximity to solar hot - air systems ) .
It is often planted because of its unique appearance and interesting character .
There are several Kentucky coffeetrees at Mount Vernon , in the gardens along the path leading up to the house of George Washington .
Trees prefer a rich moist soil , such as bottom lands .
Their growth is largely unaffected by heat , cold , drought , insects , disease , road salt , ice , and alkaline soil .
Kentucky coffeetree is easy to grow from seed .
Filing the seedcoat by hand with a small file , and then soaking the seeds in water for 24 hours will ensure rapid germination .
Propagation is also easy from dormant root cuttings from December through March .
The Kentucky coffeetree is typically found on " alluvial soils of river and flood plains and nearby terraces " .
Here it can form large clonal colonies , reproducing by shoots sprouting from roots .
FOOD Section::::Food .
The beans of the tree were eaten , after roasting , in the Meskwaki ( Fox ) , Ho - Chunk ( Winnebago ) and Pawnee Native American cultures .
The Meskwaki also drank the roasted ground seeds in a hot beverage similar to coffee .
The common name " coffeetree " derives from this latter use of the roasted seeds , which was imitated by settlers because it seemed a substitute for coffee , especially in times of poverty , similar to chicory .
The European colonialists , however , considered it inferior to " real " coffee :
The pods , preserved like those of the tamarind , can be eaten and are slightly aperient ( laxative ) .
Roasting the pods and seeds neutralizes the cytisine , the toxic alkaloid .
Toxicity Caution should be used when consuming , as unroasted or only partially roasted beans and pods are considered poisonous and are reputed to contain the alkaloid cytisine .
The plant is toxic to some animals .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
In addition to use as a food , the seeds of Kentucky coffeetree were used by Native Americans for ceremonial and recreational purposes .
Seeds were used as dice in [ games of chance ] that were common in eastern tribes .
The seeds were also used in jewelry .
Because of the importance of Kentucky coffeetree to Native Americans , they undoubtedly contributed to its dispersal .
Gymnocladus dioicus is used as a street tree as far north as Montréal Québec .
It resists well harsh winters and de - icing salts .
WOODWORKING
Section::::Woodworking .
The wood is used both by cabinetmakers and carpenters .
It has very little sapwood .
NOTABLE SPECIMENS Section::::Notable specimens .
A specimen with a height of was referenced in La Turpinerie , commune of Geay , a short distance from the Charente river in south - west France , growing in a typical calcareous soil ( see Minutes of Congrès international de sylviculture de Paris , June 1900 ) .
Cut during the 20th century , it had a circumference of and was the tallest in the country at this time .
A Kentucky coffeetree , said to have been brought to the UK in 1812 , stands in Mountsfield Park in the London Borough of Lewisham .
A Kentucky coffeetree found in the Will Rogers Park in Amarillo , Texas has been confirmed to be the largest of its kind in Texas .
Texas A&M Forest Service said , has a circumference of 92 inches , a height of 51 feet and a crown spread of 52 feet NOTES
REFERENCES
* Sternberg , Guy , ( 2004 )
Native Trees for North American Landscapes .
Timber Press ,
Inc. * University of Fort Smith Tree Guide Pod dimensions .
* Personal conversation with The Morton Arboretum regarding the occasional appearance of miniature seedless pods on female Kentucky coffeetrees .
* Hightshoe , Gary L. ( 1988 ) .
Native Trees , Shrubs , and Vines for Urban and Rural America : A Planting Design Manual for Envieronmental Designers .
New York :
Van Nostrand Reinhold .
pp 216–217 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Gymnocladus dioica images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu * NCRS : USDA Plants Profile Gymnocladus dioicus * Interactive Distribution Map for Gymnocladus dioicus
* KENTUCKY COFFEETREE , USDA Plants