PAGET 'S DISEASE OF BONE
Paget 's disease of bone ( commonly known as Paget 's disease or historically , osteitis deformans ) is a condition involving cellular remodeling and deformity of one or more bones .
The affected bones show signs of dysregulated bone remodeling at the microscopic level , specifically excessive bone breakdown and subsequent disorganized new bone formation .
These structural changes cause the bone to weaken , which may result in deformity , pain , fracture , or arthritis of associated joints .
The exact cause is unknown , although leading theories indicate both genetic and acquired factors ( see causes ) .
Paget 's disease may affect any one or multiple bones of the body ( most commonly pelvis , femur , and lumbar vertebrae , and skull ) , but never the entire skeleton , and does not spread from bone to bone .
Rarely , a bone affected by Paget 's disease can transform into a malignant bone cancer .
As the disease often affects people differently , treatments of Paget 's disease can vary .
Although there is no cure for Paget 's disease , medications ( bisphosphonates and calcitonin ) can help control the disorder and lessen pain and other symptoms .
Medications are often successful in controlling the disorder , especially when started before complications begin .
Paget 's disease affects from 1.5 to 8.0 percent of the population , and is most common in those of British descent .
It is primarily diagnosed in older people , and is rare in people less than 55 years of age .
Men are more commonly affected than women ( 3:2 ) .
The disease is named after Sir James Paget .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Mild or early cases of Pagets are asymptomatic , and so most people are diagnosed with Paget 's disease incidentally during medical evaluation for another problem .
Approximately 35 % of patients with Paget 's have symptoms related to the disease when they are first diagnosed .
Overall , the most common symptom is bone pain .
When symptoms do occur , they may be confused with those of arthritis or other disorders , and so diagnosis may be delayed .
Paget 's may first be noticed as an increasing deformity of a person 's bones .
Paget 's disease affecting the skull may lead to loss of hearing in one or both ears due to compression of the nerves in the inner ear .
Rarely , skull involvement may lead to compression of the nerves that supply the eye , leading to vision loss .
ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
Section::::Associated conditions .
Paget 's disease is a frequent component of multisystem proteinopathy .
Advanced Paget 's disease may lead to other medical conditions , including : *
Osteoarthritis may result from changes in bone shape that alter normal skeletal mechanics .
For example , bowing of a femur affected by Paget 's may distort overall leg alignment , subjecting the knee to abnormal mechanical forces and accelerating degenerative wear .
* Heart failure is a rare , reported consequence of severe Paget 's disease ( i.e. more than 40 % skeletal involvement ) .
The abnormal bone formation is associated with recruitment of abnormal blood vessels , forcing the cardiovascular system to work harder ( pump more blood ) to ensure adequate circulation .
* Kidney stones are somewhat more common in patients with Paget 's disease .
* Nervous system problems may occur in Paget 's disease , resulting from increased pressure on the brain , spinal cord , or nerves , and reduced blood flow to the brain and spinal cord .
*
When Paget 's disease affects the facial bones , the teeth may become loose .
Disturbance in chewing may occur .
Chronic dental problems may lead to infection of the jaw bone .
*
Angioid streaks may develop , possibly as a result of calcification of collagen or other pathological deposition .
* Vulvar Paget 's disease ulceration can occur in female reproductive organs .
Paget 's disease is not associated with osteoporosis .
Although Paget 's disease and osteoporosis can occur in the same patient , they are different disorders .
Despite their marked differences , several treatments for Paget 's disease are also used to treat osteoporosis .
CAUSES VIRAL Section::::Causes .
Section::::Viral .
Paget 's disease may be caused by a slow virus infection ( i.e. , paramyxoviridae ) present for many years before symptoms appear .
Associated viral infections include respiratory syncytial virus , canine distemper virus , and the measles virus .
However , recent evidence has cast some doubt upon the measles association .
Laboratory contamination may have played a role in past studies linking paramyxovirus ( e.g. measles ) to Paget 's disease .
GENETIC
Section::::Genetic .
There is a hereditary factor in the development of Paget 's disease of bone .
Two genes , SQSTM1 and RANK , and specific regions of chromosome 5 and 6 are associated with Paget 's disease of bone .
Genetic causes may or may not involve a family history of Paget 's disease .
About 40–50 % of people with the inherited version of Paget 's disease have a mutation in the gene SQSTM1 , which encodes a protein , called p62 , that is involved in regulating the function of osteoclasts ( bone cells ) .
However , about 10 - 15 percent of people that develop the disease without any family history also have a mutation in the SQSTM1 gene .
Paget 's disease of bone is associated with mutations in RANK .
Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor κ B ( RANK ) , which is a type
I membrane protein that is expressed on the surface of osteoclasts and is involved in their activation upon ligand binding .
Additional genetic associations include : !
Name !
OMIM !
Locus !
Gene PATHOGENESIS Section::::Pathogenesis .
The pathogenesis of Paget 's disease is described in four stages : * Osteoclastic activity * * Mixed osteoclastic – osteoblastic activity * * Osteoblastic activity *
* Malignant degeneration
*
Initially , there is a marked increase in the rate of bone resorption in localized areas , caused by large and numerous osteoclasts .
These localized areas of pathological destruction of bone tissue ( osteolysis ) are seen radiologically as an advancing lytic wedge in long bones or the skull .
When this occurs in the skull , it is called osteoporosis circumscripta .
The osteolysis is followed by a compensatory increase in bone formation induced by the bone forming cells , called osteoblasts , that are recruited to the area .
This is associated with accelerated deposition of lamellar bone in a disorganized fashion .
This intense cellular activity produces a chaotic picture of trabecular bone ( " mosaic " pattern ) , rather than the normal linear lamellar pattern .
The resorbed bone is replaced and the marrow spaces are filled by an excess of fibrous connective tissue with a marked increase in blood vessels , causing the bone to become hypervascular .
The bone hypercellularity may then diminish , leaving a dense " pagetic bone " , also known as burned - out
Paget 's disease .
A later phase of the disease is characterized by the replacement of normal bone marrow with highly vascular fibrous tissue .
Sir James Paget first suggested the disease was due to an inflammatory process .
Some evidence suggests that a paramyxovirus infection is the underlying cause of Paget 's disease , which may support the possible role of inflammation in the pathogenesis .
However , no infectious virus has yet been isolated as a causative agent , and other evidence suggests an intrinsic hyperresponsive reaction to vitamin D and RANK ligand is the cause .
Further research is therefore necessary .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The first clinical manifestation of Paget 's disease is usually an elevated alkaline phosphatase in the blood .
Paget 's disease may be diagnosed using one or more of the following tests : * Pagetic bone has a characteristic appearance on X - rays .
A skeletal survey is therefore indicated .
* An elevated level of alkaline phosphatase in the blood in combination with normal calcium , phosphate , and aminotransferase levels in an elderly patient are suggestive of Paget 's disease .
* Markers of bone turnover in urine eg .
Pyridinoline * Elevated levels of serum and urinary hydroxyproline are also found .
* Bone scans are useful in determining the extent and activity of the condition .
If a bone scan suggests Paget 's disease , the affected bone(s )
should be X - rayed to confirm the diagnosis .
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Although initially diagnosed by a primary care physician , endocrinologists ( internal medicine physicians who specialize in hormonal and metabolic disorders ) , rheumatologists ( internal medicine physicians who specialize in joint and muscle disorders ) , orthopedic surgeons , neurosurgeons , neurologists , oral and maxillofacial surgeons , and otolaryngologists are generally knowledgeable about treating Paget 's disease , and may be called upon to evaluate specialized symptoms .
It can sometimes difficult to predict whether a person with Paget 's disease , who otherwise has no signs or symptoms of the disorder , will develop symptoms or complications ( such as a bone fracture ) in the future .
MEDICATION Section::::Medication .
The goal of treatment is to relieve bone pain and prevent the progression of the disease .
These medications are usually recommended for people with Paget 's disease who : * have bone pain , headache , back pain , or a nerve - related symptom ( such as " shooting " pains in the leg ) that is directly associated with the disease ; * have elevated levels of serum alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) in their blood ; * display evidence that a bone fracture will occur ; * require pretreatment therapy for affected bones that require surgery ; * have active symptoms in the skull , long bones , or vertebrae ( spine ) ;
* have the disease in bones located next to major joints , placing them at risk of developing osteoarthritis ; * develop hypercalcemia that occurs when a person with several bones affected by Paget 's disease and a high serum alkaline phosphatase level is immobilized .
BISPHOSPHONATES Section::::Bisphosphonates .
Five bisphosphonates are currently available .
In general , the most commonly prescribed are risedronic acid , alendronic acid , and pamidronic acid .
Etidronic acid and other bisphosphonates may be appropriate therapies for selected patients but are less commonly used .
None of these drugs should be used by people with severe kidney disease .
* Etidronate disodium
The approved regimen is once daily for six months ; a higher dose is more commonly used .
No food , beverage , or medications should be consumed for two hours before and after taking .
The course should not exceed six months , but repeat courses can be given after rest periods , preferably of three to six months duration .
* Pamidronate disodium in intravenous form : the approved regimen uses an infusion over four hours on each of three consecutive days , but a more commonly used regimen is over two to four hours for two or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days .
*
Alendronate sodium is given as tablets once daily for six months ; patients should wait at least 30 minutes after taking before eating any food , drinking anything other than tap water , taking any medication , or lying down ( patient may sit ) .
*
Tiludronate disodium are taken once daily for three months ; they may be taken any time of day , as long as there is a period of two hours before and after resuming food , beverages , and medications .
*
Risedronate sodium tablet taken once daily for 2 months is the prescribed regimen ; patients should wait at least 30 minutes after taking before eating any food , drinking anything other than tap water , taking any medication , or lying down ( patient may sit ) .
* Zoledronic acid is given as an intravenous infusion ; a single dose is effective for two years .
This is recommended for most people at high risk with active disease .
CALCITONIN Section::::Calcitonin .
Calcitonin , also called calcitonin - salmon , is a synthetic copy of a polypeptide hormone secreted by the ultimobranchial gland of salmon .
Miacalcin is administered by injection , three times per week or daily , for 6–18 months .
Repeat courses can be given after brief rest periods .
Miacalcin may be appropriate for certain patients , but is seldom used .
Calcitonin is also linked to increased chance of cancer .
Due to the increased risk of cancer , the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) recommended that calcitonin be used only on a short - term basis for 3 conditions for which it had previously been approved in the European Union : Paget 's disease , acute bone loss resulting from sudden immobilization , and hypercalcemia caused by cancer .
The EMA said it based its recommendations on a review of the benefits and risks of calcitonin - containing medicines .
Conducted by the agency 's Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use ( CHMP ) , the review encompassed available data from the companies that market these drugs , postmarketing safety data , randomized controlled studies , 2 studies of unlicensed oral calcitonin drugs , and experimental cancer studies , among other sources .
As a solution for injection or infusion , calcitonin should be administered for no more than 4 weeks to prevent acute bone loss resulting from sudden immobilization , and normally for no more than 3 months to treat Paget 's disease , the EMA said .
The agency did not specify a time frame for the short - term use of calcitonin for treating hypercalcemia caused by cancer .
SURGERY Section::::Surgery .
Medical therapy prior to surgery helps to decrease bleeding and other complications .
Patients who are having surgery should discuss treatment with their physician .
There are generally three major complications of Paget 's disease for which surgery may be recommended .
* Fractures — Surgery may allow fractures to heal in a better position .
* Severe degenerative arthritis — If disability is severe and medication and physical therapy are no longer helpful , joint replacement of the hips and knees may be considered .
* Bone deformity — Cutting and realignment of pagetic bone ( osteotomy ) may help painful weight bearing joints , especially the knees .
Complications resulting from enlargement of the skull or spine may injure the nervous system .
However , most neurologic symptoms , even those that are moderately severe , can be treated with medication and do not require neurosurgery .
DIET AND EXERCISE Section::::Diet and exercise .
In general , patients with Paget 's disease should receive 1000–1500 mg of calcium , adequate sunshine , and at least 400 units of vitamin D daily .
This is especially important in patients being treated with bisphosphonates ; however , taking oral bisphosphonates should be separated from taking calcium by at least two hours , because the calcium can inhibit the absorption of the bisphosphonate .
Patients with a history of kidney stones should discuss calcium and vitamin D intake with their physicians .
Exercise is very important in maintaining skeletal health , avoiding weight gain , and maintaining joint mobility .
Since undue stress on affected bones should be avoided , people with Paget 's disease of bone should discuss any exercise program with their physicians or physical therapists before beginning .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
The disease is progressive and slowly worsens with time , although people may remain minimally symptomatic .
Treatment is aimed at controlling symptoms , but there is no cure .
Any bone or bones can be affected , but Paget 's disease occurs most frequently in the spine , skull , pelvis , femur , and lower legs .
Osteogenic sarcoma , a form of bone cancer , is a rare complication of Paget 's disease occurring in less than one percent of those affected .
The development of osteosarcoma may be suggested by the sudden onset or worsening pain .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Pagets disease of bone is the second most common metabolic bone disorder , after osteoporosis .
The overall prevalence and severity of Paget 's disease are decreasing ; the cause for these changes is unclear .
Paget 's disease is rare in people less than 55 years of age , and the prevalence increases with age .
Evidence from studies of autopsy results have demonstrated Paget 's disease in about 3 percent of people older than 40 years of age .
Paget 's disease is more common in males than females .
Rates of Paget 's disease are about 50 percent higher in men than in women .
About 15 percent of people with Paget 's disease also have a family member with the disease .
In cases where the disease is familial , it is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion , although not all people that inherit the affected version of the genes will express the disease ( incomplete penetrance ) .
The incidence of Paget 's disease varies considerably with geographic location .
Paget 's predominantly affects people of European descent , whereas people of African , Asian , or Indian descent are less commonly affected .
Paget 's disease is less common in Switzerland and Scandinavia than in the rest of Western Europe .
Paget 's disease is uncommon in the native populations of North and South America , Africa , Asia , and the Middle East .
When an individual from these regions does develop Paget 's disease , there is typically some European ancestry present .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The condition was initially described by Dr. James Paget .
In a paper published in 1877 , Paget told of five patients with " a rare disease of bones " which presented with slowly progressive bone deformities in the 4th and 5th decades of age .
Strikingly , the first patient was described to have many of the classic complications of the disease , including arthritis related to abnormal bone mechanics , cranial nerve palsies associated with an enlarging skull , and malignant transformation of a tumor of the radius which ultimately proved fatal .
Paget 's post - mortem autopsy evaluation showed " bones of the vault of this skull were in every part increased to about four times the normal thickness , " and microscopic evaluation showed evidence of both bone erosion and abnormal remodeling .
Although he incorrectly attributed the findings to a process of chronic inflammation , having ruled out tumor and hypertrophy as alternative etiologies , these prescient observations of a mixed destructive / regenerative process correspond to the modern understanding of the disease .
Paget 's disease of bone was originally termed osteitis deformans , because it was thought to involve an inflammatory process , which is implied by the suffix -itis .
Now , that term is considered technically incorrect , and the preferred term is osteodystrophia deformans .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE
*
Ludwig Van Beethoven is speculated to have had Paget 's disease based on autopsy description , and which may have contributed to his well - known deafness .
A murder victim in Season 2 episode " Youngblood " was afflicted with Paget 's disease .
* Retired Boston Red Sox center fielder Dom DiMaggio suffered from Paget 's disease and served as a member of the board of directors of the Paget Foundation .
* Egill Skallagrímsson , the main character in Egils Saga , may have suffered from this disease .
* The X - Files : Fox Mulder 's mother commits suicide in Season 7 , Episode 10 " Sein und Zeit " , after being diagnosed with Paget 's disease .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Paget 's Disease of Bone Overview - NIH Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases ~ National Resource Center