CARBON STEEL Carbon steel is a steel with carbon content up to 2.1 % by weight .
The definition of carbon steel from the American Iron and Steel Institute ( AISI ) states : The term " carbon steel " may also be used in reference to steel which is not stainless steel ; in this use carbon steel may include alloy steels .
As the carbon percentage content rises , steel has the ability to become harder and stronger through heat treating ; however , it becomes less ductile .
Regardless of the heat treatment , a higher carbon content reduces weldability .
In carbon steels , the higher carbon content lowers the melting point .
TYPE
MILD OR LOW - CARBON STEEL Section::::Type .
Section::::Mild or low - carbon steel .
Mild steel ( iron containing a small percentage of carbon , strong and tough but not readily tempered ) , also known as plain - carbon steel and low - carbon steel , is now the most common form of steel because its price is relatively low while it provides material properties that are acceptable for many applications .
Mild steel contains approximately 0.05–0.25 % carbon making it malleable and ductile .
Mild steel has a relatively low tensile strength , but it is cheap and easy to form ; surface hardness can be increased through carburizing .
In applications where large cross - sections are used to minimize deflection , failure by yield is not a risk so low - carbon steels are the best choice , for example as structural steel .
The density of mild steel is approximately 7.85 g / cm ( 7850 kg / m or 0.284 lb / in ) and the Young 's modulus is .
Low - carbon steels suffer from yield - point runout where the material has two yield points .
The first yield point ( or upper yield point ) is higher than the second and the yield drops dramatically after the upper yield point .
If a low - carbon steel is only stressed to some point between the upper and lower yield point then the surface develops Lüder bands .
Low - carbon steels contain less carbon than other steels and are easier to cold - form , making them easier to handle .
HIGH - TENSILE STEEL Section::::High - tensile steel .
High - tensile steels are low - carbon , or steels at the lower end of the medium - carbon range , which have additional alloying ingredients in order to increase their strength , wear properties or specifically tensile strength .
These alloying ingredients include chromium , molybdenum , silicon , manganese , nickel and vanadium .
Impurities such as phosphorus or sulphur have their maximum allowable content restricted .
* 41xx steel * 4140
steel * 4145
steel * 4340
steel * 300 M steel
* EN25 steel – 2.5 %
nickel - chromium - molybdenum steel
*
EN26 steel HIGHER - CARBON STEELS Section::::Higher - carbon steels .
Carbon steels which can successfully undergo heat - treatment have a carbon content in the range of 0.30–1.70 % by weight .
Trace impurities of various other elements can have a significant effect on the quality of the resulting steel .
Trace amounts of sulfur in particular make the steel red - short , that is , brittle and crumbly at working temperatures .
Low - alloy carbon steel , such as A36 grade , contains about 0.05 % sulfur and melts around .
Manganese is often added to improve the hardenability of low - carbon steels .
These additions turn the material into a low - alloy steel by some definitions , but AISI 's definition of carbon steel allows up to 1.65 % manganese by weight .
AISI CLASSIFICATION Section::::AISI Classification .
Carbon steel is broken down into four classes based on carbon content : LOW - CARBON STEEL Section::::Low - carbon steel . 0.05 to 0.30 % carbon ( plain carbon steel ) content .. MEDIUM - CARBON STEEL Section::::Medium - carbon steel .
Approximately 0.3–0.8 % carbon content .
Balances ductility and strength and has good wear resistance ; used for large parts , forging and automotive components .
HIGH - CARBON STEEL Section::::High - carbon steel .
Approximately 0.8–2.0 % carbon content .
Very strong , used for springs , edged tools , and high - strength wires .
ULTRA - HIGH - CARBON STEEL Section::::Ultra - high - carbon steel .
Approximately 1.25–2.0 % carbon content .
Steels that can be tempered to great hardness .
Used for special purposes like ( non - industrial - purpose ) knives , axles or punches .
Most steels with more than 2.5 % carbon content are made using powder metallurgy .
HEAT TREATMENT Section::::Heat treatment .
The purpose of heat treating carbon steel is to change the mechanical properties of steel , usually ductility , hardness , yield strength , or impact resistance .
Note that the electrical and thermal conductivity are only slightly altered .
As with most strengthening techniques for steel , Young 's modulus ( elasticity ) is unaffected .
All treatments of steel trade ductility for increased strength and vice versa .
Iron has a higher solubility for carbon in the austenite phase ; therefore all heat treatments , except spheroidizing and process annealing , start by heating the steel to a temperature at which the austenitic phase can exist .
The steel is then quenched ( heat drawn out ) at a moderate to low rate allowing carbon to diffuse out of the austenite forming iron - carbide ( cementite ) and leaving ferrite , or at a high rate , trapping the carbon within the iron thus forming martensite .
The rate at which the steel is cooled through the eutectoid temperature ( about 727 ° C ) affects the rate at which carbon diffuses out of austenite and forms cementite .
Generally speaking , cooling swiftly will leave iron carbide finely dispersed and produce a fine grained pearlite and cooling slowly will give a coarser pearlite .
Cooling a hypoeutectoid steel ( less than 0.77 wt% C ) results in a lamellar - pearlitic structure of iron carbide layers with α - ferrite ( nearly pure iron ) between .
If it is hypereutectoid steel ( more than 0.77 wt% C ) then the structure is full pearlite with small grains ( larger than the pearlite lamella ) of cementite formed on the grain boundaries .
A eutectoid steel ( 0.77 % carbon ) will have a pearlite structure throughout the grains with no cementite at the boundaries .
The relative amounts of constituents are found using the lever rule .
The following is a list of the types of heat treatments possible :
* Spheroidizing : Spheroidite forms when carbon steel is heated to approximately 700 ° C for over 30 hours .
Spheroidite can form at lower temperatures but the time needed drastically increases , as this is a diffusion - controlled process .
The result is a structure of rods or spheres of cementite within primary structure ( ferrite or pearlite , depending on which side of the eutectoid you are on ) .
The purpose is to soften higher carbon steels and allow more formability .
This is the softest and most ductile form of steel .
The adjacent image shows where spheroidizing usually occurs .
* Full annealing : Carbon steel is heated to approximately 40 ° C above Ac3 or Acm for 1 hour ; this ensures all the ferrite transforms into austenite ( although cementite might still exist if the carbon content is greater than the eutectoid ) .
The steel must then be cooled slowly , in the realm of 20 ° C ( 36 ° F ) per hour .
Usually it is just furnace cooled , where the furnace is turned off with the steel still inside .
This results in a coarse pearlitic structure , which means the " bands " of pearlite are thick .
Fully annealed steel is soft and ductile , with no internal stresses , which is often necessary for cost - effective forming .
Only spheroidized steel is softer and more ductile .
* Process annealing :
A process used to relieve stress in a cold - worked carbon steel with less than 0.3 % C.
The steel is usually heated to 550–650 ° C for 1 hour , but sometimes temperatures as high as 700 ° C .
The image rightward shows the area where process annealing occurs .
* Isothermal annealing
: It is a process in which hypoeutectoid steel is heated above the upper critical temperature .
This temperature is maintained for a time and then reduced to below the lower critical temperature and is again maintained .
It is then cooled to room temperature .
This method eliminates any temperature gradient .
* Normalizing :
Carbon steel is heated to approximately 55 ° C above Ac3 or Acm for 1 hour ; this ensures the steel completely transforms to austenite .
The steel is then air - cooled , which is a cooling rate of approximately per minute .
This results in a fine pearlitic structure , and a more - uniform structure .
Normalized steel has a higher strength than annealed steel ; it has a relatively high strength and hardness .
* Quenching : Carbon steel with at least 0.4 wt% C is heated to normalizing temperatures and then rapidly cooled ( quenched ) in water , brine , or oil to the critical temperature .
The critical temperature is dependent on the carbon content , but as a general rule is lower as the carbon content increases .
This results in a martensitic structure ; a form of steel that possesses a super - saturated carbon content in a deformed body - centered cubic ( BCC ) crystalline structure , properly termed body - centered tetragonal ( BCT ) , with much internal stress .
Thus quenched steel is extremely hard but brittle , usually too brittle for practical purposes .
These internal stresses may cause stress cracks on the surface .
Quenched steel is approximately three to four ( with more carbon ) fold harder than normalized steel .
*
Martempering ( Marquenching )
: Martempering is not actually a tempering procedure , hence the term " marquenching " .
It is a form of isothermal heat treatment applied after an initial quench , typically in a molten salt bath , at a temperature just above the " martensite start temperature " .
At this temperature , residual stresses within the material are relieved and some bainite may be formed from the retained austenite which did not have time to transform into anything else .
In industry , this is a process used to control the ductility and hardness of a material .
With longer marquenching , the ductility increases with a minimal loss in strength ; the steel is held in this solution until the inner and outer temperatures of the part equalize .
Then the steel is cooled at a moderate speed to keep the temperature gradient minimal .
Not only does this process reduce internal stresses and stress cracks , but it also increases the impact resistance .
* Tempering : This is the most common heat treatment encountered , because the final properties can be precisely determined by the temperature and time of the tempering .
Tempering involves reheating quenched steel to a temperature below the eutectoid temperature then cooling .
The elevated temperature allows very small amounts of spheroidite to form , which restores ductility , but reduces hardness .
Actual temperatures and times are carefully chosen for each composition .
* Austempering : The austempering process is the same as martempering , except the quench is interrupted and the steel is held in the molten salt bath at temperatures between 205 ° C and 540 ° C , and then cooled at a moderate rate .
The resulting steel , called bainite , produces an acicular microstructure in the steel that has great strength ( but less than martensite ) , greater ductility , higher impact resistance , and less distortion than martensite steel .
The disadvantage of austempering is it can be used only on a few steels , and it requires a special salt bath .
CASE
HARDENING Section::::Case hardening .
Case hardening processes harden only the exterior of the steel part , creating a hard , wear resistant skin ( the " case " ) but preserving a tough and ductile interior .
Carbon steels are not very hardenable meaning they can not be hardened throughout thick sections .
Alloy steels have a better hardenability , so they can be through - hardened and do not require case hardening .
This property of carbon steel can be beneficial , because it gives the surface good wear characteristics but leaves the core tough .
FORGING TEMPERATURE OF STEEL
Section::::Forging temperature of steel . !
Steel Type ! !
Maximum forging temperature ( ° F / ° C ) ! !
Burning temperature ( ° F / ° C ) SEE ALSO
* Cold working * Hot working
* Welding
* Forging REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY