JOEY ( TV SERIES )
Joey is an American sitcom and a spin - off of Friends starring Matt LeBlanc reprising his role as Joey Tribbiani .
It premiered on the NBC television network , on September 9 , 2004 , in the former time slot of its parent series , Thursday nights at 8:00 p.m. Midway through the second season , the show was placed on a hiatus by NBC but returned on March 7 , 2006 , in a new timeslot of Tuesdays at 8:30 p.m. One episode ,
" Joey and the Snowball Fight " , was shown on a Tuesday at 8:30 p.m , but was pulled by NBC when it was overshadowed in ratings by American Idol .
NBC canceled the series due to poor ratings on May 15 , 2006 and did not broadcast the remaining episodes .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
This series centers on Joey , who has struck out on his own and moved to Hollywood , hoping to truly make it as an actor .
Joey says goodbye to a time when his friends were his family and welcomes the chance to turn his family into his friends .
After reuniting with his high - strung sister Gina , a strong and sexy hairdresser , Joey moves in with her genius 20-year - old son , graduate student Michael who literally is a rocket scientist .
What Joey lacks in book smarts , however , he more than makes up for with his people skills , making him the best new friend his nephew could ask for .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Matt LeBlanc as Joey Tribbiani , a struggling actor and food lover who becomes famous for his role on Days of Our Lives as Dr. Drake Ramoray .
Joey is a womanizer with many girlfriends throughout the series , in keeping with his character on Friends .
The series roughly picks up where Friends left off , with Joey at the beginning of the show making a move from New York to Los Angeles to proceed with his acting career .
He is constantly talking about food or eating sandwiches or pizza .
* Drea de Matteo as Joey 's attractive older sister Gina Tribbiani , who is temperamental and promiscuous .
Not particularly bright but very street - wise , Gina is a caring but over - protective and domineering mother .
For years she convinced her genius son Michael that he was born when she was 22 instead of 16 years old , and always says he is the one thing she has done well .
She and Joey are friends in addition to being siblings , both having the gift of being extremely appealing to the opposite sex , with numerous lovers .
Initially working as a hairdresser , by season two she works as a secretary for Joey 's agent Bobbie , having impressed Bobbie with her brash manner .
In season two she starts dating Michael 's father Jimmy once again .
In the Season 2 episode " Joey and the Holding Hands " , it is implied that Gina may be bisexual .
* Andrea Anders as Alexis " Alex " Garrett , the next door neighbor , landlady and friend .
She is an educated , but slightly ditzy , blonde lawyer who graduated from Northwestern University and Pepperdine University School of Law .
Initially intimidated , but also intrigued by Joey 's tough street - wise older sister Gina , the two women eventually become friends , and she becomes more bold in the way she dresses and acts , thanks to Gina 's influence .
She is puzzled but impressed by Joey 's intuitive gift at being able to know when she is wearing thong panties , and spends most of her time hanging out at Joey and Michael 's apartment .
She and Joey bond and become close friends .
Her husband is a professional orchestra musician and is away from home most of the time , and she confides her problems with her marriage in Joey .
At the end of season one , she and Joey become romantically involved during her separation from her husband .
In season two she becomes romantically interested in Joey and has a crush on him for a long period .
Gina tries to help her to get over Joey , but once Alex starts dating Joey 's friend Dean , Joey soon realizes that he is also in love with Alex .
* Paulo Costanzo as Joey 's nephew Michael Tribbiani who idolises his Uncle Joey 's ability to date many women , and who himself is sheltered and nervous around girls .
He is self - conscious that he has been so sheltered and that his mother Gina breast fed him until he was seven .
Early in the second season it is revealed that Michael has Asperger syndrome .
He is a huge and Star Wars fan .
He is extremely intelligent , an aerospace engineer , attends Caltech and specialises in applied thermodynamics , works with his rival Seth frequently on engineering projects , and is an obvious direct opposite from his more street - wise mother and uncle .
He turns to Joey as a big brother and substitute father figure , even after his biological father Jimmy re - enters mother Gina 's love life .
* Jennifer Coolidge as Joey 's oversexed agent Roberta " Bobbie " Morganstern , and reportedly the twelfth most powerful woman in Hollywood .
She has an enormous crush on Joey 's nephew Michael .
She often entertains herself by making her office assistant do funny tricks , or shocking herself with a stun - gun .
She is brash , forward , aggressive , highly entertaining and slightly ditzy , laughing at everything and at anyone 's expense , including her client Joey 's .
She was once sued by Phil Collins .
* Miguel A. Núñez Jr. joined the cast at the start of season two as the character Zach Miller .
He soon became one of Joey 's best friends .
Zach has an interesting career , going from playing extras on TV , to directing amateur plays .
Zach does not appear to have a home ; he was seen at one time living in Joey 's trailer while working on a major blockbuster movie .
In one episode , Zach and Joey , both drunk , married in Tijuana , possibly a parody of Ross and Rachel marrying each other in the season - five finale of Friends .
Zach 's final appearance was in " Joey and the Big Move " .
Núñez was absent from the last five episodes , including the finale of the series , because he found another job .
Zach 's absence within the show was not mentioned , nor was the character at all .
* Ben Falcone as Howard , Joey 's friend and neighbor .
Section::::Cast and characters .
Several cast members had previously appeared as different characters in Friends ; Coolidge appeared as Amanda , an old friend of Monica and Phoebe , in a tenth - season episode .
Adam Goldberg , who played Jimmy , appeared in Friends second season in the recurring role of Eddie , who moves in with Chandler after Joey moves out .
Carlos Gómez , who played Sam The Director , appeared in one episode of Friends as the restaurant worker Julio in " The One with All the Jealousy " .
Patrick Kerr , who played the producer of the Daytime Soap Awards , appeared in one episode of Friends as a restaurant manager who auditions Monica for a job as a chef .
Brent Spiner , who played himself , appeared in one episode of Friends as James Campbell , who interviews Rachel for a job .
Additionally , Robert Costanzo reprised his role as Joey 's father , a character who originated in the first season of Friends , in " Joey and the Dad " .
Costanzo was the only actor besides LeBlanc to play the same character in this series as in Friends
( Gina appeared in a third - season episode of Friends , but was not played by Drea de Matteo ; Joey 's sister Mary Theresa also appeared in a third - season Friends episode , but was played by a different actress than on Joey ) .
BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Background and development .
After the series finale of Friends in 2004 , LeBlanc signed on for the spin - off series , Joey , following Joey 's move to Los Angeles to pursue his acting career .
Friends producers Marta Kauffman and David Crane were not interested in the spin - off , although Kevin S. Bright agreed to be executive producer along with Joey creators , Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg - Meehan , the latter of whom left the show after the first season and was replaced by Jon Pollack .
The pilot episode was released in screener for test audiences and members of the entertainment industry to preview the show and drum up business .
The screener was subsequently leaked on the Internet and thus has received a much wider critical review process than initially conceived .
There were few differences between the unbroadcast pilot and the version that was broadcast .
Ashley Scott played the role of Allison in the unbroadcast pilot , but was replaced by Andrea Anders and the character name changed to Alex .
The series did well in the Nielsen ratings in its first season ( 2004–2005 ) and was subsequently renewed for a second season ( 2005–2006 ) .
In the second season , Miguel A. Núñez Jr. was added to the show as a series regular .
Also , Jennifer Coolidge had a more prominent role .
The show was pulled from its Thursday - night timeslot in December 2005 , and NBC returned the show in a new timeslot ( Tuesdays at 8 pm ) on March 7 , 2006 .
Due in part to being in competition with American Idol , Joey was the lowest - rated prime time program of the week for NBC .
The network pulled the series after the first Tuesday broadcast and its cancellation was announced on May 15 , 2006 .
The remaining episodes have never been broadcast by NBC , but have been shown on various other networks around the world .
Episode 5 and Episode 13 of season 1 were directed by David Schwimmer , who played Ross Geller in Friends .
NBC heavily promoted Joey and gave it Friends ' Thursday 8:00 pm timeslot .
The pilot was watched by 18.6 million American viewers , but ratings continually decreased throughout the series ' two seasons , averaging 10.20 million viewers in the first season and 7.10 million in the second .
The final broadcast episode on March 7 , 2006 was watched by 4.1 million viewers ; NBC canceled the series on May 15 , 2006 after two seasons .
Bright blamed the collaboration between NBC executives , the studio and other producers for quickly ruining the series : EPISODES SEASON 1 :
2004–05 SEASON 2 :
2005–06 INTERNATIONAL AIRINGS Section::::International airings .
In the United Kingdom , the show aired on Channel 5 .
All episodes were broadcast .
In Brazil , the show premiered on November 2 , 2004 and it was first aired on Warner Channel .
All episodes were broadcast .
Two years later it also premiered on terrestrial television channel SBT under the name Vida de Artista ( Artist 's Life ) .
In Greece , the show started airing on Star Channel .
All episodes were broadcast .
In India , the show was aired on Star World .
All episodes were broadcast .
In Ireland , the series premiered on RTÉ Two and reruns aired on TV3 .
In Serbia , the show is airing on B92 .
In Russia , the show was aired on NTV .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Complete First Season was released on DVD on May 30 , 2006 with all 24 episodes and French and Spanish subtitles .
The Complete Second Season was released on April 29 , 2008 in Canada ( Region 1 ) and on September 10 , 2008 in the Netherlands and September 11 , 2008 in Portugal ( both Region 2 ) .
The show is rated PG in Australia and New Zealand and 12 in the United Kingdom for sexual references .
RECEPTION AND CANCELLATION Section::::Reception and cancellation .
Joey premiered on NBC on September 9 , 2004 as a part of the network 's Thursday night comedy lineup .
Although the series was not well received by critics , the premiere episode attracted 18.6 million viewers .
As the first season progressed , ratings fell but remained average ( 10.1 million viewers ) .
NBC renewed the series for a second season and moved it to Tuesday nights opposite Fox 's highly rated series American Idol .
As a result , ratings for the second season fell to an all - time low ( 4.1 million viewers ) and NBC put the show on hiatus in March 2006 .
NBC officially canceled the series in May 2006 citing low ratings .
NIELSEN RATINGS Section::::Nielsen ratings .
Based on average total viewers per episode of Joey on NBC AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Joey won the People 's Choice Award of Favorite New Television Comedy and Matt LeBlanc won Favorite Male Television Star .
LeBlanc was also nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
After the series ' cancellation in 2006 , Matt LeBlanc took a four - year break from acting before returning in the BBC / Showtime sitcom Episodes .
The series was a success for LeBlanc , earning him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in 2012 .
On the show he plays a fictionalized version of himself .
Joey is brought up several times in conversation by characters on the show , including LeBlanc , who praises the show but also laughs at his own real life career in the show , most notably with the line , " They said Joey was going to be a success , " to which another character replies " Joey was ... a , success . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Joey at Facebook