PORK ROLL Pork roll ( also known regionally as Taylor ham ) is a pork - based processed meat commonly available in New Jersey , New York , Delaware and parts of Pennsylvania and Maryland .
It was developed in 1856 by John Taylor of Hamilton Square , New Jersey , and sold as " Taylor 's Prepared Ham " .
Other producers entered the market , and subsequent food labeling regulations required Taylor to designate it as a " pork roll " alongside its competitors .
While " Taylor Ham " is technically a brand of pork roll , in regions of North Jersey all brands of pork roll may be referred as Taylor Ham due to John Taylor branding his original pork roll as Taylor .
ORIGIN AND DESCRIPTION Section::::Origin and description .
While a similar item , packed minced ham , may have been produced at the time of the Battle of Trenton , John Taylor is credited with creating his secret recipe for the product in 1856 .
George Washington Case , a farmer and butcher from nearby Belle Mead , New Jersey , later created his own recipe for pork roll in 1870 .
Case 's was reportedly packaged in corn husks .
Taylor originally called his product " Taylor 's Prepared Ham " , but was forced to change the name after it failed to meet the new legal definition of " ham " established by the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 .
Marketed as both " Taylor 's Pork Roll " and " Trenton Pork Roll " , it saw competition from products with similar names like " Rolled Pork " and " Trenton style Pork Roll " .
When their makers were sued by Taylor a 1910 legal case ruled that the words " Pork Roll " could not be trademarked .
In North Jersey , residents continue to use the term Taylor Ham , while South Jersey residents generally use the term Pork Roll , with Central Jersey residents using a mix of the two .
In the 1910 lawsuit , it was described as " a food article made of pork , packed in a cylindrical cotton sack or bag in such form that it could be quickly prepared for cooking by slicing without removal from the bag . "
Larry Olmsted of USA Today has described the taste of the meat as " a cross between Canadian bacon and bacon , less hammy and smoky than Canadian , fattier and saltier than bacon , with a unique texture , both crispy and slightly mushy . "
Companies that make pork roll include Case 's Pork Roll , Loeffler 's Gourmet , Hatfield Quality Meats and Alderfer Premium of Harleysville , Pennsylvania .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
It is typically eaten as part of a sandwich , with popular condiments including salt , pepper , ketchup , mustard , hot sauce , lettuce , and tomato .
It is also incorporated in many other recipes , including a popular breakfast sandwich known in the region as a " Taylor Ham , Egg , and Cheese " or " Pork Roll , Egg , and Cheese . "
in which fried pork roll is joined with a fried egg and American cheese and served on a hard roll , bagel or English muffin .
New Jersey eateries noted for their Jersey Breakfast include Slater 's in Middletown , and Starks United in Keansburg .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Trenton , New Jersey held its Inaugural Pork Roll Festival on May 24 , 2014 .
The Trenton Thunder minor league baseball team hosted their inaugural " Trenton Thunder World Famous Case 's Pork Roll Eating Championship " on September 26 , 2015 .
Joey Chestnut won the contest by eating 32 pork roll sandwiches in 10 minutes .
The Lakewood BlueClaws minor league baseball team holds a Pork Roll , Egg , and Cheese Race at the end of the fourth inning of every home game .
A song called " Pork Roll Egg and Cheese " appears on the album The Pod by Ween , locals of New Hope , Pennsylvania , referring specifically to a sandwich consisting of pork roll , egg and cheese on a kaiser roll .
Several other songs by the band such as " Frank " also contain references to pork roll .
On April 14 , 2016 , Assemblyman Tim Eustace introduced an Act in the New Jersey State Legislature designating the Taylor Ham , egg , and cheese sandwich as the New Jersey State Sandwich and supplementing chapter 9A of Title 52 of the Revised Statutes . "
An Act designating the Taylor Ham , egg , and cheese sandwich as the New Jersey State Sandwich and supplementing chapter 9A of Title 52 of the Revised Statutes . "
On May 15 , 2016 , President Barack Obama gave a commencement speech at Rutgers University 's 250th graduation ceremony in which he referenced the " Taylor Ham vs. pork roll debate " , saying , " I come here for a simple reason – to finally settle this pork roll vs.
Taylor Ham question ...
I'm just kidding ...
There 's not much
I 'm afraid to take on in my final year of office , but I know better than to get in the middle of that debate .
"
SEE ALSO
*
Back bacon * Spiced ham
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rojas , Christina ( May 21 , 2015 ) .
" Trenton mayor declares ' Pork Roll Day ' to coincide with Saturday festivals " .
The Times ( Trenton ) .