THE PALACE OF AUBURN HILLS
The Palace of Auburn Hills , commonly referred to as The Palace , is a defunct multi - purpose arena located in Auburn Hills , Michigan .
It was the home of the Detroit Pistons of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , the Detroit Shock of the Women 's National Basketball Association ( WNBA ) , the Detroit Vipers of the International Hockey League , the Detroit Safari of the Continental Indoor Soccer League , and the Detroit Fury of the Arena Football League .
The Palace was one of eight basketball arenas owned by their respective NBA franchises .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
By the time it closed as an NBA venue , the Palace was one of only two arenas which had not sold its naming rights to a corporate sponsor .
The other was Madison Square Garden .
The Pistons court was previously named the " William Davidson Court " , in honor of the late owner , prior to the home opener on October 30 , 2009 ; however , Davidson 's signature , along with the retired numbers , were removed from the hardwood when Tom Gores took over ownership of the Palace , and were re - retired instead atop the Palace rafters as replacement banners .
HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
From 1957 to 1978 , the Pistons competed in Detroit 's Olympia Stadium , Memorial Building , and Cobo Arena .
In 1978 , owner Bill Davidson elected not to share the new Joe Louis Arena with the Detroit Red Wings , and instead chose to relocate the team to the Pontiac Silverdome , a venue constructed for football , where they remained for the next decade .
While the Silverdome could accommodate massive crowds , it offered substandard sight lines for basketball viewing .
In late 1985 , a group led by Davidson decided to build a new arena in Auburn Hills .
Groundbreaking for the arena took place in June 1986 .
Using entirely private funding , The Palace cost a relatively low price of $ 90 million .
The Davidson family held a controlling interest in the arena until Tom Gores bought it as part of his purchase of the Pistons in 2011 .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Then - Pistons owner Bill Davidson and two developers privately financed the $ 90 million construction of The Palace , and did not require public funds .
The Palace was built with 180 luxury suites , considered an exorbitant number when it opened .
However , it consistently managed to lease virtually all of them .
In December 2005 , the Palace added five underground luxury suites , each containing of space and renting for $ 450,000 per year .
Eight more luxury suites , also located below arena level , were opened in February 2006 .
They range in size from and rent for $ 350,000 annually .
The architectural design of the Palace , including its multiple tiers of luxury suites , has been used as the basis for many other professional sports arenas in North America since its construction , including the Canadian Tire Centre in Ottawa , also designed by Rossetti Associates .
BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
The Palace opened in 1988 .
When one of its basketball occupants won a championship , the number on its address changed .
Its current address is 6 Championship Drive , reflecting the Pistons ' three NBA titles and the Detroit Shock 's three WNBA titles ( the Detroit Vipers ' 1997 Turner Cup championship has not been officially recognized in the arena 's address ; the address also remained unchanged despite the Shock 's move to Tulsa , Oklahoma in 2010 ; they moved to Dallas , Texas in 2016 , and are now known as the Dallas Wings ) .
The original address was 3777 Lapeer Road .
The Palace was widely considered to be the first of the modern - style NBA arenas , and its large number of luxury suites was a major reason for the building boom of new NBA arenas in the 1990s .
Although the Palace became one of the oldest arenas in the NBA , its foresighted design contained the amenities that most NBA teams have sought in new arenas built since that time .
By contrast , of the other NBA venues that opened during the 1988 - 89 season , Amway Arena , Charlotte Coliseum , and Miami Arena have been demolished , while the Bradley Center and Sleep Train Arena have been replaced .
All of these arenas were rendered obsolete by the lack of luxury suites and club seating , lucrative revenue - generating features that made pro sports teams financially successful in order to remain competitive long - term , and also being located in suburban rather than downtown areas ( the Palace , however , remained one of the successful suburban arenas ) .
Nonetheless , Palace Sports & Entertainment ( PS&E ) had spent $ 117.5 million in upgrades and renovations to keep the arena updated .
A new high definition JumboTron monitor , new LED video monitors , and more than of
ribbon display technology from Daktronics was installed in the mid-2000s .
MALICE
AT
THE PALACE Section::::Malice at the Palace .
On November 19 , 2004 , a fight broke – out between members of the Pistons and Indiana Pacers .
As the on - court fight died down , a fan threw a cup of Diet Coke at Pacers forward Ron Artest , who then rushed into the crowd , sparking a melee between players and spectators .
The fight resulted in the suspension of nine players , criminal charges against five players , and criminal charges against five spectators .
The offending fans were banned from attending games at the Palace .
In the aftermath of the fight , the NBA decided to increase the security presence between players and spectators .
The fact that the fight took place at the Palace led to it becoming colloquially referred to as the " Malice at the Palace " and the " Basketbrawl " .
The Palace was also the site of a brawl between the WNBA 's Shock and Sparks on July 21 , 2008 .
NOTABLE CONCERTS Section::::Notable concerts .
Aerosmith played the venue 14 times from 1990 - 2012 .
Michael Jackson performed three sold - out shows during his Bad World Tour on October 24 - 26 , 1988 .
Pink Floyd performed there on 16 and 17 August 1988 as part of their A Momentary Lapse of Reason Tour .
Bon Jovi performed during their Keep The Faith world tour on March 2nd , 1993 , their Crush Tour on November 18 , 2000 and their Lost Highway Tour on February 20 , 2008 .
Van Halen performed 3 shows on their For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge Tour on February 21 , 1992 and consecutive shows on April 3rd and 4th , 1992 .
They also performed consecutive shows during their The Balance " Ambulance " Tour on April 15th and 16th , 1995 .
Sting performed during his ...
Nothing Like the Sun Tour on August 13 , 1988 , becoming the very first musical act to perform at The Palace .
The Cure performed two consecutive shows , during their Wish Tour on July 18–19 , 1992 , with The Cranes as their opening act .
The shows were recorded and released as a live album , entitled Show .
Grand Funk Railroad performed a benefit show for the nation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1997 during their Reunion Tour .
The show also featured Peter Frampton , Alto Reed , Paul Shaffer , and the Detroit Symphony Orchestra .
The performance was recorded , and released as the double - live Bosnia album in October of that year .
The Palace was the site of an attempt on the life of Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page , while he was on tour , with former band mate Robert Plant , during their Tour .
On March 31 , 1995 , Lance Alworth Cunningham , a 23-year - old , who thought that Led Zeppelin music contained " satanic messages " , tried rushing the stage with a knife .
He waited until the song " Kashmir " started and then made his charge for the stage , waving the weapon .
The man was tackled by patrons and security about 50 feet from the stage .
Madonna performed two sold – out shows during her Drowned World Tour on August 25–26 , 2001 .
The shows were recorded and broadcast live on HBO and were later released as a DVD , entitled Drowned World Tour 2001 .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
In October 2016 , it was reported that the Pistons ' ownership were negotiating a possible relocation to Little Caesars Arena , a new multi - purpose venue located in Midtown Detroit built by Olympia Entertainment to replace Joe Louis Arena as home of the NHL 's Detroit Red Wings , as soon as the 2017–18 season .
On November 22 , 2016 , the team officially announced that they would play at Little Caesars Arena in 2017 .
The final NBA game at The Palace was played on April 10 , 2017 , with the Pistons losing to the Washington Wizards , 105 - 101 .
This game ended a 42-year history of professional sports in Oakland County .
Bob Seger held the final concert at the venue on September 23 , 2017 .
The last scheduled event at the venue was the Taste of Auburn Hills on October 12 , 2017 .
Palace Sports & Entertainment entered into a joint venture with Olympia known as 313 Presents to jointly manage entertainment bookings and promotions for Little Caesars Arena and other venues owned by the firms .
Despite its closure , the Palace is still in top condition as a sporting and concert venue .
However , it is located in a northern suburb , relatively far away from the city center , in light of the growing trend of " walkable urbanism " where the Pistons wanted to grow their fanbase .
While there have been no official confirmations as of yet , the Palace is likely to end up demolished , and the site could be redeveloped to accommodate a possible new auto supplier headquarters and research and development parks .
SEE ALSO
* DTE Energy Music Theatre
* List of indoor arenas in the United States
* Sports in Detroit
* Tourism in metropolitan Detroit REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS