AVIATION FUEL Aviation fuel is a specialized type of petroleum - based fuel used to power aircraft .
It is generally of a higher quality than fuels used in less critical applications , such as heating or road transport , and often contains additives to reduce the risk of icing or explosion due to high temperature , among other properties .
Most current commercial airlines and military aircraft use jet fuel for maximum fuel efficiency and lowest cost .
These aircraft account for the vast majority of aviation fuel refined today , which is also used in diesel aircraft engines .
Other aviation fuels available for aircraft are kinds of petroleum spirit used in engines with spark plugs ( e.g. , piston and Wankel rotary engines ) .
Specific energy is the important criterion in selecting an appropriate fuel to power an aircraft .
Much of the weight of an aircraft goes into fuel storage to provide the range , and more weight means more fuel consumption .
Aircraft have a high peak power and thus fuel demand during take - off and landing .
This has so far prevented electric aircraft using electric batteries as the main propulsion energy store becoming widely commercially viable .
TYPES OF AVIATION FUEL CONVENTIONAL AVIATION FUELS JET FUEL Section::::Types of aviation fuel .
Section::::Conventional aviation fuels .
Section::::Jet fuel .
Jet fuel is a clear to straw - colored fuel , based on either an unleaded kerosene ( Jet A-1 ) , or a naphtha - kerosene blend ( Jet B ) .
Similar to diesel fuel , it can be used in either compression ignition engines or turbine engines .
Jet - A powers modern commercial airliners and is a mix of pure kerosene and burns at temperatures at or above .
Kerosene - based fuel has a much higher flash point than gasoline - based fuel , meaning that it requires significantly higher temperature to ignite .
It is a high - quality fuel ; if it fails the purity and other quality tests for use on jet aircraft , it is sold to other ground - based users with less demanding requirements , such as railroad engines .
AVGAS Section::::Avgas .
Avgas ( aviation gasoline ) is used in spark - ignited internal - combustion engines in aircraft .
Its formulation is distinct from mogas ( motor gasoline , a / k / a petrol ) used in cars and many military vehicles , such as the " Deuce and a Half " .
Formulated for stability , safety , and predictable performance under a wide range of environments , avgas is typically used in aircraft which use reciprocating or Wankel engines .
EMERGING AVIATION FUELS BIOFUELS
Section::::Emerging aviation fuels .
Section::::Biofuels .
Alternatives to conventional fossil - based aviation fuels , new fuels made via the biomass to liquid method ( like sustainable aviation fuel ) and certain straight vegetable oils can also be used .
Fuels such as sustainable aviation fuel have the advantage that few or no modifications are necessary on the aircraft itself , provided that the fuel characteristics meet specifications for lubricity and density as well as adequately swelling elastomer seals in current aircraft fuel systems .
Sustainable aviation fuel and blends of fossil and sustainably - sourced alternative fuels yield lower emissions of particles and GHGs .
They are , however , not being used heavily , because they still face political , technological , and economic barriers , such as currently being more expensive than conventionally produced aviation fuels by a wide margin .
COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS AND LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS Section::::Compressed natural gas and liquified natural gas .
Compressed natural gas ( CNG ) and liquified natural gas ( LNG ) are fuel feedstocks that aircraft could switch to , other than conventional fossil - oil .
Turbofans for instance can be operated on a number of different fuels , and some have been made optimized for use with natural gas .
Some aircraft , such as the Tupolev
Tu-155 , as well as the " SUGAR Freeze " aircraft under NASA 's N+4 Advanced Concept Development program ( made by Boeing 's Subsonic Ultra Green Aircraft Research ( SUGAR ) team ) , were designed to run on LNG .
The low specific energy of natural gas even in liquid form compared to conventional fuels gives it a distinct disadvantage for flight applications .
PRODUCTION OF AVIATION FUEL Section::::Production of aviation fuel .
The production of aviation fuel falls into two categories : fuel suitable for turbine engines and fuel suitable for internal combustion engines .
There are international specifications for each .
Jet fuel is used in both turboprop and jet aircraft , and must maintain a low viscosity at low temperature , meet definite limits in terms of density and calorific value , burn cleanly , and remain chemically stable when heated to high temperature .
Aviation gasoline , often referred to as " avgas " or 100-LL ( low - lead ) , is a highly refined form of gasoline for aircraft , with an emphasis on purity , anti - knock characteristics and minimization of spark plug fouling .
Avgas must meet performance guidelines for both the rich mixture condition required for take - off power settings and the leaner mixtures used during cruise to reduce fuel consumption .
Avgas is sold in much lower volume than jet fuel , but to many more individual aircraft operators ; whereas jet fuel is sold in high volume to large aircraft operators , such as airlines and military .
ENERGY CONTENT Section::::Energy content .
The net energy content for aviation fuels depends on their composition .
Some typical values are : * BP Avgas 80 , 44.65 MJ / kg , density at 15 ° C is 690 kg / m .
* Kerosene type BP Jet A-1 , 43.15 MJ / kg , density at 15 ° C is 804 kg / m .
* Kerosene type BP Jet TS-1 ( for lower temperatures ) , 43.2 MJ / kg , density at 15 ° C is 787 kg / m .
DENSITY Section::::Density .
In performance calculations , airliner manufacturers use a density of jet fuel around ( 6.75 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 6.77 + 6.55 + 6.7)/6round1 lb / USgal or ( .809+.8028
+ 0.803 + 0.811 + 0.785 + 0.803)/6round1
kg / l .
Specific cases are : * Bombardier Aerospace : The Challenger Multi - role Aircraft isa special mission variant of the Bombardier Challenger 650 business jet platform .
Bombardier bases performance on the use of fuel with an average lower heating value of 18,550 BTU / lb ( 43.147 MJ / kg ) and a density of .
* Embraer : In its airport planning manual for the E195 uses an adopted fuel density of .
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION Section::::Chemical composition .
Aviation fuels consist of blends of over two thousand chemicals , primarily hydrocarbons ( paraffins , olefins , naphthenes , and aromatics ) , additives such as antioxidants and metal deactivators , biocides , static reducers , icing inhibitors , corrosion inhibitors , and impurities .
Principal components include n - heptane and isooctane .
Like other fuels , aviation fuel for spark - ignited piston engines are described by their octane rating .
Alcohol , alcohol mixtures , and other alternative fuels may be used experimentally , but alcohol is not permitted in any certified aviation fuel specification .
In Brazil , the Embraer Ipanema EMB-202A is a version of the Ipanema agricultural aircraft with a modified Lycoming IO-540-K1J5 engine so as to be able to run on ethanol .
Other aircraft engines that were modified to run on 100 % ethanol were several other types of Lycoming engines ( including the Lycoming 235N2C , and Lycoming IO-320 ) and certain Rotax engines .
TAX Section::::Tax .
The Convention on International Civil Aviation ( ICAO ) ( Chicago 1944 , Article 24 ) exempts air fuels already loaded onto an aircraft on landing ( and which remain on the aircraft ) from import taxes .
Bi - lateral air services agreements govern the tax exemption of aviation fuels .
In the course of an EU initiative , many of these agreements have been modified to allow taxation .
Also , the motion for a European parliament resolution on a European Strategy for Low - emission Mobility has stated that " the possibilities for harmonised international measures for kerosene taxation for aviation " needs to be explored .
Australia and the United States oppose a worldwide levy on aviation fuel , but a number of other countries have expressed interest .
During a debate in the UK Parliament , the forgone tax income due to the exemption of tax on aviation fuel was estimated at £ 10 billion annually .
Furthermore , the planned inclusion of international aviation into the European Union Emission Trading Scheme in 2014 has been called an ' illegal tax ' by countries including the US and China , which cite the Chicago Convention .
CERTIFICATION Section::::Certification .
Fuels have to conform to a specification in order to be approved for use in type certificated aircraft .
The American Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM ) developed specifications for automobile gasoline as well as aviation gasoline .
These specifications are ASTM D910 and ASTM D6227 for aviation gasoline and ASTM D439 or ASTM
D4814 ( latest revision ) for automobile gasoline .
IN USE Section::::In use .
Aviation fuel generally arrives at the airport via pipeline systems , such as the CEPS .
It is then pumped over and dispensed from a tanker or bowser .
The fuel is then driven up to parked aircraft and helicopters .
Some airports have pumps similar to filling stations to which aircraft must taxi .
Some airports have permanent piping to parking areas for large aircraft .
Aviation fuel is transferred to an aircraft via one of two methods : overwing or underwing .
OVERWING
Section::::Overwing .
Overwing fueling is used on smaller planes , helicopters , and all piston - engine aircraft .
Overwing fueling is similar to car fueling — one or more fuel ports are opened and fuel is pumped in with a conventional pump .
UNDERWING
Section::::Underwing .
Underwing fueling , also called single - point refueling or pressure refueling where not dependent on gravity , is used on larger aircraft and for jet fuel exclusively .
For pressure refueling , a high - pressure hose is attached and fuel is pumped in at 275 kilopascals ( 40 psi ) and a maximum of 310 kilopascals ( 45 psi ) for most commercial aircraft .
Pressure for military aircraft , especially fighters , ranges up to 415 kilopascals ( 60 psi ) .
Air being displaced in the tanks is usually vented overboard through a single vent on the aircraft .
Because there is only one attachment point , fuel distribution between tanks is either automated or it is controlled from a control panel at the fueling point or in the cockpit .
An early use of pressure refueling was on the de Havilland Comet and Sud Aviation Caravelle .
Larger aircraft allow for two or more attachment points ; however , this is still referred to as single - point refueling , as either attachment point can refuel all of the tanks .
Multiple attachments allow for faster fuel flows .
MISFUELING
Section::::Misfueling .
Because of the danger of confusing the fuel types , precautions are taken to distinguish between avgas and jet fuel beyond clearly marking all containers , vehicles , and piping .
The aperture on fuel tanks of aircraft requiring avgas can not be greater than 60 millimetres in diameter .
Avgas is often dyed and is dispensed from nozzles with a diameter of 40 mm ( 49 mm in the United States ) .
Jet fuel is clear to straw - colored , and is dispensed from a special nozzle called a J spout or duckbill that has a rectangular opening larger than 60 mm diagonally , so as not to fit into avgas ports .
However , some jet and turbine aircraft , such as some models of the Astar helicopter , have a fueling port too small for the J spout , and thus require a smaller nozzle .
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS Section::::Safety precautions .
Any fueling operation can be very dangerous , and aviation operations have characteristics which must be accommodated .
As an aircraft flies through the air , it can accumulate static electricity .
If this is not dissipated before fueling , an electric arc could occur and ignite fuel vapors .
To prevent this , aircraft are electrically bonded to the fueling apparatus before fueling begins , and are not disconnected until after fueling is complete .
Some regions require the aircraft and/or fuel truck to be grounded too .
Pressure fueling systems incorporate a dead man 's switch to preclude unmonitored operation .
Aviation fuel can cause severe environmental damage ; all fueling vehicles must carry equipment to control fuel spills .
Fire extinguishers must be present at any fueling operation .
Airport firefighting forces are specially trained and equipped to handle aviation fuel fires and spills .
Aviation fuel must be checked daily and before every flight for contaminants such as water or dirt .
Many airlines now require safety belts be left unfastened should passengers be aboard during refueling .
SEE ALSO
* Avgas * Aviation biofuel * Sustainable Aviation Fuel * Environmental impact of aviation
* Jet fuel
* Kerosene * JP-1 * JP-4 * JP-5 * JP-6 * JP-7 * JP-8 * JPTS * Rocket fuel *
Swift fuel
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of jet fuels ( by AirBP )
* Aviation Fuels Technical Review ( by Chevron Global Aviation )
* Air NZ sees biofuel salvation in jatropha .
* Messerschmitt Bf 109 site - transcribed document on World War II German aviation fuel * World Jet Fuel Specifications
2008 handbook
* Shell Aviation Fuels Handbook