ENDODERMIS
The endodermis is the central , innermost layer of cortex in some land plants .
It is made of compact living cells surrounded by an outer ring of endodermal cells that are impregnated with hydrophobic substances ( Casparian Strip ) to restrict apoplastic flow of water to the inside .
The endodermis is the boundary between the cortex and the stele .
In many seedless vascular plants , the endodermis is a distinctly visible layer of cells immediately outside the vascular cylinder ( stele ) in roots and shoots .
In most seed plants , especially woody types , an endodermis is absent from the stems but is present in roots .
The endodermis helps regulate the movement of water , ions and hormones into and out of the vascular system .
It may also store starch , be involved in perception of gravity and protect the plant against toxins moving into the vascular system .
STRUCTURE OF THE ENDODERMIS Section::::Structure of the Endodermis .
The endodermis is developmentally the innermost portion of the cortex .
It may consist of a single layer of barrel - shaped cells without any intercellular spaces or sometimes several cell layers .
The cells of the endodermis typically have their primary cell walls thickened on four sides radial and transverse with suberin , a water - impermeable waxy substance which in young endodermal cells is deposited in distinctive bands called Casparian strips .
These strips vary in width but are typically smaller than the cell wall on which they are deposited .
If the endodermis is likened to a brick cylinder ( e.g. a smokestack ) , with the bricks representing individual cells , the Casparian strips are analogous to the mortar between the bricks .
In older endodermal cells , suberin may be more extensively deposited on all cell wall surfaces and the cells can become lignified , forming a complete waterproof layer .
Some plants have a large number of amyloplasts ( starch containing organelles ) in their endodermal cells , in which case the endodermis may be called a starch sheath .
Endodermis is often distinctly visible with certain stains like phloroglucinol due to the phenolic and lipid nature of the Casparian strips or the abundance of amyloplasts .
FUNCTION OF THE ENDODERMIS Section::::Function of the Endodermis .
The endodermis prevents water , and any solutes dissolved in the water , from passing through this layer via the apoplast pathway .
Water can only pass through the endodermis by crossing the membrane of endodermal cells twice ( once to enter and a second time to exit ) .
Water moving into or out of the xylem , which is part of the apoplast , can thereby be regulated since it must enter the symplast in the endodermis .
This allows the plant to control to some degree the movement of water and to selectively uptake or prevent the passage of ions or other molecules .
The endodermis does not allow gas bubbles to enter the xylem and helps prevent embolisms from occurring in the water column .
Passage cells are endodermal cells of older roots which have retained thin walls and Casparian strips rather than becoming suberized and waterproof like the other cells around them , to continue to allow some symplastic flow to the inside .
Experimental evidence suggests that passage cells function to allow transfer of solutes such as calcium and magnesium into the stele , in order to eventually reach the transpiration system .
For the most part , however , old roots seal themselves off at the endodermis , and only serve as a passageway for water and minerals taken up by younger roots " downstream " .
Endodermal cells may contain starch granules in the form of amyloplasts .
These may serve as food storage , and have been shown to be involved in gravitropism in some plants .
SEE ALSO
* Suberin * Exodermis REFERENCES
* Gifford , Ernest M. & Foster , Adriance S. ( 1988 ) .
Morphology and Evolution of Vascular Plants , ( 3rd ed . ) .
New York : W. H. Freeman and Company . .