CAMELOT GROUP
Camelot Group are the operators of the UK National Lottery .
Camelot Group was awarded the National Lottery franchise in May 1994 ( though the lottery did not start until November 1994 ) and was re - awarded the franchise in 2001 and again in 2007 .
The current franchise period started in 2009 and runs until 2019 , with a possible extension of up to five years .
The governmental body the Gambling Commission is responsible for deciding who is awarded the franchise .
The way the franchise was awarded to Camelot in 2001 caused some controversy , because state - owned Royal Mail held a 20 % stake in the Camelot Group .
In March 2010 , Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan from Canada announced that it was buying Camelot for £ 389 m . HISTORY Section::::History .
Camelot was formed as a consortium to bid for the National Lottery project .
The major partners were International Computers Limited ( ICL ) , supplying hardware , software , and systems integration expertise ; Racal with responsibility for the communications network ; and Cadbury Schweppes bringing experience in consumer marketing and knowledge of the world of corner - shop retailers .
De La Rue brought knowledge of secure printing technology , and GTECH Corporation were brought in as the selected supplier of applications software .
Staff were seconded from the partner companies , transferring to Camelot Group when the bid was won .
Senior executives such as Tim Holley were enticed to join the project by the promise of large bonuses if the bid was successful .
This caused embarrassment later when the incoming Labour government , in particular Chris Smith , the Culture Secretary , publicly criticised Camelot and its executives for excessively lavish salaries and bonus payments .
The Camelot name is reflected in the actual lottery machines used in the National Lottery draw , which are named for characters , places , and objects in Arthurian Legend ( Guinevere , Lancelot , Excalibur , Arthur , etc . ) .
2000/2001
FRANCHISE CONTROVERSY
Section::::2000/2001 franchise controversy .
Two companies competed for the National Lottery franchise in 2001 : Camelot , the incumbent operator , and a rival operator called " The People 's Lottery " , organised by Sir Richard Branson .
During the 2000 franchise bidding process , a technical problem with lottery terminals supplied by American company GTECH Corporation came to light .
It was discovered that this technical problem may have inadvertently caused winners to be paid incorrect amounts .
Because of this problem and the relationship between Camelot and GTECH , the National Lottery Commission recommended that the lottery franchise be awarded to the People 's Lottery .
GTECH had been a shareholder in Camelot Group but they sold their shareholding to Camelot Group , and the remaining shareholders increased their stakes from 16.66 % to 20 % .
In August 2000 , the chair of the National Lottery Commission , Dame Helena Shovelton , announced that neither party would be invited to run the National Lottery , claiming that neither party met the statutory requirements to run the lottery .
It was felt that legal problems were responsible for the downfall of the People 's Lottery bid , while the relationship between G - Tech and Camelot was the reason Camelot would not be invited to run the lottery .
Although neither bid met the statutory requirements , the Commission still tried to award the franchise to the People 's Lottery .
By September 2000 , it was clear that although neither party met the statutory requirements to run the lottery , the Commission was going to award the franchise to the People 's Lottery .
Camelot initiated legal action , taking the Commission to the high court for a judicial review .
The High Court judges sided with Camelot , describing the Commission 's decision as " conspicuously unfair " .
The National Lottery Commission responded by dismissing the HM Treasury legal team who had been advising them .
Dame Helena resigned shortly afterwards and was replaced by Lord Burns .
During November , the National Lottery Commission reopened the bidding process and both parties resubmitted their bids , the commission hoped to announce the winner by mid - December .
On 19 December 2000 the commission announced that Camelot would be awarded the franchise , with voting 4 - 1 in favour of Camelot .
One member later resigned from the commission over the process , deeply unhappy that Camelot had been re - awarded the franchise .
It was during the second bidding process that Camelot agreed to buy out shareholder G - Tech 's stake in the company .
Sir Richard Branson threatened to take further legal action ; but faced with the prospect of a lengthy and costly legal battle , one which could have resulted in the National Lottery games being suspended , he backed down .
2009
LICENCE
Section::::2009 licence .
Camelot 's third licence period started on 31 January 2009 ; the money given to good causes was increased , and retailers ' commission increased from 5 % to 6 % .
The third licence is for a ten - year period with the option to extend by a further five years .
In March 2009 , Camelot announced a programme of redundancies to cut costs throughout the company .
In March 2012 , the National Lottery Commission extended Camelot 's Licence by four years to 2023 , on condition that Camelot deliver an additional £ 1.7 billion in lottery funding to good causes .
In October 2013 , Camelot doubled the ticket price of its main National Lottery game , Lotto , to £ 2 , with the aim of increasing ticket sales .
Analysts noted that in the subsequent two - year period , funds raised for good causes by the National Lottery fell by £ 100 million .
2016
GAMBLING COMMISSION FINE Section::::2016 Gambling Commission fine .
In December 2016 , Camelot was fined £ 3 million by the Gambling Commission over an apparent ticket fraud .
A jackpot winner in 2009 had allegedly conspired with a Camelot employee to claim £ 2.5 million in prize money using a bogus ticket .
Although police did not have enough evidence to bring a prosecution , the commission found that Camelot had breached the terms of its operating licence in failing to investigate the veracity of the prize claim before paying out .
INCOME Section::::Income . , each pound ( 100p ) spent on the National Lottery is divided as follows : * 50p Prize fund
* 28p Good causes * 12p Government * 5p Retailers as commission
* 5p Camelot * 4.5p Camelot for operating costs
* 0.5p Camelot for profit FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Camelot Group website
* National Lottery website