NBA ROOKIE OF THE YEAR AWARD
The National Basketball Association 's Rookie of the Year Award is an annual National Basketball Association ( NBA ) award given to the top rookie(s ) of the regular season .
Initiated following the 1952–53 NBA season , it confers the Eddie Gottlieb Trophy , named after the former Philadelphia Warriors head coach .
The winner is selected by a panel of United States and Canadian sportswriters and broadcasters , each casting first , second , and third place votes ( worth five points , three points , and one point respectively ) .
The player(s ) with the highest point total , regardless of the number of first - place votes , wins the award .
The most recent Rookie of the Year winner is Ben Simmons .
Twenty - one winners were drafted first overall .
Sixteen winners have also won the NBA Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) award in their careers ; Wilt Chamberlain and Wes Unseld earning both honors the same season .
Nineteen of the forty two non - active winners have been elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame .
Three seasons had joint winners — Dave Cowens and Geoff Petrie in the , Grant Hill and Jason Kidd in the , and Elton Brand and Steve Francis in the 1999–2000 season .
Five players won the award unanimously ( by capturing all of the first - place votes ) – Ralph Sampson , David Robinson , Blake Griffin , Damian Lillard , and Karl - Anthony Towns .
Patrick Ewing of Jamaica , Pau Gasol of Spain , Kyrie Irving and Ben Simmons of Australia and Andrew Wiggins of Canada are the only winners not born in the United States .
Three of these individuals have dual nationality by birth — Wiggins and Simmons have American fathers , and both of Irving 's parents are Americans .
Ewing immigrated to the Boston area at age 11 , Irving moved to the United States at age 2 , and Wiggins and Simmons moved to the U.S. while in high school .
Gasol is the only winner trained totally outside the U.S.
WINNERS Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of FameTerritorial pick UNOFFICIAL WINNERS
SEE ALSO * NBA Development League Rookie of the Year Award
* NBA Rookie of the Month Award NOTES
REFERENCES
General Specific