HART 'S WAR
Hart 's War is a 2002 American thriller drama film about a World War II prisoner of war ( POW ) camp based on the novel by John Katzenbach .
It stars Bruce Willis as Col . William McNamara and Colin Farrell as Lt .
Thomas Hart .
The film co - stars Terrence Howard , Cole Hauser and Marcel Iureş .
The film , directed by Gregory Hoblit , was shot at Barrandov Studios in Prague , and released on 15 February 2002 .
The film earned mixed reviews and did poorly at the box office .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
During the Battle of the Bulge in World War II , U.S. Army intelligence officer First Lieutenant Thomas Hart ( Farrell ) is captured by German forces .
While interrogating Hart , the Germans coerce him to divulge intelligence by taking away his boots , causing his feet to become frostbitten and badly injured , and leaving him , naked , in a very cold cell .
He is then transferred by train to Stalag VI - A prisoner of war camp at Hemer , Germany .
While en route , a P-51 Mustang attacks ( the letters POW were painted on the top of the train , but got covered by thick snow ) .
To save themselves , the POWs leave the train and spell P - O - W with their bodies and prevent further strafing .
After arriving at the new POW camp , Lt . Hart is interviewed by the ranking American officer , Colonel William McNamara ( Willis ) .
When McNamara asks if he cooperated with the Germans after he was captured , Hart denies it .
McNamara knows this to be a lie when Hart says he only endured three days of interrogation .
McNamara does not reveal this to Hart , but sends him to bunk in a barracks for enlisted men , rather than allow him to bunk with the other officers .
Two Black pilots are brought to the camp and assigned to Hart 's barracks .
They are the only African Americans in the camp , and their situation is compounded by their status as officers .
Staff Sgt .
Vic W. Bedford ( Hauser ) , a racist , is their primary antagonist .
One of the pilots , Lt . Lamar Archer , is executed when accused of keeping a weapon that Bedford had planted in his bunk .
When Bedford himself subsequently turns up dead , the surviving pilot , Lt .
Lincoln A. Scott ( Howard ) is accused of killing Bedford in retaliation .
A law student before the war , Hart is appointed by McNamara to defend the accused pilot at his court - martial , a trial to which the camp commandant , Oberst Werner Visser ( Iureş ) agrees .
Much later , McNamara reveals to Hart that the " defense , " like the trial itself , is a sham , an elaborate distraction to hide a planned attack on a nearby ammunition plant ( which the U.S. Army mistakenly believes to be a shoe factory ) by McNamara and his men , in aid of the war effort .
It is revealed that Bedford planted the weapon in Archer 's bunk , knowing the guards would kill Archer for it .
In return , Bedford informed the guards of the location of a secret radio .
It is also revealed Bedford planned to escape with money and clothes , likely in return for telling the Nazis about McNamara 's plan .
Upon realizing Bedford 's plot , McNamara killed Bedford to prevent it .
Hart is shocked that McNamara as a senior officer would sacrifice a fellow American ( Scott ) to protect the planned attack on the ammunition plant .
McNamara reminds Hart that in war , sometimes one man must be sacrificed to save the lives of many .
Hart acknowledges this , but retorts that it is McNamara 's duty to ensure that he ( McNamara ) , not Lincoln Scott , is the sacrifice .
Disgusted , McNamara says that Hart does not know anything about duty , in reference to how Hart gave in to a " Level 1 " interrogator after three days , whereas McNamara was tortured for a month .
McNamara 's ploy nearly succeeds .
The escaped soldiers destroy the nearby munitions plant .
However , at the end of the court - martial , Hart falsely confesses to Bedford 's murder in order to save Lt .
Scott .
McNamara overhears Hart 's confession ; McNamara has a change of heart and voluntarily returns to the camp to accept responsibility .
Oberst Visser holds McNamara accountable and personally executes him on the spot , but spares the remaining prisoners .
Three months later , the German army surrenders to the Allies .
The prison camp is liberated and all of the surviving prisoners , including Hart , are sent home .
Hart 's final comments are that he learned about honor , duty , and sacrifice .
CAST
* Bruce Willis as Col .
William McNamara
* Colin Farrell as Lt .
Thomas Hart
* Terrence Howard as Lt .
Lincoln Scott * Cole Hauser as Staff Sgt
Vic Bedford
* Marcel Iureş as Oberst Werner Visser
* Linus Roache as Captain Peter Ross * Vicellous Reon Shannon as Lt .
Lamar Archer
* Jonathan Brandis as Private Lewis P. Wakely * Maury Sterling as Private First Class Dennis A. Gerber
* Sam Jaeger as Captain R. G. Sisk
* Scott Michael Campbell as Corporal Joe Cromin
* Rory Cochrane as Sergeant Carl Webb * Sebastian Tillinger as Private Bert D. " Moose "
Codman
* Rick Ravanello as Major Joe Clary * Adrian Grenier as Private Daniel E. Abrams
* Sam Worthington as Corporal B.J. ' Depot ' Guidry * Holger Handtke as Major Johann Wirtz RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Hart 's War received mixed reviews .
The film holds a 60 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 122 reviews , with an average rating of 6/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads : " Well - made and solidly acted , Hart 's War is modestly compelling .
However , the movie suffers from having too many subplots " .
Metacritic rated it 49/100 based on 32 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
Hart 's War was a box office bomb .
Produced on a budget of $ 70 million , the film grossed between $ 32 and $ 33.1 million worldwide .
Jonathan Brandis , who hanged himself in November 2003 , had previously said that he was depressed about his waning career , which had continued to decline in the final years of his life .
He was also reportedly disappointed when his appearance in Hart 's War , a role he had hoped would revive his career , was significantly reduced in the film 's final cut .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS