WHITE CASTLE ( RESTAURANT )
White Castle is an American regional hamburger restaurant chain in the Midwestern region of the United States with a location in Shanghai , China .
It has been generally credited as the country 's first fast - food chain .
It is known for its small , square hamburgers .
Sometimes referred to as " sliders " , the burgers were initially priced at five cents until 1929 and remained at ten cents until 1949 .
In the 1940s , White Castle periodically ran promotional ads in local newspapers which contained coupons offering five burgers for ten cents , takeout only .
On January 14 , 2014 , Time labeled the White Castle slider the most influential burger of all time .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Walter Anderson ( 1880 - 1963 ) had been running food stands in Wichita since 1916 when he opened his first diner in a converted streetcar .
After a second and third location , he was looking to open a fourth location when he met Billy Ingram and together they started the White Castle chain .
White Castle was founded in 1921 in Wichita , Kansas .
Cook Walt A. Anderson partnered with insurance and real estate man Edgar Waldo " Billy " A. Ingram to make White Castle into a chain of restaurants and market the brand and its distinctive product .
Anderson and Ingram started with only $ 700 for the original White Castle in Wichita , Kansas .
The original location was the northwest corner of First and Main ; the building is no longer standing .
At the time , Americans were hesitant to eat ground beef after Upton Sinclair 's 1906 novel The Jungle had publicized the poor sanitation practices of the meat packing industry .
The founders set out to change the public 's perception of the cleanliness of the industry they were creating .
To invoke a feeling of cleanliness , their restaurants were small buildings with stainless steel interiors , and employees outfitted with spotless uniforms .
Their first restaurants in Wichita , Kansas , were a success , and the company branched out into other Midwestern markets , starting in 1922 with El Dorado , Kansas .
The earliest buildings , such as Indianapolis White Castle#3 , built in 1927 , had exteriors of white enamel - glazed brick and interiors of enameled steel .
The Indianapolis unit was in operation until 1979 , making it , at the time of its closure , the longest - operating fast food restaurant in the country .
The company constructed this style of building from 1924 to 1929 .
White Castle Building No . 8 , in Minneapolis , Minnesota , originally built in 1936 and remodeled ( photo in infobox above ) , is an example of the chain 's buildings with prefabricated white porcelain enamel on steel exteriors .
The building measured by and was made to resemble the Chicago Water Tower , with octagonal buttresses , crenelated towers , and a parapet wall .
The success of White Castle led to numerous imitators .
Restaurants copied the distinctive architecture of White Castle buildings , as well as created confusion for consumers by using a similar name .
The first of these imitators in Wichita was Little Kastle .
Many competitors created their names with a play on the White Castle name .
Some restaurant chains just replaced the word " Castle " with their own word ( Cabin , Cap , Clock , Crescent , Diamond , Dome , Fortress , Grille , House , Hut , Kitchen , Knight , Log , Manna , Mill , Palace , Plaza , Shop , Spot , Tavern , Tower , Turret , Wonder ) while others chose to replace " White " with another ( Blue , King 's , Little , Magic , Modern , Prince 's , Red , Royal , Silver ) .
Some of the other imitators included Castle Blanca , Blue Beacon , Blue Bell , Blue Tower , Red Barn , Red Lantern , and Klover Kastle .
Despite all the competition , none of the competitors were able to match the success of White Castle .
Anderson is credited with invention of the hamburger bun as well as " the kitchen as assembly line , and the cook as infinitely replaceable technician , " hence giving rise to the modern fast - food phenomenon .
Due to White Castle 's innovation of having chain - wide standardized methods , customers could be sure that they would receive the same product and service in every White Castle restaurant .
Since fast food was unknown in the United States at the time of White Castle 's founding , there was no infrastructure to support the business , as is common with today 's fast - food restaurants .
The company established centralized bakeries , meat supply plants , and warehouses to supply itself .
It was said that the only things they did n't do themselves were raise the cows and grow their own wheat .
Ingram developed a device to produce previously unheard of paper hats .
In 1932 , Ingram set up a subsidiary , Paperlynen , to produce these hats and other paper products used in his restaurants as well as for many other purposes .
At the time , White Castle 's distribution stretched from Wichita to New York .
Ingram decided the central office should be in the center of the distribution area .
To accommodate this , in 1936 , the central office was relocated to Columbus , Ohio .
In the same year , Ingram decided to close all of the restaurants in the two smallest - profit markets ( Wichita and Omaha ) .
In 1955 , Paperlynen produced over 42 million paper hats worldwide with more than 25,000 different inscriptions .
White Castle also created a subsidiary in 1934 named Porcelain Steel Buildings that manufactured movable , prefabricated , steel frame structures with porcelain enamel interior and exterior panels that could be assembled at any of its restaurant sites .
This is the first known use of this material in a building design .
The company also began publishing its own internal employee magazine , the White Castle Official House Organ , circa November 1925 ( it was originally named The Hot Hamburger ) .
The bulk of the material was contributed by company personnel and consisted mostly of letters and photographs of workers , promotional announcements , 25-year milestones , retirements , and similar items of interest arranged by geographic area .
" Employees could ... read about the progress and innovations made by those in other areas which made everyone aware of the entire system 's direction and condition .
"
The White Castle Official House Organ was published quarterly at least through the early 1980s , and at some point was renamed The Slider Times .
The Ohio Historical Society houses an extensive archive of White Castle System ,
Inc. records from 1921–1991 , including issues dating from 1927 to 1970 of the White Castle Official House Organ .
Ingram 's business savvy not only was responsible for White Castle 's success but for the popularization of the hamburger .
In 1933 , Anderson sold his half of the Business to Ingram , and the following year the company moved its corporate headquarters to Columbus , Ohio .
Co - founder Billy Ingram was followed as head of the firm by his son E. W. Ingram , Jr. and grandson E. W. Ingram , III .
In 1959 , White Castle expanded into new markets for the first time since the 1920s .
Billy Ingram , who had retired to Miami in 1958 , built three White Castle restaurants there .
The company closed the Florida operations in 1967 due to inefficient supply distribution .
Throughout its existence , White Castle has been a private company and relied on company - owned stores .
It remains privately held today , and its restaurants are all company owned ; none are franchised .
In concurrence with its 80th anniversary in 2001 , White Castle started its Cravers ' Hall of Fame . "
Cravers " are inducted annually based on stories written about them by another person or that the particular Craver submits for consideration .
Between five and ten stories have been chosen each year , with a grand total of 64 stories selected through the 2007 induction class .
This represents less than 1 % of the total stories submitted since the inception of the Cravers ' Hall of Fame , an indication of the exclusivity of the honor .
Starting in 2011 , the Long Island White Castle has become a frequent setting for challenges on the show Impractical Jokers , during which the contestants pose as cashiers , drive - thru workers and janitors .
The Ingram family 's steadfast refusal to franchise or take on debt throughout the company 's existence has kept the chain relatively small , with a more discontinuous geography than its principal competitors .
There are over 420 White Castle outlets , predominantly in the Midwest , Kentucky , and Tennessee .
The exceptions are a significant smattering of outlets in the New York metropolitan region , two locations in Nevada , and two in Shanghai .
By comparison , there are over 36,000 McDonald 's locations globally , with approximately 14,000 of those in the United States .
The chain does , however , sell frozen sliders at supermarkets nationwide , with availability varying by chain .
Some locations are also cobranded with Church 's Chicken .
Current White Castle markets include Chicago , Cincinnati , Columbus , Ohio , Dayton , Detroit , Indianapolis , Las Vegas , Louisville , Lexington , Minneapolis –
St .
Paul , Nashville , New York City / New Jersey / Pennsylvania and St. Louis .
Louisville and Columbus also house bulk - manufacturing ( grocery - store sales , meat and bun production ) divisions .
Company headquarters and the Porcelain Steel Buildings ( PSB ) division are in Columbus , Ohio .
White Castle exited the Cleveland and Akron , Ohio markets effective December 25 , 2014 .
The first White Castle in the far western United States opened at the Casino Royale Hotel & Casino on the Las Vegas Strip on January 27 , 2015 .
This was the first expansion for White Castle into a different state in 56 years .
On the first day of business , demand for food was so great that the restaurant had to temporarily close for two hours to restock .
White Castle Vice President Jamie Richardson said that the store sold 4,000 sliders per hour in its first 12 hours .
He was not aware of any similar closing because of demand in White Castle 's 94-year history .
A second White Castle location opened in Las Vegas on September 22 , 2017 , on Fremont Street .
In September 2015 , White Castle began to offer veggie sliders with veganized buns making the sliders entirely vegan .
In December 2015 , White Castle announced that chief executive officer ( CEO ) E.W. " Bill " Ingram III would step down at the end of the year , but continue to be chairman of the board .
His daughter , Lisa Ingram , then became the fourth CEO of the company .
In 2018 , White Castle began offering meat - free Impossible Burgers designed to closely mimic the flavor and texture of beef burgers .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
White Castle also markets its sandwiches in 30-hamburger boxes , called a Crave Case .
The figure of 30 burgers represents the number that can be produced on one of its standard grills at the same time .
A " Crave Crate " is also offered , with the contents being 100 burgers .
Although White Castle originated in Wichita , Kansas , the city has not had a branch since 1938 , nor is there a White Castle restaurant in the entire state of Kansas .
White Castle is one of the few restaurant chains that does not have a location in its original city .
White Castle is also unusual in that their store locations include a region that is essentially a significant " exclave " to its primary area .
It has many stores in metropolitan New York City , though the next nearest location outside the metropolitan area is located hundreds of miles away in the Midwest .
COUNTRIES
FORMERLY WITH WHITE CASTLE
* Malaysia – 1989/90 * Japan – 1986 * Singapore
* Mexico
* Thailand
* Canada
*
Hong Kong SEE ALSO * Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle
* Krystal * List of hamburger restaurants
* Little Tavern * White Tower REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Company website