DEXTROCARDIA Dextrocardia ( from Latin dexter ,
meaning " right , " and Greek kardia , meaning " heart " ) is a rare congenital condition in which the apex of the heart is located on the right side of the body .
There are two main types of dextrocardia : dextrocardia of embryonic arrest ( also known as isolated dextrocardia ) and dextrocardia situs inversus .
Dextrocardia situs inversus is further divided .
CLASSIFICATION DEXTROCARDIA OF EMBRYONIC ARREST Section::::Classification .
Section::::Dextrocardia of embryonic arrest .
In this form of dextrocardia , the heart is simply placed further right in the thorax than is normal .
It is commonly associated with severe defects of the heart and related abnormalities including pulmonary hypoplasia .
DEXTROCARDIA SITUS INVERSUS Section::::Dextrocardia situs inversus .
Dextrocardia with situs inversus refers to the heart being a mirror image situated on the right side .
For all visceral organs to be mirrored , the correct term is dextrocardia situs inversus totalis .
Although statistically people with dextrocardia do not have any medical problems from the disorder , they may be prone to a number of bowel , esophageal , bronchial and cardiovascular disorders ( such as double outlet right ventricle , endocardial cushion defect and pulmonary stenosis ) .
Certain cardiovascular and pulmonary disorders related to dextrocardia can be life - threatening if left unchecked ( see reference ) .
Kartagener syndrome may also be present in patients with dextrocardia but this must be in the setting of situs inversus and may include male infertility .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Medical diagnosis of the two forms of congenital dextrocardia can be made by ECG or imaging .
TECHNICAL DEXTROCARDIA Section::::Technical dextrocardia .
Technical dextrocardia refers to an ECG reading that has no basis in the patient 's anatomy .
This apparent presentation is typically caused by the accidental lead placement of the left and right arm electrodes .
Usually this would show as an extreme axis deviation .
MANAGEMENT
Section::::Management .
ECG leads must be placed in reversed positions on a person with dextrocardia .
In addition , when defibrillating someone with dextrocardia , the pads should be placed in reverse positions .
That is , instead of upper right and lower left , pads should be placed upper left and lower right .
When heart transplantation is required in a person with situs inversus , reconstruction of the venous pathways to accommodate a normal donor heart is a major , but not insurmountable , challenge .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Dextrocardia is believed to occur in approximately 1 in 12,019 pregnancies .
A Japanese study of 1,753 fetal cardiac echocardiograms over five years revealed only two cases .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS