SOUTHERN AMERICAN
ENGLISH
Southern American English or Southern
U.S. English is a large collection of related American English dialects spoken throughout the Southern United States , though increasingly in more rural areas and primarily by white Americans .
Commonly in the United States , the dialects are together simply referred to as Southern .
Other , much more recent ethno - linguistic terms within American linguistics include Southern White Vernacular English and Rural White Southern English .
A regional Southern American English consolidated and expanded throughout all the traditional Southern States since the last quarter of the nineteenth century until around World War II , largely superseding the older Southern American English dialects .
With this younger and more unified pronunciation system , Southern American English now comprises the largest American regional accent group by number of speakers .
As of 2006 , its Southern accent is strongly reported throughout the U.S. states of North Carolina , South Carolina , Georgia , Alabama , Mississippi , Tennessee , Arkansas , Louisiana , and Kentucky , as well as most of Texas , eastern and southern Oklahoma , southern Missouri , southeastern Maryland , Southern Virginia , West Virginia , northern Florida , and southeastern New Mexico .
The accent of some Midland American English ( often identified as a South Midland accent ) is documented as sharing key features with Southern American English , though to a weaker extent , including in northern Oklahoma , eastern and central Kansas , Missouri generally , the southern halves of Illinois and Indiana , southern Ohio , western Delaware , and south - central Pennsylvania .
Southern American English as a regional dialect can be divided into various sub - dialects , the most phonologically advanced ( i.e. , the most innovative ) ones being southern varieties of Appalachian English and certain varieties of Texan English .
African - American English has many common points with Southern American English dialects due to the strong historical ties of African Americans to the South .
Recently , the Southern accent has been receding , particularly among younger people and in urban areas .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The dialects collectively known as Southern American English stretch across the south - eastern and south - central United States , but exclude the southernmost areas of Florida and the extreme western and south - western parts of Texas as well as the Rio Grande Valley ( Laredo to Brownsville ) .
This linguistic region includes Alabama , Georgia , Tennessee , Mississippi , North Carolina , South Carolina , Louisiana , and Arkansas , as well as most of Texas , Virginia , Kentucky , Oklahoma , West Virginia , and northern and central Florida .
Southern American English dialects can also be found in extreme southern parts of Missouri , Maryland , Delaware , and Illinois .
Southern dialects originated in large part from a mix of immigrants from the British Isles , who moved to the American South in the 17th and 18th centuries , and the creole or post - creole speech of African slaves .
Upheavals such as the Great Depression , the Dust Bowl and World War II caused mass migrations of those and other settlers throughout the United States .
MODERN PHONOLOGY Section::::Modern phonology .
+
class="nowrap " A list of typical Southern vowels !
Southern phoneme !
Example words !
colspan="3 "
Pure vowels ( Monophthongs ) !
colspan="3 "
Diphthongs !
colspan="3
" R - colored vowels
Most of the Southern United States underwent several major sound changes from the beginning to the middle of the twentieth century , during which a more unified , region - wide sound system developed , markedly different from the sound systems of the nineteenth - century Southern dialects .
The South as a present - day dialect region generally includes all of these pronunciation features below , which are popularly recognized in the United States as a " Southern accent " .
However , there is still variation in Southern speech regarding potential differences based on factors like a speaker 's exact sub - region , age , ethnicity , etc .
The following phonological phenomena focus on the developing sound system of the twentieth - century Southern dialects of the United States that altogether largely ( though certainly not entirely ) superseded the older Southern regional patterns : * Southern Vowel Shift ( or Southern Shift ) : A chain shift regarding vowels is fully completed , or occurring , in most Southern dialects , especially younger ones , and at the most advanced stage in the " Inland South " ( i.e. away from the coastline ) and " Texas South " ( i.e. most of central and northern Texas ) .
This 3-stage chain movement of vowels , called the Southern Shift , is first triggered by Stage 1 that dominates the entire Southern region , followed by Stage 2 that covers almost all of that area , and Stage 3 that is concentrated only in speakers of certain core sub - regions .
Stage 1 ( defined below ) may have begun in some Southern dialects as early as the first half of the 1800s with a glide weakening of to or ; however , it was still largely incomplete or absent in the mid-1800s , before expanding rapidly from the last quarter of the 1800s into the middle 1900s ; today , this glide weakening or even total glide deletion is the pronunciation norm throughout all of the Southern United States .
* Stage 1 ( → and → ): * The starting point , or first stage , of the Southern Shift is the transition of the gliding vowel ( diphthong ) ( ) towards a " glideless " long vowel ( ) , so that , for example , the word ride
commonly approaches a sound that most other American English speakers would hear as rod or rad .
Stage 1 is now complete for a majority of Southern dialects .
Southern speakers particularly exhibit the Stage 1 shift at the ends of words and before voiced consonants , but often not before voiceless consonants , where the diphthong instead retains its glide , so that ride is , but right is .
Inland ( i.e. non - coastal ) Southern speakers , however , indeed delete the glide of in all contexts , as in the stereotyped pronunciation " nahs whaht rahss " for nice white rice ; these most shift - advanced speakers are largely found today in an Appalachian area that comprises eastern Tennessee , western North Carolina and northern Alabama , as well as in central Texas .
Some traditional East Coast Southern accents do not exhibit this Stage 1 glide deletion , particularly in Charleston , SC and possibly Atlanta and Savannah , GA ( cities that are , at best , considered marginal to the modern Southern dialect region ) .
*
This new glideless vowel encroaches on the territory of the " short a " vowel , ( as in rat or bad ) , thus pushing generally higher and fronter in the mouth ( and also possibly giving it a complex gliding quality , often starting higher and then gliding lower ) ; thus can range variously away from its original position : .
An example is that , to other English speakers , the Southern pronunciation of yap sounds something like yeah - up .
* Stage 2 ( → and → ):
*
By removing the existence of , Stage 1 leaves open a lower space for ( as in name and day ) to occupy , causing Stage 2 : the pulling of the diphthong into a lower starting position , towards or to an even lower and/or more retracted sound .
*
At the same time , the pushing of into the vicinity of ( as in red or belt ) , forces itself into a higher and fronter position , occupying the area ( previously the vicinity of ) .
also often acquires an in - glide : thus , .
An example is that , to other English speakers , the Southern pronunciation of yep sounds something like yay - up .
Stage 2 is most common in heavily stressed syllables .
Southern accents originating from cities that formerly had the greatest influence and wealth in the South ( Richmond , VA ; Charleston , SC ; Atlanta , Macon , and Savannah , GA ; and all of Florida ) do not traditionally participate in Stage 2 .
* Stage 3 ( → and →
):
By the same pushing and pulling domino effects described above , ( as in hit or lick ) and ( as in beam or meet ) follow suit by both possibly becoming diphthongs whose nuclei switch positions .
may be pushed into a diphthong with a raised beginning , , while may be pulled into a diphthong with a lowered beginning , .
An example is that , to other English speakers , the Southern pronunciation of fin sounds something like fee - in , while meal sounds something like mih - eel .
Like the other stages of the Southern shift , Stage 3 is most common in heavily stressed syllables and particularly among Inland Southern speakers .
* Southern vowel breaking ( " Southern drawl " ) :
All three stages of the Southern Shift often result in the short front pure vowels being " broken " into gliding vowels , making one - syllable words like pet and pit sound as if they might have two syllables ( as something like pay - it and pee - it respectively ) .
This short front vowel gliding phenomenon is popularly recognized as the " Southern drawl " .
The " short a " , " short e " , and " short i " vowels are all affected , developing a glide up from their original starting position to , and then often back down to a schwa vowel : ; ; and , respectively .
This phenomenon is on the decline , being most typical of Southern speakers born before 1960 , though mostly after the mid-1800s .
* Unstressed , word - final → :
The phoneme in an unstressed syllable at the end of a word fronts to , so that singing is sometimes written phonetically as singin .
This is common in vernacular English dialects around the world .
* Lacking or transitioning cot – caught merger : The historical distinction between the two vowels sounds and , in words like caught and cot or stalk and stock is mainly preserved .
In much of the South during the 1900s , there was a trend to lower the vowel found in words like stalk and caught , often with an upglide , so that the most common result today is the gliding vowel .
However , the cot – caught merger is becoming increasingly common throughout the United States , thus affecting Southeastern and even some Southern dialects , towards a merged vowel .
In the South , this merger , or a transition towards this merger , is especially documented in central , northern , and ( particularly ) western Texas .
* Pin - pen merger : the vowels and now merge when before nasal consonants , so that pen and pin , for instance , or hem and him , are pronounced the same , as pin or him , respectively .
The merger , towards the sound , is still unreported among some vestigial varieties of the older South , and other geographically Southern U.S. varieties that have eluded the Southern Vowel Shift , such as the Yat dialect of New Orleans or the anomalous dialect of Savannah , Georgia .
* Rhoticity : The " dropping " of the r sound after vowels was historically widespread in the South , particularly in former plantation area .
This phenomenon , non - rhoticity , was considered prestigious before World War II , after which the social perception in the South reversed .
Now , rhoticity ( sometimes called r - fulness ) , in which all r sounds are pronounced , is dominant throughout the entire South , and even more so among younger and female white Southerners ; the only major exception is among African American Southerners , whose modern vernacular dialect continues to be mostly non - rhotic .
The sound quality of the Southern r is the distinctive " bunch - tongued r " , produced by strongly constricting the root and/or midsection of the tongue .
* Lax and tense vowels often neutralize before , making pairs like feel / fill and fail / fell homophones for speakers in some areas of the South .
Some speakers may distinguish between the two sets of words by reversing the normal vowel sound , e.g. , feel in Southern may sound like fill , and vice versa .
*
The back vowel ( in goose or true ) is fronted in the mouth to the vicinity of or even farther forward , which is then followed by a slight gliding quality ; different gliding qualities have been reported , including both backward and ( especially in the eastern half of the South ) forward glides .
* Back Upglide ( Chain ) Shift :
In Southern regional dialects , shifts forward and upward to [ æʊ ] ( also possibly realized , variously , as ) ; thus allowing the back vowel to fill an area similar to the former position of /aʊ/ in the mouth , becoming lowered and developing an upglide [ ɑɒ ] ; this , in turn , allows ( though only for the most advanced Southern speakers )
the upgliding , before , to lose its glide ( for instance , causing the word boils to sound something like the British or New York City pronunciations of ) .
*
The vowel , as in bug , luck , strut , etc . , is realized as , occasionally fronted to or raised in the mouth to .
In former plantation areas , a more backed form , , is common among older speakers .
* becomes before , for example was n't , business , but has n't may keep the [ z ] to avoid merging with had n't .
*
Many nouns are stressed on the first syllable that are stressed on the second syllable in most other American accents .
These may include police , cement , Detroit , Thanksgiving , insurance , behind , display , hotel , motel , recycle , TV , guitar , July , and umbrella .
Today , younger Southerners tend to keep this initial stress for a more reduced set of words , perhaps including only insurance , defense , Thanksgiving , and umbrella .
*
Phonemic incidence is sometimes unique in the South , so that : * Florida is typically pronounced rather than General American , and lawyer is rather than General American ( i.e. , the first syllable of lawyer sounds like law , not loy ) .
*
The in words like Monday and Sunday is commonly .
* Spigot ( a water tap ) is often pronounced , as if spelled spicket .
* Lacking or incomplete happy tensing : The tensing of unstressed , word - final ( the second vowel sound in words like happy , money , Chelsea , etc . ) to a higher and fronter vowel like is typical throughout the United States , except in the South .
The South maintains a sound not obviously tensed : or .
* Words ending in unstressed ( especially with the spelling ) may be pronounced as or , making yellow sound like yella or tomorrow like tomorra .
INLAND SOUTH AND TEXAS Section::::Inland South and Texas .
William Labov et al .
identify the " Inland South " as a large linguistic sub - region of the South located mostly in southern Appalachia ( specifically naming the cities of Greenville SC , Asheville NC , Knoxville and Chattanooga TN , and Birmingham and Linden AL ) , inland from both the Gulf and Atlantic Coasts , and the originating region of the Southern Vowel Shift .
The Inland South , along with the " Texas South " ( an urban core of central Texas : Dallas , Lubbock , Odessa , and San Antonio ) are considered the two major locations in which the Southern regional sound system is the most highly developed , and therefore the core areas of the current - day South as a dialect region .
The accents of Texas are actually diverse , for example with important Spanish influences on its vocabulary ; however , much of the state is still an unambiguous region of modern rhotic Southern speech , strongest in the cities of Dallas , Lubbock , Odessa , and San Antonio , which all firmly demonstrate the first stage of the Southern Shift , if not also further stages of the shift .
Texan cities that are noticeably " non - Southern " dialectally are Abilene and Austin ; only marginally Southern are Houston , El Paso , and Corpus Christi .
In western and northern Texas , the cot – caught merger is very close to completed .
DISTINCT PHONOLOGIES
Section::::Distinct phonologies .
Some sub - regions of the South , and perhaps even a majority of the biggest cities , are showing a gradual shift away from the Southern accent since the second half of the twentieth century to the present .
Such well - studied cities include Houston , Texas , and Raleigh , North Carolina ; in Raleigh , for example , this retreat from the accent appears to have begun around 1950 .
Other sub - regions are unique in that their inhabitants have never spoken with the Southern regional accent , instead having their own distinct accents .
ATLANTA , CHARLESTON , AND SAVANNAH Section::::Atlanta , Charleston , and Savannah .
The Atlas of North American English identified Atlanta , Georgia as a dialectal " island of non - Southern speech " , Charleston , South Carolina likewise as " not markedly Southern in character " , and the traditional local accent of Savannah , Georgia as " giving way to regional [ Midland ] patterns " , despite these being three prominent Southern cities .
The dialect features of Atlanta are best described today as sporadic from speaker to speaker , with such variation increased due to a huge movement of non - Southerners into the area during the 1990s .
Modern - day Charleston speakers have leveled in the direction of a more generalized Midland accent , away from the city 's now - defunct , traditional Charleston accent , whose features were " diametrically opposed to the Southern Shift ... and differ in many other respects from the main body of Southern dialects " .
The Savannah accent is also becoming more Midland - like .
The following vowel sounds of Atlanta , Charleston , and Savannah have been unaffected by typical Southern phenomena like the Southern drawl and Southern Vowel Shift :
* as in bad ( the " default " General American nasal short - a system is in use , in which is tensed only before or ) .
* as in bide ( however , some Atlanta and Savannah speakers do variably show Southern glide weakening ) .
* as in bait .
* as in bed .
* as in bid .
* as in bead .
* as in bought ( which is lowered , as in most of the U.S. , and approaches ; the cot – caught merger is mostly at a transitional stage in these cities ) .
Today , the accents of Atlanta , Charleston , and Savannah are most similar to Midland regional accents or at least Southeastern super - regional accents .
In all three cities , some speakers ( though most consistently documented in Charleston and least consistently in Savannah ) demonstrate the Southeastern fronting of and the status of the pin – pen merger is highly variable .
Non - rhoticity ( r - dropping ) is now rare in these cities , yet still documented in some speakers .
SOUTHERN LOUISIANA Section::::Southern Louisiana .
Most of southern Louisiana constitutes Acadiana , a cultural region dominated for hundreds of years by monolingual speakers of Cajun French , which combines elements of Acadian French with other French and Spanish words .
Today , this French dialect is spoken by many oolder Cajun ethnic group and is said to be dying out .
A related language , Louisiana Creole French , also exists .
Since the early 1900s , Cajuns additionally began to develop their own vernacular dialect of English , which retains some influences and words from French , such as " cher " ( dear ) or " nonc " ( uncle ) .
This dialect fell out of fashion after World War II , but experienced a renewal in primarily male speakers born since the 1970s , who have been the most attracted by , and the biggest attractors for , a successful Cajun cultural renaissance .
The accent includes : variable non - rhoticity ( or r - dropping ) , high nasalization ( including in vowels before nasal consonants ) , deletion of any word 's final consonant(s ) ( hand becomes , food becomes , rent becomes , New York becomes , etc . ) , a potential for glide weakening in all gliding vowels ( e.g. ( as in Joe ) , as in jay , and as in joy , have reduced glides : , , and , respectively ) , and the cot – caught merger towards .
One historical English dialect spoken only by those raised in the Greater New Orleans area is traditionally non - rhotic and noticeably shares more pronunciation commonalities with the New York accent than with other Southern accents .
Since at least the 1980s , this local New Orleans dialect has popularly been called " Yat " , from the common local greeting " Where you at ? " .
The New York accent features shared with the Yat accent include : non - rhoticity , a short - a split system ( so that bad and back , for example , have different vowels ) , as high gliding , as rounded , and the coil – curl merger ( traditionally , though now in decline ) .
Yat also lacks the typical vowel changes of the Southern Shift and the pin – pen merger that are commonly heard elsewhere throughout the South .
Yat is associated with the working and lower - middle classes , though a spectrum with fewer notable Yat features is often heard the higher one 's socioeconomic status ; such New Orleans affluence is associated with the New Orleans Uptown and the Garden District , whose speech patterns are sometimes considered distinct from the lower - class Yat dialect .
OLDER PHONOLOGIES Section::::Older phonologies .
Prior to becoming a phonologically unified dialect region , the South was once home to an array of much more diverse accents at the local level .
Features of the deeper interior Appalachian South largely became the basis for the newer Southern regional dialect ; thus , older Southern American English primarily refers to the English spoken outside of Appalachia : the coastal and former plantation areas of the South , best documented before the Civil War , on the decline during the early 1900s , and basically non - existent in speakers born since the Civil Rights Movement .
Little unified these older Southern dialects , since they never formed a single homogeneous dialect region to begin with .
Some older Southern accents were rhotic ( most strongly in Appalachia and west of the Mississippi ) , while the majority were non - rhotic ( most strongly in plantation areas ) ; however , wide variation existed .
Some older Southern accents showed ( or approximated )
Stage 1 of the Southern Vowel Shift — namely , the glide weakening of — however , it is virtually unreported before the very late 1800s .
In general , the older Southern dialects clearly lacked the Mary – marry – merry , cot – caught ,
horse – hoarse , wine – whine , full – fool , fill – feel , and do –
dew mergers , all of which are now common to , or encroaching on , all varieties of present - day Southern American English .
Older Southern sound systems included those local to :
* Plantation South ( the Black Belt excluding the Lowcountry ) : phonologically characterized by glide weakening , non - rhoticity ( for some accents , including a coil – curl merger ) , and the Southern trap – bath split ( a version of the trap – bath split unique to older Southern U.S. speech that causes words like lass not to rhyme with words like pass ) .
* Eastern and central Virginia ( often identified as the " Tidewater accent " ) : further characterized by Canadian raising and some vestigial resistance to the vein – vain merger .
* Lowcountry ( of South Carolina and Georgia ; often identified as the traditional " Charleston accent " ) :
characterized by no glide weakening , non - rhoticity ( including the coil - curl merger ) , the Southern trap – bath split , Canadian raising , the cheer – chair merger , pronounced as , and pronounced as .
* Outer Banks and Chesapeake Bay ( often identified as the " Hoi Toider accent " ) : characterized by no glide weakening ( with the on - glide strongly backed , unlike any other U.S. dialect ) , the card – cord merger , pronounced as , and up - gliding of pure vowels especially before ( making fish sound almost like feesh and ash like aysh ) .
It is the only dialect of the older South still extant on the East Coast , due to being passed on through generations of geographically isolated islanders .
* Appalachian and Ozark Mountains : characterized by strong rhoticity and a tor – tore – tour merger ( which still exist in that region ) , the Southern trap – bath split , plus the original and most advanced instances of the Southern Vowel Shift now defining the whole South .
GRAMMAR
Section::::Grammar .
These grammatical features are characteristic of both older and newer Southern American English .
* Use of done as an auxiliary verb between the subject and verb in sentences conveying the past tense .
I done told you before .
* Use of done ( instead of did ) as the past simple form of do , and similar uses of the past participle in place of the past simple , such as seen replacing saw as past simple form of see .
I only done what you done told me .
I seen her first .
* Use of other non - standard preterites , Such as drownded as the past tense of drown , knowed as past tense of know , choosed as the past tense of choose , degradated as the past tense of degrade .
I knowed you for a fool soon as I seen you .
* Use of was in place of were , or other words regularizing the past tense of be to was .
You was sittin ' on that chair .
* Use of been instead of have been in perfect constructions .
I been livin '
here darn near my whole life .
* Use of double modals ( might could , might should , might would , used to could , etc.--also called " modal stacking " ) and sometimes even triple modals that involve oughta ( like might should oughta )
I might could climb to the top .
I used to could do that .
* Use of ( a-)fixin ' to , or just " fixing to " in more modern Southern , to indicate immediate future action in place of intending to , preparing to , or about to .
He 's fixin ' to eat .
They 're fixing to go for a hike .
* Preservation of older English me , him , etc .
as reflexive datives .
I 'm fixin ' to paint me a picture .
He 's gon na catch him a big one .
*
Saying this here in place of this or this one , and that there in place of that or that one .
This
here 's mine and that there is yours .
* Existential It , a feature dating from Middle English which can be explained as substituting it for there when there refers to no physical location , but only to the existence of something .
It 's one lady that lives in town .
* Use of ever in place of every .
Ever'where 's the same these days .
* Use of " over yonder " in place of " over there " or " in or at that indicated place " , especially to refer to a particularly different spot , such as in " the house over yonder " .
Additionally , " yonder " tends to refer to a third , larger degree of distance beyond both " here " and " there " , indicating that something is a longer way away , and to a lesser extent , in a wide or loosely defined expanse , as in the church hymn " When the Roll Is Called Up Yonder " .
VOCABULARY Section::::Vocabulary .
In the United States , the following vocabulary is mostly unique to , or best associated with ,
Southern U.S. English :
*
Ai n't to mean am not , is not , are not , have not , has not , etc .
* Buggy to mean shopping cart
* Carry to additionally mean escort or accompany * Catty - corner to mean located or placed diagonally * Chill bumps as a synonym for goose bumps
* Coke to mean any sweet , carbonated soft drink * Crawfish to mean
crayfish
*
Devil is beating his wife to describe the weather phenomenon of a sunshower
* Icing ( preferred over frosting , in the confectionary sense ) * Liketa to mean almost or nearly ( particularly in Alabama and Appalachian English )
* Ordinary to mean disreputable * Ornery to mean bad - tempered or surly ( derived from ordinary )
* Powerful to mean great in number or amount ( used as an adverb )
* Right to mean very or extremely ( used as an adverb )
* Reckon to mean think , guess , or conclude
* Rolling to mean the prank of toilet papering * Slaw as a synonym for coleslaw * Toboggan to mean knit cap
* Tote to mean carry
* Veranda to mean large , roofed porch
* Yonder to mean over there Unique words can occur as Southern nonstandard past - tense forms of verbs , particularly in the Southern highlands and Piney Woods , as in yesterday they riz up , come outside , drawed , and drownded , as well as participle forms like they have took it , rode it , blowed it up , and swimmed away .
Drug is traditionally both the past tense and participle form of the verb drag .
Y'ALL
Section::::Y'all .
Y'all is a second person plural pronoun and the usual Southern plural form of the word you .
It is originally a contractionyou allwhich is used less frequently .
This term originated with the modern Southern dialect region and is not found in older Southern dialects .
* When addressing a group , y' all is general ( I know y' all ) and is used to address the group as a whole , whereas all y' all is used to emphasize specificity of each and every member of the group ( " I know all y' all . " )
The possessive form of Y'all is created by adding the standard " - 's " .
" I 've got y' all 's assignments here . "
* Y'all is distinctly separate from the singular you .
The statement " I gave y' all my truck payment last week , " is more precise than " I gave you my truck payment last week .
" You ( if interpreted as singular ) could imply the payment was given directly to the person being spoken towhen that may not be the case .
*
" All y' all " is used to specify that all members of the second person plural ( i.e. , all persons currently being addressed and/or all members of a group represented by an addressee ) are included ; that is , it operates in contradistinction to " some of y' all " , thereby functioning similarly to " all of you " in standard English .
*
In rural southern Appalachia an " n " is added to pronouns indicating " one " " his'n " " his one " " her'n " " her one " " Yor'n " " your one " i.e. " his , hers and yours " .
Another example is yernses .
It may be substituted for the 2nd person plural possessive yours .
" That book is yernses . "
SOUTHERN LOUISIANA Section::::Southern Louisiana .
Southern Louisiana English especially is known for some unique vocabulary : long sandwiches are often called poor boys or po ' boys , woodlice / roly - polies called doodle bugs , the end of a bread loaf called a nose , pedestrian islands and median strips alike called neutral ground , and sidewalks called banquettes .
RELATIONSHIP TO AFRICAN - AMERICAN ENGLISH Section::::Relationship to African - American English .
Discussion of " Southern dialect " in the United States popularly refers to those English varieties spoken by white Southerners ; however , as a geographic term , it may also encompass the dialects developed among other social or ethnic groups in the South , most prominently including African Americans .
Today , African - American Vernacular English ( AAVE ) is a fairly unified variety of English spoken by
working- and middle - class African Americans throughout the United States .
AAE exhibits an evident relationship with both older and newer Southern dialects , though the exact nature of this relationship is poorly understood .
It is clear that AAE was influenced by older speech patterns of the Southern United States , where Africans and African Americans were held as slaves until the American Civil War .
These slaves originally spoke a diversity of indigenous African languages but picked up English to communicate with one another , their white masters , and the white servants and laborers they often closely worked alongside .
Many features of AAE suggest that it largely developed from nonstandard dialects of colonial English ( with some features of AAE absent from other modern American dialects , yet still existing in certain modern British dialects ) .
However , there is also evidence of the influence of West African languages on AAE vocabulary and grammar .
It is uncertain to what extent early white Southern English borrowed elements from early African American English versus the other way around .
Like many white accents of English once spoken in Southern plantation areas — namely , the Lowcountry , Virginia Piedmont and Tidewater , lower Mississippi Valley , and western Black Belt — the modern - day AAE accent is mostly non - rhotic ( or " r - dropping " ) .
The presence of non - rhoticity in both black English and older white Southern English is not merely coincidence , though , again , which dialect influenced which is unknown .
It is better documented , however , that white Southerners borrowed some morphological processes from black Southerners .
Many grammatical features were used alike by older speakers of white Southern English and African American English more so than by contemporary speakers of the same two varieties .
Even so , contemporary speakers of both continue to share these unique grammatical features : " existential it " , the word y' all , double negatives , was to mean were , deletion of had and have , them to mean those , the term fixin ' to , stressing the first syllable of words like hotel or guitar , and many others .
Both dialects also continue to share these same pronunciation features : tensing , raising , upgliding , the pin – pen merger , and the most defining sound of the current Southern accent ( though rarely documented in older Southern accents ) : the glide weakening of .
However , while this glide weakening has triggered among white Southerners a complicated " Southern Vowel Shift " , black speakers in the South and elsewhere on the other hand are " not participating or barely participating " in much of this shift .
AAE speakers also do not front the vowel starting positions of and , thus aligning these characteristics more with the speech of nineteenth - century white Southerners than twentieth - century white Southerners .
One strong possibility for the divergence of black American English and white Southern American English ( i.e. , the disappearance of older Southern American English ) is that the civil rights struggles caused these two racial groups " to stigmatize linguistic variables associated with the other group " .
This may explain some of the differences outlined above , including why all traditionally non - rhotic white Southern accents have shifted to now becoming intensely rhotic .
SOCIAL PERCEPTION Section::::Social perception .
Non - Southern Americans tend to have negative stereotypes of Southern accents , associating them with cognitive and verbal slowness , lack of education , bigotry , and religious and political conservatism , with labels for the accent such as " hick " or " hillbilly " .
Meanwhile , Southerners themselves tend to have mixed judgments of their own accents , some similarly negative but some positively associated with a laid - back , plain , or humble attitude .
The sum negative associations nationwide then are the likely cause of a gradual decline of Southern accent features , particularly among younger and more urban residents , since the middle of the twentieth century onwards .
SEE ALSO
* Accent perception *
African - American English * Chicano English
* Drawl * High Tider
* Regional vocabularies of American English
* Southern literature *
Texan English
REFERENCES SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS