CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT
A certificate of deposit ( CD ) is a time deposit , a financial product commonly sold in the United States and elsewhere by banks , thrift institutions , and credit unions .
CDs are similar to savings accounts in that they are insured " money in the bank " and thus virtually risk free .
In the USA , CDs are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) for banks and by the National Credit Union Administration ( NCUA ) for credit unions .
They differ from savings accounts in that the CD has a specific , fixed term ( often one , three , or six months , or one to five years ) and , usually , a fixed interest rate .
The bank intends that the customer hold the CD until maturity , at which time they can withdraw the money and accrued interest .
In exchange for the customer depositing the money for an agreed term , institutions usually grant higher interest rates than they do on accounts that customers can withdraw from on demand — though this may not be the case in an inverted yield curve situation .
Fixed rates are common , but some institutions offer CDs with various forms of variable rates .
For example , in mid-2004 , interest rates were expected to rise — and many banks and credit unions began to offer CDs with a " bump - up " feature .
These allow for a single readjustment of the interest rate , at a time of the consumer 's choosing , during the term of the CD .
Sometimes , financial institutions introduce CDs indexed to the stock market , bond market , or other indices .
Some features of CDs are : *
A larger principal should / may receive a higher interest rate .
* A longer term usually earns a higher interest rate , except in the case of an inverted yield curve ( e.g. , preceding a recession ) .
* Smaller institutions tend to offer higher interest rates than larger ones .
* Personal CD accounts generally receive higher interest rates than business CD accounts .
* Banks and credit unions that are not insured by the FDIC or NCUA generally offer higher interest rates .
CDs typically require a minimum deposit , and may offer higher rates for larger deposits .
The best rates are generally offered on " Jumbo CDs " with minimum deposits of $ 100,000 .
The consumer who opens a CD may receive a paper certificate , but it is now common for a CD to consist simply of a book entry and an item shown in the consumer 's periodic bank statements .
That is , there is often no " certificate " as such .
Consumers who want a hard copy that verifies their CD purchase may request a paper statement from the bank , or print out their own from the financial institution 's online banking service .
CLOSING A CD
Section::::Closing a CD .
Withdrawals before maturity are usually subject to a substantial penalty .
For a five - year CD , this is often the loss of up to twelve months ' interest .
These penalties ensure that it is generally not in a holder 's best interest to withdraw the money before maturity — unless the holder has another investment with significantly higher return or has a serious need for the money .
Commonly , institutions mail a notice to the CD holder shortly before the CD matures requesting directions .
The notice usually offers the choice of withdrawing the principal and accumulated interest or " rolling it over " ( depositing it into a new CD ) .
Generally , a " window " is allowed after maturity where the CD holder can cash in the CD without penalty .
In the absence of such directions , it is common for the institution to roll over the CD automatically , once again tying up the money for a period of time ( though the CD holder may be able to specify at the time the CD is opened not to roll over the CD ) .
CD REFINANCE
Section::::CD refinance .
The Truth in Savings Regulation DD requires that insured CDs state , at time of account opening , the penalty for early withdrawal .
It is generally accepted that these penalties can not be revised by the depository prior to maturity .
However , there have been cases in which a credit union modified its early withdrawal penalty and made it retroactive on existing accounts .
The second occurrence happened when Main Street Bank of Texas closed a group of CDs early without full payment of interest .
The bank claimed the disclosures allowed them to do so .
The penalty for early withdrawal deters depositors from taking advantage of subsequent better investment opportunities during the term of the CD .
In rising interest rate environments , the penalty may be insufficient to discourage depositors from redeeming their deposit and reinvesting the proceeds after paying the applicable early withdrawal penalty .
Added interest from the new higher yielding CD may more than offset the cost of the early withdrawal penalty .
LADDERS Section::::Ladders .
While longer investment terms yield higher interest rates , longer terms also may result in a loss of opportunity to lock in higher interest rates in a rising - rate economy .
A common mitigation strategy for this opportunity cost is the " CD ladder " strategy .
In the ladder strategies , the investor distributes the deposits over a period of several years with the goal of having all one 's money deposited at the longest term ( and therefore the higher rate ) , but in a way that part of it matures annually .
In this way , the depositor reaps the benefits of the longest - term rates while retaining the option to re - invest or withdraw the money in shorter - term intervals .
For example , an investor beginning a three - year ladder strategy starts by depositing equal amounts of money each into a 3-year CD , 2-year CD , and 1-year CD .
From that point on , a CD reaches maturity every year , at which time the investor can re - invest at a 3-year term .
After two years of this cycle , the investor has all money deposited at a three - year rate , yet have one - third of the deposits mature every year ( which the investor can then reinvest , augment , or withdraw ) .
The responsibility for maintaining the ladder falls on the depositor , not the financial institution .
Because the ladder does not depend on the financial institution , depositors are free to distribute a ladder strategy across more than one bank .
This can be advantageous , as smaller banks may not offer the longer terms of some larger banks .
Although laddering is most common with CDs , investors may use this strategy on any time deposit account with similar terms .
STEP - UP CALLABLE CD Section::::Step - up callable CD .
Step - Up Callable CDs are a form of CD where the interest rate increases multiple times prior to maturity of the CD .
These CDs are often issued with maturities up to 15 years , with a step - up in interest happening at year 5 and year 10 .
Typically , the beginning interest rate is higher than what is available on shorter - maturity CDs , and the rate increases with each step - up period .
These CD 's have a " call " feature which allows the issuer to return the deposit to the investor after a specified period of time , which is usually at least a year .
When the CD is called , the investor is given back their deposit and they will no longer receive any future interest payments .
Because of the call feature , interest rate risk is born by the investor , rather than the issuer .
This transfer of risk allows Step - Up Callable CDs to offer a higher interest rate than currently available from non - callable CDs .
If prevailing interest rates decline , the issuer will call the CD and re - issue debt at a lower interest rate .
If the CD is called before maturity , the investor is faced with reinvestment risk .
If prevailing interest rates increase , the issuer will allow the CD to go to maturity .
DEPOSIT INSURANCE Section::::Deposit insurance .
The amount of insurance coverage varies , depending on how accounts for an individual or family are structured at the institution .
The level of insurance is governed by complex FDIC and NCUA rules , available in FDIC and NCUA booklets or online .
The standard insurance coverage is currently $ 250,000 per owner or depositor for single accounts or $ 250,000 per co - owner for joint accounts .
Some institutions use a private insurance company instead of , or in addition to , the federally backed FDIC or NCUA deposit insurance .
Institutions often stop using private supplemental insurance when they find that few customers have a high enough balance level to justify the additional cost .
The Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service program lets investors keep up to $ 50 million invested in CDs managed through one bank with full FDIC insurance .
However rates will likely not be the highest available .
TERMS AND CONDITIONS Section::::Terms and conditions .
There are many variations in the terms and conditions for CDs .
The federally required " Truth in Savings " booklet , or other disclosure document that gives the terms of the CD , must be made available before the purchase .
Employees of the institution are generally not familiar with this information ; only the written document carries legal weight .
If the original issuing institution has merged with another institution , or if the CD is closed early by the purchaser , or there is some other issue , the purchaser will need to refer to the terms and conditions document to ensure that the withdrawal is processed following the original terms of the contract .
*
The terms and conditions may be changeable .
They may contain language such as " We can add to , delete or make any other changes ( " Changes " )
we want to these Terms at any time . "
* The CD may be callable .
The terms may state that the bank or credit union can close the CD before the term ends .
* Payment of interest .
Interest may be paid out as it is accrued or it may accumulate in the CD .
* Interest calculation .
The CD may start earning interest from the date of deposit or from the start of the next month or quarter .
*
Right to delay withdrawals .
Institutions generally have the right to delay withdrawals for a specified period to stop a bank run .
* Withdrawal of principal .
May be at the discretion of the financial institution .
Withdrawal of principal below a certain minimum — or any withdrawal of principal at all — may require closure of the entire CD .
A US Individual Retirement Account CD may allow withdrawal of IRA Required Minimum Distributions without a withdrawal penalty .
* Withdrawal of interest .
May be limited to the most recent interest payment or allow for withdrawal of accumulated total interest since the CD was opened .
Interest may be calculated to date of withdrawal or through the end of the last month or last quarter .
* Penalty for early withdrawal .
May be measured in months of interest , may be calculated to be equal to the institution 's current cost of replacing the money , or may use another formula .
May or may not reduce the principal — for example , if principal is withdrawn three months after opening a CD with a six - month penalty .
* Fees .
A fee may be specified for withdrawal or closure or for providing a certified check .
* Automatic renewal .
The institution may or may not commit to sending a notice before automatic rollover at CD maturity .
The institution may specify a grace period before automatically rolling over the CD to a new CD at maturity .
Some banks have been known to renew at rates lower than that of the original CD .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
CD interest rates closely track inflation .
For example , in one situation interest rates may be 15 % and inflation may be 15 % , and in another situation interest rates may be 2 % and inflation may be 2 % .
Of course , these factors cancel out , so the real interest rate is the same in both cases .
In this situation , it is a misinterpretation that the interest is an increase in value .
However , to keep the same value , the rate of withdrawal must be the same as the real rate of return , in this case , zero .
People may also think that the higher - rate situation is " better " , when the real rate of return is actually the same .
Also , the above does not include taxes .
When taxes are considered , the higher - rate situation above is worse , with a lower ( more negative ) real return , although the before - tax real rates of return are identical .
The after - inflation , after - tax return is what 's important .
Author Ric Edelman writes : " You do n't make any money in bank accounts ( in real economic terms ) , simply because you 're not supposed to . "
On the other hand , he says , bank accounts and CDs are fine for holding cash for a short amount of time .
Even if CD rates track inflation , this can only be the expected inflation at the time the CD is bought .
The actual inflation will be lower or higher .
Locking in the interest rate for a long term may be bad ( if inflation goes up ) or good ( if inflation goes down ) .
For example , in the 1970s , inflation increased higher than it had been , and banks were slow to raise their interest rates .
This does not much affect a person with a short note , since they get their money back , and they can go somewhere else ( or the same place ) that gives a higher rate .
But longer notes are locked in their rate .
This gave rise to amusing nicknames for CDs .
A bit later , the opposite happened , where inflation was declining .
This does not greatly help a person with a short note , since they shortly get their money back
and they are forced to reinvest at a new , lower rate .
But longer notes become very valuable since they have a higher interest rate .
However , this applies only to " average " CD interest rates .
In reality , some banks pay much lower than average rates , while others pay much higher rates ( two - fold differences are not unusual , e.g. , 2.5 % vs 5 % ) .
In the United States , depositors can take advantage of the best FDIC - insured rates without increasing their risk .
Investors should be suspicious of an unusually high interest rate on a CD .
Allen Stanford used fraudulent CDs with high rates to lure people into his Ponzi scheme .
Finally , the statement that " CD interest rates closely track inflation " is not necessarily true .
For example , during a credit crunch banks are in dire need of funds , and CD interest rate increases may not track inflation .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The US SEC on buying CDs
* North American Securities Administrators Association on buying CDs .
* 2008 US SEC Litigation Release " ...
a scheme to defraud investors , many of them elderly , of approximately $ 3,661,248 by selling the investors fraudulent certificates of deposit . "