RED SQUIRREL
The red squirrel or Eurasian red squirrel ( Sciurus vulgaris ) is a species of tree squirrel in the genus Sciurus common throughout Eurasia .
The red squirrel is an arboreal , omnivorous rodent .
In Great Britain , Ireland , and in Italy numbers have decreased drastically in recent years .
This decline is associated with the introduction by humans of the eastern grey squirrel ( Sciurus carolinensis ) from North America and habitat loss .
Due to this , without conservation the species could be extirpated from Great Britain by 2030 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The red squirrel has a typical head - and - body length of , a tail length of , and a mass of .
Males and females are the same size .
The red squirrel is somewhat smaller than the eastern grey squirrel which has a head - and - body length of and weighs between .
The long tail helps the squirrel to balance and steer when jumping from tree to tree and running along branches , and may keep the animal warm during sleep .
The red squirrel , like most tree squirrels , has sharp , curved claws to enable it to climb and descend broad tree trunks , thin branches and even house walls .
Its strong hind legs enable it to leap gaps between trees .
The red squirrel also has the ability to swim .
The coat of the red squirrel varies in colour with time of year and location .
There are several different coat colour morphs ranging from black to red .
Red coats are most common in Great Britain ; in other parts of Europe and Asia different coat colours co - exist within populations , much like hair colour in some human populations .
The underside of the squirrel is always white - cream in colour .
The red squirrel sheds its coat twice a year , switching from a thinner summer coat to a thicker , darker winter coat with noticeably larger ear - tufts ( a prominent distinguishing feature of this species ) between August and November .
A lighter , redder overall coat colour , along with the ear - tufts ( in adults ) and smaller size , distinguish the Eurasian red squirrel from the American eastern grey squirrel .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Red squirrels occupy boreal , coniferous woods in northern Europe and Siberia , preferring Scots pine , Norway spruce and Siberian pine .
In western and southern Europe they are found in broad - leaved woods where the mixture of tree and shrub species provides a better year round source of food .
In most of the British Isles and in Italy , broad - leaved woodlands are now less suitable due to the better competitive feeding strategy of introduced grey squirrels .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Mating can occur in late winter during February and March and in summer between June and July .
Up to two litters a year per female are possible .
Each litter averages three young , called kittens .
Gestation is about 38 to 39 days .
The young are looked after by the mother alone and are born helpless , blind and deaf .
They weigh between 10 and 15 g.
Their body is covered by hair at 21 days , their eyes and ears open after three to four weeks , and they develop all their teeth by 42 days .
Juvenile red squirrels can eat solids around 40 days following birth and from that point can leave the nest on their own to find food ; however , they still suckle from their mother until weaning occurs at 8 to 10 weeks .
During mating , males detect females that are in œstrus by an odor that they produce , and although there is no courtship , the male will chase the female for up to an hour prior to mating .
Usually multiple males will chase a single female until the dominant male , usually the largest in the group , mates with the female .
Males and females will mate multiple times with many partners .
Females must reach a minimum body mass before they enter œstrus , and heavy females on average produce more young .
If food is scarce breeding may be delayed .
Typically a female will produce her first litter in her second year .
LIFE EXPECTANCY Section::::Life expectancy .
Red squirrels that survive their first winter have a life expectancy of 3 years .
Individuals may reach 7 years of age , and 10 in captivity .
Survival is positively related to availability of autumn – winter tree seeds ; on average , 75–85 % of juveniles die during their first winter , and mortality is approximately 50 % for winters following the first .
ECOLOGY AND BEHAVIOUR Section::::Ecology and behaviour .
The red squirrel is found in both coniferous forest and temperate broadleaf woodlands .
The squirrel makes a drey ( nest ) out of twigs in a branch - fork , forming a domed structure about 25 to 30 cm in diameter .
This is lined with moss , leaves , grass and bark .
Tree hollows and woodpecker holes are also used .
The red squirrel is a solitary animal and is shy and reluctant to share food with others .
However , outside the breeding season and particularly in winter , several red squirrels may share a drey to keep warm .
Social organization is based on dominance hierarchies within and between sexes ; although males are not necessarily dominant to females , the dominant animals tend to be larger and older than subordinate animals , and dominant males tend to have larger home ranges than subordinate males or females .
The red squirrel eats : *
mostly the seeds of trees , neatly stripping conifer cones to get at the seeds within .
* fungi * nuts ( especially hazelnuts but also beech and chestnuts )
* berries * young shoots More rarely , red squirrels may also eat bird eggs or nestlings .
A Swedish study shows that out of 600 stomach contents of red squirrels examined , only 4 contained remnants of birds or eggs .
Thus , red squirrels may occasionally exhibit opportunistic omnivory , similarly to other rodents .
Excess food is put into caches , either buried or in nooks or holes in trees , and eaten when food is scarce .
Although the red squirrel remembers where it created caches at a better - than - chance level , its spatial memory is substantially less accurate and durable than that of grey squirrel ; it therefore will often have to search for them when in need , and many caches are never found again .
Between 60 % and 80 % of its active period may be spent foraging and feeding .
The active period for the red squirrel is in the morning and in the late afternoon and evening .
It often rests in its nest in the middle of the day , avoiding the heat and the high visibility to birds of prey that are dangers during these hours .
During the winter , this mid - day rest is often much more brief , or absent entirely , although harsh weather may cause the animal to stay in its nest for days at a time .
No territories are claimed between the red squirrels , and the feeding areas of individuals overlap considerably .
ENEMIES AND THREATS Section::::Enemies and threats .
Arboreal predators include small mammals such as the pine marten , wildcats and the stoat , which preys on nestlings ; birds , including owls and raptors such as the goshawk and buzzards , may also take the red squirrel .
The red fox , cats and dogs can prey upon the red squirrel when it is on the ground .
Humans influence the population size and mortality of the red squirrel by destroying or altering habitats , by causing road casualties , and by introducing non - native populations of the North American eastern grey squirrels .
The eastern grey squirrel and the red squirrel are not directly antagonistic , and violent conflict between these species is not a factor in the decline in red squirrel populations .
However , the eastern grey squirrel appears to be able to decrease the red squirrel population due to several reasons :
*
The eastern grey squirrel carries a disease , the squirrel parapoxvirus , that does not appear to affect their own health but will often kill the red squirrel .
It was revealed in 2008 that the numbers of red squirrels at Formby ( England ) had declined by 80 % as a result of this disease , though the population is now recovering .
*
The eastern grey squirrel can better digest acorns , while the red squirrel can not access the proteins and fats in acorns as easily .
* When the red squirrel is put under pressure , it will not breed as often .
In the UK , due to the above circumstances , the population has today fallen to 160,000 red squirrels or fewer ( 120,000 of these are in Scotland ) .
Outside the UK and Ireland , the impact of competition from the eastern grey squirrel has been observed in Piedmont , Italy , where two pairs escaped from captivity in 1948 .
A significant drop in red squirrel populations in the area has been observed since 1970 , and it is feared that the eastern grey squirrel may expand into the rest of Europe .
CONSERVATION AND STRATEGIES BACKGROUND Section::::Conservation and strategies .
Section::::Background .
The red squirrel is protected in most of Europe , as it is listed in Appendix III of the Bern Convention ; it is listed as being of least concern on the IUCN Red List .
However , in some areas it is abundant and is hunted for its fur .
Although not thought to be under any threat worldwide , the red squirrel has nevertheless drastically reduced in number in the United Kingdom ; especially after the grey squirrels were introduced from North America in the 1870s .
Fewer than 140,000 individuals are thought to be left in 2013 ; approximately 85 % of which are in Scotland , with the Isle of Wight being the largest haven in England .
A local charity , the Wight Squirrel Project , supports red squirrel conservation on the island , and islanders are actively recommended to report any invasive greys .
The population decrease in Britain is often ascribed to the introduction of the eastern grey squirrel from North America , but the loss and fragmentation of its native woodland habitat has also played a role .
In contrast , the red squirrel may present a threat if introduced to regions outside its native range .
It is classed as a " prohibited new organism " under New Zealand 's Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996 preventing it from being imported into the country .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
In January 1998 , eradication of the non - native North American grey squirrel began on the North Wales island of Anglesey .
This facilitated the natural recovery of the small remnant red squirrel population .
It was followed by the successful reintroduction of the red squirrel into the pine stands of Newborough Forest .
Subsequent reintroductions into broadleaved woodland followed and today the island has the single largest red squirrel population in Wales .
Brownsea Island in Poole Harbour is also populated exclusively by red rather than grey squirrels ( approximately 200 individuals ) .
Mainland initiatives in southern Scotland and the north of England also rely upon grey squirrel control as the cornerstone of red squirrel conservation strategy .
A local programme known as the " North East Scotland Biodiversity Partnership " , an element of the national Biodiversity Action Plan was established in 1996 .
This programme is administered by the Grampian Squirrel Society , with an aim of protecting the red squirrel ; the programme centres on the Banchory and Cults areas .
In 2008 , the Scottish Wildlife Trust announced a four - year project which commenced in the spring of 2009 called " Saving Scotland 's Red Squirrels " .
Other notable projects include red squirrel projects in the Greenfield Forest , including the buffer zones of Mallerstang , Garsdale and Widdale ; the Northumberland Kielder Forest Project ; and within the National Trust reserve in Formby .
These projects were originally part of the Save Our Squirrels campaign that aimed to protect red squirrels in the north of England , but now form part of a five - year Government - led partnership conservation project called " Red Squirrels Northern England " to undertake grey squirrel control in areas important for red squirrels .
Research undertaken in 2007 in the UK credits the pine marten with reducing the population of the invasive eastern grey squirrel .
Where the range of the expanding pine marten population meets that of the eastern grey squirrel , the population of these squirrels retreats .
It is theorised that , because the grey squirrel spends more time on the ground than the red , they are far more likely to come in contact with this predator .
During October 2012 , four male and one female red squirrel , on permanent loan from the British Wildlife Centre , were transported to Tresco in the Isles of Scilly by helicopter , and released into Abbey Wood , near the Abbey Gardens .
Only two survived and a further twenty were transported and released in October 2013 .
Although the red squirrel is not indigenous to the Isles of Scilly , those who supported this work intend to use Tresco as a ″safe haven″ for the endangered mammal as the islands are free of predators such as foxes , and of the squirrel pox carrying grey squirrel .
HISTORICAL , CULTURAL AND FINANCIAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Historical , cultural and financial significance .
Squirrel Nutkin is a character , always illustrated as a red squirrel , in English author Beatrix Potter 's books for children .
' Ekorren ' ( The Squirrel ) is a well known and appreciated children 's song in Sweden .
Text and lyrics by Alice Tegnér in 1892 .
In Norse mythology , Ratatoskr is a red squirrel who runs up and down with messages in the world tree , Yggdrasil , and spreads gossip .
In particular , he carried messages between the unnamed eagle at the top of Yggdrasill and the wyrm Níðhöggr beneath its roots .
The red squirrel used to be widely hunted for its pelt .
In Finland squirrel pelts were used as currency in ancient times , before the introduction of coinage .
The expression " squirrel pelt " is still widely understood there to be a reference to money .
It has been suggested that the trade in red squirrel fur , highly prized in the mediaeval period and intensively traded , may have been responsible for the leprosy epidemic in mediaeval Europe .
Within Great Britain , widespread leprosy is found early in East Anglia , to which many of the squirrel furs were traded , and the strain is the same as that found in modern red squirrels on Brownsea Island .
However , no squirrel cases have spread to a human for hundreds of years .
The Rareware character Conker the Squirrel is a red squirrel .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
There have been over 40 described subspecies of the red squirrel , but the taxonomic status of some of these is uncertain .
A study published in 1971 recognises 16 subspecies and has served as a basis for subsequent taxonomic work .
Although the validity of some subspecies is labelled with uncertainty because of the large variation in red squirrels even within a single region , others are relatively distinctive and one of these , S. v. meridionalis of South Italy , was elevated to species status as the Calabrian black squirrel in 2017 .
At present , there are 23 recognized subspecies of the red squirrel .
Genetic studies indicate that another , S. v. hoffmanni of Sierra Espuña in southeast Spain ( below included in S. v. alpinus ) , deserves recognition as distinct .
* S. v. alpinus .
Desmarest , 1822 .
( Synonyms : S. v. baeticus , hoffmanni , infuscatus , italicus , numantius and segurae . )
* S. v. altaicus .
Serebrennikov , 1928 .
* S. v. anadyrensis .
Ognev , 1929 .
* S. v. arcticus .
Trouessart , 1906 .
( Synonym : S. v. jacutensis . )
* S. v. balcanicus .
Heinrich , 1936 .
( Synonyms : S. v. istrandjae and rhodopensis . )
* S. v. chiliensis .
Sowerby , 1921 .
* S. v. cinerea .
Hermann , 1804 .
* S. v. dulkeiti .
Ognev , 1929 .
* S. v. exalbidus .
Pallas , 1778 .
( Synonyms : S. v. argenteus and kalbinensis . )
* S. v. fedjushini .
Ognev , 1935 .
* S. v. formosovi .
Ognev , 1935 .
* S. v. fuscoater .
Altum , 1876 .
( Synonyms : S. v. brunnea , gotthardi , graeca , nigrescens , russus and rutilans . )
* S. v. fusconigricans .
Dvigubsky , 1804 * S. v. leucourus .
Kerr , 1792 .
* S. v. lilaeus .
Miller , 1907 .
( Synonyms : S. v. ameliae or croaticus . )
* S. v. mantchuricus .
Thomas , 1909 .
( Synonyms : S. v. coreae and coreanus . )
* S. v. martensi .
Matschie , 1901 .
( Synonym : S. v. jenissejensis . )
* S. v. ognevi .
Migulin , 1928 .
( Synonyms : S. v. bashkiricus , golzmajeri and uralensis . )
* S. v. orientis .
Thomas , 1906 .
* S. v. rupestris .
Thomas , 1907
* S. v. ukrainicus .
Migulin , 1928 .
( Synonym : S. v. kessleri . )
* S. v. varius .
Gmelin , 1789 .
* S. v. vulgaris .
Linnaeus , 1758 .
( Synonyms : S. v. albonotatus , albus , carpathicus , europaeus , niger , rufus and typicus . )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
ARKive : photographs and videos * A partnership to save the red squirrel , between the Scottish Wildlife Trust , et al .
* WildlifeOnline : Natural History of Tree Squirrels
* Red squirrels make a comeback as culling of grey rivals brings results
* Acute Fatal Toxoplasmosis in Three Eurasian Red Squirrels