WHAT 'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE
What 's Eating Gilbert Grape is a 1993 American drama film directed by Lasse Hallström and starring Johnny Depp , Juliette Lewis , Darlene Cates , and Leonardo DiCaprio .
The film follows 24-year - old Gilbert ( Depp ) , a grocery store clerk caring for his morbidly obese mother ( Cates ) and his mentally impaired younger brother ( DiCaprio ) in a sleepy Midwestern town .
Peter Hedges wrote the screenplay , adapted from his 1991 novel of the same name .
The film was well - received ; DiCaprio received his first Academy Award nomination for his role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the small town of Endora , Iowa , Gilbert Grape ( Johnny Depp ) is busy caring for Arnie ( Leonardo DiCaprio ) , his mentally challenged brother , as they wait for the many tourists ' trailers to pass through town during an annual Airstreamer 's Club gathering at a nearby recreational area .
His father had hanged himself seven years earlier , and since then his mother , Bonnie ( Darlene Cates ) , has spent most of her days on the couch watching TV and eating .
With Bonnie unable to care for her children on her own due to her morbid obesity , Gilbert has taken responsibility for repairing the old house and looking after Arnie , who has a habit of climbing the town water tower , while his sisters Amy ( Laura Harrington ) and Ellen ( Mary Kate Schellhardt ) do the rest .
The relationship between the brothers is of both care and protection , as Gilbert continually enforces the " nobody touches Arnie " policy .
A new FoodLand supermarket has opened , threatening the small Lamson 's Grocery where Gilbert works .
In addition , Gilbert is having an affair with a married woman , Betty Carver ( Mary Steenburgen ) .
The family is looking forward to Arnie 's 18th birthday .
A young woman named Becky ( Juliette Lewis ) and her grandmother are stuck in town when the International Harvester Travelall pulling their trailer breaks down .
Gilbert 's unusual life circumstances threaten to get in the way of their budding romance .
In order to spend time with Becky to watch the sunset , Gilbert leaves Arnie alone in the bath .
He returns home late and finds that Arnie is still in the bath the following morning , shivering in the ( now cold ) water ; his guilt is compounded by his family 's anger .
His affair with Betty ends when she leaves town in search of a new life following her husband 's death — he drowned in the family 's wading pool after suffering a heart attack .
Becky becomes close to both Gilbert and Arnie .
While they are distracted during one of their talks , Arnie returns to the water tower that he is always trying to climb .
Arnie is arrested after being rescued from the top of the tower , causing his mother — who has not left the house in seven years — to become the object of pointing , laughing , and gawking from the townspeople as she goes to the police station , forcing Arnie 's release .
Soon after , Arnie tries to run away yet again from his bath and in his frustration , Gilbert finally snaps , hitting Arnie several times .
Guilty and appalled at himself , Gilbert runs out and drives away in his truck without another word .
Arnie also runs out and goes to Becky 's , who takes care of him for the evening until he is picked up by his sisters .
After some soul searching aided by Becky , Gilbert returns home during the birthday party to make amends to his family for running out and to be forgiven by Arnie which , with only the slightest hesitation , he is .
He apologizes to his mother for his behavior and promises that he is not ashamed of her and that he will not let her be hurt any more .
She admits to Gilbert her knowledge of what a burden she has become to the family , and he forgives her .
He introduces her to Becky — something he had been reluctant to do earlier .
Following Arnie 's 18th birthday party , Bonnie climbs the stairs to her bedroom for the first time since her husband 's suicide .
Arnie later tries to wake her but discovers that she has died .
The children , not willing to let their mother become the joke of the town by having her corpse lifted from the house by crane , empty their family home of possessions and set it on fire .
A year later , Gilbert describes what happened to his family after his mother 's death , as Gilbert and his brother Arnie wait by the side of a road for Becky , who arrives with her grandmother , and picks them up .
CAST * Johnny Depp as Gilbert Grape * Juliette Lewis as Becky * Leonardo DiCaprio as Arnie Grape
* Mary Steenburgen as Betty Carver * Darlene Cates as Bonnie Grape * Laura Harrington as Amy Grape
* Mary Kate Schellhardt as Ellen Grape
* Kevin Tighe as Ken Carver
* John C. Reilly as Tucker Van Dyke
* Crispin Glover as Bobby McBurney * Penelope Branning as Becky 's Grandma * Libby Villari as the Waitress * Adrienne King as Group ( voice ) PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
What 's Eating Gilbert Grape was shot in Texas , in various towns and cities ; Austin and Pflugerville were primary locations , as well as Manor , where the water tower featured in the film was located .
Film Review quoted actor Leonardo DiCaprio : RELEASE Section::::Release .
The film had a limited release on December 17 , 1993 and wide release on March 4 , 1994 .
The wide release garnered $ 2,104,938 on its first weekend .
Total domestic gross for the film was $ 10,032,765 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film was given an 89 % " Certified Fresh " score and an average rating of 7.3/10 based on 45 reviews .
The site 's consensus states that the film is " sentimental and somewhat predictable , but those are small complaints , given the tender atmosphere and moving performances at the heart of What 's Eating Gilbert Grape . "
The New York Times film critic Janet Maslin praised DiCaprio 's performance , writing " the film 's real show - stopping turn comes from Mr. DiCaprio , who makes Arnie 's many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch … The performance has a sharp , desperate intensity from beginning to end . "
Roger Ebert of Chicago Sun - Times described it as " … one of the most enchanting films of the year " and said that DiCaprio deserved to win the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for which he was nominated .
Todd McCarthy of Variety found the film a " bemused view on life " and remarked that " Depp manages to command center screen with a greatly affable , appealing characterization .
"
The Washington Posts Desson Howe thought the film was an earnest but highly predictable effort .
Film Review praised Leonardo DiCaprio as the mentally handicapped brother , calling it " a performance of astonishing innocence and spontaneity " , bringing " a touching credibility to a very difficult part " .
The film was nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics .
ACCOLADES 66th
Academy Awards
Best Supporting Actor Leonardo DiCaprio Leonardo DiCaprio
Chicago Film Critics Association Awards 1993 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS