SEATTLE 'S
BEST COFFEE Seattle 's Best Coffee LLC is an American coffee retailer and wholesaler based in Seattle , Washington .
Since 2003 , they have been a subsidiary of American coffeehouse chain Starbucks .
Seattle 's Best Coffee has retail stores and grocery sub - stores in 20 states and provinces and the District of Columbia .
Sub - stores can also be found at many other businesses and college campuses , including JCPenney and Subway restaurants .
Seattle 's Best Coffee is generally cheaper than that of its parent , and is marketed as more of a working class coffee compared to the upmarket Starbucks .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Seattle 's Best Coffee began as a combination ice cream and coffee shop called the Wet Whisker in Coupeville on Whidbey Island , northwest of Seattle , Washington in 1969 .
Founder Jim Stewart purchased green coffee beans from local roasters to be roasted and sold at the Wet Whisker .
By the end of the second summer , the shop had roasted and sold nearly 500 pounds ( 226 kg ) of coffee .
By the end of the following year , the Vashon Island Wet Whisker was sold , and Jim Stewart , along with his brother Dave , opened another ice cream and coffee store on Pier 70 on Seattle 's Waterfront .
The shop was called Stewart Brothers Wet Whisker .
In 1982 , Stewart Brothers Wet Whisker began serving espresso based beverages alongside other coffee products .
In 1983 , the name again changed from Stewart Brothers Wet Whisker to Stewart Brothers Coffee .
Shortly after , business began to expand , and new shops opened in Bellevue , Washington , and in Seattle 's historic Pike Place Market a year later .
In 1991 , the company was renamed " Seattle 's Best Coffee " after winning a local competition .
Around 1995 , Seattle 's Best Coffee was purchased by a group of investors who own Torrefazione Italia .
They formed a new company made up of both parties called Seattle Coffee Holdings .
In 1997 , Seattle Coffee Holdings changed its name to Seattle Coffee Company .
In 1998 , AFC Enterprises purchased Seattle Coffee Holdings and began franchising the Seattle 's Best Coffee brand .
During AFC Enterprise 's ownership , Seattle Coffee Company 's Vashon Island roasterie was upgraded and the company 's organic coffee line was established .
AFC Enterprises sold SBC to Starbucks in July 2003 , retaining franchise rights in eleven countries , Hawaii and U.S. military bases .
Starbucks closed the Vashon Island facility October 23 , 2003 and moved production to their Kent , Washington roasterie .
The historic Vashon Island roasterie building , Jim Stewart 's original 1952 roaster , and roastmaster Peter Larsen , while no longer affiliated with SBC or Starbucks , continue operations as " The Vashon Island Coffee Roasterie " .
DISTRIBUTION PARTNERS Section::::Distribution partners .
The Borders bookstore chain signed a contract with Seattle 's Best Coffee in 2004 to convert Borders ' in - store cafes to Seattle 's Best cafes .
By 2006 , approximately two - thirds of Borders ' domestic superstores had completed the Seattle 's Best conversion .
Seattle 's Best parent company Starbucks Corporation has contracted with Borders ' competitor Barnes & Noble to sell its products in Barnes & Noble 's Cafes .
( Borders has since completely shut down due to bankruptcy . )
Starbucks also owns and operates locations within Chapters and Indigo Books and Music bookstores in Canada .
Seattle 's Best Coffee Cafes are found in larger JCPenney department stores when the company signed a contract in the late 1990s to have in - store cafés in department stores .
Seattle 's Best Coffee Cafes and Kiosks can also be found on all 21 ships in the fleet of the cruise line Royal Caribbean International under the name " Latte - Tudes " or " Cafe Promenade " .
The presence of the Seattle 's Best outlets on Royal Caribbean is also tied in with all other free - of - charge coffee items on the ship also being exclusively supplied by SBC .
The Oasis class ships also have Starbucks outlet with the regular land price list , SBC is for - free ( included in cruise cost )
On February 16 , 2010 , Burger King announced that they would add Seattle 's Best Coffee to their menu in over 7,000 restaurants .
On May 12 , 2010 , Starbucks announced a rebranding of Seattle 's Best Coffee , with a new logo and plans to expand Seattle 's Best Coffee distribution from 3,000 locations to 30,000 by the end of the 2010 fiscal year .
The rebranding of the Seattle 's Best Coffee logo from the detailed , vintage logo to the clinical , generic design for the new mass market was met with much criticism , with the new logo being likened to a label for eye - drops , a blood - bank sign and a gas station logo .
On February 8 , 2011 , Delta Air Lines and Seattle 's Best entered into an agreement to offer Seattle 's Best Coffee onboard all domestic , international , and Delta Connection flights beginning March 1 , 2011 .
Since February 2015 ; however , Delta adjusted its coffee offerings in favor of Seattle 's Best 's parent company Starbucks on all flights .
SEE ALSO
* List of coffeehouse chains REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS