IN THE TIME OF THE BUTTERFLIES
In the Time of the Butterflies is a historical fiction novel by Julia Alvarez , relating a fictionalized account of the Mirabal sisters during the time of the Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Republic .
The book is written in the first and third person , by and about the Mirabal sisters .
First published in 1994 , the story was adapted into a feature film in 2001 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
This is the story of the four Mirabal sisters during the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic .
At school , one of the sisters , Minerva , meets a girl , Sinita , who later became one of her best friends .
Sinita eventually confided in Minerva the truth about Trujillo - that their " glorious " leader was a killer .
The sisters make a political commitment to overthrow the Trujillo regime .
They are harassed , persecuted , and imprisoned , all while their family suffers retaliation from the Military Intelligence Service ( SIM ) .
As vengeance for their political activities , Trujillo orders three of the sisters be killed on Puerto Plata Road , with their driver Rufino , while returning from visiting their husbands in jail .
The women and driver are beaten to death and later their vehicle and bodies are dumped off a cliff in order to make their deaths look like an accident .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Minerva : The third Mirabal sister , and certainly the most headstrong .
She is focused on law school , and succeeds in completing it as an adult , although Trujillo withholds her degree as revenge .
She has a brief romance with the revolutionary leader " Lio " before she meets Manolo in law school ( also a revolutionary ) and marries him .
She has two children , a daughter Minou and a son Manolito .
Dedé : Dede is the second Mirabal sister .
She is not as certain about the revolution as her sisters and feels weaker because of that fact .
She has mixed feelings about joining the revolution , so she does n't .
She uses her husband , Jaimito , as the reason she does n't officially join .
He does n't want her involved in the revolution , and the conflict almost destroys their marriage .
She is constantly worrying about her sisters , telling them they 'll be killed .
She has children , all boys , Enrique , Rafael , and David .
In the end , she is the only survivor of her four sisters .
María Teresa :
The youngest of the four Mirabal sisters , she is very materialistic .
She marries Leandro and has one daughter , named Jacqueline .
She joined the revolution while she is living with her sister Minerva .
She joined because she wanted to feel worthy of Leandro .
Patria : The oldest of the Mirabal sisters , she is very religious .
While looking for her calling from God , she instead finds her husband , Pedrito , whom she marries at age 16 .
Her faith wavers intensely as a young woman .
She takes the miscarriage of her third child as God 's punishment towards her , which drives her further into a religious depression .
She later regains her faith on a pilgrimage to Higuey that she takes with her mother and sisters .
She has three children : Nelson , Noris , and Raul Ernesto .
She is also a revolutionary , starting a Christian revolutionary group and merging it with her sister Minerva 's revolutionary group .
Also her tone went from being a litle confusing in the beginnging and losing her relationship with her family to becoming more connected to her family .
Trujillo :
Rafael Leonidas Trujillo , also known as " El Jefe " ( " the Chief " ) , the main antagonist of the novel .
He is the self - appointed dictator of the Dominican Republic .
A harsh ruler , he demands complete obedience of everyone and commits many cruel and unjust acts against his people , such as imprisonment without trial , confiscating land and possessions , and torture .
Though married , he has many affairs with young girls who he keeps in houses around the country .
He is also identified as a rapist .
As his regime falls apart , he becomes even more vicious and cruel , and eventually has the Mirabal sisters ( all except for Dede ) killed when they become too much of an opposition to his decaying power .
Mamá : Mother to the Mirabal girls , and married to Papa .
She takes care of the girls and is always worried about them .
Papá : Father to the Mirabal girls , and married to Mama .
He heads the family store .
Pedrito González : A farmer .
He married Patria Mirabal when she was 16 , on February 24 , 1947 .
He and his wife eventually join the revolution , along with their son , Nelson .
He is later imprisoned , along with his brothers - in - law , Leandro and Manolo , for participating in the revolution .
He and Patria have three children : Nelson , Noris , and Raulito .
Manolo : A law student when he first arrives in the novel , Manolo is Minerva 's husband .
Manolo emerges as a leader of the revolution and is chosen as president of the June 14th movement .
Fela :
A worker for the Mirabal family who claims to be a fortune teller .
After the girls die , she claims to be possessed by them .
Minou goes to Fela for a time to " talk " to her mother after her death .
Minou : One of Minerva 's children , Minou was born around 1956 .
Like her mother , she is strong - willed and independent .
Don Manuel :
Trujillo 's right - hand man .
Manuel is very " tall and dapper " ( page 110 ) .
He is a corrupt politician , like many of Trujillo 's cronies .
Manuel does many of Trujillo 's odd jobs , such as delivering messages and threats for him .
Virgilio : Virgilio Morales , nicknamed " Lio " .
He is a revolutionary , but unlike most , he is not underground .
He speaks out publicly against the government , which is considered suicide .
Lio was forced into hiding because of his actions against the government .
He was very close to Minerva before he fled the country .
He asked her to flee with him but Minerva did not get the letter in time because Minerva 's father hid the letters from her .
Jaimito :
Jaimito is Dede 's husband and cousin .
Jaimito and Dede live on his farm after they are married .
He is opposed to his wife 's family 's involvement in the revolution and forbids her to join .
When he and Dede were first married he was kind , but over the years he and Dede drift apart .
He cares deeply for his boys .
Sinita : Minerva 's good friend , whom she met at Inmaculada Catholic School for Girls .
She later goes to Santo Domingo and becomes a revolutionary , just like Minerva .
All the men in Sinita 's ' family were killed by Trujillo , the last when she was a young girl , anchoring her deep - seated hatred of Trujillo .
Rufino de la Cruz :
The Mirabals ' driver whenever they rented a car to go over the mountains to visit their husbands in prison
, he was very loyal to the " butterflies " , and they trusted him wholeheartedly .
He has a wife and one child .
He was murdered along with the Mirabal girls .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The book was nominated for the 1994 National Book Critics Circle Award .
The Port Washington School District in Port Washington
, NY banned this book because it has a detailed diagram depicting how to construct a bomb .
" We believe that the purpose of education is to expose students to all areas of reality so that we can make our own judgments .
Is n't that why we are able to read Romeo and Juliet without committing suicide , or The Lord of the Flies without being violent ?
We should not ban a powerful piece of literature just because of a diagram .
" stated a New York Times opinion piece written by two Schreiber High School students where the book was banned .
In the Time of the Butterflies is a selection of The Big Read , the National Endowment for the Arts ' community - wide reading program , and of " Readers Round Table"(Algonquin ) .
CONNECTION TO HISTORICAL EVENTS Section::::Connection to historical events .
The idea behind In the Time of the Butterflies originated in the 1960s when author Julia Alvarez was in the Dominican Republic .
The Mirabal sisters had been murdered just three months after her father got involved with the underground against Trujillo .
REFERENCES