THE PARKERS
The Parkers is an American sitcom that aired on UPN from August 30 , 1999 , to May 10 , 2004 .
A spin - off of UPN 's Moesha
, The Parkers features the mother - daughter team of Nikki ( played by Mo'Nique ) and Kim Parker ( played by Countess Vaughn ) .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series centers around a mother and daughter who both attend Santa Monica College .
Nikki Parker was forced to drop out of high school when she discovered she was pregnant with daughter Kim .
After Kim reaches adulthood , Nikki decides to go back to school .
Kim is initially mortified with this decision , but eventually accepts the situation .
Nikki and Kim 's mother - daughter relationship evolves as roommates and as students .
Nikki adjusts to the fact that her daughter is old enough to live on her own , while Kim realizes that Nikki has more going on than just being her mom .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Kimberly Ann " Kim " Parker ( played by Countess Vaughn ) is the first of the two protagonists of the series .
Kim is funny and lovable , but very dimwitted .
Though she is usually behind most people when it comes to academics , her big heart and dreams makes up for it .
Kim is also a lead singer in the group named Free Style Unity , which also include her friends Stevie and " T " .
At the end of series , she does not graduate from Santa Monica Community College due to failing grades .
However , Kim goes on to become a successful fashion designer ( Kim originated as a regular character on Moesha ) .
* Nicole Ann " Nikki " Oglevee ( formerly Nicole Parker ) ( née West ) ( played by Mo'Nique ) is the second of the two protagonists of the series .
Nikki cares a lot for her family , and lets nothing stand in the way of love .
Throughout the series , she has several relationships with other people but her love always remains steadfast for the Professor Oglevee , despite his apparent hatred of her ( a running gag that occurs throughout the series )
In the series finale , she finally wins him over after five years of chasing him .
He proposes to her , she accepts and they marry on that same day .
The two live happily ever after .
* Desiree Littlejohn ( played by Mari Morrow ) – Originally , the Parkers ' neighbor and Nikki 's friend .
She only appears in the first season and is not credited as a regular later on during the season .
She is not seen after episode 13 and is replaced by the Andell Wilkerson character .
* Stevie Alison Van Lowe ( played by Jenna von Oÿ ) is Kim 's constant companion .
Stevie is from a wealthy family and has a tempestuous relationship with her mother .
She is also a member of the group Free Style Unity , along with Kim and " T " ( whom she briefly dates ) .
Upon graduating from Santa Monica Community College , Stevie attends UCLA and goes into business with Kim .
* Thaddeus " T " Radcliffe ( played by Ken Lawson ) is best friends with Kim and Stevie .
Although his duty as a loyal friend , " T " can sometimes be side - tracked when he and the professor let their wannabe mack daddy status get in the way of true values .
He is also the rapper in his , Kim , and Stevie 's , group , Free Style Unity .
At the end of the series , " T " goes on to attend Berklee College of Music .
* Professor Stanley De'Vanté Oglevee ( played by Dorien Wilson ) is a Professor at Santa Monica Community College who Nikki is constantly pursuing .
He loses several companions ( particularly Veronica ) , because Nikki either scares them off or completely sabotages the relationship .
He is a type of role model to " T " and often counsels him about love — sometimes with disastrous results .
Twice during the series he is convinced he loves Nikki , but changed his mind the first time .
The second time , which occurs in the series finale , he realizes that deep down he has feelings for her .
Depressed and confused , he sees a vision of himself in the mirror that ultimately convinces him to crash Nikki 's wedding to a man she met several weeks prior , and propose marriage .
Nikki , of course , accepts and they marry on that same day .
* Andell Wilkerson ( played by Yvette Wilson ) , is Nikki Parker 's ever loving and loyal best friend replacing Desiree Littlejohn .
Andell originated as a regular character on Moesha and appears on The Parkers in a recurring role during the first season but becoming a main character starting from the second season .
From Season 3 onwards , she is the owner of her self - named place of business
" Andell 's " , a restaurant that is the setting for several episodes .
Throughout the show , she is usually the one keeping a level head but sometimes can be pessimistic .
At the end of the series , she marries her boyfriend Lester .
Originally , Andell was in a relationship with Moesha 's uncle Bernie ( Bernie Mac ) .
He was mentioned once in the first series but was never seen on The Parkers .
RECURRING
* Mel Parker ( Thomas Mikal Ford ) –
Nikki 's rich ex - husband and Kim 's father .
* Erica Willis ( Porscha Coleman ) – Guest starring television role .
* Regina Foster ( Kara Brock ) –
Snobbish and stuck - up colleague of Nikki , Kim and Stevie 's at Santa Monica Community College and also a member of the Triple A Sorority .
*
Joe Woody ( Dwight Woody ) – Works in the " Grub Hub " cafeteria at Santa Monica Community College .
He previously played Coach Vines on Moesha .
* Veronica Cooper ( Paulette Braxton ) –
On - and - off girlfriend of Professor Oglevee and occasional nemesis of Nikki .
* Sophia Van Lowe ( Shannon Tweed ) –
Stevie 's mother whom she does not have a close relationship with .
* Gertrude " Gertie " Lowe ( Kym Whitley ) – Is the organ player at " Mount Zion " church in which Nikki is the choir director .
She is occasionally a nemesis of Nikki .
* Frederick " Freddy " Jones ( Kel Mitchell ) – A flamboyant fashion design student at Santa Monica College who often has conflict with Kim .
* Symone ( Samantha Becker ) – Originally a backup singer in the group Free Style Unity in the first Season but is not seen after .
* Chandra Carrington ( Lark Voorhies ) – Colleague of Nikki and Kim 's at Santa Monica Community College and also a member the Triple A Sorority .
*
Jerel Goodrich ( Trent Cameron ) –
Kim 's boyfriend turned fiance , later ex - husband .
* George and Shirley West
( Earl Billings and Aloma Wright ) – Nikki 's adoptive parents .
* Constance McFarland ( Suzzanne Douglass ) –
Nikki 's haughty older sister .
*
Tiffany McFarland ( Cherie Johnson ) – Nikki 's niece and daughter of her older sister .
* Quincy DeJohn ( George Wallace ) – Nikki 's biological father .
* Camille Oglevee ( Veronica Redd ) – Professor Oglevee 's mother .
She tried convince Kim to drop out of college to work for her , much to Nikki 's disapproval .
* Aunt Rita ( Nancy Wilson ) – Nikki 's aunt who turned out to be her biological mother .
She explained that was unable to raise Nikki due to her career .
* Evelyn " Nana " Smith ( Isabel Sanford ) – Nikki 's grandmother who comes onto Professor Oglvee while visiting Nikki .
GUEST APPEARANCES
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes . !
colspan="2"Season ! !
Episodes ! !
width="150"Premiere ! ! width="150"Finale bgcolor="#fada00 " height="10px " align="center " 1 align="center
" 22 align="center " August 30 , 1999 align="center "
May 22 , 2000 bgcolor="#2fce1f
" height="10px " align="center " 2 align="center " 22 align="center "
September 4 , 2000 align="center
" May 14 , 2001 bgcolor="#3DC6FF " height="10px " align="center " 3 align="center " 22 align="center " September 10 , 2001 align="center " May 20 , 2002 bgcolor="#A62626
" height="10px " align="center " 4 align="center " 25 align="center "
September 23 , 2002 align="center
" May 19 , 2003 bgcolor="#F86A28 " height="10px " align="center " 5 align="center " 19 align="center " September 15 , 2003 align="center " May 10 , 2004 SERIES FINALE
Section::::Series finale .
The Parkers series finale aired on May 10 , 2004 and drew in 3.6 million viewers .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The Parkers was produced by Saradipity Productions , Regan Jon Productions ( season 1 only ) , and Big Ticket Television .
Reruns are currently distributed by CBS Television Distribution .
BROADCAST
SYNDICATION Section::::Broadcast .
Section::::Syndication .
The Parkers aired in syndication on BET J before that channel 's September 2009 conversion to Centric .
On September 6 , 2011 , The Parkers returned to BET after a three - year hiatus and was reacquired .
On September 30 , 2013 , Centric aired reruns of the series .
Since September 27 , 2014 , UP started airing reruns of The Parkers weeknights starting at 11:00pm .
Since December 28 , 2014 , TV One airs reruns of the show .
As of 2017 , the series briefly aired reruns on VH1 , but has since moved to sister network MTV2 .
Since April 1 , 2018 , Fuse began airing reruns .
INTERNATIONAL AIRINGS
Section::::International airings .
In Europe , the show has aired in Ireland and the UK .
In Ireland , it aired on RTÉ Two from 2000 to 2005 , usually airing Thursdays as 7.00pm .
The first four seasons were aired in this evening time slot , with season five beginning in this timeslot and with the few remaining episodes moved to a late night timeslot on Fridays .
After the series finished on RTÉ Two , there have been no re - runs and no current plans to run the show again .
It was also shown on UK channel Trouble , which was also available in Ireland .
It usually aired weekdays from 2000 to 2004 but after it was completely removed , it was shown on a one - off weekend in late 2006 , with episodes airing all day .
In Australia , it aired on Fox8 and in Jamaica on TVJ .
REUNION Section::::Reunion .
In 2009 , the cast members Countess Vaughn , Jenna von Oÿ , Ken Lawson and Dorien Wilson appeared on The Mo'Nique Show for a full length episode , " The Parkers Reunion " .
Series creator Sara V. Finney was part of the audience for the episode .
Yvette Wilson did n't appear due to her busy work schedule .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release .
The Parkers : The Complete Collection , containing all five seasons , was released on region 1 DVD in Canada via Visual Entertainment in a 14-disc set on 18 March 2016 . ! width="170"Title ! ! width="128"Season ! !
width="60"Discs ! !
width="120"Release date rowspan="5 " The Complete Collection One 3 rowspan="5 " March 18 , 2016 RATINGS Section::::Ratings . !
colspan="2"Season !
Episodes !
Premiere !
Finale ! Ratings(in millions ) !
Rank AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS