MALT LIQUOR Malt liquor , in North America , is beer with high alcohol content .
Legally , it often includes any alcoholic beverage with 5 % or more alcohol by volume made with malted barley .
In common usage , it refers to beers containing a high alcohol content , generally above 6 % , which are made with ingredients and processes resembling those for American - style lagers .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
Malt liquor is a strong lager or ale in which sugar , corn or other adjuncts are added to the malted barley to boost the total amount of fermentable sugars in the wort .
This gives a boost to the final alcohol concentration without creating a heavier or sweeter taste , thus they are not very bitter .
BREWING AND LEGAL DEFINITIONS
Section::::Brewing and legal definitions .
Malt liquor is typically straw to pale amber in color .
While typical beer is made primarily from barley , water , and hops , malt liquors tend to make much greater use of inexpensive adjuncts such as corn , rice , or dextrose .
Use of these adjuncts , along with the addition of special enzymes , results in a higher percentage of alcohol than an average beer .
Higher alcohol versions , sometimes called " high - gravity " or just " HG " , may contain high levels of fusel alcohols , which gives off solvent- or fuel - like aromas and flavors .
The confusing and inconsistent use of the term " malt liquor " has to do with the vagaries of American alcoholic beverage regulations , which can vary from state to state .
In some states , " malt liquor " refers to any alcoholic beverage made by fermenting grain and water ; in these states a non - alcoholic beer may also be called a non - alcoholic or non - intoxicating malt liquor .
In some states , products labeled " beer " must fall below a certain alcohol content , and beers that exceed the mark must be labeled as " malt liquor " .
While ordinary beers in the United States average around 5 % alcohol by volume , malt liquors typically range from 6 % up to 9 % alcohol by volume .
A typical legal definition is Colorado 's Rev. Stat .
ss .
12 - 47 - 103(19 ) , which provides that : " Malt Liquors " includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley , malt , hops or any other similar products , or any combination thereof , in water containing more than three and two - tenths percent of alcohol by weight .
Alcohol percentages measured by weight translate into larger figures when re - expressed as alcohol percentages by volume , because ethanol is less dense than water .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The term " malt liquor " is documented in England in 1690 as a general term encompassing both beer and ale .
The first mention of the term in North America appears in a patent issued by the Canadian government on July 6 , 1842 , to one G. Riley for " an improved method of brewing ale , beer , porter , and other maltliquors . "
While Colt 45 , St. Ides , Schlitz , Mickey 's , Steel Reserve , King Cobra , and Olde English 800 are most closely associated with malt liquors in the United States , the beverage itself is older than these products .
Clix is often credited as the first malt liquor made in the United States , granted a patent in 1948 .
The first widely successful malt liquor brand in America was Country Club , which was produced in the early 1950s by the M. K. Goetz Brewing Company in St. Joseph , Missouri .
ADVERTISING
Section::::Advertising .
The core market for malt liquor brewers in the United States has been the black and Hispanic populations .
Brewers ' use of target marketing in advertising malt liquor primarily to young , inner - city , black males has been controversial , due to the drink 's higher alcohol content and the perceived vulnerability of the target audience .
Brewers and advertisers have stated that they simply advertise to those who already buy their products .
Critics have objected to the targeting of a segment of the population suffering disproportionately from alcohol - related disease and poor access to medical care .
In order to highlight the potency of malt liquor , brand names have stressed powerful imagery such as Colt 45 , Big Bear , and Power Master , and used slogans such as " It 's got more " or " The Real Power " .
Power and sexual dominance have been common themes in advertising .
Ads for Power Master were eventually banned in the United States due to regulations against advertising the strength of alcoholic beverages .
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism ( NIAAA ) has reported that African Americans suffer disproportionate rates of cirrhosis of the liver and other alcohol - related health problems .
In light of such statistics , African - American community leaders and some health officials have concluded that targeting high - alcohol beverage ads at this segment of the population is unethical and socially irresponsible .
In 1991 , U.S. Surgeon General Antonia Novello criticized all alcoholic beverage companies for " unabashedly targeting teenagers " with " sexual imagery , cartoons , and rock and rap music " in television and print ads .
FORTY - OUNCE Section::::Forty - ounce .
In the American vernacular , a forty - ounce or simply forty is a glass or plastic bottle that holds 40 fluid ounces ( 1.18 liters , or 2.5 U.S. pints ) of malt liquor .
Malt liquors are commonly sold in 40 fluid ounce bottles , among other sizes , as opposed to the standard twelve ounce ( 355 mL ) bottle that contains a single serving of beer , although many malt liquors are offered in varying volumes .
After the introduction of 40-ounce containers , which contain roughly the same amount of alcohol as five regular cocktails , " 40s " became a favorite high of many youth in inner - city areas .
When American suburban youth adopted the habit of drinking malt liquor , drug counselors began to refer to " 40s " as " liquid crack " and " date - rape brew " .
Examples of malt liquors sold in forty ounce bottles include Olde English 800 , Colt 45 , Mickey 's , Camo 40 , Black Fist , Country Club , Black Bull , Labatt Blue Dry 6.1/7.1/8.1/9.1/10.1 , WildCat , Molson Dry 6.5/7.5/8.5/10.1 , Private Stock , Big Bear , St. Ides , Steel Reserve 211 , B40 Bull Max , King Cobra , Jeremiah Weed , and Hurricane .
Dogfish Head Brewery has sporadically produced a high - end bottle - conditioned forty called " Liquor de Malt " .
Ballantine markets its ale in a forty - ounce bottle as well .
Forties are often mentioned in hip - hop and rap culture by rap stars endorsing the " 40 " Ounce tradition .
A similar trend was common around the late 1990s ' and early 2000s ' punk scene , with such songs as " 40.oz Casualty " by The Casualties and " Rock the 40 .
Oz . "
by Leftöver Crack ; and " 40 oz .
to Freedom " by Sublime .
At least for a brief period in the mid-1990s , some brands of malt liquor , including Olde English 800 , Colt 45 , and Mickey 's , were available in even larger , 64-ounce glass bottles .
Forty - ounce bottles are not permitted in some US states , such as Florida , where the largest container that a malt beverage may be sold at retail is 32 US fluid ounces .
INTERNATIONAL Section::::International .
American malt liquor brands are rarely exported to Europe .
However , similar inexpensive high - alcohol beers are available in many areas there ; these include the " super - strength lagers " such as Tennent 's Super and Carlsberg Special Brew in the United Kingdom , and in France the " bières fortes " Amsterdam Navigator , Amsterdam Maximator and Bavaria 8.6 ; Arboga 10.2 % of Sweden or Olvi Tuplapukki and Karhu Tosi Vahva in Finland or " malt liquor"-labeled German brewer Spaten 's Optimator , a doppelbock that weighs in at 7.6 ABV .
There was a short lived fashion for brewing American style malt liquors in Britain in the late 1970s and early 1980s .
Some of these were genuine American brands brewed under license , notably Colt 45 , and some were simply inspired by the style .
They generally contained 5 % ABV .
These beers were heavily marketed for a few years but failed to make a lasting impact and are no longer produced .
In Italy , beers with more than 14.5 Plato degrees fall into a distinct tax rate known as " Birra doppio malto " .
Brewing companies often state this classification on the label .
Therefore , the " doppio malto " indication nearly always identifies a beer that is the rough equivalent of a North American malt liquor .
SEE ALSO
* Edward Fortyhands *
Flavored fortified wines
*
Barley wine
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Database of 40s