THE STARS AND STRIPES FOREVER
" The Stars and Stripes Forever " is a patriotic American march widely considered to be the magnum opus of composer John Philip Sousa .
By a 1987 act of the U.S. Congress , it is the official National March of the United States of America .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In his autobiography , Marching Along , Sousa wrote that he composed the march on Christmas Day , 1896 .
He was on an ocean liner on his way home from a vacation with his wife in Europe and had just learned of the recent death of David Blakely , the manager of the Sousa Band .
He composed the march in his head and committed the notes to paper on arrival in the United States .
It was first performed at Willow Grove Park , just outside Philadelphia , on May 14 , 1897 , and was immediately greeted with enthusiasm .
Following an Act of Congress in 1987 , it was officially adopted as the national march of the United States of America .
Historically , in show business and particularly in theater and the circus , this piece is called " the Disaster March " .
In the early 20th century , when it was common for theaters and circuses to have house bands , this march was a traditional code signaling a life - threatening emergency .
It subtly notified personnel of emergency situations and ideally allowed them to organize the audience 's exit without causing the chaos and panic that an overt declaration might .
Circus bands would never play the tune under circumstances other than impending disaster .
One memorable , if heartbreaking , example of its use was during the Hartford circus fire of July 6 , 1944 .
At least 168 people were killed , though some estimates are much higher .
Numerous bodies burned so badly that they were either unrecognizable or completely incinerated .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
" The Stars and Stripes Forever " follows the standard American military march form .
The march begins with a four - bar introduction , which is followed by the first strain and the second strain , which are repeated , the famous trio which is repeated with the obbligato piccolos , the break strain , the final strain , and then the break strain is repeated again .
In the final repeat of the trio ( grandioso ) , the low brass joins the piccolo players with a prominent countermelody .
Sousa explained to the press that the three themes of the final trio were intended to represent the three regions of the United States .
The broad melody , or main theme , represents the North .
The South is represented by the famous piccolo obbligato , and the West by the bold countermelody of the trombones .
The three come together in the climax , representing the Union itself .
LYRICS Section::::Lyrics .
Sousa wrote lyrics to the piece , although they are not as familiar as the music itself .
The typical pairing of Sousa 's lyrics with the various sections of the march is noted in the square brackets .
SOUSA 'S LYRICS Section::::Sousa 's lyrics .
[ First strain ]
Let martial note in triumph float
And liberty extend its mighty hand
A flag appears ' mid thunderous cheers , The banner of the Western land .
The emblem of the brave and true Its folds protect no tyrant crew ;
The red and white and starry blue Is freedom 's shield and hope .
Let eagle shriek from lofty peak
The never - ending watchword of our land ; Let summer breeze waft through the trees
The echo of the chorus grand .
Sing out for liberty and light , Sing out for freedom and the right .
Sing out for Union and its might , O patriotic sons .
[ Second strain ]
Other nations may deem their flags the best And cheer them with fervid elation
But the flag of the North and South and West Is the flag of flags , the flag of Freedom 's nation .
( repeats )
Other nations may deem their flags the best And cheer them with fervid elation ,
But the flag of the North and South and West Is the flag of flags , the flag of Freedom 's nation .
[ Trio ]
Hurrah for the flag of the free !
May it wave as our standard forever ,
The gem of the land and the sea , The banner of the right .
Let despots remember the day When our fathers with mighty endeavor Proclaimed as they marched to the fray That by their might and by their right
It waves forever .
[ Grandioso ] Hurrah for the flag of the free .
May it wave as our standard forever
The gem of the land and the sea ,
The banner of the right .
Let despots remember the day When our fathers with mighty endeavor Proclaimed as they marched to the fray , That by their might and by their right
It waves forever .
TIDMARSH 'S ADDITIONAL LYRICS
Section::::Tidmarsh 's additional lyrics .
In 1942 the John Church Company published a four - part choral version of the march with a piano arrangement by Elmer Arthur Tidmarsh .
This arrangement has additional lyrics written by Tidmarsh for the Breakstrain section of the march .
NONSENSE LYRICS Section::::Nonsense lyrics .
The exact origin of the parody is unclear , but versions of it were being quoted as early as the 1930s on college campuses , and during the 1940s , where it was sung for entertainment by soldiers at the USO .
Some newspapers of that time referred to it as the " Duck Song .
"
In 1954 , Charles Grean and Joan Javits composed " Crazy Mixed Up Song " , using the theme from Stars and Stripes Forever , with lyrics beginning " Be kind to your web - footed friends " .
It was made somewhat popular by Peter Lind Hayes & Mary Healy in that year .
In the early 1960s , it reached a wider audience as a part of a nationally syndicated sing - along show , " Mitch Miller and the Gang " .
This version has perhaps the best known lyrics , which were used to end every show : SOCCER CHANTS Section::::Soccer chants .
" Here We Go " , the best known and most widespread English football chant , consist of the words " here we go " continuously repeated to the tune of " The Stars and Stripes Forever " .
It was described by Auberon Waugh as the national anthem of the working classes .
It was the basis of Everton F.C. 's official song for the 1984 FA Cup Final .
The tune has been repurposed for many other , similarly repetitive , football chants .
VARIATIONS AND NOTABLE USES Section::::Variations and notable uses .
" The Stars and Stripes Forever " is featured in many U.S. musical performances and pop culture :
* There are several orchestral transcriptions of " The Stars and Stripes Forever " , including one by conductor Leopold Stokowski and one by Keith Brion and Loras Schissel .
There was also an orchestral arrangement of the march by Carl Davis and David Cullen for the album Carl Conducts ...
Classical Festival Favourites .
*
The tune is widely used by soccer fans , with the trio / grandioso section sung with the words " Here We Go " .
The supporters of Spanish side Valencia CF used to sing it with the words Xe que bó !
which means something like " Oh !
How good " in Catalan , and those words have become a symbol for the team .
Another version uses the word cheerio repeatedly , normally sung to players or coaches when they have been sent off or occasionally when an underdog has ended its opponent 's cup campaign .
Finally , certain clubs such as Forest Green or Sunderland use the chant just using the club name ; this only works if the name has three syllables .
A nickname can instead be used for the chant , such as Gateshead fans chanting " Tynesiders " .
*
In the classic 1933 film Duck Soup , Harpo Marx , playing Pinky , a spy infiltrating a house in the middle of the night , attempts to open what he believes to be a safe , but turns out to be a large radio , which loudly begins playing " Stars & Stripes Forever " when he turns the knob .
Pinky spends the next several moments futilely ( and loudly ) trying to quell the noise before throwing the radio out a nearby window .
* Classic Popeye the Sailor cartoons by Fleischer Studios make frequent use of the tune in the music score accompanying the climactic fight between Popeye and the villain starting with the moment Popeye gets a spinach power boost .
* Parts of the tune feature in two Laurel and Hardy short films , The Chimp and Come Clean .
*
In show business , particularly theater and the circus , this piece is called " the Disaster March " .
It is a traditional code signaling a life - threatening emergency .
This helps theater personnel to handle events and organize the audience 's exit without panic .
Circus bands never play it under any other circumstances .
One memorable example of its use was at the Hartford Circus Fire in July 1944 , in which at least 160 people were killed .
* A 1952 biographical film , Stars and Stripes Forever , gives an account of the composer 's life and music .
* Russian - American pianist Vladimir Horowitz wrote a famous transcription of " The Stars and Stripes Forever " for solo piano to celebrate his becoming an American citizen .
In an interview , Horowitz opined that the march , being a military march , is meant to be played at a walking tempo .
He complained that many conductors played the piece too fast , resulting in music that is " hackneyed " .
* In " " , the first episode of the of the television series , a malfunction in the ship 's systems causes the main computer to play Sousa 's march on all channels throughout the ship .
The episode was first aired on September 25 , 1989 .
*
The song is usually played for the President of the United States after he gives a speech at a public forum , event , or ceremony , whereas " Hail to the Chief " is played when the President is introduced .
*
The tune of the song appears in the 1970 animated TV special adaptation of Horton Hears
a Who !
by Dr. Seuss , used as the melody for the song " Be Kind To Your Small Person Friends " .
*
The march was adapted for the theme song to The Berenstain Bears 1985 cartoon .
*
The student band Strindens Promenade Orchester in Trondheim , Norway , has the world record in " speed playing " of " The Stars and Stripes Forever " ( absolutely all notes must be played ) .
The band calls their speedy rendering of the march " Stars and Stribes " , and performs the march at all Saturday parties at the Trondheim Student Society .
Set during the fall term of 1999 , the record time is 50.9 seconds ( nominal time is 3 minutes 50 seconds ) .
For this , the band is noted in the Norwegian edition of the Guinness Book of Records .
* American composer Robert W. Smith parodied " Stars and Stripes Forever " along with " Jingle Bells " with his composition " Jingle Bells Forever " , published by Alfred Publishing Co.
*
In 2008 , the Muppets performed a web version starring Sam the Eagle , Beaker , a clucking chicken , Bobo the Bear , The Swedish Chef , and Crazy Harry .
*
At the conclusion of WWE 's Extreme Rules pay - per - view in 2011 , " Stars and Stripes Forever " played following John Cena announcing the death of Osama Bin Laden .
*
In Argentina , a sensationalist news channel Crónica TV always uses part of this march as a background music on reporting a breaking news story .
*
The Grateful Dead finished their 50th reunion concert on July 4 , 2015 with fireworks accompanied by a recording of " Stars and Stripes Forever " , in front of 70,000 people in Soldier Field in Chicago .
The recording followed an uncharacteristically predictable live encore performance of the band 's tongue - in - cheek " U.S. Blues " , which led to speculation about whether Sousa 's anthem was being celebrated ironically , or championed as a piece of uniquely American entertainment .
MEDIA
SEE ALSO
*
" You 're a Grand Old Flag "
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Bierley , Paul E. John Philip Sousa : American Phenomenon .
Miami , FL :
Warner Bros. Publications , 2001 .
* Sousa , John Philip , & Tidmarsh , Elmer A. ( 1942 . )
" The Stars and Stripes Forever " .
USA :
The John Church Company .
* Skidgell , Michael .
The Hartford Circus Fire : Tragedy Under the Big Top .
Stroud , U.K. :
The History Press , 2014 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sousa Band ( Gramofono )