SQUARE
In geometry , a square is a regular quadrilateral , which means that it has four equal sides and four equal angles ( 90-degree angles , or ( 100-gradian angles or right angles ) .
It can also be defined as a rectangle in which two adjacent sides have equal length .
A square with vertices ABCD would be denoted .
CHARACTERIZATIONS Section::::Characterizations .
A convex quadrilateral is a square if and only if it is any one of the following :
* a rectangle with two adjacent equal sides * a rhombus with a right vertex angle * a rhombus with all angles equal * a parallelogram with one right vertex angle and two adjacent equal sides * a quadrilateral with four equal sides and four right angles * a quadrilateral where the diagonals are equal and are the perpendicular bisectors of each other , i.e. a rhombus with equal diagonals * a convex quadrilateral with successive sides a , b , c , d whose area is formula_1 PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
A square is a special case of a rhombus ( equal sides , opposite equal angles ) , a kite ( two pairs of adjacent equal sides ) , a trapezoid ( one pair of opposite sides parallel ) , a parallelogram ( all opposite sides parallel ) , a quadrilateral or tetragon ( four - sided polygon ) , and a rectangle ( opposite sides equal , right - angles ) and therefore has all the properties of all these shapes , namely : *
The diagonals of a square bisect each other and meet at 90 ° * The diagonals of a square bisect its angles .
*
Opposite sides of a square are both parallel and equal in length .
* All four angles of a square are equal .
( Each is 360 ° /4
= 90 ° , so every angle of a square is a right angle . )
* All four sides of a square are equal .
*
The diagonals of a square are equal .
*
The square is the n=2 case of the families of n - hypercubes and n - orthoplexes .
*
A square has Schläfli symbol { 4 } .
A truncated square , t{4 } , is an octagon , { 8 } .
An alternated square , h{4 } , is a digon , { 2 } .
PERIMETER AND AREA Section::::Perimeter and area .
The perimeter of a square whose four sides have length formula_2 is and the area
A is
In classical times , the second power was described in terms of the area of a square , as in the above formula .
This led to the use of the term square to mean raising to the second power .
The area can also be calculated using the diagonal d according to In terms of the circumradius R , the area of a square is since the area of the circle is formula_7 the square fills approximately 0.6366 of its circumscribed circle .
In terms of the inradius r , the area of the square is Because it is a regular polygon , a square is the quadrilateral of least perimeter enclosing a given area .
Dually , a square is the quadrilateral containing the largest area within a given perimeter .
Indeed , if A and P are the area and perimeter enclosed by a quadrilateral , then the following isoperimetric inequality holds : with equality if and only if the quadrilateral is a square .
OTHER FACTS
* The diagonals of a square are formula_10 ( about 1.414 ) times the length of a side of the square .
This value , known as the square root of 2 or Pythagoras ' constant , was the first number proven to be irrational .
* A square can also be defined as a parallelogram with equal diagonals that bisect the angles .
*
If a figure is both a rectangle ( right angles ) and a rhombus ( equal edge lengths ) , then it is a square .
* If a circle is circumscribed around a square , the area of the circle is formula_11 ( about 1.5708 ) times the area of the square .
*
If a circle is inscribed in the square , the area of the circle is formula_12 ( about 0.7854 ) times the area of the square .
* A square has a larger area than any other quadrilateral with the same perimeter .
* A square tiling is one of three regular tilings of the plane ( the others are the equilateral triangle and the regular hexagon ) .
*
The square is in two families of polytopes in two dimensions : hypercube and the cross - polytope .
The Schläfli symbol for the square is { 4 } .
*
The square is a highly symmetric object .
There are four lines of reflectional symmetry and it has rotational symmetry of order 4 ( through 90 ° , 180 ° and 270 ° ) .
Its symmetry group is the dihedral group D. *
If the inscribed circle of a square ABCD has tangency points E on AB , F on BC , G on CD , and H on DA , then for any point P on the inscribed circle , *
If formula_14 is the distance from an arbitrary point in the plane to the i - th vertex of a square and formula_15 is the circumradius of the square , then COORDINATES AND EQUATIONS Section::::Coordinates and equations .
The coordinates for the vertices of a square with vertical and horizontal sides , centered at the origin and with side length 2 are ( ±1 , ±1 ) , while the interior of this square consists of all points ( x , y ) with and .
The equation specifies the boundary of this square .
This equation means " x or y , whichever is larger , equals 1 .
" The circumradius of this square ( the radius of a circle drawn through the square 's vertices ) is half the square 's diagonal , and equals formula_10 .
Then the circumcircle has the equation
Alternatively the equation can also be used to describe the boundary of a square with center coordinates ( a , b ) and a horizontal or vertical radius of r. CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
The following animations show how to construct a square using a compass and straightedge .
This is possible as 4 = 2 , a power of two .
SYMMETRY Section::::Symmetry .
The square has Dih symmetry , order 8 .
There are 2 dihedral subgroups : Dih , Dih , and 3 cyclic subgroups : Z , Z , and Z.
A square is a special case of many lower symmetry quadrilaterals : * a rectangle with two adjacent equal sides * a quadrilateral with four equal sides and four right angles *
a parallelogram with one right angle and two adjacent equal sides * a rhombus with a right angle * a rhombus with all angles equal * a rhombus with equal diagonals These 6 symmetries express 8 distinct symmetries on a square .
John Conway labels these by a letter and group order .
Each subgroup symmetry allows one or more degrees of freedom for irregular quadrilaterals .
r8 is full symmetry of the square , and a1 is no symmetry .
d4 , is the symmetry of a rectangle and p4 , is the symmetry of a rhombus .
These two forms are duals of each other and have half the symmetry order of the square .
d2 is the symmetry of an isosceles trapezoid , and p2 is the symmetry of a kite .
g2 defines the geometry of a parallelogram .
Only the g4 subgroup has no degrees of freedom but can seen as a square with directed edges .
SQUARES INSCRIBED IN TRIANGLES Section::::Squares inscribed in triangles .
Every acute triangle has three inscribed squares ( squares in its interior such that all four of a square 's vertices lie on a side of the triangle , so two of them lie on the same side and hence one side of the square coincides with part of a side of the triangle ) .
In a right triangle two of the squares coincide and have a vertex at the triangle 's right angle , so a right triangle has only two distinct inscribed squares .
An obtuse triangle has only one inscribed square , with a side coinciding with part of the triangle 's longest side .
The fraction of the triangle 's area that is filled by the square is no more than 1/2 .
SQUARING
THE CIRCLE Section::::Squaring the circle .
Squaring the circle is the problem , proposed by ancient geometers , of constructing a square with the same area as a given circle by using only a finite number of steps with compass and straightedge .
In 1882 , the task was proven to be impossible , as a consequence of the Lindemann – Weierstrass theorem which proves that pi ( ) is a transcendental number , rather than an algebraic irrational number ; that is , it is not the root of any polynomial with rational coefficients .
NON - EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY Section::::Non
- Euclidean geometry .
In non - Euclidean geometry , squares are more generally polygons with 4 equal sides and equal angles .
In spherical geometry , a square is a polygon whose edges are great circle arcs of equal distance , which meet at equal angles .
Unlike the square of plane geometry , the angles of such a square are larger than a right angle .
Larger spherical squares have larger angles .
In hyperbolic geometry , squares with right angles do not exist .
Rather , squares in hyperbolic geometry have angles of less than right angles .
Larger hyperbolic squares have smaller angles .
Examples : Two squares can tile the sphere with 2 squares around each vertex and 180-degree internal angles .
Each square covers an entire hemisphere and their vertices lie along a great circle .
This is called a spherical square dihedron .
The Schläfli symbol is { 4,2 } .
Six squares can tile the sphere with 3 squares around each vertex and 120-degree internal angles .
This is called a spherical cube .
The Schläfli symbol is { 4,3 } .
Squares can tile the Euclidean plane with 4 around each vertex , with each square having an internal angle of 90 ° .
The Schläfli symbol is { 4,4 } .
Squares can tile the hyperbolic plane with 5 around each vertex , with each square having 72-degree internal angles .
The Schläfli symbol is { 4,5 } .
In fact , for any n ≥ 5 there is a hyperbolic tiling with n squares about each vertex .
CROSSED SQUARE
Section::::Crossed square .
A crossed square is a faceting of the square , a self - intersecting polygon created by removing two opposite edges of a square and reconnecting by its two diagonals .
It has half the symmetry of the square , Dih , order 4 .
It has the same vertex arrangement as the square , and is vertex - transitive .
It appears as two 45 - 45 - 90 triangle with a common vertex , but the geometric intersection is not considered a vertex .
A crossed square is sometimes likened to a bow tie or butterfly .
the crossed rectangle is related , as a faceting of the rectangle , both special cases of crossed quadrilaterals .
The interior of a crossed square can have a polygon density of ±1 in each triangle , dependent upon the winding orientation as clockwise or counterclockwise .
A square and a crossed square have the following properties in common :
* Opposite sides are equal in length .
* The two diagonals are equal in length .
*
It has two lines of reflectional symmetry and rotational symmetry of order 2 ( through 180 ° ) .
It exists in the vertex figure of a uniform star polyhedra , the tetrahemihexahedron .
GRAPHS Section::::Graphs .
The K complete graph is often drawn as a square with all 6 possible edges connected , hence appearing as a square with both diagonals drawn .
This graph also represents an orthographic projection of the 4 vertices and 6 edges of the regular 3-simplex ( tetrahedron ) .
SEE ALSO
* Cube *
Pythagorean theorem *
Square lattice * Squircle * Unit square REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Animated course ( Construction , Circumference , Area ) * Definition and properties of a square With interactive applet * Animated applet illustrating the area of a square