TERRITORY OF HAWAII
The Territory of Hawaii or Hawaii Territory was an organized incorporated territory of the United States that existed from August 12 , 1898 , until August 21 , 1959 , when most of its territory , excluding Palmyra Island and the Stewart Islands , was admitted to the Union as the fiftieth U.S. state , the State of Hawaii .
The Hawaii Admission Act specified that the State of Hawaii would not include the distant Palmyra Island , the Midway Islands , Kingman Reef , and Johnston Atoll , which includes Johnston ( or Kalama ) Island and Sand Island , and the Act was silent regarding the Stewart Islands .
The U.S. Congress passed the Newlands Resolution which annexed the Republic of Hawaii to the United States .
Hawaii 's territorial history includes a period from 1941 to 1944—during World War II — when the islands were placed under martial law .
Civilian government was dissolved and a military governor was appointed .
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT Section::::Provisional Government .
Upon the overthrow of Queen Liliuokalani in 1893 , the Committee of Safety , Henry E. Cooper , Chairman ( which had been started by Cooper and newspaper publisher Lorrin A. Thurston ) , established the Provisional Government of Hawaii to govern the islands in transition to expected annexation by the United States .
Thurston actively lobbied Congress for annexation , while the former monarchy lobbied Congress to protest the overthrow and lobbied against any annexation of Hawaii .
First annexation proceedings began when Democrat Grover Cleveland took office .
Cleveland was an anti - imperialist and was strongly against annexation .
He withdrew the annexation treaty from consideration , mounted an inquiry , and recommended the restoration of Liliuokalani as queen .
Further investigation by Congress led to the Morgan Report , which established that the actions of U.S. troops were completely neutral , and exonerated the U.S. from any accusations of complicity with the overthrow .
The provisional government convened a constitutional convention to establish the Republic of Hawaii .
Thurston was urged to become the nation 's first president but he was worried his brazen personality would damage the cause of annexation .
The more conservative Sanford B. Dole , former Supreme Court Justice and friend of Queen Liliuokalani , was elected as the first and only president of the new regime .
Hawaii 's strategic location to support the Spanish – American War in the Philippines made it especially important to American interests , as argued by naval strategist Alfred Thayer Mahan .
On July 4 , 1898 , the United States Congress passed the Newlands Resolution ( named after Congressman Francis Newlands ) , which officially annexed Hawaii .
It was signed into law by President McKinley on July 7 , 1898 , and came into effect on August 12 , 1898 .
A formal ceremony was held on the steps of the formerly royal ʻIolani Palace in Honolulu where the Hawaiian flag of the Republic was lowered and the American flag of the " Stars and Stripes " raised on August 12 .
Former President Sanford B. Dole was appointed Hawaii 's first territorial governor .
The Newlands Resolution said , Whereas , the Government of the Republic of Hawaii having , in due form , signified its consent , in the manner provided by its constitution , to cede absolutely and without reserve to the United States of America , all rights of sovereignty of whatsoever kind in and over the Hawaiian Islands and their dependencies , and also to cede and transfer to the United States , the absolute fee and ownership of all public , Government , or Crown lands , public buildings or edifices , ports , harbors , military equipment , and all other public property of every kind and description belonging to the Government of the Hawaiian Islands , together with every right and appurtenance thereunto appertaining :
Therefore , Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled
, That said cession is accepted , ratified , and confirmed , and that the said Hawaiian Islands and their dependencies be , and they are hereby , annexed as a part of the territory of the United States and are subject to the sovereign dominion thereof , and that all and singular the property and rights hereinbefore mentioned are vested in the United States of America .
The Newlands Resolution established a five - member commission to study which laws were needed in the newly organized Territory of Hawaii .
The commission included : Territorial Governor Sanford B. Dole ( R - Hawaii Territory ) , Senators Shelby M. Cullom ( R - Illinois ) and John T. Morgan ( D - Alabama ) , Representative Robert R. Hitt ( R - Illinois ) and former Hawaii Chief Justice and later succeeding Territorial Governor Walter F. Frear ( R - Hawaii Territory ) .
The commission 's final report was submitted to Congress for a debate which lasted over a year .
Many Congressmen and Senators raised objections that establishing an elected territorial government in Hawaii would lead to the admission of a state with a " non - white " majority in the then racist and segregated era of " Jim Crow " laws in the South at the time .
ORGANIC ACT Section::::Organic Act .
The United States Congress finally agreed to grant Hawaii a popularly elected government of its own and 25th President William McKinley signed a law passed by the Congress , " An Act to Provide a Government for the Territory of Hawaii " , also known as the Hawaiian Organic Act of 1900 .
The Organic Act established the Office of the Territorial Governor , an office appointed by the sitting American president , usually from his own political party .
The territorial governor " served at the pleasure " of the President of the United States , was nominated by him and confirmed by the Senate , and could be replaced at any time .
TERRITORIAL GOVERNORS
* Sanford B. Dole , Republican , ( 1900–1903 )
* George R. Carter , Republican , ( 1903–1907 ) * Walter F. Frear , Republican , ( 1907–1913 ) * Lucius E. Pinkham , Democrat,(1913–1918 )
* Charles J. McCarthy , Democrat , ( 1918–1921 )
* Wallace R. Farrington , Republican , ( 1921–1929 ) * Lawrence M. Judd , Republican , ( 1929–1934 )
* Joseph B. Poindexter , Democrat , ( 1934–1942 )
* Ingram M. Stainback , Democrat , ( 1942–1951 )
* Oren E. Long , Democrat , ( 1951–1953 ) * Samuel Wilder King , Republican , ( 1953–1957 )
* William F. Quinn , Republican ( 1957–1959 )
The Organic Act created a bicameral Hawaii Territorial Legislature , consisting of a lower chamber House of Representatives and the upper chamber , the Senate , with its members elected by popular vote .
Section::::Territorial governors .
A Territorial Supreme Court of several justices / judges led by a Chief Justice , and additional appellate courts , also appointed by the President with the constitutional " advice and consent " of the Senate .
The Act also provided as with the other several Federal territories for a non - voting Delegate to the United States Congress , seated and with offices and the otherwise usual rights and privileges of a U.S. Representative in the U.S. House of Representatives CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATES Section::::Congressional delegates .
Representation in the U.S. House of Representatives was limited to a single , non - voting delegate :
* Robert William Wilcox ( 1900–1903 ) * Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaole ( 1903–1922 ) * Henry Alexander Baldwin ( 1922 )
* William Paul Jarrett ( 1923–1927 )
* Victor Stewart Kaleoaloha Houston ( 1927–1933 )
* Lincoln Loy McCandless ( 1933–1935 )
* Samuel Wilder King ( 1935–1943 ) * Joseph Rider Farrington ( 1943–1954 ) * Mary Elizabeth Pruett Farrington ( 1954–1957 ) * John Anthony Burns ( 1957–1959 ) TOURISM Section::::Tourism .
Hawaii 's tourism industry began in 1882 when Matson Navigation Company , founded by William Matson , began sailing vessels between San Francisco and Hawaii carrying goods .
His transports encouraged him to purchase passenger steamships that would carry tourists hoping to vacation in Hawaii from the mainland United States .
Matson 's fleet included the SS Wilhelmina , rivaling the best passenger ships serving traditional Atlantic routes .
With the boom in interest of Hawaiian vacations by America 's wealthiest families in the late 1920s , Matson added the SS Mariposa , SS Monterey and SS Lurline ( one of many Lurlines ) to the fleet .
Matson Navigation Company operated two resort hotels in Honolulu near royal grounds .
The first ( and for a time the only ) hotel on Waikīkī was the Moana Hotel which opened in 1901 .
As the first hotel in Waikīkī , the Moana Hotel was nicknamed the " First Lady of Waikīkī .
" The hotel gained international attention in 1920 when Edward , Prince of Wales and future King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom , stayed as a guest .
In 1927 , the luxurious Royal Hawaiian Hotel , informally called the " Pink Palace of the Pacific , " opened for business .
It was the preferred Hawaii residence of President Franklin D. Roosevelt when he visited Hawaii during World War II .
MILITARY BASES Section::::Military bases .
With annexation , the United States saw Hawaii as its most strategic military asset .
McKinley and his successor U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt expanded the military presence in Hawaii and established several key bases , some still in use today .
By 1906 , the entire island of Oahu was being fortified at the coastlines with the construction of a " Ring of Steel , " a series of gun batteries mounted on steel coastal walls .
One of the few surviving batteries completed in 1911 , Battery Randolph , is today the site of the U.S. Army Museum of Hawaii .
List of Territorial Installations :
* Camp McKinley ( est . 1898 )
* Fort Kamehameha ( est . 1907 )
* Pearl Harbor Naval Station ( est . 1908 )
* Fort Shafter ( est . 1907 )
* Fort Ruger ( est . 1909 )
* Schofield Barracks ( est . 1909 )
* Battery Closson ( est . 1911 )
* Battery Dudley ( est . 1911 )
* Battery Randolph ( est . 1911 )
* Fort DeRussy ( est . 1915 )
*
Wheeler Army Airfield ( est . 1922 ) INDUSTRIAL BOOM AND THE " BIG FIVE " Section::::Industrial boom and the " Big Five " .
As a territory of the United States , sugarcane plantations gained a new infusion of investment .
By getting rid of tariffs imposed on sugarcane sent to the United States , planters had more money to spend on equipment , land and labor .
Increased capital resulted in increased production .
Five kingdom - era corporations benefited from annexation , becoming multi - million dollar conglomerations : Castle & Cooke , Alexander & Baldwin , C. Brewer & Co. , American Factors ( later Amfac ) , Theo H. Davies &
Co. Together , the five companies dominated the Hawaiian economy as the " Big Five . "
PINEAPPLES AND HAWAII Section::::Pineapples and Hawaii .
James Dole , also known as the Pineapple King , arrived in Hawaii in 1899 .
He purchased land in Wahiawa and established the first pineapple plantation in Hawaii .
Confident that canned pineapples could become a popular food export , Dole built a cannery near his first plantation in 1901 .
Hawaiian Pineapple Company , later renamed Dole Food Company , was born .
With his profits soaring , Dole expanded and built a larger cannery in Iwilei near Honolulu Harbor in 1907 .
The Iwilei location made his main operations more accessible to labor .
The cannery at Iwilei was in operation until 1991 .
Dole found himself in the midst of an economic boom industry .
In response to growing pineapple demand in 1922 , Dole purchased the entire island of Lanai and transformed the Hawaiian tropical low shrublands into the largest pineapple plantation in the world .
For a long stretch of time , Lanai would produce 75 % of the world 's pineapple and become immortalized as the " Pineapple Island . "
By the 1930s , Hawaii became the pineapple capital of the world and pineapple production became its second largest industry .
After World War II , there were a total of eight pineapple companies in Hawaii .
Today pineapples are imported from Thailand and elsewhere ; few are commercially grown in Hawaii .
RACE RELATIONS Section::::Race relations .
One of the most prominent challenges territorial Hawaii had to face
was race relations .
Intermarriage was tolerated and even sought after .
Many native women married immigrant men and joined their community .
By 1898 , most of Hawaii 's population was made up of plantation workers from China , Japan , the Philippines and Portugal .
Their plantation experiences molded Hawaii to become a plantation culture .
The Hawaiian Pidgin language was developed on the plantations so they all could understand each other .
Buddhism and Shintoism grew to become large religions .
Catholicism became Hawaii 's largest Christian denomination .
MASSIE TRIAL Section::::Massie Trial .
Race relations in Hawaii took to the national spotlight on September 12 , 1931 when Thalia Massie , a United States Navy officer 's wife , got drunk and alleged that she was beaten and raped .
That same night , the Honolulu Police Department stopped a car and detained five men , all plantation workers .
Officers took the men to Massie 's hospital bedroom where she identified them .
Although evidence could not prove that the men were directly involved , national newspapers quickly ran stories about the brute locals on the prowl for white women in Hawaii .
The jury in the initial trial failed to reach a verdict .
One of the accused was afterwards severely beaten , while another , Joseph Kahahawai , was murdered .
Police caught the Kahahawai killers : Massie 's husband Thomas , mother Grace Fortescue , and two sailors .
Famed criminal lawyer Clarence Darrow defended them .
A jury of locals found them guilty and sentenced to hard labor for ten years .
Outraged by the court 's punishment , the territory 's white leaders as well as 103 members of Congress signed a letter threatening to impose martial law over the territory .
This pressured Governor Lawrence M. Judd to commute the sentences to an hour each in his executive chambers .
Hawaii residents were shocked and all of America reconsidered what they thought of Hawaii 's racial diversity .
The term " local " ( Hawaii 's non - Caucasian population ) was galvanized through the Massie trial MARTIAL LAW Section::::Martial law .
From 1941 to 1944 , following the attack on Pearl Harbor and America 's entry into World War II , Territorial Governors Joseph B. Pointdexter and Ingram M. Stainback stripped themselves of their administrative powers by declaring martial law .
With the territorial constitution suspended , the legislature and supreme court were also dissolved indefinitely .
Military law was enforced on all residents of Hawaii .
The formation of the military government was mostly done by Maj .
Gen. Thomas H. Green of the U.S Army Judge Advocate General 's Corps , who became Military Attorney General .
General Walter Short appointed himself military governor December 7 , 1941 .
He assumed control of Hawaii and governed from ʻIolani Palace , which was quickly barricaded and fitted with trenches .
He was relieved December 17 and charged with dereliction of duty , accused of making poor preparations in case of attack before the attack on Pearl Harbor .
Under martial law , every facet of Hawaiian life was under the control of the military governor .
His government fingerprinted all residents over the age of six , imposed blackouts and curfews , rationed food and gasoline , censored the news and media , censored all mail , prohibited alcohol , assigned business hours , and administered traffic and special garbage collection .
The military governor 's laws were called General Orders .
Violations meant punishment without appeal by military tribunals .
Anthony , the shadow Attorney General of the period , provides different information .
The " aged and weak " Poindexter ( sic ) , an appointed Democrat , was variously misled into surrendering his powers .
Anthony does not mention fingerprinting ; corroborates gasoline rationing but not food ( the latter unlike the mainland ) ; and disproves a liquor ban by showing how the military gained handsome profits by liquor permits and fees .
The military government instituted employment stasis by General Order No . 91 ( no leaving an employer without a letter of good standing ) ; and the banning of courts that required witnesses and juries .
Traffic violations were said to have netted prison terms and the military courts evidenced bias against civilians .
There ensued a turf battle between the federal Departments of War , Justice and Interior , in which the middle one played a mediating or flip - flopping role .
Indeed , it appeared War if not the Pacific Command was operating autonomously .
The Glockner and Seifert cases , actually two detained , naturalized Germans , tested the military 's suspension of habeas corpus .
In the second year of martial law , August 1943 , U.S. District Judge Metzger subpoenaed General Richardson as to why these two were held without charges .
The General , according to General Order No . 31 , could have had the server arrested for bringing charges against a military person , but instead had the Marshal manhandled so as to evade summons .
The prisoners were released outside of Hawaii , avoiding the implicated fall of military power .
List of Military Governors :
* Walter C. Short ( 1941 )
* Delos C. Emmons ( 1941–1943 )
* Robert C. Richardson ,
Jr. ( 1943–1944 ) DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION OF 1954 Section::::Democratic Revolution of 1954 .
The Democratic Revolution of 1954 was a nonviolent revolution consisting of general strikes , protests , and other acts of civil disobedience .
The Revolution culminated in the territorial elections of 1954 where the reign of the Hawaii Republican Party in the legislature came to an abrupt end , as they were voted out of office to be replaced by members of the Democratic Party of Hawaii .
HAWAII 7 Section::::Hawaii 7 .
During the years leading up to the ousting of the Republican Party Cold War fears brewed and the U.S. was in the middle of the Second Red Scare .
The FBI employed the Smith Act toward the ILWU and Communist Party of Hawaii , arresting those who would become known as the Hawaii 7 on August 28 , 1951 in synchronized raids at 6:30 that morning .
They were convicted in a two - year - long trial .
The Hawaii 7 were eventually released in 1958 .
* Jack Hall
* John Reinecke * Koji Ariyoshi
* Jack Kimoto
* Jim Freeman
* Charles Fujimoto
*
Eileen Fujimoto STATEHOOD Section::::Statehood .
The first Congressional bill for Hawaii statehood was proposed in 1919 by Kuhio Kalanianaole , and was based upon the argument that World War I had proved Hawaii 's loyalty .
It was ignored , and proposals for Hawaii statehood were forgotten during the 1920s because the archipelago 's rulers believed that sugar planters ' interests would be better served if Hawaii remained a territory .
Following the Jones - Costigan Act , another statehood bill was introduced to the House in May 1935 by Samuel Wilder King but it did not come to be voted on , largely because FDR himself strongly opposed Hawaii statehood , while " Solid South " Democrats who could not accept non - white Congressmen controlled all the committees .
Hawaii resurrected the campaign in 1940 by placing the statehood question on the ballot .
Two - thirds of the electorate in the territory voted in favor of joining the Union .
After World War II , the call for statehood was repeated with even larger support , even from some mainland states .
The reasons for the support of statehood were clear :
* Hawaii wanted the ability to elect its own governor *
Hawaii wanted the ability to elect the president * Hawaii wanted an end to taxation without voting representation in Congress * Hawaii suffered the first blow of the war
* Hawaii 's non - white ethnic populations , especially the Japanese , proved their loyalty by having served on the European frontlines
* Hawaii consisted of 90 % United States citizens , most born within the U.S.
A former officer of the Honolulu Police Department , John A. Burns , was elected Hawaii 's delegate to Congress in 1956 .
A Democrat , Burns won without the white vote but rather with the overwhelming support of Japanese and Filipinos in Hawaii .
His election proved pivotal to the statehood movement .
Upon arriving in Washington , D.C. , Burns began making key political maneuvers by winning over allies among Congressional leaders and state governors .
Burns ' most important accomplishment was convincing Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson ( D - Texas ) that Hawaii was ready to become a state , despite the continuing opposition of such Deep Southerners as James Eastland and John Sparkman .
In March 1959 , both houses of Congress passed the Hawaii Admission Act and U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed it into law .
On June 27 , 1959 , a plebiscite was held asking Hawaii residents to vote on accepting the statehood bill .
The plebiscite passed overwhelmingly , with 94.3 % voting in favor .
On August 21 , church bells throughout Honolulu were rung upon the proclamation that Hawaii was finally a US state .
SEE ALSO * Historic regions of the United States * History of Hawaii * Territorial evolution of the United States
* Sovereign states that governed the Hawaiian Islands :
* Kingdom of Hawaii , 1795–1893 * Republic of Hawaii , 1894–1898 * U.S. state created from the Territory of Hawaii : * State of Hawaii , 1959 REFERENCES FURTHER READING
SURVEYS
* Craig , Robert D. Historical dictionary of Honolulu and Hawaiʻi ( Scarecrow Press , 1998 ) .
* Fuchs , Lawrence H. Hawaii Pono : ' Hawaii the Excellent ' :
An Ethnic and Political History.(1961 ) .
* Haley , James L. Captive Paradise : A History of Hawaii ( St. Martin 's Press , 2014 ) .
* Kuykendall , Ralph Simpson , and Arthur Grove Day .
Hawaii : a history , from Polynesian kingdom to American state ( Prentice Hall , 1961 ) .
* Wyndette , Olive .
Islands of Destiny : A History of Hawaii ( 1968 ) .
SPECIALTY STUDIES
* Allen , Helena G. Sanford Ballard Dole :
Hawaii 's Only President , 1844 - 1926 ( 1988 ) .
* Bartholomew , Duane P. , Richard A. Hawkins , and Johnny A. Lopez . "
Hawaii pineapple : the rise and fall of an industry . "
HortScience 47#10 ( 2012 ) : 1390 - 1398 .
online
* Beechert , Edward D. Working in Hawaii : A Labor History ( U of Hawaii Press , 1985 )
401pp
* Brown , DeSoto and Anne Ellett .
Hawaii goes to war : life in Hawaii from Pearl Harbor to peace ( 1989 ) .
* Chapin , Helen .
Shaping history : The role of newspapers in Hawai'i ( University of Hawaii Press , 1996 ) .
* Forbes , David W. Encounters with paradise : views of Hawaii and its people , 1778 - 1941 ( Honolulu Academy of Arts , 1992 ) .
* Hawkins , Richard A. " James D. Dole and the 1932 Failure of the Hawaiian Pineapple Company , " The Hawaiian Journal of History ( 2007 )
vol .
41 , pp .
149–170 .
* Imai , Shiho .
Creating the Nisei Market : Race & Citizenship in Hawai'i 's Japanese American Consumer Culture ( 2010 )
* Jung , Moon - Kie .
Reworking Race : the making of Hawaii 's interracial labor movement ( Columbia University Press , 2006 ) .
* MacLennan , Carol A. Sovereign Sugar , Industry and Environment in Hawaii ( 2014 ) .
* Melendy , Howard Brett , and Rhoda E.A. Hackler .
Hawaii , America 's Sugar Territory , 1898 - 1959 ( Edwin Mellen Press , 1999 ) .
* Melendy , Howard Brett .
Walter Francis Dillingham , 1875 - 1963 : Hawaiian Entrepreneur and Statesman
( Edwin Mellen Pr , 1996 ) .
* Melendy , H. Brett . "
The Controversial Appointment of Lucius Eugene Pinkham , Hawaii 's First Democratic Governor , " Hawaiian Journal of History ( 1983 ( , Vol .
17 , pp 185–208 .
* Parkman , Margaret A. , and Jack Sawyer .
" Dimensions of ethnic intermarriage in Hawaii . " American Sociological Review ( 1967 ) : 593 - 607 .
in JSTOR
* Poblete , JoAnne .
Islanders in the Empire : Filipino and Puerto Rican Laborers in Hawai'i ( University of Illinois Press , 2014 ) .
* Rohrer , Judy .
" Haoles in Hawai'i "
( 2010 ) 124pp ;
scholarly survey * Sumida , Stephen H. And the View from the Shore : Literary Traditions of Hawai'i ( University of Washington Press , 2015 ) .
* Williams , Jr. , Ronald . "
Race , Power , and the Dilemma of Democracy : Hawaii 's First Territorial Legislature , 1901 . "
Hawaiian Journal of History ( 2015 )
49#1
pp 1–45 .
* Whitehead , John S. Completing the Union : Alaska , Hawai`i , and the Battle for Statehood ( 2004 ) .
PRIMARY SOURCES
* Thomas H. Green , The Papers of Major General Thomas H. Green , Judge Advocate General 's Corps , U.S. Army , University Publications of America , 2001
EXTERNAL LINKS * Hawaii Army Museum Society
* Morgan Report * Congressional Debates On Hawaiian Organic Act ...
Matters Concerning the Hawaiian Islands in the 56th Congress , First Session , December 4 , 1899 – June 7 , 1900 .
Photostatic Reproductions from the Congressional Record , Vol . 33 , Parts 1–8 .