SAMURAI CHAMPLOO , stylized as SAMURAI CHAMPLOO , is a Japanese anime series developed by Manglobe .
It featured a production team led by director Shinichirō Watanabe , character designer Kazuto Nakazawa and mechanical designer Mahiro Maeda .
Samurai Champloo was Watanabe 's first directorial effort for an anime television series after the critically acclaimed Cowboy Bebop .
It was first broadcast in Japan on Fuji TV on May 20 , 2004 and ran for twenty - six episodes until its conclusion on March 19 , 2005 .
Samurai Champloo is set in an alternate version of Edo - era ( 1603 to 1868 )
Japan with an anachronistic , predominantly hip hop , setting .
It follows Mugen , an impudent and freedom - loving vagrant swordsman ; Jin , a composed and stoic rōnin ; and Fuu , a brave girl who asks them to accompany her in her quest across Japan to find the " samurai who smells of sunflowers " .
Samurai Champloo has many similarities to Shinichirō Watanabe 's other work Cowboy Bebop .
Both series are critically acclaimed , focus on mixing genres , follow an episodic narrative design , and utilize contemporary music .
Samurai Champloo was dubbed in the English language and licensed by Geneon Entertainment for releases in North America .
Funimation began licensing the series after Geneon ceased production of its titles .
It was also licensed for English releases in the United Kingdom by MVM Films , and in Australia and New Zealand by Madman Entertainment .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A young woman named Fuu is working as a waitress in a tea shop when she is abused by a band of samurai .
She is saved by a mysterious rogue named Mugen and a young rōnin named Jin .
Mugen attacks Jin after he proves to be a worthy opponent .
The pair begin fighting one another and inadvertently cause the death of Shibui Tomonoshina , the magistrate 's son .
For this crime , they are to be executed .
With help from Fuu , they are able to escape execution .
In return , Fuu asks them to travel with her to find " the samurai who smells of sunflowers " .
SETTING AND STYLE Section::::Setting and style .
Samurai Champloo employs a blend of historical Edo - period backdrops with modern styles and references .
The show relies on factual events of Edo - era Japan , such as the Shimabara Rebellion ( " Unholy Union " ; " Evanescent Encounter , Part I " ) ; Dutch exclusivity in an era in which an edict restricted Japanese foreign relations ( " Stranger Searching " ) ; ukiyo - e paintings ( " Artistic Anarchy " ) ; and fictionalized versions of real - life Edo personalities like Mariya Enshirou and Miyamoto Musashi ( " Elegy of Entrapment , Verse 2 " ) .
The content and accuracy of the historical content is often distorted via artistic license .
HISTORICAL CONTEXT AND WESTERN INFLUENCE
Section::::Historical context and Western influence .
Samurai Champloo contains many scenes and episodes relating to historical occurrences in Japan 's Edo period .
In episode 5 ( " Artistic Anarchy " ) , Fuu is kidnapped by the famous ukiyo - e painter Hishikawa Moronobu , a figure prominent in the Edo period 's art scene .
Episode 23 ( " Baseball Blues " ) pits the main characters in a baseball game against Alexander Cartwright and a team of American baseball players trying to declare war on Japan .
As for Western influences , the opening of the show as well as many of the soundtracks are influenced by hip hop .
In episode 5 , Vincent van Gogh is referenced at the end in relation to Hishikawa Moronobu 's ukiyo - e paintings .
A hip hop singer challenges the main characters in episode 8 ( " The Art of Altercation " ) and uses break dance throughout .
In episode 18 ( " War of the Words " ) , graffiti tagging , a culturally Western art form , is performed by characters as an artistic expression and form of writing .
The ending of the episode has Mugen writing his name on the roof of Hiroshima Castle , the palace of the daimyō in Edo Japan .
CHARACTERS
*
Fuu :
A spirited 15-year - old girl , Fuu asks Mugen and Jin to help her find a sparsely described man she calls " the samurai who smells of sunflowers " .
Her father left her and her mother for an unknown reason .
Without her father around to support them , Fuu and her mother led a difficult life until her mother died of illness .
After a not - so - successful stint as a teahouse waitress / dancer she saves Mugen and Jin from execution and recruits them as her bodyguards .
A flying squirrel named " Momo " ( short for momonga , " flying squirrel " ) accompanies her , inhabiting her kimono and frequently leaping out to her rescue .
Her name , Fuu , is the character for " wind " .
In the title cards , her totem is Sunflowers .
* Jin : Jin is a 20-year - old reserved rōnin who carries himself in the conventionally stoic manner of a samurai of the Tokugawa era .
Using his waist - strung daishō , he fights in the traditional kenjutsu style of a samurai trained in a prominent , sanctioned dojo .
He is pursued by several members of his dojo as he had killed their master in self - defense .
He wears glasses , an available but uncommon accessory in Edo - era Japan .
Spectacles , called " Dutch glass merchandise " ( " Oranda gyoku shinajina " in Japanese ) at the time , were imported from the Netherlands early in the Tokugawa period and became more widely available as the 17th century progressed .
His pair of glasses is purely ornamental , as Mugen later found out after getting a chance to peer through them .
Although pictured in advertisements as smoking a kiseru , he was never depicted with one in the series .
In the title cards his totem is a koi fish .
He is named after one of the seven virtues of the samurai in Bushido , " Jin " ( Benevolence ) .
* Mugen : A brash vagabond from the penal colony of the Ryukyu Islands , Mugen is a 19-year - old wanderer with a wildly unconventional fighting style .
Rude , lewd , vulgar , conceited , temperamental and psychotic , he is something of an antihero .
He is fond of fighting and has a tendency to pick fights for petty reasons .
It is implied in a few episodes that he is also a womanizer , with his libido sometimes getting the better of him .
He wears metal - soled geta and carries an exotic sai - handled sword on his back .
In Japanese , the word mugen means " infinite " ( literally , " without limit " or " limitless " ) .
He was a former pirate .
In the title cards , his totem is the rooster .
Section::::Characters .
Apart from this trio , other characters tend to appear only once or twice throughout the series .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The episodes of the anime series Samurai Champloo were produced by Manglobe and written and directed by Shinichirō Watanabe .
The first episode premiered in Japan on Fuji Television on May 20 , 2004 where it ran for 26 episodes until its conclusion on March 19 , 2005 . PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Samurai Champloo is considered to be an example of the popular chanbara film and television genre .
Trademarks include the Edo setting , a focus on samurai or other swordsman characters , and lots of thrilling , dramatic fights .
Chanbara was used in the early days of Japanese cinema ( when government political censorship ran high ) as a way of expressing veiled social critiques .
The word champloo comes from the Okinawan word chanpurū ( as in gōyā chanpurū , the Okinawan stir - fry dish containing bitter melon ) .
Chanpurū , alone , simply means " to mix " or " to hash " .
* Director : Shinichirō Watanabe * Chief Writer :
Shinji Obara * Character Design :
Kazuto Nakazawa * Chief Animator :
Kazuto Nakazawa
* Weapon Design :
Mahiro Maeda * Opening Director : Mamoru Hosoda * Opening Animation
: Takeshi Koike * Art Director : Takeshi Waki * Color Design :
Eri Suzuki * Director of Photography : Kazuhiro Yamada
* Editing : Shuichi Kakesu * Dubbing Director : Tsutomu Kashiwakura
* Music : Tsutchie , Fat Jon , Nujabes , Force of Nature
* Producer :
Takatoshi Hamano , Takashi Kochiyama , Tetsuro Satomi
* Animation Production : Manglobe MEDIA Section::::Media .
Samurai Champloo premiered in Japan on May 20 , 2004 on Fuji Television , and concluded on March 19 , 2005 , spanning a total of 26 episodes .
It was also aired in Japan on Animax .
ANIME
Section::::Anime .
Geneon licensed the show for distribution in North America almost a year prior to the show 's airing in Japan .
An English dub of the series premiered in the United States on the Adult Swim anime block on May 14 , 2005 .
The version aired was edited and had foul language replaced with sound effects , in addition to cutting out blood and nudity .
The final first run of the episodes concluded on March 18 , 2006 .
Samurai Champloo debuted in Canada on December 24 , 2006 , on the digital station Razer .
The series has also aired in the United Kingdom , France , Latin America , Australia , New Zealand , Poland , Mexico , Portugal , Spain and Germany .
Funimation has distributed Samurai Champloo for Geneon since they ceased in - house distribution of their titles in 2007 .
Geneon , in association with Funimation , re - released the entire 26-episode anime series in a box set in June 2009 and on Blu - ray in November 2009 .
As of November 26 , 2010 , Funimation has fully licensed the series and once again released the series under the Classics line on May 24 , 2011 .
The anime series made its return to US television on FUNimation Channel starting March 21 , 2011 .
The series returned to Adult Swim on January 2 , 2016 , this time part of the revived Toonami block , replacing Michiko & Hatchin .
The episodes use six pieces of theme music .
" Battlecry " , performed by Nujabes and Shing02 , is the opening theme for all twenty six episodes . "
" by Nujabes and Minmi is the primary ending theme , except for four episodes .
Episode 12 uses Minmi 's " Who 's Theme " as its ending , episode 17 uses " You " by Kazami , 23 uses " Fly " by Tsutchie , and the final episode uses the song " San Francisco " by Midicronica .
MANGA
Section::::Manga .
A Samurai Champloo manga debuted in Shōnen Ace on January 26 , 2004 and ended on September 26 , 2004 .
Tokyopop licensed the manga in an English - language release in North America and Madman Entertainment lit for an English release in Australia and New Zealand .
It is also licensed for a Portuguese - language and Spanish - language release in Brazil and Spain by Panini .
There are 2 volumes in this series .
SOUNDTRACKS Section::::Soundtracks .
Music used in the series was released across four CD soundtracks by Victor Entertainment .
* , was released on June 23 , 2004 .
Produced by Shinichirō Watanabe 's longtime friend DJ Tsutchie and the Japanese hip hop duo Force of Nature , the album features 18 instrumental tracks and one mid - tempo ballad sung by R&B songstress Kazami .
* was released on the same date , containing 17 tracks , with two being vocal pieces performed by rap artist Shing02 and R&B singer Minmi .
The album was produced by Japanese DJ / producer Nujabes and American MC / producer Fat Jon .
Two additional soundtracks followed on September 22 , 2004 : * contained an additional 18 tracks , all created by Tsutchie , with only one being a vocal piece : a remix of the first album 's song " Fly " , performed by Azuma Riki of the hip hop group Small Circle of Friends .
* , features 23 tracks from Force of Nature , Nujabes and Fat Jon .
Rap artists Suiken and
S - word , members of Tokyo rap group Nitro Microphone Underground , provide guest vocals and Minmi performs the final song on the album .
Two separate soundtracks were released in 2004 by Geneon Entertainment only in North America .
They bare most of the same tracks as the Japanese albums .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
Grasshopper Manufacture developed a video game for the PlayStation 2 based on the series entitled ; however , the manufacturer has stated that the game has no relation to the events depicted in the show .
The soundtrack was composed by Masafumi Takada and Jun Fukuda , while it was written by Goichi Suda .
It was released on February 23 , 2006 in Japan and on April 11 , 2006 in the United States .
It received mixed reviews .
The game is notable for giving Mugen 's distinctive sword a name , " Typhoon Swell " ; it was never called by this name in the anime or manga series .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Samurai Champloo received critical acclaim , with many critics and scholars praising the unique blend of genres and influence of music within the series .
The ambient soundtrack recorded by artists Fat Jon , Force of Nature , Tsutchie and the late Nujabes received very high critical acclaim , with IGN ranking it among the Top Ten Anime Themes and Soundtracks of All Time .
Samurai Champloo was listed at # 10 , with Cowboy Bebop taking the # 1 spot .
A scholastic essay was penned by writer Jiwon Ahn about the series and its relationship to western culture , as well as various television and film genres .
The essay was published in the textbook How to Watch Television , and is currently used at the USC School of Cinematic Arts .
In her essay , Ahn refers to the series as " a rich text to examine within the analytical framework of auteurism and genre theory . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Adult Swim website
* Official Madman Entertainment Samurai Champloo web site ( Archive )