TWELFTH NIGHT Twelfth Night , or
What You Will is a comedy by William Shakespeare , believed to have been written around 1601–1602 as a Twelfth Night 's entertainment for the close of the Christmas season .
The play centres on the twins Viola and Sebastian , who are separated in a shipwreck .
Viola ( who is disguised as Cesario ) falls in love with Duke Orsino , who in turn is in love with the Countess Olivia .
Upon meeting Viola , Countess Olivia falls in love with her thinking
she is a man .
The play expanded on the musical interludes and riotous disorder expected of the occasion , with plot elements drawn from the short story " Of Apollonius and Silla " by Barnabe Rich , based on a story by Matteo Bandello .
The first recorded performance was on 2 February 1602 , at Candlemas , the formal end of Christmastide in the year 's calendar .
The play was not published until its inclusion in the 1623 First Folio .
CHARACTERS
* Viola - a shipwrecked young woman who disguises herself as " Cesario " * Sebastian – Viola 's twin brother * Duke Orsino – Duke of Illyria
* Olivia – a wealthy countess * Malvolio – steward in Olivia 's household * Maria – Olivia 's gentlewoman * Sir Toby Belch – Olivia 's uncle * Sir Andrew Aguecheek – friend of Sir Toby
* Feste – Olivia 's servant , a jester
* Maria - Olivia 's servant * Fabian – a servant in Olivia 's household * Antonio – a sea captain and friend to Sebastian * Valentine and Curio – gentlemen attending on the Duke * A Servant of Olivia * A Sea Captain – friend to Viola
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Viola is shipwrecked on the coast of Illyria and she comes ashore with the help of a Captain .
She has lost contact with her twin brother , Sebastian , whom she believes to be drowned and with the aid of the Captain , she disguises herself as a young man under the name Cesario , and enters the service of Duke Orsino .
Duke Orsino has convinced himself that he is in love with Olivia , who is mourning the recent deaths of her father and brother .
She refuses to see entertainments , be in the company of men , or accept love or marriage proposals from anyone , the Duke included , until seven years have passed .
Duke Orsino then uses ' Cesario ' as an intermediary to profess his passionate love before Olivia .
Olivia , however , falls in love with ' Cesario ' , setting her at odds with her professed duty .
In the meantime , Viola has fallen in love with the Duke Orsino , creating a love triangle among Duke Orsino , Olivia and Viola : Viola loves Duke Orsino , Duke Orsino loves Olivia , and Olivia loves Viola disguised as Cesario .
In the comic subplot , several characters conspire to make Olivia 's pompous steward , Malvolio , believe that Olivia has fallen for him .
This involves Olivia 's riotous uncle , Sir Toby Belch ; another would - be suitor , a silly squire named Sir Andrew Aguecheek ; her servants Maria and Fabian ; and her melancholy fool , Feste .
Sir Toby and Sir Andrew engage themselves in drinking and revelry , thus disturbing the peace of Olivia 's household until late into the night , prompting Malvolio to chastise them .
Sir Toby famously retorts , " Dost thou think , because thou art virtuous , there shall be no more cakes and ale ? "
( Act II , Scene III ) .
Sir Toby , Sir Andrew , and Maria
plan revenge on Malvolio .
They convince Malvolio that Olivia is secretly in love with him by planting a love letter , written by Maria in Olivia 's handwriting .
It asks Malvolio to wear yellow stockings cross - gartered , to be rude to the rest of the servants , and to smile constantly in the presence of Olivia .
Malvolio finds the letter and reacts in surprised delight .
He starts acting out the contents of the letter to show Olivia his positive response .
Olivia is shocked by the changes in Malvolio and agreeing that he seems mad , leaves him to be cared for by his tormentors .
Pretending that Malvolio is insane , they lock him up in a dark chamber .
Feste visits him to mock his insanity , both disguised as a priest and as himself .
Meanwhile , Viola 's twin , Sebastian , has been rescued by Antonio , a sea captain who previously fought against Orsino , yet who accompanies Sebastian to Illyria , despite the danger , because of his affection for Sebastian .
Sebastian 's appearance adds the confusion of mistaken identities to the comedy .
Taking Sebastian for ' Cesario ' , Olivia asks him to marry her , and they are secretly married in a church .
Finally , when ' Cesario ' and Sebastian appear in the presence of both Olivia and Orsino , there is more wonder and confusion at their physical similarity .
At this point , Viola reveals her identity and is reunited with her twin brother .
The play ends in a declaration of marriage between Duke Orsino and Viola , and it is learned that Sir Toby has married Maria .
Malvolio swears revenge on his tormentors and stalks off , but Orsino sends Fabian to placate him .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
Illyria , the exotic setting of Twelfth Night , is important to the play 's romantic atmosphere .
Illyria was an ancient region of the Western Balkans whose coast ( the eastern coast of the Adriatic Sea which is the only part of ancient Illyria which is relevant to the play ) covered ( from north to south )
the coasts of modern - day Slovenia , Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro , and Albania .
It included the city - state of the Republic of Ragusa which has been proposed as the setting .
Illyria may have been suggested by the Roman comedy Menaechmi , the plot of which also involves twins who are mistaken for each other .
Illyria is also referred to as a site of pirates in Shakespeare 's earlier play , Henry VI , Part 2 .
The names of most of the characters are Italian but some of the comic characters have English names .
Oddly , the " Illyrian " lady Olivia has an English uncle , Sir Toby Belch .
It has been noted that the play 's setting also has other English allusions such as Viola 's use of " Westward ho !
" , a typical cry of 16th century London boatmen , and also Antonio 's recommendation to Sebastian of " The Elephant " as where it is best to lodge in Illyria ( The Elephant was a pub not far from the Globe Theatre ) .
SOURCES
Section::::Sources .
The play is believed to have drawn extensively on the Italian production Gl'ingannati ( or The Deceived Ones ) , collectively written by the Accademia degli Intronati in 1531 .
It is conjectured that the name of its male lead , Orsino , was suggested by Virginio Orsini , Duke of Bracciano , an Italian nobleman who visited London in the winter of 1600 to 1601 .
Another source story , " Of Apollonius and Silla " , appeared in Barnabe Riche 's collection , Riche his Farewell to Militarie Profession conteining verie pleasaunt discourses fit for a peaceable tyme ( 1581 ) , which in turn is derived from a story by Matteo Bandello .
" Twelfth Night " is a reference to the twelfth night after Christmas Day , called the Eve of the Feast of Epiphany .
It was originally a Catholic holiday and therefore , like other Christian feast days , an occasion for revelry .
Servants often dressed up as their masters , men as women and so forth .
This history of festive ritual and Carnivalesque reversal , based on the ancient Roman festival of Saturnalia at the same time of year ( characterized by drunken revelry and inversion of the social order ; masters became slaves for a day , and vice versa ) , is the cultural origin of the play 's gender confusion - driven plot .
The actual Elizabethan festival of Twelfth Night would involve the antics of a Lord of Misrule , who before leaving his temporary position of authority , would call for entertainment , songs and mummery ; the play has been regarded as preserving this festive and traditional atmosphere of licensed disorder .
This leads to the general inversion of the order of things , most notably gender roles .
The embittered and isolated Malvolio can be regarded as an adversary of festive enjoyment and community , led by Sir Toby Belch , " the vice - regent spokesman for cakes and ale " and his partner in a comic stock duo , the simple and constantly exploited Sir Andrew Aguecheek .
DATE AND TEXT Section::::Date and text .
The full title of the play is Twelfth Night , or What You Will .
Subtitles for plays were fashionable in the Elizabethan era , and though some editors place The Merchant of Venice 's alternative title , The Jew of Venice , as a subtitle , this is the only Shakespearean play to bear one when first published .
The play was probably finished between 1600 and 1601 , a period suggested by the play 's referencing of events which happened during that time .
A law student , John Manningham , who was studying in the Middle Temple in London , described the performance on 2 February 1602 ( Candlemas ) which took place in the hall of the Middle Temple at the formal end of Christmastide in the year 's calendar , and to which students were invited .
This was the first recorded performance of the play .
The play was not published until its inclusion in the First Folio in 1623 .
THEMES GENDER Section::::Themes .
Section::::Gender .
Viola is not alone among Shakespeare 's cross - dressing heroines ; in Shakespeare 's theatre , convention dictated that adolescent boys play the roles of female characters , creating humour in the multiplicity of disguise found in a female character who for a while pretended at masculinity .
Her cross dressing enables Viola to fulfill usually male roles , such as acting as a messenger between Orsino and Olivia , as well as being Orsino 's confidant .
She does not , however , use her disguise to enable her to intervene directly in the plot ( unlike other Shakespearean heroines such as Rosalind in As You Like It and Portia in The Merchant of Venice ) , remaining someone who allows " Time " to untangle the plot .
Viola 's persistence in transvestism through her betrothal in the final scene of the play often engenders a discussion of the possibly homoerotic relationship between Viola and Orsino .
As the very nature of Twelfth Night explores gender identity and sexual attraction , having a male actor play Viola enhanced the impression of androgyny and sexual ambiguity .
Some modern scholars believe that Twelfth Night , with the added confusion of male actors and Viola 's deception , addresses gender issues " with particular immediacy " .
They also accept that the depiction of gender in Twelfth Night stems from the era 's prevalent scientific theory that females are simply imperfect males .
This belief explains the almost indistinguishable differences between the sexes reflected in the casting and characters of Twelfth Night .
METATHEATRE Section::::Metatheatre .
At Olivia 's first meeting with " Cesario " ( Viola ) in I.V she asks her " Are you a comedian ? "
( an Elizabethan term for " actor " ) .
Viola 's reply , " I am not that I play " , epitomising her adoption of the role of Cesario , is regarded as one of several references to theatricality and " playing " within the play .
The plot against Malvolio revolves around these ideas , and Fabian remarks in Act III , Scene iv : " If this were play'd upon a stage now , I could condemn it as an improbable fiction " .
In Act IV , Scene ii , Feste ( The Fool ) plays both parts in the " play " for Malvolio 's benefit , alternating between adopting the voice of the local curate , Sir Topas , and his own voice .
He finishes by likening himself to " the old Vice " of English Morality plays .
Other influences of the English folk tradition can be seen in Feste 's songs and dialogue , such as his final song in Act
V.
The last line of this song ,
" And we 'll strive to please you every day " , is a direct echo of similar lines from several English folk plays .
PERFORMANCE HISTORY DURING AND
JUST AFTER SHAKESPEARE 'S LIFETIME Section::::Performance history .
Section::::During and just after Shakespeare 's lifetime .
The earliest known performance took place at Middle Temple Hall , one of the Inns of Court , on Candlemas night , 2 February 1602 .
The only record of the performance is an entry in the diary of the lawyer John Manningham , who wrote : Clearly , Manningham enjoyed the Malvolio story most of all , and noted the play 's similarity with Shakespeare 's earlier play , as well as its relationship with one of its sources , the Inganni plays .
It may have been performed earlier as well , before the Court at Whitehall Palace on Twelfth Night ( 6 January ) of 1601 .
Twelfth Night was also performed at Court on Easter Monday , 6 April 1618 , and again at Candlemas in 1623 .
RESTORATION TO 20TH CENTURY Section::::Restoration to 20th century .
The play was also one of the earliest Shakespearean works acted at the start of the Restoration ; Sir William Davenant 's adaptation was staged in 1661 , with Thomas Betterton in the role of Sir Toby Belch .
Samuel Pepys thought it " a silly play " , but saw it three times anyway during the period of his diary on 11 September 1661 , 6 January 1663 , and 20 January 1669 .
Another adaptation , Love Betray'd , or , The Agreeable Disappointment , was acted at Lincoln 's Inn Fields in 1703 .
After holding the stage only in the adaptations in the late 17th century and early 18th century , the original Shakespearean text of Twelfth Night was revived in 1741 , in a production at Drury Lane .
In 1820 an operatic version by Frederic Reynolds was staged , with music composed by Henry Bishop .
20TH AND 21ST CENTURY
Section::::20th and 21st century .
Influential productions were staged in 1912 , by Harley Granville - Barker , and in 1916 , at the Old Vic .
Lilian Baylis reopened the long - dormant Sadler 's Wells Theatre in 1931 with a notable production of the play starring Ralph Richardson as Sir Toby and John Gielgud as Malvolio .
The Old Vic Theatre was reopened in 1950 ( after suffering severe damage in the London Blitz in 1941 ) with a memorable production starring Peggy Ashcroft as Viola .
Gielgud directed a production at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre with Laurence Olivier as Malvolio and Vivien Leigh playing both Viola and Sebastian in 1955 .
The longest running Broadway production by far was Margaret Webster 's 1940 staging starring Maurice Evans as Malvolio and Helen Hayes as Viola .
It ran for 129 performances , more than twice as long as any other Broadway production .
A memorable production directed by Liviu Ciulei at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis , October – November 1984 , was set in the context of an archetypal circus world , emphasising its convivial , carnival tone .
When the play was first performed , all female parts were played by men or boys , but it has been the practice for some centuries now to cast women or girls in the female parts in all plays .
The company of Shakespeare 's Globe , London , has produced many notable , highly popular all - male performances , and a highlight of their 2002 season was Twelfth Night , with the Globe 's artistic director Mark Rylance playing the part of Olivia .
This season was preceded , in February , by a performance of the play by the same company at Middle Temple Hall , to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the play 's première , at the same venue .
The same production was revived in 2012–13 and transferred to sell - out runs in the West End and Broadway .
Stephen Fry played Malvolio .
It ran in repertory with Richard III .
Interpretations of the role of Viola have been given by many well - renowned actresses in the latter half of the 20th century , and have been interpreted in the light of how far they allow the audience to experience the transgressions of stereotypical gender roles .
This has sometimes correlated with how far productions of the play go towards reaffirming a sense of unification , for example a 1947 production concentrated on showing a post - World War II community reuniting at the end of the play , led by a robust hero / heroine in Viola , played by Beatrix Lehmann , then 44 years old .
The 1966 Royal Shakespeare Company production played on gender transgressions more obviously , with Diana Rigg as Viola showing much more physical attraction towards the duke than previously seen , and the court in general being a more physically demonstrative place , particularly between males .
John Barton 's 1969 production starred Donald Sinden as Malvolio and Judi Dench as Viola ; their performances were highly acclaimed and
the production as a whole was commented on as showing a dying society crumbling into decay .
Malvolio is a popular character choice among stage actors ; others who have taken the part include Ian Holm many times , Simon Russell Beale ( Donmar Warehouse , 2002 ) , Richard Cordery in 2005 , Patrick Stewart , in Chichester , in 2007 , Derek Jacobi ( Donmar Warehouse )
in 2009 , Richard Wilson in 2009 and Stephen Fry at the Globe in 2012 .
In March 2017 , the Royal National Theatre 's production of Twelfth Night changed some of the roles from male to female , including Feste , Fabian ( which became Fabia ) , and most notably , Malvolio – which became Malvolia – played by Tamsin Greig to largely positive reviews .
As a result , the production played with sexuality as well as gender .
In 2017/18 , the Royal Shakespeare Company staged Twelfth Night , which was directed by Christopher Luscombe .
Adrian Edmondson played Malvolio and Kara Tointon played Olivia .
ADAPTATIONS
STAGE Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Stage .
Due to its themes such as young women seeking independence in a " man 's world " , " gender - bending " and " same - sex attraction " ( albeit in a roundabout way ) , there have been a number of re - workings for the stage , particularly in musical theatre , among them
Your Own Thing ( 1968 )
, Music Is ( 1977 ) ,
All Shook Up ( 2005 ) , and Play On !
( 1997 ) , the last two jukebox musicals featuring the music of Elvis Presley and Duke Ellington , respectively .
Another adaptation is Illyria , by composer Pete Mills .
Theatre Grottesco created a modern version of the play from the point of view of the servants working for Duke Orsino and Lady Olivia .
The adaptation takes a much deeper look at the issues of classism , and society without leadership .
In 1999 , the play was adapted as Epiphany by the Takarazuka Revue , adding more overt commentary on the role of theatre and actors , as well as gender as applied to the stage ( made more layered by the fact that all roles in this production were played by women ) .
FILM Section::::Film .
In 1910 , Vitagraph Studios released the silent , short adaptation Twelfth Night starring actors Florence Turner , Julia Swayne Gordon and Marin Sais .
There was a 1986 Australian film .
The adapted and directed by Trevor Nunn and set in the 19th century , stars Imogen Stubbs as Viola , Helena Bonham Carter as Olivia and Toby Stephens as Duke Orsino .
The film also features Mel Smith as Sir Toby , Richard E. Grant as Sir Andrew , Ben Kingsley as Feste , Imelda Staunton as Maria and Nigel Hawthorne as Malvolio .
Much of the comic material was downplayed into straightforward drama , and the film received some criticism for this .
The 2001 Disney Channel Original Movie Motocrossed sets the story in the world of motocross racing .
In the 2004 movie Wicker Park , Rose Byrne 's character Alex plays Viola in an amateur production of Twelfth Night .
The 2006 film
She 's
the Man modernises the story as a contemporary teenage comedy ( as 10 Things I Hate About
You did with The Taming of the Shrew ) .
It is set in a prep school named Illyria and incorporates the names of the play 's major characters .
For example , Orsino , Duke of Illyria becomes simply Duke Orsino ( " Duke " being his forename ) .
The story was changed to revolve around the idea of soccer rivalry but the twisted character romance remained the same as the original .
Viola , the main character , pretends to be her brother Sebastian , and a girl named Olivia falls in love with Viola as Sebastian .
She also goes to a restaurant named " Cesario 's " .
Two of Duke 's Illyria soccer teammates are named Andrew and Toby .
A nod is given to the omitted subplot by naming a briefly - onscreen tarantula Malvolio .
Sebastian 's ex - girlfriend Monique was given the surname Valentine , and the meddling Malcolm was given the surname Festes .
Shakespeare in Love contains several references to Twelfth Night .
Near the end of the movie , Elizabeth I ( Judi Dench ) asks Shakespeare ( Joseph Fiennes ) to write a comedy for the Twelfth Night holiday .
Shakespeare 's love interest in the film , " Viola " ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , is the daughter of a wealthy merchant who disguises herself as a boy to become an actor ; while Shakespeare , a financially struggling playwright suffering from writer 's block , is trying to write Romeo and Juliet .
She is presented in the final scene of the film as William Shakespeare 's " true " inspiration for the heroine of Twelfth Night .
In a nod to the shipwrecked opening of Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night , the movie includes a scene where the character Viola , separated from her love by an arranged marriage and bound for the American colonies , survives a shipwreck and comes ashore to Virginia .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
On 14 May 1937 , the BBC Television Service in London broadcast a thirty - minute excerpt of the play , the first known instance of a work of Shakespeare being performed on television .
Produced for the new medium by George More O'Ferrall , the production is also notable for having featured a young actress who would later go on to win an Academy Award – Greer Garson .
As the performance was transmitted live from the BBC 's studios at Alexandra Palace and the technology to record television programmes did not at the time exist , no visual record survives other than still photographs .
The entire play was produced for television in 1939 , directed by Michel Saint - Denis and starring another future Oscar - winner , Peggy Ashcroft .
The part of Sir Toby Belch was taken by a young George Devine .
In 1957 , another adaptation of the play was presented by NBC on U.S. television 's Hallmark Hall of Fame , with Maurice Evans recreating his performance as Malvolio .
This was the first color version ever produced on TV .
Dennis King , Rosemary Harris , and Frances Hyland co - starred .
In 1966 there was an Australian TV version .
Another version for UK television was produced in 1969 , directed by John Sichel and John Dexter .
The production featured Joan Plowright as Viola and Sebastian , Alec Guinness as Malvolio , Ralph Richardson as Sir Toby Belch and Tommy Steele as an unusually prominent Feste .
Yet another TV adaptation followed in 1980 .
This version was part of the BBC Television Shakespeare series and featured Felicity Kendal in the role of Viola , Sinéad Cusack as Olivia , Alec McCowen as Malvolio and Robert Hardy as Sir Toby Belch .
In 1988 , Kenneth Branagh 's stage production of the play , starring Frances Barber as Viola and Richard Briers as Malvolio , was adapted for Thames Television .
In 1998 the Lincoln Center Theater production directed by Nicholas Hytner was broadcast on PBS Live From Lincoln Center .
It starred Helen Hunt as Viola , Paul Rudd as Orsino , Kyra Sedgwick as Olivia , Philip Bosco as Malvolio , Brian Murray as Sir Toby , Max Wright as Sir Andrew , and David Patrick Kelly as Feste .
A 2003 telemovie adapted and directed by Tim Supple is set in the present day .
It features David Troughton as Sir Toby , and is notable for its multi - ethnic cast including Parminder Nagra as Viola and Chiwetel Ejiofor as Orsino .
Its portrayal of Viola and Sebastian 's arrival in Illyria is reminiscent of news footage of asylum seekers .
An episode of the British series Skins , entitled Grace , featured the main characters playing Twelfth Night , with a love triangle between Franky , Liv and Matty , who respectively played Viola , Olivia and Orsino .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
An adaptation of Twelfth Night by Cathleen Nesbitt for the BBC was the first complete Shakespeare play ever broadcast on British radio .
This occurred on 28 May 1923 , with Nesbitt as both Viola and Sebastian , and Gerald Lawrence as Orsino .
In 1937 an adaptation was performed on the CBS Radio Playhouse starring Orson Welles as Orsino and Tallulah Bankhead as Viola .
A year later , Welles played Malvolio in a production with his Mercury Theater Company .
There have been several full adaptations on BBC Radio .
A 1982 BBC Radio 4 broadcast featured Alec McCowen as Orsino , Wendy Murray as Viola , Norman Rodway as Sir Toby Belch , Andrew Sachs as Sir Andrew Aguecheek , and Bernard Hepton as Malvolio ; in 1993 , BBC Radio 3 broadcast a version of the play ( set on a Caribbean Island ) , with Michael Maloney as Orsino , Eve Matheson as Viola , Iain Cuthbertson as Malvolio , and Joss Ackland as Sir Toby Belch ; this adaptation was broadcast again on 6 January 2011 by BBC Radio 7 ( now Radio 4 Extra ) .
1998 saw another Radio 3 adaptation , with Michael Maloney , again as Orsino , Josette Simon as Olivia and Nicky Henson as Feste .
In April 2012 , BBC Radio 3 broadcast a version directed by Sally Avens , with Paul Ready as Orsino , Naomi Frederick as Viola , David Tennant as Malvolvio and Ron Cook as Sir Toby Belch .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In 1888 , Alexander Campbell Mackenzie composed an overture based on Twelfth Night .
In 1942 , Gerald Finzi set the songs " O Mistress Mine " ( Act II , Scene 3 ) and " Come Away , Come Away , Death " ( Act II , Scene 4 ) to music as part of his song cycle on Shakespearean texts
Let Us Garlands Bring .
In 1943 , Erich Korngold set the songs " Come Away , Death " ( Act II , Scene 4 ) ,
" O Mistress Mine " ( Act II , Scene 3 ) , " Adieu , Good Man Devil "
( Act IV , Scene 2 ) , " Hey , Robin " ( Act IV , Scene 2 ) , and " For the Rain , It Raineth Every Day " ( Act V , Scene 1 ) as a song cycle entitled Narrenlieder , Op . 29 . Roger Quilter set " O Mistress Mine " and " Come Away , Come Away , Death " in his Three Shakespeare Songs , Op . 6 .
Swedish composer Sven - Eric Johanson 's song cycle for mixed chorus and piano
" Fancies
I " includes a setting in waltz time of " O Mistress Mine " ( 1974 ) .
INFLUENCE Section::::Influence .
The Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard opens his book Philosophical Fragments with the quote
" Better well hanged than ill we d " which is a paraphrase of Feste 's comment to Maria in Act 1 , Scene 5 : " Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage " .
Nietzsche also refers passingly to Twelfth Night ( specifically , to Sir Andrew Aguecheek 's suspicion , expressed in Act 1 , Scene 3 , that his excessive intake of beef is having an inverse effect on his wit ) in the third essay of his Genealogy of Morality .
The Kiddy Grade characters Viola and Cesario are named for Viola and her alter ego Cesario , respectively .
Elizabeth Hand 's novella Illyria features a high school production of Twelfth Night , containing many references to the play , especially Feste 's song .
One of Club Penguin 's plays , Twelfth Fish , is a spoof of Shakespeare 's works .
It is a story about a countess , a jester , and a bard who catch a fish that talks .
As the play ends , they begin eating the fish .
Many of the lines are parodies of Shakespeare .
Agatha Christie 's 1940 mystery novel Sad Cypress draws its title from a song in Act II , Scene IV of Twelfth Night .
American playwright Ken Ludwig wrote a play inspired by the details of Twelfth Night , called Leading Ladies .
Cassandra Clare 's 2009 novel City of Glass contains chapter names inspired by quotations of Antonio and Sebastian .
Two of the dogs in the film Hotel for Dogs are twins called Sebastian and Viola .
Clive Barker 's short story " Sex , Death and Starshine " revolves around a doomed production of Twelfth Night .
The Baker Street Irregulars believe Sherlock Holmes 's birthday to be January 6 due to the fact that Holmes quotes twice from Twelfth Night whereas he quotes only once from other Shakespeare plays .
NOTES REFERENCES
* Donno , Elizabeth Story ( ed . ) :
Twelfth Night ( Cambridge , 2003 )
* Mahood , M. M. ( ed . )
Twelfth Night ( Penguin , 1995 )
* Pennington , Michael :
Twelfth Night : a user 's guide ( New York , 2000 ) * Mulherin , Jennifer : Twelfth Night ( Shakespeare for Everyone ) EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Twelfth Night Navigator Includes annotated text , line numbers , scene index with scene summaries , and a search engine .
* Searchable Twelfth Night Etext Unattributed edited version : bare bones , but with a long summary .
* Twelfth Night at the British Library * Lesson plans for Twelfth Night at Web English Teacher
* Twelfth Night study guide and teacher resources – themes , quotes , multimedia , study questions
*
For an analysis of various characters in Twelfth Night , one may refer to Pinaki Roy 's essay
" Epiphanies :
Rereading Select Characters in William Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night " , published in Yearly Shakespeare – 2012
( I.S.S.N. 0976 - 9536 ) 10 , April 2012 : 53 - 60 .