PARALLEL ( GEOMETRY )
In geometry , parallel lines are lines in a plane which do not meet ; that is , two lines in a plane that do not intersect or touch each other at any point are said to be parallel .
By extension , a line and a plane , or two planes , in three - dimensional Euclidean space that do not share a point are said to be parallel .
However , two lines in three - dimensional space which do not meet must be in a common plane to be considered parallel ; otherwise they are called skew lines .
Parallel planes are planes in the same three - dimensional space that never meet .
Parallel lines are the subject of Euclid 's parallel postulate .
Parallelism is primarily a property of affine geometries and Euclidean geometry is a special instance of this type of geometry .
In some other geometries , such as hyperbolic geometry , lines can have analogous properties that are referred to as parallelism .
SYMBOL Section::::Symbol .
The parallel symbol is formula_1 .
For example , formula_2 indicates that line AB is parallel to line CD .
In the Unicode character set , the " parallel " and " not parallel " signs have codepoints U+2225 ( ∥ ) and U+2226 ( ∦ ) , respectively .
In addition , U+22D5 ( ⋕ ) represents the relation " equal and parallel to " .
EUCLIDEAN PARALLELISM TWO LINES IN A PLANE CONDITIONS FOR PARALLELISM Section::::Euclidean parallelism .
Section::::Two lines in a plane .
Section::::Conditions for parallelism .
Given parallel straight lines l and m in Euclidean space , the following properties are equivalent : * Every point on line m is located at exactly the same ( minimum ) distance from line l ( equidistant lines ) .
* * Line m is in the same plane as line l but does not intersect l
( recall that lines extend to infinity in either direction ) .
*
* When lines m and l are both intersected by a third straight line ( a transversal ) in the same plane , the corresponding angles of intersection with the transversal are congruent .
* Since these are equivalent properties , any one of them could be taken as the definition of parallel lines in Euclidean space , but the first and third properties involve measurement , and so , are " more complicated " than the second .
Thus , the second property is the one usually chosen as the defining property of parallel lines in Euclidean geometry .
The other properties are then consequences of Euclid 's Parallel Postulate .
Another property that also involves measurement is that lines parallel to each other have the same gradient ( slope ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The definition of parallel lines as a pair of straight lines in a plane which do not meet appears as Definition 23 in Book
I of Euclid 's Elements .
Alternative definitions were discussed by other Greeks , often as part of an attempt to prove the parallel postulate .
Proclus attributes a definition of parallel lines as equidistant lines to Posidonius and quotes Geminus in a similar vein .
Simplicius also mentions Posidonius ' definition as well as its modification by the philosopher Aganis .
At the end of the nineteenth century , in England , Euclid 's Elements was still the standard textbook in secondary schools .
The traditional treatment of geometry was being pressured to change by the new developments in projective geometry and non - Euclidean geometry , so several new textbooks for the teaching of geometry were written at this time .
A major difference between these reform texts , both between themselves and between them and Euclid , is the treatment of parallel lines .
These reform texts were not without their critics and one of them , Charles Dodgson ( a.k.a . Lewis Carroll ) , wrote a play , Euclid and His Modern Rivals , in which these texts are lambasted .
One of the early reform textbooks was James Maurice Wilson 's Elementary Geometry of 1868 .
Wilson based his definition of parallel lines on the primitive notion of direction .
According to Wilhelm Killing the idea may be traced back to Leibniz .
Wilson , without defining direction since it is a primitive , uses the term in other definitions such as his sixth definition , " Two straight lines that meet one another have different directions , and the difference of their directions is the angle between them . "
In definition 15 he introduces parallel lines in this way ; " Straight lines which have the same direction , but are not parts of the same straight line , are called parallel lines .
"
Augustus De Morgan reviewed this text and declared it a failure , primarily on the basis of this definition and the way Wilson used it to prove things about parallel lines .
Dodgson also devotes a large section of his play ( Act II , Scene VI § 1 ) to denouncing Wilson 's treatment of parallels .
Wilson edited this concept out of the third and higher editions of his text .
Other properties , proposed by other reformers , used as replacements for the definition of parallel lines , did not fare much better .
The main difficulty , as pointed out by Dodgson , was that to use them in this way required additional axioms to be added to the system .
The equidistant line definition of Posidonius , expounded by Francis Cuthbertson in his 1874 text Euclidean Geometry suffers from the problem that the points that are found at a fixed given distance on one side of a straight line must be shown to form a straight line .
This can not be proved and must be assumed to be true .
The corresponding angles formed by a transversal property , used by W. D. Cooley in his 1860 text , The Elements of Geometry , simplified and explained requires a proof of the fact that if one transversal meets a pair of lines in congruent corresponding angles then all transversals must do so .
Again , a new axiom is needed to justify this statement .
CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Construction .
The three properties above lead to three different methods of construction of parallel lines .
DISTANCE
BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL LINES
Section::::Distance between two parallel lines .
Because parallel lines in a Euclidean plane are equidistant there is a unique distance between the two parallel lines .
Given the equations of two non - vertical , non - horizontal parallel lines , the distance between the two lines can be found by locating two points ( one on each line ) that lie on a common perpendicular to the parallel lines and calculating the distance between them .
Since the lines have slope m , a common perpendicular would have slope −1 / m and we can take the line with equation y = −x / m as a common perpendicular .
Solve the linear systems and to get the coordinates of the points .
The solutions to the linear systems are the points and These formulas still give the correct point coordinates even if the parallel lines are horizontal ( i.e. , m = 0 ) .
The distance between the points is which reduces to When the lines are given by the general form of the equation of a line ( horizontal and vertical lines are included ) :
their distance can be expressed as TWO LINES IN THREE - DIMENSIONAL SPACE Section::::Two lines in three - dimensional space .
Two lines in the same three - dimensional space that do not intersect need not be parallel .
Only if they are in a common plane are they called parallel ; otherwise they are called skew lines .
Two distinct lines l and m in three - dimensional space are parallel if and only if the distance from a point P on line m to the nearest point on line l is independent of the location of P on line m.
This never holds for skew lines .
A LINE AND A PLANE Section::::A line and a plane .
A line m and a plane q in three - dimensional space , the line not lying in that plane , are parallel if and only if they do not intersect .
Equivalently , they are parallel if and only if the distance from a point P on line m to the nearest point in plane q is independent of the location of P on line m. TWO PLANES Section::::Two planes .
Similar to the fact that parallel lines must be located in the same plane , parallel planes must be situated in the same three - dimensional space and contain no point in common .
Two distinct planes q and r are parallel if and only if the distance from a point P in plane q to the nearest point in plane r is independent of the location of P in plane
q.
This will never hold if the two planes are not in the same three - dimensional space .
EXTENSION TO NON - EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY Section::::Extension to non - Euclidean geometry .
In non - Euclidean geometry , it is more common to talk about geodesics than ( straight ) lines .
A geodesic is the shortest path between two points in a given geometry .
In physics this may be interpreted as the path that a particle follows if no force is applied to it .
In non - Euclidean geometry ( elliptic or hyperbolic geometry ) the three Euclidean properties mentioned above are not equivalent and only the second one,(Line m is in the same plane as line l but does not intersect l ) since it involves no measurements is useful in non - Euclidean geometries .
In general geometry the three properties above give three different types of curves , equidistant curves , parallel geodesics and geodesics sharing a common perpendicular , respectively .
HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
Section::::Hyperbolic geometry .
While in Euclidean geometry two geodesics can either intersect or be parallel , in hyperbolic geometry , there are three possibilities .
Two geodesics belonging to the same plane can either be :
* intersecting , if they intersect in a common point in the plane , * * parallel , if they do not intersect in the plane , but converge to a common limit point at infinity ( ideal point ) , or *
* ultra parallel , if they do not have a common limit point at infinity .
*
In the literature ultra parallel geodesics are often called non - intersecting .
Geodesics intersecting at infinity are called limiting parallel .
As in the illustration through a point a not on
line l
there are two limiting parallel lines , one for each direction ideal point of line
l. They separate the lines intersecting line l and those that are ultra parallel to line l. Ultra parallel lines have single common perpendicular ( ultraparallel theorem ) , and diverge on both sides of this common perpendicular .
SPHERICAL OR ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
Section::::Spherical or elliptic geometry .
In spherical geometry , all geodesics are great circles .
Great circles divide the sphere in two equal hemispheres and all great circles intersect each other .
Thus , there are no parallel geodesics to a given geodesic , as all geodesics intersect .
Equidistant curves on the sphere are called parallels of latitude analogous to the latitude lines on a globe .
Parallels of latitude can be generated by the intersection of the sphere with a plane parallel to a plane through the center of the sphere .
REFLEXIVE VARIANT Section::::Reflexive variant .
If l , m , n are three distinct lines , then formula_14 In this case , parallelism is a transitive relation .
However , in case l = n , the superimposed lines are not considered parallel in Euclidean geometry .
The binary relation between parallel lines is evidently a symmetric relation .
According to Euclid 's tenets , parallelism is not a reflexive relation and thus fails to be an equivalence relation .
Nevertheless , in affine geometry a pencil of parallel lines is taken as an equivalence class in the set of lines where parallelism is an equivalence relation .
To this end , Emil Artin ( 1957 ) adopted a definition of parallelism where two lines are parallel if they have all or none of their points in common .
Then a line is parallel to itself so that the reflexive and transitive properties belong to this type of parallelism , creating an equivalence relation on the set of lines .
In the study of incidence geometry , this variant of parallelism is used in the affine plane .
SEE ALSO * Clifford parallel *
Limiting parallel * Parallel curve *
Ultraparallel theorem
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Constructing a parallel line through a given point with compass and straightedge