POWDERED MILK Powdered milk or dried milk is a manufactured dairy product made by evaporating milk to dryness .
One purpose of drying milk is to preserve it ; milk powder has a far longer shelf life than liquid milk and does not need to be refrigerated , due to its low moisture content .
Another purpose is to reduce its bulk for economy of transportation .
Powdered milk and dairy products include such items as dry whole milk , nonfat ( skimmed ) dry milk , dry buttermilk , dry whey products and dry dairy blends .
Many dairy products exported conform to standards laid out in Codex Alimentarius .
Many forms of milk powder are traded on exchanges .
Powdered milk is used for food and health ( nutrition ) , and also in biotechnology ( saturating agent ) .
HISTORY AND MANUFACTURE Section::::History and manufacture .
While Marco Polo wrote of Mongolian Tatar troops in the time of Kublai Khan who carried sun - dried skimmed milk as " a kind of paste " , the first modern production process for dried milk was invented by the Russian doctor Osip Krichevsky in 1802 .
The first commercial production of dried milk was organized by the Russian chemist M. Dirchoff in 1832 .
In 1855 , T.S. Grimwade took a patent on a dried milk procedure , though a William Newton had patented a vacuum drying process as early as 1837 .
In modern times , powdered milk is usually made by spray drying nonfat skimmed milk , whole milk , buttermilk or whey .
Pasteurized milk is first concentrated in an evaporator to approximately 50 percent milk solids .
The resulting concentrated milk is then sprayed into a heated chamber where the water almost instantly evaporates , leaving fine particles of powdered milk solids .
Alternatively , the milk can be dried by drum drying .
Milk is applied as a thin film to the surface of a heated drum , and the dried milk solids are then scraped off .
However , powdered milk made this way tends to have a cooked flavour , due to caramelization caused by greater heat exposure .
Another process is freeze drying , which preserves many nutrients in milk , compared to drum drying .
The drying method and the heat treatment of the milk as it is processed alters
the properties of the milk powder , such as its solubility in cold water , its flavour , and its bulk density .
FOOD AND HEALTH USES Section::::Food and health uses .
Powdered milk is frequently used in the manufacture of infant formula , confectionery such as chocolate and caramel candy , and in recipes for baked goods where adding liquid milk would render the product too thin .
Powdered milk is also widely used in various sweets such as the famous Indian milk balls known as gulab jamun and a popular Indian sweet delicacy ( sprinkled with desiccated coconut ) known as chum chum ( made with skim milk powder ) .
Many no - cook recipes that use nut butters use powdered milk to prevent the nut butter from turning liquid by absorbing the oil .
Powdered milk is also a common item in UN food aid supplies , fallout shelters , warehouses , and wherever fresh milk is not a viable option .
It is widely used in many developing countries because of reduced transport and storage costs ( reduced bulk and weight , no refrigerated vehicles ) .
Like other dry foods , it is considered nonperishable , and is favored by survivalists , hikers , and others requiring nonperishable , easy - to - prepare food .
Because of its resemblance to cocaine and other drugs , powdered milk is sometimes used in filmmaking as a non - toxic prop that may be insufflated .
RECONSTITUTION Section::::Reconstitution .
The weight of nonfat dry milk ( NFDM ) to use is about 10 % of the water weight .
Alternatively , when measuring by volume rather than weight , one cup of potable fluid milk from powdered milk requires one cup of potable water and one - third cup of powdered milk .
NUTRITIONAL VALUE
Section::::Nutritional value .
Milk powders contain all twenty - one standard amino acids , the building blocks of proteins , and are high in soluble vitamins and minerals .
According to USAID , the typical average amounts of major nutrients in the unreconstituted nonfat dry milk are ( by weight )
36 % protein , 52 % carbohydrates ( predominantly lactose ) , calcium 1.3 % , potassium 1.8 % .
Whole milk powder , on the other hand , contains on average 25 - 27 % protein , 36 - 38 % carbohydrates , 26 - 40 % fat , and 5 - 7 % ash ( minerals ) .
In Canada , powdered milk must contain added vitamin D in an amount such that a reasonable daily intake of the milk will provide between 300 to 400 International Units ( IU ) of vitamin D. However , inappropriate storage conditions such as high relative humidity and high ambient temperature can significantly degrade the nutritive value of milk powder .
Commercial milk powders are reported to contain oxysterols ( oxidized cholesterol ) in higher amounts than in fresh milk ( up to 30 μg / g , versus trace amounts in fresh milk ) .
Oxysterols are derivatives of cholesterol that are produced either by free radicals or by enzymes .
Some free radicals - derived oxysterols have been suspected of being initiators of atherosclerotic plaques .
For comparison , powdered eggs contain even more oxysterols , up to 200 μg / g .
EXPORT MARKET Section::::Export market .
European production of milk powder is estimated around 800,000 tons of which the main volume is exported in bulk packing or consumer packs .
Brands on the market include " Nido " , from the company Nestlé , " Incolac " from the company Milcobel , and " Dutch Lady " from FrieslandCampina .
ADULTERATION Section::::Adulteration .
In the 2008 Chinese milk scandal , melamine adulterant was found in Sanlu infant formula , added to fool tests into reporting higher protein content .
Thousands became ill , and some children died , after consuming the product .
CONTAMINATION SCARE Section::::Contamination scare .
In August 2013 , China temporarily suspended all milk powder imports from New Zealand , after a scare where botulism - causing bacteria was falsely detected in several batches of New Zealand - produced whey protein concentrate .
As a result of the product recall , the New Zealand dollar slipped significantly based on expected losses in sales from this single commodity .
USE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY Section::::Use in biotechnology .
Fat - free powdered milk is used as a saturating agent to block nonspecific binding sites on supports like blotting membranes ( nitrocellulose , polyvinylidene fluoride ( PVDF ) or nylon ) , preventing binding of further detection reagents and subsequent background .
It may be referred as Blotto .
The major protein of milk , casein , is responsible for most of the binding site saturation effect .
SEE ALSO * Baked milk *
Coconut milk powder *
Condensed milk * Convenience food
* Creamer * Evaporated milk * Food powder *
Instant breakfast
* List of dried foods * Pomazánkové máslo
* Powdered eggs * Scalded milk
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS