100 EPISODES
In the U.S. television industry , 100 episodes is the traditional threshold for a television series to become viable for syndication .
One hundred episodes are advantageous for stripped syndication because it allows for 20 weeks of weekday reruns ( depending on the number of episodes produced once the program debuts in syndication ) without repeating an episode , and such shows can be sold for higher per - episode pricing .
It is unclear when conventional wisdom came to decide that 100 episodes was the ideal .
One of the first series made specifically for syndication , the 1953–55 sitcom Life with Elizabeth , purposely ended its run after only 65 episodes , concerned that producing more would saturate the market and reduce the syndication package 's value .
In recent years , the minimum number of episodes for off - network , stripped syndication has been set at 88 ( typically four seasons of 22 episodes ) , although some programs have been relatively successful in syndication with fewer episodes .
SUCCESSES Section::::Successes .
Syndication is often a profitable enterprise because a series can be rerun for years after they end production .
Shows of limited profitability during their first run will still prove to be viable to the production company if they can last 100 episodes .
This point is usually reached during a series ' fifth season .
+ Examples of per - season number of episodesfor some highly rated programs !
Decade !
Program !
Episodes rowspan=21950sI Love Lucy31
( 1952–53 )
rowspan=21960sThe Beverly Hillbillies36 ( 1963–64 ) rowspan=21970sAll in the Family24 ( 1974–75 ) rowspan=21980sDallas30 ( 1983–84 ) rowspan=21990sCheers26 ( 1990–91 ) rowspan=22000s ( 2003–04 ) 2010s Person of Interest 22–23
( 2012–13 ) Shows that have produced fewer episodes have become syndication successes , in some cases prompting additional episodes to be commissioned specifically for syndication to reach the 100-episode mark .
WKRP in Cincinnati was a major success in syndication despite having only produced 90 episodes , eventually prompting 47 additional episodes to be produced a decade after the original ended .
The Monkees , a show that lasted only 58 episodes and two seasons , went on to be rerun extensively in the decades that followed , with interest in the series being revived in the 1980s when the series was rerun on cable .
The Honeymooners was a series spun off in 1955 - 56 from sketches of the same name that aired on The Jackie Gleason Show , an hour - long variety program ( 1952–55 ) .
While only 39 episodes of The Honeymooners were produced , there were enough Honeymooners sketches from The Jackie Gleason Show ( which ran again in the 1956 - 57 season and would be revived in the 1960s ) to compile a syndication package with over 100 episodes .
Mama 's Family was put into syndication despite having only 35 episodes at the time of its cancellation ; the surprise success of the show in syndication prompted the syndicator to rush the show back into production , which led to an additional 95 episodes over four seasons in first - run syndication .
More recently , Clueless had reasonable success in syndication , especially on cable , even though only 62 episodes had been produced by the time the series ended in 1999 .
Chappelle 's Show entered syndication despite only producing 33 episodes , five of which were clip shows .
Series which have entered the public domain , such as Dusty 's Trail , Meet Corliss Archer , and Life with Elizabeth are sometimes aired regardless of the number of episodes because there is no licensing fee .
Dramas , which do not require daily runs , have also had success in syndication with shorter runs .
For example , Lost in Space ceased production in 1968 after 84 episodes because of declining ratings , but did well in syndication for a number of years .
The original series had only 79 episodes available when its network run ended in 1969 , but after its considerable success in syndication , it spawned multiple feature films and more than six spin - off series .
Other examples include The Prisoner and Hondo , both successfully syndicated for more than 30 years despite having only 17 episodes produced .
The original 1978 series Battlestar Galactica and its spin - off Galactica 1980 produced a combined 34 episodes , yet it not only remains in syndication but it also led to a 2003 reimagining that lasted for 75 episodes .
In 2014 , AMC released The Walking Dead for reruns on MyNetworkTV after 51 episodes had aired ; that series was still in production at the time , and MyNetworkTV airs its shows once a week instead of in a daily strip .
The growth of cable and satellite television has prompted channels to rerun series more often , with fewer episodes .
Reruns of a particular show may air multiple times a day , several days a week , despite having only one or two seasons of episodes produced .
In recent years , the 100-episode milestone for syndication has been lowered to 88 episodes , which is typically reached after four seasons .
Shows approaching the 88-episode target are often renewed despite low ratings in order to ensure syndication .
Production companies can offer discounts on licensing fees to the networks to encourage renewal .
Shows that are approaching the 88-episode syndication milestone while suffering from poor ratings are often moved to graveyard slots on Friday or Saturday in order to burn off remaining episodes .
An extreme example of a show renewed primarily for syndication purposes was ' Til Death . '
Til Death was pulled from Fox 's lineup just seven episodes into its third season , after it had fallen out of the top 100 in the primetime ratings .
Cancellation seemed imminent , but ' Til Death was renewed for a fourth season after Sony Pictures Entertainment offered Fox a discount on the licensing fee .
Unaired episodes from the third season were broadcast alongside fourth season episodes from October 2009 through June 2010
( a total of 37 episodes ) , including four new episodes airing in a Christmas Day " marathon " and two new episodes being scheduled against Super Bowl XLIV with the knowledge that these episodes would have minuscule ratings .
The overlapped seasons led to some comical confusion , because four different actresses played the part of Allison Stark during this span of episodes .
The show eventually reached 81 episodes , and debuted in off - network syndication in the fall of 2011 .
DISAPPOINTMENTS Section::::Disappointments .
Reaching the 100-episode milestone does not guarantee successful syndication , even for sitcoms .
December Bride was an early example : highly rated during its original broadcast run , it bombed in syndication .
Michael Dann , who scheduled December Bride during its network run , soon realized that this was because the show had been picking up ratings from its lead - in , I Love Lucy , bringing rise to the industry concept of hammocking .
Becker , for instance , ran for 129 episodes and had high first - run ratings for four of its six seasons , yet was only briefly released to broadcast stations in syndication before a move to HDNet , which took many broadcast programs in the late 1990s and early - to - mid 2000s which did not reach 100 episodes early in its history mainly because they were among the first produced in high - definition television ; Universal HD pursued the same programming strategy
( Becker would return to a wider audience when Antenna TV picked up the series in 2017 ) .
Yes , Dear ( 122 episodes ) and Grace Under Fire ( 112 episodes ) also never made any significant impact in local syndication , though Yes , Dear has become a fixture on the schedules of both Nick @
Nite and TBS , while Grace Under Fire was a minor success in building the viewership of Oxygen , which was co - owned by Grace producer Carsey - Werner - Mandabach in its early years .
Another successful first - run show to fare poorly in syndication is Night Court ( 193 episodes ) .
The series Empty Nest ( 170 episodes ) though having a seven year run in syndication from 1993 to 2000 on both superstations TBS and WGN , was not run in syndication on American television for over a decade , returning briefly to The Hallmark Channel in 2011 and then to Laff in 2015 .
Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper ( 101 episodes ) has aired sporadically in syndication since it first started airing in off - network syndication in 1996 .
There are also cases , such as Mad About You ( 164 episodes ) and Murphy Brown ( 247 episodes , with an additional 13 set to be produced in 2018 ) , where a series was expected to do well in syndication but ended up with disappointing ratings and revenue .
Reasons include dated references in early seasons , topical humor that does not age well , or plotlines in later seasons that fall flat , causing the series to end up being defined by that one plot line or season rather than as a whole , changing the audience 's perception .
Murphy Brown itself ( along with WKRP in Cincinnati ) is additionally hobbled by music rights issues for a number of Motown Records recordings used in the course of the series , which complicates the airing of that series due to those copyright issues .
It also occasionally occurs that a marginally performing show that is approaching the syndication threshold will be canceled because the show is not expected to perform well enough in syndication to make it worth the first - run production cost .
Such was the case with 8 Simple Rules , a sitcom that lasted three seasons and 76 episodes .
ABC thought that the show 's change of direction partway through the series ( forced by the sudden death of the show 's star , John Ritter ) would make the show less palatable for syndication .
The network declined to renew the series for a fourth season , which would have produced the remaining 24 episodes to make syndication otherwise viable .
8 Simple Rules would eventually be internally syndicated by Disney - ABC Domestic Television to ABC Family as well as to The WB for their " Daytime " block .
Another example was the marginally - performing 1990s sitcom Anything
But Love ; in an unusual case , it was 20th Century Fox ( the production company ) , and not the network ( ABC ) , who pulled the plug on the show in 1992 after 56 episodes , having calculated that the show would not get renewed for a fifth season and would be unprofitable in first - run syndication .
NICHE GENRES Section::::Niche genres .
The 100-episode threshold is generally applied solely to scripted prime time programming , since sitcoms and dramas are the most prevalent in syndicated reruns .
Other programming may follow different patterns .
GAME SHOWS Section::::Game shows .
On rare occasions , game shows have been rerun on broadcast television .
Despite having very high output as far as numbers of episodes ( a typical 13-week run of even an unsuccessful game show yielded 65 episodes ) , most networks instead opted to recycle the tapes of those shows , as it was viewed at the time as a more profitable practice than trying to sell reruns of daytime programming .
The practice of rerunning some of the most popular game shows in syndication was rare , but not unheard of , in the 1970s and 1980s ; Gambit was rerun in 1978 and Match Game was rerun in syndication in 1985 .
Jeopardy ! , which has produced thousands of episodes over its 34-year run in syndication as of 2018 , offers a package of reruns under the title Daytime Jeopardy !
as a companion series for stations with an extra time slot .
With the advent of cable channels such as Game Show Network and the subchannel network Buzzr , rerunning game shows has become more common ; for instance , Merv Griffin 's Crosswords , which lasted one season and 225 episodes in syndication during the 2007 - 08 season , ran continuously for several years thereafter , originally in syndication and later on RTV .
GSN has rerun several game shows that ran less than 100 episodes , including Greed ( 44 episodes )
, Dog Eat Dog ( 26 episodes ) , Power of 10 ( 18 episodes ) , and perhaps the most extreme case , Million Dollar Password , which ran for only 12 episodes .
Even among shows with hundreds ( and even thousands ) of episodes , since the early 2010s , GSN typically has only acquired the rights to 50 to 65 episodes at a time for most series .
CARTOONS AND CHILDREN 'S PROGRAMMING Section::::Cartoons and children 's programming .
Rerunning children 's programming generally requires fewer episodes than programming for adults .
For most children 's series , reruns are aired for a short period of time after the series finishes production , then are replaced .
For weekly series , this practice dates to at least the 1960s , when Saturday morning cartoons would , after the end of their 13-week run , begin rerunning continuously for about a year ( usually four runs / year ) until being replaced by the next show , either new or archival .
During the 1970s , 22 episodes was typically the number a producer sought in order for an animated program to be rerun beyond its first year .
After several years , once the previous generation of children outgrew the show , it could be reintroduced for the next younger generation by airing reruns .
For shows that are rerun daily , the time span is usually on the order of months .
It was noted in a study that when the animated series Robotech aired in 1985 , daily strip syndication for a series for children required 65 episodes at minimum .
REALITY TELEVISION Section::::Reality television .
Syndication thresholds for reality television vary widely depending on the subgenre of the program .
Reality series that are self - contained and originally aired on network television , such as Rescue 911 , Fear Factor , America 's Funniest Home Videos , Wipeout , and COPS , typically follow similar patterns to other network series in that once such a show reaches 100 episodes , it can ( and often is ) sold into syndication , albeit typically at a price somewhat lower than scripted programming , and can be aired daily .
Due to the large number of episodes which exist for each series , COPS and AFHV are unusual in maintaining several syndication packages rather than one for their entire run ; COPS has packages for both older and newer episodes , along with a ' best - of ' compilation known as COPS Reloaded , while AFHV packages their episodes by the host for each era , so that three separate packages for episodes hosted by Bob Saget , John Fugelsang and Daisy Fuentes , and Tom Bergeron are offered up divided by each host , with a fourth package for the current run hosted by Alfonso Ribeiro likely to follow in the coming years .
Annual and semi - annual contests have been a relative failure in syndication ; although these shows typically draw very high ratings in their first runs and produce a number of episodes on par with ( if not exceeding ) scripted programs , the cast changeovers each season , the serial format that requires stations broadcast the episodes in sequential order , combined with the loss of the element of surprise and the lack of media buzz that drives many popular reality shows ' first - run ratings means that shows like Survivor and Dancing with the Stars garner little interest in reruns , especially when traditionally stripped as scripted series are .
Cable networks may play such programs by the season in marathons , a strategy that has seen mixed success ; both Survivor on OLN and Dancing with the Stars on GSN ended up not going further than their first run in syndication on those individual networks , while America 's Next Top Model and RuPaul 's Drag Race have a consistent afterlife in cable reruns airing in this manner , as those programs are defined by their main host ( Tyra Banks and RuPaul , respectively ) rather than the format and contestants in whole .
However , CBS has managed to make a minor success of reruns of the full runs of Survivor and Big Brother as a lure to draw in viewers to their over - the - top streaming service CBS All Access .
Another issue in syndicating a reality series is licensing ; shows that rely heavily on music , a format popular in the late 2000s and early 2010s , require that the music used in the show be licensed , which discourages the rerunning of the show ( along with aged pop culture references and songs which had popularity at the time gaining comical or controversial infamy after the fact ) .
American Idol Rewind , which repackaged the first five seasons of the popular reality contest American Idol , ran for four seasons in syndication , with one of the five seasons being compressed into three half - hour episodes because of problems securing rights to the music for that season .
REFERENCES