FELINE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS Feline immunodeficiency virus ( FIV ) is a lentivirus that affects cats worldwide .
From 2.5 % up to 4.4 % of cats worldwide are infected with FIV .
FIV differs taxonomically from two other feline retroviruses , feline leukemia virus ( FeLV ) and feline foamy virus ( FFV ) , and is more closely related to human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) .
Within FIV , five subtypes have been identified based on nucleotide sequence differences coding for the viral envelope ( env ) or polymerase ( pol ) .
FIV is the only non - primate lentivirus to cause an AIDS - like syndrome , but FIV is not typically fatal for cats , as they can live relatively healthily as carriers and transmitters of the disease for many years .
A vaccine is available although its efficacy remains uncertain .
Cats will test positive for FIV antibodies after vaccination .
FIV was first isolated in 1986 by Dr. Niels Pedersen at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine in a colony of cats that had a high prevalence of opportunistic infections and degenerative conditions and was originally called Feline T - lymphotropic Virus ( FTLV ) .
It has since been identified in domestic cat populations worldwide .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
FIV can compromise the immune system of cats .
FIV infects many cell types in its host , including CD4 + and CD8 + T lymphocytes , B lymphocytes , and macrophages .
FIV can be tolerated well by cats , but can eventually lead to debilitation of the immune system in its feline hosts by the infection and exhaustion of T - helper ( CD4 + ) cells .
In cats the percentage of this happening is very low .
Less than 5 % .
Unlike in humans with HIV , where this percentage is estimated at over 50 % .
FIV and HIV are both lentiviruses .
However , humans can not be infected by FIV , nor can cats be infected by HIV .
FIV is transmitted primarily through deep bite wounds , where the virus present in the infected cat 's saliva enters the body tissues of another cat .
FIV+ cats can share water bowls , pellet bowls , eat from the same bowl of wet food , and use the same litter box with low danger of transmitting the disease .
A vigilant pet owner who treats secondary infections can allow an infected cat to live a reasonably long life .
The chance that an FIV - infected cat will pass the virus to other cats within a household is low , unless there is fighting between cats , or wounds present that could allow entry of the virus from infected to non - infected cat .
Newborn kittens may test positive for up to six months and most thereafter will gradually test negative .
It is thought that this is due to antibodies transferred to the kittens via the mother 's milk .
However these antibodies are transient so subsequent testing will be negative .
Once they have received vaccinations against FIV , they will , in the future , always test positive , as the various blood tests detect and show the antibodies that have developed in response to the vaccination .
FIV is known in other feline species , and in fact is endemic in some large wild cats , such as African lions .
IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::In the United States .
Consensus in the United States on whether there is a need to euthanize FIV - infected cats has not been established .
The American Association of Feline Practitioners ( an organization in the United States ) , as well as many feral cat organizations , recommends against euthanizing FIV - positive cats , or even spending funds to test for the virus , as spaying or neutering cats seems to effectively control transmission ( spayed / neutered cats are less likely to engage in territorial fights ) .
PATHOLOGY Section::::Pathology .
The virus gains entry to the host 's cells through the interaction of the envelope glycoproteins ( from the glycoprotein env ) of the virus and the target cells ' surface receptors .
First the SU glycoprotein binds to CD134 , a receptor on the host cell .
This initial binding changes the shape of the SU protein to one that facilitates interaction between SU and the chemokine receptor CXCR4 .
This interaction causes the viral and cellular membranes to fuse , allowing the transfer of the viral RNA into the cytoplasm , where it is reverse transcribed and integrated into the cellular genome through nonhomologous recombination .
Once integrated into the host cell 's genome , the virus can lay dormant in the asymptomatic stage for extended periods of time without being detected by the immune system or can cause lysis of the cell .
( 4,5 ) CD134 is predominantly found on activated T cells and binds to OX40 ligand , causing T - cell stimulation , proliferation , activation , and apoptosis ( 3 ) .
This leads to a significant drop in cells which have critical roles in the immune system .
Low levels of CD4 + and other affected immune system cells cause the cat to be susceptible to opportunistic diseases once the disease progresses to feline acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( FAIDS ) .
TRANSMISSION Section::::Transmission .
The primary mode of FIV transmission is via deep bite wounds , where the infected cat 's saliva enters the other cat 's tissues .
FIV may also be transmitted from pregnant females to their offspring in utero , however this vertical transmission is considered to be relatively rare based on the small number of FIV - infected kittens and adolescents .
This differs from FeLV , which may be spread by more casual , non - aggressive contact such as mutual grooming and sharing of food bowls .
Risk factors for infection are being of the male sex , adulthood , and outdoor access .
One case study conducted in São Paulo found that 75 % of the FIV - infected cats were males .
Higher rates of infection in males than females occurs due to biting being more frequently engaged in by males defending their territory .
DISEASE STAGES Section::::Disease stages .
FIV progresses through similar stages to HIV in humans .
The initial stage , or acute phase , is accompanied by mild symptoms such as lethargy , anorexia , fever , and lymphadenopathy .
This initial stage is fairly short and is followed by the asymptomatic stage .
Here the cat demonstrates no noticeable symptoms for a variable length of time .
Some cats stay in this latent stage for only a few months , but for some it can last for years .
Factors that influence the length of the asymptomatic stage include the pathogenicity of the infecting virus and FIV subtype ( A - E ) , the age of the cat , and exposure to other pathogens .
Finally , the cat progresses into the final stage ( known as the feline acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( FAIDS ) stage ) , wherein the cat is extremely susceptible to secondary diseases that inevitably are the cause of death .
TESTING Section::::Testing .
Veterinarians will check a cat 's history , look for clinical signs , and possibly administer a blood test for FIV antibodies .
FIV affects 2 - 3 % of cats in the US and testing is readily available .
It should be noted that this testing identifies those cats that carry the FIV antibody but does not detect the actual virus .
False positives occur when the cat carries the antibody ( which is harmless ) but does not carry the actual virus .
The most frequent occurrence of this is when kittens are tested after ingesting the antibodies from mother 's milk , and when testing cats that have been previously vaccinated for FIV .
For this reason , neither kittens under eight weeks nor cats that have been previously vaccinated are tested .
Kittens and young cats that test positive for the FIV antibody may test negative at a later time due to seroreversion , provided they have never been infected with FIV and have never been immunized with the FIV vaccine .
Cats that have been vaccinated will test positive for the FIV antibody for the rest of their lives owing to seroconversion , even though they are not infected .
Therefore , testing of strays or adopted cats is inconclusive , since it is impossible to know whether or not they have been vaccinated in the past .
For these reasons , a positive FIV antibody test by itself should never be used as a criterion for euthanasia .
Tests can be performed in a vet 's office with results in minutes , allowing for quick consultation .
Early detection helps maintain the cat 's health and prevents spreading infection to other cats .
With proper care , infected cats can live long and healthy lives .
TREATMENT OPTIONS Section::::Treatment options .
In 2006 , the United States Department of Agriculture issued a conditional license for a new treatment aid termed Lymphocyte T - Cell Immunomodulator ( LTCI ) .
Lymphocyte T - Cell Immunomodulator is manufactured and distributed exclusively by T - Cyte Therapeutics ,
Inc. Lymphocyte T - Cell Immunomodulator is intended as an aid in the treatment of cats infected with feline leukemia virus ( FeLV ) and/or feline immunodeficiency virus ( FIV ) , and the associated symptoms of lymphocytopenia , opportunistic infection , anemia , granulocytopenia , or thrombocytopenia .
The absence of any observed adverse events in several animal species suggests that the product has a very low toxicity profile .
Lymphocyte T - Cell Immunomodulator is a potent regulator of CD-4 lymphocyte production and function .
It has been shown to increase lymphocyte numbers and Interleukin 2 production in animals .
It is a single chain polypeptide and a strongly cationic glycoprotein , and is purified with cation exchange resin .
Purification of protein from bovine - derived stromal cell supernatants produces a substantially homogeneous factor , free of extraneous materials .
The bovine protein is homologous with other mammalian species and is a homogeneous 50 kDa glycoprotein with an isoelectric point of 6.5 .
The protein is prepared in a lyophilized 1 microgram dose .
Reconstitution in sterile diluent produces a solution for subcutaneous injection .
VACCINE Section::::Vaccine .
As with HIV , the development of an effective vaccine against FIV is difficult because of the high number and variations of the virus strains .
" Single strain " vaccines , i.e. , vaccines that only protect against a single virus variant , have already demonstrated a good efficacy against homologous FIV strains .
A dual - subtype vaccine for FIV released in 2002 called Fel - O - Vax ( ATCvet code : ) made it possible to immunize cats against more FIV strains .
It was developed using inactivated isolates of two of the five FIV subtypes ( or clades ) : A Petaluma and D Shizuoka .
The vaccine was shown to be moderately protective ( 82 % of cats were protected ) against subtype A FIV , but a later study showed it to offer no protection against sub type A.
It has shown 100 % effectiveness against two different subtype B FIV strains .
Vaccination will cause cats to have positive results on FIV tests , making diagnosis more difficult .
For these reasons the vaccine is considered " non - core " , and the decision to vaccinate should be made after discussion with a veterinarian and consideration of the risks vs. the effectiveness .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
FIV displays a similar structure to the primate and ungulate lentiviruses .
The virion has a diameter from 80 to 100 nanometers and is pleomorphic .
The viral envelope also has surface projections that are small , 8 nm , and evenly cover the surface .
The FIV virus genome is diploid .
It consists of two identical single - strands of RNA in each case about 9400 nucleotides existing in plus - strand orientation .
It has the typical genomic structure of retroviruses , including the gag , pol , and env genes .
The Gag polyprotein is cleaved into matrix ( MA ) , capsid ( CA ) and nucleocapsid ( NC ) proteins .
Cleavage between CA and NC releases a nine amino acid peptide , while cleavage at the C - terminus of NC releases a 2kDa fragment ( p2 ) .
The Pol polyprotein is translated by ribosomal frame - shifting , a feature shared with HIV .
Cleavage of Pol by the viral protease releases the protease itself ( PR ) , reverse transcriptase ( RT ) , deoxyuridine triphosphatase ( dUTPase or DU ) and integrase ( IN ) .
The Env polyprotein consists of a leader peptide ( L ) , surface ( SU ) and transmembrane ( TM ) glycoproteins .
In common with other lentiviruses , the FIV genome encodes additional short open reading frames ( ORFs ) encoding the Vif and Rev proteins .
An additional short ORF termed orfA ( also known as orf2 ) precedes the env gene .
The function of OrfA in viral replication is unclear , however the orfA - encoded product may display many of the attributes of HIV-1 accessory gene products such as Vpr , Vpu or Nef .
The capsid protein derived from the polyprotein Gag is assembled into a viral core ( the protein shell of a virus ) and the matrix protein also derived from Gag forms a shell immediately inside of the lipid bilayer .
The Env polyprotein encodes the surface glycoprotein ( SU ) and transmembrane glycoprotein ( TM ) .
Both SU and TM glycoproteins are heavily glycosylated , a characteristic that scientists believe may mask the B - cell epitopes of the Env glycoprotein giving the virus resistance to the virus neutralizing antibodies .
LENTIVIRAL VECTOR Section::::Lentiviral vector .
Like HIV-1 , FIV has been engineered into a viral vector for gene therapy .
Like other lentiviral vectors , FIV vectors integrate into the chromosome of the host cell , where it can generate long - term stable transgene expression .
Furthermore , the vectors can be used on dividing and non - dividing cells .
FIV vectors could potentially be used to treat neurological disorders like Parkinson 's disease , and have already been used for transfer RNAi , which may find use as gene therapy for cancer .
SEE ALSO
* Feline vaccination *
Winn Feline Foundation REFERENCES
*
Mat Best said so EXTERNAL LINKS * Lymphocyte T - Cell Immunomodulator ( LTCI )
* WikiVet Review Feline Immunodeficiency Virus