LATERALITY
The term laterality refers to the preference most humans show for one side of their body over the other .
Examples include left - handedness / right - handedness and left / right - footedness ; it may also refer to the primary use of the left or right hemisphere in the brain .
It may also apply to animals or plants .
The majority of tests have been conducted on humans , specifically to determine the effects on language .
HUMAN Section::::Human .
The majority of humans are right - handed .
Many are also right - sided in general ( that is , they prefer to use their right eye , right foot and right ear if forced to make a choice between the two ) .
The reasons for this are not fully understood , but it is thought that because the left cerebral hemisphere of the brain controls the right side of the body , the right side is generally stronger ; it is suggested that the left cerebral hemisphere is dominant over the right in most humans because in 90 - 92 % of all humans , the left hemisphere is the language hemisphere .
Human cultures are predominantly right - handed , and so the right - sided trend may be socially as well as biologically enforced .
This is quite apparent from a quick survey of languages .
The English word " left " comes from the Anglo - Saxon word lyft which means " weak " or " useless " .
Similarly , the French word for left , gauche , is also used to mean " awkward " or " tactless " , and sinistra , the Latin word from which the English word " sinister " was derived , means " left " .
Similarly , in many cultures the word for " right " also means " correct " .
The English word " right " comes from the Anglo - Saxon word riht which also means " straight " or " correct . "
This linguistic and social bias is not restricted to European cultures : for example , Chinese characters are designed for right - handers to write , and no significant left - handed culture has ever been found in the world .
When a person is forced to use the hand opposite of the hand that they would naturally use , this is known as forced laterality , or more specifically forced dextrality .
A study done by the Department of Neurology at Keele University , North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary suggests that forced dextrality may be part of the reason that the percentage of left - handed people decreases with the higher age groups , both because the effects of pressures toward right - handedness are cumulative over time ( hence increasing with age for any given person subjected to them ) and because the prevalence of such pressure is decreasing , such that fewer members of younger generations face any such pressure to begin with .
Ambidexterity is when a person has approximately equal skill with both hands and/or both sides of the body .
True ambidexterity is very rare .
Although a small number of people can write competently with both hands and use both sides of their body well , even these people usually show preference for one side of their body over the other .
However , this preference is not necessarily consistent for all activities .
Some people may for example use their right hand for writing , and their left hand for playing racket sports and eating ( see also : cross - dominance ) .
Also , it is not uncommon that people preferring to use the right hand prefer to use the left leg , e.g. when using a shovel , kicking a ball , or operating control pedals .
In many cases , this may be because they are disposed for left - handedness but have been trained for right - handedness .
In the sport of cricket , some players may find that they are more comfortable bowling with their left or right hand , but batting with the other hand .
Approximate statistics are below :
* Favoring right hand : 88.2 %
* Favoring right foot : 81.0 %
* Favoring right eye : 71.1 %
* Favoring right ear : 59.1 % * Same hand and foot : 84 %
* Same ear and eye
: 61.8 % Laterality of motor and sensory control has been the subject of a recent intense study and review .
It turns out that the hemisphere of speech is the hemisphere of action in general and that the command hemisphere is located either in the right or the left hemisphere ( never in both ) .
Around eighty percent of people are left hemispheric for speech and the remainder are right hemispheric : ninety percent of right - handers are left hemispheric for speech , but only fifty percent of left - handers are right hemispheric for speech ( the remainder are left hemispheric ) .
The reaction time of the neurally dominant side of the body ( the side opposite to the major hemisphere or the command center , as just defined ) is shorter than that of the opposite side by an interval equal to the interhemispheric transfer time .
Thus , one in five persons has a handedness that is the opposite for which they are wired ( per laterality of command center or brainedness , as determined by reaction time study mentioned above ) .
DIFFERENT EXPRESSIONS
* Board footedness : The stance in a board sport is not necessarily the same as the normal footedness of the person .
In skateboarding and other board sports a goofy footed stance is one with the right foot leading .
A stance with the left foot forward is called regular or normal .
* Jump and spin : Direction of rotation in figure skating jumps and spins is not necessarily the same as the footedness or the handedness of each person .
A skater can jump and spin counter - clockwise ( the most common direction ) , yet be left - footed and left - handed .
* Ocular dominance :
The eye preferred when binocular vision is not possible , as through a keyhole or monocular microscope .
SPEECH Section::::Speech .
Cerebral dominance or specialization has been studied in relation to a variety of human functions .
With speech in particular , many studies have been used as evidence that it is generally localized in the left hemisphere .
Research comparing the effects of lesions in the two hemispheres , split - brain patients , and perceptual asymmetries have aided in the knowledge of speech lateralization .
In one particular study , the left hemisphere 's sensitivity to differences in rapidly changing sound cues was noted ( Annett , 1991 ) .
This has real world implication , since very fine acoustic discriminations are needed to comprehend and produce speech signals .
In an electrical stimulation demonstration performed by Ojemann and Mateer ( 1979 ) , the exposed cortex was mapped revealing the same cortical sites were activated in phoneme discrimination and mouth movement sequences ( Annett , 1991 ) .
As suggested by Kimura ( 1975 , 1982 ) , left hemisphere speech lateralization might be based upon a preference for movement sequences as demonstrated by American Sign Language ( ASL ) studies .
Since ASL requires intricate hand movements for language communication , it was proposed that skilled hand motions and speech require sequences of action over time .
In deaf patients suffering from a left hemispheric stroke and damage , noticeable losses in their abilities to sign were noted .
These cases were compared to studies of normal speakers with dysphasias located at lesioned areas similar to the deaf patients .
In the same study , deaf patients with right hemispheric lesions did not display any significant loss of signing nor any decreased capacity for motor sequencing ( Annett , 1991 ) .
One theory , known as the acoustic laterality theory , the physical properties of certain speech sounds are what determine laterality to the left hemisphere .
Stop consonants , for example t , p , or k , leave a defined silent period at the end of words that can easily be distinguished .
This theory postulates that changing sounds such as these are preferentially processed by the left hemisphere .
As a result of the right ear being responsible for transmission to sounds to the left hemisphere , it is capable of perceiving these sounds with rapid changes .
This right ear advantage in hearing and speech laterality was evidenced in dichotic listening studies .
Magnetic imaging results from this study showed greater left hemisphere activation when actual words were presented as opposed to pseudo - words ( Shtyrov , Pihko , and Pulvermuller , 2005 ) .
Two important aspects of speech recognition are phonetic cues , such as format patterning , and prosody cues , such as intonation , accent , and emotional state of the speaker ( Imaizumi , Koichi , Kiritani , Hosoi & Tonoike , 1998 ) .
In a study done with both monolinguals and bilinguals , which took into account language experience , second language proficiency , and onset of bilingualism among other variables , researchers were able to demonstrate left hemispheric dominance .
In addition , bilinguals that began speaking a second language early in life demonstrated bilateral hemispheric involvement .
The findings of this study were able to predict differing patterns of cerebral language lateralization in adulthood ( Hull & Vaid , 2006 ) .
IN OTHER ANIMALS Section::::In other animals .
It has been shown that cerebral lateralization is a widespread phenomenon in the animal kingdom .
Functional and structural differences between left and right brain hemispheres can be found in many other vertebrates and also in invertebrates .
It has been proposed that negative , withdrawal - associated emotions are processed predominantly by the right hemisphere , whereas the left hemisphere is largely responsible for processing positive , approach - related emotions .
This has been called the " laterality - valence hypothesis " .
One sub - set of laterality in animals is limb dominance .
Preferential limb use for specific tasks has been shown in species including chimpanzees , mice , bats , wallabies , parrots , chickens and toads .
Another form of laterality is hemispheric dominance for processing conspecific vocalizations , reported for chimpanzees , sea lions , dogs , zebra finches and Bengalese finches .
IN MAMMALS Section::::In mammals .
Domestic horses ( Equus ferus caballus ) exhibit laterality in at least two areas of neural organization , i.e. sensory and motor .
In thoroughbreds , the strength of motor laterality increases with age .
Horses under 4 years old have a preference to initially use the right nostril during olfaction .
Along with olfaction , French horses have an eye laterality when looking at novel objects .
There is a correlation between their score on an emotional index and eye preference ; horses with higher emotionality are more likely to look with their left eye .
The less emotive French saddlebreds glance at novel objects using the right eye , however , this tendency is absent in the trotters , although the emotive index is the same for both breeds .
Racehorses exhibit laterality in stride patterns as well .
They use their preferred stride pattern at all times whether racing or not , unless they are forced to change it while turning , injured , or fatigued .
In domestic dogs ( Canis familiaris ) , there is a correlation between motor laterality and noise sensitivity - a lack of paw preference is associated with noise - related fearfulness .
( Branson and Rogers , 2006 )
Fearfulness is an undesirable trait in guide dogs , therefore , testing for laterality can be a useful predictor of a successful guide dog .
Knowing a guide dog 's laterality can also be useful for training because the dog may be better at walking to the left or the right of their blind owner .
Domestic cats ( Felis silvestris catus ) show an individual handedness when reaching for static food .
In one study , 46 % preferred to use the right paw , 44 % the left , and 10 % were ambi - lateral ; 60 % used one paw 100 % of the time .
There was no difference between male and female cats in the proportions of left and right paw preferences .
In moving - target reaching tests , cats have a left - sided behavioural asymmetry .
One study indicates that laterality in this species is strongly related to temperament .
Furthermore , individuals with stronger paw preferences are rated as more confident , affectionate , active , and friendly .
Chimpanzees show right - handedness in certain conditions .
This is expressed at the population level for females , but not males .
The complexity of the task has a dominant effect on handedness in chimps .
Cattle use visual / brain lateralisation in their visual scanning of novel and familiar stimuli .
Domestic cattle prefer to view novel stimuli with the left eye , ( similar to horses , Australian magpies , chicks , toads and fish ) but use the right eye for viewing familiar stimuli .
Schreibers ' long - fingered bat is lateralized at the population level and shows a left - hand bias for climbing or grasping .
Some types of mastodon indicate laterality through the fossil remains having differing tusk lengths .
IN
MARSUPIALS Section::::In marsupials .
Marsupials are fundamentally different from other mammals in that they lack a corpus callosum .
However , wild kangaroos and other macropod marsupials have a left - hand preference for everyday tasks .
Left - handedness is particularly apparent in the red kangaroo ( Macropus rufus ) and the eastern gray kangaroo ( Macropus giganteus ) .
The red - necked wallaby ( Macropus rufogriseus ) preferentially uses the left hand for behaviours that involve fine manipulation , but the right for behaviours that require more physical strength .
There is less evidence for handedness in arboreal species .
IN BIRDS Section::::In birds .
Parrots tend to favor one foot when grasping objects ( for example fruit when feeding ) .
Some studies indicate that most parrots are left footed .
The Australian magpie
( Gymnorhina tibicen ) uses both left - eye and right - eye laterality when performing anti - predator responses , which include mobbing .
Prior to withdrawing from a potential predator , Australian magpies view the animal with the left eye ( 85 % ) , but prior to approaching , the right eye is used ( 72 % ) .
The left eye is used prior to jumping ( 73 % ) and prior to circling ( 65 % ) the predator , as well as during circling ( 58 % ) and for high alert inspection of the predator ( 72 % ) .
The researchers commented that " mobbing and perhaps circling are agonistic responses controlled by the LE[left eye]/right hemisphere , as also seen in other species .
Alert inspection involves detailed examination of the predator and likely high levels of fear , known to be right hemisphere function . "
Yellow - legged gull ( Larus michahellis )
chicks show laterality when reverting from a supine to prone posture , and also in pecking at a dummy parental bill to beg for food .
Lateralization occurs at both the population and individual level in the reverting response and at the individual level in begging .
Females have a leftward preference in the righting response , indicating this is sex dependent .
Laterality in the begging response in chicks varies according to laying order and matches variation in egg androgens concentration .
IN FISH Section::::In fish .
Laterality determines the organisation of rainbowfish ( Melanotaenia spp . ) schools .
These fish demonstrate an individual eye preference when examining their reflection in a mirror .
Fish which show a right - eye preference in the mirror test prefer to be on the left side of the school .
Conversely , fish that show a left - eye preference in the mirror test or were non - lateralised , prefer to be slightly to the right side of the school .
The behaviour depends on the species and sex of the school .
IN AMPHIBIANS Section::::In amphibians .
Three species of toads , the common toad ( Bufo bufo ) , green toad ( Bufo viridis ) and the cane toad ( Bufo marinus ) show stronger escape and defensive responses when a model predator was placed on the toad 's left side compared to their right side .
Emei music frogs ( Babina daunchina ) have a right - ear preference for positive or neutral signals such as a conspecific 's advertisement call and white noise , but a left - ear preference for negative signals such as predatory attack .
IN INVERTEBRATES Section::::In invertebrates .
The Mediterranean fruit fly ( Ceratitis capitata ) exhibits left - biased population - level lateralisation of aggressive displays ( boxing with forelegs and wing strikes ) with no sex - differences .
In ants , Temnothorax albipennis ( rock ant ) scouts show behavioural lateralization when exploring unknown nest sites , showing a population - level bias to prefer left turns .
One possible reason for this is that its environment is partly maze - like and consistently turning in one direction is a good way to search and exit mazes without getting lost .
This turning bias is correlated with slight asymmetries in the ants ' compound eyes ( differential ommatidia count ) .
SEE ALSO
* Ambidexterity * Cross - dominance
* Dextrocardia * Footedness * Handedness
* Ocular dominance * Situs inversus
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Development and disorders of lateral dominance and the development of specialised centres and functions in the left and right brain hemispheres