AUGUSTA NATIONAL GOLF CLUB Augusta National Golf Club , located in Augusta , Georgia , is one of the most famous golf clubs in the world .
Founded by Bobby Jones and Clifford Roberts on the site of the former Fruitland ( later Fruitlands ) Nursery , the course was designed by Jones and Alister MacKenzie and opened for play in January 1933 .
Its first club professional was Ed Dudley , who served in the role until 1957 ; Dudley was one of the top tournament professionals of his era , with 15 wins on the PGA Tour .
Since 1934 , the club has played host to the annual Masters Tournament , one of the four major championships in professional golf , and the only major played each year at the same course .
It was the top - ranked course in Golf Digest 's 2009 list of America 's 100 greatest courses and was the number ten - ranked course based on course architecture on Golfweek Magazines 2011 list of best classic courses in the United States .
The club has drawn criticism for its exclusionary membership policies : Augusta National barred African Americans until 1990 and women until 2012 .
The club , which long required all caddies to be black , barred black golfers from the Masters Tournament for 40 years until Lee Elder participated in the 1975 Tournament .
Tiger Woods would become the first person of color to win the tournament in 1997 .
He and Vijay Singh are the only people of color to win the tournament .
In 2018 , Augusta National Golf Club was voted the number one Platinum Club of the World , Golf & Country Clubs by the election conducted by Club Leaders Forum .
On April 4 , 2018 , Fred Ridley , in his first major appearance as chairman of Augusta National Golf Club , announced that the Augusta National Women 's Amateur Championship would start in 2019 .
The tournament will take place a week before the 2019 Masters Tournament .
COURSE
Section::::Course .
The course was formerly a plant nursery , and each hole on the course is named after the tree or shrub with which it has become associated .
Several of the holes on the first nine have been renamed , as well as hole # 11 . !
Hole!!Name!!Yards!!Par ! ! ! !
Hole!!Name!!Yards!!Par
1align =
leftTea Olive4454rowspan=10
10align =
leftCamellia4954
2align
= leftPink Dogwood575511align =
leftWhite Dogwood5054 3align =
leftFlowering Peach350412align =
leftGolden Bell1553 4align =
leftFlowering Crab Apple240313align =
leftAzalea5105 5align
= leftMagnolia455414align =
leftChinese
Fir4404 6align
= leftJuniper180315align
= leftFirethorn5305 7align = leftPampas450416align = leftRedbud1703
8align =
leftYellow Jasmine570517align = leftNandina4404
9align = leftCarolina Cherry460418align =
leftHolly4654
colspan=5 align = leftcolspan=2Total7,43572
Lengths of the course for the Masters at the start of each decade : * 2010 : * 2000 : * 1990 :
* 1980 :
* 1970 : * 1960 : * 1950 : * 1940 :
Unlike most other private or public golf courses in the US , Augusta National has never been rated .
During the 1990 Masters Tournament , a team of USGA raters , organized by Golf Digest , evaluated the course and gave it an unofficial rating of 76.2 .
It was re - evaluated in 2009 and given an unofficial rating of 78.1 .
The golf course architecture website GolfClubAtlas.com has said , " Augusta National has gone through more changes since its inception than any of the world 's twenty or so greatest courses .
To call it a MacKenzie course is false advertising as his features are essentially long gone and his routing is all that is left . "
The authors of the site also add that MacKenzie and Jones were heavily influenced by the Old Course at St Andrews , and intended that the ground game be central to the course .
Almost from Augusta 's opening , Roberts sought to make changes to minimize the ground game , and effectively got free rein to do so because MacKenzie died shortly after the course 's opening and Jones went into inactivity due to World War II and then a crippling illness .
The authors add , " With the ground game gone , the course was especially vulnerable to changes in technology , and this brought on a slew of changes from at least 15 different ' architects ' .
" Golf Course Histories has an aerial comparison of the architectural changes for Augusta National Golf Club for the year 1938 versus 2013 .
Among the changes to the course were several made by architect Perry Maxwell in 1937 , including an important alteration involving the current 10th hole .
When Augusta National originally opened for play in January 1933 , the opening hole ( now the 10th ) was a relatively benign par 4 that played just in excess of 400 yards .
From an elevated tee , the hole required little more than a short iron or wedge for the approach .
Maxwell moved the green in 1937 to its present location – on top of the hill , about 50 yards back from the old site – and transformed it into the toughest hole in Masters Tournament history .
Ben Crenshaw referred to Maxwell 's work on the 10th hole as " one of the great strokes in golf architecture " .
For the 1999 tournament , a short rough was instated around the fairways .
Referred to as the second cut , it is substantially shorter than the comparable primary rough at other courses , with an average length of .
It is meant to reduce a player 's ability to control the ball coming out of this lie , and encourage better accuracy for driving onto the fairway .
AMEN CORNER Section::::Amen Corner .
The second shot at the 11th , all of the 12th , and the first two shots at the 13th hole at Augusta are nicknamed " Amen Corner " .
This term was first used in print by author Herbert Warren Wind in his April 21 , 1958 , Sports Illustrated article about the Masters that year .
In a Golf Digest article in April 1984 , 26 years later , Wind told about its origin .
He said he wanted a catchy phrase like baseball 's " hot - corner " or football 's " coffin - corner " to explain where some of the most exciting golf had taken place ( the Palmer - Venturi rules issue at twelve , over an embedded ball ruling and how it was handled , in particular ) .
Thus " Amen Corner " was born .
He said it came from the title of a jazz record he had heard in the mid-1930s by a group led by Chicago 's Mezz Mezzrow , Shouting in that Amen Corner .
In a Golf Digest article in April 2008 , writer Bill Fields added some new updated information about the origin of the name .
He wrote that Richard Moore , a golf and jazz historian from South Carolina , tried to purchase a copy of the old Mezzrow 78 RPM disc for an " Amen Corner " exhibit he was putting together for his Golf Museum at Ahmic Lake , Ontario .
After extensive research , Moore found that the record never existed .
As Moore put it , Wind , himself a jazz buff , must have " unfortunately bogeyed his mind , 26 years later " .
While at Yale , he was no doubt familiar with , and meant all along , the popular version of the song ( with the correct title , " Shoutin ' in that Amen Corner " written by Andy Razaf ) , which was recorded by the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra , vocal by Mildred Bailey ( Brunswick label No . 6655 ) in 1935 .
Moore told Fields that , being a great admirer of Wind 's work over the years , he was reluctant , for months , to come forth with his discovery that contradicted Wind 's memory .
Moore 's discovery was first reported in Golf World magazine in 2007 , before Fields ' longer article in Golf Digest in 2008 .
In 1958 Arnold Palmer outlasted Ken Venturi to win the tournament with heroic escapes at Amen Corner .
Amen Corner also played host to Masters moments such as Byron Nelson 's birdie - eagle at 12 and 13 in 1937 , and Sam Snead 's water save at 12 in 1949 that sparked him to victory .
On the flip side of fate , Jordan Spieth 's quadruple bogey on 12 during Sunday 's final round in 2016 cost him his 2-stroke lead and ultimately the championship .
" THE BIG OAK TREE " Section::::"The Big Oak Tree " .
" The Big Oak Tree " is on the golf course side of the clubhouse and was planted in the 1850s .
EISENHOWER TREE
Section::::Eisenhower Tree .
Also known as the " Eisenhower Pine " , a loblolly pine was located on the 17th hole , approximately 210 yards ( 192 m ) from the Masters tee .
President Dwight D. Eisenhower , an Augusta National member , hit the tree so many times that , at a 1956 club meeting , he proposed that it be cut down .
Not wanting to offend the president , the club 's chairman , Clifford Roberts , immediately adjourned the meeting rather than reject the request .
In February 2014 , the Eisenhower Tree was removed after suffering extensive damage during an ice storm .
IKE 'S POND Section::::Ike 's Pond .
During a visit to Augusta National , then - General Eisenhower returned from a walk through the woods on the eastern part of the grounds , and informed Clifford Roberts that he had found a perfect place to build a dam if the club would like a fish pond .
Ike 's Pond was built and named , and the dam is located just where Eisenhower said it should be .
This is also the location that Roberts committed suicide by gunshot in 1977 .
At age 83 , he had been in ill health for several months with cancer and had a debilitating stroke .
RAE 'S CREEK Section::::Rae 's Creek .
Rae 's Creek cuts across the southeastern corner of the Augusta National property .
It flows along the back of the 11th green , in front of the 12th green , and ahead of the 13th tee .
This is the lowest point in elevation of the course .
The Hogan and Nelson Bridges cross the creek after the 12th and 13th tee boxes , respectively .
The creek was named after former property owner John Rae , who died in 1789 .
Rae 's Creek runs in front of No . 12 green , has a tributary evident at No . 13 tee , and flows at the back of No . 11 green .
It was Rae 's house which was the farthest fortress up the Savannah River from Fort Augusta .
The house kept residents safe during Indian attacks when the fort was out of reach .
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
Augusta National Golf Club has about 300 members at any given time .
Membership is strictly by invitation : there is no application process .
In 2004 , USA Today published a list of all the current members .
Membership is believed to cost between $ 10,000 and $ 30,000 and annual dues were estimated in 2009 to be less than $ 10,000 per year .
Augusta invited and accepted its first African - American member , TV executive Ron Townsend , in 1990 following a controversy at Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club .
Shoal Creek , an all - white golf club in Alabama , refused membership to African Americans .
The club also faced demands that the PGA Championship not be held there because of racist comments by the club 's founder .
In his 2012 pre - Masters press conference , Chairman Billy Payne declined to discuss the club 's then - continued refusal to admit women .
He defended the club 's position by noting that in 2011 , more than 15 % of the non - tournament rounds were played by female players who were member guests or spouses of active members .
However , on August 20 , 2012 , Augusta National admitted its first two female members , Condoleezza Rice and Darla Moore .
NOTABLE MEMBERS Section::::Notable members .
Notable current members include : * Warren Buffett , CEO of Berkshire Hathaway * Pete Coors , former chairman and CEO of Coors Brewing Company and Molson Coors Brewing Company , current chairman of MillerCoors
* Bill Gates , co - founder and chairman of Microsoft * Roger Goodell , commissioner of the National Football League * Pat Haden , former NFL player and former athletic director at the University of Southern California
* John Luna , CEO
Ping / Karsten * Lou Holtz , former college football coach
* Hugh L. McColl Jr. , former CEO of Bank of America
* Darla Moore , South Carolina businesswoman * Sam Nunn , former United States Senator from Georgia
* Sam Palmisano , former CEO of IBM
* T. Boone Pickens , Jr. , oil tycoon
* Condoleezza Rice , former United States Secretary of State * Ginni Rometty , chair , president , and CEO of IBM
* Henry Waite , former Chairman of HUFF Productions
* Simon Chirayath , British businessman * James D. Robinson III , former CEO of American Express * Lynn Swann , former NFL player and current athletic director at the University of Southern California
* Jack Welch , former CEO of General Electric * Matt Rose , former CEO of BNSF Railway
* Jack Nicklaus , Hall of Fame golfer , six - time Masters champion , and the only Masters champion who is currently a regular member of the club * Anoop Dave , Commercial Real Estate Mogul , BSD Recently deceased members include : * Arnold Palmer , Hall of Fame golfer and four - time Masters champion , was also a regular member when he died in September 2016 .
* Melvin Laird , former United States Secretary of Defense ( died November 2016 )
* Robert Sumner former pastor ( died December 2016 )
* Frank Broyles , former athletic director at the University of Arkansas ( died August 2017 )
CHAIRMEN
* Clifford Roberts ( 1931–1976 )
* William Lane ( 1976–1980 )
* Hord Hardin ( 1980–1991 ) * Jackson T. Stephens ( 1991–1998 ) * Hootie Johnson ( 1998–2006 )
* Billy Payne ( 2006–2017 )
* Fred Ridley ( 2017–present ) Section::::Chairmen .
In 1966 , the governing board of Augusta National passed a resolution honoring founder Bobby Jones with the position of President in Perpetuity .
2002
MEMBERSHIP CONTROVERSY Section::::2002 membership controversy .
Augusta National and its Chairman Hootie Johnson are widely known for a disagreement beginning in 2002 with Martha Burk , then chair of the Washington - based National Council of Women 's Organizations ; the dispute arose over Augusta National 's refusal to admit female members to the club .
Burk said she found out about the club 's policies in a USA Today column by Christine Brennan published April 11 , 2002 .
She then wrote a private letter to Johnson , saying that hosting the Masters Tournament at a male - only club constituted sexism .
Johnson characterized Burk 's approach as " offensive and coercive " .
Responding to efforts to link the issue to sexism and civil rights , Johnson maintained that the issue had to do with the rights of any private club :
Burk , whose childhood nickname was also Hootie , claimed to have been " called a man hater , anti - family , lesbian , all the usual things . "
Johnson was portrayed as a Senator Claghorn type—"a blustery defender of all things Southern " .
Following the discord , two club members resigned : Thomas H. Wyman , a former CEO of CBS , and John Snow , when President George W. Bush nominated him to serve as Secretary of the Treasury .
Pressure on corporate sponsors led the club to broadcast the 2003 and 2004 tournaments without commercials .
The controversy was discussed by the International Olympic Committee when re - examining whether golf meets Olympic criteria of a " sport practiced without discrimination with a spirit of friendship , solidarity and fair play " .
Augusta National extended membership to Condoleezza Rice and Darla Moore on August 20 , 2012 .
In 2018 , chairman Fred Ridley announced that the club would establish the Augusta National Women 's Amateur Championship in 2019 , a 54-hole event for the world 's top amateur players .
GREEN JACKET
Section::::Green jacket .
Every member of Augusta National receives a green sport coat with the club 's logo on the left breast .
The idea of the green jacket originated with club co - founder Clifford Roberts .
Many believe it is because he wanted patrons visiting during the tournament to be able to readily identify members .
Since Sam Snead 's victory in 1949 , the winner of each year 's Masters Tournament has received a green jacket , although he does not receive membership .
The jacket is presented to the new winner by the winner of the previous tournament .
If the previous champion is either unavailable or has won consecutive tournaments , then the current chairman acts as the presenter .
Until 1967 , the jackets were manufactured by Brooks Brothers and since have been made by Hamilton of Cincinnati , Ohio , with the imported wool produced at the Victor Forstmann plant in Dublin , Georgia .
The current Masters champion is the only owner of a green jacket permitted to remove it from the grounds of Augusta National , and only for a period of one year .
Before this time limit was in place , the jacket of a few long - past Masters champions had been sold , after their deaths , to collectors .
Consequently , the members of Augusta National have gone to great lengths to secure the remaining examples .
Now , two jackets remain outside the grounds of Augusta National with the club 's permission .
When Gary Player first won the Masters in 1961 , he brought his jacket home to South Africa .
For years the board insisted that Player return the jacket but Player kept " forgetting " or coming up with humorous creative excuses why he did not return the jacket .
After becoming something of a running joke , Augusta National 's members allowed him to keep it , where it is on display in his personal museum .
The second jacket belongs to 1938 champion Henry Picard .
Before the traditions surrounding one of golf 's greatest awards were well established , the jacket was removed by Picard from Augusta National .
It is now currently on display in the " Picard Lounge " at Canterbury Golf Club in Beachwood , Ohio .
Along with Snead , the nine previous winners were also awarded green jackets in 1949 , and these became known as the " original ten " jackets .
Horton Smith 's jacket , awarded for his wins in 1934 and 1936 , sold at auction in September 2013 for over $ 682,000 ; the highest price ever paid for a piece of golf memorabilia .
Smith died at age 55 in 1963 and it had been in the possession of his brother Ren 's stepsons for decades .
CADDIES Section::::Caddies .
Augusta National employs a staff of caddies to assist members , guests , and professionals .
Before 1983 , staff caddies were assigned to players at the Masters , and all were black males .
Club co - founder Roberts once said , " As long as I 'm alive , all the golfers will be white and all the caddies will be black .
" Roberts committed suicide at Augusta in 1977 and five years later in November 1982 , chairman Hord Hardin announced that players were henceforth permitted to use their regular caddies at the Masters .
This decision followed an incident that occurred during the 1982 tournament .
Following a Thursday rain delay , many of the caddies failed to show up at the proper time on Friday morning .
As a result of the confusion , two - time champion Tom Watson and others sent scathing complaint letters to Hardin .
Twelve players , including then five - time champion Jack Nicklaus , defending champion Craig Stadler , and future two - time champion Ben Crenshaw , employed club caddies in 1983 .
Well into the 1970s , all four majors and some tour events required the use of the host club 's caddies ; the U.S. Open had this policy through 1975 , but by 1980 , only the Masters and the Western Open near Chicago retained the requirement .
Augusta 's caddie staff continues to wear its trademark white jumpsuits year - round .
Female caddies are permitted .
Most of them are professional golfers ' regular caddies , such as Fanny Sunesson .
Sunesson is one of the PGA Tour 's few female caddies , and has caddied for several players at the Masters , most notably three - time champion Nick Faldo , and more recently Henrik Stenson .
The first female caddie at Augusta was George Archer 's daughter Elizabeth in 1983 , her 21st event carrying the bag for her father .
Archer , the 1969 champion , tied for twelfth for one of his better finishes at Augusta .
During the pre - tournament events in 2007 , Golf Channel 's Kelly Tilghman caddied for Arnold Palmer in the par-3 contest .
Fuzzy Zoeller 's daughter Gretchen was his caddie for his last year as a competitor in the tournament in 2009 .
Tennis pro Caroline Wozniacki , ex - fiancée of Rory McIlroy , caddied for him in the par-3 contests of 2013 and 2014 .
Crenshaw won his 1984 and 1995 Masters titles with Augusta National caddie Carl Jackson .
APPEARANCES IN VIDEO GAMES
Section::::Appearances in video games .
Augusta National Golf Club is featured in the Japan - exclusive video game franchise , which started in 1989 .
The games were produced by T&E Soft .
One of its last titles was released for the Nintendo 64 .
Augusta National Golf Club and the Masters Tournament are also featured in the video game , and has subsequently featured in later iterations of the game .
This is the first time that the course has been officially used in the Tiger Woods franchise .
Augusta National was also previously used in the 1986 computer game Mean 18 , published by Accolade .
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Augusta.com coverage from the Augusta Chronicle
* Aerial view from Google Maps
* Augusta , Georgia , a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary * Guide to Augusta National at BBC * Guide to Augusta National at Golflink * 3D Course Planner at ProVisualizer