LITERACY TEST
A literacy test assesses a person 's literacy skills : their ability to read and write .
Literacy tests have been administered by various governments to immigrants .
In the United States , between the 1850s and 1960s , literacy tests were administered to prospective voters , and this had the effect of disenfranchising African Americans and others .
VOTING
Section::::Voting .
From the 1890s to the 1960s , many state governments in the United States administered literacy tests to prospective voters purportedly to test their literacy in order to vote .
In practice , these tests were intended to disenfranchise racial minorities .
Southern state legislatures employed literacy tests as part of the voter registration process starting in the late 19th century .
Literacy tests , along with poll taxes , residency and property restrictions and extra - legal activities ( violence , intimidation ) were all used to deny suffrage to African Americans .
The first formal voter literacy tests were introduced in 1890 .
At first , whites were generally exempted from the literacy test if they could meet alternate requirements that in practice excluded blacks , such as a grandfather clause or a finding of " good moral character "
In Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections ( 1959 ) , the U.S. Supreme Court held that literacy tests were not necessarily violations of Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment nor of the Fifteenth Amendment .
Southern states abandoned the literacy test only when forced to do so by federal legislation in the 1960s .
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 provided that literacy tests used as a qualification for voting in federal elections be administered wholly in writing and only to persons who had completed six years of formal education .
In part to curtail the use of literacy tests , Congress enacted the Voting Rights Act of 1965 .
The Act prohibited jurisdictions from administering literacy tests to citizens who attained a sixth - grade education in an American school in which the predominant language was Spanish , such as schools in Puerto Rico .
The Supreme Court upheld this provision in Katzenbach v. Morgan ( 1966 ) .
Although the Court had earlier held in Lassiter that literacy tests did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment , in Morgan the Court held that Congress could enforce Fourteenth Amendment rights — such as the right to vote — by prohibiting conduct it deemed to interfere with such rights , even if that conduct may not be independently unconstitutional .
As originally enacted , the Voting Rights Act also suspended the use of literacy tests in all jurisdictions in which less than 50 % of voting - age residents were registered as of November 1 , 1964 , or had voted in the 1964 presidential election .
In 1970 , Congress amended the Act and expanded the ban on literacy tests to the entire country .
The Supreme Court then upheld the ban as constitutional in Oregon v. Mitchell ( 1970 ) , but just for federal elections .
The Court was deeply divided in this case , and a majority of justices did not agree on a rationale for the holding .
IMMIGRATION
Section::::Immigration .
The literacy test was a device to restrict the total number of immigrants while not offending the large element of ethnic voters .
The " old " immigration ( British , Irish , German , Scandinavian ) had fallen off and was replaced by a " new " immigration from Italy , Russia and other points in Southern and eastern Europe .
The " old " immigrants were voters and strongly approved of restricting the " new " immigrants .
All groups of American voters strongly opposed Chinese and Asian immigration .
The 1896 Republican platform called for a literacy test .
The American Federation of Labor took the lead in promoting literacy tests that would exclude illiterate immigrants , primarily from Southern and Eastern Europe .
A majority of the labor union membership were immigrants or sons of immigrants from Germany , Scandinavia and Britain , but the literacy test would not hinder immigration from those countries .
Corporate industry however , needed new workers for its mines and factories and opposed any restrictions on immigration .
In 1906 , the House Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon , a conservative Republican , worked aggressively to defeat a proposed literacy test for immigrants .
A product of the western frontier , Cannon felt that moral probity was the only acceptable test for the quality of an immigrant .
He worked with Secretary of State Elihu Root and President Theodore Roosevelt to set up the " Dillingham Commission , " a blue ribbon body of experts that produced a 41-volume study of immigration .
The Commission recommended a literacy test and the possibility of annual quotas .
Presidents Cleveland and Taft vetoed literacy tests in 1897 and 1913 .
President Wilson did the same in 1915 and 1917 , but the test was passed over Wilson 's second veto .
SEE ALSO
* Disfranchisement after the Civil War
*
Freedmen
* Jim Crow laws
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Are You " Qualified " to Vote ?
Alabama literacy test ~ Civil Rights Movement Veterans
* Naturalization literacy test still in use today