SET IT OFF ( FILM )
Set It
Off is a 1996 American crime action film directed by F. Gary Gray and written by Kate Lanier and Takashi Bufford .
The film stars Jada Pinkett , Queen Latifah , Vivica A. Fox and Kimberly Elise
( in her film debut ) .
It follows four close friends in Los Angeles , California , who decide to plan and execute a bank robbery .
They decide to do so for different reasons , although all four want better for themselves and their families .
The film became a critical and box office success , grossing over $ 41 million against a budget of $ 9 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Francesca " Frankie " Sutton ( Fox ) is a Los Angeles bank teller who witnesses a robbery .
Although she had no prior knowledge of the robbery , the bank fires
Frankie after the police uncover a connection between her and one of the three robbers .
Frankie goes to work at Luther 's Janitorial Services with her three best friends , Lida " Stony " Newsom ( Pinket ) , Cleopatra " Cleo " Sims ( Latifah ) , and Tisean " T.T. " Williams ( Elise ) .
Luther ( Byrd ) treats them with disrespect and pays them paltry wages .
Cleo states that they should rob a bank themselves .
Frankie agrees , but Stony and T.T. are reluctant .
However , when Stony 's younger brother is gunned down by the police in a case of mistaken identity and T.T. 's son is taken away from her by Child Protective Services because she can not afford to take care of him , they too now have the motivation to join the robbery .
The four women embark on a series of bank robberies , which are investigated by LAPD Detective Strode ( McGinley ) .
He suspects that Cleo ( because of her prior convictions ) , Frankie ( because of her inadvertent connection to the earlier robbery and subsequent firing ) and Stony ( because of her brother 's death ) are involved .
But his superior refuses to allow him to bring them in for questioning because he does n't feel the evidence is sufficient .
The four women stash the money in an air vent at one of their work sites .
However , when Cleo , Frankie , and T.T. show up for work one day and find a new boss in charge , they quickly realize that Luther has discovered the money and fled with it .
While Stony attends a banking event with her lover Keith Weston ( Underwood ) , the three women track Luther to a motel , where he is sleeping with a prostitute and demand the return of their money .
When Luther pulls a gun on Cleo , T.T. kills him in self - defense .
The next day , Detective Strode takes Cleo to the police station to participate in a lineup .
A glare from Cleo intimidates the prostitute into silence .
Frankie and Cleo persuade T.T. and Stony that they need to rob another bank and leave town the next day .
The women rob the bank where Keith , Stony 's lover , works .
Strode and his partner ( Joyce ) try to prevent the robbery , but a bank security guard shoots
T.T. A shootout ensues as Stony shoots the guard , and an enraged Cleo opens fire on the detectives .
The women eventually drive away and as they proceed to switch getaway cars ,
T.T. succumbs to her wound and dies in Stony 's arms .
The three remaining women decide to split up and meet up later .
The police find Cleo who proceeds to lead them on a high speed chase .
After her car is shot up by police , Cleo leaps from her car in one final battle for her dignity , firing her gun , and is shot down by the police .
Frankie is found a short time later .
Strode tries to get her to surrender , but when she runs away , she is shot in the back and killed .
Stony tearfully watches this from a passing bus .
Strode sees her from a distance but lets her go , realizing that he was the cause for all of this .
In Mexico , Stony mourns the losses of her friends and brother , and calls Keith to assure him that she is all right and thanks him .
Keith hangs up the phone and smiles .
After cutting her hair , Stony is seen driving through the mountains with the stolen money from the robberies in tow .
CAST * Jada Pinkett as Lida
" Stony " Newsom * Queen Latifah as Cleopatra " Cleo " Sims * Vivica A. Fox as Francesca " Frankie " Sutton * Kimberly Elise as Tisean " T.T. " Williams * John C. McGinley as Detective Strode * Blair Underwood as Keith Weston
* Ella Joyce as Detective Waller * Charlie Robinson as Nate Andrews
*
Dr. Dre as Black Sam * WC as Darnell ( Bank robber ) * Charles Walker as Captain Fredricks * Mark Thompson as TV Anchor
* F. Gary Gray as Guy driving low - rider * Geoff Callan as Nigel
* Natalie Desselle as Tanika * Chaz Lamar Shepard as Stevie Newsom
* Thomas Jefferson Byrd as Luther
* Samuel Monroe Jr. as Lorenz PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Takashi Bufford said that he wrote the script with Pinkett Smith and Queen Latifah in mind even though he had not yet met them .
The script was offered to New Line three times before finally being accepted , and the studio filled in more about why the female leads turn to bank robbery in a way that was n't in the original script .
CRITICAL RECEPTION AND BOX OFFICE Section::::Critical reception and box office .
Set It Off received generally positive reviews from critics and audiences .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , it holds an overall 63 % approval rating based on 24 reviews , with a rating average of 6.1 out of 10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " It may not boast an original plot , but Set It Off is a satisfying , socially conscious heist film
thanks largely to fine performances from its leads .
"
Roger Ebert stated that Set It Off is " a lot more " than a thriller about four black women who rob banks .
Comparing it to Waiting to Exhale , but " with a strong jolt of reality , " he said , " It creates a portrait of the lives of these women that 's so observant and informed . "
He gave the film three and a half stars , and added , " The movie surprised and moved me : I expected a routine action picture and was amazed how much I started to care about the characters . "
Stephen Holden of The New York Times compared Set It Off to Thelma & Louise , stating , " In formulaic Hollywood terms , Set It
Off might be described as Thelma and Louise Ride Shotgun in the Hood While Waiting to Exhale .
A pop psychologist might translate the story into a fable called Women Who Rob Banks and the Society That Hates Them . "
He added that among " the long list of Hollywood heist movies that make you root for its criminals to steal a million dollars and live happily ever after , F. Gary Gray 's film Set It
Off is one of the most poignantly impassioned , " and that " [ i]f this messy roller coaster of a film often seems to be going in several directions at once , it never for a second loses empathy " for the female robbers .
James Berardinelli said that if Set It Off owes any debt to films , those films are Thelma & Louise and Dead Presidents , rather than Waiting to Exhale .
He stated that " [ t]here 's a freshness and energy in the way director F. Gary Gray attacks this familiar material that keeps Set It
Off entertaining , even during its weakest moments " and that " [ t]he concept of four black action heroines makes for a welcome change in a genre that is dominated by : ( a ) rugged white males with a perpetual five o'clock shadow , ( b ) rugged white males who speak English with an accent , and ( c ) rugged white males with the acting ability of a fence post . "
Berardinelli added that although " [ t]he film does n't get off to a promising start " and " [ t]he first half - hour , which details the various characters ' motives for becoming involved in a bank robbery , is unevenly scripted , " and that some aspects of the plot are contrived , "
[ o]nce the setup is complete , however , things shift into high gear .
The remainder of the film , which includes several high - adrenaline action sequences and some slower , more dramatic moments , is smoothly - crafted .
There are occasional missteps , such as an out - of - place Godfather parody , but , in general ,
Set It
Off manages to rise above these . "
On a budget of $ 9 million and R - rated , Set It Off grossed $ 36,461,139 in the U.S. and Canada , $ 5,129,747 internationally , and $ 41,590,886 worldwide .
Tribute magazine stated that it is New Line Cinema 's highest - grossing film of 1996 , and that it won Gray a Black Film Award for Best Director , and the Special Jury Prize at the Cognac Film Festival .
MUSIC SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music .
Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was released on September 24 , 1996 by East West Records and featured production from several of hip hop and R&B 's top producers such as Organized Noize , DJ U - Neek and DJ Rectangle .
The soundtrack was a huge success making it to number four on the Billboard 200 and number three on the Top R&B / Hip - Hop Albums and featured seven charting singles
" Set It Off " , " Do n't Let Go ( Love ) " , " Days of Our Livez " , " Angel " , " Come On " , " Let It Go " and " Missing You " .
All of the singles had music videos made for them .
The track " The Heist " by Da 5 Footaz also had a music video made , even though it was not released as a single .
On November 12 , 1996 the album was certified platinum by the RIAA .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
" Up Against the Wind " ( runtime – 4:28 ) , sung by Lori Perri and produced by Christopher Young , is not included in the soundtrack . !
rowspan="2"Year !
rowspan="2"Album !
colspan="2"Peak chart positions !
rowspan="2"Certifications ! width=40 !
width=40
1996
Set It
Off
* Released : September 24 , 1996
* Label : East West Records
align="center"4 align="center"3
* US :
Platinum } SCORE
Section::::Score .
Varèse Sarabande issued an album of Christopher Young 's score for the film , including Lori Perri 's " Up Against The Wind " on November 19 , 1996 .
TRACK LISTING
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
1997
Acapulco Black Film Festival
* Best Director :
F. Gary Gray ( won ) 1996
Independent Spirit Awards
* Best Supporting Female :
Queen Latifah ( nominated ) 1997
NAACP Image Awards
* Outstanding Lead Actress in a Motion Picture : Queen Latifah and Jada Pinkett Smith ( nominated )
* Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture :
Blair Underwood ( nominated ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS