JACK ( 1996 FILM )
Jack is a 1996 American comedy - drama film starring Robin Williams and directed by Francis Ford Coppola .
The film co - stars Diane Lane , Jennifer Lopez , Fran Drescher , Bill Cosby , and Brian Kerwin .
Williams plays the role of Jack Powell , a boy who ages four times faster than normal as a result of Werner syndrome , a form of progeria .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins as Karen Powell ( Diane Lane ) goes into labor during a Halloween party and is rushed to the hospital by her husband , Brian ( Brian Kerwin ) , and their friends .
Although the delivery is successful , the baby is extremely premature , born after only ten weeks of pregnancy .
Strangely , the infant seems to be a normal , healthy , full - term baby .
After examinations and tests , the infant , now named Jack , is found to have an exaggerated form of Werner syndrome .
Dr. Benfante ( Allan Rich ) and Dr. Lin ( Keone Young ) diagnose a very rare autosomal recessive disorder .
Their prognosis is that Jack will develop and age at a rate four times as fast as an average child , rendering him " sick as frick " as Dr. Lin explains colloquially .
Jack ( Robin Williams ) is next seen ten years later as a ten year old boy in the body of a forty year old man .
Four boys lurk outside his house , swapping rumors of a " monstrosity " of a boy their age who ca n't go to school .
He scares them away by dipping a fake eye into slime and throwing it at them from his window .
He is extremely childish due to his secluded life .
He has only socialized with his parents and his tutor , Lawrence Woodruff ( Bill Cosby ) , who introduces the idea that he should go to public school .
His parents initially balk , for fear Jack could be emotionally hurt .
When he first attends school , he is exploited by the other kids to win at basketball against bullies , and eventually to get adult magazines and other such items .
As time goes by , he is accepted by them , beginning with Louis , as they discover that they like him .
He attempts to be normal there , for example , when he deals with his first crush , heartbreak , and the relationship with his teacher , Miss Marquez ( Jennifer Lopez ) .
When he goes through a fall while attempting to leave , he is rushed to the hospital , where his doctor explains that he suffered a shocking severe strain ( which could 've been a rare form of angina ) , and also , because of his Werner syndrome , his internal clock is starting to run out .
Realizing the dangers it might entail for his health , his parents decide to withdraw him from school , which upsets him .
He sneaks out of the house and goes to a bar , where he gets drunk and befriends a man named Paulie ( Michael McKean ) , and tries to hit on Dolores ( Fran Drescher ) , Louis 's mother .
However , he then gets into a fight with a bully ( Edward Lynch ) and both are arrested .
Dolores bails Jack out , leaving the other guy to suffer in jail .
Upon returning home , he locks himself in his room and does n't go out for weeks .
Karen speculates that perhaps he realized the fragility of his life and is now scared of facing the outside world again .
He also doubts the need to study as he realizes that he would n't have the time to use any of the knowledge .
Meanwhile , his friends continue coming to his house , hoping that he will come out and play , but he refuses .
Finally , Louis has an idea : he brings the entire class over as they take turns yelling " Can Jack come out and play ? " and participate in various games and fun activities right in front of the yard .
The next day he decides to go back to school .
Seven years later , an elderly - looking Jack and his four best friends are at their high school graduation .
He delivers the valedictory speech , in which he reminds his classmates that life is short , and urges them to " make your life spectacular , " as the five of them drive off into the future .
CAST
* Robin Williams as Jack Powell * Diane Lane as Karen Powell * Brian Kerwin as Brian Powell * Jennifer Lopez as Miss Marquez
* Bill Cosby as Lawrence Woodruff
* Fran Drescher as Dolores Durante * Adam Zolotin as Louie Durante * Todd Bosley as Eddie
* Seth Smith as John - John * Mario Yedidia as George * Michael McKean as Paulie *
Allan Rich as Dr. Benfante
* Keone Young as Dr. Lin
* Allison Whitbeck as Lucy
* Dwight Hicks as High School Principal * Mark Coppola as Radio Personality ( voice )
* Al Nalbandian as Principal McGee RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Jack debuted at # 1 and grossed roughly $ 58.6 million on a budget of $ 45 million .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Jack received negative reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 19 % of 31 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating is 4/10 .
Todd McCarthy of Variety called it a " tedious , uneventful fantasy " that wastes the talents of the filmmakers .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film theme is " Star " , performed by Canadian musician Bryan Adams .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS