MAJOR LEAGUE ( FILM )
Major League is a 1989 American sports comedy film produced by Chris Chesser and Irby Smith , written and directed by David S. Ward , that stars Tom Berenger , Charlie Sheen , Wesley Snipes , James Gammon , Bob Uecker , Rene Russo , and Corbin Bernsen .
Made for $ 11 million , Major League grossed nearly $ 50 million in domestic release .
Major League deals with the exploits of a fictionalized version of the Cleveland Indians baseball team , and spawned two sequels ( Major League II and ) , neither of which replicated the success of the original film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Former Las Vegas showgirl Rachel Phelps ( Margaret Whitton ) inherits the Cleveland Indians baseball team from her deceased husband .
Phelps hates Cleveland and wants to relocate the team to Miami .
The Indians ' contract with Cleveland contains an escape clause stipulating that the team may relocate if attendance falls below a certain level .
Determined to put together the worst Major League team in the country , Phelps hires Lou Brown , the manager for the Toledo Mud Hens , to manage the team and promotes former manager Charlie Donovan to general manager .
During spring training in Tucson , the team 's shortcomings become evident .
The team 's lone star , third baseman Roger Dorn , is an egotistical prima donna whose skills have faded .
Staff ace Eddie Harris has to rely on illegally doctoring the baseball due to his weakening arm .
Pedro Cerrano , a voodoo - practicing Cuban import with significant power , can not hit breaking balls and and clashes with the devoutly Christian Harris .
Veteran catcher Jake Taylor , a former star turned drunk who had spent the last few years playing in the Mexican League after his knees gave out , has lost so much strength on his throws that he can not reach second base .
The two players who draw the most attention are brash young outfielder Willie Mays Hayes , who simply showed up at spring training without an invite , and pitcher Rick Vaughn , a convicted felon on work release from a California prison .
Hayes is by far the fastest player on the team , but can only hit pop flies .
Vaughn can throw a fastball well above 90 miles an hour , but has no control over it , which earns him the nickname " Wild Thing " .
His attitude causes him to run afoul of Dorn , who can not stand him .
The team predictably starts the season on a losing streak .
Lou then discovers Vaughn 's control issues stem from an uncorrected visual impairment .
After being fitted with glasses , Vaughn 's performance improves and the team begins to win .
Meanwhile , Taylor tries to reunite with his ex - girlfriend Lynn despite her being engaged to another man .
Phelps , angered by the team 's improvement , tries to demoralize them by removing team amenities .
She replaces their chartered team jet , first with a rickety propeller plane and then an old bus .
She then refuses to fix their workout equipment , and even has the hot water to the locker room turned off .
Despite her efforts the team continues to win and brings themselves into contention for the division championship .
Eventually Charlie is able to reveal Phelps 's plan to Lou .
Lou then calls a team meeting and announces that all of the players on the current roster would be released at the end of the season no matter the outcome .
With nothing to lose , Taylor says they should just focus on winning the pennant .
The team succeeds in tying the division with the New York Yankees , leading to a one - game playoff to determine the champions .
However , Lou decides to start Harris in place of Vaughn due to his experience .
Vaughn later ends up in bed with a woman who he later finds out
is Suzanne Dorn , Roger 's wife ; she had slept with Vaughn to repay her husband for being unfaithful during a victory party .
In the playoff game in Cleveland , the Yankees take an early lead but Cerrano finally manages to hit a curveball and hits a home run to tie the game .
In the final inning , The Yankees bring out " The Duke " , their headhunting closer .
The Indians manage to catch the Yankees off guard with an unexpected bunt and win the game .
As the team celebrates , Dorn punches Vaughn in the face for what happened the night before but then quickly pulls him up so they can keep celebrating .
Taylor spots Lynn in the stands , no longer wearing her engagement ring .
The two rush to hug each other as the city celebrates the victory .
ALTERNATE ENDING
Section::::Alternate ending .
The theatrical release 's ending includes Rachel Phelps , apparently unable to move the team because of increased attendance , angry and disappointed about the team 's success .
An alternate ending on the " Wild Thing Edition " DVD shows a very different characterization of Phelps .
Lou confronts Phelps over her plan to sabotage the team and announces his resignation .
Phelps then reveals the threatened move to Miami was merely a ruse to motivate the team , as the Indians were on the verge of bankruptcy when she inherited them
and she could not afford to hire star players or maintain the expensive amenities .
She also Lou that she felt he was the right manager to bring the ragtag group together .
Lou does not resign , but Phelps reasserts her authority by saying that if he shares any part of their conversation with anyone , she will fire him .
This alternate ending was scrapped after test screening audiences responded negatively to the softer portrayal of Phelps .
The producers actually preferred the twist ending as a resolution to the plot .
CAST
* Tom Berenger as Jake Taylor * Charlie Sheen as Ricky " Wild Thing " Vaughn * Corbin Bernsen as Roger Dorn * Margaret Whitton
as Rachel Phelps * James Gammon as Lou Brown * Rene Russo as Lynn Weslin * Bob Uecker as Harry Doyle
* Wesley Snipes as Willie Mays Hayes * Charles Cyphers as Charlie Donovan * Chelcie Ross as Eddie Harris * Dennis Haysbert as Pedro Cerrano * Andy Romano as Pepper Leach * Kip Powers as Cooper Vaughn
* Steve Yeager as Duke Temple * Pete Vuckovich as Clu Haywood * Willie Mueller as The Duke * Stacy Carroll as Suzanne Dorn * W Goodall as Yankees 3rd Baseman
* Todd Johnson as Jeremy Keltner * Neil Flynn as an Indian fan
* Ed Grode , Jr. as an Indian fan * Marc Daniloff as Sports Reporter PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film 's opening montage is a series of somber blue - collar images of the Cleveland landscape synchronized to the score of Randy Newman 's " Burn On " : an ode to the infamous day in Cleveland when the heavily polluted Cuyahoga River caught fire .
Much of the film 's spring training scenes were shot at Hi Corbett Field in Tucson , Arizona , which was the spring training home for the Cleveland Indians from 1947 to 1992 .
The production used members of the University of Arizona Wildcats baseball team as extras .
Despite being set in Cleveland , the film was principally shot in Milwaukee because it was cheaper and the producers were unable to work around the schedules of the Cleveland Indians and Cleveland Browns .
Milwaukee County Stadium , then the home of the Brewers ( and three Green Bay Packers games per season ) , doubles as Cleveland Stadium for the film , although several exterior shots of Cleveland Stadium were used , including some aerial shots taken during an Indians game .
In fact , the sign for the TV station atop the scoreboard is for WTMJ , the NBC affiliate for Milwaukee .
One of the ending scenes of the movie is in West Milwaukee 's legendary restaurant , 4th Base which showcases their unique horseshoe bar that is shown in the celebration scenes .
Another restaurant scene , at the then Gritz Pazazz on Milwaukee 's north side , is no longer open for business .
Both facilities have since been demolished : the playing field of County Stadium is now a Little League baseball field known as Helfaer Field , while the rest of the former site is now a parking lot for the Brewers ' new home , Miller Park ; the new Cleveland Browns stadium ( now FirstEnergy Stadium ) , a football - only facility owned by the City of Cleveland and used by the Browns , sits on the site of its predecessor .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The film was notable for featuring several actors who would go on to stardom : Snipes and Russo were relative unknowns before the movie was released , while Haysbert remained best known as Pedro Cerrano until he portrayed US President David Palmer on the television series 24 .
The longshoreman who is occasionally seen commenting and is shown in the final celebration inside a bar is Neil Flynn , who later achieved fame playing the Janitor in Scrubs .
This is Flynn 's first credited movie role .
The film also featured former Major League players , including 1982 American League Cy Young Award winner Pete Vuckovich as Yankees first baseman Clu Haywood , former Milwaukee Brewers pitcher Willie Mueller as the Yankees pitcher Duke Simpson , known as " The Duke " , and former Los Angeles Dodgers catcher Steve Yeager as third - base coach Duke Temple .
Former catcher and longtime Brewers broadcaster Bob Uecker played the Indians ' broadcaster Harry Doyle .
The names of several crewmembers were also used for peripheral players .
Sheen himself was a pitcher on his high school 's baseball team .
At the time of filming Major League , his own fastball topped out at 85 miles per hour .
( In 2011 , Sheen said that he had used steroids for nearly two months to improve his athletic abilities in the film . )
RELEASE RECEPTION
Section::::Release .
Section::::Reception .
The film debuted at No . 1 at the box office and received generally positive reviews .
It has an 82 % " fresh " rating on review website Rotten Tomatoes based on 39 reviews , with an average rating of 6.5/10 .
The consensus states , " Major League may be predictable and formulaic , but buoyed by the script 's light , silly humor — not to mention the well - built sports action sequences and funny performances . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2008 :
AFI 's 10 Top 10 : * Nominated Sports Film IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In popular culture .
When he joined the Cubs in 1989 ( the same year the film was released ) , pitcher Mitch Williams ' extravagant wind - up and release , and his frequent wild pitches , earned him the nickname " Wild Thing . "
As with Rick Vaughn 's character , the Wrigley Field organist played " Wild Thing " as Williams came out of the bullpen .
A few years later , in 1993 with the Phillies , Williams started wearing the number 99 on his jersey , the same number that Vaughn wears in the film .
In the years since its release Major League has become a beloved film of many professional baseball players and announcers , and is often referenced during game broadcasts .
For example , in 2014 , for the film 's 25th anniversary , Major League catcher David Ross filmed a one - man tribute to the film , with Ross playing the part ( among others ) of Lou Brown , Pedro Cerrano , Willie Mays Hayes , Rick Vaughn , and Roger Dorn .
Additionally , as part of their 2014 " Archives " set , the trading card company Topps celebrated the film 's 25th anniversary by creating baseball cards ( using the same design as the company 's 1989 base set ) of Roger Dorn , Jake Taylor , Eddie Harris , Rachel Phelps , Rick Vaughn , and " Jobu . "
In 2017 , the University of Arizona men 's baseball team created a parody of Major League , which was filmed at UA 's current home field , Hi Corbett Field in Tucson , Arizona .
Hi Corbett was the spring training home for the Cleveland Indians from 1947 to 1992 .
The star of the short film is outfielder Matt " Mays " Frazier , who played the role of Snipes ' Willie Mays Hayes character from the original film .
Rick " Wild Thing " Vaughn and Roger Dorn are also parodied , and Arizona coach Jay Johnson plays the role of Indians coach Lou Brown .
Major League became an inspiration for the real Cleveland Indians and the city , given the previously long - standing Cleveland sports curse that had left Cleveland without any sporting championships in between 1964 and 2016 ( when the NBA 's Cleveland Cavaliers won their first title in their 46-year history ) .
The Indians reached the 2016 World Series , but lost in heartbreaking fashion to the similarly cursed Cubs .
Between 1995 and 2016 , the team went to the World Series three times , though losing each time .
GAME ADAPTATION Section::::Game adaptation .
Major League was made into and released as a sports video game , developed by Lenar and published by Irem , exclusively for the NES in Japan in 1989 .
JOBU Section::::Jobu .
Soon after the film 's 25th anniversary in 2015 , a company called " The Jobu Lifestyle " began producing figurines of Jobu ( Pedro Cerrano 's voodoo figure ) .
The packaging is a reference to Cerrano 's locker that made up Jobu 's shrine .
In news coverage of the 2017 World Baseball Classic , Team Israel 's outfielder Cody Decker made a comparison between Jobu and the team 's mascot , "
Mensch on a Bench " , a five - foot - tall stuffed toy that looks a bit like a rabbi or Hasidic Jew : " He 's a mascot , he 's a friend , he 's a teammate , he 's a borderline deity to our team ...
He brings a lot to the table ...
Every team needs their Jobu .
He was ours .
He had his own locker , and we even gave him offerings :
Manischewitz , gelt , and gefilte fish ...
He is everywhere and nowhere all at once .
His actual location is irrelevant because he exists in higher metaphysical planes .
But he 's always near . "
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
Due to the success of the film , two sequels have been produced neither of which achieved the original 's success .
Major League II returned most of the original stars , with the notable exception of Wesley Snipes , and focused on the following season and the players ' reaction to the previous season 's success .
again starred Corbin Bernsen , but this time , as the owner of the Minnesota Twins , attempting to turn around the Twins ' AAA team , the Buzz .
A possible third sequel , Major League 3 ( which was to ignore Back to the Minors ) , was reported in 2010 to be in development by original writer and producer David S. Ward .
Charlie Sheen , Tom Berenger , and Snipes would return , with the plot revolving around Ricky Vaughn coming out of retirement to work with a young player .
In 2015 , Morgan Creek Productions announced that the sequel was still in the works .
REBOOT Section::::Reboot .
In 2017 , Morgan Creek announced plans to reboot their classic films from the 1980s and 1990s as television series or movies , following the success of The Exorcist television series .
Several films in early stages of development include film series Young Guns , Major League , and Ace Ventura .
ROSTER
* 00 - Willie Mays Hayes , CF * 2 - Mitchell Friedman , C * 7 - Jake Taylor , C * 8 - Duke Temple , Coach * 10 - Eddie Harris , SP * 12 - Mario Crespi , 2B * 13 - Pedro Cerrano , RF
* 14 - Lee Van Dyke , LF * 15 - Toby Reyna , SS
* 16 - Pepper Leach , Coach * 20 - Donnie Larson , 2B * 21 - Matt Kuntz , 3B * 23 - Charles Graham , 1B * 24 - Roger Dorn , 3B * 26 - Seth Lindberg , RP * 27 - Brian Campi , CF
* 28 - Troy Pearson , RP
* 30 - A.J. Metcalf , 1B * 33 - Matthew Bushnell , SP * 34 - Lou Brown , Manager
* 37 - Blake Stocker , RP
* 38 - Dale Tomlinson , LF * 40 - Jeremy Keltner ,
SP
* 41 - Sammy Rhoads , CP
* 44 - Nathan Mosser , SP * 45 - Chris Schindler , RP
* 48 - Sammy Huffman SS * 99 - Ricky " Wild Thing " Vaughn , SP REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * DVDTalk.com Review of " Major League - Wild Thing Edition "