NINHYDRIN Ninhydrin ( 2,2-dihydroxyindane-1,3-dione ) is a chemical used to detect ammonia or primary and secondary amines .
When reacting with these free amines , a deep blue or purple color known as Ruhemann 's purple is produced .
Ninhydrin is most commonly used to detect fingerprints , as the terminal amines of lysine residues in peptides and proteins sloughed off in fingerprints react with ninhydrin .
It is a white solid which is soluble in ethanol and acetone at room temperature .
Ninhydrin can be considered as the hydrate of indane-1,2,3-trione .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Ninhydrin was discovered in 1910 by the German - English chemist Siegfried Ruhemann ( 1859–1943 ) .
In the same year , Ruhemann observed ninhydrin 's reaction with amino acids .
In 1954 , Swedish investigators Oden and von Hofsten proposed that ninhydrin could be used to develop latent fingerprints .
USES Section::::Uses .
Ninhydrin can also be used to monitor deprotection in solid phase peptide synthesis ( Kaiser Test ) .
The chain is linked via its C - terminus to the solid support , with the N - terminus extending off it .
When that nitrogen is deprotected , a ninhydrin test yields blue .
Amino - acid residues are attached with their N - terminus protected , so if the next residue has been successfully coupled onto the chain , the test gives a colorless or yellow result .
Ninhydrin is also used in amino acid analysis of proteins .
Most of the amino acids , except proline , are hydrolyzed and react with ninhydrin .
Also , certain amino acid chains are degraded .
Therefore , separate analysis is required for identifying such amino acids that either react differently or do not react at all with ninhydrin .
The rest of the amino acids are then quantified colorimetrically after separation by chromatography .
A solution suspected of containing the ammonium ion can be tested by ninhydrin by dotting it onto a solid support ( such as silica gel ) ; treatment with ninhydrin should result in a dramatic purple color if the solution contains this species .
In the analysis of a chemical reaction by thin layer chromatography ( TLC ) , the reagent can also be used ( usually 0.2 % solution in either n - butanol or in ethanol ) .
It will detect , on the TLC plate , virtually all amines , carbamates and also , after vigorous heating , amides .
When ninhydrin reacts with amino acids , the reaction also releases CO .
The carbon in this CO originates from the carboxyl carbon of the amino acid .
This reaction has been used to release the carboxyl carbons of bone collagen from ancient bones for stable isotope analysis in order to help reconstruct the palaeodiet of cave bears .
Release of the carboxyl carbon ( via ninhydrin ) from amino acids recovered from soil that has been treated with a labeled substrate demonstrates assimilation of that substrate into microbial protein .
This approach was successfully used to reveal that some ammonium oxidizing bacteria , also called nitrifying bacteria use urea as a carbon source in soil .
A ninhydrin solution is commonly used by forensic investigators in the analysis of latent fingerprints on porous surfaces such as paper .
Amino acid containing fingermarks , formed by minute sweat secretions which gather on the finger 's unique ridges , are treated with the ninhydrin solution which turns the amino acid finger ridge patterns purple and therefore visible .
REACTIVITY Section::::Reactivity .
The carbon atom of a carbonyl bears a partial positive charge enhanced by neighboring electron withdrawing groups like carbonyl itself .
So the central carbon of a 1,2,3-tricarbonyl compound is much more electrophilic than one in a simple ketone .
Thus indane-1,2,3-trione reacts readily with nucleophiles , including water .
Whereas for most carbonyl compounds , a carbonyl form is more stable than a product of water addition ( hydrate ) , ninhydrin forms a stable hydrate of the central carbon because of the destabilizing effect of the adjacent carbonyl groups .
Note that to generate the ninhydrin chromophore ( 2-(1,3-dioxoindan-2-yl)iminoindane-1,3-dione ) , the amine is condensed with a molecule of ninhydrin to give a Schiff base .
Thus only ammonia and primary amines can proceed past this step .
At this step , there must be an alpha hydrogen present to form the Schiff base .
Therefore , amines bound to tertiary carbons do not react further and thus are not detected .
The reaction of ninhydrin with secondary amines gives an iminium salt , which is also coloured , and this is generally yellow – orange in color .
SEE ALSO
* Paper chromatography REFERENCES