PETER OSTRUM
Peter Gardner Ostrum (; born November 1 , 1957 )
is an American veterinarian and former child actor whose only film role was as Charlie Bucket in the 1971 motion picture
Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory .
Ostrum was 12 years old when selected by talent agents for Willy Wonka .
Though he enjoyed the experience of shooting the film , he opted not to sign a three - film contract when it was over .
After eschewing a career in film and theatre , Ostrum became reluctant to speak about his one starring role .
In 1990 , he began an annual tradition of speaking to schoolchildren about the film , and he became a subject of interest again when the 2005 film Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was released to theaters .
Ostrum became interested in horses when he returned from shooting Willy Wonka , and was particularly influenced by the veterinarian that tended to them .
Receiving his Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine in 1984 , Ostrum practiced and lived in Lowville , New York with his wife Loretta ( ) , and two children : son , Leif , and daughter , Helenka .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Peter Gardner Ostrum was born in Dallas , Texas on November 1 , 1957 to Dean Gardner Ostrum ( 1922–2014 ) and Sarepta Mabel ( born 1922 ) .
He is the youngest of four children .
Ostrum was living in Cleveland , Ohio at age twelve , a city of which he was described as a native by MSNBC .
Ostrum married Loretta M. Lepkowski in .
The couple has two children , Helenka and Leif , with the latter following his father onto stage as the leading actor in several South Lewis Central School musicals .
The Ostrums lived in Lowville , New York as recently as 2005 .
ACTING CAREER
Section::::Acting career .
Ostrum was in the sixth grade and performing at the Cleveland Play House children 's theatre , when he was noticed by talent agents who were searching nationwide for the actor to portray Charlie Bucket in Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory .
The agents took Polaroid photos of Ostrum and recorded him reading from the original novel , then returned to New York .
Two months later Ostrum was called to New York for a screen test where he sang " My Country , ' Tis of Thee " , and a month after that he was contacted and given ten days to prepare to leave for filming .
Ostrum left for Munich on August 10 , 1970 .
In 2000 , Ostrum recalled that shooting Willy Wonka in Munich was " sort of like being an exchange student for five months " .
Fond memories of his five months in West Germany included watching the construction of Olympiapark , Munich , for the 1972 Summer Olympics , and working with Gene Wilder and Jack Albertson .
Ostrum was tutored on - set for three hours a day , though sometimes only for 30–60 minutes at a time .
Though in his audition he had been assured that his singing would probably be cut and dubbed , it was Ostrum 's own singing voice that made it to the screen — albeit significantly cut .
In a 2011 interview , Ostrum told the story of how director Mel Stuart gave him a clapperboard from the film , and later on asked him how he got it because he had forgotten that he had done so ; it is Ostrum 's only souvenir from the set .
After he finished shooting Willy Wonka , the then 13-year - old Ostrum declined David L. Wolper 's offer of a three - film contract .
The teenager confided in Frawley Becker , his Willy Wonka dialogue coach , that he turned down the contract to retain " the freedom to choose what he played , and in what picture . "
( Ostrum and Becker remained friends through at least 1996 . )
In January 2018 , Ostrum said he sometimes misses acting — though not its hurry - up - and - wait nature — but feels he dodged having to make the transition from child- to adult - actor .
, Ostrum still received in royalty payments about every three months .
LASTING EFFECT
Section::::Lasting effect .
In his senior year , Ostrum was involved in film class and , at the interest of one of his instructors , looked back into theatre and acting .
After auditioning for , but not landing , several roles ( including for Alan Strang in Equus on Broadway ) , Ostrum decided not to pursue it further .
After putting his short film career behind him , Ostrum declined reporters and interviews , preferring not to speak on the subject ; " I wanted people to judge me on who I was , not what I 'd done " .
For some time , Ostrum even lied and told people that his brother , and not he , had starred in the film .
It took Ostrum years after moving to Lowville before he told anybody there about his one - time stardom ; even his wife Loretta did not know about his role until he warned her about it just before she met his mother .
Since 1990 , Ostrum has since spoken to students at Lowville Academy once a year — on the last day of school , as a special treat — about his experience in Willy Wonka as well as his work in veterinary medicine .
The students chiefly ask about the film 's special effects , and Ostrum describes to them " what happened to Veruca , how did Violet blow up like a blueberry , how did Charlie fly with Grandpa Joe , all those types of questions . "
Ostrum also accepted an invitation to appear at the 2018 Snowtown Film Festival in Watertown , New York , answering audience questions after a screening of the film ; " it 's in my backyard — it 's become a popular event in January and I like to support local events .
"
Ostrum said of the 2018 event that he enjoyed re - watching the film , and that people ask him " great questions .
" Ostrum has been called " the most famous man in Lowville " , where the local video rental shop has twice worn out its VHS copy of Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory .
In the run - up to the release of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory in 2005 , Ostrum garnered a spate of attention that included seeing the film in New York City with NPR as well as being included in VH1 's list of " 100 Greatest Kid Stars " ( placing 78th ) .
On the new film , Ostrum quoted fellow Wonka actor Julie Dawn Cole , saying that " It 's sort of like going back to a house that you once lived in and it 's been redecorated . "
Ultimately , the media attention was so pervasive that Ostrum stopped answering his phone , and requested " please , no more interviews . "
In January 2009 , Ostrum teamed up with Dunkin ' Donuts to hand out free rides on the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority ( MBTA ) at South Station in Boston , Massachusetts ; Ostrum 's participation connected the MBTA 's CharlieCards
he was handing out with his portrayal of Charlie Bucket in Willy Wonka .
The promotion also gave out one " golden ticket " , worth unlimited rides on MBTA and unlimited Dunkin ' Donuts coffee for 2009 .
In October 2000 , Ostrum and some of his co - stars from the film were scheduled to record an audio commentary for a special edition DVD .
In a 2010 interview , Wonka co - star Denise Nickerson ( Violet Beauregarde ) revealed that Ostrum had agreed to join her and Paris Themmen ( Wonkas Mike Teevee ) for a reunion commemorating the 40th anniversary of the film 's release in 2011 .
VETERINARY CAREER
Section::::Veterinary career .
Soon after Ostrum returned home from filming Willy Wonka , his family acquired a horse ; while the teenaged Ostrum was interested in the horse , it was the animal 's veterinarian that left a lasting impression on him .
Taking a hiatus from school between high school and college , Ostrum groomed horses and worked at the Delaware Equine Center in Pennsylvania .
Ostrum contemplated a return to Hollywood , and even visited California for a week to " test the waters " there .
He ultimately decided to pursue a degree in veterinary medicine instead , feeling that he would forever berate himself if he did n't .
In 1984 , Peter Ostrum received his Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine . , Ostrum worked out of the Countryside Veterinary Clinic in Lowville , New York , where he works mainly with horses and cows .
He has taken part in the video series Veterinarians on Call , funded by Pfizer , highlighting the work of large animal veterinarians .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Countryside Veterinary Clinic , LLP