ALKALINE BATTERY Alkaline batteries ( IEC code : L ) are a type of primary battery dependent upon the reaction between zinc metal and manganese dioxide .
Another type of alkaline batteries are secondary rechargeable alkaline battery , which allows reuse of specially designed cells .
Compared with zinc - carbon batteries of the Leclanché cell or zinc chloride types , alkaline batteries have a higher energy density and longer shelf - life , with the same voltage .
The alkaline battery gets its name because it has an alkaline electrolyte of potassium hydroxide , instead of the acidic ammonium chloride or zinc chloride electrolyte of the zinc - carbon batteries .
Other battery systems also use alkaline electrolytes , but they use different active materials for the electrodes .
Alkaline batteries account for 80 % of manufactured batteries in the US and over 10 billion individual units produced worldwide .
In Japan alkaline batteries account for 46 % of all primary battery sales .
In Switzerland alkaline batteries account for 68 % , in the UK 60 % and in the EU 47 % of all battery sales including secondary types .
Alkaline batteries are used in many household items such as MP3 players , CD players , digital cameras , pagers , toys , lights , and radios .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Batteries with alkaline ( rather than acid )
electrolyte were first developed by Waldemar Jungner in 1899 , and , working independently , Thomas Edison in 1901 .
The modern alkaline dry battery using the zinc / manganese dioxide chemistry was invented by Canadian engineer Lewis Urry in the 1950s while working for Union Carbide 's Eveready Battery division in Cleveland , OH , building on earlier work by Edison .
On October 9 , 1957 , Urry , Karl Kordesch , and P.A. Marsal filed US patent ( 2,960,558 ) for the alkaline battery .
It was granted in 1960 and was assigned to the Union Carbide Corporation .
When introduced in the late 1960s , alkaline batteries contained a small amount of toxic mercury amalgam to control side reactions at the zinc anode .
With mercury content reduced by law and improvements in the purity and consistency of materials , manufacturers have reduced the mercury content in modern cells .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
In an alkaline battery , the negative electrode is zinc and the positive electrode is manganese dioxide ( MnO ) .
The alkaline electrolyte of potassium hydroxide is not part of the reaction , only the zinc and MnO are consumed during discharge .
The alkaline electrolyte of potassium hydroxide remains , as there are equal amounts of OH consumed and produced .
The half - reactions are :
Overall reaction :
The chemical energy is stored mostly in the zinc metal , whose cohesive free energy per atom is at least 225 kJ / mol higher ( less stable ) than that of the three oxides .
CAPACITY Section::::Capacity .
Capacity of an alkaline battery is greater than an equal size Leclanché cell or zinc - chloride cell because the manganese dioxide is purer and denser , and space taken up by internal components such as electrodes is less .
An alkaline cell can provide between three and five times capacity .
The capacity of an alkaline battery is strongly dependent on the load .
An AA - sized alkaline battery might have an effective capacity of 3000 mAh at low drain , but at a load of 1 ampere , which is common for digital cameras , the capacity could be as little as 700 mAh .
The voltage of the battery declines steadily during use , so the total usable capacity depends on the cut - off voltage of the application .
Unlike Leclanché cells , the alkaline cell delivers about as much capacity on intermittent or continuous light loads .
On a heavy load , capacity is reduced on continuous discharge compared with intermittent discharge , but the reduction is less than for Leclanche cells .
VOLTAGE Section::::Voltage .
The nominal voltage of a fresh alkaline cell as established by manufacturer standards is 1.5
V. The effective zero - load voltage of a non discharged alkaline battery , however , varies from 1.50 to 1.65 V , depending on the purity of the manganese dioxide used and the contents of zinc oxide in the electrolyte .
The average voltage under load depends on level of discharge and the amount of current being drawn , varying from 1.1 to 1.3 V. The fully discharged cell will still have a remaining voltage in the range of 0.8 to 1.0 V. Multiple voltages may be achieved with series of cells ( three new alkaline batteries in series will be able to generate between 4.5 and 5.0 V ) .
+ Open circuit , zero - load voltage and voltage for a 330 mW load vs capacity !
Capacity !
Zero - load !
33 Ω CURRENT Section::::Current .
The amount of current an alkaline battery can deliver is roughly proportional to its physical size .
This is a result of decreasing internal resistance as the internal surface area of the cell increases .
A rule of thumb is that an AA alkaline battery can deliver 700 mA without any significant heating .
Larger cells , such as C and D cells , can deliver more current .
Applications requiring currents of several amperes , such as powerful flashlights and portable stereos , will require D - sized cells to handle the increased load .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Alkaline batteries are manufactured in standardized cylindrical forms interchangeable with zinc - carbon batteries , and in button forms .
Several individual cells may be interconnected to form a true " battery " , such as those sold for use with flashlights and the 9 volt transistor - radio battery .
A cylindrical cell is contained in a drawn stainless steel can , which is the cathode connection .
The positive electrode mixture is a compressed paste of manganese dioxide with carbon powder added for increased conductivity .
The paste may be pressed into the can or deposited as pre - molded rings .
The hollow center of the cathode is lined with a separator , which prevents contact of the electrode materials and short - circuiting of the cell .
The separator is made of a non - woven layer of cellulose or a synthetic polymer .
The separator must conduct ions and remain stable in the highly alkaline electrolyte solution .
The negative electrode is composed of a dispersion of zinc powder in a gel containing the potassium hydroxide electrolyte .
The zinc powder provides more surface area for chemical reactions to take place , compared to a metal can .
This lowers the internal resistance of the cell .
To prevent gassing of the cell at the end of its life , more manganese dioxide is used than required to react with all the zinc .
Also , plastic - made gasket is usually added to increase leakage resistance .
The cell is then wrapped in aluminium foil , a plastic film , or rarely , cardboard , which acts as a final layer of leak protection as well as providing a surface on which logos and labels can be printed .
When describing AAA , AA , C , sub - C and D size cells , the negative electrode is connected to the flat end , and the positive terminal is the end with the raised button .
This is usually reversed in button cells , with the flat ended cylindrical can being the positive terminal .
RECHARGING OF ALKALINE BATTERIES Section::::Recharging of alkaline batteries .
Some alkaline batteries are designed to be recharged ( see rechargeable alkaline battery ) , but most are not .
Attempts to recharge may cause rupture , or the leaking of hazardous liquids which will corrode the equipment .
However , attempts at recharging alkaline cells a highly limited number of times ( 10 or fewer times with reduced capacity after each charge ) are reported and chargers are available commercially .
In 2017 , Gautam G. Yadav discovered that alkaline batteries can be recharged for over 6000 cycles by intercalating the interlayers with copper ions , due to the theoretical second electron capacity of manganese dioxide .
The energy density ( > 160Wh / L ) of these rechargeable batteries with copper intercalated manganese dioxide is reported to be the best among the aqueous - based chemistries .
It is also capable of energy densities ( > 250Wh / L ) comparable to lithium - ion if zinc utilization in the batteries is improved .
LEAKS
Section::::Leaks .
Alkaline batteries are prone to leaking potassium hydroxide , a caustic agent that can cause respiratory , eye and skin irritation .
Risk of this can be reduced by not attempting to recharge disposable alkaline cells , not mixing different battery types in the same device , replacing all of the batteries at the same time , storing in a dry place and at room temperature , and removing batteries for storage of devices .
All batteries gradually self - discharge ( whether installed in a device or not ) and dead batteries will eventually leak .
Extremely high temperatures can also cause batteries to rupture and leak ( such as in a car during summer ) as well as decrease the shelf life of the battery .
The reason for leaks is that as batteries discharge — either through usage or gradual self - discharge — the chemistry of the cells changes and some hydrogen gas is generated .
This out - gassing increases pressure in the battery .
Eventually , the excess pressure either ruptures the insulating seals at the end of the battery , or the outer metal canister , or both .
In addition , as the battery ages , its steel outer canister may gradually corrode or rust , which can further contribute to containment failure .
Once a leak has formed due to corrosion of the outer steel shell , potassium hydroxide absorbs carbon dioxide from the air to form a feathery crystalline structure of potassium carbonate that grows and spreads out from the battery over time , following along metal electrodes to circuit boards where it commences oxidation of copper tracks and other components , leading to permanent circuitry damage .
The leaking crystalline growths can also emerge from seams around battery covers to form a furry coating outside the device , that corrodes any objects in contact with the leaking device .
DISPOSAL Section::::Disposal .
With the reduction in mercury in 1996 , alkaline batteries are allowed to be disposed of as regular domestic waste in some locations .
However , older alkaline batteries with mercury , and the remaining other heavy metals and corrosive chemicals in all batteries ( new and old ) , still present problems for disposal — especially in landfills .
There is also the issue of simplifying the disposal of batteries to exclude them all so that the most toxic will be diverted from general waste streams .
Disposal varies by jurisdiction .
For example , the state of California considers all batteries as hazardous waste when discarded , and has banned the disposal of batteries with other domestic waste .
In Europe , battery disposal is controlled by the WEEE Directive and Battery Directive regulations , and as such alkaline batteries must not be thrown in with domestic waste .
In the EU , most stores that sell batteries are required by law to accept old batteries for recycling .
RECYCLING
Section::::Recycling .
The use of disposable batteries increases by 5–6 % every year .
In the past , used batteries ended up at landfill sites , but in 2004 , disposal of alkaline batteries at landfill sites was forbidden by an EU regulation .
EU member countries are committed to recycling 50 % of alkaline batteries by 2016 .
The need for recycling thus equals to 125,000 tons per year .
The share of alkaline batteries is approximately 80 % of the whole .
In the US , only one state , California , requires all alkaline batteries to be recycled .
Vermont also has a statewide alkaline battery collection program .
It 's much more difficult to recycle them in other states resulting in many being thrown away which has caused a harmful cycle in which more materials are mined causing a negative impact on the environment .
People in other US states can purchase battery recycling kits used to ship batteries to recyclers such as Retriev Technologies ' The Big Green Box , Battery Solutions ' iRecycleKits , and Call2Recycle 's battery recycling boxes .
Some stores such as IKEA also collect alkaline batteries for recycling .
However , some chain stores which advertise battery recycling like Best Buy however only accept rechargeable batteries and will generally not accept alkaline batteries .
Both Call2Recycle and Earth911 offer locators for drop - off locations that accept alkaline batteries for recycling respectively at https://www.call2recycle.org/locator/ and https://earth911.com / recycling - guide / how - to - recycle - single - use - batteries/. For recycling , the metals from crushed alkaline batteries are mechanically separated , and the waste black mass is treated chemically to separate zinc , manganese and potassium .
In the US , one company called Retriev Technologies , Inc. shreds and separates the battery case metals , manganese and zinc .
SEE ALSO * History of the battery * Battery nomenclature * Lewis Urry
* Oxyride battery
* Rechargeable battery * Rechargeable alkaline battery
* Recharging alkaline batteries
* List of battery sizes * List of battery types
* Battery recycling
* Battery holder * Battery types * Edison - Lalande cell ( an early alkaline primary battery ) * Comparison of battery types NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Alkaline Material Safety Data for Duracell Alkaline Batteries
* Alkaline batteries * Brand Neutral Alkaline Battery Specifications
Based On ANSI Standards
* Overview Of Battery Standards and Testing