ZEBROID
A zebroid is the offspring of any cross between a zebra and any other equine : essentially , a zebra hybrid .
In most cases , the sire is a zebra stallion .
Offspring of a donkey sire and zebra dam , called a zebra hinny , or donkra , and offspring of a male horse and a female zebra called a hebra do exist , but are rare and are usually sterile and infertile .
Zebroids have been bred since the 19th century .
Charles Darwin noted several zebra hybrids in his works .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Zebroid is the term generally used for all zebra hybrids .
The different hybrids are generally named using a portmanteau of the sire 's name and the dam 's name .
Generally , no distinction is made as to which zebra species is used .
Many times , when zebras are crossbred , they develop some form of dwarfism .
Breeding of different branches of the equine family , which does not occur in the wild , generally results in infertile offspring .
The combination of sire and dam also affects the offspring phenotype .
A zorse is the offspring of a zebra stallion and a horse mare .
This cross is also called a zebrula , zebrule , or zebra mule .
The rarer reverse pairing is sometimes called a horbra , hebra , zebrinny , or zebret .
Like most other animal hybrids , the zorse is sterile .
A zony is the offspring of a zebra stallion and a pony mare .
Medium - sized pony mares are preferred to produce riding zonies , but zebras have been crossed with smaller pony breeds such as the Shetland , resulting in so - called " Zetlands " .
A cross between a zebra and a donkey is known by many terms , including : zonkey , zebonkey , zebronkey , zebrinny , zebrula , zebrass , zedonk , and zebadonk .
Donkeys are closely related to zebras and both animals belong to the horse family .
These zebra donkey hybrids are very rare .
In South Africa , they occur where zebras and donkeys are found in proximity to each other .
Like mules and hinnys , however , they are generally genetically unable to breed , due to an odd number of chromosomes disrupting meiosis .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
Donkeys and wild equids have different numbers of chromosomes .
A donkey has 62 chromosomes ; the zebra has between 32 and 46 ( depending on species ) .
In spite of this difference , viable hybrids are possible , provided the gene combination in the hybrid allows for embryonic development to birth .
A hybrid has a number of chromosomes somewhere in between .
The chromosome difference makes female hybrids poorly fertile and male hybrids generally sterile due to a phenomenon called Haldane 's rule .
The difference in chromosome number is most likely due to horses having two longer chromosomes that contain similar gene content to four zebra chromosomes .
Horses have 64 chromosomes , while most zebroids end up with 54 chromosomes .
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Physical characteristics .
Zebroids physically resemble their nonzebra parent , but are striped like a zebra .
The stripes generally do not cover the whole body , and might be confined to the legs or spread onto parts of the body or neck .
If the nonzebra parent was patterned ( such as a roan , Appaloosa , pinto horse / paint , piebald , or skewbald ) , this pattern might be passed down to the zebroid , in which case the stripes are usually confined to nonwhite areas .
The alternative name " golden zebra " relates to the interaction of zebra striping and a horse 's bay or chestnut colour to give a zebra - like black - on - bay or black - on - chestnut pattern that superficially resembles the extinct quagga .
Zebra - donkey hybrids usually have a dorsal ( back ) stripe and a ventral ( belly ) stripe .
Zorses combine the zebra striping overlaid on colored areas of the hybrid 's coat .
Zorses are most often bred using solid - color horses .
If the horse parent is piebald ( black and white ) or skewbald ( other color and white ) , the zorse may inherit the dominant depigmentation genes for white patches .
The tobiano ( the most common white modifier found in the horse ) directly interacts with the zorse coat to give the white markings .
Only the nondepigmented areas will have zebra striping , resulting in a zorse with white patches and striped patches .
This effect is seen in the zebroid named Eclyse ( a hebra rather than a zorse ) born in Stukenbrock , Germany , in 2007 to a zebra mare called Eclipse and a stallion called Ulysses .
Zebroids are preferred over zebra for practical uses , such as riding , because the zebra has a different body shape from a horse or donkey , and consequently it is difficult to find tack to fit a zebra .
However , a zebroid is usually more inclined to be temperamental than a purebred horse and can be difficult to handle .
Zebras , being wild animals , and not domesticated like horses and donkeys , pass on their wild animal traits to their offspring .
Zebras , while not usually very large , are extremely strong and aggressive .
Similarly , zorses have a strong temperament and can be aggressive .
HISTORICAL AND NOTABLE ZEBROIDS Section::::Historical and notable zebroids .
In 1815 , Lord Morton mated a quagga stallion to a chestnut Arabian mare .
The result was a female hybrid which resembled both parents .
This provoked the interest of Cossar Ewart , Professor of Natural History at Edinburgh ( 1882–1927 ) and a keen geneticist .
Ewart crossed a zebra stallion with pony mares to investigate the theory of telegony , or paternal impression .
In Origin of Species ( 1859 ) , Charles Darwin mentioned four coloured drawings of hybrids between the ass and zebra .
He also wrote " In Lord Morton 's famous hybrid from a chestnut mare and male quagga , the hybrid , and even the pure offspring subsequently produced from the mare by a black Arabian sire , were much more plainly barred across the legs than is even the pure quagga . "
In his book The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication , Darwin described a hybrid ass - zebra specimen in the British Museum as being dappled on its flanks .
He also mentioned a " triple hybrid , from a bay mare , by a hybrid from a male ass and female zebra " displayed at London Zoo .
This would have required the zebroid sire to be fertile .
During the South African War , the Boers crossed Chapman 's zebras with a ponies , to produce animals for transport work , chiefly for hauling guns .
A specimen was captured by British forces and presented to King Edward VII by Lord Kitchener , and was photographed by W S Berridge .
Zebras are resistant to sleeping sickness , whereas purebred horses and ponies are not , and zebra mules hopefully would inherit this resistance .
Grevy 's zebra has been crossed with the Somali wild ass in the early 20th century .
Zorses were bred by the US government and reported in Genetics in Relation to Agriculture by E. B. Babcock and R. E. Clausen ( early 20th century ) , in an attempt to investigate inheritance and telegony .
The experiments were also reported in The Science of Life by H G Wells , J Huxley , and G P Wells ( around 1929 ) .
Interest in zebra crosses continued in the 1970s .
In 1973 , a cross between a zebra and a donkey was foaled at the Jerusalem Zoo .
They called it a " hamzab " .
In the 1970s , the Colchester Zoo in England bred zedonks , at first by accident and later to create a disease - resistant riding and draft animal .
The experiment was discontinued when zoos became more conservation - minded .
A number of hybrids were kept at the zoo after this ; the last died in 2009 .
One adult still remains at the tourist attraction of Groombridge Place near Tunbridge Wells in Kent .
21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
Today , various zebroids are bred as riding and draft animals , and as curiosities in circuses and smaller zoos .
Zorses are bred in Africa and used for trekking on Mount Kenya ; the zebra parent gives resistance to the nagana pest disease .
A zorse ( more accurately a zony ) was born at Eden Ostrich World , Cumbria , England , in 2001 , after a zebra was left in a field with a Shetland pony .
It was referred to as a Zetland .
Usually , a zebra stallion is paired with a horse mare or donkey mare , but in 2005 , a Burchell 's zebra named Allison produced a zonkey called Alex sired by a donkey at Highland Plantation in the parish of Saint Thomas , Barbados .
Alex , born 21 April 2005 , is apparently the first zonkey in Barbados .
In 2007 , a stallion , Ulysses , and a zebra mare , Eclipse , produced a zebroid named Eclyse , displaying an unusually patchy color coating .
The Wild Animal Safari in Springfield , Missouri , and its sister location in Pine Mountain , Georgia , have several zedonks as of 31 March 2010 .
In July 2010 , a zedonk was born at the Chestatee Wildlife Preserve in Dahlonega , Georgia .
Another zebra – donkey hybrid , like the Barbados zonkey sired by a donkey , was born 3 July 2011 in Haicang Safari Park , Haicang , Xiamen , China .
A zonkey , Ippo , was born 21 July 2013 in an animal reserve , in Florence , Italy .
Khumba , the offspring of a zebra dam and a dwarf albino donkey sire , was born on 21 April 2014 in the zoo of Reynosa in the state of Tamaulipas , Mexico .
More recently , in November 2018 at a farm in Somerset , a cross between a donkey stallion and a zebra mare was born .
The male foal was described as a zonkey by its owner and has been named Zippy .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
Zorses have appeared in several TV shows and movies .
In the Viva La Bam episode " Groundhog Day " .
in the final race , Brandon Dicamillo 's sled is a zorse .
It was colored pink , blue , purple .
and red .
On the ' uncommentary ' on the DVD seasons of Viva La Bam , Tim Glomb says , " If you send me a list of all the episodes where the zorse is , I 'll give you a dollar " .
The 2007 movie I 'm Reed Fish features a zorse named Zabrina .
In the movie Racing Stripes , an animated zorse appears in the alternate ending .
He is the son of Stripes , a zebra stallion and Sandy , a grey Arabian mare .
Zorses have also appeared in books .
They are briefly mentioned several times in George R.R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series of fantasy novels .
Sutton Coleman wrote a sonnet about zorses and published it in his 2007 book , Ligers , Tigons , and Zorses ,
Oh My !
In Roald Dahl 's book Going Solo , several other characters
and he speculate on how nice it would be to own a zorse , although they admit it would be difficult to train .
The video game Red Dead Redemption has the " Zebra Donkey " available as a multiplayer mount .
In , the characters ' school 's mascot is the famed Zebra Donkey .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Hybrid Equines Information and images of different zebroids * Eclyse - Photo of a zebroid named Eclyse * BBC News ( 26 June 2001 ) : " Zebra Hybrid is Cute Surprise " * Metro ( 28 June 2007 ) : " A single - zorsed story " * Dorsett , Katherine . " What the heck is a zedonk ?
" CNN .
23 September 2010 .
* The International Zebra Zorse Zonkey Association * Video of a Zorse * Rare zebra - donkey mix born in Florence animal reserve :
The zonkey named Ippo only one in Italy