BLUE ÖYSTER CULT ( ALBUM )
Blue Öyster Cult is the eponymous debut studio album by the American hard rock band Blue Öyster Cult , released on January 16 , 1972 by Columbia Records .
The album featured songs such as " Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll " , " Stairway to the Stars " , and " Then Came the Last Days of May " , all of which the band still plays regularly during its concerts .
Despite positive reviews , the album failed to chart for some time before finally cracking the Billboard 200 chart on May 20 , 1972 , peaking at No . 172 .
Blue Öyster Cult toured with artists such as The Byrds , Alice Cooper and the Mahavishnu Orchestra to support the album .
TRACK INFORMATION
TRANSMANIACON MC Section::::Track information .
Section::::Transmaniacon MC .
" Transmaniacon MC " is about the Altamont Free Concert .
The " MC " in the title stands for " motorcycle club " .
I'M
ON THE LAMB
BUT I AIN'T NO SHEEP Section::::I'm on the Lamb
but I Ai n't No Sheep .
" I 'm on the Lamb
but I Ai n't No Sheep " is about a fugitive pursued by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and was originally recorded in 1970 ( when the band was known as Oaxaca ) .
Another version from 1970 was intended to be included on the band 's unreleased first album for Elektra Records ( when the band was known as " Stalk - Forrest Group " ) .
Both of these 1970 versions were eventually included on .
In 1971 , the song was recorded again and finally released on the first Columbia album , and then recorded again at a much faster tempo and with much heavier guitars as " The Red and the Black " and included on the band 's second Columbia album , Tyranny and Mutation .
The main riff in this song was heavily inspired by " Frying Pan " , a Captain Beefheart b - side from 1966 .
Some versions of the song make this influence more apparent than others .
THEN CAME
THE LAST DAYS OF MAY Section::::Then Came the last Days of May.
" Then Came the Last Days of May " is based on a reportedly true story , when two friends were killed in a drug deal gone bad in the West .
This song is frequently played live as a showcase for Buck Dharma 's guitar soloing skills .
BEFORE THE KISS , A REDCAP Section::::Before the Kiss , a Redcap .
Originally titled " Conry 's Bar , " " Before the Kiss , a Redcap " describes scenes from that real location .
Guitarist Buck Dharma explains the title as originating in an event witnessed by lyricist / manager Sandy Pearlman in which the titular drug was passed between partners during a kiss .
The term " redcap " was supposedly slang for a type of barbiturate ; however , " redcap " usually referred to the drug Dalmane .
CITIES ON FLAME WITH ROCK AND ROLL Section::::Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll .
" Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll " was written by Sandy Pearlman , Donald Roeser and Albert Bouchard , and released as a single .
Bouchard performed lead vocals , also singing from his drum kit in concerts .
The riff was inspired by Black Sabbath 's song " The Wizard , " featured on their own self - titled debut album .
It remains a staple of Blue Öyster Cult 's live shows .
On live albums , the name of the song is shortened to " Cities on Flame . "
REDEEMED Section::::Redeemed .
" Redeemed " was written by singer - songwriter Harry Farcas , and sold to the band .
Other band members are listed as authors , due to their input in the arrangement . "
Sir Rastus Bear " was Farcas ' pet Saint Bernard .
Farcas is now an iridologist in Southern California .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The album received a positive reaction from critics .
Lester Bangs gave the album a generally positive review in Rolling Stone stating , " with the Blue Öyster Cult , New York has produced its first authentic boogie beast , and with any luck this one should be around for awhile " telling readers that " I do n't think you should miss this album . "
Circus wrote that " it could well be the album of the Seventies " , while Robert Christgau in The Village Voice called it " the tightest and most musical hard rock record since – dare I say it –
Who 's Next " .
The record was named an honorable mention on IGN 's list of " Top 25 Metal Albums " and has been called " heavy metal for people who hate heavy metal . "
Canadian critic Martin Popoff criticized the " limp and lifeless " guitar sound and the unimpressive percussive display , which did not make a good service to the " tragic and beautiful BÖC compositions " on the album , leaving the listener " in muted bewilderment " .
COVERS AND APPEARANCES Section::::Covers and appearances .
" Transmaniacon MC " is featured in the video game Rock Band as downloadable content that may be purchased off of the system or downloaded from the Rock Band Metal Track Pack using a one - time use code .
A cover version of " Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll " was featured as a track in the music video game .
Additionally , the song has been covered by Church of Misery ( on Master of Brutality ) , Iced Earth ( on Tribute to the Gods ) and 3 Inches of Blood ( as a bonus track on Here Waits Thy Doom )
Additionally , the song appears in the American television period sitcom
That ' 70s Show , as well as its soundtrack .
Guitarist William Tyler performs a 2015 solo acoustic instrumental version of " She 's as Beautiful as a Foot " on Aquarium Drunkard 's " Lagniappe Sessions " page .
TRACK LISTING
PERSONNEL Band members
* Eric Bloom – vocals , stun guitar , keyboards * Albert Bouchard – drums , vocals * Joe Bouchard – bass , vocals
* Allen Lanier – rhythm guitar , keyboards * Donald " Buck Dharma " Roeser – lead guitar , vocals 2001 bonus tracks as ' Soft White Underbelly ' * Eric Bloom - vocals , rhythm guitar * Albert Bouchard - drums , vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards , rhythm guitar * Donald Roeser - lead guitar , vocals
* Andy Winters - bass
Production * David Lucas – producer , engineer * Murray Krugman , Sandy Pearlman –
associate producers
* Bill Robertson - engineer * Bruce Dickinson – reissue compilation * Vic Anesini – reissue mastering CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
align="center"Year !
align="center"Chart !
align="center"Position
align="center"1972 align="center"Billboard 200 ( United States ) align="center"172 REFERENCES