CHRIS MCCANDLESS
Christopher Johnson McCandless (; February 12 , 1968 – c. August 1992 ) was an American hiker and itinerant traveler , who also went by the name " Alexander Supertramp " .
After graduating from college in 1990 , McCandless traveled across the North American continent and eventually hitchhiked to Alaska in April 1992 .
There , he set out along an old mining road known as the Stampede Trail , with minimal supplies , hoping to live simply off the land .
In September , McCandless ' decomposing body , weighing only 30 kilograms ( 66 lb ) , was found by a hunter in a converted bus , Fairbanks Bus 142 , used as a backcountry shelter along the Stampede Trail , on the eastern bank of the Sushana River .
His cause of death was officially ruled to be starvation , although the exact cause remains the subject of some debate .
In January 1993 , Jon Krakauer published McCandless ' story in that month 's issue of Outside magazine .
He had been assigned the story and had written it under a tight deadline .
Inspired by the details of McCandless ' story , Krakauer wrote and published the more extensive biographical book Into the Wild ( 1996 ) , about McCandless ' travels .
The book was subsequently adapted into a 2007 film directed by Sean Penn , with Emile Hirsch portraying McCandless .
That same year , McCandless ' story also became the subject of Ron Lamothe 's documentary The Call of the Wild ( 2007 ) .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Christopher Johnson McCandless was born in El Segundo , California .
He was the first child of Wilhelmina " Billie " McCandless ( née Johnson ) and Walter " Walt " McCandless .
The couple subsequently had one more child , a daughter named Carine .
McCandless also had six half - siblings from Walt McCandless ' first marriage , who lived with their mother in California .
Author Jon Krakauer later speculated that Walt 's transition between these two marriages may have deeply affected and profoundly shaped McCandless ' world - view .
In 1976 , the family relocated to Washington , D.C. , and settled in suburban Annandale , Virginia , when McCandless ' father was hired as an antenna specialist for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) ; McCandless ' mother worked as a secretary at Hughes Aircraft .
The couple went on to establish a successful consultancy business out of their home , specializing in Walt 's area of expertise .
McCandless graduated from W.T. Woodson High School in Fairfax , Virginia , in 1986 .
He excelled academically , although a number of teachers and fellow students observed that he " marched to the beat of a different drummer . "
McCandless also served as captain of the cross - country team , where he would urge teammates to treat running as a spiritual exercise in which they were " running against the forces of darkness ... all the evil in the world , all the hatred . "
In the summer of 1986 , McCandless traveled to Southern California and reconnected with distant relatives and friends .
It was during this journey he learned that his father had not yet divorced his first wife when McCandless and his sister Carine were born , and had apparently maintained somewhat of a double life before the move to Virginia .
It is speculated that this discovery had a profound impact on the younger McCandless .
McCandless graduated from Emory University in May 1990 , with a bachelor 's degree in the double majors of history and anthropology .
After graduating , McCandless donated most of his savings to charity and adopted a vagabond lifestyle , working when necessary as a restaurant food preparer and farm hand .
An avid outdoorsman , McCandless completed several lengthy wilderness hiking trips and paddled a canoe down a portion of the Colorado River before hitchhiking to Alaska , in April 1992 .
TRAVELS Section::::Travels .
By the end of summer in 1990 , McCandless had driven his Datsun through Arizona , California , and South Dakota , where he worked at a grain elevator in Carthage .
A flash flood disabled his car , at which point he removed its license plates , took what he could carry , and kept moving on foot .
His car was later found , repaired , and put into service as an undercover vehicle for the local police department .
ALASKA Section::::Alaska .
In April 1992 , McCandless hitchhiked from Carthage , South Dakota , to Fairbanks , Alaska .
As noted by Krakauer , McCandless was last seen alive at the head of the Stampede Trail on April 28 , 1992 , by a local electrician named Jim Gallien .
Gallien had given McCandless a ride from Fairbanks to the start of the rugged track just outside the small town of Healy .
Gallien later said he had been seriously concerned about the safety of McCandless ( who introduced himself as " Alex " ) , after noticing McCandless ' light pack , minimal equipment , meager rations , and obvious lack of experience .
Gallien said he had deep doubts about " Alex 's " ability to survive the harsh and unforgiving Alaskan bush .
Gallien repeatedly tried to persuade McCandless to defer the trip , at one point offering to detour to Anchorage , and buy him suitable equipment and supplies .
However , McCandless ignored Gallien 's persistent warnings and refused his offers of assistance ( though McCandless did accept a pair of Xtratufs , two sandwiches , and a packet of corn chips from Gallien ) .
Gallien dropped McCandless off believing McCandless would head back towards the highway within a few days as hunger set in .
After hiking along the snow - covered Stampede Trail , McCandless came upon an abandoned bus ( about west of Healy at ) alongside an overgrown section of the trail near Denali National Park .
McCandless , according to Into the Wild , attempted to continue " heading west until I hit the Bering Sea . "
However , he was deterred by the thick Alaskan bush and returned to the bus , where he set up camp and attempted to live off the land .
He had of rice , a Remington semi - automatic rifle with 400 rounds of .22LR hollowpoint ammunition , a number of books , including one on local plant life , some personal effects , and a few items of camping equipment .
Self - portrait photographs and journal entries indicate he foraged for edible plants and hunted game .
McCandless hunted porcupines , squirrels , and birds , such as ptarmigans and Canada geese .
On June 9 , 1992 , he stalked and shot a moose .
However , the meat spoiled within days after McCandless failed to properly preserve it .
It has been speculated that McCandless may have been responsible for vandalizing several cabins in the area that were stocked with food , survival equipment , and emergency supplies .
In response , Denali National Park Chief Ranger Ken Kehrer has categorically stated that McCandless was not considered a viable suspect by the National Park Service .
McCandless ' journal documents 113 days in the area .
In July , after living in the bus for three months , he decided to head back to civilization – but the trail was blocked by the swollen Teklanika River ; the watercourse by that stage was considerably higher and swifter than when he had crossed in April .
McCandless did not have a detailed topographical map of the region and was unaware of a hand - operated tramway that crossed the river eight - tenths of a mile away from where he had previously crossed .
At this point , McCandless headed back to the bus and re - established his camp .
He posted an S.O.S. note on the bus , which stated : DEATH Section::::Death .
McCandless ' final written journal entry , noted as " Day 107 " , simply read , " Beautiful Blue Berries .
" The days 108 through 113 contained no words and were marked with only slashes .
On September 6 , 1992 , a hunter who was looking for shelter for the night came upon the converted bus McCandless had been staying in .
Upon entering , he smelled what he thought was rotting food and discovered " a lump " in a sleeping bag .
The hunter quickly radioed police , who arrived the following day .
They found McCandless ' decomposing body in the sleeping bag .
He had died of starvation sometime in August .
POSSIBLE
DEATH SCENARIOS Section::::Possible death scenarios .
In his book Into the Wild ( 1997 ) , Jon Krakauer suggests two factors may have contributed to McCandless ' death .
First , he offered that McCandless was running the risk of a phenomenon known as " rabbit starvation " , from overrelying on lean game for nutrition .
Krakauer also speculated that McCandless might have been poisoned by a toxic alkaloid called swainsonine , by ingesting seeds ( Hedysarum alpinum or Hedysarum mackenzii ) containing the toxin , or possibly by a mold that grows on them ( Rhizoctonia leguminicola ) when he put them damp into a plastic bag .
Swainsonine inhibits metabolism of glycoproteins , which causes starvation despite ample caloric intake .
However , an article in the September 2007 issue of Men 's Journal , by Matthew Powers , states that extensive laboratory testing showed there were no toxins or alkaloids present in the H. alpinum seeds McCandless had been eating .
Dr. Thomas Clausen , the chair of the chemistry and biochemistry department at UAF , said , " I tore that plant apart .
There were no toxins .
No alkaloids .
I 'd eat it myself " .
Analysis of the wild sweet peas , given as the cause of McCandless ' death in Into the Wild , found no toxic compounds , and there is not a single account in modern medical literature of anyone being poisoned by this species of plant .
As Powers put it : " He did n't find a way out of the bush , could n't catch enough food to survive , and simply starved to death " .
In 2013 , a new hypothesis was proposed .
Ronald Hamilton , a retired bookbinder at the Indiana University of Pennsylvania , suggested a link between the symptoms described by McCandless and the poisoning of Jewish prisoners in the Nazi concentration camp in Vapniarca .
He put forward the proposal that McCandless starved to death because he was suffering from paralysis in his legs induced by lathyrism , which prevented him from gathering food or hiking out .
Lathyrism may be caused by ODAP poisoning from seeds of Hedysarum alpinum ( commonly called wild potato ) .
The ODAP , a toxic amino acid , had not been detected by the previous studies of the seeds because they had suspected and tested for a toxic alkaloid , rather than an amino acid , and nobody had previously suspected that Hedysarum alpinum seeds contained this toxin .
The protein would be relatively harmless to someone who was well - fed and on a normal diet , but toxic to someone who was malnourished , physically stressed , and on an irregular and insufficient diet , as McCandless was .
As Krakauer points out , McCandless ' field guide did not warn of any dangers of eating the seeds , which were not yet known to be toxic .
Krakauer suspects this is the meaning of McCandless ' journal entry of July 30 , which states " EXTREMELY WEAK .
FAULT OF POT[ATO ] SEED .
MUCH TROUBLE
JUST TO STAND UP .
STARVING .
GREAT JEOPARDY .
"
In September 2013 , Krakauer published an article in The New Yorker following up on Hamilton 's claims .
A sample of fresh Hedysarum alpinum seeds was sent to a laboratory for HPLC analysis .
Results suggest that the seeds contained 0.394 % beta - ODAP by weight , a concentration well within the levels known to cause lathyrism in humans , although the interpretation of the results was disputed by other chemists .
The article notes that while occasional ingestion of foodstuffs containing ODAP is not hazardous for healthy individuals eating a balanced diet , " individuals suffering from malnutrition , stress , and acute hunger are especially sensitive to ODAP , and are thus highly susceptible to the incapacitating effects of lathyrism after ingesting the neurotoxin " .
Anchorage , Alaska , reporter Craig Medred pointed out in a January 2015 article in the Alaska Dispatch News that mushrooms which McCandless collected , photographed , and consumed may have also contributed to his death .
In February 2015 , Krakauer published a follow up article in The New Yorker that reported on scientific analysis of the H. alpinum seeds McCandless ate .
A report in Wilderness and Environmental Medicine demonstrated relatively high levels of L - canavanine in Hedysarum alpinum seeds and suggests this as the toxic component in McCandless ' diet , rather than ODAP , as originally supposed by Ronald Hamilton .
In his New Yorker article Krakauer goes on to speculate that L - canavanine " was a contributing factor to " McCandless ' death .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The converted bus where McCandless lived and died has since become a well - known destination for hikers .
Known as " The Magic Bus " , the 1946 International Harvester was abandoned by road workers in 1961 on the Stampede Trail where it remains today .
A plaque in McCandless ' memory is affixed to the interior .
McCandless ' life became the subject of a number of articles , books , films , and documentaries , which helped elevate his life to the status of modern myth .
He became a romantic figure to some inspired by what they see as his free - spirited idealism , but to others a controversial misguided figure .
"
The Magic Bus " has become a pilgrimage destination for trekkers who camp at the vehicle , some of whom have also gotten into difficulties due to the Teklanika River .
ASSESSMENTS Section::::Assessments .
McCandless has been a polarizing figure since his story came to widespread public attention , with the publication of Krakauer 's January 1993
Outside article .
While the author and many others have a sympathetic view of the young traveler , others , particularly Alaskans , have expressed negative views about McCandless and those who romanticize his fate .
Alaskan Park Ranger Peter Christian wrote : When you consider McCandless from my perspective , you quickly see that what he did was n't even particularly daring , just stupid , tragic , and inconsiderate .
First off , he spent very little time learning how to actually live in the wild .
He arrived at the Stampede Trail without even a map of the area .
If he [ had ] had a good map he could have walked out of his predicament [ ... ]
Essentially , Chris McCandless committed suicide .
Sherry Simpson , writing in the Anchorage Press , described her trip to the bus with a friend , and their reaction upon reading the comments that tourists had left lauding McCandless as an insightful , Thoreau - like figure : Among my friends and acquaintances , the story of Christopher McCandless makes great after - dinner conversation .
Much of the time I agree with the " he had a death wish " camp because I do n't know how else to reconcile what we know of his ordeal .
Now and then I venture into the " what a dumbshit " territory , tempered by brief alliances with the
" he was just another romantic boy on an all - American quest " partisans .
Mostly I 'm puzzled by the way he 's emerged as a hero .
Krakauer defends McCandless , claiming that what critics point to as arrogance was merely McCandless ' desire for " being the first to explore a blank spot on the map .
"
Krakauer continues : " In 1992 , however , there were no more blank spots on the map — not in Alaska , not anywhere .
But Chris , with his idiosyncratic logic , came up with an elegant solution to this dilemma :
He simply got rid of the map .
In his own mind , if nowhere else , the terra would thereby remain incognita . "
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Jon Krakauer 's approximately 9,000-word article , " Death of an Innocent " ( January 1993 ) , was published in Outside .
Chip Brown 's full - length article on McCandless , " I Now Walk Into the Wild " ( February 8 , 1993 ) , was published in The New Yorker .
Jon Krakauer 's non - fiction book , Into the Wild ( 1996 ) , expanded upon his 1993 Outside article and retraced McCandless ' travels leading up to the hiker 's eventual death .
An eponymous 2007 film adaptation of Into the Wild , directed by Sean Penn with Emile Hirsch portraying McCandless , received a number of awards , including Best Picture from the American Film Institute .
Ron Lamothe 's documentary , The Call of the Wild ( 2007 ) , also covers McCandless ' life story .
The 2011 book " Back To The Wild " compiles photographs , postcards and journal entries by McCandless .
A PBS documentary uncovering some additional information , with interviews , titled Return to the Wild :
The Chris McCandless Story , first aired on the PBS network in November 2014 .
Carine McCandless , Chris ' younger sister , wrote the memoir The Wild Truth ( November 2014 ) , published by HarperCollins .
In the book , Carine describes the verbal , physical and sexual abuse her parents allegedly inflicted upon each other and their children , often fueled by alcohol .
Carine cites her and her brother 's allegedly abusive childhoods as one of the motivating factors in Chris ' desire to " disappear " into the wilderness .
In a statement released to the media shortly before the memoir was released , Walt and Billie McCandless denied their daughter 's accusations , stating that her book is , " fictionalized writing [ that ] has absolutely nothing to do with our beloved son , Chris , his journey or his character .
This whole unfortunate event in Chris ' life 22 years ago is about Chris and his dreams . "
SEE ALSO
*
Lillian
Alling *
Christopher Thomas Knight * Carl McCunn
* Richard Proenneke * Everett Ruess
* Survivalism
* Timothy Treadwell
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* ChristopherMcCandless.info Website on Christopher McCandless .
* Chrisspurpose.org – C J McCandless Memorial Foundation
* Dispatches from the Wild – Excerpts of McCandless ' own articles published in the Emory Wheel student newspaper .