FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OF 1993
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 ( FMLA ) is a United States labor law requiring covered employers to provide employees with job - protected and unpaid leave for qualified medical and family reasons .
These include pregnancy , adoption , foster care placement of a child , personal or family illness , or family military leave .
The FMLA is administered by the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor .
The FMLA was intended " to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families .
" The Act allows eligible employees to take up to 12 work weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period to attend to the serious health condition of the employee , parent , spouse or child , or for pregnancy or care of a newborn child , or for adoption or foster care of a child .
In order to be eligible for FMLA leave , an employee must have been at the business at least 12 months , and worked at least 1,250 hours over the past 12 months , and work at a location where the company employs 50 or more employees within 75 miles .
The FMLA covers both public- and private - sector employees , but certain categories of employees are excluded , including elected officials and their personal staff members .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The bill was a major part of President Bill Clinton 's agenda in his first term .
Rapid growth in the workforce , including a large number of women joining , suggested a necessary federal regulation that would support the working class who desired to raise a family and/or required time off for illness related situations .
President Clinton signed the bill into law on February 5 , 1993 (; 29 U.S.C. sec .
2601 ; 29 CFR 825 ) to take effect on August 5 , 1993 .
The United States Congress passed the Act with the understanding that " it is important for the development of children and the family unit that fathers and mothers be able to participate in early childrearing … [ and ] the lack of employment policies to accommodate working parents can force individuals to choose between job security and parenting " .
It also stressed the Act was intended to provide leave protection for individuals " in a manner that accommodates the legitimate interests of employers " .
CONTENTS SCOPE OF RIGHTS Section::::Contents .
Section::::Scope of rights .
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 generally applies to employers of 50 or more employees in 20 weeks of the last year .
Employees must have worked over 12 months and 1250 hours in the last year ( around 25 hours a week ) .
However , employees " at which such employer employs less than 50 employees if the total number of employees employed by that employer within 75 miles of that worksite is less than 50 . "
A worksite includes a public agency , including schools and state , local , and federal employers .
The 50 employee threshold does not apply to public agency employees and local educational agencies .
There are special hours rules for certain airline employees .
Employees must give notice of 30 days to employers if birth or adoption is " foreseeable " , and for serious health conditions if practicable .
Treatments should be arranged " so as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the employer " according to medical advice .
Along with the 30 day notice , there are also other requirements to be made when seeking the FMLA rights .
If an employee wants to leave the first time using ones FMLA rights , the person must first claim the Family and Medical Leave Act .
In the case that an employee were to leave again under the FMLA act , the same process must proceed .
With the release of employees , there is a certification as well .
The absence of an employee due to the conditions he or she may have may require a certification as proof of the verification of absence .
In order to certify the leave of an employee , the employer may ask for other requirements .
An example of these requirements are requiring multiple medical opinions .
All of these prerequisites are at the employer 's expense .
There are also certain rules that may apply to those who work at local education agencies .
RIGHTS DURING LEAVE Section::::Rights during leave .
Employees can have up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for child birth , adoption , to care for a close relative in poor health , or because of an employee 's own poor health .
In full , the purposes for leave are : * to care for a new child , whether for the birth , the adoption , or placement of a child in foster care ; * to care for a seriously ill family member ( spouse , son , daughter , or parent )
( Note : Son / daughter has been clarified by the Department of Labor to mean a child under the age of 18 or a child over the age of 18 with a mental or physical disability as defined by the Americans With Disabilities Act , which excludes among other conditions , pregnancy and post - partum recovery from childbirth ) ; * to recover from a worker 's own serious illness ; * to care for an injured service member in the family ; or * to address qualifying exigencies arising out of a family member 's deployment .
* twenty - six workweeks of leave during a single 12-month period to care for a covered servicemember with a serious injury or illness if the eligible employee is the servicemember 's spouse , son , daughter , parent , or next of kin ( military caregiver leave ) .
Child care leave should be taken in one lump , unless an employer agrees otherwise .
If a father and mother have the same employer , they must share their leave , in effect halving each person 's rights , if the employer so chooses .
Employers must provide benefits during the unpaid leave .
Under § 2652(b ) states are empowered to provide " greater family or medical leave rights " .
Since 2008 , the US Department of Labor , allowed the spouse , child , or parent of an active duty military member who is deployed across seas for 12 or more months to take up to 12 weeks of leave .
Also , a military caregiver provision was added that would allow a caregiver to take up to 26 weeks of leave in order to actively care for a military member who requires medical attention for acute or ongoing conditions .
SUBSTITUTE LEAVE Section::::Substitute leave .
Under § 2612(2)(A )
an employer can make an employee substitute the right to 12 unpaid weeks of leave for " accrued paid vacation leave , personal leave or family leave " in an employer 's personnel policy .
Originally the Department of Labor had a penalty to make employers notify employees that this might happen .
However , five judges in the US Supreme Court in Ragsdale v Wolverine World Wide , Inc held that the statute precluded the right of the Department of Labor to do so .
Four dissenting judges would have held that nothing prevented the rule , and it was the Department of Labor 's job to enforce the law .
RIGHT TO RETURN TO JOB Section::::Right to return to job .
After unpaid leave , an employee generally has the right to return to his or her job , except for employees who are in the top 10 % of highest paid and the employer can argue refusal " is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of the employer . "
In full , the rights during and after unpaid leave are to : * the same group health insurance benefits , including employer contributions to premiums , that would exist if the employee were not on leave .
* restoration to the same position upon return to work .
If the same position is unavailable , the employer must provide the worker with a position that is substantially equal in pay , benefits , and responsibility .
* protection of employee benefits while on leave .
An employee is entitled to reinstatement of all benefits to which the employee was entitled before going on leave .
* protection of the employee to not have their rights under the Act interfered with or denied by an employer .
* protection of the employee from retaliation by an employer for exercising rights under the Act .
* intermittent FMLA leave for his or her own serious health condition , or the serious health condition of a family member .
This includes occasional leave for doctors ' appointments for a chronic condition , treatment ( e.g. , physical therapy , psychological counseling , chemotherapy ) , or temporary periods of incapacity ( e.g. , severe morning sickness , asthma attack ) .
" Highly compensated employees " have limited rights to return to their jobs .
They are defined as " a salaried eligible employee who is among the highest paid 10 percent of the employees employed by the employer within 75 miles of the facility at which the employee is employed " .
Their employers are not required to restore them to their original position ( or an equivalent position with equivalent pay and benefits , as is guaranteed to other employees ) if the employer determines that denying the employee their position is " necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of the employer " and the employer provides the worker with notice of this decision , though no time frame for providing this notice is established . ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
Employees or the Secretary of Labor can bring enforcement actions , but there is no right to a jury for reinstatement claims .
Employees can seek damages for lost wages and benefits , or the cost of child care , plus an equal amount of liquidated damages unless an employer can show it acted in good faith and reasonable cause to believe it was not breaking the law .
There is a two - year limit on bringing claims , or three years for willful violations .
NON - ELIGIBLE WORKERS AND TYPES OF LEAVE Section::::Non - eligible workers and types of leave .
The federal FMLA does not apply to :
* workers in businesses with fewer than 50 employees ( this threshold does not apply to public agency employers and local educational agencies as they are covered employers by name
but there still must be at least 50 employees with a 75 mile radius for the employee to be eligible for FMLA leave ) ;
* part - time workers who have worked fewer than 1,250 hours within the 12 months preceding the leave and a paid vacation ; * workers who need time off to care for seriously ill elderly relatives ( other than parents ) , unless the relative was acting in loco parentis at the time the worker turned 18 ; * workers who need time off to care for pets ; * workers who need time off to recover from short - term or common illness like a cold , or to care for a family member with a short - term illness ; * elected officials ; and * workers who need time off for routine medical care , such as check - ups .
STATE FAMILY LEAVE Section::::State family leave .
Some states have enacted laws that mandate additional family and medical leave for workers in a variety of ways .
By 2016 four states had laws for paid family leave : California since 2002 , New Jersey since 2008 , Rhode Island since 2013 , and New York since 2016 .
Washington state passed a paid family and medical leave law in 2007 , but the law has not taken effect due to a lack of funding mechanism .
DROPPING
THE EMPLOYER THRESHOLD
Section::::Dropping the employer threshold .
The federal FMLA only applies to employers with 50 or more employees , within 75 miles .
Some states have enacted their own FMLAs that have a lower threshold for employer coverage :
* Maine : 15 or more employees ( private employers ) and 25 or more ( city or town employers ) .
* Maryland : 15 or more employees ( private employers)Up to seven days for bone marrow donation .
Up to 30 days for organ donation .
* Minnesota : 21 or more employees ( parental leave only ) .
* Oregon : 25 or more employees .
An employee must have worked at least 180 days , and averaged 25 hours per week at the time medical leave is requested * Rhode Island : 50 or more employees ( private employers ) and 30 or more employees ( public employers ) .
* Vermont : 10 or more employees ( parental leave only ) and 15 or more employees ( family and medical leave ) .
* Washington : 50 or more employees ( FMLA reasons besides insured parental leave ) ; all employers are required to provide insured parental leave .
* District of Columbia : 20 or more employees .
EXPANDED COVERAGE Section::::Expanded coverage .
The federal FMLA only applies to immediate family — parent , spouse , and child .
The 2008 amendments to the FMLA for military family members extend the FMLA 's protection to next of kin and to adult children .
The Department of Labor on June 22 , 2010 clarified the definition of " son and daughter " under the FMLA " to ensure that an employee who assumes the role of caring for a child receives parental rights to family leave regardless of the legal or biological relationship " and specifying that " an employee who intends to share in the parenting of a child with his or her same sex partner will be able to exercise the right to FMLA leave to bond with that child . "
In February 2015 , the Department of Labor issued its final rule amending the definition of spouse under the FMLA in response to the decision in United States v. Windsor , effective March 27 , 2015 .
The revised definition of " spouse " extends FMLA leave rights and job protections to eligible employees in a same - sex marriage or a common - law marriage entered into in a state where those statuses are legally recognized , regardless of the state in which the employee works or resides .
Even if an employee works where same - sex or common law marriage is not recognized , that employee 's spouse triggers FMLA coverage if the employee married in a state that recognized same - sex marriage or common law marriage .
Some states had already expanded the definition of family in their own FMLAs :
* California : Domestic partner and domestic partner 's child .
* Connecticut : Civil union partner , parent - in - law .
* Hawaii : Grandparent , parent - in - law , grandparent - in - law or an employee 's reciprocal beneficiary .
* Maine : Domestic partner and domestic partner 's child , siblings .
* Maryland : Allows the employee to use time for immediate family under the same rules if taking it for themselves .
Includes step , adopted and even people who were primary caregivers even if not related .
* New Jersey :
Civil union partner and child of civil union partner , parent - in - law , step parent .
* Oregon : Domestic partner , grandparent , grandchild or parent - in - law .
* Rhode Island : Domestic partners of state employees , parent - in - law .
* Vermont : Civil union partner , parent - in - law .
* Wisconsin : Parent - in - law .
* District of Columbia : Related to the worker by blood , legal custody , or marriage ; person with whom the employee lives and has a committed relationship ; child who lives with employee and for whom employee permanently assumes and discharges parental responsibility .
INCREASING THE USES FOR
FMLA LEAVE
Section::::Increasing the uses for FMLA leave .
FMLA leave can be used for a worker 's serious health condition , the serious health condition of a family member , or upon the arrival of a new child .
State FMLA laws and the new military family provisions of the FMLA have broadened these categories :
* Connecticut : Organ or bone marrow donor .
* Maine : Organ donor ; death of employee 's family member if that family member is a servicemember killed while on active duty .
* Maryland : Maryland Family Leave Act ( MFLA ) –
Organ donor , Person Standing in Loco Parentis , For Service Leave , and added a specific anti - retaliation penalty on top of FMLA recovery .
Runs parallel to FMLA .
* Oregon : Care for the non - serious injury or illness of a child requiring home care .
UNPAID LEAVE FOR OTHER RELATED PURPOSES
Section::::Unpaid leave for other related purposes .
Several states have passed FMLA - type statutes to give parents unpaid leave for other related purposes , including : * Attending child 's school or educational activities .
Examples include California , District of Columbia , Massachusetts , Minnesota , Rhode Island , Vermont , and others .
* Taking family members to routine medical visits .
Massachusetts and Vermont .
* Addressing the effects of domestic violence , stalking , or sexual assault .
Examples include Colorado , Florida , Hawaii , and Illinois .
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
In 2003 , Han and Waldfogel found that " only about 60 % of private sector workers are covered " due to the clause stipulating a minimum number of employees , and once the clause stipulating a minimum number of hours worked is added , only 46 % of private sector workers are eligible for leave under the FMLA .
In June 2007 , the Department of Labor estimated that of 141.7 million workers in the United States , 94.4 million worked at FMLA - covered worksites , and 76.1 million were eligible for FMLA leave .
Only eight to 17.1 percent of covered , eligible workers ( or between 6.1 million and 13.0 million workers ) took FMLA leave in 2005 .
The 2008 National Survey of Employers found no statistically significant difference between the proportion of small employers ( 79 % ) and large employers ( 82 % ) that offer full FMLA coverage .
Although much of the research has been conducted on populations in other countries ,
Berger et al . found that children in the United States whose mothers return to work within the first 3 months after giving birth are less likely to be breastfed , have all of their immunizations up to date ( by 18 months ) , and receive all of their regular medical checkups ; they are also more likely to exhibit behavioral problems by four years of age .
Chatterji and Markowitz also found an association between longer lengths of maternity leave and lesser incidence of depression among mothers .
Despite the lack of rights to leave , there is no right to free child care or day care .
This has encouraged several proposals to create a public system of free child care , or for the government to subsidize parents ' costs .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Critics of the act have suggested that by mandating various forms of leave that are used more often by female than male employees , the Act , like the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 , makes women more expensive to employ than men .
They argue that employers will engage in subtle discrimination against women in the hiring process , discrimination which is much less obvious to detect than pregnancy discrimination against the already hired .
Throughout history , gender discrimination towards women was common ; certain laws were placed that would restrict a woman 's option in choosing a working position , as well as , how many hours she could work ei .
Employers Supporters counter that the act , in contrast to the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 , is aimed at both women and men , and is part of an overall strategy to encourage both men and women to take family - related leave .
However , this is based on the assumption that men will take advantage of the opportunity of unpaid leave at comparable rates to women .
According to Grossman , there is no basis for this assumption upon the inception of the legislation and no evidence has been found today to support this assumption .
Therefore , the employer incentive to prefer male employees is preserved despite the equal opportunity for both sexes to take leave .
Moreover , the FMLA is much less comprehensive than Western European leave policies .
Namely , the United States is the only industrialized country without paid leave for parents .
The following table illustrates the lack of provisions offered in the United States as compared to that of other industrialized countries .
For instance , all Western European nations have maternity paid leave and over half have paternity and sick child care paid leave , while the United States has no paid leave . !
Maternity !
Paternity !
Sick Child ( over 3 years ) !
Sick Spouse / Parent !
Own Illness United States
Austria
Belgium Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Portugal Spain
Sweden United Kingdom
* = available , = not available , = not applicable Additionally , workplace fairness has been questioned under the Act .
For instance , any woman - specific benefits provided by the legislation were considered special treatment and thus unacceptable , and ignoring the idea that women may have a greater share of burden of caregiving in reality .
In retort , supporters may argue that creating such legislation that recognizes the female 's greater role in child care , stereotype would be reinforced .
The success of the implementation of the policy is also controversial because it is questioned whether the policy is actually going to those who need the benefits .
For instance , since the leave offered is unpaid , majorities of eligible employees can not take time off because they can not afford to do so .
And according to Pyle and Pelletier , eligible workers may not even know about this policy and the benefits allotted to them .
Under law , women are protected from sex discrimination in the workplace but a large stigma against women still exists in terms of them being equally skilled as their male co - workers , and ultimately testing the federal protection of rights in a work environment .
Like any other federal regulation , it is strictly prohibited for an employer to discriminate towards an employee ( especially if the employee is using their FMLA rights ) , and to strain from providing accurate information for all employees to access .
CEREMONY Section::::Ceremony .
Vicki Yandle , a receptionist who was fired after asking for a few weeks of time off to care for a daughter with cancer , was on stage with President Clinton when the law was signed .
SEE ALSO
* United States labor law * Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur ( 1974 )
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS * Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
29 U.S. Code Chapter 28 * Department of Labor Family & Medical Leave information pages
* Senate roll call vote
* House roll call vote * Nevada Dept . of Human Resources v. Hibbs * Your Rights Under the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act ( FMLA )
* – A made - for - TV film about the act in which President Clinton appears briefly as himself .
* https://web.archive.org/web/20090703173531/http://paidsickdays.nationalpartnership.org/site/PageServer?pagename=ourwork_fmla_FamilyandMedicalLeave * http://www.nationalpartnership.org/site/DocServer/WF_PL_FactSheet_PaidFamilyLeave_2009.pdf?docID=4682&autologin=true