RUBY TUESDAY ( RESTAURANT )
Ruby Tuesday Inc. is an American multinational foodservice retailer that owns , operates , and franchises Ruby Tuesday restaurants .
The concept was started in 1972 by Samuel E. ( Sandy ) Beall III .
The corporation was formed in 1996 as a reincorporation of
Morrison Restaurants Inc. They are headquartered in Maryville , Tennessee , and have 736 locations worldwide .
Their flagship brand is an American cuisine casual dining restaurant chain that is primarily located along the eastern coast of the United States .
In 2016 , Ruby Tuesday sold the rights to the Lime Fresh Mexican Grill to an undisclosed buyer in an attempt to refocus on the main Ruby Tuesday brand .
The company has closed all locations of Wok Hay and Marlin and Ray 's .
Additionally , they hold development rights to Truffles Grill .
On June 6 , 2012 , founder and CEO Sandy Beall announced he would be leaving the company .
In October 2017 , it announced that NRD Capital Management would be taking the company private through a $ 146 million deal in early 2018 .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The restaurant 's name was derived from The Rolling Stones song , " Ruby Tuesday " , which was popular during the time of the first restaurant 's inception .
The name was suggested to founder Sandy Beall by Bob Hope .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Ruby Tuesday was born out of a $ 10,000 endowment Sandy Beall had received from a friend and operator of several Pizza Huts to open his own restaurant .
With that money , and another $ 10,000 put together with four of his University of Tennessee fraternity brothers , the first Ruby Tuesday restaurant was opened in 1972 .
The location was adjacent to the University 's Knoxville campus , and although the building still stands , the restaurant has since closed .
Over the next decade , a new location opened about every nine months .
In April 1982 , Sandy sold the expanded 16-unit Ruby Tuesday chain to Morrison Inc. for $ 15 million in cash and stock .
The sale provided the rapidly growing restaurant chain with additional financial support .
It also saw Sandy Beall become president of a newly formed Specialty Restaurant Division spearheaded by Ruby Tuesday .
By 1985 , the chain had grown to operate 35 locations , and was a major contributor to the renewed success of Morrison 's .
Morrison Inc. was renamed Morrison Restaurants Inc. in 1992 to reflect the importance of their restaurant investments .
Additionally , the company realigned their dining division with a new name , the Ruby Tuesday Group .
That same year , Beall was named CEO of
Morrison Restaurants Inc. On March 9 , 1996 , the shareholders of Morrison 's approved a distribution and dissolved Morrison Restaurants Inc. into three separate companies : Ruby Tuesday Inc. , Morrison Health Care Inc. , and Morrison 's Fresh Cooking Inc. Ruby Tuesday Inc. became the legal successor to Morrison Restaurants Inc. and was incorporated in Mobile , Alabama .
At the time of the distribution , Ruby Tuesday Inc. operated many other restaurant brands in addition to their flagship Ruby Tuesday brand , including L&N Seafood Grill , Mozzarella 's Café , Silver Spoon Café , and Tia 's Tex - Mex .
In November 2000 , Ruby Tuesday Inc. completed the sale of all restaurant brands ( with the exception of Ruby Tuesday ) to Specialty Restaurant Group , LLC .
This divestiture allowed Ruby Tuesday to concentrate exclusively on the growth and development of its namesake brand .
On April 12 , 2007 , Ruby Tuesday Inc. changed its NYSE ticker symbol from RI to RT .
RESTAURANT THEMES
Section::::Restaurant themes .
In August 2007 , Ruby Tuesday Inc. ventured back into other concepts with their newly acquired Asian dining restaurant , Wok Hay .
The company proceeded to convert the concept from self - service to full - service dining .
In October 2008 , a second location was opened in a former Ruby Tuesday restaurant building .
The company 's 2011 Annual Report noted an additional franchised Wok Hay restaurant in Trinidad , bringing the emerging chain to three operating restaurants .
In September 2010 , Ruby Tuesday Inc. continued its venture into other concepts with an agreement to license the Lime Fresh Mexican Grill brand .
Earlier the same year , Ruby Tuesday also acquired the development rights to Truffles Grill and introduced their home - grown Marlin & Ray 's Seafood & Sunsets concept .
As of 2011 , the company was researching conversion of poorly performing Ruby Tuesday restaurants into some of these concepts .
An excerpt from the 2011 Annual Report :
The company has also experimented with conversion with the Alabama - based Jim ' N Nick 's Bar - B - Q chain .
However , a year after remodeling a Ruby Tuesday restaurant into the company 's first Jim ' N Nick 's , company spokeswoman Meridith Hammond indicated they would no longer explore that particular concept .
On April 4 , 2012 , Ruby Tuesday Inc. announced that it had purchased fast - casual chain Lime Fresh Mexican Grill for $ 24 million cash .
The announcement by Sandy Beall added , " John Kunkel , Lime 's founder , will be joining our Board of Directors following completion of the acquisition . "
In 2013 , after posting a second quarter loss of $ 15.1 million , or 24 cents a share , Ruby Tuesday decided to close 13 Marlin & Ray 's restaurants and its one Wok Hay location , exiting from both concepts .
It also decided to seek a buyer for its two licensed Truffles Grill restaurants and close two company - developed Lime Fresh restaurants .
Ruby Tuesday announced plans that it would be taken private through a purchase by NRD Capital Management , a private - equity firm based in Atlanta , Georgia .
The $ 146 million deal is expected to occur in early 2018 .
HEADQUARTERS Section::::Headquarters .
In the summer of 1998 , Ruby Tuesday relocated its main headquarters from Mobile , Alabama to Maryville , Tennessee , just 15 miles south of where the company had been founded .
This location contains their Restaurant Support Center and an on - site training facility , called the Center for Leadership Excellence ( formerly known as WOW - U ) .
These facilities are used as an internal troubleshooting department , development center , test kitchen , and corporate office for the company 's executives , restaurant managers , and chefs .
The company purchased a residential property at nearby Maryville College in 1997 to develop a corporate retreat , and renamed it the Ruby Tuesday ( RT ) Lodge .
Additional guest buildings were added , and the area is currently used to dine and house management during corporate training sessions .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Throughout the first half of the company history , the chain mainly located itself in or near shopping malls .
Starting in the early 1990s , the company adjusted its distribution strategy by including more freestanding locations .
As of June 2 , 2015 , Ruby Tuesday , Inc. has company - owned and/or franchised Ruby Tuesday brand restaurants in 43 states and 13 foreign countries .
The company owned and operated 658 Ruby Tuesday restaurants , while domestic and international franchisees operated 29 and 49 restaurants , respectively .
Their international locations include Canada , Chile , Egypt , El Salvador , Greece , Guam , Honduras , Hong Kong , Iceland , India , Kuwait , Romania , Saudi Arabia , Trinidad , Panama , and the United Kingdom .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
For much of its history , Ruby Tuesday had little , if any , advertising .
By 2002 , the company found itself combating traffic and sales losses at many of its locations .
This caused the company to change course and introduce coupons at selected sites .
By June of the following year , Ruby Tuesday had expanded on this strategy by testing television , radio , and billboard advertising in select locations .
The company also began offering a curbside carryout service originally dubbed " TueGo ! " .
NEW IDENTITY Section::::New identity .
In 2007 , the company began a series of significant changes to its brand identity .
The changes were made to move the brand 's customer perception out of the " bar - and - grill " segment of the casual dining industry , and were showcased in the opening of their Times Square location the same year .
As part of the changes , Pentagram design studios were hired to help construct a new public visual identity for the brand .
The design team created a new logo set in Clarendon , altered the standard color scheme , and created all new packaging to promote the renamed " Ruby TueGo " carryout service .
Ruby Tuesday also began remodeling its entire suite of restaurants via the removal of their novelty wall artifacts , faux tiffany lamps , and dated furnishings .
The update went on to bring a new menu with higher - quality food and beverages , revamped service techniques , high - definition televisions , and a free guest - accessible Wi - Fi network .
" IMPLOSION " Section::::"Implosion " .
In 2008 , Ruby Tuesday marketed an advertising campaign to show how radical their recent changes were .
On August 5 , over " live " streaming internet video , a demolition crew was supposed to implode the final " old Ruby Tuesday " to cap off the brand 's commitment of change in front of a small crowd in Mount Holly , Ohio .
However , to the crowd 's shock , the " restaurant " next door ( Cheeky 's Bar and Grill , which looked like a typical casual dining chain ) was demolished .
Following the events , the senior VP of marketing for Ruby Tuesday ( in actuality , an actor ) posted a written apology on the company 's website and videotaped a formal apology that was broadcast on television .
As it turned out , the idea was merely an elaborate marketing ploy to raise attention to the newly remodeled restaurants .
The implosion was actually done on a miniature set staffed by a Hollywood special effects crew , and the " live " event had been pre - recorded in Harriman , Tennessee .
The two films were then edited together to make it look like an accident .
CHANGES CONTINUE
Section::::Changes continue .
The remodel and its accompanying changes came at an inopportune time for the chain .
A global financial crisis was underway , and the casual dining segment of the industry was financially suffering .
To address these issues , the company debuted made - from - scratch
garlic cheese biscuits , a Sunday brunch program , and a steak - and - lobster deal night .
Despite all of this , financial analysts have been highly critical of the company 's actions regarding the ever - changing shift in strategies .
In 2012 , yet another advertising campaign was announced to analysts to boost guest perception .
It included a reintroduction of television advertising and a continued shift to convert under - performing stores .
In 2014 , returning to the more family friendly casual restaurant chain , Ruby Tuesday changed the employees ' uniform to more colorful attire of blue jeans and shirts in a variety of colors , changing the menus to a chalkboard theme , adding more current top 100 hit songs to the internal music system and updating their logo to a more modern font style .
Continuing the trend in 2015 , the chain updated their dated children 's menu with the addition of cheese pizza and corn dogs , more colorful plastic beverage cups , and colorful twisty straws .
To promote the more family friendly feel , the chain introduced a Kids Eat Free night on their flagship day , Tuesday .
At all company owned restaurants , a child 's meal is free with the purchase of an adult entree .
SPONSORSHIPS Section::::Sponsorships .
From 2006 until 2009 , Alex Job Racing and Ruby Tuesday partnered to form the Ruby Tuesday Championship Racing Team .
The team drove the No . 23 Porsche - powered Daytona Prototype in the GRAND - AM Rolex Sports Car Series .
In 2009 , Eddie Sharp Racing announced a long - term partnership agreement with Ruby Tuesday as the sponsor of the No . 2 Toyota , driven by Tim George Jr. in the ARCA Racing Series .
NASCAR
Section::::NASCAR .
Starting with the 2010 NASCAR Nationwide Series , Ruby Tuesday has had a partnership with Penske Racing to sponsor Brad Keselowski in the No . 22 Dodge Challenger .
The 2010 season saw them appear in six races , while the 2011 season saw nine races .
The company was also advertised on the rear deck lid of Brad 's No . 2 Dodge Charger in the 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series .
Prior to the beginning of the 2011 Daytona 500 , Ruby Tuesday was added as a last - minute one - race sponsor for Brian Keselowski , older brother of Brad Keselowski .
In 2012 , Ruby Tuesday dropped sponsorship on Brad Keselowski 's car .
MENU Section::::Menu .
Ruby Tuesday offers primarily American cuisine , including all - natural chicken , pasta , pork ribs , soups , steak , and seafood .
However , the brand is still commonly recognized for their salad bar and hamburgers , which have been staples to the chain since its creation .
All of the restaurants also offer a full bar that serves cocktails , beer , and wine .
The wine menu was most recently changed in November 2011 to introduce what the brand is calling " Cultivate Wines " .
A separate menu is available for placing bulk take - out or catering orders .
On January 25 , 2012 the company announced their partnership with ezCater to help boost the company 's catering sales .
The executive chef for the chain is Peter Glander , former sous - chef at The Modern restaurant inside the Museum of Modern Art in New York City .
He is responsible for the addition of the pretzel bun to their menu , along with the removal of the brand 's long - standing dessert , the chocolate tallcake .
DIETARY CONCERNS
Section::::Dietary concerns .
The company was the first large national casual dining chain in the country to post specific nutritional information on their menus .
After initially posting this information for all menu items , they reduced the inclusion to a more subtle item - specific format , called the " Smart - Eating " section ( currently labeled as " Fit & Trim " ) .
Nutritional and allergen - sensitivity information for the entire menu is available upon request .
Early 2011 saw the company revise and rewrite a portion of their drink recipes to encompass trendy " skinny " cocktails .
This shift included changing drink recipes to incorporate healthier liquor and mixer alternatives and labeling the new creations with their " under 150 calories " tagline .
VeeV Açaí Spirit , Absolut Berri Açaí Vodka , St - Germain elderflower liqueur , and Minute Maid Light Lemonade are the key products used in these drinks .
COOKBOOK
Section::::Cookbook .
Ruby Tuesday released a cookbook by Jeff Morgan on October 25 , 2011 titled Simply Fresh :
Casual Dining at Home
It contains recipes that have been inspired by the menu , and even recipes that are signature to the brand .
RESTATEMENT Section::::Restatement .
On April 11 , 2005 , the company and its audit committee determined the company would restate previously issued historical financial statements to properly account for leases .
RESTAURANT CLOSINGS Section::::Restaurant closings .
In August 2016 , Ruby Tuesday announced that it will close 95 restaurants as sales slide .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website