DAVE ( TV CHANNEL )
Dave is a British television channel owned by UKTV , which is available in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
The channel is available on IPTV , Freeview and satellite .
The channel took the name Dave in October 2007 , but it had been on air under various identities and formats since October 1998 .
HISTORY UK GOLD CLASSICS AND UK GOLD 2
Section::::History .
Section::::UK Gold Classics and UK Gold 2 .
UK Gold Classics , UKTV 's first digital - only channel , was launched on 2 October 1998 and was only broadcast from Friday to Sunday on Sky Digital from 6.00 pm to 2.00 am .
Around this time UK Gold began to move towards newer programmes instead of older ones ; the ' classics ' line - up included a number of early shows , including some black - and - white programmes , which had been acquired in the early years of the UK Gold service .
They also showed some recent shows from the main channel , but the main part of the channel was older shows from the early years of UK Gold .
On weekdays , the channel was off air , showing a still caption of all the UKTV channels and start - up times .
The ' Classics ' format lasted just six months ; the channel ended on 28 March 1999 , and from 2 April 1999 the channel was renamed to UK Gold 2 , and screened morning programmes from UK Gold time - shifted to the evening of the same day instead of classic shows .
UKG2 AND UKTV G2 Section::::UKG2 and UKTV G2 .
The UK Gold subsidiary channel was again relaunched with a completely new programme line - up and renamed UKG² on 12 November 2003 .
The channel was promoted as being an edgier alternative to UK Gold ; like that channel , the output was mainly comedy from the BBC with some shows produced inhouse .
A fair amount is similar to the comedy output of UK Play / Play UK before that channel 's closure ; however , unlike Play , the channel did not include music videos .
Along with the rest of the UKTV network , the " UK " prefix was changed to " UKTV " on 8 March 2004 and therefore the channel name changed to UKTV G2 .
Initially , the channel broadcast in the evenings only , but during the ' G2 ' era the decision was made to expand hours into the daytime ; to expand the programming line - up , comedy was joined by popular - factual and magazine shows which were already running on UKTV People ( then Blighty , now Drama ) such as Top Gear and Airport .
G2 PROGRAMMING Section::::G2 programming .
On 7 October 2005 , it was announced that they would show sports programming .
This new line - up was called UKTV Sport and included a new show by the same name .
UKTV Sport also had its own logo and DOG .
There was talk that this could lead to a channel but it never happened .
In February 2006 , they picked up the rights to show highlights of the RBS Six Nations rugby union championship , with a highlights show broadcast on the evening of the games previously shown live on the BBC .
On 16 March 2006 , they announced a deal to air extensive coverage of the 2006 FIFA World Cup as a sub licensing of the BBC 's rights to the tournament .
UKTV G2 simulcast the BBC 's live matches , including the opening match between Germany and Costa Rica , England 's game with Paraguay and the final .
The channel also showed highlights of every match in the tournament .
In April 2006 , the channel acquired the rights to the quarter - finals of Euroleague Basketball and in August , UKTV G2 also picked up rights to the 2006 FIBA World Championship .
, forming the programme ' UKTV Slam ' .
DAVE AND FREEVIEW LAUNCH Section::::Dave and Freeview launch .
In September 2007 , UKTV announced that they would relaunch and rename UKTV G2 as Dave on 15 October .
UKTV said the name of the channel was chosen because " everyone knows a bloke called Dave " .
The rebrand included the channel being available free - to - air on digital terrestrial platform , Freeview , replacing UKTV Bright Ideas which only averaged 0.1 % of the audience share .
The move to Freeview saw Dave launch in the bandwidth previously used by UKTV History which was moved to the time limited ( 7.00 am to 6.00 pm ) bandwidth once occupied by UKTV Bright Ideas .
Dave is available daily , from 7.00 am to 3.00 am , on all platforms .
It uses the tagline " the home of witty comedy banter " and uses Ralph Ineson as an announcer , along with David Flynn , Phill Jupitus , Iain Lee and BBC Radio 1 DJ Greg James .
To ensure that all Freeview viewers receive the channel on number 19 , UKTV briefly placed a re - tuning notice on the programme 's information .
This later changed to the current location on Channel 12 .
From 31 January 2008 , the channel began broadcasting in , along with the other UKTV channels .
In April 2009 , they aired three new instalments of Red Dwarf , entitled .
This marked the channel 's first foray into scripted original programming .
During the airing of the Red Dwarf mini - series , the Dave DOG in the top left corner of the screen had the word '
Lister ' added after it in the same font , after the show 's lead character ; during the show it is even suggested that the station is named after him .
Back to Earth brought record breaking viewing figures , not just in the context of the channel 's past , but for digital television in general .
In June 2009 , the logo was updated to incorporate the ' circle ' logo branding of all the new UKTV channels ( for example Home , GOLD and Really ) .
At the same time , the voice of Dave became Nigel Grover , aka Scott Saunders , who had previously worked at a number of local radio stations .
On 29 April 2014 , the ' circle ' logo was removed and the original 2007 logo was restored .
DAVE HD Section::::Dave HD .
On 29 July 2011 , UKTV announced that it had secured a deal with BSkyB to launch three more high - definition channels on Sky .
As part of Virgin Media 's deal to sell its share of UKTV , all five of UKTV 's HD channels would also be added to Virgin 's cable television service by 2012 .
Dave HD launched on 10 October 2011 on Sky and Virgin Media , two days before Watch HD , while Alibi HD launched in July 2012 .
All three channels are HD simulcasts of the standard - definition channel .
Dave HD along with Good Food HD and Eden HD launched on BT TV on 3 October 2016 .
TIMESHIFT Section::::Timeshift .
A one - hour timeshifted service of the channel – then known as UKTV G2 – began to operate on 1 November 2004 , under the name UKTV G2 +1 .
As UKTV G2 at the time was an evenings - only service , the timeshift also operated in the evenings only , using the satellite and cable capacity which , during daytime , was used by the now - defunct UKTV Bright Ideas .
The sharing arrangement meant that when UKTV G2 's hours extended into daytime , the timeshift remained evenings - only .
At the time of the Dave relaunch , UKTV Bright Ideas closed , freeing up the space to allow UKTV G2 +1 to expand its hours to follow those of the parent channel fully ; due to the main channel 's relaunch as Dave , UKTV G2 +1 became Dave +1 .
The timeshift was initially available on the Virgin Media and Sky platforms ; from 22 January 2009 , following UKTV 's acquisition of a further Freeview broadcast slot , Dave +1 was made available on the digital terrestrial platform .
On 24 February 2009 , Dave +1 was renamed Dave ja vu ( a play on the phrase déjà vu ) on all platforms ; this was carried out to " strengthen the brand 's positioning as the home of witty banter " according to UKTV bosses .
On 14 June 2011 , UKTV announced that Really would launch on Freeview on 2 August 2011 , to facilitate this Dave ja vu 's broadcast hours on the platform were reduced from 8.00 am-4.00 am to 2.00 am-4.00 am .
On 22 November 2012 , UKTV confirmed that it had secured a deal for another 24-hour DTT slot and would use it for Dave ja vu until it firmed up permanent plans for the slot .
Dave ja vu began to broadcast its full schedule on the platform again from 3 January 2013 .
Drama permanently took the slot from 8 July 2013 , however Dave ja vu continued to broadcast between 2.00 am-5.00 am .
On 20 November 2014 , Dave ja vu returned to 24-hour broadcasting .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Within just one month of its launch , Dave had become the tenth largest television channel in the UK .
The broadcaster puts daily averages at around 3 million viewers , although , much of the growth may be attributed to its presence on Freeview ; nonetheless , it is performing significantly better in pay TV homes than UKTV G2 ever did .
Over the month since its launch , Dave averaged a 1.32 % share in multichannel homes and a 3.2 % share in the 16–34 male demographic .
Dave 's positive reception is proven by an attraction of 4 million viewers throughout 18 November 2007 for its coverage of " Car of the Year " , pushing it to second place in multichannel behind ITV2 .
The first episode of attracted 2,060,000 viewers on the first viewing , though over 4 million viewed the episode at some point over its debut weekend .
The highest rating original commission before this had been Red Bull X - Fighters ( about 185,000 ) .
Some Freesat boxes , as supplied , including the HB-1100S , show it and other channels as " weak or insufficient signal " due to out - of - date firmware ; this can be rectified by upgrading .
Also , on Sky boxes , the same issue can occur if using the older Freesat cards .
PROGRAMMING CURRENTLY MADE FOR DAVE ( UKTV ORIGINALS ) Section::::Programming .
Section::::Currently made for Dave ( UKTV Originals ) . !
Name of show ! !
Original run CURRENT RERUNS AND IMPORTS Section::::Current reruns and imports . !
Name of show ! !
Original channel(s ) ! !
Original run SPORT Section::::Sport .
On 6 January 2016 , UKTV announced that Dave would show its first - ever live sporting event with a boxing match between David Haye and Mark de Mori at the O2 Arena on 16 January 2016 produced by Salter Brothers Entertainment .
In late May 2016 , Dave broadcast full live coverage of the 2016 BDO World Trophy darts tournament .
In July 2016 , Dave covered cricket 's Caribbean Premier League .
It broadcast five matches live , including the final and showed the other games in full on a delayed basis .
In 2017 , Dave started broadcasting live MMA with promotion BAMMA .
FILMS
Section::::Films .
In early 2016 , Dave aired western films during the daytime , including One More Train to Rob , Chief Crazy Horse , Buffalo Bill and the Indians , or Sitting Bull 's History Lesson , The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid and The Hired Hand .
Dave mostly show films on Friday and Saturday nights , with Friday being a repeat of the film that was shown on a Saturday .
PREVIOUS Section::::Previous . !
Name of show ! !
Original channel(s ) ! !
Original run Coupling BBC TwoBBC
Three 2000–2004
Cutting It BBC One 2002–2005
The Horne Section Television Programme Dave 2018 Problems ABC ( United States ) 2012 DAVE WEEKLY
PODCAST Section::::Dave Weekly podcast .
In August 2011 , Dave launched a regular comedy podcast called The Dave Weekly hosted on joindave.co.uk and accessible via iTunes .
Presented by Ben Shires , the podcast comprises interviews with comedians such as Russell Kane , Jo Brand , Adam Buxton , Paul Foot and Alex Horne along with occasional features .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS