AUSTRALIAN PERMANENT RESIDENT
Australian permanent residents are residents of Australia who hold a permanent residency visa but are not citizens of Australia .
A holder of a permanent residency visa may remain in Australia indefinitely .
A 5-year initial travel facility , which corresponds to the underlying migration program , is granted alongside the permanent residency .
Until the travel facility expires , the visa holder may leave and re - enter Australia freely .
After that period the visa holder needs to re - apply for the travel facility .
Permanent residency may be revoked at the discretion of the responsible Minister , for example in cases of criminal misconduct .
Permanent residents enjoy many of the rights and privileges of citizens , including access to free or subsidised legal and health services .
They do not have the right to vote in federal or state / territory elections , unless they were registered to vote prior to 1984 , but may vote in some local government elections .
Permanent residents are not entitled to an Australian passport .
Most permanent residents are eligible to become citizens after a waiting period .
When the waiting period is complete , the process of sitting the citizenship test and attending the ceremony will add three to twelve months to gaining citizenship .
MIGRATION PROGRAMS Section::::Migration programs .
There are a number of programs under which a person may enter and obtain permanent residency in Australia , including : * General Skilled Migration Program - mainly for skilled migrants , and has made available 129,250 visas for year 2012 - 2013 * Humanitarian Program - mainly for refugees seeking permanent residency , and has made available 13,750 visas for year 2012 - 2013 .
Family members can also be sponsored .
An unlimited number of visas can be issued for partners ( either married or de facto ) and dependent children .
Visas for other family member types are subject to limited ( known as " capping " ) ; for example there are only 1000 visas available under the ' Parent ' category , and as a consequence there is currently up to a twenty - year waiting period before undergoing consideration for these visas .
CITIZENS OF NEW ZEALAND Section::::Citizens of New Zealand .
Citizens of New Zealand are allowed to enter Australia to live and work indefinitely under the Trans - Tasman Travel Arrangement , without applying for a visa but instead are automatically granted a Special Category Visa on arrival .
Despite having the ability to reside with no time limit , the visa is still considered temporary .
If they decided to become Australian citizens , then they need to apply for permanent residency visa first .
BENEFITS Section::::Benefits .
Benefits of permanent resident status include : *
Few limitations on employment in Australia .
Some job opportunities , largely federal governmental work , require citizenship as opposed to permanent residence .
*
The right to apply for Australian citizenship after fulfilling some criteria .
* For permanent residents accepted under the humanitarian program and enrolled in a Commonwealth supported place , the right to defer payment of their student contribution under the HECS - HELP scheme .
* The right to sponsor relatives for permanent residence , subject to fulfilling residence criteria and assurance of support requirements .
* Children born inside Australia will be Australian citizens by birth .
* The right to access medical and social security benefits , though there is a 2-year waiting period for some benefits .
* The right to travel to New Zealand without applying for a New Zealand visa .
( This right is granted by the New Zealand government . )
* Unrestricted rights to live , work and study in New Zealand .
( This right is granted by the New Zealand government . )
SEE ALSO
* Permanent residency
* Australian nationality law
* Guide for a successful application to the Australian residency REFERENCES