BLINKING
Blinking is a bodily function ; it is a semi - autonomic rapid closing of the eyelid .
A single blink is determined by the forceful closing of the eyelid or inactivation of the levator palpebrae superioris and the activation of the palpebral portion of the orbicularis oculi , not the full open and close .
It is an essential function of the eye that helps spread tears across and remove irritants from the surface of the cornea and conjunctiva .
Blinking may have other functions since it occurs more often than necessary just to keep the eye lubricated .
Researchers think blinking may help us disengage our attention ; following blink onset , cortical activity decreases in the dorsal network and increases in the default - mode network , associated with internal processing .
Blink speed can be affected by elements such as fatigue , eye injury , medication , and disease .
The blinking rate is determined by the " blinking center " , but it can also be affected by external stimulus .
Some animals , such as tortoises and hamsters , blink their eyes independently of each other .
Humans use winking , the blinking of only one eye , as a form of body language .
FUNCTION AND ANATOMY Section::::Function and anatomy .
Blinking provides moisture to the eye by irrigation using tears and a lubricant the eyes secrete .
The eyelid provides suction across the eye from the tear duct to the entire eyeball to keep it from drying out .
Blinking also protects the eye from irritants .
Eyelashes are hairs attached to the upper and lower eyelids that create a line of defense against dust and other elements to the eye .
The eyelashes catch most of these irritants before they reach the eyeball .
There are multiple muscles that control reflexes of blinking .
The main muscles , in the upper eyelid , that control the opening and closing are the orbicularis oculi and levator palpebrae superioris muscle .
The orbicularis oculi closes the eye , while the contraction of the levator palpebrae muscle opens the eye .
The Müller 's muscle , or the superior tarsal muscle , in the upper eyelid and the inferior palpebral muscle in the lower 3 eyelid are responsible for widening the eyes .
These muscles are not only imperative in blinking , but they are also important in many other functions such as squinting and winking .
The inferior palpebral muscle is coordinated with the inferior rectus to pull down the lower lid when one looks down .
Also , when the eyes move , there is often a blink ; the blink is thought to help the eye shift its target point .
CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM 'S
CONTROL
Section::::Central nervous system 's control .
Though one may think that the stimulus triggering blinking is dry or irritated eyes , it is most likely that it is controlled by a " blinking center " of the globus pallidus of the lenticular nucleus — a body of nerve cells between the base and outer surface of the brain .
Nevertheless , external stimuli can contribute .
The orbicularis oculi is a facial muscle ; therefore its actions are translated by the facial nerve root .
The levator palpebrae superioris ' action is sent through the oculomotor nerve .
The duration of a blink is on average 100 - 150 milliseconds according to UCL researcher and between 100 - 400 ms
according to the Harvard Database of Useful Biological Numbers .
Closures in excess of 1000 ms were defined as microsleeps .
Greater activation of dopaminergic pathways dopamine production in the striatum is associated with a higher rate of spontaneous eye blinking .
Conditions in which there is reduced dopamine availability such as Parkinson 's disease have reduced eye blink rate , while conditions in which it is raised such as schizophrenia have an increased rate .
TYPES OF BLINK Section::::Types of blink .
There are three types of blink .
SPONTANEOUS BLINK
Section::::Spontaneous blink .
Spontaneous blinking which is done without external stimuli and internal effort .
This type of blinking is conducted in the pre - motor brain stem and happens without conscious effort , like breathing and digestion .
REFLEX BLINK
Section::::Reflex blink .
A reflex blink occurs in response to an external stimulus , such as contact with the cornea or objects that appear rapidly in front of the eye .
A reflex blink is not necessarily a conscious blink either ; however it does happen faster than a spontaneous blink .
Reflex blink may occur in response to tactile stimuli ( e.g. corneal , eyelash , skin of eyelid , contact with eyebrow ) , optical stimuli ( e.g. dazzle reflex , or menace reflex ) or auditory stimuli ( e.g. , menace reflex ) VOLUNTARY BLINK Section::::Voluntary blink .
Voluntary blink is larger amplitude than Reflex blink , with the use of all 3 divisions of the orbicularis oculi muscle .
BLINKING IN EVERYDAY
LIFE
CHILDREN
Section::::Blinking in everyday life .
Section::::Children .
Infants do not blink at the same rate of adults ; in fact , infants only blink at an average rate of one or two times in a minute .
The reason for this difference is unknown , but it is suggested that infants do not require the same amount of eye lubrication that adults do because their eyelid opening is smaller in relation to adults .
Additionally , infants do not produce tears during their first month of life .
Infants also get a significant amount more sleep than adults do and , as discussed earlier , fatigued eyes blink more .
However , throughout childhood the blink rate increases , and by adolescence , it is usually equivalent to that of adults .
ADULTS Section::::Adults .
There have been mixed results when studying gender - dependent differences in blinking rates , with results varying from the female rate nearly doubling the male to no significant difference between them .
In addition , women using oral contraceptives blink 32 % more often than other women on average for unknown reasons .
Generally , between each blink is an interval of 2–10 seconds ; actual rates vary by individual averaging around 10 blinks per minute in a laboratory setting .
However , when the eyes are focused on an object for an extended period of time , such as when reading , the rate of blinking decreases to about 3 to 4 times per minute .
This is the major reason that eyes dry out and become fatigued when reading .
When the eyes dry out or become fatigued due to reading on a computer screen , it can be an indication of Computer Vision Syndrome .
Computer Vision Syndrome can be prevented by taking regular breaks , focusing on objects far from the screen , having a well - lit workplace , or using a blink reminder application such as EyeLeo or VisionProtect .
Studies suggest that adults can learn to maintain a healthy blinking rate while reading or looking at a computer screen using biofeedback .
Eye blinking can be a criterion for diagnosing medical conditions .
For example , excessive blinking may help to indicate the onset of Tourette syndrome , strokes or disorders of the nervous system .
A reduced rate of blinking is associated with Parkinson 's disease .
SEE ALSO
* Corneal reflex * Reflex action
* Keratoconjunctivitis sicca or dry eyes
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS