WHITE FANG White Fang is a novel by American author Jack London ( 1876–1916 ) — and the name of the book 's eponymous character , a wild wolfdog .
First serialized in Outing magazine , it was published in 1906 .
The story takes place in Yukon Territory and the Northwest Territories , Canada , during the 1890s Klondike Gold Rush and details White Fang 's journey to domestication .
It is a companion novel ( and a thematic mirror ) to London 's best - known work , The Call of the Wild , which is about a kidnapped , domesticated dog embracing his wild ancestry to survive and thrive in the wild .
Much of White Fang is written from the viewpoint of the titular canine character , enabling London to explore how animals view their world and how they view humans .
White Fang examines the violent world of wild animals and the equally violent world of humans .
The book also explores complex themes including morality and redemption .
As early as 1925 , the story was adapted to film , and it has since seen several more cinematic adaptations , including a 1991 film starring Ethan Hawke and a 2018 Netflix original .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The story begins before the wolf - dog hybrid is born , with two men and their sled dog team on a journey to deliver Lord Alfred 's coffin to a remote town named Fort McGurry in the higher area of the Yukon Territory , Canada .
The men , Bill and Henry , are stalked by a large pack of starving wolves over the course of several days .
Finally , after all of their dogs and Bill have been eaten , four more teams find Henry trying to escape from the wolves ; the wolf pack scatters when they hear the large group of people coming .
The story then follows the pack , which has been robbed of its last prey .
When the pack finally brings down a moose , the famine is ended ; they eventually split up , and the story now follows a she - wolf and her mate , One Eye .
The she - wolf gives birth to a litter of five cubs by the Mackenzie River , and all but one die from hunger .
One Eye is killed by a lynx while trying to rob her den for food for the she - wolf and her cub ; his mate later discovers his remains near the lynx 's den .
The surviving cub and the she - wolf are left to fend for themselves .
Shortly afterward , the she - wolf kills all the lynx 's kittens to feed her cub , prompting the lynx to track her down , and a vicious fight breaks out .
The she - wolf eventually kills the lynx but suffers severe injury ; the lynx carcass is devoured over a period of seven days as the she - wolf recovers from her injuries .
The cub comes across five Native Americans one day , and the she - wolf comes to his rescue .
One man , Gray Beaver , recognizes the she - wolf as Kiche , his brother 's wolfdog , who left during a famine .
Gray Beaver 's brother is dead and so he takes Kiche and her cub and christens the cub White Fang .
White Fang has a harsh life in the Indian camp ; the current puppy pack , seeing him as a wolf , immediately attacks him .
The Indians save him , but the pups never accept him , and the leader , Lip - lip , singles him out for persecution .
White Fang grows to become a savage , callous , morose , solitary , and deadly fighter , " the enemy of his kind " .
It is at this time that White Fang is separated from his mother who is sold off to another Indian Camp by Three Eagles .
He realizes how hard life in the wild is when he runs away from camp and earns the respect of Gray Beaver when he saves his son Mit - Sah from a group of boys seeking revenge .
When a famine occurs , he runs away into the woods and encounters his mother Kiche , only for her to chase him away for she has a new litter of cubs .
He also encounters Lip - lip whom he fights and kills before returning to the camp .
When White Fang is five years old , he is taken to Fort Yukon so that Gray Beaver can trade with the gold - hunters .
There , when Gray Beaver is drunk , White Fang is bought by an evil dog - fighter named Beauty Smith .
White Fang defeats all opponents pitted against him , including several wolves and a lynx , until a bulldog called Cherokee is brought in to fight him .
Cherokee has the upper hand in the fight when he grips the skin and fur of White Fang 's neck and begins to throttle him .
White Fang nearly suffocates but is rescued when a rich , young gold hunter , Weedon Scott , stops the fight and forcefully buys White Fang from Beauty Smith .
Scott attempts to tame White Fang , and after a long , patient effort , he succeeds .
When Scott attempts to return to California alone , White Fang pursues him , and Scott decides to take the dog with him back home .
In Sierra Vista , White Fang must adjust to the laws of the estate .
At the end of the book , an escaped convict , Jim Hall , tries to kill Scott 's father , Judge Scott , for sentencing him to prison for a crime he did n't commit , not knowing that Hall was " railroaded " .
White Fang kills Hall and is nearly killed himself but survives .
As a result , the women of Scott 's estate name him " The Blessed Wolf " .
The story ends with White Fang relaxing in the sun with the puppies he has fathered with the sheep - dog Collie .
MAIN CHARACTERS
* White Fang is the novel 's protagonist .
He is a wolfdog who was born wild but becomes more dog - like after Grey Beaver domesticates him .
*
Gray Beaver is a Native American chief who is White Fang 's first master .
* Beauty Smith is the main antagonist of the novel and White Fang 's second master .
* Weedon Scott is a wealthy gold hunter who is White Fang 's third master and the first one to truly show affection towards him .
* Kiche is White Fang 's mother ; she is known as the " she - wolf " at the beginning of the novel .
* Lip - lip is a canine pup who also lives in the Native American village .
* One - Eye was White Fang 's father .
* Jim Hall was an escaped convict .
MAJOR THEMES Section::::Major themes .
Critics have identified many underlying themes in the novel .
Tom Feller describes the story as " an allegory of humanity 's progression from nature to civilization . "
He also expresses that " the [ story 's ] implication is that the metamorphosis of both the individual and society will require violence at some point . "
Paul Deane states that " [ in the novel , ] society demands a conformity that undermines individualism . "
London himself took influence from Herbert Spencer 's words : " survival of the fittest " , as well as Friedrich Nietzsche 's idea of a " superman " ( or " superdog " , in this instance ) and of " the worship of power " .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The novel is partly an autobiographical allegory based on London 's conversion from teenage hoodlum to married , middle - class writer .
In writing it , he was influenced by the ideas of Herbert Spencer , Karl Marx , and Friedrich Nietzsche .
Conditions in the US also influenced the story .
PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
Since the novel has been published it has been translated into over 89 different languages and released as a three - volume Braille edition .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon its release , White Fang was an immediate success worldwide , and became especially popular among younger readers .
Robert Greenwood called White Fang " one of London 's most interesting and ambitious works . "
Virginia Crane claims that the novel is " generally regarded as artistically inferior to its companion piece
[ The Call of the Wild ] , but [ that it ] helped establish London as a popular American literary figure .
"
Shortly after the book 's publication , London became a target in what would later be called the nature fakers controversy , a literary debate highlighting the conflict between science and sentiment in popular nature writing .
President Theodore Roosevelt , who first spoke out against the " sham naturalists " in 1907 , specifically named London as one of the so - called " nature fakers " .
Citing an example from White Fang , Roosevelt referred to the fight between the bulldog and the wolfdog " the very sublimity of absurdity . "
London only responded to the criticism after the controversy had ended .
He wrote in a 1908 essay entitled " The Other Animals " : ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The novel has been adapted into motion pictures and sequels , animated specials , as well as audiobook format .
A TV series , White Fang , was filmed in Arrowtown , New Zealand in 1993 .
FILMS
* White Fang ( 1946 )
* White Fang ( 1973 )
* Challenge to White Fang ( 1974 )
* White Fang to the Rescue ( 1974 )
* The Story of White Fang ( 1982 )
* White Fang ( 1991 ) * ( 1994 )
* White Fang ( 2018 ) TV SERIES
* The Legend of White Fang ( 1992 )
* White Fang ( 1993 ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS