CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA
The Chief Justice of India ( CJI ) is the head of the judiciary of India and the Supreme Court of India .
The CJI also heads their administrative functions .
As head of the supreme court , the chief justice is responsible for the allocation of cases and appointment of constitutional benches which deal with important matters of law .
In accordance with Article 145 of the Constitution of India and the Supreme Court Rules of Procedure of 1966 , the Chief Justice allocates all work to the other judges who are bound to refer the matter back to him or her ( for re - allocation ) in any case where they require it to be looked into by a larger bench of more judges .
On the administrative side , the Chief Justice carries out the following functions : maintenance of the roster ; appointment of court officials and general and miscellaneous matters relating to the supervision and functioning of the Supreme Court .
It has been an unbroken convention for decades now , to appoint the senior - most judge of the supreme court as the CJI .
The present CJI is Justice Ranjan Gogoi , and is the 46th CJI since January 1950 , the year the Constitution came into effect and the supreme court came into being .
He succeeded Justice Dipak Misra on 2 October 2018 , and will remain in office till 17 November 2019 , the day he retires on turning 65 years in age .
APPOINTMENT Section::::Appointment .
Article 124 of the Constitution of India provides for the manner of appointing judges to the Supreme Court .
Though no specific provision exists in the Constitution for appointing the Chief Justice , who , as a result , is appointed like the other judges conventionally , the outgoing CJI recommends the name of the senior - most judge ( i.e. by date of appointment to the Supreme Court ) for appointment by the President of India , as his successor .
REMOVAL Section::::Removal .
Article 124(4 ) of Constitution of India lays down the procedure for removal of a Judge of Supreme Court which is applicable to Chief Justice as well .
Once appointed , the Chief Justice remains in the office until the age of 65 years .
He can be removed only through a process of impeachment by Parliament as follows :
ACTING PRESIDENT Section::::Acting President .
The President ( Discharge of Functions ) Act , 1969 of India provides that the Chief Justice of India ( CJI ) shall act as the President of India in the event of the offices of both the President and the Vice President being vacant .
When President Zakir Hussain died in office , the Vice President V. V. Giri , acted as the President .
Later , Mr. Giri resigned as the Vice President .
The CJI , Justice Mohammad Hidayatullah then became the acting President of India .
As per the convention , the senior - most judge of the Supreme Court became the acting CJI .
When the newly elected President took office a month later , Justice Hidayatullah reverted as the Chief Justice of India LIST OF CHIEF JUSTICES OF INDIA REMUNERATION Section::::Remuneration .
The Constitution of India gives the power of deciding remuneration as well as other conditions of service of the Chief Justice to the Parliament of India .
Accordingly , such provisions have been laid down in The Supreme Court Judges ( Salaries and Conditions of Service ) Act , 1958 .
This remuneration was revised in 2006 - 2008 , after the sixth central pay commission 's recommendation .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website of Supreme Court of India
* Photo Gallery of Former Chief Justices of India