SPIRIT :
STALLION OF THE CIMARRON Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron is a 2002 American animated adventure film Spirit is the seventh overall film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by DreamWorks Pictures .
The film was directed by Kelly Asbury and Lorna Cook in their directional debuts , and written by John Fusco .
It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature .
In contrast to the way animals are portrayed in an anthropomorphic style in other animated features , Spirit and his fellow horses communicate with each other through sounds and body language like real horses .
Spirit 's thoughts are narrated by his voice actor Matt Damon , but otherwise , he has no vocal dialogue .
Spirit :
Stallion of the Cimarron was released in theaters on May 24 , 2002 , and earned $ 122.6 million on an $ 80 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the 19th - century American West , a young Kiger Mustang colt , Spirit , is born to a herd of horses .
Spirit soon grows into a stallion and assumes the role of leader of the herd , whose duty is to keep the herd safe .
Spirit is a courageous leader but has great curiosity .
One night , upon spotting a strange light near his herd , the stallion decides to investigate the location , where he finds restrained , docile horses and their human wranglers sleeping around a campfire .
They wake up , and seeing him as a magnificent specimen , chase and capture him , taking him to a US cavalry post .
At this time , the US army is fighting the Indian Wars and taking over the soon - to - be western United States .
Frightened and confused , Spirit finds himself enslaved among other horses .
Then , he encounters " The Colonel " , who decides to have the mustang tamed , refusing to believe the idea of Spirit being too stubborn , but Spirit manages to fight off all attempts to tame him .
To weaken Spirit , the Colonel orders him tied to a post for three days with no food or water .
Meanwhile , a Lakota Native American named Little Creek is also brought into the fort and held captive .
Spirit is later supposedly broken in by the Colonel , who speaks his idea of how any wild horse can be tamed .
However , Spirit gets a second wind and finally throws him off .
Frustrated , the Colonel attempts to shoot him before Little Creek ( who frees himself from his bounds with a knife ) saves Spirit from being shot as they , along with the rest of the horses , escape from the post .
Little Creek 's mare , Rain , meets them along with other natives who capture Spirit again .
After returning to the Lakota village , Little Creek tries to tame Spirit with kindness , but Spirit refuses to be ridden .
Little Creek ties Spirit and Rain together and , when he tries to leave , she insists on staying , then shows him her world .
Spirit begins to warm up to Little Creek and falls in love with Rain .
At the end of their time together , Little Creek tries again to ride him , but Spirit is still unwilling .
He then decides that Spirit will never be tamed and frees him .
As Spirit asks Rain to come with him to his herd , a cavalry regiment led by the Colonel attacks the village .
During the vicious battle , the Colonel tries to shoot Little Creek , but Spirit runs into the Colonel and his horse , deflecting the shot and saving Little Creek 's life .
However , Rain is shot by the Colonel , knocking her into the river .
Spirit dives into the river to try to rescue Rain but is unsuccessful and they both plummet over a waterfall .
Spirit finds Rain dying from her injuries and stays by her side until the army captures him .
Watching Spirit being pulled away , Little Creek arrives , vowing to free him to satisfy his life - debt and follows the men after tending to Rain .
Spirit is loaded onto a train and taken to a work site on the Transcontinental Railroad , where he is put to work pulling a steam locomotive .
Realizing that the track will infringe on his homeland , Spirit breaks free from the sledge and breaks the chains holding the other horses .
They escape , and the locomotive falls off its wooden sledge and rolls down the hill chasing Spirit in a heavily damaged condition , once the badly damaged locomotive and Spirit got back to the work site , the locomotive demolishes two wooden storage sheds and then slamming into another locomotive cause a massive fire explosion from its boiler / water heater causing to set the entire forest a blaze .
Once Spirit sees all this , he scurries off into the burning forest , leaving the work site behind .
But after running for quite a while , the chain caught Spirit of a trunk of a fallen tree .
Little Creek appears in time and saves Spirit from the ensuing wildfire and together they jump and threw themselves into the water of the small river to safety .
The next morning , the Colonel and his men find Spirit and Little Creek , and a chase ensues through the Grand Canyon .
Eventually , they are trapped by a gorge .
Little Creek gives up , but Spirit manages to successfully leap across the canyon .
Spirit 's move amazes the Colonel ; he humbly accepts defeat , stops his men from shooting the two , and allows Spirit and Little Creek to leave .
Spirit returns to the rebuilt Lakota village with Little Creek and finds Rain nursed back to health .
Little Creek decides to name Spirit the " Spirit - Who - Could - Not - Be - Broken " and sets him and Rain free .
The two horses return to Spirit 's homeland , eventually reuniting with Spirit 's herd .
VOICE CAST
* Matt Damon as Spirit
* James Cromwell as The Colonel .
He is loosely based on George Armstrong Custer .
* Daniel Studi as Little Creek
* Chopper Bernet as Sgt .
Adams * Jeff LeBeau as Murphy and the Railroad Foreman * Richard McGonagle as Bill * Matt Levin as Joe * Robert Cait as Jake * John Rubano as the Soldier
* Adam Paul as Pete * Charles Napier as Roy
* Zahn McClarnon and Michael Horse as Little Creek 's friends * Meredith Wells as a Lakota girl
* Donald Fullilove as Train Pull Foreman * Rodger Bumpass , Jack Angel , Bob Bergen , Philip Proctor , Paul Eiding , Corey Burton , David Cowgill , Robert Clotworthy , Chris Sanders , Stephen J. Anderson and Jim Cummings as Colonel 's Soldiers
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Writer John Fusco , best known for his work in the Western and Native American genres ( such as the films Young Guns and Young Guns II ) , was hired by DreamWorks to create an original screenplay based on an idea by Jeffrey Katzenberg .
Fusco began by writing and submitting a novel to the studio and then adapted his own work into screenplay format .
He remained on the project as the main writer over the course of four years , working closely with Katzenberg , the directors , and artists .
ANIMATION AND DESIGN Section::::Animation and design .
Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron was made over the course of four years using a conscious blend of traditional hand - drawn animation and computer animation .
Katzenberg said that the animation was the most difficult piece of production he worked on for a movie : " I literally spent the first few weeks with my door shut , telling everyone , ' Go away ; I 've got to concentrate . '
It was quite daunting because when I first started to draw horses , I suddenly realized how little I knew .
"
The team at DreamWorks Animation , under his guidance , used a horse named " Donner " as the model for Spirit and brought the horse to the animation studio in Glendale , California for the animators to study .
Sound designer Tim Chau was dispatched to stables outside Los Angeles to record the sounds of real horses ; the final product features real hoof beats and horse vocals that were used to express their vocalizations in the film .
None of the animal characters in the film speak English beyond occasional reflective narration from the protagonist mustang , voiced by Matt Damon in the film .
Many of the animators who worked on Spirit also worked on Shrek 2 , as their influence can be seen for the character Donkey .
The production team , consisting of Kelly Asbury , Lorna Cook , Mireille Soria , Jeffrey Katzenberg , Kathy Altieri , Luc Desmarchelier , Ron Lukas , and story supervisor
Ronnie del Carmen took a trip to the western United States to view scenic places they could use as inspiration for locations in the film .
The homeland of the mustangs and Lakotas is based on Glacier National Park , Yellowstone National Park , Yosemite National Park , and the Grand Teton mountain range ; the cavalry outpost was also based on Monument Valley .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The instrumental score was composed by Hans Zimmer with songs by Bryan Adams in both the English and French versions of the album .
The opening theme song for the film , " Here I Am " was written by Bryan Adams , Gretchen Peters , and Hans Zimmer .
It was produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis .
Another song , not included in the film itself ( although it can be heard in the ending credits ) , is " Do n't Let Go " , which is sung by Bryan Adams with Sarah McLachlan on harmonies and piano .
It was written by Bryan Adams , Gavin Greenaway , Robert John " Mutt " Lange , and Gretchen Peters .
Many of the songs and arrangements were set in the American West , with themes based on love , landscapes , brotherhood , struggles , and journeys .
Garth Brooks was originally supposed to write and record songs for the film but the deal fell through .
The Italian versions of the songs were sung by Zucchero .
The Spanish versions of the tracks on the album were sung by Erik Rubín ( Hispanic America ) and Raúl ( Spain ) .
The Brazilian version of the movie soundtrack was sung in Portuguese by Paulo Ricardo .
The Norwegian versions of the songs were sung by Vegard Ylvisåker of the Norwegian comedy duo Ylvis .
RELEASE RECEPTION
Section::::Release .
Section::::Reception .
Based on 126 reviews collected by review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron has an overall approval rating of 69 % and a weighted average score of 6.4/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : " A visually stunning film that may be too predictable and politically correct for adults , but should serve children well . "
Review aggregator Metacritic gave the film a score of 52 based on 29 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Critic Roger Ebert , said in his review of the film , " Uncluttered by comic supporting characters and cute sidekicks , Spirit is more pure and direct than most of the stories we see in animation – a fable I suspect younger viewers will strongly identify with . "
Leonard Maltin of Hot Ticket called it " one of the most beautiful and exciting animated features ever made " .
Clay Smith of Access Hollywood considered the film " An Instant Classic " .
Jason Solomons described the film as " a crudely drawn DreamWorks animation about a horse that saves the West by bucking a US Army General " .
USA Today 's Claudia Puig gave it 3 stars out of 4 , writing that the filmmakers ' " most significant achievement is fashioning a movie that will touch the hearts of both children and adults , as well as bring audiences to the edge of their seats . "
Dave Kehr of the New York Times criticized the way in which the film portrayed Spirit and Little Creek as " pure cliches " and suggested that the film could have benefited from a comic relief character .
The film was screened out of competition at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival .
Rain was the first animated horse to receive an honorary registration certificate from the American Paint Horse Association ( APHA ) .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
When the film opened on Memorial Day Weekend 2002 , the film earned $ 17,770,036 on the Friday - Sunday period , and $ 23,213,736 through the four - day weekend for a $ 6,998 average from 3,317 theaters .
The film overall opened in fourth place behind , Spider - Man , and Insomnia .
In its second weekend , the film retreated 36 % to $ 11,303,814 for a $ 3,362 average from expanding to 3,362 theaters and finishing in fifth place for the weekend .
In its third weekend , the film decreased 18 % to $ 9,303,808 for a $ 2,767 average from 3,362 theaters .
The film closed on September 12 , 2002 , after earning $ 73,280,117 in the United States and Canada with an additional $ 49,283,422 overseas for a worldwide total of $ 122,563,539 , against an $ 80 million budget .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Winner / Nominee recipient(s ) ! !
Result HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron was released on VHS and DVD on November 19 , 2002 .
It was re - released on DVD on May 18 , 2010 .
The film was released on Blu - ray in Germany on April 3 , 2014 , in Australia on April 4 and in the United States and Canada on May 13 , 2014 .
The film was re - issued by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu - ray and DVD on October 19 , 2014 .
In July 2014 , the film 's distribution rights were purchased by DreamWorks Animation from Paramount Pictures ( owners of the pre-2005 DreamWorks Pictures catalog ) and transferred to 20th Century Fox before reverting to Universal Studios in 2018 .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Two video games based on the film were released on October 28 , 2002 , by THQ : the PC game Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron — Forever Free and the Game Boy Advance game Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron — Search For Homeland .
TELEVISION SERIES Section::::Television series .
A computer - animated television series based on the film , titled Spirit Riding Free , premiered on Netflix on May 5 , 2017 .
The series follows all the daring adventures when Spirit , who is the offspring of the original , meets a girl named Lucky whose courage matches his own .
SEE ALSO
* List of animated feature films * Kiger Mustang , the horse breed of Spirit , the protagonist of the story
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS