HYPERDONTIA Hyperdontia is the condition of having supernumerary teeth , or teeth that appear in addition to the regular number of teeth .
They can appear in any area of the dental arch and can affect any dental organ .
The opposite of this condition is hypodontia , where there is a congenital lack of teeth .
This is seen more commonly than hyperdontia .
The scientific definition of hyperdontia is " any tooth or odontogenic structure that is formed from tooth germ in excess of usual number for any given region of the dental arch .
" They can be a lot of teeth or not many teeth and can occur on any place in the dental arch .
They may be symmetrical or non - symmetrical .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Supernumerary teeth can be classified by shape and by position .
The shapes include the following : * Supplemental ( where the tooth has a normal shape for the teeth in that series ) ; * Tuberculate ( also called barrel shaped ) ; * Conical ( also called peg shaped ) ; * Compound odontoma ( multiple small tooth - like forms ) ; * Complex odontoma ( a disorganized mass of dental tissue ) When classified by position , a supernumerary tooth may be referred to as a mesiodens , a paramolar , or a distomolar .
Occasionally , these teeth do not erupt into the oral cavity but manifest as a malocclusion .
The most common supernumerary tooth is a mesiodens , which is a malformed , peg - like tooth that occurs between the maxillary central incisors .
Fourth and fifth molars that form behind the third molars are another kind of supernumerary teeth .
PREVALENCE Section::::Prevalence .
It is evident that hyperdontia Is more common in the permanent dentition than in the primary .
The difference between the prevalence of these teeth in permanent dentition in males and females is considerate .
Males show hyperdontia twice as often as females .
This approximation does vary in terms of location , any other associating syndromes and ethnicity of the individual .
In terms of ethnicity it can be seen that hyperdontia is in fact less common in Caucasian than in Asian populations .
There is evidence to show that an individual is more likely to have hyperdontia if people in their family also have hypodontia .
DETECTION OF SUPERNUMERARY TEETH Section::::Detection of supernumerary teeth .
Supernumerary teeth may be detected by taking two different x - rays at different angles .
Examples of this may be an intra - oral X - ray ( one that is taken inside the mouth ) and a panoramic radiograph .
However , these x - rays are 2D and therefore do not accurately portray the 3D view of the teeth .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
There is evidence of hereditary factors along with some evidence of environmental factors leading to this condition .
While a single excess tooth is relatively common , multiple hyperdontia is rare in people with no other associated diseases or syndromes .
Many supernumerary teeth never erupt , but they may delay eruption of nearby teeth or cause other dental or orthodontic problems .
Molar - type extra teeth are the rarest form .
Dental X - rays are often used to diagnose hyperdontia .
It is suggested that supernumerary teeth develop from a third tooth bud arising from the dental lamina near the regular tooth bud or possibly from splitting the regular tooth bud itself .
Supernumerary teeth in deciduous ( baby ) teeth are less common than in permanent teeth .
Hyperdontia may be seen in a multitude of syndromic conditions such as : Cleft lip / palate , Craniofacial Dysplasia , Gardner Syndrome and Sturge - Weber Syndrome .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
The presence of a supernumerary tooth , particularly when seen in young children , is associated with a disturbance of the maxillary incisor region .
This commonly results in the impaction of the incisors during the mixed dentition stage .
The study debating this also considered many other factors such as : the patient 's age , number , morphology , growth orientation and position of the supernumerary tooth .
Alongside this issue the presence of an extra tooth can impede the eruption of other extra or adjacent normal teeth .
Therefore , the presence of a supernumerary tooth when found must be appropriately approached with the correct treatment plan incorporating the likelihood of incisal crowding .
In some individuals the eruption of extra teeth can occur far from the dental arch i.e. within the maxillary sinus .
Extra teeth may also migrate to a different location after development .
In some cases , extra teeth may cause cysts forming .
Crowding is also something frequently seen in people with extra teeth .
REMOVAL Section::::Removal .
Although these teeth are usually asymptomatic and pose no threat to the individual , they are often extracted for aesthetic reasons , to allow the eruption of other teeth , orthodontic reasons and/or suspected pathology .
This is done particularly if the mesiodens is positioned in the maxillary central incisor region .
The traditional method of removal is done by using bone chisels , although a more advanced technique has been found to be more beneficial , especially if surgery is required .
Through the use of Piezoelectricity , Piezoelectric ultrasonic bone surgery may be more time consuming than the traditional method but it seems to reduce the post - operative bleeding and associated complications quite significantly .
RELATED CONDITIONS Section::::Related conditions .
Another abnormal condition is hypodontia , in which there are fewer than the usual number of teeth .
Hypodontia is seen in a number of disorders , including Gardner 's syndrome and cleidocranial dysostosis , where multiple supernumerary teeth are seen that are usually impacted .
Other associated conditions are : Cleidocranial dysplasia , Ehlers - Danlos syndrome Type III , Ellis - Van Creveld syndrome , Gardner 's syndrome , Goldenhar syndrome , Hallermann - Streiff syndrome , Orofaciodigital syndrome type
I , Incontinentia pigmenti , Marfan syndrome , Nance Horan syndrome , and Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome 1 REFERENCES