JOHNNY CAGE Johnny Cage is a fictional character from the Mortal Kombat fighting game franchise by Midway Games .
He was introduced as one of the series ' original seven player characters in the first Mortal Kombat game in 1992 , and has become a staple of the series .
Created as a parody of martial arts film actor Jean - Claude Van Damme , Cage is a cocky movie star who provides the comic relief of the franchise .
He becomes a more rounded character in Mortal Kombat X , which introduces his and Sonya Blade 's daughter Cassie Cage .
Cage has featured extensively also in non - game media and merchandise for the series .
General and critical reception of the character has been mostly positive for multiple factors such as his role in the series , his characterization and gameplay , and his Fatality finishing moves .
CHARACTER DESIGN
Section::::Character design .
Original concept sketches for a proposed fighting game by artist John Tobias showed a character called " Michael Grimm , the current box office champion and star of such movies as Dragon 's Fist , Dragon 's Fist II and the award - winning Sudden Violence . "
Midway Games had hoped to license martial artist and actor Jean - Claude Van Damme for the game that was intended to be modeled after Van Damme 's 1988 film Bloodsport , and the company created a short demo reel that consisted of film footage of Van Damme inserted into a digital background in order to convince the actor to join the project .
However , the attempt fell through , and when the fighting game later became Mortal Kombat , the Michael Grimm character was retained as a spoof of Van Damme and renamed Johnny Cage .
According to martial artist Daniel Pesina , who portrayed Cage in the original game and the 1993 sequel Mortal Kombat II , the character was first modeled after Daniel Rand from the Iron Fist comic series .
As a narcissistic Hollywood star , Cage serves as comic relief in contrast to the games ' more serious characters like Liu Kang and Raiden , which is embellished in the 2011 Mortal Kombat reboot game with a large tattoo of his first name across his chest .
Cage 's real name , John Carlton , was taken from Midway artist and programmer John Carlton , who worked on the NBA Jam game series .
Cage 's main role in Mortal Kombat X is as a Special Forces consultant instead of an actor ; his design by NetherRealm Studios ( formerly Midway Games ) was their attempt to define whether or not he had taken his martial arts skills seriously since the aftermath of the 2011 reboot game , and he was outfitted in tactical gear that was designed to fit his fighting style while finding the balance between " serious or stoic " and " too goofy " .
Cage was the first character created for Mortal Kombat , and the test prototype of the original game had just two Johnnies fighting each other , while Van Damme 's split - legged groin punch from Bloodsport was included as one of Cage 's special moves .
He was additionally the last character to be given a Fatality ( a finishing move that executes the player 's defeated opponent ) , as he originally was to just throw his opponent across the screen until Tobias ultimately created what would become Cage 's decapitation - punch finisher .
In Mortal Kombat X , Cage 's gameplay style is split into three fighting variations like those of the other playable characters , and Bryan Dawson of Prima Games wrote in 2015 that while Cage was effective at zoning .
APPEARANCES MORTAL KOMBAT GAMES
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Mortal Kombat games .
In the original Mortal Kombat , Johnny Cage is a martial artist and actor who enters the Shaolin Tournament simply to prove that he does not rely on special effects in his films , and he is the only character in the game who does not share a past history with the other characters .
In the 1993 sequel Mortal Kombat II , Cage disappears from the set of his latest film after following Mortal Kombat champion Liu Kang into the otherworldly dimension of Outworld , where he joins forces with other fighters in participating in a second tournament in their successful attempt at protecting Earthrealm ( Earth ) against Outworld 's evil emperor , Shao Kahn .
Cage is absent from the series continuity until the 1996 compilation title Mortal Kombat Trilogy , which expands on the events of Mortal Kombat 3 ( 1995 ) and its upgrade .
He is killed by Shao Kahn 's forces during an invasion of Earth , but his path to the afterlife is blocked due to a merger of the realm and Earth , which restores his soul and enables him to help his comrades defeat Kahn , after which he ascends to the heavens .
In Mortal Kombat 4 ( 1997 ) , Cage , at his request , is restored to life by Raiden so he can again fight alongside his friends , this time in attempt to defeat the forces of the disgraced former deity Shinnok .
Cage returns along with the series ' then - entire playable roster in ( 2006 ) , participating in the final tournament that would decide mankind 's fate .
He is one of only seventeen characters to receive an official game biography , in which he becomes the de facto leader of Earthrealm 's forces after he sees multiple visions of Shinnok and tracks him down to Shang Tsung 's island , where Shinnok plots to take over Shao Kahn 's rule of Outworld .
However , Cage is killed for the third time in the original series continuity when he dies along with the other combatants in a battle royal at the Pyramid of Argus in the fictional realm of Edenia in the game 's opening sequence .
In Mortal Kombat , the 2011 reboot of the first three games , Cage is described as " a descendant of an ancient Mediterranean cult who bred warriors for the gods " as an explanation for his special powers .
His disembodied head is seen amidst the fighters ' corpses in the introduction sequence that depicts the grisly aftermath of the battle and the resulting onset of Armageddon .
The storyline then travels back in time to the Shaolin Tournament from the original Mortal Kombat , where Cage is a cocky and talkative martial arts actor who has entered as a publicity stunt and repeatedly flirts with Special Forces lieutenant Sonya Blade .
He initially considers the tournament a joke after defeating Outworld minions Reptile and Baraka , until Raiden informs him of the consequences should Outworld emerge victorious , which convinces Cage to fight alongside Raiden 's chosen heroes in the game 's story mode .
However , he is later defeated in the competition by Earthrealm assassin Cyrax , who refuses to kill him .
In the retelling of the second tournament from Mortal Kombat II , he is eliminated by Ermac , and during the events of Mortal Kombat 3 , Raiden saves Cage from death at the hands of the centaur Motaro .
Cage and Sonya are the only Earth warriors to survive the course of the game 's plot after their cohorts are killed by Shao Kahn 's queen , Sindel .
In
Mortal Kombat X ( 2015 ) , while attempting to rescue Sonya from Shinnok , Cage inadvertently discovers his special powers that enable him to assist the thunder god Raiden in imprisoning Shinnok inside a magical amulet .
He and Sonya are later married and have a daughter , Cassie , but they divorce due to Sonya 's commitment to her career .
Twenty - five years after the events of the reboot game , Cage is part of a secret Special Forces unit under Sonya 's command and headed by Cassie , who bears her mother 's looks and her father 's cocky attitude .
Near the climax of the game 's story mode , Shinnok returns and corrupts the Jinsei ( the source of Earthrealm 's life force ) while holding Cage hostage , but he is rescued after Cassie defeats Shinnok in the final battle , and the Cage family reunites .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
In the 1995 live - action film Mortal Kombat , Johnny Cage is one of Raiden 's three chosen warriors with Liu Kang and Sonya , and he takes part in the tournament to prove he is a legitimate fighter after Shang Tsung assumes the identity of Cage 's sensei in order to trick him into participating .
He defeats Scorpion and Goro , and is handpicked by Shang Tsung to fight him in final combat near the conclusion until Liu Kang accepts the challenge .
Cage was played by actor Linden Ashby , who had practiced martial arts before he was cast in the role .
He did not return for the 1997 sequel , in which Cage is played by Chris Conrad .
During Shao Kahn 's invasion of Earth in the beginning of the film , Cage is killed by the emperor in his attempt to save Sonya when she is taken hostage .
Pat E. Johnson , the first film 's stunt choreographer , recommended Conrad as Ashby 's replacement to Annihilation 's producers .
Martial artist Matt Mullins plays Cage in director Kevin Tancharoen 's 2010 short film .
Cage is a faltering action star who works undercover for police officer Jackson Briggs , but Baraka kills him in a brutal fight .
Mullins reprised the role in the third episode of the 2011 web series , with Cage revised as an unemployed television actor who had starred in Power Rangers .
Desperate to revive his flailing career , he pitches reality show pilots in which he engages in acts of vigilantism by beating up various criminals , but they are rejected by two executives .
Cage later overhears one of them stealing his ideas while proposing a new show to another actor , and he assaults the executive along with two security guards .
He is then approached by Shang Tsung as the episode concludes .
Mullins was replaced by Casper Van Dien for the 2013 second season , in which it is revealed that Cage refused Shang Tsung 's offer to fight for Outworld , and reluctantly agreed to join Raiden 's warriors in participating in the tournament .
Van Dien compared his career trajectory to that of the character in a 2013 interview with MTV .
In Malibu Comics ' Mortal Kombat comic book line that ran from 1994 to 1995 , Cage first features with the characters from the original game in the 1994 six - issue Blood & Thunder miniseries , which loosely follows the game 's storyline of Shang Tsung hosting the Shaolin Tournament .
In the follow - up miniseries Battlewave ( 1995 ) , which focuses mainly on the new characters introduced in Mortal Kombat II , Cage has resumed his acting career after the tournament , but later travels to Outworld with Jax to investigate an attack carried out by Goro .
He is a supporting character in DC Comics ' 2015 twelve - issue Mortal Kombat X miniseries , with a chapter in the eighth issue devoted to the background of his relationship with Sonya .
Cage has been licensed for various action figures produced by Hasbro , Toy Island , and Jazwares .
Advanced Graphics released a life - sized Cage cardboard standee in 2011 , and Syco Collectibles released a polystone character statuette in 2012 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Cage has been rated among the top Mortal Kombat characters by various gaming media publications , and his Fatality finishing moves over the course of his series appearances have been positively received .
Brad Nicholson of Destructoid enthused in 2008 that Cage was " easily the best character in a fighting game ever , " and Marcin Górecki of Polish gaming magazine Secret Service ranked Cage the second - best male fighting - game character in 1996 , behind Ryu from the Street Fighter franchise .
However , Shea Serrano of Grantland rated Cage the second - worst of Mortal Kombat II 's twelve characters in 2012 , on the basis of his skill being " overtaken almost entirely by his own ego .
"
In her 2015 review of Mortal Kombat X , Maddy Myers of Eurogamer questioned what she felt was the implausibility of the " white - as - snow " union of Cage and Sonya .
Justin Clark of Slant Magazine considered Cage to be among the " older , self - serious dinosaurs wrestling with relevance " in Mortal Kombat X , his cocky attitude notwithstanding .
Critical reception of Cage 's characterization in the Mortal Kombat games and alternate media has proven mixed .
Chris Buffa of GameDaily wrote : " If you ca n't marry Brad Pitt , you can always settle for Mortal Kombat 's Johnny Cage .
GamesRadar considered Cage a combination of Jean - Claude Van Damme , Nicolas Cage , and Robert Downey ,
Jr. Writing for Complex , Elton Jones declared that Cage " embodies Hollywood 's overpaid jerk persona perfectly , " while Hanuman Welch considered Cage an exemplification of overconfidence and self - delusion , as well as a " spokesperson of the obnoxious Ed Hardy crowd . "
Mark Walton of GameSpot castigated Cage in the 2011 reboot game as sexist and arrogant .
Gavin Jasper of Den of Geek praised Linden Ashby 's performance in the first Mortal Kombat film as " a perfect idea of " Cage 's personality .
R. L. Shaffer of IGN was critical of Cage 's " illogical character arc " as a former Power Rangers actor in the 2011 first season of Mortal Kombat :
Legacy , as he felt it was disconnected from Cage 's role in the games , but Carl Lyon of Fearnet opined in his 2013 second - season review that Casper Van Dien 's portrayal of the character made Cage " the unlikable asshole we all know and love . "
SEE ALSO
*
Dan Hibiki
NOTES REFERENCES