MOVING VIOLATION
A moving violation is any violation of the law committed by the driver of a vehicle while it is in motion .
The term " motion " distinguishes it from other motor vehicle violations , such as paperwork violations ( which include violations involving automobile insurance , registration and inspection ) , parking violations , or equipment violations .
TYPES Section::::Types .
While some violations , like parking violations , are civil matters involving a vehicle 's owner , moving violations are charged against the actual driver .
Moving violations are usually classified as infractions or misdemeanors , but serious violations such as hit and run , driving under the influence , and road rage can be considered felonies .
COSTS Section::::Costs .
Moving violations involve fines which must be paid as well and sometimes punitive points assessed to the license of the driver .
As a driver accumulates points , he or she may be required to attend defensive driving lessons , re - take his or her driving test , pay additional taxes , or even surrender his or her license .
Additionally , drivers with more points on their driving record often must pay more for car insurance than drivers with fewer .
Sometimes tickets are used in a speed trap as a form of fundraising .
For example , a local government that is suffering a budget shortfall may ticket more aggressively within its jurisdiction to increase revenue .
In the United States , citation fines can vary widely between jurisdictions for the same behaviour , usually between $ 25 and $ 1000 .
In countries such as Finland , however , they are specific proportions of the violator 's income , and fines in excess of $ 100,000 can be assessed to wealthy individuals .
In Canada , each province is individual in how they treat similar behaviour and each violation usually includes a set fine and demerit points against the driver 's license .
For example , a speeding ticket in Ontario of 50 + km over is 6 demerit points against the driver 's licence with the approximate fine calculated as ( km over x 9.75 )
x 1.25 , as well it carries a one - week automatic licence suspension and car impoundment .
In Manitoba speeding in excess of 49 km is 8 demerit points and a fine of 557 dollars .
EXAMPLES OF MOVING VIOLATIONS
* speeding , which can be exceeding a limit or ( in some jurisdictions ) simply driving at an unsafe speed * tailgating or failing to maintain an assured clear distance ahead ( ACDA )
* running a stop sign or red traffic light * failure to yield to another vehicle with the right - of - way * failure to signal for turns or lane changes * improper lane usage , such as failing to drive within a single lane * crossing over a center divider , median or gore * driving on the shoulder where it is considered illegal under certain conditions * failure to use a seat belt * illegal use of window tints and obstructions * failure to stop for a pedestrian in a crosswalk * failure to stop for a school bus when children are boarding or exiting ( in certain jurisdictions )
* failure to secure a load to a truck or lorry
* driving in a car pool lane illegally
* operating a telecommunications device
while driving ( in jurisdictions that prohibit this ) * driving a vehicle outside the conditions of one 's license * driving without a license or with a suspended license or with a license from another country * driving a vehicle in a bus lane or tracks * failure to stop after a traffic collision or make a report
More serious moving violations include : * driving under the influence
* reckless driving
* street racing
*
vehicular homicide SEE ALSO * Traffic ticket
* Traffic court * Traffic school REFERENCES