PARIS LAS VEGAS
Paris Las Vegas is a hotel and casino located on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise , Nevada .
It is owned and operated by Caesars Entertainment Corporation .
The theme is the city of Paris , France ; it includes a half scale , tall replica of the Eiffel Tower , a sign in the shape of the Montgolfier balloon , a two - thirds size Arc de Triomphe , a replica of La Fontaine des Mers , and a 1,200-seat theatre called Le Théâtre des Arts .
The front of the hotel suggests the Paris Opera House and the Louvre .
The Paris is linked via a promenade to its sister property , Bally 's Las Vegas , through which it is linked to the Las Vegas Monorail at the Bally 's & Paris station .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In May 1995 , Bally Entertainment , owner of the adjacent Bally 's Las Vegas , announced the projects at a shareholders meeting .
Paris was designed by architectural companies Leidenfrost / Horowitz & Assoc . , Bergman , Walls & Assoc .
and MBH Architects .
The design architect of the project was Bergman Walls Associates .
Herbert Horowitz , Partner of Leidenfrost / Horowitz & Assoc . , was executive architect and signed all plans .
Bally broke ground for the Paris Las Vegas on April 18 , 1997 , and construction began in May on the parcel .
It was built at an estimated cost of $ 760 million .
Original plans for the Eiffel Tower called for a full - scale replica , however that would have interfered with the nearby McCarran Airport and designers therefore reduced it to approximately 1:2 scale .
The hotel is 33 stories tall .
A unique architectural aspect of the Paris is that the back legs of its Eiffel Tower actually come down through the ceiling into the casino floor .
Paris Las Vegas opened on September 1 , 1999 , with fireworks being shot from the Eiffel Tower .
French actress Catherine Deneuve flipped a switch , turning on all of Paris ' lights , including the various crystal chandeliers in the main lobby .
On January 31 , 2007 , Paris Las Vegas premiered its new show The Producers , headlined by David Hasselhoff .
There were reports of friction between the show 's producers and Hasselhoff and he announced he would leave May 6 due to other commitments .
The Producers refocused on Max , played by Tony Danza .
Danza came on as the celebrity actor for the show until The Producers closed on February 9 , 2008 .
Barry Manilow has headlined at the Paris since March 6 , 2010 .
To counter the 2008–2009 economic downturn , Harrah 's focused on marketing its properties to specific segments of the population ; as a result Paris is being marketed heavily towards gay and lesbian travelers .
Beginning in 2010 , Caesars Entertainment Corporation has begun a series of improvement projects that will see some removal of the Parisian theme .
Caesars is beginning to phase out the French greeters around the property , and in early 2010 begun a major remodel project at the front entrance .
The project debuted in Spring 2011 and includes a new nightclub dubbed ' Chateau ' and the largest Sugar Factory store on the Strip .
It was announced in early December 2010 that the hotel 's famous steakhouse Les Artisies would close at the end of January 2011 to make way for Gordon Ramsay Steak .
The controversial icon 's restaurant opened in June 2011 .
The Chateau nightclub opened in early March , 2011 .
The nightclub overlooks the Strip and spans more than in a two - story , outdoor setting .
Outside , guests will find a terrace overlooking the Strip with VIP cabanas and three additional bars .
During the day , the terrace will serve as a beer garden and restaurant , opening at 10 a.m.
In 2015 , Hexx Kitchen & Bar and Hexx Chocolate & Confexxions was opened in the space formerly occupied by the Sugar Factory .
Hexx is the first " bean - to - bar " chocolate maker in Nevada .
In 2016 , Beer Park by Budweiser opened on a 10,000-square - foot ( 930 m² ) deck overlooking the Las Vegas Strip .
It is Las Vegas ' first rooftop bar and grill .
FILM HISTORY
FILMS
*
In the 2006 miniseries , Paris is seen sinking in a massive sinkhole caused by acidic water undermining the underground limestone ( barring the Eiffel Tower replica , which collapses while it sinks ) along with the rest of the city .
*
In the 2007 film , Paris is seen buried in sand , along with the rest of Las Vegas , several years after a zombie apocalypse .
One of the characters climbs the Eiffel Tower replica to escape a horde of zombies .
* Lester Nygaard ( Fargo ) got Insurance Salesman of the Year 2007
Prix there .
*
In the 2009 film 2012 , Paris , along with the rest of The Strip , is destroyed .
*
In the 2010 animated film Despicable Me , Gru is shown to have stolen the Eiffel Tower replica along with the Statue of Liberty replica from the New York - New York Hotel and Casino .
*
The Eiffel Tower replica is destroyed by the female MUTO in the 2014 film Godzilla .
* Pteranodons land on the Eiffel Tower in the post - credits scene of 2018 's GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* List of Caesars Entertainment properties
* List of casinos in Nevada
*
The Parisian Macao - similarly themed hotel in Macau , China .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS