THE NOTEBOOK ( NOVEL )
The Notebook is a 1996 romantic novel by American novelist Nicholas Sparks , The novel was later adapted into a popular film of the same name , in 2004 .
The Indian Bollywood film , Zindagi Tere Naam , starring Mithun Chakraborty , is also based on it .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
This was Nicholas Sparks ' first published novel .
It was the third written after The Passing and The Royal Murders , which he did not publish .
He wrote it over a period of six months in 1994 .
Literary agent Theresa Park discovered Sparks by picking the book out of her agency 's slush pile and reading it .
Park offered to represent him .
In October 1995 , Park secured a $ 1 million advance for the book from the Time Warner Book Group , and the novel was published in October 1996 .
It was on The New York Times Best Seller list in its first week of release .
The Notebook was a hardcover best seller for more than a year .
In interviews , Sparks said he was inspired to write the novel by the grandparents of his wife , who had been married for more than 60 years when he met them .
In The Notebook , he tried to express the long romantic love of that couple .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The novel opens with Noah Calhoun , an old man , reading to a woman in a nursing home .
He tells her the following story : Noah , 31 , returns from World War II to his town of New Bern , North Carolina .
He finishes restoring an antebellum - style house , after his father 's death .
Meanwhile Allie , 29 , sees the house in the newspaper and decides to pay him a visit .
They are meeting , again , after a 14-year separation , which followed their brief but passionate summer romance when her family was visiting the town .
They were separated by class , as she was the daughter of a wealthy family , and he worked as a laborer in a lumberyard .
Seeing each other brings on a flood of memories and strong emotions in both of them .
They have dinner together and talk about their lives and the past .
Allie learns that Noah had written letters to her for one year after their breakup .
She realizes that her mother hid the letters so that Allie could never receive them and would conclude that Noah had forgotten about her .
They talk about what could have happened between them without her mother 's interference .
At the end of the night , Noah invites Allie to come back the next day and promises her a surprise .
She decides to see him again .
During this time , her fiancé , Lon , tries to reach her at the hotel .
When Allie does not respond to his calls , he begins to worry .
The next day , Noah takes Allie on a canoe ride in a small lake where swans and geese swim .
She is enchanted .
On their way back , they are caught in a storm and end up soaked .
When they return to his house , they talk again about how important they were to each other , and how their feelings have not changed .
Noah and Allie share a kiss and make love .
Allie 's mother shows up the next morning and gives Allie the letters from Noah .
When her mother leaves , Allie is torn and has a decision to make .
She knows she loves Noah , but she does not want to hurt Lon .
Noah begs her to stay with him , but she decides to leave .
She cries all the way back to the hotel and starts reading the letters her mother returned to her .
At the hotel , her fiancé Lon is waiting in the lobby .
The man stops reading the story at this point , and implies to the audience that he is reading to his wife , who suffers from Alzheimer 's disease and does not recognize him .
Throughout the story he explains he is also ill , battling a third cancer , and suffering heart disease , kidney failure , and severe arthritis in his hands .
He resumes reading the story and describing their life together : her career as a noted painter , their children , growing old together , and finally the diagnosis of Alzheimer 's .
He had changed the names in the story to protect her , but he is Noah
and she is Allie .
They walk together and Allie , although she does not recognize him , says she might feel something for him .
That night they have dinner together .
Referring to the story , she ca n't quite remember who Allie chose .
Recognizing her husband , she tells him that she loves him .
They embrace and talk , but after almost four hours , Allie fades .
She begins to panic and hallucinate .
She forgets who Noah is again .
The nurses have to come in and they have to sedate her .
Later Noah has a stroke and can not visit Allie .
When he recovers he visits Allie late at night , as he is staying in the same care home .
Noah tries to sneak past the nurse station , the nurse on duty pretends that she is going for a coffee , even though she has one on the counter and tells Noah she wo n't be back for a while .
And not to do anything while she is away .
Noah realises it is just a ruse to let him go see Allie
and he finds Allie in bed in her room , asleep .
She wakes up and recognizes him as Noah and tells him that she loves him .
They kiss and fall asleep next to each other , believing irrationally their love will take them away together .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The novel was adapted into a popular film of the same name , in 2004 .
The Indian Bollywood film , Zindagi Tere Naam , starring Mithun Chakraborty , is also based on it .
A Bengali film , " Niyoti , " was inspired by The Notebook .
A television series based on the novel is also being developed by writer Todd Graff , who will also exec produce along with Sparks and Theresa Park for the Warner Bros. Television and Nicholas Sparks Productions .
REFERENCES