HYDROXYZINE Hydroxyzine , sold under the brand names Atarax among others , is a medication of the antihistamine type .
It is used in the treatment of itchiness , anxiety , and nausea , including that due to motion sickness .
It used either by mouth or injection into a muscle .
Common side effects include sleepiness , headache , and a dry mouth .
Serious side effects may include QT prolongation .
It is unclear if use during pregnancy or breastfeeding is safe .
Hydroxyzine works by blocking the effects of histamine .
It is in the piperazine family of chemicals .
It was first made by Union Chimique Belge in 1956 and was approved for sale by Pfizer in the United States later that year .
In the United Kingdom 28 doses cost less than a pound .
In the United States the wholesale cost in 2018 was about 0.05 USD per dose .
In the United States about 8 million prescriptions were written for hydroxyzine in 2016 .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Hydroxyzine is used in the treatment of itchiness , anxiety , and nausea including that due to motion sickness .
Hydroxyzine is prescribed when the onset of an organic disease state manifests through anxiety , as generalized anxiety disorder , or in other more serious cases as psychoneurosis , and is therefore prescribed as a means of regulating normal function .
Hydroxyzine has shown to be as effective as the benzodiazepine drug bromazepam in the treatment of generalised anxiety disorder .
A systematic review concluded that compared with other anxiolytic agents ( benzodiazepines and buspirone ) , hydroxyzine was equivalent in efficacy , acceptability , and tolerability .
Hydroxyzine can also be used for the treatment of allergic conditions , such as chronic urticaria , atopic or contact dermatoses , and histamine - mediated pruritus .
These have also been confirmed in both recent and past studies to have no adverse effects on the liver , blood , nervous system , or urinary tract .
Use of hydroxyzine for premedication as a sedative has no effects on tropane alkaloids , such as atropine , but may , following general anesthesia , potentiate meperidine and barbiturates , and use in pre - anesthetic adjunctive therapy should be modified depending upon the state of the individual .
In other cases , the usage of hydroxyzine is as a form of non - barbiturate tranquilizer used in the pre - operative sedation and treatment of neurological disorders , such as psychoneurosis and other forms of anxiety or tension states .
CONTRAINDICATIONS Section::::Contraindications .
The administration of hydroxyzine in large amounts by ingestion or intramuscular administration during the onset of pregnancy can cause fetal abnormalities — when administered to pregnant rats , mice and rabbits , hydroxyzine caused abnormalities such as hypogonadism with doses significantly above that of the human therapeutic range .
In humans , a significant dose has not yet been established in studies , and by default , the FDA has introduced contraindication guidelines in regard to hydroxyzine .
Similarly the use in those at risk from or showing previous signs of hypersensitivity is also contraindicated .
Hydroxyzine is contraindicated for intravenous ( IV ) injection , as it has shown to cause hemolysis .
Other contraindications include the administration of hydroxyzine alongside depressants and other compounds which affect the central nervous system .
and if absolutely necessary , it should only be administered concomitantly in small doses .
If administered in small doses with other substances , such as mentioned , then patients should refrain from using dangerous machinery , motor vehicles or any other practice requiring absolute concentration , in accordance with safety law .
Studies have also been conducted which show that long - term prescription of hydroxyzine can lead to tardive dyskinesia after years of use , but effects related to dyskinesia have also anecdotally been reported after periods of 7.5 months , such as continual head rolling , lip licking and other forms of athetoid movement .
In certain cases , elderly patients ' previous interactions with phenothiazine derivatives or pre - existing neuroleptic treatment may have had some contribution towards dyskinesia at the administration of hydroxyzine due to hypersensitivity caused due to the prolonged treatment , and therefore some contraindication is given to the short - term administration of hydroxyzine to those with previous phenothiazine use .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
Several reactions have been noted in manufacturer guidelines — deep sleep , incoordination , sedation , calmness , and dizziness have been reported in children and adults , as well as others such as hypotension , tinnitus , and headaches .
Gastro - intestinal effects have also been observed , as well as less serious effects such as dryness of the mouth and constipation caused by the mild antimuscarinic properties of hydroxyzine .
Central nervous system problems such as hallucinations or confusion have been observed in rare cases , attributed mostly to overdosage .
Such properties have been attributed to hydroxyzine in several cases , particularly in patients treated for neuropsychological disorders , as well as in cases where overdoses have been observed .
While there are reports of the " hallucinogenic " or " hypnotic " properties of hydroxyzine , several clinical data trials have not reported such side effects from the sole consumption of hydroxyzine , but rather , have described its overall calming effect described through the stimulation of areas within the formatio reticularis .
The hallucinogenic or hypnotic properties have been described as being an additional effect from overall central nervous system suppression by other CNS agents , such as lithium or ethanol .
The effect of hydroxyzine has also been tested on the ability of humans in the registration and storage of memory , and was used in comparison with relatively safe drugs , such as lorazepam , to illustrate the effects of benzodiazepines , which are thought to have adverse effects on the capacity of memory storage .
Hydroxyzine was found to have no adverse effects on memory in relation to lorazepam , which caused several deficiencies in the capacity of memory storage .
In a comparative study with lorazepam on memory effects , patients who had taken hydroxyzine experienced sedative effects like drowsiness , but recalled that they felt capable , attentive and able to continue with a memory test under these conditions .
Conversely , those under the effects of lorazepam felt unable to continue due to the fact they felt out of control with its effects ; 8 out of 10 patients describing tendencies of problems with balance and control of simple motor functions .
Somnolence with or without vivid dreams or nightmares may occur in users with antihistamine sensitivities in combination with other CNS depressants .
Hydroxyzine exhibits anxiolytic and sedative properties in many psychiatric patients .
Other studies have suggested that hydroxyzine acts as an acute hypnotic , reducing sleep onset latency and increasing sleep duration — also showing that some drowsiness did occur .
This was observed more in female patients , who also had greater hypnotic response .
Because of potential for more severe side effects , this drug is on the list to avoid in the elderly .
In 2015 , the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) announced a small but definite risk of QT prolongation associated with the use of hydroxyzine .
This side effect is more likely to occur in people with pre - existing cardiac disease , or with the use of other medicines known to prolong the QT interval .
PHARMACOLOGY PHARMACODYNAMICS Section::::Pharmacology . Section::::Pharmacodynamics .
+
Hydroxyzine !
Site ! !
K ( nM ) ! !
Species ! !
Ref Hydroxyzine 's predominant mechanism of action is as a potent and selective histamine H receptor inverse agonist .
This action is responsible for its antihistamine and sedative effects .
Unlike many other first - generation antihistamines , hydroxyzine has very low affinity for the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors , and in accordance , has low or no propensity for producing anticholinergic side effects .
In addition to its antihistamine activity , hydroxyzine has also been shown to act more weakly as an antagonist of the serotonin 5-HT receptor , the dopamine D receptor , and the α - adrenergic receptor .
The weak antiserotonergic effects of hydroxyzine likely underlie its usefulness as an anxiolytic , as other antihistamines without such properties have not been found to be effective in the treatment of anxiety .
Hydroxyzine crosses the blood – brain barrier easily and exerts effects in the central nervous system .
A positron emission tomography ( PET ) study found that brain occupancy of the H receptor was 67.6 % for a single 30 mg dose of hydroxyzine .
In addition , subjective sleepiness correlated well with the brain H receptor occupancy .
PET studies with antihistamines have found that brain H receptor occupancy of more than 50 % is associated with a high prevalence of somnolence and cognitive decline , whereas brain H receptor occupancy of less than 20 % is considered to be non - sedative .
PHARMACOKINETICS Section::::Pharmacokinetics .
Hydroxyzine can be administered orally or via intramuscular injection .
When given orally , hydroxyzine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract .
The effect of hydroxyzine is notable in 30 minutes .
Pharmacokinetically , hydroxyzine is rapidly absorbed and distributed in oral and intramuscular administration , and is metabolized in the liver ; the main metabolite ( 45 % ) , cetirizine , is formed through oxidation of the alcohol moiety to a carboxylic acid by alcohol dehydrogenase , and overall effects are observed within one hour of administration .
Higher concentrations are found in the skin than in the plasma .
Cetirizine , although less sedating , is non - dialyzable and possesses similar anti - histaminergic properties .
The other metabolites identified include a N - dealkylated metabolite , and an O - dealkylated 1/16 metabolite with a plasma half - life of 59 hours .
These pathways are mediated principally by CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 .
"
In animals , hydroxyzine and its metabolites are excreted in feces via biliary elimination . "
Administration in geriatrics differs from the administration of hydroxyzine in younger patients ; according to the FDA , there have not been significant studies made ( 2004 ) , which include population groups over 65 , which provide a distinction between elderly aged patients and other younger groups .
Hydroxyzine should be administered carefully in the elderly with consideration given to possible reduced elimination .
Similarly , the use of sedating drugs alongside hydroxyzine can cause oversedation and confusion if administered in large amounts — any form of treatment alongside sedatives should be done under supervision of a doctor .
The T of hydroxyzine is about 2.0 hours in both adults and children and its elimination half - life is around 20.0 hours in adults and 7.1 hours in children .
Another study found that the elimination half - life of hydroxyzine in adults was as short as 3 hours , but this may have simply been due to methodological limitations .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Hydroxyzine is a member of the diphenylmethylpiperazine class of antihistamines .
ANALOGUES
Section::::Analogues .
Analogues of hydroxyzine include buclizine , cetirizine , cinnarizine , cyclizine , etodroxizine , meclizine , and pipoxizine among others .
SYNTHESIS Section::::Synthesis .
Hydroxyzine is synthesized by the alkylation of 1-(4-chlorobenzohydril)piperazine with 2-(2-hydroxyethoxy)ethylchloride : BRAND NAMES Section::::Brand names .
Hydroxyzine preparations require a doctor 's prescription .
The drug is available in two formulations , the pamoate and the dihydrochloride or hydrochloride salts .
Vistaril , Equipose , Masmoran , and Paxistil are preparations of the pamoate salt , while Atarax , Alamon , Aterax , Durrax , Tran - Q , Orgatrax , Quiess , and Tranquizine are of the hydrochloride salt .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S. National Library of Medicine :
Drug Information Portal - Hydroxyzine