MEHRAN KARIMI NASSERI Mehran Karimi Nasseri ( Persian : مهران کریمی ناصری pronounced ; born 1942 ) , also known as Sir , Alfred Mehran , is an Iranian refugee who lived in the departure lounge of Terminal One in Charles de Gaulle Airport from 26 August 1988 until July 2006 , when he was hospitalized for an unspecified ailment .
His autobiography has been published as a book , The Terminal Man , in 2004 .
His story was the inspiration for the 2004 Steven Spielberg film The Terminal .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Nasseri was born in the Anglo - Persian Oil Company settlement located in Masjed Soleiman , Iran .
His father was an Iranian doctor working for the company .
Nasseri stated that his mother was a nurse from Scotland working in the same place .
He arrived in the United Kingdom in September 1973 , to take a three - year course in Yugoslav studies at the University of Bradford .
LIFE IN TERMINAL 1 Section::::Life in Terminal 1 .
Nasseri claims he was expelled from Iran in 1977 for protests against the Shah and after a long battle , involving applications in several countries , was awarded refugee status by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Belgium .
This allegedly permitted residence in many other European countries .
However , this claim has been disputed , with investigations showing that Nasseri was never expelled from Iran .
Having claimed to have one British parent , although he has produced no evidence to support this claim , he decided to settle in the UK in 1986 , but en route there in 1988 , his papers were lost when his briefcase was allegedly stolen
( others indicate that Nasseri actually mailed his documents to Brussels while onboard a ferry to Britain , lying about them being stolen ) .
Despite this setback , he boarded the plane for London but was promptly returned to France when he failed to present a passport to British immigration officials .
He was initially arrested by the French , but then released as his entry to the airport was legal
and he had no country of origin to be returned to ; thus began his residency at Terminal 1 .
His case was later taken on by French human rights lawyer Christian Bourget .
In 1992 , a French court ruled that , having entered the country legally , he could not be expelled from the airport , but it could not grant him permission to enter France .
Attempts were then made to have new documents issued from Belgium , but the authorities there would only do so if Nasseri presented himself in person .
However , under Belgian law a refugee who voluntarily leaves a country that has accepted him can not return .
In 1995 , the Belgian authorities granted permission for him to return , but only if he agreed to live there under supervision of a social worker .
Nasseri refused this on the grounds of wanting to enter the UK as originally intended .
Both France and Belgium offered Nasseri residency , but Nasseri refused to sign the papers as they listed him as being Iranian ( he wanted it to be British ) and did not show his preferred name , " Sir , Alfred Mehran " .
His refusal to sign the documents that would give him his freedom was much to the frustration of his lawyer , Bourget .
When contacted about Nasseri 's situation , his family stated that they believed he was living the life he wanted .
In 2003 Spielberg 's DreamWorks production company paid US$ 250,000 to Nasseri for the rights to his story , but ultimately did not use his story in the subsequent film , The Terminal .
Nasseri 's stay at the airport ended in July 2006 when he was hospitalized and his sitting place dismantled .
Towards the end of January 2007 he left the hospital and was looked after by the airport 's branch of the French Red Cross ; he was lodged for a few weeks in a hotel close to the airport .
On 6 March 2007 he transferred to an Emmaus charity reception - centre in Paris 's 20th arrondissement .
Since 2008 he has continued to live in a Paris shelter .
During his 18-year - long stay at Terminal 1 in the Charles de Gaulle Airport , Nasseri had his luggage at his side and spent his time reading , writing in his diary or studying economics .
He received food and newspapers from employees of the airport , visits from journalists eager to hear his story and letters of support .
AUTOBIOGRAPHY Section::::Autobiography .
In 2004 Nasseri 's autobiography , The Terminal Man , was published .
It was co - written by Nasseri with British author Andrew Donkin and was reviewed in The Sunday Times as being " profoundly disturbing and brilliant " .
DOCUMENTARIES AND FICTIONALIZATIONS Section::::Documentaries and fictionalizations .
Nasseri 's story provided the inspiration for the 1994 French film Tombés du ciel , starring Jean Rochefort , internationally released under the title Lost in Transit .
The short story " The Fifteen - Year Layover " , written by Michael Paterniti and published in GQ and The Best American Non - Required Reading , chronicles Nasseri 's life .
Alexis Kouros made a documentary about him , Waiting for Godot at De Gaulle ( 2000 ) .
Glen Luchford and Paul Berczeller made the Here to Where mockumentary ( 2001 ) , also featuring Nasseri .
Hamid Rahmanian and Melissa Hibbard made a documentary called Sir Alfred of Charles De Gaulle Airport ( 2001 ) .
Nasseri was reportedly the inspiration behind the character Viktor Navorski , from the 2004 Steven Spielberg film The Terminal ; however , neither publicity materials , nor the DVD " special features " nor the film 's website mentions Nasseri 's situation as an inspiration for the film .
Despite this , in September 2003 , The New York Times noted that Steven Spielberg had bought the rights to his life story as the basis for The Terminal .
The Guardian indicates that Spielberg 's DreamWorks production company paid US$ 250,000 to Nasseri for rights to his story and report that , as of 2004 , he carried a poster advertising Spielberg 's film draping his suitcase next to his bench .
Nasseri was reportedly excited about The Terminal , but it was unlikely that he would ever have had a chance to see it in cinemas .
Nasseri 's story was also the inspiration for the contemporary opera Flight by British composer Jonathan Dove , which won the Helpmann Award at the Adelaide Festival Theatre in March 2006 .
SEE ALSO
* Stateless person
* List of people who have lived at airports REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * , 26 July 2004 ,