BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE
A backflow prevention device is used to protect potable water supplies from contamination or pollution due to backflow .
In water supply systems , water is normally maintained at a significant pressure to enable water to flow from the tap , shower , or other fixture .
Water pressure may fail or be reduced when a water main bursts , pipes freeze , or there is unexpectedly high demand on the water system ( for example , when several fire hydrants are opened ) .
Reduced pressure in the pipe may allow contaminated water from the soil , from storage , or from other sources to be drawn up into the system .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of a liquid , gas , or suspended solid into the potable water supply ; a backflow preventer is designed to keep this from happening .
Points at which a potable water system connects with a non - potable water system are called cross connections .
Such connections occur naturally in appliances such as clothes washers and dishwashers , but they must be carefully designed and installed to prevent backflow .
Another common location for a backflow preventer is the connection of a fire sprinkler system to a water main , to prevent pressurized water from flowing from the fire suppression system into the public water supply .
Back - siphonage occurs when higher pressure fluids , gases , or suspended solids move to an area of lower pressure fluids .
For example , when a drinking straw is used to consume a beverage , suction reduces the pressure of fluid inside the straw , causing liquid to move from the cup to inside the straw and then into the drinker 's mouth .
A significant drop of pressure in a water delivery system creates a similar suction , pulling possibly undesirable material into the system .
This is an example of an indirect cross - connection .
Back - pressure occurs for example when air is blown through the straw and bubbles
begin to erupt at the submerged end .
If instead of air , natural gas had been forced into a potable water tank , the gas in turn could be carried to a kitchen faucet .
This is an example of a direct cross - connection , with undesirable material being pushed into the system .
Back pressure can force an undesirable contaminant to enter potable water piping .
Sources of back pressure may be boilers , heat exchanging equipment , power washing equipment , fire sprinklers , or pumps in the water distribution system .
In some cases there may be an almost continuous risk of overcoming the static water pressure in the piping .
To reduce the risk of contamination , a backflow preventer can be fitted .
A backflow preventer is also important when potentially toxic chemicals are used , for instance for commercial / industrial descaling of boilers , or when chemical bleaches are used for residential power washing .
A closely related device is the backwater valve , which is designed to prevent sewage from backing up into a building and causing basement flooding .
PREVENTIVE DEVICES Section::::Preventive devices .
The simplest , most reliable way to provide backflow prevention is to provide an air gap .
An air gap is simply an open vertical space between any device that connects to a plumbing system ( like a valve or faucet ) and any place where contaminated water can collect or pool .
A simple air gap has no moving parts , other than flowing water .
Many plumbing codes specify a minimum air gap distance required for various circumstances , such as a drain connection for a dishwasher , e.g. , BS 6282 .
Alternatively , a specialized backflow preventer valve may be installed at strategic locations in the plumbing system wherever there is a risk of contaminated fluids entering the water supply pipes .
These valves are used where there is not sufficient vertical clearance or physical space to install an air gap , or when pressurized operation or other factors rule out use of an air gap .
Because these valves use moving parts , they are often required to be inspected or tested periodically .
REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS Section::::Regulatory requirements .
To prevent contamination due to back pressure , many health regulatory regimes require an air gap or mechanical backflow prevention assembly between the delivery point of mains water and local storage or use .
Where submerged mains inflow is permitted , a backflow prevention assembly is required , which protects the potable water system from contamination hazards .
A check valve is a basic form of backflow prevention , but often more complex devices are required because check valves are not considered to be reliable , when compared to more sophisticated devices with redundancies and reduced - pressure zones .
In many countries .
approved backflow prevention assemblies are required by law , and must be installed in accordance with plumbing or building codes .
A typical backflow assembly has test cocks and shut - off valves , and must be tested when installed , if relocated or repaired , and also on a periodic basis .
In the US , the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) holds local water suppliers responsible for maintaining a certain amount of purity in potable water systems .
Many states and/or local municipalities require annual testing of backflow prevention assemblies .
In most cases , the law requires a double check ( DC ) , reduced pressure principle device ( RP ) device , or an air gap when backflow prevention is mandated .
PARTIAL LIST OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
* Air gap * Atmospheric vacuum breaker ( AVB )
* Check valve ( usually not a legally approved method of backflow prevention ) * Chemigation valve ( primarily used in agriculture )
* Double check valve , or double check valve assembly ( DCVA ) * Pressure vacuum breaker assembly ( PVB )
* Reduced pressure zone device ( RPZ )
* Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker assembly ( SPVB )
* Vacuum breaker SEE
ALSO
* Backflow ( plumbing ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
* Drinking Water & Backflow Prevention magazine
* The American Backflow Prevention Association
* Foundation for Cross - Connection Control and Hydraulic Research