THE POWER OF ONE ( NOVEL )
The Power of One is a novel by Australian author Bryce Courtenay , first published in 1989 .
Set in South Africa during the 1930s and 1940s , it tells the story of an English boy who , through the course of the story , acquires the nickname of Peekay .
( In the movie version , the protagonist 's given name is Peter Phillip Kenneth Keith , but not in the book .
The author identifies " Peekay " as a reference to his earlier nickname " Pisskop " : Afrikaans for " Pisshead . " )
It is written from the first person perspective , with Peekay narrating ( as an adult , looking back ) and trusting the reader with his thoughts and feelings , as opposed to a detailed description of places and account of actions .
A film adaptation was released in 1992 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
" The Power of One " follows an English - speaking South African boy named Peekay from 1939 to 1951 .
The story begins when Peekay 's mother has a nervous breakdown , and Peekay ends up being raised by a Zulu wet nurse , Mary Mandoma , who eventually becomes his nanny .
At a young age , Peekay is sent to a boarding school .
As the youngest student attending the school , he is frequently harassed .
The students call him Piskop ( meaning piss - head ) and rooinek ( redneck — a name given to the British soldiers during the Boer War ) among other names .
This continues with an older boy , the Judge , and his partners who further punish him for his frequent bedwetting with verbal and physical abuse .
The Judge is a Nazi sympathizer , and he has a hatred for the English , proclaiming that Hitler will march the English out to sea .
The Afrikaans woman who runs the boarding school does not console him and walks around threateningly with a whip .
After Peekay returns home after his first year at the boarding school , his nanny calls a medicine man called Inkosi - Inkosikazi to cure his bedwetting .
Inkosi - Inkosikazi not only succeeds , but also leads Peekay 's mind to a place where there are three waterfalls and ten stepping stones , where Peekay can always " find " him .
The next school year , Peekay returns with a magic chicken of Inkosi - Inkosikazi 's and a different paradigm , called " the power of one " .
Peekay is excellent in his studies , but maintains a camouflage to hide it from his fellow students and teachers .
He finds that this is a good way to beat the system and avoid unnecessary abuse .
As the punishments from the Judge continue to get worse , Peekay ends up doing the Judge 's math homework .
At the end of the year , the Judge forces Peekay to eat feces , and kills his beloved chicken .
He looks forward to arriving home to his nanny , but has been informed there has been a change in plans .
He will be travelling to a town called Barberton , where he will meet his grandfather .
On the train ride to Barberton , Peekay meets Hoppie Groenwald , who shows Peekay his boxing gloves .
Hoppie is a boxing champion , and he invites Peekay to watch him box during a stop in the ride .
It is there that Peekay is inspired to be the welterweight champion of the world .
Hoppie teaches Peekay the phrase "
First with your head , then with the heart , " a phrase which Peekay commits to memory .
At Barberton , Peekay sees his mother again .
She has returned from the mental institution and converted to being a born - again - Christian .
He learns that his mother had left his nanny because she refused to convert .
His mother also tries to convert him , but he tells his mother that the Lord is a " shithead . "
Retreating to the hills behind his home , Peekay meets a German professor , Karl von Vollensteen , to whom Peekay refers as " Doc .
" Doc is a music professor and botanist who collects cacti and has his own cacti garden .
Doc and Peekay become close friends , and he offers Peekay piano lessons .
When World War II breaks out , Doc is taken into the Barberton prison for being an unregistered alien .
Peekay visits him every day for piano lessons , and attends the prison 's boxing squad .
A prisoner with whom Peekay becomes friends , Geel Piet , teaches him to box , and Peekay leads the team to a victory .
Later , Peekay develops great sympathy for the prisoners and arranges Doc and Geel Piet a letter - writing service and a tobacco distribution service .
This makes Peekay very famous among the prisoners , and they call him the great chief " Tadpole Angel " ( a reference to Doc being the " Frog " for his nightly piano playing ) .
One of the wardens discovers that some suspicious activity has been going on , and one night , Geel Piet is murdered in the gym .
The war ends , and Doc finds himself free again .
Ms. Boxhall , the local librarian , and a Jewish schoolteacher , Miss Bornstein , work with Doc to further encourage the blossoming of Peekay 's intellect with many activities such as science , literature and chess .
He passes his Royal College of Music exams and earns the best under - twelve boxer in the region .
With the help of his guides , Peekay is accepted into the prestigious Prince of Wales school in Johannesburg .
At the Prince of Wales , Peekay partners with the son of a Jewish millionaire , Morrie ( Hymie in non - American versions ) Levy .
They pull off many " scams " to earn money and Peekay joins the school 's ailing boxing team .
Morrie becomes Peekay 's manager and they pull off the first win of the school in many years .
Peekay then starts boxing lessons with South Africa 's famous Solly Goldman .
Peekay grows to be a stranger to failure , excelling at academics , boxing and rugby .
Near the end of his last year of school , he must face the death of Doc and not earning a Rhodes scholarship , therefore missing his chance to join Morrie ( Hymie ) at Oxford to study law .
As a result , Peekay takes a year off of boxing and academics and goes to work in Northern Rhodesia 's copper mines to " find himself " and build up the muscle to become a welterweight .
He takes on the dangerous work of a " grizzly man " as required by all new miners , but continues on to earn double wages , thereby saving enough to attend Oxford .
At the mines , he meets a Georgian called Rasputin and they become close friends .
When Peekay has an accident in his shaft , Rasputin saves Peekay , but gives his own life up instead .
Rasputin names Peekay as his beneficiary ; that and his own insurance payout gives him enough to be able to attend Oxford .
One night before Peekay leaves the mining camp , Peekay meets his old nemesis , the Judge , in a bar at the mines .
The Judge is in an insane rage due to handling mine explosives and tries to kill Peekay .
A fight ensues and Peekay puts all he has learned in his life to destroy the Judge .
After defeating the Judge , Peekay carves a Union Jack and the initials " PK " over the Swastika in the Judge 's arm .
He then walks into the night .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Power of One is Bryce Courtenay 's best known book .
It has been translated into 18 languages , has sold more than 8 million copies and has been made into a Hollywood film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bryce Courtenay 's official site