DAWN WELLS
Dawn
Elberta Wells ( born October 18 , 1938 ) is an American actress who is best known for her role as Mary Ann Summers on the CBS sitcom Gilligan 's Island .
She and Tina Louise are the last surviving regular cast members from that series .
LIFE AND CAREER EARLY LIFE Section::::Life and career .
Section::::Early life .
Wells was born in Reno , Nevada , where she attended Reno High School .
She later attended Stephens College in Columbia , Missouri , where she majored in chemistry .
She transferred to the University of Washington in Seattle , where she graduated in 1960 with a degree in theater arts and design .
She was a member of the Alpha Chi Omega sorority .
In 1959 , Wells was crowned Miss Nevada and represented her state in the Miss America 1960 pageant in Atlantic City , New Jersey .
CAREER Section::::Career .
In Hollywood , Wells made her debut on ABC 's The Roaring 20s and the movie The New Interns and was cast in episodes of such television series as 77 Sunset Strip , The Cheyenne Show , Maverick , and Bonanza , before she took the role of Mary Ann on Gilligan 's Island .
She reprised her character in the various Gilligan 's Island reunion specials , including the reunion cartoon spin - off Gilligan 's Planet and three reunion movies : Rescue from Gilligan 's Island , The Castaways on Gilligan 's Island , and The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan 's Island .
She also appeared as a guest star on Wagon Train , Tales of Wells Fargo , 87th Precinct , Surfside 6 , Hawaiian Eye , Ripcord , The Everglades , The Detectives , It 's a Man 's World , Channing , Laramie , Burke 's Law , The Invaders , The Wild Wild West , The F.B.I. , Vega$ , The Love Boat , Fantasy Island , Matt Houston , ALF , Herman 's Head , Three Sisters , Pastor Greg , and Roseanne .
Wells had small roles in the early 1960s films Palm Springs Weekend and The New Interns , and later starred with Michael Dante in the independent 1975 film Winterhawk , playing a Western settler kidnapped by an Indian chief .
Her other films include The Town That Dreaded Sundown , Return to Boggy Creek , Lover 's Knot , Soulmates , Forever for Now , and Super Sucker .
In fall 2011 , she began filming Silent
But Deadly ( originally titled Hotel Arthritis ) , a comedy horror film released in 2012 .
Following Gilligan 's Island , Wells embarked on a theater career , appearing in nearly one hundred theatrical productions as of July 2009 .
She spent the majority of the 1970s , and 1980s , touring in musical theater productions .
She also had a one - woman show at the MGM Grand Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas in 1985 .
In 1993 , Wells published Mary Ann 's Gilligan 's Island Cookbook with co - writers Ken Beck and Jim Clark , including a foreword by Bob Denver .
She was close to Alan Hale Jr. , who played The Skipper in Gilligan 's Island , even after the series completed its run , and he contributed a family recipe ( " Kansas Chicken and Dumplings " ) to her cookbook .
Hale 's character was the inspiration behind such concoctions as Skipper 's Coconut Pie , Skipper 's Navy Bean Soup , and Skipper 's Goodbye Ribeye , and he is depicted as Skipper Jonas Grumby in numerous photographs throughout the book .
She said in a 2014 interview with GoErie.com , " Alan could not have been kinder to a young actress .
He was a real peach . "
In 2005 , Wells consigned her original gingham blouse and shorts ensemble for sale from her signature role .
Beverly Hills auction house Profiles in History sold it for $ 20,700 .
In 2008 , she joined Gilligan 's Island creator Sherwood Schwartz in Los Angeles for the celebration of Schwartz 's entry into the Hollywood Walk of Fame .
She appeared on the " Celebrity Holiday Bash " episode of Food Network 's Chopped , which first aired December 1 , 2013 .
In 2014 , Wells released What Would Mary Ann Do ?
A Guide to Life , which she co - wrote with Steve Stinson .
The book was released to coincide with the 50th anniversary of Gilligan 's Island .
Gilligan 's Island co - star Russell Johnson died on January 16 , 2014 , and Wells and Tina Louise are the only surviving cast members of the sitcom .
In May 2016 , Wells was named Marketing Ambassador to MeTV Network .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In 2005 , TV Guide ranked Wells No . 50 on its " 50 Sexiest Stars of All Time " list .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
She married Larry Rosen , a talent agent , in 1962 .
The couple had no children and were divorced in 1967 .
In 2018 , a GoFundMe page was set up to help Wells cope with financial trouble .
HUMANITARIAN WORK Section::::Humanitarian work .
Wells runs a business , Wishing Wells Collections , making clothing for people with limited mobility .
She is the founder of the Idaho Film and Television Institute , a not - for - profit ( 501c3 ) educational organization with " a vision of education , technical training and economic development in Southeastern Idaho . "
She organized SpudFest , a regional annual family movie festival , and has been a spokeswoman for Idaho Potatoes .
CHARITY Section::::Charity .
Wells continues to lend her support to the Denver Foundation , a charity chaired by Dreama Denver , widow of Wells ' Gilligan 's Island co - star Bob Denver .
In November 2009 , she appeared at the Denver Foundation 's Christmas Wish Celebrity Auction , helping to raise funds for the disabled and disadvantaged in West Virginia .
FILMOGRAPHY SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS