REPUBLIC DAY ( PHILIPPINES ) Philippine Republic Day , also known as Filipino - American Friendship Day , is a commemoration in the Philippines held annually on July 4 .
It was formerly an official holiday designated as Independence Day , celebrating the signing of the Treaty of Manila , which granted Philippine Independence from the United States of America in 1946 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Philippine Islands were an American possession from 1898 to 1946 , first as a territory and then as a Commonwealth beginning in 1935 .
Between 1941 and 1945 , the Empire of Japan occupied the Islands during the Second World War ; the Commonwealth government - in - exile headed by President Manuel Luis Quezon was based in Australia and later in the United States .
A campaign to retake the country began in October 1944 , when General Douglas MacArthur landed in Leyte along with Sergio Osmeña , who succeeded to the presidency after Quezon 's death in 1944 .
The battles entailed long fierce fighting ; some of the Japanese continued to fight until the official surrender of the Japan on September 2 , 1945 .
The country gained complete independence on July 4 , 1946 .
OBSERVANCE Section::::Observance .
Initially , the nation 's Independence Day holiday ( Araw ng Kalayaan ) was held on July 4 .
President Diosdado Macapagal moved it to June 12 , the date in 1898 on which Emilio Aguinaldo issued the Philippine Declaration of Independence from Spain .
Philippine Republic Day was created in its place and kept as a holiday under Macapagal , coinciding with the United States 's own Independence Day .
In 1955 , President Ramón Magsaysay had issued Presidential Proclamation № 212 , s. 1955 , which established the observance of Philippine American Day every November 15 — the anniversary of the inauguration of the Commonwealth .
Sometime under the rule of President Ferdinand Marcos , Philippine – American Day was renamed " Philippine – American Friendship Day " and moved to July 4 , overshadowing the observance of the date as Republic Day .
After the 1935 Constitution was suspended under Martial Law and later superseded by the 1972 Constitution , it was impolitic to remind the nation of the old , Third Republic .
This is why , when President Marcos issued Presidential Proclamation № . 2346
s. 1984 , reference was made to Philippine – American Friendship Day , which was relegated to a working holiday without mention of Republic Day .
In 1996 , President Fidel V. Ramos celebrated the day as Republic Day .
DELISTING
Section::::Delisting .
The practice of celebrating Philippine – American Friendship Day and Republic Day as a non - working holiday was formally abolished in 1987 under President Corazon C. Aquino .
Section 26 of the Administrative Code of 1987 specified a list of regular holidays and nationwide special days that did not include July 4 .
SEE ALSO
* Araw ng Kalayaan on June 12 – the current Independence Day * Bell Trade Act
* Philippine - American Friendship Day Parade * Philippines – United States relations * Public holidays in the Philippines * RP – US Visiting Forces Agreement
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Gazette :
Philippine Republic Day * Official Gazette :
Philippine Republic Day ( older version )
* July 4 , 1946 :
True Philippine Independence Day
* The Independence Day That Was n't * June 12 , 1898 as Independence Day
* PHILIPPINES :
Torn Between Two Colonisers – Spain and America