PROCUREMENT Procurement is the process of finding , agreeing terms , and acquiring goods , services , or works from an external source , often via a tendering or competitive bidding process .
The process is used to ensure the buyer receives goods , services , or works at the best possible price , when aspects such as quality , quantity , time , and location are compared .
Corporations and public bodies often define processes intended to promote fair and open competition for their business while minimizing risk , such as exposure to fraud and collusion .
Almost all purchasing decisions include factors such as delivery and handling , marginal benefit , and price fluctuations .
Procurement generally involves making buying decisions under conditions of scarcity .
If good data is available , it is good practice to make use of economic analysis methods such as cost - benefit analysis or cost - utility analysis .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
An important distinction should be made between analyses without risk and those with risk .
Where risk is involved , either in the costs or the benefits , the concept of best value should be employed .
Procurement activities are also often split into two distinct categories , direct and indirect spend .
Direct spend refers to the production - related procurement that encompasses all items that are part of finished products , such as raw material , components and parts .
Direct procurement , which is the focus in supply chain management , directly affects the production process of manufacturing firms .
In contrast , indirect procurement concerns non - production - related acquisition :
obtaining " operating resources " which a company purchases to enable its operations .
Indirect procurement comprises a wide variety of goods and services , from standardized items like office supplies and machine lubricants to complex and costly products and services like heavy equipment , consulting services , and outsourcingMaintenance , repair , and operating supplies , outsourcing TOPICS PROCUREMENT VS .
SOURCING VS .
ACQUISITION Section::::Topics .
Section::::Procurement vs. sourcing vs. acquisition .
Procurement is one component of the broader concept of sourcing and acquisition .
Typically procurement is viewed as more tactical in nature ( the process of physically buying a product or service ) and sourcing and acquisition are viewed as more strategic and encompassing .
The Institute of Supply Management ( ISM ) defines strategic sourcing as the process of identifying sources that could provide needed products or services for the acquiring organization .
The term procurement used to reflect the entire purchasing process or cycle , and not just the tactical components .
ISM defines procurement as an organizational function that includes specifications development , value analysis , supplier market research , negotiation , buying activities , contract administration , inventory control , traffic , receiving and stores .
Purchasing refers to the major function of an organization that is responsible for acquisition of required materials , services and equipment .
The United States Defense Acquisition University ( DAU ) defines procurement as the act of buying goods and services for the government .
DAU defines acquisition as the conceptualization , initiation , design , development , test , contracting , production , deployment , Logistics Support ( LS ) , modification , and disposal of weapons and other systems , supplies , or services ( including construction ) to satisfy Department of Defense needs , intended for use in or in support of military missions .
Acquisition and sourcing are therefore much wider concepts than procurement .
Multiple sourcing business models exist , and acquisition models exist .
ACQUISITION PROCESS Section::::Acquisition process .
The revised acquisition process for major systems in industry and defense is shown in the next figure .
The process is defined by a series of phases during which technology is defined and matured into viable concepts , which are subsequently developed and readied for production , after which the systems produced are supported in the field .
The process allows for a given system to enter the process at any of the development phases .
For example , a system using unproven technology would enter at the beginning stages of the process and would proceed through a lengthy period of technology maturation , while a system based on mature and proven technologies might enter directly into engineering development or , conceivably , even production .
The process itself includes four phases of development : * Concept and technology development is intended to explore alternative concepts based on assessments of operational needs , technology readiness , risk , and affordability .
* The concept and technology development phase begins with concept exploration .
During this stage , concept studies are undertaken to define alternative concepts and to provide information about capability and risk that would permit an objective comparison of competing concepts .
* The system development and demonstration phase could be entered directly as a result of a technological opportunity and urgent user need , as well as having come through concept and technology development .
*
The last , and longest phase is the sustainable and disposal phase of the program .
During this phase all necessary activities are accomplished to maintain and sustain the system in the field in the most cost - effective manner possible .
SOURCING BUSINESS MODELS Section::::Sourcing business models .
Procurement officials increasingly realize that their make - buy supplier decisions fall along a continuum from simple buying transactions to more complex , strategic buyer - supplier collaborations .
It is important for procurement officials to use the right sourcing business model that fits each buyer - seller situation .
There are seven models along the sourcing continuum : basic provider , approved provider , preferred provider , performance - based / managed services model , Vested business model , shared services model and equity partnerships .
* A basic provider model is transaction - based ; it usually has a set price for individual products and services for which there are a wide range of standard market options .
Typically these products or services are readily available , with little differentiation in what is offered .
* An approved provider model uses a transaction - based approach where goods and services are purchased from prequalified suppliers that meet certain performance or other selection criteria .
*
The preferred provider model also uses a transaction - based economic model , but a key difference between the preferred provider and the other transaction - based models is that the buyer has chosen to move to a supplier relationship where there is an opportunity for the supplier to add incremental value to the buyer 's business to meet strategic objectives .
* A performance - based ( or managed services model ) is generally a formal , longer - term supplier agreement that combines a relational contracting model with an output - based economic model .
It seeks to drive supplier accountability for output - based service - level agreements ( SLAs ) and/or cost reduction targets .
* A vested sourcing business model is a hybrid relationship that combines an outcome - based economic model with a relational contracting model .
Companies enter into highly collaborative arrangements designed to create and share value for buyers and suppliers above and beyond .
* A shared services model is typically an internal organization based on an arm's - length outsourcing arrangement .
Using this approach , processes are often centralized into an SSO that charges business units or users for the services they use .
*
An equity partnership creates a legally binding entity ; it can take different legal forms , from buying a supplier ( an acquisition ) , to creating a subsidiary , to equity - sharing joint ventures or entering into cooperative ( co - op ) arrangements .
PROCUREMENT SOFTWARE Section::::Procurement software .
Procurement software ( often labeled as e - procurement software ) manages the purchasing processes electronically or via cloud computing .
PROCUREMENT LIFE CYCLE Section::::Procurement life cycle .
Most of the organizations think of their procurement process in terms of a life cycle .
Different consulting firms and experts have developed various frameworks .
Some of the most common steps from the most popular frameworks include : * Identification of need and requirements analysis is an internal step that involves an understanding of business objectives by establishing a short term strategy ( three to five years ) for overall spend category followed by defining the technical direction and requirements .
* External macro - level market analysis : Once an organization understands its requirements , it should look outward to assess the overall marketplace .
A key part of a market analysis is understanding the overall competitiveness of the marketplace and trends that are likely to impact the organization .
*
Cost analysis is the accumulation , examination and manipulation of cost data for comparisons and projections .
A cost analysis is important to help an organization make a make - buy decision .
* Supplier identification includes identifying particular suppliers that can provide the required product or services .
There are many sources to search for potential suppliers .
One good source is trade shows .
Modern procurement software often incorporates a supplier catalog for standardized goods and services .
* Non - disclosure agreement ( NDA )
: It is quite normal to request vendors to sign an NDA prior to engaging with them .
This protects the organisation where sensitive information is shared with multiple potential vendors ahead of releasing detailed requirements which often point to strategic decisions a firm has taken .
* Supplier communication : When one or more suitable suppliers have been identified , an organization will typically conduct a competitive bidding process .
Organizations can use a variety of competitive bidding methods including requests for quotation , requests for proposals , requests for information , requests for tender , request for solution or a request for partnership .
Some institutions choose to use a notification service in order to raise the competition for the chosen opportunity .
These systems can either be direct from their e - tendering software , or as a re - packaged notification from an external system .
During this step direct contact may be made with the suppliers .
References for product / service quality are consulted , and any requirements for follow - up services including installation , maintenance , and warranty are investigated .
Samples of the product / service being considered may be examined , or trials undertaken .
Organizations should do a risk assessment , total cost of ownership analysis and best value assessment before selecting the final suppliers / solution .
* Negotiations and contracting : Negotiations are undertaken that often include price , availability , customization , and delivery schedules .
The details are outlined in a purchase order or more formal contract .
* Logistics and performance management :
Supplier preparation , expediting , shipment , delivery , and payment for the product / service are completed , based on contract terms .
Installation and training may also be included .
An organization should evaluate the performance of the product / service as they are consumed .
A supplier scorecard is a popular tool for this purpose .
When the product / service has been consumed or disposed of , the contract expires , or the product or service is to be re - ordered , the organization should review their experience with the product / service .
If the product / service is to be re - ordered , the company determines whether to consider other suppliers or to continue with the same supplier .
* Supplier management and liaison : Organizations that have more strategic goods or services that require ongoing interfaces with a supplier will use a supplier relationship management process .
Strategic outsourcing relationships should set up formal governance processes .
PROCUREMENT PERFORMANCE Section::::Procurement performance .
The Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply ( CIPS ) promotes a model of " five rights " which it claims are " a traditional formula expressing the basic objectives of procurement and the general criteria by which procurement performance is measured " , namely that goods and services purchased should be of the right quality , in the right quantity , delivered to the right place at the right time and obtained at the right price .
CIPS also offers an alternative listing of the five rights as " buy[ing ] goods or services of the right quality , in the right quantity , from the right source , at the right time and at the right price .
Ardent Partners published a report in 2011 which presented a comprehensive , industry - wide view into what was happening in the world of procurement at that time by drawing on the experience , performance , and perspective of nearly 250 chief procurement officers and other procurement executives .
The report includes the main procurement performance and operational benchmarks that procurement leaders use to gauge the success of their organizations .
This report found that the average procurement department manages 60.6 % of total enterprise spend .
This measure commonly called " spend under management " refers to the percentage of total enterprise spend ( which includes all direct and indirect spend ) that a procurement organization manages or influences .
The average procurement department also achieved an annual savings of 6.7 % in the last reporting cycle , sourced 52.6 % of its addressable spend , and has a contract compliance rate of 62.6 % .
RELATIONSHIP WITH FINANCE Section::::Relationship with Finance .
Procurement and Finance have , as functions within the corporate structure , been at odds .
The contentious nature of their relationship can perhaps be attributed to the history of procurement itself .
Historically , Procurement has been considered Finance 's underling .
One reason behind this perception can be ascribed to semantics .
When Procurement was in its infancy , it was referred to as a " commercial " operation .
And so the procurement department was referred to as the commercial department rather than the procurement department : the word " commercial " was understood to be associated with money .
And so it was obvious that Procurement would become directly answerable to Finance .
Another factor , equally grounded in semantics , was that procurement departments ( or rather , commercial departments ) were always seen as " spending the money .
"
This impression was enough to situate Procurement within the Finance function .
It 's easy to see why Procurement and Finance are functions with interests that are mutually irreconcilable .
Whereas Procurement is fundamentally concerned with the spending or disbursal of money , Finance , by its very nature , performs a cost - cutting role .
That is fundamentally the reason why Procurement 's aspirations have been constantly checked by Finance 's cost - cutting imperatives .
This notion , however , has been changing as more chief procurement officers have begun to argue for more autonomy and less interference from Finance departments .
PUBLIC PROCUREMENT Section::::Public procurement .
Public procurement generally is an important sector of the economy .
In Europe , public procurement accounts for 16.3 % of the Community GDP .
GREEN PUBLIC
PROCUREMENT Section::::Green public procurement .
In green public procurement ( GPP ) , contracting authorities and entities take environmental issues into account when tendering for goods or services .
The goal is to reduce the impact of the procurement on human health and the environment .
In the European Union , the Commission has adopted its communication on public procurement for a better environment , where proposes a political target of 50 % Green public procurement to be reached by the Member States by the year 2010 .
ACCESSIBLE PROCUREMENT Section::::Accessible procurement .
The United States Section 508 and European Commission standard EN 301 549 require public procurement to promote accessibility .
This means buying products and technology that has accessibility features built in to promote access for the around 1 billion people worldwide who have disabilities .
ALTERNATIVE COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCEDURES Section::::Alternative competitive bidding procedures .
There are several alternatives to traditional competitive bid tendering that are available in formal procurement .
One approach that has gained increasing momentum in the construction industry and among developing economies is the selection in planning ( SIP ) process , which enables project developers and equipment purchasers to make significant changes to their requirements with relative ease .
The SIP process also enables vendors and contractors to respond with greater accuracy and competitiveness as a result of the generally longer lead times they are afforded .
University of Tennessee research shows that Request for Solution and Request for association ( also known as request for partner or request for partnership ) methods are also gaining traction as viable alternatives and more collaborative methods for selecting strategic suppliers – especially for outsourcing .
FRAUD Section::::Fraud .
Recognizing the negative impact of procurement fraud , OECD has published guidelines on how to detect and combat bid rigging .
Procurement fraud can be defined as dishonestly obtaining an advantage , avoiding an obligation or causing a loss to public property or various means during procurement process by public servants , contractors or any other person involved in the procurement .
An example is a kickback , whereby a dishonest agent of the supplier pays a dishonest agent of the purchaser to select the supplier 's bid , often at an inflated price .
Other frauds in procurement include : * Collusion among bidders to reduce competition .
* Providing bidders with advance " inside " information .
* Submission of false or inflated invoices for services and products that are not delivered or work that is never done . "
Shadow vendors " , shell companies that are set up and used for billing , may be used in such schemes .
* Intentional substitution of substandard materials without the customer 's agreement .
* Use of " sole source " contracts without proper justification .
* Use of prequalification standards in specifications to unnecessarily exclude otherwise qualified contractors .
* Dividing requirements to qualify for small - purchase procedures to avoid scrutiny for contract review procedures of larger purchases .
SEE ALSO * Agreement on Government Procurement
* Auction * Bidder conferences * Buyer leverage
* Call for bids
* Contract management * E - procurement
*
Expediting *
Global sourcing * Group purchasing organization
* National Association of State Procurement Officials * Presales
* Procurement outsourcing * Performance Based Contracting * Preferred Partnership
* Purchase order
* Purchasing * Rate contract
* Reverse auction * Selection in planning
* Spend analysis *
Strategic
sourcing * Tender notification * Total cost of acquisition
* Turnkey REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Benslimane , Y. ; Plaisent , M. ; Bernard , P. :
Investigating Search Costs and Coordination Costs in Electronic Markets : A Transaction Costs Economics Perspective , in : Electronic Markets , 15 , 3 , 2005 , pp .
213–224 .
* Hodges Silverstein , S. ; Sager , T. : 2015 .
Legal Procurement Handbook ( New York : Buying Legal Council ) .
* Keith , B. ; Vitasek , K. ; Manrodt , K. ; Kling , J. : 2016 .
Strategic Sourcing in the New Economy : Harnessing the Potential of Sourcing Business Models for Modern Procurement ( New York : Palgrave Macmillan ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Federal Procurement Data System ( United States )
*
Green public procurement ( European Commission ) * Systems Engineering Fundamentals .
Defense Acquisition University Press , 2001