SOLO FAMILY
The Solo family is a fictional family of characters in the Star Wars franchise , whose most key member is smuggler Han Solo , one of the central protagonists of the franchise starting in the original film trilogy which he is featured prominently throughout .
Subsequent to these films ' events , Han marries Princess Leia , hence connecting her family tree to his ; their son Ben Solo is introduced in the 2015 film .
In the alternate Star Wars expanded universe of novels and comic books , Han and Leia have three children : Jaina , Jacen and Anakin Solo , who appear as lead characters in several expanded universe books and other media .
KEY FAMILY MEMBERS IN FILM BACKSTORY Section::::Key family members in film .
Section::::Backstory .
The anthology film reveals Han Solo 's father , whose name is not revealed , constructed ships in planet Corelia , where Han was born .
The name of Han 's dad is not known .
In the Legends - canon his name was Jonash Solo .
HAN SOLO Section::::Han Solo .
Han 's surname Solo , was not his birth name , with Han being given his Solo surname by an imperial officer right before Han joined the imperial flight academy , which he would leave three years after .
Han Solo 's first film appearance however was in 1977 's Star Wars : A New Hope where he is played by Harrison Ford .
He and his Wookiee co - pilot and best friend , Chewbacca are initially hired to transport Luke Skywalker and Obi - wan Kenobi .
Han and Chewbacca later become involved in the Rebel Alliance and are committed to its cause .
Over the course of the franchise , Han becomes a military leader for the Alliance , falling in love with and marrying Leia Organa , with whom he has a son named Ben .
LEIA ORGANA Section::::Leia Organa .
Leia Organa first appears in Star Wars :
A New Hope , played by Carrie Fisher .
She is princess of the planet Alderaan , a member of the Imperial Senate and also an agent for the Rebel Alliance .
She is later revealed to be the daughter of Darth Vader and twin sister of Luke Skywalker .
Over the course of the franchise , Leia becomes a leader among the Alliance and later of the New Republic .
She falls in love with and marries Han Solo , with whom she has a son named Ben , known as Kylo Ren when he turned to the dark side .
BEN SOLO Section::::Ben Solo .
Following the events of Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) , Leia and Han have a son , Ben Solo .
He is taught the ways of the Force by his uncle , Luke Skywalker , but is corrupted and turned to the dark side by Supreme Leader Snoke of the First Order .
Taking up the name " Kylo Ren " , he sets out to destroy the First Order 's enemy and his mother 's militant force , the Resistance , as well as kill his former master , Luke .
LEGENDS Section::::Legends .
The following characters are exclusive to what is now retroactively known as the Legends brand since April 2014 , and non - canonical to any and all Star Wars material produced under the ownership of the Walt Disney Company .
BACKSTORY
Section::::Backstory .
King Berethon e Solo ruled the planet Corellia ( the Solo homeworld ) during the Golden Age of the Old Republic , and set up a constitutional monarchy in 312 BBY ( Before the Battle of Yavin ) .
His descendants continued to rule Corellia until the establishment of the Diktat centuries later .
By 29 BBY , their declining status had driven them out of rule and into poverty .
Han Solo was born to father Jonash Solo during this time .
Following the events of the original film trilogy , Han is a hero of the Rebel Alliance , and marries Rebel leader Princess Leia in The Courtship of Princess Leia ( 1994 ) by Dave Wolverton .
Han and Leia have a twin son and daughter in Timothy Zahn 's The Last Command ( 1993 ) .
Leia becomes the Chief of State of the New Republic by the time of the Jedi Academy trilogy ( 1994 ) by Kevin J. Anderson , and during this period has another son with Han .
All three of the Solo children become Jedi Knights under the tutelage of their maternal uncle Luke Skywalker .
The Solo children were ranked as the 16th top Star Wars heroes , according to IGN in 2008 .
JAINA SOLO Section::::Jaina Solo .
Jaina Solo and her twin brother Jacen were created by Timothy Zahn in the Star Wars expanded universe novel
The Last Command ( 1994 ) .
She is the eldest child of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo , and has appeared in various novels and the Champions of the Force set for the Star Wars Miniatures game .
Jaina , named after Han 's mother , is born five minutes before her brother Jacen in the Thrawn trilogy ( 1991–93 ) .
The twins , and eventually their younger brother , live at various safe havens for their first few years under the protection of Leia 's handmaiden Winter .
The twins play a small role in Kevin J. Anderson 's Jedi Academy trilogy ( 1994 ) .
In Champions of the Force ( 1994 ) , Jaina helps her brother defend their unconscious uncle from the spirit of Sith Lord Exar Kun .
In Vonda McIntyre 's The Crystal Star ( 1994 ) , Jaina is kidnapped and used in a plot , along with her siblings , to take advantage of their Force powers .
In the Corellian trilogy ( 1994 ) , Jaina is again kidnapped but escapes .
Jaina becomes a major character in Young Jedi Knights ( 1995 ) as Jaina and Jacen begin their Jedi training .
Throughout the New Jedi Order series ( 1999–2003 ) , Jaina pursues a life separate from her twin brother and becomes Mara Jade Skywalker 's apprentice .
Jaina progresses quickly as a Jedi and a pilot , eventually joining Rogue Squadron .
She also develops a romantic relationship with Jagged Fel .
She briefly becomes the apprentice of fallen Jedi Kyp Durron .
Jaina 's understanding and manipulation of Yuuzhan Vong technology causes them to associate her with their trickster goddess .
She is present at the conclusion of the war with the Yuuzhan Vong .
Walter Jon Williams , author of Destiny 's Way ( 2002 ) , noted that the plot concerning Jaina 's love life caused some frantic rewrites .
Elaine Cunningham , author of the Dark Journey , commented that the story of the 2002 novel is a personal one focusing on a difficult time in Jaina 's life .
In The Joiner King ( 2005 ) , Jaina and the Jedi Zekk are joined in the Killik hive .
Jacen tricks them into attacking a Chiss base to provoke a war between the Chiss and the Killiks ; Jaina , furious , vows that she will never fly with Jacen again .
In the Legacy of the Force series ( 2006–08 ) , Jacen throws Jaina out of the Galactic Alliance when she refuses to follow his order to destroy a crippled ship .
She senses at this time a growing darkness in her twin .
In Betrayal ( 2006 ) , Jacen falls to the dark side of the Force , and Jaina realizes her duty as the " Sword of the Jedi " requires her to stop him .
She turns to Boba Fett to train her .
In Invincible ( 2008 ) , Jaina duels and kills Jacen .
In the Fate of the Jedi series ( 2009–12 ) , Jaina is promoted to Jedi Master by Luke Skywalker , and marries Jagged Fel .
In 2017 , Hasbro released a 6 " Jaina figure as a part of its Black Series line .
JACEN SOLO Section::::Jacen Solo .
Jacen Solo is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa , introduced in the 1994 Star Wars expanded universe novel The Last Command .
He is a major character in several Star Wars novels , particularly as the protagonist of The New Jedi Order series and later as the antagonist of the Legacy of the Force series , in which he becomes known as Darth Caedus .
IGN listed Jacen as # 17 on their list of the top 100 Star Wars heroes , saying that he had a more " profound effect " than any other Solo children on the Star Wars setting .
Jesse Schedeen , writing for IGN , also listed him as # 5 in a reader - inspired list of top Star Wars villains , and named the character 's murder of Mara Jade as his " defining moment of villainy " .
UGO.com listed Jacen as their top Star Wars expanded universe character , calling him " one of the most fearsome — and most tragic — villains in the Star Wars universe " .
ANAKIN SOLO Section::::Anakin Solo .
Anakin Solo is the youngest child born to Han Solo and Princess Leia , and the younger brother of Jacen and Jaina Solo .
Anakin is named after his maternal grandfather , Anakin Skywalker , and , like his namesake , is a talented pilot who is prodigiously gifted both in the Force and mechanical engineering .
Anakin appears as an infant and toddler in many Star Wars novels such as the Jedi Academy trilogy ( 1994 ) .
Anakin and his siblings play central roles in other novels such as The Crystal Star ( 1994 ) , the Corellian trilogy ( 1995 ) and The New Rebellion ( 1996 ) .
Anakin 's birth is featured in Tom Veitch 's Dark Empire II comic book miniseries ( May 1995 ) .
He is first referred to as Han Solo , Jr. by his father , but Leia corrects him , having named the baby after her biological father , Anakin Skywalker , as a reminder of hope .
However , Anakin still fears the name and his grandfather 's legacy .
On October 1 , 1995 , Nancy Richardson started the Junior Jedi Knights series with The Golden Globe starring Anakin and his best friend Tahiri Veila .
Anakin was now an eleven - year - old child starting his training at the Jedi Academy on Yavin 4 .
Richardson continued Anakin 's adventures in the following two novels , Lyric 's World and Promises , before Rebecca Moesta finished the series with Anakin 's Quest , Vader 's Fortress , and Kenobi 's Blade , starting in 1996 .
Anakin appears in the Young Jedi Knights series by Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta , which follows the adventures of Anakin 's siblings , Jacen and Jaina .
In 1999 , the first novel of the New Jedi Order series was published , entitled Vector Prime by R.A. Salvatore .
Anakin is now a teenager studying as a Jedi under his uncle , Luke Skywalker , debating with his brother , Jacen , on the ways of a Jedi and the Force .
In the novel 's climax , his father 's copilot and best friend , Chewbacca , dies saving Anakin 's life .
Anakin plays major roles in and by Michael A. Stackpole published 1 February 2000 and 1 June 2000 , respectively , and is the main focus of the books and by Greg Keyes published April 1 , 2001 and August 1 , 2001 , respectively .
In the 2001 novel Star by Star by Troy Denning , Anakin leads a team of Jedi to take out a dangerous enemy , resulting in his death .
Writers of the New Jedi Order storyline revealed in a question - and - answer section of the paperback edition of The Unifying Force published on August 3 , 2004 that Anakin was supposed to be the hero of the story and lead the Jedi Order , but this was changed due to the release of the Star Wars prequel films , in which the hero was also named Anakin .
Instead , he dies in battle at the conclusion of the novel .
Even after his death , Anakin Solo has been mentioned several times in most following novels , including a possible appearance in Traitor by Matthew Stover , as a droid in Betrayal by Aaron Allston as Anakin Sal - Solo , and in Backlash , where he appeared to his maternal uncle Luke Skywalker and to Luke 's son , Ben Skywalker by Aaron Allston .
Anakin is portrayed in the earlier books as being a genius and a loner , but is haunted by his name .
In Lyric 's World , it is revealed that he loves to take computers apart and put them back together and sees it as a puzzle .
He would also have dreams of Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader trying to persuade him to fall to the dark side of the Force ; Anakin overcomes this fear in Anakin 's Quest , in which he confronts himself .
In The New Jedi Order series , Anakin is older .
He still spent time alone thinking about the role of the Force , and would get into arguments with his brother Jacen on the subject .
However , his uncle Luke still sees Anakin as too young and reckless .
FAMILY TREE
References SEE ALSO * Skywalker family REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS