CELEBRITY CRUISES Celebrity Cruises is a premium cruise line which was founded in 1988 by the Greece - based Chandris Group .
In 1997 , Celebrity Cruises Ltd. merged with Royal Caribbean International to become Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. , which operates Celebrity , Royal Caribbean International , Azamara Club Cruises , Pullmantur Cruises and CDF Croisières de France .
The signature " Χ " displayed on the funnel of Celebrity ships is the Greek letter chi , for " Chandris " .
The company has its headquarters in Miami , Florida .
Common features on board Celebrity brand ships feature aft - glass dining rooms , formal foyer areas , alternative dining venues , balcony and suite staterooms , pools and lounging areas , bars and lounges , libraries , spas and gyms , and relaxation areas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Celebrity Cruises was founded in April 1988 as a subsidiary of the Greece - based Chandris Group to operate upmarket cruise ships to Bermuda .
Chandris had been involved in cruise traffic since the 1960s , and during the late 1980s the company operated in the United States market under the brand name Chandris Cruises .
Chandris Fantasy Cruises targeted the lower end of the cruise passenger market , with fleets consisting of second - hand ocean liners .
Celebrity Cruises came into existence when , in April 1988 , Home Lines , at the time one of the world 's leading premium cruise lines , was sold to Holland America Line .
Home Lines ' ships had held two of the five contracts offered by the Government of Bermuda to cruise lines , giving the ships priority berthing arrangement and unlimited access of sail to the islands in exchange for the ships sailing to Bermuda between April and October each year .
Although these contracts were highly valued , Holland America Line decided to withdraw the former Home Lines ships from this service , leaving an opening for two new ships to gain access .
Chandris wanted to acquire the contracts , but the Government of Bermuda was only willing to award them to upmarket cruise lines , which Chandris Fantasy Cruises was not .
In order to gain the Bermuda Government contracts , Chandris created Celebrity Cruises and immediately began negotiating with the Bermuda Government in April 1988 .
As a result of the negotiations , Celebrity Cruises was awarded the contract for two ships for a five - year period beginning in 1990
In order to fulfill the contract , Chandris Fantasy Cruises ' was rebuilt at Lloyd Werft , Germany in 1989 , re - entering service as for Celebrity Cruises in February 1990 .
As the second ship Horizon , that had been ordered in 1988 as a replacement for in the Chandris Fantasy fleet , was transferred to Celebrity Cruises fleet , entering service in May 1990 .
In late 1990 Celebrity Cruises placed an order for a sister ship of the Horizon , delivered in 1992 as .
In 1997 the Chandris family sold their interests in Celebrity Cruises to Royal Caribbean International .
During the same year Celebrity Cruises took delivery of the first Century class vessel , Century , that was followed by Galaxy in 1996 and Mercury in 1997 .
Following the delivery of the Mercury , the Meridian was sold to Singapore - based Sun Cruises .
Between 2000 and 2002 Celebrity took delivery of a quartet of new ships , the gas turbine - powered and aptly named Millennium class ships Millennium , Infinity , Summit and Constellation .
The Celebrity Expeditions sub - brand was launched in 2001 with the acquisition of Celebrity Xpedition , a small boutique ship offering specialized cruises around the Galápagos Islands .
In 2005 , the Horizon was transferred to the fleet Royal Caribbean 's United Kingdom - based subsidiary Island Cruises .
In the same year , the first ship of what was to be named Solstice class was ordered from Meyer Werft .
By 2007 , three more ships of this class were on order .
In 2006 , plans were made to transfer Blue Moon and Blue Dream from the fleet of Pullmantur Cruises to Celebrity Cruises under the names of Celebrity Quest and Celebrity Journey .
The ships would have joined the Celebrity Expeditions sub - brand , but in the end the decision was made to form an entirely new line , Azamara Cruises , to operate these ships in 2007 .
Also in 2007 the Zenith was transferred to Pullmantur Cruises ' in exchange ' for the Azamara ships .
Transfer of the Zenith also meant the end of Celebrity Cruises ' association with Bermuda for the time being , as no ship was brought in to replace her on the cruises to Bermuda .
In April 2010 , The Celebrity Summit reposition yearly to New Jersey and offers cruises to Bermuda .
In 2007 - 2008 , all of Celebrity Cruises ' ships were renamed with a " Celebrity " prefix added to the pre - existing ship names .
Celebrity Solstice , the first ship in the new Solstice class , was delivered to Celebrity on 24 October 2008 .
In May 2009 Galaxy was transferred to the fleet of TUI Cruises , a joint venture between Celebrity Cruises ' owner Royal Caribbean International and TUI AG and renamed as Mein Schiff .
Two more Solstice Class ships entered service – the Celebrity Equinox in 2009 and the Celebrity Eclipse in 2010 .
In 2011 , Celebrity Mercury was sold by Celebrity fleet to become Mein Schiff 2 for TUI Cruises .
The fourth Solstice Class ship
the Celebrity Silhouette entered service in 2011 .
The Celebrity Reflection was delivered in 2012 .
In 2014 , Celebrity Cruises launched a blog called Catalyst , which covers travel , fashion and culture .
In April 2015 , Celebrity 's oldest ship , the Celebrity Century departed the fleet .
On December 4 , 2014 , Celebrity Cruises signed of a letter of intent for a new class of vessels .
The two 2,900-guest , 117,000 GT ships , will be developed under the project name EDGE and will build upon the brand 's Millennium and Solstice class vessels .
The company expects delivery of the first ship in fall 2018 , with the second vessel delivered in the early part of 2020 .
On March 14 , 2016 , Celebrity Cruises announced the planned acquisition of Galápagos Islands tour operator Ocean Adventures and its two ships , the 48-guest M / V Eclipse and the 16-guest catamaran M / C Athala II .
The move expands Celebrity 's guest capacity in the Galápagos by 65 percent .
Celebrity Cruises announced on October 11 , 2017 , that it will perform legal same - sex marriages on its ships while in international waters following the legalization of same - sex marriage in Malta , where most of the Celebrity fleet is registered .
The company already hosted same - sex marriages while docked in jurisdictions where they are legal , but the change in Maltese law allowed the company 's captains to perform legally - recognized marriages while in international waters .
In July 2018 , the company announced its intention to invest more than $ 500 million to refurbish all ships in the company 's fleet .
LEADERSHIP Section::::Leadership .
Lisa Lutoff - Perlo was appointed the first woman president and CEO of Celebrity Cruises in December 2014 .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
Recent Travel awards include * " Best Premium Cruise Line " 2016 by Travel Weekly * " Best Europe Cruise Line " 2016 by Travel Weekly FLEET CURRENT FLEET MILLENNIUM CLASS Section::::Fleet .
Section::::Current fleet .
Section::::Millennium class . !
Ship Entered servicefor Celebrity Capacity Gross tonnage Flag Notes Image Ship was refurbished , or " Solsticized " ( as Celebrity Cruise calls it ) , in May 2012 .
SOLSTICE CLASS Section::::Solstice class . !
Ship Entered servicefor Celebrity Capacity Gross tonnage Flag Notes Image XPEDITION CLASS Section::::Xpedition class . !
Ship Entered servicefor
Celebrity Capacity Gross tonnage Flag Notes Image FUTURE SHIPS Section::::Future ships . !
Ship Class Enters servicewith Celebrity Capacity Gross tonnage Flag Notes RETIRED SHIPS Section::::Retired ships . !
Ship Class Years in service Tonnage * Status after Celebrity Image * May be specified in gross tonnage ( GT ) or gross register tonnage ( GRT ) .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website * Official UK website * Cruise Critic review
* Celebrity Cruises fleet locations in Google Maps