ANISOMETROPIA Anisometropia is the condition in which the two eyes have unequal refractive power .
Each eye can be nearsighted ( myopia ) , farsighted ( hyperopia ) or a combination of both , which is called antimetropia .
Generally a difference in power of two diopters or more is the accepted threshold to label the condition anisometropia .
In certain types of anisometropia , the visual cortex of the brain will not use both eyes together ( binocular vision ) , and will instead suppress the central vision of one of the eyes .
If this occurs often enough during the first 10 years of life while the visual cortex is developing , it can result in amblyopia , a condition where even when correcting the refractive error properly , the person 's vision in the affected eye is still not correctable to 20/20 .
The name is from four Greek components : an- " not , " iso- " same , " metr- " measure , " ops " eye . "
An estimated 6 % of subjects aged 6 to 18 have anisometropia .
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT SPECTACLE CORRECTION Section::::Treatment .
Section::::Spectacle correction .
For those with large degrees of anisometropia , spectacle correction may cause the person to experience a difference in image magnification between the two eyes ( aniseikonia ) which could also prevent the development of good binocular vision .
This can make it very difficult to wear glasses without symptoms such as headaches and eyestrain .
However , the earlier the condition is treated , the easier it is to adjust to glasses .
It is possible for spectacle lenses to be made which can adjust the image sizes presented to the eye to be approximately equal .
These are called iseikonic lenses .
In practice though , this is rarely ever done .
The formula for iseikonic lenses ( without cylinder ) is : where : t = center thickness ( in meters ) n =
refractive index P = front base curve h = vertex distance ( in meters )
F = back vertex power ( essentially , the prescription for the lens )
If the difference between the eyes is up to 3 diopters , iseikonic lenses can compensate .
At a difference of 3 diopters the lenses would however be very visibly different - one lens would need to be at least 3 mm thicker and have a base curve increased by 7.5 spheres .
CONTACT LENSES Section::::Contact lenses .
The usual recommendation for those needing iseikonic correction is to wear contact lenses .
The effect of vertex distance is removed and the effect of center thickness is also almost removed , meaning there is minimal and likely unnoticeable image size difference .
This is a good solution for those who can tolerate contact lenses .
REFRACTIVE SURGERY Section::::Refractive surgery .
Refractive surgery causes only minimal size differences , similar to contact lenses .
In a study performed on 53 children who had amblyopia due to anisometropia , surgical correction of the anisometropia followed by strabismus surgery if required led to improved visual acuity and even to stereopsis in many of the children ( see : Refractive surgery#Children ) .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
A determination of the prevalence of anisometropia has several difficulties .
First of all , the measurement of refractive error may vary from one measurement to the next .
Secondly , different criteria have been employed to define anisometropia , and the boundary between anisometropia and isometropia depend on their definition .
Several studies have found that anisometropia occurs more frequently and tends to be more severe for persons with high ametropia , and that this is particularly true for myopes .
Anisometropia follows a U - shape distribution according to age : it is frequent in infants aged only a few weeks , is more rare in young children , comparatively more frequent in teenagers and young adults , and more prevalent after presbyopia sets in , progressively increasing into old age .
One study estimated that 6 % of those between the ages of 6 and 18 have anisometropia .
Notwithstanding research performed on the biomechanical , structural and optical characteristics of anisometropic eyes , the underlying reasons for anisometropia are still poorly understood .
Anisometropic persons who have strabismus are mostly far - sighted , and almost all of these have ( or have had )
esotropia .
However , there are indications that anisometropia influences the long - term outcome of a surgical correction of an inward squint , and vice versa .
More specifically , for patients with esotropia who undergo strabismus surgery , anisometropia may be one of the risk factors for developing consecutive exotropia and poor binocular function may be a risk factor for anisometropia to develop or increase .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS