MO ' BETTER BLUES
Mo ' Better Blues is a 1990 musical drama film starring Denzel Washington , Wesley Snipes , and Spike Lee , who also directed .
It follows a period in the life of fictional jazz trumpeter Bleek Gilliam ( played by Washington ) as a series of bad decisions result in his jeopardizing both his relationships and his playing career .
The film focuses on themes of friendship , loyalty , honesty , cause - and - effect , and ultimately salvation .
It features the music of the Branford Marsalis quartet and Terence Blanchard on trumpet , who also plays for the Bleek Gilliam character .
The film was released five months after the death of Robin Harris and is dedicated to his memory , and is his second final acting role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins with a scene set in Brooklyn , New York in 1969 .
A group of four boys walk up to Bleek Gilliam 's brownstone and ask him to play baseball with them .
Bleek 's mother insists that he continue his trumpet lesson .
His father becomes concerned that Bleek will grow up to be a sissy , and a family argument ensues .
Bleek continues playing his trumpet , and his friends go away .
Over twenty years later , an adult Bleek performs on the trumpet at a busy nightclub with his jazz band , The Bleek Quintet .
Giant , the band 's manager , advises Bleek to stop allowing his saxophone player Shadow Henderson to grandstand with long solos .
The next morning Bleek wakes up with his girlfriend , Indigo Downes .
She leaves to go to class , while he meets his father for a game of catch , telling him that while he likes Indigo , he likes other women too and is not ready to make a commitment .
Later in the day while he is practicing , another woman named Clarke Bentancourt visits him .
She suggests that he fire Giant as manager ; he suggests that they make love ( which he refers to as " mo ' better " ) .
She bites his lip and he becomes upset about it , saying , " I make my living with my lips . "
Giant meets with his bookie to place bets .
He meets Bleek at the club with the rest of the band , except for the pianist , Left Hand Lacey , who arrives late with his French girlfriend and is scolded by Giant .
Later Giant goes to the club owners ' office , points out how busy the club has been since Bleek and his band began playing there , and unsuccessfully attempts to renegotiate their contract .
Giant meets his bookie the next morning , who is concerned that Giant is going too deep into debt .
Giant shrugs it off , and places several new bets .
He then stops at Shadow 's home to drop off a record .
Shadow confides in him that he is cheating on his girlfriend .
This leads to the next scene where Bleek is in bed with Clarke , and she asks him to let her sing a number at the club with his band .
He declines her request .
Bleek and Giant fend off requests from the other members of the band for a raise due to the band 's success .
Bleek goes to the club owners to ask for more money , which they refuse , reminding him that it was Giant who locked him into the current deal .
That night both Clarke and Indigo arrive at the club to see Bleek .
They are wearing the same style dress , which Bleek had purchased for them both .
Bleek attempts to work it out with each girl , but they are both upset with him , and though he sleeps with them each again , they leave him ( after he calls each of them by the other 's name ) .
However , tension rises with Shadow who has feelings for Clarke .
Bleek and Giant go for a bike ride , where Bleek insists that Giant do a better job managing .
Giant promises to do so , and then asks Bleek for a loan to pay his gambling debts .
Bleek declines , and later Giant is apprehended by two loan sharks who demand payment .
Giant ca n't pay and gets his fingers broken .
Later Giant tells Bleek that he injured himself , but Bleek does n't believe him .
Giant asks the other band members for money , and Left loans him five hundred dollars .
When loan sharks stake out Giant 's home , he goes to Bleek for a place to stay .
Bleek agrees to help him raise the money but fires him as manager .
Bleek misses both his girlfriends and leaves messages for each , but Clarke has begun a new relationship with Shadow .
Bleek finds out about it and fires Shadow .
The loan sharks find Giant at the club , take him outside , and beat him while Bleek plays .
Bleek goes outside to intervene and gets beaten as well .
Additionally , one loan shark takes Bleek 's own trumpet and smacks him across the face with it .
This permanently injures his lip , making him unable to continue playing trumpet .
Months later , Bleek reunites with Giant , who has gotten a job as a doorman and stopped gambling .
He drops in to see Shadow and Clarke , who are now performing together with the rest of Bleek 's former band .
Shadow invites him on stage , and they play together .
Bleek still has scars on his lips and is unable to play well .
He walks off the stage , gives his trumpet to Giant , and goes directly to Indigo 's house .
She is angry with him because he has n't contacted her in over a year .
She tries to reject him but agrees to take him back when he begs her to save his life .
A montage flashes through their wedding , the birth of their son , Miles , and Bleek teaching his son to play the trumpet .
In the final scene , Miles is ten years old and wants to go outside to play with his friends .
Indigo wants him to finish his trumpet lessons .
However , unlike in the opening scene , Bleek relents and allows his son go play with friends .
CAST * Denzel Washington —
Bleek Gilliam
* Spike Lee — Giant * Wesley Snipes — Shadow Henderson * Joie Lee —
Indigo Downes
* Cynda Williams — Clarke Bentancourt
* Giancarlo Esposito — Left Hand Lacey
* Bill Nunn — Bottom Hammer
* Jeff " Tain " Watts —
Rhythm Jones
* Dick Anthony Williams —
Big Stop Williams * Abbey Lincoln — Lillian Gilliam * John Turturro —
Moe Flatbush * Nicholas Turturro —
Josh Flatbush
* Robin Harris — Butterbean Jones * Samuel L. Jackson — Madlock * Leonard L. Thomas — Rod * Charlie Murphy — Eggy
* Coati Mundi — Roberto * Diahann Carroll — Jazz Club Singer SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack to the film was composed and played by Branford Marsalis Quartet and Terence Blanchard .
In 1991 , the soundtrack was nominated for a Soul Train Music Award for Best Jazz Album , but lost to saxophonist Najee for " Tokyo Blue " .
* " Harlem Blues " ( vocals : Cynda Williams )
4:50
*
*
" Say
Hey " 3:18 * * " Knocked Out the Box " 1:35 * *
" Again , Never " 3:54 * * " Mo ' Better Blues " ( Bill Lee )
3:40 * * " Pop Top 40 "
( vocals : Denzel Washington , Wesley Snipes ) 5:40 * * " Beneath the Underdog " 5:07 * * " Jazz Thing " ( Gang Starr , Kenny Kirkland , Robert Hurst ) 4:48 * * Harlem Blues ( Acapulco version ) "
( vocals : Cynda Williams )
4:46
* ANTI DEFAMATION LEAGUE CONTROVERSY Section::::Anti Defamation League controversy .
For his portrayal of Jewish nightclub owners Moe and Josh Flatbush , Lee drew the ire of the Anti Defamation League ( ADL ) , B'nai B'rith , and other such Jewish organizations .
The ADL claimed that the characterizations of the nightclub owners " dredge up an age - old and highly dangerous form of anti - Semitic stereotyping " , and the ADL was " disappointed that Spike Lee – whose success is largely due to his efforts to break down racial stereotypes and prejudice – has employed the same kind of tactics that he supposedly deplores . "
Lee eventually responded in an editorial in The New York Times , alleging " a double standard at work in the accusations of anti - Semitism " given the long history of negative portrayals of African - Americans in film : " Not every black person is a pimp , murderer , prostitute , convict , rapist or drug addict , but that has n't stopped Hollywood from writing these roles for African - Americans " .
Lee argues that even if the Flatbush brothers are stereotyped figures , their " 10 minutes of screen time " is insignificant when compared to " 100 years of Hollywood cinema ...
[ and ] a slew of really racist , anti - Semitic filmmakers " .
According to Lee , his status as a successful African - American artist has led to hostility and unfair treatment : " Do n't hold me to a higher moral standard than the rest of my filmmaking colleagues ...
Now that young black filmmakers have arisen in the film industry , all of a sudden stereotypes are a big issue ...
I think it 's reaching the point where I 'm getting reviewed , not my films . "
Ultimately , however , Lee refuses to apologize for his portrayal of the Flatbush brothers : " I stand behind all my work , including my characters , Moe and Josh Flatbush ...
if critics are telling me that to avoid charges of anti - Semitism , all Jewish characters I write have to be model citizens , and not one can be a villain , cheat or a crook , and that no Jewish people have ever exploited black artists in the history of the entertainment industry , that 's unrealistic and unfair . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Mo
' Better Blues received mixed to positive reviews from critics , as the film holds a 73 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 33 reviews .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1990 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS