PARASYTE PLOT Section::::Plot .
Parasyte centers on a male 17-year - old high school student named Shinichi Izumi , who lives with his mother and father in a quiet neighborhood in Tokyo , Japan .
One night , strange worm - like creatures with drills as a ' head ' called Parasytes appear on Earth , taking over the brains of human hosts by entering through their ears or noses .
One Parasite attempts to crawl into Shinichi 's nose while he sleeps , but fails as Shinichi wakes up , and enters his body by burrowing into his arm instead .
In the Japanese version , it takes over his right hand and is named , after the Japanese word for ' right ' ; Tokyopop 's 1990s English version , in which the images are flipped horizontally , has the Parasite take over Shinichi 's left hand and it is named Lefty .
Because Shinichi was able to prevent Migi from travelling further up into his brain , both beings retain their separate intellect and personality .
As the duo encounter other Parasites , they capitalize on their strange situation and gradually form a strong bond , working together to survive .
This gives them an edge in battling other Parasites who frequently attack the pair upon realization that Shinichi 's human brain is still intact .
Shinichi feels compelled to fight other Parasites , who devour humans as food , while enlisting Migi 's help .
CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
HUMANS
PARASITES
Section::::Characters .
Section::::Parasites .
The antagonists of the series .
The Parasites are creatures of unknown origin which start off as worm - like creatures that instinctively enter the body of the nearest life form and travel to the brain to completely assimilate it while destroying the host 's identity in the process .
From there , using the vital organs of the host bodies to survive , the Parasites would be driven with a need to kill humans and Parasites with failed host bodies .
After assimilating their host , Parasites exhibit a variety of abilities that make them dangerous adversaries : the immediate area around their entry site ( typically the head ) is morphed into a versatile " parasite tissue " which can take a variety of offensive and defensive forms , and a parasite that successfully takes over a host 's brain can then maximize the physical potential of that host .
In general , Parasite intelligence is comparable to humans , though their thought process is strictly rational and cold , with very little emotion .
They are also capable of learning extremely quickly depending on their environment - Migi , for example , mastered Japanese after one night of reading books on the subject .
While most Parasites initially acted alone , causing a chain of multiple grisly deaths coined the " mincemeat murders " , they eventually form groups for safety in numbers .
By the time of the final chapter , Shinichi speculating that they might have been created as an evolutionary countermeasure to humans , the surviving Parasites are assumed to have gone into hiding and adopt themselves further into human society to keep their activities to a minimum .
NAMES IN TOKYOPOP PUBLICATION
Section::::Names in Tokyopop publication .
In the Tokyopop publication the main character 's name was Shin and his hand was called " Lefty " , as the image had been flipped to read left to right .
Satomi Murano is Sara .
Jaw , Uda 's Parasite , is referred to as Jaws , in reference to the film Jaws by Steven Spielberg .
Reiko is known as Tamara Rockford in the Tokyopop version .
Gotō 's name was written without a macron .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Iwaaki chose a high school setting due to a scene he had thought of .
When considering a scene where Migi turns his shape into a penis in front of Satomi Murano , Iwaaki believed that the scene would work best in a high school setting , so Iwaaki gave Parasyte a high school setting .
MEDIA
MANGA Section::::Media .
Section::::Manga .
Parasyte was originally serialized in Japan in the Morning Open Zōkan from 1988 and switched to Afternoon after a few issues in 1990 .
It was collected into ten tankōbon volumes by Kodansha , and was later republished in eight kanzenban volumes .
It was originally licensed for English translation and North American distribution by Tokyopop , which published the series over 12 volumes .
The Tokyopop version ran in Mixxzine .
Daily pages from the Tokyopop version ran in the Japanimation Station , a service accessible to users of America Online .
The Tokyopop English - language manga went out of print on May 2 , 2005 .
Del Rey Manga later acquired the rights to the series , and published eight volumes following the kanzenban release .
Kodansha Comics later republished the volumes in North America between 2011 and 2012 .
LIVE - ACTION FILMS Section::::Live - action films .
Hollywood 's New Line Cinema had acquired the film rights to Parasyte in 2005 , and a film adaptation was reported to be in the works , with Jim Henson Studios and Don Murphy allegedly in charge of production .
New Line Cinema 's option expired in 2013 , prompting a bidding war in Japan .
Film studio and distributor Toho won the rights , and decided to adapt the manga into a two - part live - action film series directed by Takashi Yamazaki .
The first part , , was released in November 2014 and the second part , , was released in April 2015 .
ANIME
Section::::Anime .
An anime television series adaptation by Madhouse titled aired in Japan on NTV between October 9 , 2014 and March 26 , 2015 .
The series follows Shinichi Izumi , a high school boy whose right hand becomes possessed by an alien Parasite named Migi , finding himself in a battle against other Parasites who feast on other humans .
The series was simulcast by Crunchyroll outside of Asia and by Animax Asia in Southeast Asia and South Asia .
Sentai Filmworks has licensed the anime for North America , South America , United Kingdom , Australia , and New Zealand release .
UK Distributor Animatsu Entertainment will release the series in the UK .
In Australia and New Zealand , Hanabee has acquired the series and will release it within the region .
The opening theme song is " Let Me Hear " performed by Fear , and loathing in Las Vegas .
The ending theme is " It 's the Right Time " performed by Daichi Miura .
At Anime Expo 2015 , Sentai Filmworks announced that the anime would run on Adult Swim 's Toonami block on October 3 , 2015 .
The English dub , provided and distributed by Sentai Filmworks , has been released on DVD and Blu - ray in two parts , with Part 1 ( Episodes 1–12 ) on April 5 , 2016 and Part 2 ( Episodes 13–24 ) on July 5 , 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The series won the Kodansha Manga Award for general manga in 1993 .
It also won the Seiun Award for being the best manga of the year in 1996 .
The live action film Parasyte : Part 1 had grossed around at the Japanese box office after two weeks .
CHINA BAN Section::::China ban .
On June 12 , 2015 , the Chinese Ministry of Culture listed Parasyte among 38 anime and manga titles banned in China .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official manga website at Afternoon * Official anime website * Official film website