DOUBLE - BARRELLED NAME
In the Western tradition of surnames , there are several types of double surname ( also double - barrelled surname ) .
If the two names are joined with a hyphen , it may also be called a hyphenated surname .
*
In British tradition , a double surname is heritable , and mostly taken in order to preserve a family name which would have become extinct due to the absence of male descendants bearing the name , connected to the inheritance of a family estate .
Examples include Harding - Rolls and Stopford Sackville .
*
In Hispanic tradition , double surnames are the norm , and not an indication of social status .
A person will take the ( first ) surname of their father , followed by the ( first ) surname of their mother ( i.e. their maternal grandfather 's surname ) .
The double surname itself is not heritable .
These names are combined without hyphen ( but optionally combined using y " and " ) .
In addition to this , there are heritable double surnames ( apellidos compuestos ) which are combined with a hyphen .
*
In German tradition , double surnames are taken upon marriage , written with or without hyphen , combining the husband 's surname with the wife 's ( more recently the sequence has become optional under some legislations ) .
These double surnames are " alliance names " ( Allianznamen ) and as such not heritable .
BRITISH TRADITION Section::::British tradition .
A few British upper - class families have " triple - barrelled " surnames ( e.g. Anstruther - Gough - Calthorpe ; Cave - Browne - Cave ; Elliot - Murray - Kynynmound ; Heathcote - Drummond - Willoughby ; Smith - Dorrien - Smith ; Vane - Tempest - Stewart ) .
Not all of those with multiple names were of the peerage ; landed gentry such as George Henry Lane - Fox Pitt - Rivers consolidated the estates and wealth of several families in their multiple names .
These are sometimes created when one spouse has a double - barrelled name and the other has a single surname .
Nowadays , such names are almost always abbreviated in everyday use to a single or double - barrelled version .
There are even a few " quadruple - barrelled " surnames ( e.g. Hepburn - Stuart - Forbes - Trefusis , Hovell - Thurlow - Cumming - Bruce , Montagu - Stuart - Wortley - Mackenzie , Plunkett - Ernle - Erle - Drax and Stirling - Home - Drummond - Moray ) .
The surname of the extinct family of the Dukes of Buckingham and Chandos was the quintuple - barrelled Temple - Nugent - Brydges - Chandos - Grenville .
Captain Leone
Sextus Denys Oswolf Fraudatifilius Tollemache - Tollemache de Orellana Plantagenet Tollemache - Tollemache is sometimes quoted as the man with the most ever " barrels " in his surname ( six ) , but in fact all but the last two of these ( Tollemache - Tollemache ) were forenames .
Many double - barrelled names are written without a hyphen , which can cause confusion as to whether the surname is double - barrelled or not .
Notable persons with unhyphenated double - barrelled names include prime minister David Lloyd George , the composer Ralph Vaughan Williams , astronomer Robert Hanbury Brown , actors Kristin Scott Thomas and Helena Bonham Carter (
although she has said the hyphen is optional )
comedian Sacha Baron Cohen ( however , his cousin Professor Simon Baron - Cohen opted for the hyphen ) and Sylvia Llewelyn Davies .
IBERIAN TRADITION Section::::Iberian tradition .
When a person is born , the custom is for them to take the first surname of the father and then the first surname of the mother .
Thus , when D. Julio Iglesias de la Cueva and Dª Isabel Preysler Arrastía had a son called Enrique , he legally was Enrique Iglesias Preysler .
Where the optional conjunction y ( and ) is used , the example would become " Enrique Iglesias y Preysler " ( never used in the case of Enrique Iglesias ;
see for example José Ortega y Gasset ) .
On the other hand , actual double - barrelled names exist ( called apellidos compuestos ) , such as García - Huidobro , Cruz - Coke .
For example , Luciano Cruz - Coke Carvallo is the son of Mr. Carlos Cruz - Coke Ossa and Ms. Lucía Carvallo Arriagada .
In every day use Mr. Cruz - Coke Carvallo
is Mr. Cruz - Coke , never Mr. Cruz .
Such names usually reflect the same case as in Anglo - Saxon tradition : the survival of a family name that would be lost without this practice .
Another common case is to find double - barrelled names with the use of the conjunction " de " ( of ) .
In Iberian tradition this commonly indicates a toponymic surname or a noble family name .
Toponymic family such as the surnames García De las Heras , Pérez de Arce or the very common Ortiz de Zárate combine a regular family name with the place that family resides .
For example , the " Ortiz " resides in the Basque town of Zarate , in Euskal Herria .
The least common double - barreled names that use the particle " de " are the nobiliary ones , such as the Álvarez de Toledo , Ramírez de Arellano or Fernández de Córdoba .
In these cases , the first surname indicates the original name of the family , whereas the second surname denotes the nobiliary feud of that family .
In this case , the conjunction " de " ( of ) reflects that the family used to be the feudal lords of that place .
Thus , the Ramírez were the lords of the village of Arellano , in Navarre .
Álava , Spain is notorious for its incidence of true compound surnames , known as " apellido compuesto alavés " ( Álava compound surname ) .
Unlike other true compound surnames , which resulted from the merging of a previously paternal and maternal surname , the Álava compound surname is characterized for having the first portion of the surname as a patronymic , normally a Spanish patronymic ( i.e. from the Castilian language ) or more unusually a Basque language patronymic , followed by the preposition " de " , with the second part of the surname being a local toponymic surname from Álava .
While this form of compound surname can be found in other regions of Spain , albeit scarcely , it is only in Álava that it has persisted .
These type of customary compound surnames used to be found throughout Guipúzcoa , Navarra , Soria , Logroño , and most of Green Spain generally ( i.e. the Spanish northern maritime façade exposed to the Atlantic Ocean which runs along the coastal strip lying north of the Cantabrian and Basque mountains , along the Bay of Biscay . )
In Portugal , where most of the population have two to four surnames ( apelidos de família ) , the practice of using a double combination of surnames is very common .
The person can either use a paternal and a maternal surname combined ( Aníbal Cavaco Silva ) or use a double last name that has been passed down through one of the parents ( António Lobo Antunes ) .
The last surname ( normally the paternal one ) is usually considered the " most important " , but people may choose to use another one , often favouring the more sonant or less common of their surnames in their daily or professional life ( such as Manuel Alegre or José Manuel Barroso , who is known in Portugal by his double surname Durão Barroso ) .
The use of more than two surnames in public life is less common , but not unusual ( see Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen ) .
One historic early aviator , Alberto Santos - Dumont , is known to have not only often used an equals sign ( =) between his two surnames in place of a hyphen , but also seems to have preferred that practice , to display equal respect for his father 's French ethnicity and the Brazilian nationality of his mother .
CONTINENTAL GERMANIC TRADITION
Section::::Continental Germanic tradition .
In Germany a double surname ( ) is generally joined with a single hyphen .
Other types of double surnames are not accepted by German name law .
However , exceptions are made for immigrants and for marriages where the double surname already was the official name of one partner before marriage .
A 1993 law forbids surnames with more than two components .
Prior to this , it was permitted for adults ( e.g. , Simone Greiner - Petter - Memm and formerly Elisabeth Noelle - Neumann - Maier - Leibniz ) but their children would not inherit the name .
The 1993 ban was upheld by the Constitutional Court in 2009 .
The crew members of the famous First World War light cruiser were allowed to add the name Emden with a hyphen to their surname as a special honour after World War I. In Switzerland double surnames are traditionally written with a hyphen and combine the surnames of a married couple with the husband 's surname in first place and the wife 's second .
This double name is called " alliance name " ( ) .
The first name as such , however , is the official family name , which will be inherited by their legitimate children .
So , for example , if Werner Stauffacher is married to Gertrud Baumgarten , both can use the name Stauffacher - Baumgarten .
Their children Heinrich and Verena , however , bear only the surname Stauffacher .
Prominent bearers of an alliance name are Micheline Calmy - Rey ( former Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs ) , Eveline Widmer - Schlumpf ( former Federal Minister for Finance ) , and Johann Schneider - Ammann ( Federal Minister for the Economy ) .
Lately , based on feminist pressure , wives have been permitted by law to place their maiden name before the family name .
This double name is written without a hyphen and is borne by the wife only .
So , in the example above , the wife 's name is Gertrud Baumgarten Stauffacher , while her husband 's is Werner Stauffacher .
Again , the children 's names remain Heinrich and Verena Stauffacher .
Doubling of surnames is also practised by the Dutch .
An example is the name of Dutch footballer Jan Vennegoor of Hesselink .
According to The Guardian , his name derives from " the 17th century , when two farming families in the Enschede area of the Netherlands intermarried .
Both the Vennegoor and Hesselink names carried equal social weight , and so – rather than choose between them – they chose to use both . '
Of ' in Dutch translates to ' or ' , which means that a strict translation of his name reads Jan Vennegoor or Hesselink .
" Some of these Dutch surnames also survive in South Africa , for example , the rugby player Rohan Janse van Rensburg 's surname is Janse van Rensburg , not only van Rensburg ( which is itself an existing surname ) .
SCANDINAVIA Section::::Scandinavia .
Denmark has a tradition of double surnames originating in the 19th century .
This was a result of two naming acts obliging commoners to adopt heritable surnames , passed first for the Duchy of Schleswig in 1771 , and then for Denmark proper in 1828 .
Most people chose their patronymic as their heritable surname , resulting in an overwhelming dominance of a few surnames .
In order to avoid the risk of mistaken identity , many Danes started using their mothers ' maiden names as a heritable middle name ( similar to the Russian or Hispanic system ) , rather than as a second given name ( as in the Anglo - Saxon system ) .
One such case in point is the fact that three successive prime ministers of Denmark all share the same last name , Rasmussen , and so they are usually referred to by their middle name , viz .
Nyrup , Fogh and Løkke , respectively .
Today , however , the order of the names invariably places the patronymic -sen at the end , regardless of whether that name has been passed down by the father or mother , or adopted through marriage .
Unlike in the Russian or Hispanic systems , this surname - style middle name is not considered a proper last name in official documents , unless hyphenated into one compound name .
POLAND
Section::::Poland .
In Poland a double surname ( ) is generally joined with a hyphen and by law
includes only one hyphen .
Polish surnames ( nazwisko ( N. sg . ) ) , like those in most of Europe , are hereditary and generally patrilineal , i.e. , passed from the father on to his children .
A married woman usually adopts her husband 's name .
However , other combinations are legally possible .
The wife may keep her maiden name ( nazwisko panieńskie ) or add her husband 's surname to hers , thus creating a double name ( nazwisko złożone ) .
A married man can also adopt his wife 's surname , or add it to his .
Polish triple - barreled surnames are known to exist ; an example is the one borne by Ludwik Kos - Rabczewicz - Zubkowski , a university professor and writer , living in Canada .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
In Russia , double - barreled surnames are somewhat uncommon , but normal and accepted practice , often associated with some families of note wishing to preserve both of their lineages .
Federal law # 143-FZ "
On Civil State Acts " explicitly allows double - barreled names in its Article 28 , but limits such compound surnames to two parts only .
TURKISH TRADITION Section::::Turkish tradition .
Turkish tradition offers options to couples after the marriage for the naming conventions .
Renewing the national identity card to reflect the naming changes has two options , one is to use man 's surname for the newly formed family 's surname , the second is to use two surnames for the family noting that one is the bride 's maiden name , the latter is the groom 's surname .
This highlights the equal importance of men and women in Turkish history , by giving legal opportunity to use whichever is preferable for partners .
Another double - barreled naming custom in Turkey , is that the grandfather of a newborn to give the first name , while the father of the newborn issues a middle name which is known as " Göbek Adı " in Turkish .
In other words , " Gobek Adi " is the name that 's been given to newborn while his / her umbilical cord is being cut .
In the surname section , the tradition is to use the paternal heritage surname .
For example ; Cahit Sıtkı Tarancı , Melih Cevdet Anday , Falih Rıfkı Atay
and so on .
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Recent developments .
Since the late 20th century , increasingly liberal legislation on the inheritance of legal surnames in many Western countries has led to the emergence of various non - traditional or ad
hoc coinages of combined surnames .
For example , Hispanic American politician Antonio Villar and his wife Corina Raigosa adopted the " blended " surname Villaraigosa upon their marriage in 1987 .
In some cases , courts in member states of the European Union have refused to register children under the surname given according to a foreign naming tradition .
In France a practice abolished in 2010 was to use two consecutive hyphens -- ( not the same as a " long hyphen " or dash , or with a double hyphen ) to distinguish between recently formed double surnames and ancient hyphenated family names ( ) .
The use of double surnames is legal but not customary .
Children traditionally take on their father 's surname ( or , more recently , optionally their mother 's ) .
In Canada , especially Quebec , it is common for children born since the 1970s to bear both parents ' surnames , with no established rules as to whether the father 's or mother 's name should come first .
( In Quebec , under the provisions of the Civil Code enacted in 1980 , both spouses must retain their original surnames upon marriage . )
This situation was frequent enough that naming laws had to be amended in the early 1990s when those with double surnames began to marry , and wished themselves to give their children double surnames .
In such cases , any combination involving at most two elements of the father 's or the mother 's surname is permitted .
NON - WESTERN SURNAME TRADITIONS Section::::Non
- Western surname traditions .
A Chinese compound surname is a Chinese surname using more than one character .
Many of these surnames derive from noble and official titles , professions , place names and other areas , to serve for a purpose .
Some are originally non - Han , while others were created by joining two one - character family names .
Only a few of these names ( e.g. Ouyang , Shangguan , Sima , Situ ) survive in modern times .
Many clans eventually took on a single - character surname for various reasons .
A small minority of Koreans and Vietnamese also have compound surnames .
In 2007 , PRC officials suggested that parents should be encouraged to create two - syllable ( two - character ) surnames for their children by combining their parents ' ( one - syllable ) surnames ; this could make people 's names more unique , and " could help solve the problem of widely recurring names " .
In India , double surnames are comparatively common , especially in Bengal , examples including Roy Chaudhury ( sometimes written as Chowdhury ) , Ghosh Dastidar , Das Gupta , Dutta Roy , etc ..
In recent years , a few notable married women have been keeping their maiden surnames resulting in a double - barred name such as Arati Ankalikar - Tikekar , Padmaja Phenany Joglekar .
The Filipino naming tradition is derived from the Hispanic system , but was influenced by the American ( Anglo - Saxon ) naming tradition when the Philippines became a United States colony in 1901 .
A child customarily will carry the mother 's maiden name as his middle name and carry the father 's surname .
When the female marries , she keeps her maiden surname and adds the husband 's surname , but does not typically hyphenate it .
So , when Maria Santos Aguon marries José Lujan Castro , her name becomes Maria Aguon Castro and their children will typically carry the middle name Aguon , and the surname Castro .
In Nigeria , a double barrelled surname is adopted when an aristocratic woman marries a lower ranked man .
It also occurs when a ruling family adopts the forename of their patriarch as part of their surname in order to distinguish themselves from others that might share their surname .
An example of the former is that of the Vaughan - Richards family , a branch of the family of the American emancipated slave Scipio Vaughan , who maintain their mother 's last name as well as their father 's .
An example of the latter is that of the royal family of King Adeniji Adele of Lagos , who are distinguished from their numerous Adele cousins by the use of the double barrelled name Adeniji - Adele .
SEE ALSO
* Dual naming
* Double name
* Name blending
* List of double placenames REFERENCES