COLD - STIMULUS HEADACHE
A cold - stimulus headache , also known as brain freeze , ice - cream headache , trigeminal headache or its given scientific name sphenopalatine ganglioneuralgia
( meaning " pain of the sphenopalatine ganglion " ) , is a form of brief pain or headache commonly associated with consumption ( particularly quick consumption ) of cold beverages or foods such as ice cream and ice pops .
It is caused by having something cold touch the roof of the mouth , and is believed to result from a nerve response causing rapid constriction and swelling of blood vessels or a " referring " of pain from the roof of the mouth to the head .
The rate of intake for cold foods has been studied as a contributing factor .
A cold - stimulus headache is distinct from dentin hypersensitivity , a type of pain that can occur under similar circumstances .
Cats and other animals have been observed experiencing a similar reaction when presented with a similar stimulus .
The term ice - cream headache has been in use since at least January 31 , 1937 , contained in a journal entry by Rebecca Timbres published in the 1939 book We Did n't Ask Utopia : A Quaker Family in Soviet Russia .
CAUSE AND FREQUENCY Section::::Cause and frequency .
A cold - stimulus headache is the direct result of the rapid cooling and rewarming of the capillaries in the sinuses leading to periods of vasoconstriction and vasodilation .
A similar but painless blood vessel response causes the face to appear " flushed " after being outside on a cold day .
In both instances , the cold temperature causes the capillaries in the sinuses to constrict and then experience extreme rebound dilation as they warm up again .
In the palate , this dilation is sensed by nearby pain receptors , which then send signals back to the brain via the trigeminal nerve , one of the major nerves of the facial area .
This nerve also senses facial pain , so as the neural signals are conducted the brain interprets the pain as coming from the forehead — the same " referred pain " phenomenon seen in heart attacks .
Brain - freeze pain may last from a few seconds to a few minutes .
Research suggests that the same vascular mechanism and nerve implicated in " brain freeze " cause the aura ( sensory disturbance ) and pulsatile ( throbbing pain ) phases of migraines .
It is possible to suffer from a cold - stimulus headache in both hot and cold weather , because the effect relies upon the temperature of the food being consumed rather than that of the environment .
Other causes that may mimic the sensation of cold - stimulus headache include that produced when high speed drilling is performed through the inner table of the skull in people undergoing such a procedure in an awake or sedated state .
ANTERIOR CEREBRAL ARTERY THEORY Section::::Anterior cerebral artery theory .
Another theory into the cause of cold - stimulus headaches is explained by increased blood flow to the brain through the anterior cerebral artery , which supplies oxygenated blood to most medial portions of the frontal lobes and superior medial parietal lobes .
This increase in blood volume and resulting increase in size in this artery is thought to bring on the pain associated with a cold - stimulus headache .
When the anterior cerebral artery constricts , reining in the response to this increased blood volume , the pain disappears .
The dilation , then quick constriction , of this blood vessel may be a type of self - defense for the brain .
This inflow of blood can not be cleared as quickly as it is coming in during the cold - stimulus headache , so the blood flow could raise the pressure inside the skull and induce pain that way .
As the intracranial pressure and temperature in the brain rise the blood vessel contracts , and the pressure in the brain is reduced before reaching dangerous levels .
RELIEF Section::::Relief .
To relieve pain , some doctors suggest pressing the tongue against the roof of the mouth to warm the area , tilting the head back for 20 seconds , or drinking something warmer than whatever caused the headache .
Some people report relief from breathing in through the mouth and out through the nose , thus passing warm air through the nasal passages .
Others have noted that the Valsalva manoeuvre can speed the recovery of the headache , in spite of this contravening the Anterior Cerebral Artery Theory RESEARCH Section::::Research .
The phenomenon is common enough to have been the subject of research published in the British Medical Journal and Scientific American .
A study conducted by Maya Kaczorowski demonstrated a higher incidence of sphenopalatine ganglioneuralgia in subjects consuming the ice cream sample in less than 30 seconds vs. those who consumed slowly , with no time limit ( 27.3 % and 12.5 % respectively ) .
However , Kaczorowski was ultimately not able to draw a clear connection between the speed of consumption and incidence of sphenopalatine ganglioneuralgia .
According to research by Nigel Bird , Anne MacGregor , and Marcia I. Wilkinson published in the journal Headache , in their study " 17 % of the migraine patients and 46 % of the students developed headache following palatal application or a swallow of ice cream . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS