PETTICOAT JUNCTION Petticoat Junction is an American sitcom that originally aired on CBS from September 1963 to April 1970 .
The series takes place at the Shady Rest Hotel , which is run by Kate Bradley , her three daughters Billie Jo , Bobbie Jo , and Betty Jo , and her uncle Joe Carson .
The series is one of three interrelated shows about rural characters produced by Paul Henning .
Petticoat Junction was created upon the success of Henning 's previous rural / urban - themed sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies ( 1962–1971 ) .
The success of Petticoat Junction led to a spin - off , Green Acres ( 1965–1971 ) .
Petticoat Junction was produced by Wayfilms ( a joint venture of Filmways Television and Pen - Ten Productions ) .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The show centers on the goings - on at the rural Shady Rest Hotel .
Widowed Kate Bradley ( Bea Benaderet ) is the proprietor .
Her lazy - but - lovable Uncle Joe Carson ( Edgar Buchanan ) supposedly helps her in the day - to - day running of the hotel , while she serves as a mediator in the various minor crises that befall her three beautiful daughters : redhead Betty Jo ( Linda Kaye Henning ) ; brunette Bobbie Jo ( first Pat Woodell , later Lori Saunders ) ; and blonde Billie Jo ( first Jeannine Riley , then Gunilla Hutton , and finally Meredith MacRae ) .
Uncle Joe , when he is not idling in his favorite porch chair , frequently comes up with half - baked get - rich - quick schemes and ill - conceived hotel promotions .
Early on , much of the show also focuses on the Hooterville Cannonball , an 1890s vintage steam - driven train run more like a taxi service by engineer Charley Pratt ( Smiley Burnette ) and fireman / railway conductor Floyd Smoot ( Rufe Davis ) .
It was not uncommon for the Cannonball to make an unscheduled stop for the crew to go fishing , or to pick fruit for Kate 's apple butter and pies .
The single - tracked Hooterville spur line was cut off from the rest of the railroad 20 years before the start of the show by the demolition of a trestle .
Charlie and Floyd are alternately depicted as retired employees of the railroad receiving pensions and salaried railroad workers .
Many plots involve railroad executive Homer Bedloe 's futile attempts to shut down and scrap the Hooterville Cannonball .
Occasionally , youngest daughter Betty Jo can be found with her hand on the Cannonball 's throttle , as running the train is one of her favorite pastimes .
Trips on the Cannonball usually include a stop in Hooterville at Drucker 's Store , run by Sam Drucker ( Frank Cady ) .
Drucker 's is the local hub , where menfolk come to play checkers and chat .
Sam Drucker is the postmaster , and his telephone is a lifeline for the Bradleys , Uncle Joe , and others .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
The Shady Rest Hotel is located at a water stop along the isolated branch line of the C. & F.W. Railroad .
Due to a trestle demolition many years ago , the line now is entirely unconnected to any other railroad ; it runs between the rural farm community of Hooterville and the small town of Pixley .
Each of these towns is about away from the hotel , which is located roughly at the midpoint of the line .
Kate Bradley says that her stubborn grandfather built the hotel there because that was where the lumber fell off the train .
The town of Pixley , at one end of the Cannonball 's route , was named for Pixley , California .
A number of location shots were filmed in the real Pixley .
The exact location of Hooterville is never mentioned on Petticoat Junction or Green Acres .
The Shady Rest is an old - fashioned Victorian - style hotel , accessible primarily by train ( and a poorly - maintained fire road ) , where guests share bathing facilities and eat together with the family at a large dining - room table .
Kate Bradley cooks sumptuous meals on a wood - burning stove , and her specialty is chicken ' n ' dumplings .
Meals were prepared for the show by property master Vince Vecchio .
In a 1966 interview , Bea Benaderet said , " I suspect that Vince is better at cooking things like [ my ] mother used to than anybody 's mother ever was . "
Regarding the show 's title , Petticoat Junction , the hotel is located at a water stop , not a junction ( where two or more railroad lines meet ) .
The train stop is nicknamed " petticoat junction " because the Bradley sisters often go swimming in the railway 's water tower and leave their petticoats draped over the side .
The opening titles of the series show their petticoats hanging on the tower while they are swimming offscreen .
SHOW HISTORY Section::::Show history .
The idea for Petticoat Junction came from Paul Henning 's wife , Ruth .
Paul Henning said , The Shady Rest was based on a real hotel in Eldon , Missouri , run by my wife 's grandmother ...
that 's where the hotel and the train and the whole setting came from , from Ruth 's reminiscences of visiting her grandma .
Ruth Henning told him stories of her childhood adventures at the Burris Hotel , which was owned by her grandparents in Eldon .
Once called the Rock Island Hotel , the Burris was located next to the now - derelict Rock Island Line railroad tracks .
Ruth Henning 's mother , Alice ( Burris ) Barth , also told her many stories about the hotel and about growing up in the small town of Eldon .
The stories of Ruth and her mother , Alice , became the basis of the show .
Linda Kaye Henning said that her father , " wrote the series for Bea Benaderet . "
Paul Henning thought the show would make an ideal starring vehicle for the veteran character actress .
Since the 1930s , Benaderet had played second - banana roles on radio and television to such personalities as Jack Benny , Lucille Ball , and George Burns and Gracie Allen .
She was an uncredited voice actress for many Warner Bros. cartoons , and provided the voice of Betty Rubble on The Flintstones .
She also played the semiregular character Cousin Pearl Bodine on season one of The Beverly Hillbillies .
Henning felt that Benaderet had more than paid her dues and had earned the right to headline her own series .
During preproduction , proposed titles for the show were Ozark Widow , Dern Tootin ' , and Whistle Stop .
HOOTERVILLE CANNONBALL Section::::Hooterville Cannonball .
Motion shots of the Hooterville Cannonball were filmed on the Sierra Railroad , based in Jamestown , California .
The steam locomotive used was the 4 - 6 - 0 ( ten - wheeler )
Sierra No . 3 , which has the distinction of appearing in more movies than any other locomotive .
Its first sound film appearance was in 1929 with Gary Cooper in The Virginian , and it has since appeared in many other Westerns , including a prominent role in the climactic ending of Back to the Future Part III .
It was also used in such television shows as Little House on the Prairie and The Iron Horse .
Today , the Sierra No . 3 locomotive is still operational and can be found at Railtown 1897 State Historic Park .
A full - sized locomotive replica was used for studio scenes in and around the locomotive cab .
The prop locomotive was provided by the Hoyt Hotel in Portland , Oregon .
It was displayed in the lobby of the hotel as part of the décor of its Barbary Coast Lounge , hence the screen credit at the end of each episode
" Train furnished by Barbary Coast , Hoyt Hotel , Portland , Oregon " .
CAST NOTES Section::::Cast notes .
The only actors who appeared in all seven seasons were Edgar Buchanan , Linda Kaye Henning , and Frank Cady .
Buchanan was the only one to appear in every episode .
Linda Kaye Henning appeared in every episode but three , the first - season episode " Bobbie Jo and the Beatnik " , the second - season episode " Have Library , Will Travel " and the fifth season episode " The Power of the Press " .
Edgar Buchanan , who portrayed Bea Benaderet 's character 's uncle , was only three years older than Benaderet in real life .
Veteran character actor Charles Lane played Cannonball nemesis Homer Bedloe in 24 episodes .
Lane said that he perfected his stern curmudgeon character - type on I Love Lucy ; recalling in 1981 his many roles , he said " They were all good parts , but they were jerks .
If you have a type established , though , and you 're any good , it can mean considerable work for you . "
The New York Times reported that Lane 's persona was so familiar to the public , " that people would come up to him in the street and greet him , because they thought they knew him from their hometowns . "
In the first - season episode # 32
" Dog Days At Shady Rest " , Higgins , the actor dog , was featured as " Sheba " , the dog of Betty Jo 's boyfriend Orville Miggs ( played by actor Jimmy Hawkins ) .
That episode gave the producers an idea .
It was decided at the start of the 1964 - 1965 season to add a new character to The Shady Rest - a dog .
As a result , Higgins became a regular cast member .
His first appearance was in the second season opener " Betty Jo 's Dog " .
In that installment , coming home on the first day of school , Betty Jo meets a little male dog who immediately attaches himself to her and the Bradley family .
Kate , at first , is against keeping him but by the end of the episode , she is won over by him and allows him to stay .
Also , in that episode , the subject of Higgins 's name is addressed .
At first , different names are suggested by the sisters when he first arrives ( " Spike " , " Prince " , and " Byron " ) , but they never decide , so the dog at that time is not actually named .
Eventually , the character 's name becomes simply " Dog " or " Boy " .
Press releases for the show referred to him as the " Shady Rest Dog " .
Higgins remained with the show until its cancellation in 1970 .
During that time , he won a PATSY Award , and he also was cover - featured on an issue of TV Guide magazine .
Higgins had a close rapport with Edgar Buchanan .
In the official cast pictures taken each year during the run of Petticoat Junction , Buchanan is shown holding or petting the dog .
Higgins went on to star in the successful 1974 film Benji which also featured Buchanan in a cameo role .
Another new character was introduced for the 1964 - 65 season to serve as a female nemesis for Kate Bradley - Selma Plout .
Virginia Sale briefly reprised her role in the first season of Green Acres ( her character is not mentioned by name , but is listed in the end credits ) .
During the third season , Elvia Allman ( who had appeared in season one as Gladys Stroud ) was brought on as Cora Watson for one episode ( a role she reprised on Green Acres the same season ) .
Starting with Season 4 ( 1966 - 1967 ) , Sale 's Selma was replaced by Allman .
She appeared in 19 episodes in all , which extended to the end of season 7 ( 1969 - 1970 ) .
Selma 's daughter Henrietta Plout ( Lynette Winter ) was introduced at the same time and appeared in 7 episodes over the next 3 seasons .
Selma tries repeatedly to marry off the seemingly homely girl , the butt of many " plain Jane " jokes .
In her next - to - last episode , Henrietta is given a glamorous makeover by the Bradley sisters and is revealed to be quite attractive .
Mike Minor first appeared on the series as Selma Plout 's son Dan in the second - season episode " Mother Of The Bride " that aired December 15 , 1964 .
After that episode , the character of Dan Plout is never seen again .
Two years later , in the fall of 1966 , Mike Minor rejoined the series as handsome crop duster Steve Elliott .
Steve is originally the love interest of eldest daughter Billie Jo , but later marries ( youngest daughter ) Betty Jo .
The three Bradley sisters ( played by Linda Kaye Henning , Pat Woodell , and Jeannine Riley ) form a Beatlesque band called " The Ladybugs " with their friend Sally Ragsdale ( Sheila James ) in the season - one episode " The Ladybugs " .
They wear mop - top wigs and perform the Beatles song "
I Saw Her Standing There " with the word " Him " substituted for " Her " .
On March 22 , 1964 , mere days before this episode aired , the four actresses performed this same song as " The Ladybugs " on The Ed Sullivan Show .
Ed invited his viewers to tune in later that week to see the girls on their show .
Frank Cady , who played Sam Drucker , was the only actor in television history to play the same recurring character on three different shows at the same time .
He was a regular on Petticoat Junction and Green Acres , in addition to some late series guest appearances on The Beverly Hillbillies .
Benaderet had played Mrs. Granby on the short - lived 1950 radio show Granby 's Green Acres .
This show was the inspiration for the Petticoat Junction spin - off Green Acres .
The Mrs. Granby character was altered on television and became Lisa Douglas , played by Eva Gabor .
Jack Bannon , Benaderet 's son , played small parts over the course of the show , usually as a boyfriend or date for one of the Bradley girls .
Byron Foulger played two different recurring characters on Petticoat Junction .
In the early seasons , he was banker Mr. Guerney , and in later seasons , he was train engineer Wendell Gibbs .
Jimmy Hawkins appeared in five episodes as Betty Jo 's love interest Orville Miggs .
He also appeared in four other episodes as four other characters .
Hawkins played Jimmy Stewart 's son in the film
It 's A Wonderful Life .
In season seven , Steve and Betty Jo 's baby Kathy Jo was played by Elna Danelle Hubbell .
In season six , Kathy Jo was played ( uncredited ) by infant twins Heather and Barbara Whiter .
Heather said her sister and she landed the role when their mother heard that the producers were looking for red - haired babies .
She also said that she has no first - hand memories of working on the show .
CAST CHANGES
Section::::Cast changes .
Billie Jo was originally to be played by Sharon Tate .
Though a cast photo was taken with Tate , she never appeared in the show .
Though long rumored possible explanations for Tate 's replacement include the emergence of racy photos of Tate , the reality is that Martin Ransohoff , Filmways producer , felt she simply was n't prepared for a central role , and her agents simply convinced her to pass up the opportunity .
Billie Jo was played for the first two seasons ( 1963–65 ) by Jeannine Riley , who left to pursue a movie career .
In the third season ( 1965–66 ) , Riley was replaced by Gunilla Hutton ( not present for 11 episodes ) , and for the rest of the show 's run , Billie Jo was played by Meredith MacRae .
Bobbie Jo was played in the first two seasons ( 1963–65 ) by Pat Woodell , who left the series to start a singing career .
In some scenes in a few episodes , when Pat Woodell was unavailable , Bobbie Jo was only shown from behind , with a double standing in .
For the remaining seasons , the character was played by Lori Saunders .
Woodell and Saunders resembled each other physically , but the character of Bobbie Jo was gradually revamped after the cast change , going from a shy bookworm to a humorous scatterbrain .
The book Glamour , Gidgets , and the Girl Next Door by Herbie J. Pilato attributes this change in character to actress Lori Saunders having " a different flair for comedy than Pat [ Woodell ] . "
After Saunders took over the role , she at times gave her lines " a slightly daffy delivery .
"
The show writers picked up on this and gradually changed the character of Bobbie Jo from Paul Henning 's original conception of a brainy introvert into " a high - spirited , delightfully ditzy extrovert . "
In 1967 , the show suffered its first loss when Smiley Burnette ( engineer Charley Pratt ) died of leukemia right after filming wrapped for the fourth season .
During the show 's fifth season ( 1967 - 1968 ) , Floyd Smoot ( Rufe Davis ) took over running the train alone as engineer and conductor .
The absence of Burnette 's character of Charley was explained by allusions in several episodes to his passing .
Floyd was replaced the following season by Wendell Gibbs , played by Byron Foulger .
During the show 's last season ( 1969–70 ) , Foulger had become too ill to continue and did not appear .
Davis guested as Floyd Smoot for two episodes , one of them being " Last Train To Pixley " .
He was also addressed off - screen in one episode as an invisible character .
Coincidentally , Foulger died on the same day that the final episode of Petticoat Junction aired : April 4 , 1970 .
Bea Benaderet , who played the main character Kate Bradley , died in 1968 ; June Lockhart then joined the show as Dr. Janet Craig , a mother figure to the girls , from 1968 until the show 's end in 1970 .
CHANGES IN TONE AND CHARACTERS Section::::Changes in tone and characters .
For the first three seasons , Petticoat Junction centered on homespun humor and the village 's backward mindset .
Beginning in season four , however , the show gradually took on a different feel .
Stories began to focus more on the Bradley sisters , specifically on the romance of Steve and Betty Jo , who became key characters .
The show became more of a domestic comedy .
Musical numbers and singing became prominent .
Songs featured the Bradley sisters singing as a trio , Billie Jo solo , Steve solo , or Steve and Betty Jo as a duet .
Sometimes , as many as two or three songs were in each episode .
The additions of Mike Minor as Steve Elliott and Meredith MacRae as the third Billie Jo influenced this change , as they were both accomplished singers .
The characters of Billie Jo and Bobbie Jo also changed .
Billie Jo went from being a boy - crazy dumb blonde to a strong , independent young lady .
Bobbie Jo went from being book - smart ( nicknamed " the walking encyclopedia " ) to more of a bubble - head used for comic relief .
Kate Bradley 's appearance also changed .
In the first two seasons , Kate 's wardrobe and hair style depicted her as a dowdy country farm woman .
Beginning with the third year ( in color ) , her clothing and coiffure were much more flattering and appealing , and she wore high heels .
DEATH OF BEA BENADERET Section::::Death of Bea Benaderet .
Sickness kept Bea Benaderet away for the last third of season five as she dealt with illness from lung cancer .
She missed two episodes ( # 159 and 160 ) , returned for one ( # 161 ) , then missed eight more .
Storylines dealt with Kate 's absence by having other characters say that she was out of town , although it was never stated where she was out of town or what she was doing there .
Paul Henning brought in temporary replacement mother - figures Rosemary DeCamp ( as Kate 's sister Helen ) and Shirley Mitchell ( as Kate 's cousin Mae ) .
In January 1968 , it was announced that Benaderet 's treatment was successful , and she returned for the fifth - season finale ( " Kate 's Homecoming " ) that aired on March 30 , 1968 .
Benaderet 's performance showed the effects of her cancer treatment , as she appeared noticeably thinner and weaker .
Following the conclusion of her treatment , she had revealed to the Press - Republican that despite her lengthy absence , series producer Charles Stewart would continue to write her as the lead for the upcoming sixth season .
However , by the time Benaderet filmed the first three episodes of season six , her cancer was found to have returned .
The third episode , " Only A Husband " , was her final physical appearance on the show , in which she shared a brief scene with Mike Minor and was conspicuously absent from the other scenes that were written for her .
Linda Kaye Henning recalled in 2008 :
" The last few shows we knew she was very ill . …
She was not well enough to do the episode where I have the baby . "
When Paul Henning realized that Benaderet would not recover , he decided that the fourth episode of season six would be the birth of Betty Jo 's baby , so Benaderet 's character could be included .
In this episode , titled " The Valley Has a Baby " , Benaderet provided only her voice for scenes of Betty Jo and Steve reading a letter from Kate ; her speaking to Cannonball engineer Wendell Gibbs over the phone and using the handcar with him to get to the hospital ; and her presence at Betty Jo 's bedside after the baby 's arrival .
The latter segments featured Benaderet 's stand - in , actress Edna Laird , portraying Kate with her back to the camera .
The episode additionally featured three short flashbacks of Kate from season five : " You Know
I Ca n't Hear You
When The Thunder Is Clapping " , where Betty Jo reveals to Kate that Steve and she are in love ; " A Cottage For Two " , where Betty Jo 's dream house turns out to be an old shack ; and " With This Gown I Thee
We d " , where Steve and Betty Jo get married .
The episode aired just 13 days after Benaderet 's death on October 13 , 1968 .
Benaderet was quite popular with viewers , and her fan mail increased during her illness as she received many get - well cards and letters from fans .
In the first five years of Petticoat Junction , she was indisputably the star of the show .
As a result , the absence of her character had to be handled delicately .
In the 1950s and ' 60s , it was almost unheard of for a main character on a television show to die , particularly on a situation comedy .
The producers and CBS decided to continue the show , and Kate Bradley continued to be referred to as being " out of town .
" Benaderet 's name was removed from the opening credits and Edgar Buchanan received star billing for the remainder of the series .
Referring to the hotel , the opening theme lyrics were changed from " It is run by Kate , come and be her guest " to " It is run by Joe , come and be his guest " .
Although Petticoat Junction was still beloved by fans , the central premise of a country family was lost without a motherly figure .
The long absence of Kate was only mentioned once in passing during the final two seasons .
In the season - seven premiere " Make Room For Baby " , the Bradley sisters and baby Kathy Jo return from swimming in the water tower .
Steve has paternal qualms about his daughter 's safety , to which Billie Jo and Bobbie Jo wistfully reply : " Mom taught all of us to swim before we could walk .
And in the same old water tower , too . "
SEASONS SIX AND SEVEN Section::::Seasons six and seven .
Choosing not to recast the Kate Bradley role , or to sign Rosemary DeCamp on full - time ( she was also playing the mother of Marlo Thomas on That Girl ) , the producers introduced the new character of Dr. Janet Craig , played by June Lockhart , who had just come off a three - year run as Maureen Robinson on Lost In Space .
Lockhart 's character was essentially brought on as a surrogate mother figure to fill the void left by the death of Bea Benaderet , and takes up a medical practice at the hotel and also serves as a counsel of sorts for the girls .
The cast was described as " most welcoming " to Lockhart as the newcomer during a difficult time .
Quickly , Lockhart graduated from featured billing at the end of each episode to co - star billing in the opening credits .
The show 's theme song lyrics were slightly altered to accommodate the change in cast .
A decline in Nielsen ratings had begun in season five , when CBS moved the show from Tuesday night to Saturday night .
In season six , the show failed to make the ratings top 30 .
With the sitcom 's future hanging in the balance , CBS considered cancelling the show in the spring of 1969 .
The season - six finale " Tune In Next Year " was meant to be the series finale .
Dr. Janet Craig receives a good job offer in another city and decides to accept it .
However , at the end of the episode , Dr. Craig decides to stay when Steve and Betty Jo announce that they are going to have another baby .
At the last minute , CBS decided to renew the series for a seventh season .
The main reason for the renewal was that it would give the series five full years of color episodes for syndication , which would be very profitable for the network .
When the show returned for its seventh and final season in September 1969 , two major plotline changes were made .
The first is that Steve and Betty Jo , and their daughter Kathy Jo , move out of their cottage and back into the Shady Rest Hotel .
The storyline involving Betty Jo 's new pregnancy was dropped and never referred to again .
The second change is the addition of bumbling , but well - meaning , game warden Orrin Pike ( played by actor Jonathan Daly ) , who becomes Bobbie Jo 's boyfriend , much to the annoyance of Uncle Joe .
In the spring of 1970 , despite somewhat improving ratings , Petticoat Junction was cancelled as a precursor to the infamous CBS rural purge of the early 1970s , when all rural - themed shows were cancelled .
The series officially ended its primetime run on Saturday , September 12 , 1970 , at 9:30 pm , and was replaced one week later by The Mary Tyler Moore Show .
Petticoat Junction did not have a series finale .
However , " Last Train to Pixley " , the fourth - to - last episode to air , is in some ways like a series finale .
In the episode , Hooterville Cannonball engineer / conductor Floyd Smoot decides to retire .
The residents of the Shady Rest Hotel and Sam Drucker all take a ride on the Cannonball and recall ( with flashbacks ) such treasured memories as fishing from the train , a very pregnant Betty Jo driving the train when she is about to give birth , and the Christmas - time Cannonball decorated with lights .
During the episode , Floyd sings the song " Steam , Cinders and Smoke " , which was written by former cast member Smiley Burnette .
It was released as a single in 1964 by Burnette and Rufe Davis ( who played Floyd Smoot ) .
At the end of the episode , Floyd decides not to retire when the people of Hooterville write him letters asking him to stay .
REUNIONS Section::::Reunions .
Petticoat Junction was the only one of Paul Henning 's country trio not to return in an updated reunion movie .
In the 1970s , Meredith MacRae and Linda Kaye Henning tried to produce Hello Again Hooterville : A Thanksgiving Reunion , but the project never came to fruition .
The game show Family Feud featured a Petticoat Junction cast reunion in 1983 , when Frank Cady , Linda Kaye Henning , Lori Saunders , Gunilla Hutton , and Meredith MacRae competed against cast members from The Brady Bunch .
Henning , Saunders , and Hutton reunited again in 2015 for a MeTV promotional ad .
In 1990 , the character of Sam Drucker appeared in Return to Green Acres , in what was Frank Cady 's final acting role .
In 1981 , Linda Kaye Henning and Charles Lane both appeared in The Return of the Beverly Hillbillies , but not as Betty Jo and Homer Bedloe .
Henning played a secretary named Linda , and Lane played Chief .
EPISODE LIST
GREEN ACRES AND BEVERLY HILLBILLIES CROSSOVERS Section::::Green Acres and Beverly Hillbillies crossovers .
Petticoat Junction is set in the same fictional universe as Green Acres .
Both shows are set in Hooterville , and they share such characters as Sam Drucker , Newt Kiley , and Floyd Smoot .
A number of core Green Acres characters , such as Fred and Doris Ziffel ( originally named " Ruthie " after Paul Henning 's wife , Ruth ) , Arnold the Pig , Newt Kiley , and Ben Miller , first appeared on season two of Petticoat Junction , which saw a number of scripts written by Green Acres creator Jay Sommers .
Characters in all of Henning 's creations often crossed over into one another 's programs , especially during the first two seasons of Green Acres .
During Petticoat 's run from 1963 to 1968 ( up until Kate Bradley 's last few appearances at the beginning of season six ) , and with the exception of Green Acres , not once was there ever a connection to The Beverly Hillbillies even though Bea Benaderet had played Cousin Pearl Bodine during the latter 's first season ( Bea reprised the role for a brief cameo in the sixth season ) .
Despite this , in a 1968 episode of Petticoat ( # 175 " Granny , the Baby Expert " ) , Granny comes to Hooterville to tend to Betty Jo and Steve 's baby .
Prior to her visit , she reminds Jed that he is related to Kate through Pearl and then later when she arrives at the Shady Rest she mistakes Uncle Joe for Kate and says " They 's right about you
Kate , you and Cousin Pearl are lookalikes .
" The episode is also part two of a three - episode crossover with Hillbillies that begins on " Granny Goes to Hooterville " and concludes on " The Italian Cook " .
Other crossover shows feature the Clampetts spending Thanksgiving and Christmas of 1968 in Hooterville on The Beverly Hillbillies ( " The Thanksgiving Story " , " The Week Before Christmas " , " Christmas in Hooterville " , and " Drysdale and Friend " ) .
Finally , two consecutive 1970 episodes of The Beverly Hillbillies ( " Buzz Bodine , Boy General " and " The Clampett - Hewes Empire " ) with a visiting Miss Jane and Mr. Drysdale , who mistakenly believes billionaire Howard Hughes lives in Hooterville .
CROSSOVERS WITH GREEN
ACRES Section::::Crossovers with Green Acres .
The following is a list of Petticoat Junction episodes featuring characters from Green Acres .
Only those that debuted on Acres before Junction are counted .
Season Three
* Episode 2 : " The Baffling Raffle " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 3 : "
The Dog Turns Playboy " –
Oliver Wendell Douglas
* Episode 4 :
" The Good Luck Ring " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 5 :
" Joe Carson , General Contractor " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 6 :
" Bobbie Jo 's Sorority " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 7 :
" A Doctor in the House " – Oliver Wendell Douglas
* Episode 8 : " Hooterville - A - Go - Go " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 10 : " Betty Jo Goes to New York " – Oliver Wendell Douglas , Lisa Douglas
* Episode 13 :
" Uncle Joe Plays Post Office " – Oliver Wendell Douglas
* Episode 19 : " Yogurt , Anyone ? " – Oliver Wendell Douglas
* Episode 21 : " The County Fair " – Mr. Haney
* Episode 29 : " Kate Bradley , Peacemaker " – Oliver Wendell Douglas
* Episode 32 : " The Young Matchmakers " – Lisa Douglas
Season Four
* Episode 1 : " Young Love " – Eb Dawson * Episode 5 : " The All - Night Party " – Eb Dawson * Episode 11 : " The Runt Strikes Back " – Eb Dawson * Episode 13 : " The Santa Claus Special " – Eb Dawson * Episode 26 : " Author ! Author ! " – Eb Dawson
Season Five
* Episode 3 :
" One Dozen Roses " – Eb Dawson
Season Six
* Episode 4 :
" The Valley Has a Baby " – Oliver Wendell Douglas ,
Lisa Douglas
* Episode 14 : " The Ballad of the Everyday Housewife " – Lisa Douglas
Season Seven
* Episode 3 :
" The Other Woman " – Mr. Haney
* Episode 9 : " A Most Momentous Occasion " – Mr. Haney THEME SONG Section::::Theme song .
Curt Massey sang the Petticoat Junction theme song .
The song was composed by Massey and Paul Henning .
Flatt and Scruggs recorded a version of the song " Petticoat Junction " .
*
The Moody Brothers ' 1989 Grammy - nominated country instrumental " The Great Train Song Medley " featured the song " Petticoat Junction " .
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
After its cancellation , Filmways and Paul Henning 's company sold the show to CBS .
Its distribution has changed hands over the years due to corporate changes involving Viacom , which in 2006 split into two separate companies .
Today , CBS Television Distribution handles syndication .
The color ( 1965–70 ) episodes were shown in syndication for many years after the show 's cancellation .
However , the rights to the black - and - white ( 1963–65 ) episodes were not resolved , and they were not included in the syndication package until the Me - TV Network began broadcasting the black - and - white ( 1963–65 ) episodes on Tuesday , July 12 , 2011 .
The airings of the black - and - white episodes airings were short lived , and on Thursday , July 21 , 2011 , Me - TV started airing the color episodes once again .
Me - TV began to air the first two black - and - white seasons of the show again on November 4 , 2013 .
The show has rotated on and off of the Me - TV schedule in various time slots .
On March 12 , 2018 Decades TV Network and on April 23 , 2018 Punch TV Studios began broadcasting the black - and - white episodes , both networks are continuing through with the color episodes .
The color episodes have run constantly , with the show running on TV Land from 1996 to 2000 .
The show ran on the Retro Television Network from 2005 to 2008 , and on Me - TV beginning in June 2012 .
The program has run on three different Canadian cable channels : Prime - TV from 2000 to 2002 , Deja - Vu from 2005 to 2008 , and on TV Land Canada from 2006 to 2010 .
The black - and - white episodes from season one are now in the public domain , their copyrights having lapsed .
As a result , numerous discount DVDs of these episodes have been released , although with generic bluegrass - like theme music instead of the familiar opening and closing music , which is still under copyright .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Paul Henning Estate holds the original film elements to the black - and - white episodes , and in 2005 allowed 20 black - and - white episodes from Season One to be officially released on DVD in an " ultimate collection " via MPI Home Video .
This release features the first 20 episodes of the series , excluding the Christmas episode . "
Cannonball Christmas " was released by MPI Home Video in a separate release together with the Christmas - themed episode from The Beverly Hillbillies on October 25 , 2005 .
This 1963 episode was reshot in color with small variations and aired on December 20 , 1966 as " The Santa Claus Special " .
On December 16 , 2008 CBS Home Entertainment ( distributed by Paramount ) released the Complete First Season on DVD , with new interviews with cast members , commercials from the original broadcasts , and the original opening and closing theme song .
The Complete Second Season was released on July 7 , 2009 , concluding the black - and - white episodes of the series .
( Beginning with the third season , the show switched to color for the remainder of the series . )
It , too , contained the original theme song , as well as introductions and an interview from two cast members .
On October 1 , 2013 season three was released on DVD as a Walmart exclusive .
It received a full retail release on April 15 , 2014 .
The rights to the show are held by CBS Television Distribution . !
DVD Name !
Ep # !
Release Date Petticoat Junction ( Ultimate Collection )
August 30 , 2005 Petticoat Junction
( The Official First Season )
December 16 , 2008
Petticoat Junction ( The Official Second Season ) July 7 , 2009 Petticoat Junction ( Return to Hooterville )
March 12 , 2013 Petticoat Junction ( The Official Third Season )
April 15 , 2014 PETTICOAT JUNCTION
AMUSEMENT PARK
Section::::Petticoat Junction Amusement Park .
There was an amusement park in Panama City Beach , Florida named " Petticoat Junction Amusement Park " , which opened in 1963 ( the same year that the show first aired ) and closed in 1984 , 14 years after the show ended .
According to author Tim Hollis , the park 's owners ( the Churchwell family ) , were friends with Edgar Buchanan .
He talked to Paul Henning , who okayed the park being named after the show .
As would be expected , there was a steam railroad attraction at the park , the narrow gauge Petticoat Junction Railroad .
Although the park is closed , the locomotives and train cars from its railroad attraction survived .
They were bought at auction by the late Fred H. Hallmark in 1985 and are kept and preserved on his family 's property at 9485 US-31 ; Kimberly , AL .
PETTICOAT JUNCTION CAFETERIA AND SHADY REST HOTEL IN MABANK , TEXAS Section::::Petticoat Junction Cafeteria and Shady Rest Hotel in Mabank , Texas .
In 1965
Claudia and J.T. " Peavine " Westmoreland bought an old train depot in Mabank , Texas and converted it into a restaurant .
Since the restaurant was next to a working railroad line , the customers nicknamed it " Petticoat Junction " , and the name was made official .
Specialties at the Petticoat Junction Cafeteria included chicken fried steak and homemade coconut cream pies .
The real - life Petticoat Junction was like the fictional show .
In her memoirs , Claudia writes : " The train crew grew to be a part of the Petticoat Junction .
They would stop and eat with us and we looked forward to the once a day run . "
In 1966 , the Southern Pacific Railroad sent work crews to elevate the railroad track .
Claudia set up makeshift bedrooms for the workers and called it the " Shady Rest Hotel " .
More permanent lodgings were soon added .
Claudia 's daughter Ann recalled : " Mother got people from the television show to send her photos of the Petticoat Junction set , the actors , just all kinds of things .
" The business was relocated one mile west in the 1970s and an RV park was added .
The Petticoat Junction Cafeteria and Shady Rest Hotel lasted until 1996 .
OTHER " SHADY REST " LOCATIONS Section::::Other " Shady Rest " Locations .
In the town of Woodstock , NY , is a hamlet called Shady ; a rooming house operating there since 1968 is called " The Shady Rest Townhouse " , as an homage to the hotel in Petticoat Junction .
SEE ALSO
* The Beverly Hillbillies * Green Acres
* Rural purge
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS