KRYSTAL ( RESTAURANT )
Krystal is an American fast food restaurant chain headquartered in Atlanta , Georgia .
It is known for its small , square hamburger sliders with steamed - in onions .
Krystal moved its corporate headquarters from Chattanooga , Tennessee , where it had been based since 1932 , to Atlanta in early 2013 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Founded on October 11 , 1932 , in Chattanooga , Tennessee , during the first years of the Great Depression , entrepreneur Rody Davenport Jr. and partner J. Glenn Sherrill theorized that even in a severe economic upheaval , " People would patronize a restaurant that was kept spotlessly clean , where they could get a good meal with courteous service at the lowest possible price .
" The restaurant 's first customer , French Jenkins , ordered six " Krystals " and a cup of coffee , all for the price of 35¢ , thus proving their theory true .
Davenport had visited Chicago 's White Castle restaurants , taking notes of successful features , before setting forth on his own venture .
Davenport and Sherrill set up the first Krystal at the corner of 7th and Cherry Streets in Chattanooga .
The first Krystal was a modular building constructed in Chicago and shipped to Chattanooga for final installation .
The oldest Krystal still in operation is located on Cherokee Boulevard in Chattanooga 's Northshore District .
Krystal is the seventh or eighth - oldest hamburger chain in the United States ( the oldest being White Castle ) and the oldest in the South .
Regarding the origins of the Krystal name , company legend states that Davenport and his wife were riding down a mountain road when Mrs. Mary McGee Davenport saw a lawn ornament in the shape of a crystal ball .
While gazing at the lawn ornament , Mrs. Davenport commented that since Davenport and Sherrill felt cleanliness was a cornerstone of the concept , they should name the restaurant Crystal for " clean as a crystal " - yet with a " K " to add a little twist .
Krystal 's restaurants through the years often sported a crystal ball on the top .
From the early 1930s through the early 1960s , the chain served much of its food , not in take - out containers , but on inexpensive porcelain dish ware with the " Krystal " moniker .
The waiters and waitresses wore white uniforms , and food was offered through counter service .
In the 1950s , Krystal opened its first drive - through window - which most locations maintain today .
A 2013 study of seven fast food franchises found that service at Krystal drive - throughs was the slowest , with an average wait time of 218 seconds .
It was , however , the most accurate in terms of fulfilling orders .
In the 1950s , cake doughnuts were served as a breakfast and dessert item .
From about 1970 until 1986 , " bone - in " kettle fried chicken and related sides were offered .
These items were sometimes sold from a stand - alone addition to the hamburger restaurants .
DavCo , a division of Krystal , operated Wendy 's franchises from the 1960s until 2017 , when the franchises were bought back by Wendy 's and sold to NPC International .
Between 1983 and 1988 , DavCo also operated the Po ' Folks family restaurant chain .
CURRENT BUSINESS Section::::Current business .
Krystal restaurants , both company - owned and franchised , operate in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Kentucky , Louisiana , Mississippi , South Carolina , and Tennessee .
There is also a Krystal in Bristol , Virginia , ( which lies on the Tennessee - Virginia border ) , one in West Memphis , Arkansas ( directly across the Mississippi River from Memphis , Tennessee ) , and one in Murphy , North Carolina .
Krystal has also operated several restaurants in Texas over the years .
It is often compared to the northern restaurant chain White Castle , and other than the South Central Kentucky and Nashville , Tennessee markets , the two restaurants ' market areas do not generally overlap .
Krystal maintained its corporate headquarters in Chattanooga from 1932 to 2013 , and has been owned by Argonne Capital Group since early 2012 .
Previously , Port Royal Holdings , Inc. owned the chain from 1997 - 2012 , expanding the chain to a peak of over 420 locations in 11 states in 2002 , before downsizing and closing dozens of locations .
Ten new locations were added in 2011 , 11 more in 2012 - 2013 , and 25 more are planned for 2014 throughout the Southeast .
In the late 1990s , Krystal emerged from a bankruptcy proceeding and a sale of assets that placed majority ownership outside the heirs of the founding families .
Krystal 's period of structural change and uncertainty in the late 1990s has regenerated into a successfully reborn restaurant chain with reported customer satisfaction and an evolving menu .
Krystal 's product line centers on a square hamburger patty slider with a steamed bun , together with diced onions , pickle , and mustard , and collectively called a " Krystal " .
Small hot dogs called " pups " are also featured menu items .
The chain has occasionally expanded its menu to include larger burgers , such as the " Big Angus Burger , " a full - size hamburger made of 100 % Angus beef .
Krystal is known for a diverse breakfast menu , which includes a made - to - order country breakfast , meat and egg sandwiches , and biscuits , as well as other items .
One particularly popular breakfast item is the Scrambler , which includes a layered stack of scrambled eggs , sausage , grits , and cheese served in a styrofoam cup .
Other variations of the Scrambler also feature pancakes , sausage gravy , or southwestern - style spices .
In 1998 , Krystal introduced the Krystal Chik , a fried chicken breast filet slider served on the signature steamed square bun .
Krystal Chiks are extremely popular , along with other chicken , chili , and dessert items .
Krystal continues to focus on their core menu products , but is also in the process of redesigning and upgrading their stores to appeal to a mobile and multi - tasking audience .
In the mid 2000s Krystal tested a prototype for a new high - tech drive - in featuring individual television monitors for ordering and watching television ( audio accessed via car stereo ) , and indoor and outdoor seating areas with multiple big - screen television monitors and free digital jukeboxes .
COMPETITIVE EATING
Section::::Competitive eating .
Krystal restaurants are the host of the Krystal Square Off , a competitive eating contest .
The current world record is 103 Krystal burgers consumed in 8 minutes by Joey Chestnut , set at the 2007 competition .
SEE ALSO
* List of hamburger restaurants REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Krystal website