MONTGOMERY WARD Montgomery Ward Inc. is the name of two historically distinct American retail enterprises .
It can refer either to the defunct mail order and department store retailer , which operated between 1872 and 2001 , or to the current catalog and online retailer also known as Wards .
ORIGINAL MONTGOMERY WARD ( 1872 - 2001 )
COMPANY ORIGINS Section::::Original Montgomery Ward ( 1872 - 2001 ) .
Section::::Company origins .
Montgomery Ward was founded by Aaron Montgomery Ward in 1872 .
Ward had conceived of the idea of a dry goods mail - order business in Chicago , Illinois , after several years of working as a traveling salesman among rural customers .
He observed that rural customers often wanted " city " goods , but their only access to them was through rural retailers who had little competition and did not offer any guarantee of quality .
Ward also believed that by eliminating intermediaries , he could cut costs and make a wide variety of goods available to rural customers , who could purchase goods by mail and pick them up at the nearest train station .
Ward started his business at his first office , either in a single room at 825 North Clark Street , or in a loft above a livery stable on Kinzie Street between Rush and State Streets .
He and two partners used $ 1,600 they had raised in capital and issued their first catalog in August 1872 .
It consisted of an single - sheet price list , listing 163 items for sale with ordering instructions for which Ward had written the copy .
His two partners left the following year , but he continued the struggling business and was joined by his future brother - in - law , George Robinson Thorne .
In the first few years , the business was not well received by rural retailers .
Considering Ward a threat , they sometimes publicly burned his catalog .
Despite the opposition , however , the business grew at a fast pace over the next several decades , fueled by demand primarily from rural customers who were inspired by the wide selection of items that were unavailable to them locally .
Customers were also inspired by the innovative company policy of " satisfaction guaranteed or your money back " , which Ward began in 1875 .
Ward turned the copy writing over to department heads , but he continued poring over every detail in the catalog for accuracy .
In 1883 , the company 's catalog , which became popularly known as the " Wish Book " , had grown to 240 pages and 10,000 items .
In 1896 , Wards encountered its first serious competition in the mail order business , when Richard Warren Sears introduced his first general catalog .
In 1900 , Wards had total sales of $ 8.7 million , compared to $ 10 million for Sears , and both companies would struggle for dominance during much of the 20th century .
By 1904 , the company had expanded such that it mailed three million catalogs , weighing each , to customers .
In 1908 , the company opened a building stretching along nearly one - quarter mile of the Chicago River , north of downtown Chicago .
The building , known as the Montgomery Ward &
Co. Catalog House , served as the company headquarters until 1974 , when the offices moved across the street to a new tower designed by Minoru Yamasaki .
The catalog house was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1978 and a Chicago historic landmark in May 2000 .
In the decades before 1930 , Montgomery Ward built a network of large distribution centers across the country in Baltimore , Fort Worth , Kansas City , St. Paul , Portland , and Oakland .
In most cases , these reinforced concrete structures were the largest industrial structures in their respective locations .
The Baltimore Montgomery Ward Warehouse and Retail Store was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2000 .
EXPANSION INTO RETAIL OUTLETS Section::::Expansion into retail outlets .
Ward died in 1913 , after 41 years running the catalog business .
The company president , William C. Thorne ( the eldest son of the co - founder ) , died in 1917 , and was succeeded by Robert J. Thorne .
Robert Thorne retired in 1920 due to ill health .
In 1926 , the company broke with its mail - order - only tradition when it opened its first retail outlet store in Plymouth , Indiana .
It continued to operate its catalog business while pursuing an aggressive campaign to build retail outlets in the late-1920s .
In 1928 , two years after opening its first outlet , it had opened 244 stores .
By 1929 , it had more than doubled its number of outlets to 531 .
Its flagship retail store in Chicago was located on Michigan Avenue between Madison and Washington streets .
In 1930 , the company declined a merger offer from its rival chain Sears .
Losing money during the Great Depression , the company alarmed its major investors , including J. P. Morgan .
In 1931 , Morgan hired Sewell Avery as president who cut staff levels and stores , changed lines , hired store rather than catalog managers and refurbished stores .
These actions caused the company to become profitable before the end of the 1930s .
Wards was very successful in its retail business . "
Green awning " stores dotted hundreds of small towns across the country .
Larger stores were built in the major cities .
By the end of the 1930s , Montgomery Ward had become the country 's largest retailer and Sewell Avery became the company 's chief executive officer .
In 1939 , as part of a Christmas promotional campaign , staff copywriter Robert L. May created the character and illustrated poem of " Rudolph , the Red - Nosed Reindeer .
" The store distributed six - million copies of the storybook in 1946 and actor and singer Gene Autry popularized the song nationally .
In 1946 , the Grolier Club , a society of bibliophiles in New York City , exhibited the Wards catalog alongside Webster 's Dictionary as one of 100 American books chosen for their influence on life and culture of the people .
The brand name of the store became embedded in the popular American consciousness and was often called by the nickname Monkey Ward ( a corruption of Mont'gy Ward ) , both affectionately and derisively .
GOVERNMENT SEIZURE Section::::Government seizure .
In April 1944 , four months into a nationwide strike by the company 's 12,000 workers , U.S. Army troops seized the Chicago offices of Montgomery Ward & Company .
The seizure was ordered because Avery refused to settle the strike as requested by the Roosevelt administration because of its adverse effect on the delivery of needed goods in wartime .
Avery had refused to comply with a War Labor Board order to recognize the unions and institute the terms of a collective bargaining agreement .
Eight months later , with Montgomery Ward continuing to refuse to recognize the unions , President Roosevelt issued an executive order seizing all of Montgomery Ward 's property nationwide , citing the War Labor Disputes Act as well as his power under the Constitution as commander - in - chief .
In 1945 , Truman ended the seizure and the Supreme Court ended the pending appeal as moot .
DECLINE Section::::Decline .
After World War II , Sewell Avery believed the country would fall back into a recession or even a depression .
He decided to not open any new stores , and did not even permit expenditure for paint to freshen the existing stores .
His plan was to bank profits to preserve liquidity when the recession or depression hit , and then buy up his retail competition .
However , without new stores or any investment back into the business , Montgomery Ward declined in sales volume compared to Sears ; many have blamed the conservative decisions of Avery , who seemed to not understand the changing economy of the postwar years .
As new shopping centers were built after the war , it was Sears that got the best locations , and Wards was shut out of any opportunity to expand .
Nonetheless , for many years Wards was still the nation 's third - largest department store chain .
In 1955 , investor Louis Wolfson waged a high - profile proxy fight to obtain control of the board of Montgomery Ward .
The new board forced the resignation of Avery .
This fight led to a state court decision that Illinois corporations are not entitled to stagger election of their board members under that state 's laws , as well as to tax litigation over whether the costs of a proxy fight are an " ordinary and necessary business expense . "
In time , it helped inspire new Securities and Exchange Commission rules concerning proxies .
Meanwhile , throughout the 1950s , the company was slow to respond to the general movement of the American middle class to suburbia .
While its competitors Sears , JCPenney , Macy 's , Gimbels , and Dillard 's established new anchor outlets in the growing number of suburban shopping malls , Avery and succeeding top executives had been reluctant to pursue such expansion .
They stuck to their downtown and main street stores until the company had lost too much market share to compete with its rivals .
After Avery 's departure in 1955 , it took two years before the first new store since the 1930s was opened in 1957 .
Wards tried to become more aggressive with store opening , but it was too late : competition had already taken the best locations .
As the existing stores looked worn and disheveled , malls would often not allow Wards to build there .
Its catalog business had also begun to slip by the 1960s .
In 1961 then president John Barr hired Robert Elton Brooker to lead Montgomery Ward as president in its turnaround .
Brooker brought with him a number of key new management people , including Edward Donnell , former manager of Sears ' Los Angeles stores .
Wards new management team achieved the turnaround reducing the number of suppliers from 15,000 to 7,000 and the number of brands being carried dropped from 168 to 16 .
Ward 's private brands were given 95 percent of the volume compared with 40 percent in 1960 .
The results of these changes were lower handling costs and higher quality standards .
Buying was centralized but store operations were decentralized , under a new territory system modeled after Sears .
In 1966 , Ed Donnell was named President of Montgomery Ward .
Brooker continued as Chairmen and Chief Executive Officer until the mid 1970s .
In 1968 as Brooker helped engineer a friendly merger with the Container Corporation of America ; the new company was named MARCOR .
In 1974 , Mobil oil company bought MARCOR .
During the 1970s , the company continued to struggle .
In 1973 , its 102nd year in business , it purchased a small discount store chain , the Miami - based Jefferson Stores ,
Inc. It renamed the stores Jefferson Ward .
In 1976 Mobil , flush with cash from the recent rise in oil prices , acquired Montgomery Ward .
By 1980 , Mobil realized that the Montgomery Ward stores were doing poorly in comparison to the Jefferson stores , and decided that high quality discount units , along the lines of Dayton Hudson Company 's Target stores , would be the retailer 's future .
Within 18 months , management quintupled the size of the operation , now called Jefferson Ward , to more than 40 units and planned to convert one - third of Montgomery Ward 's existing stores to the Jefferson Ward model .
The burden of servicing the new stores fell to the tiny Jefferson staff , who were overwhelmed by the increased store count , had no experience in dealing with some of the product lines they now carried , and were unfamiliar with buying for northern markets .
Almost immediately , Jefferson had turned from a small moneymaker into a large drain on profits .
The company sold the chain 's 18-store northern division to Bradlees , a division of Stop & Shop , in 1985 .
The remaining stores closed .
In 1985 , the company closed its catalog business after 113 years and began an aggressive policy of renovating its remaining stores .
It restructured many of the store layouts in the downtown areas of larger cities and affluent neighborhoods into boutique - like specialty stores , as these were drawing business from traditional department stores .
In 1988 , the company management undertook a successful $ 3.8 billion leveraged buyout , making Montgomery Ward a privately held company .
In 1987 , the company began a push into consumer electronics , using the " Electric Avenue " name .
Montgomery Ward greatly expanded its electronics presence by shifting from a predominantly private label mix to an assortment dominated by major brands such as Sony , Toshiba , Hitachi , Panasonic , JVC , and others .
Vice President Vic Sholis , later president of the Tandy Name Brand Retail Group ( McDuff , VideoConcepts , and Incredible Universe ) , led this strategy .
In 1994 , revenues increased 94 % largely due to Montgomery Ward 's tremendously successful direct - marketing arms .
For a short period , the company reentered the mail - order business , through " Montgomery Ward Direct " , a mail order business licensed to the catalog giant Fingerhut .
However , by the mid-1990s , sales margins eroded in the competitive electronics and appliance hardlines , which traditionally were Montgomery Ward 's strongest lines .
In 1989 , Jim Hamilton who headed the Small Electronics department ( later known as the Father of Computer Retailing ) ran an aggressively priced PC in Montgomery Ward advertising .
The low promotional price was $ 1499 , unheard of at the time .
The Computer promotion was a huge success .
( Hamilton , with the cooperation of Packard Bell , later , for the first time ever , broke the $ 999 PC price point floor for a " back to school " promotion . )
After the successful promotion , Hamilton developed a business plan to launch the first National Branded Computer Product Department in the world .
Executives approved the plan and allocated space in three Sacramento stores to create the SOHO ( Small Office Home Office ) department .
Since many of the brands , like Hewlett Packard and Panasonic would not disrupt their dealer channel and sell direct to Montgomery Ward , Hamilton had to create relationships with many distributors to pull together the branded department .
When the Sacramento stores opened the shelves included items like Hewlett Packard printers , OkiData printers and other brands that had never been in a national retailer .
The test was a major success and the SOHO department was rolled out to all Montgomery Ward locations .
Montgomery Ward was one of the first retailers to carry consumer products from IBM , Apple , Compaq , Hewlett Packard , Western Digital and many others .
The SOHO Department was carved into a separate division of the company and quickly became Montgomery Ward 's largest revenue producing division , with over $ 4 billion in revenues .
In 1994 , Wards acquired the now - defunct New England retail chain Lechmere .
BANKRUPTCY , RESTRUCTURING , AND LIQUIDATION Section::::Bankruptcy , restructuring , and liquidation .
By the 1990s , however , even its rivals began to lose ground to low - price competition from Kmart , Wal - Mart , and especially Target , which eroded even more of Montgomery Ward 's traditional customer base .
In 1997 , it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy , emerging from protection by the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Illinois in August 1999 as a wholly owned subsidiary of GE Capital , which was by then its largest shareholder .
As part of a last - ditch effort to remain competitive , the company closed over 100 retail locations in 30 U.S. states ( including all the Lechmere stores ) , abandoned the specialty store strategy , renamed and rebranded the chain as simply Wards ( although unrelated , Wards was the original name for the now - defunct Circuit City ) , and spent millions of dollars to renovate its remaining outlets to be flashier and more consumer - friendly .
However , GE Capital reneged on promises of further financial support of Montgomery Ward 's restructuring plans .
On December 28 , 2000 , after lower - than - expected sales during the Christmas season , the company announced it would cease operating , close its remaining 250 retail outlets , and lay off its 37,000 employees .
All stores closed within weeks of the announcement .
The subsequent liquidation was at the time the largest retail Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation in American history ( this would be later surpassed by the 2009 and 2018 store closures of Circuit City and Toys ' R ' Us ) .
Roger Goddu , Montgomery Ward 's CEO , received an offer from JCPenney to become CEO , but he declined under pressure from GE Capital .
One of the last stores to close was the Salem , Oregon , location in which the human resources division was located .
All of Montgomery Ward was liquidated by the end of May 2001 , ending a 129-year enterprise .
TERMINATION OF PENSION PLAN Section::::Termination of pension plan .
In 1999 , Montgomery Ward completed a standard termination of its $ 1.1 billion employee pension plan ( Wards Retirement Plan WRP and Retired / Terminated Associate Plan RTAP ) , which at that time had an alleged estimated surplus of $ 270 million .
The termination of the pension plan included 30,000 Wards retirees and 22,000 active employees who were employed by Wards in 1999 .
According to tax rules at that time ( to avoid paying a 50 % federal excise tax on the plan 's termination ) , Wards then placed 25 % of the plan 's surplus into a replacement pension plan , and paid federal tax of just 20 % on the balance of the surplus .
The final result : the estimated remaining $ 25 to $ 50 million of the employee pension plan surplus went to Wards free of income taxes , because the company , which was in Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings , had huge operating losses .
In reality , Wards received an alleged estimated $ 25 to $ 50 million for ending the employee pension plan and avoided paying hundreds of thousands in yearly pension premiums to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation .
Employees and retirees vested in the pension plan were given a choice of receiving an annuity from an insurance company or a lump sum payment .
DISTRIBUTION CENTERS Section::::Distribution centers .
Four of the six massive catalog distribution centers Montgomery Ward built between 1921 and 1929 remain .
Three have been subject to renovations for adaptive reuse and the buildings are perhaps the most tangible legacy of Montgomery Ward .
Two others have been demolished for various types of redevelopment .
*
In Baltimore , the 1925 warehouse , an eight - story , building at 1800 Washington Blvd .
southwest of downtown Baltimore , now known as Montgomery Park , has been restored for office use .
It has a green building with a green roof , storm water reutilization systems , and extensive use of recycled building materials .
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2000 as the Montgomery Ward Warehouse and Retail Store .
* The eight - story Fort Worth facility at West 7th St and Carroll was built in 1928 to replace the previous operation in a former Chevrolet assembly plant across the street .
In its history , the warehouse survived a flood in 1949 that reached the second floor and a direct hit from a tornado in 2000 .
After the demise of the company , developers renovated the structure as a mixed - use condominium project and retail center known as Montgomery Plaza .
*
The Portland , Oregon , center at NW 27th and Vaughn , ceased operation as a warehouse in 1976 .
A developer purchased the property in 1984 and renamed it Montgomery Park , converting it for offices making it the second - largest office building in Portland .
* The Kansas City distribution center at St. John Street and North Belmont Boulevard houses the Super Flea flea market .
*
The St. Paul , Minnesota , center at 1450 University Ave West was the fourth of the distribution centers to be built and employed up to 2,500 employees in the 1920s .
It had nearly or approximately 27 acres under roof , making it the largest building in St. Paul at the time .
The last remaining section of the original building was demolished in 1996 .
The site was redeveloped as a shopping center called Midway Marketplace .
* The Oakland , California , facility , constructed in 1923 , was an eight - story structure of reinforced concrete frame that was the largest industrial building in Oakland .
After years of community organizing that urged city leaders to either demolish or re - purpose the site , despite opposition by preservation groups , the building at 2875 International Boulevard was demolished in 2003 .
It has been replaced by the Cesar Chavez Education Center , an elementary school .
AS ONLINE RETAILER Section::::As online retailer .
At its height , the original Montgomery Ward was one of the largest retailers in the United States .
After its demise , the familiarity of its brand meant its name , corporate logo , and advertising were still considered valuable intangible assets .
In 2004 , catalog marketer Direct Marketing Services Inc. ( DMSI ) , an Iowa - based direct marketing company , purchased much of the intellectual property assets of the former Wards , including the " Montgomery Ward " and " Wards " trademarks , for an undisclosed amount of money .
DMSI applied the brand to a new online and catalog - based retailing operation , with no physical stores , headquartered in Cedar Rapids , Iowa .
DMSI then began operating under the Montgomery Ward branding and managed to get it up and running in three months .
The new firm began operations in June 2004 , selling essentially the same categories of products as the former brand , but as a new , smaller catalog .
The DMSI version of Montgomery Ward was not the same company as the original .
The company did not honor obligations of the previous company , such as gift cards and items sold with a lifetime guarantee .
David Milgrom , then president of the firm , said in an interview with the Associated Press : " We 're rebuilding the brand , and we want to do it right . "
In July 2008 , DMSI announced it was on the auction block , with sale scheduled for the following month .
Catalog retailer Swiss Colony purchased DMSI August 5 , 2008 .
Swiss Colony — which changed its name to Colony Brands Inc. on June 1 , 2010—announced it would keep the Montgomery Ward catalog division open .
The website launched September 10 , 2008 , with new catalogs mailing in February 2009 .
A month before the catalog 's launch , Swiss Colony President John Baumann told United Press International the retailer might also resurrect Montgomery Ward 's Signature and Powr - Kraft store brands .
To augment its vast selection , Montgomery Ward started promoting several exclusive new brands in July 2012 in its Early Fall 2012 catalog and on its website , including Devonshire Collection , Apothecarie Collection and Elysian Forest Collection furniture , Chef Tested kitchen products , Comfort Creek towels and sheets , Freshica shoes , Sleep Connection bedding , and Color Connection window treatments .
SEE ALSO * Montgomery Ward Building ( disambiguation ) ( numerous buildings ) * Montgomery Ward Company Complex REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
FURTHER READING
*
Boorstin , Daniel J. " A. Montgomery Ward 's Mail - Order Business , " Chicago History ( 1973 )
2#3
pp
142–152 .
* Latham , Frank B. 1872–1972 : A Century of Serving Consumers .
The Story of Montgomery Ward ( 1972 ) EXTERNAL LINKS