UMBILICAL ARTERY
The umbilical artery is a paired artery ( with one for each half of the body ) that is found in the abdominal and pelvic regions .
In the fetus , it extends into the umbilical cord .
STRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Structure . Section::::Development .
The umbilical arteries supply deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta .
Although this blood is typically referred to as deoxygenated , it is important to note that this blood is fetal systemic arterial blood and will have the same amount of oxygen and nutrients as blood distributed to the other fetal tissues .
There are usually two umbilical arteries present together with one umbilical vein in the umbilical cord .
The umbilical arteries surround the urinary bladder and then carry all the deoxygenated blood out of the fetus through the umbilical cord .
Inside the placenta , the umbilical arteries connect with each other at a distance of approximately 5 mm from the cord insertion in what is called the Hyrtl anastomosis .
Subsequently , they branch into chorionic arteries or intraplacental fetal arteries .
The umbilical arteries are actually the latter of the internal iliac arteries ( anterior division of ) that supply the hind limbs with blood and nutrients in the fetus .
The umbilical arteries are one of two arteries in the human body , that carry deoxygenated blood , the other being the pulmonary arteries .
The pressure inside the umbilical artery is approximately 50 mmHg .
AFTER DEVELOPMENT Section::::After development .
The umbilical artery regresses after birth .
A portion obliterates to become the medial umbilical ligament ( be careful not to confuse this with the median umbilical ligament , a different structure that represents the remnant of the embryonic urachus ) .
A portion remains open as a branch of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery .
The umbilical artery is found in the pelvis , and gives rise to the superior vesical arteries .
In males , it may also give rise to the artery to the ductus deferens which can be supplied by the inferior vesical artery in some individuals .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO
* Single umbilical artery
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " The Female Pelvis : Branches of Internal Iliac Artery "