COMMON BILE DUCT
The common bile duct , sometimes abbreviated CBD , is a duct in the gastrointestinal tract of organisms that have a gall bladder .
It is formed by the union of the common hepatic duct and the cystic duct ( from the gall bladder ) .
It is later joined by the pancreatic duct to form the ampulla of Vater .
There , the two ducts are surrounded by the muscular sphincter of Oddi .
When the sphincter of Oddi is closed , newly synthesized bile from the liver is forced into storage in the gall bladder .
When open , the stored and concentrated bile exits into the duodenum .
This conduction of bile is the main function of the common bile duct .
The hormone cholecystokinin , when stimulated by a fatty meal , promotes bile secretion by increased production of hepatic bile , contraction of the gall bladder , and relaxation of the Sphincter of Oddi .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Several problems can arise within the common bile duct .
A diameter of more than 8 mm is regarded as abnormal dilatation and is a sign of cholestasis .
+ Diameter in adults
On abdominal ultrasonography , the common bile duct is generally seen most readily in the perihilar area ( the border area between the common hepatic duct and the CBD , by the hilum of the liver ) .
The absence of Doppler signal distinguishes it from the portal vein and hepatic artery .
If clogged by a gallstone , a condition called choledocholithiasis can result .
In this clogged state , the duct is especially vulnerable to an infection called ascending cholangitis .
Very rare deformities of the common bile duct are cystic dilations ( 4 cm ) , choledochoceles ( cystic dilation of the ampula of Vater ( 3–8 cm ) ) , and biliary atresia .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Blockage of the common bile duct and related jaundice has been documented since at least since the time of Erasistratus .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES REFERENCES
*
S.E.Miederer et al.:Endoscopic transpapillary splitting of a choledochocele .
Dtsch Med .
Wochenschr .
1978 Feb.3:103(5):216,219 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " The gallbladder and extrahepatic bile ducts . "