NATIONAL DEFENSE SERVICE MEDAL
The National Defense Service Medal ( NDSM ) is a service medal of the United States Armed Forces established by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953 .
The medal was first intended to be a " blanket campaign medal " awarded to service members who served honorably during a designated time period of which a " national emergency " had been declared during a time of war or conflict .
It may also be issued to active military members for any other period that the Secretary of Defense designates .
Currently , the National Defense Service Medal is the oldest service medal in use by the United States Armed Forces .
The oldest continuously issued combat medal is the Medal of Honor .
ELIGIBLE PERIODS Section::::Eligible periods .
The National Defense Service Medal is authorized for the following wars and time periods : !
War !
From !
To AWARD CRITERIA Section::::Award criteria .
The National Defense Service Medal ( NDSM ) is awarded to anyone who serves on active duty in the United States Armed Forces during the above time periods .
Reserve Component service during the Korean and Vietnam periods , other than those Reserve Component personnel in a full - time status or on active duty greater than 89 days , did not qualify for award of the NDSM .
For service in the Persian Gulf War , members of the Reserve Component ( in good standing ) , to include the National Guard , were initially awarded the NDSM when called to active duty service , but this was later expanded to include all members of the Reserve or National Guard in good standing on the Reserve Active Status List ( or equivalent ) during the eligibility period .
For service in the Global War on Terrorism , Selected Reserve and National Guard members need only to have been in good standing to receive the NDSM and no active duty service is required .
Inactive Ready Reserve and Retired Reserve are not eligible to be awarded the NDSM unless called to active duty .
The medal is authorized to cadets and midshipmen at the military service academies after they are sworn into service , as well as pre - commission officer candidates / trainees at the Officer Candidate Schools or Officer Training Schools of the various U.S. Armed Forces ; but is not granted to discharged or retired military personnel who did not serve in one of the above time periods ; nor is it authorized for Reserve Officer Training Corps cadets and midshipmen at colleges and universities who enlisted in the inactive reserve ( i.e. , Obligated Reserve Section or ORS ) during qualifying periods .
The NDSM ranks eleventh out of twenty - nine in the order of precedence of service medals .
There is no time requirement for the medal 's issuance , meaning that someone who joins the United States Armed Forces for simply a few days , and then receives an entry level discharge , would technically be entitled to the NDSM ; in practice , however , military clerks will not add the NDSM on a DD Form 214 if the service member performed duty for less than 90 days from the completion of their initial entry training .
This accounts for the medal 's omission from a large number of " uncharacterized " and " entry level " separation documents .
Veterans who have this medal so omitted may apply to the military service departments to have the NDSM added to records via a DD Form 214 .
ADDITIONAL AWARDS Section::::Additional awards .
Additional awards of the National Defense Service Medal are authorized for members of the military who served in more than one of the eligible time periods .
Each additional award is denoted by a -inch bronze service star attached to the suspension and service ribbon of the medal ( a six award is indicated by one -inch silver star ) .
A second award of the medal is not granted for reenlisting during the same time period or transferring between branches of service .
NDSM ribbons with inch bronze stars { class="wikitable
" SEE ALSO * American Defense Service Medal
* Global War on Terrorism Service Medal * Korean Service Medal * Southwest Asia Service Medal * Vietnam Service Medal REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS