SNELLEN CHART
A Snellen chart is an eye chart that can be used to measure visual acuity .
Snellen charts are named after the Dutch ophthalmologist Herman Snellen , who developed the chart in 1862 .
Many ophthalmologists and vision scientists now use an improved chart known as the LogMAR chart .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Snellen developed charts using symbols based in a 5×5 unit grid .
The experimental charts developed in 1861 used abstract symbols .
Snellen 's charts published in 1862 used alphanumeric capitals in the 5×5 grid .
The original chart shows A , C , E , G , L , N , P , R , T , 5 , V , Z , B , D , 4 , F , H , K , O , S , 3 , U , Y , A , C , E , G , L , 2 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The normal Snellen chart is printed with eleven lines of block letters .
The first line consists of one very large letter , which may be one of several letters , for example E , H , or N. Subsequent rows have increasing numbers of letters that decrease in size .
A person taking the test covers one eye from 6 metres or 20 feet away , and reads aloud the letters of each row , beginning at the top .
The smallest row that can be read accurately indicates the visual acuity in that specific eye .
The symbols on an acuity chart are formally known as " optotypes " .
In the case of the traditional Snellen chart , the optotypes have the appearance of block letters , and are intended to be seen and read as letters .
They are not , however , letters from any ordinary typographer 's font .
They have a particular , simple geometry in which : * the thickness of the lines equals the thickness of the white spaces between lines and the thickness of the gap in the letter " C " * the height and width of the optotype ( letter ) is five times the thickness of the line .
Only the ten letters C , D , E , F , L , N , O , P , T , Z are used in the common Snellen chart .
The perception of five out of six letters ( or similar ratio ) is judged to be the Snellen fraction .
Wall - mounted Snellen charts are inexpensive and are sometimes used for approximate assessment of vision , e.g. in a primary - care physician 's office .
Whenever acuity must be assessed carefully ( as in an eye doctor 's examination ) , or where there is a possibility that the examinee might attempt to deceive the examiner ( as in a motor vehicle license office ) , equipment is used that can present the letters in a variety of randomized patterns .
BS 4274 - 1:1968(British Standards Institution )
" Specification for test charts for determining distance visual acuity " was replaced by BS 4274 - 1:2003 " Test charts for clinical determination of distance visual acuity — Specification " .
It states that " the luminance of the presentation shall be uniform and not less than 120 cd / m .
Any variation across the test chart shall not exceed 20 % . "
According to BS 4274 - 1:2003 only the letters C , D , E , F , H , K , N , P , R , U , V , and Z should be used for the testing of vision based upon equal legibility of the letters .
SNELLEN FRACTION Section::::Snellen fraction .
Visual acuity
= Distance at which test is made / distance at which the smallest optotype identified subtends an angle of five arcminutes .
" 6/6"(M ) OR " 20/20"(FT ) VISION
Section::::"6/6"(m ) or " 20/20"(ft ) vision .
Snellen defined " standard vision " as the ability to recognize one of his optotypes when it subtended 5 minutes of arc .
Thus the optotype can only be recognized if the person viewing it can discriminate a spatial pattern separated by a visual angle of one minute of arc .
Outside of the United States , the standard chart distance is , and normal acuity is designated " 6/6 " .
Other acuities are expressed as ratios with a numerator of 6 .
Some clinics do not have 6-metre eye lanes available , and either a half - size chart subtending the same angles at , or a reversed chart projected and viewed by a mirror is used to achieve the correct sized letters .
In the most familiar acuity test , a Snellen chart is placed at a standard distance : 6 metres .
At this distance , the symbols on the line representing " normal " acuity subtend an angle of five minutes of arc , and the thickness of the lines and of the spaces between the lines subtends one minute of arc .
This line , designated 6/6 ( or 20/20 ) , is the smallest line that a person with normal acuity can read at a distance of 6 metres .
Three lines above
, the letters have twice the height of those letters on the 6/6 ( or 20/20 in the US ) line .
If this is the smallest line a person can read , the person 's acuity is " 6/12 " ( " 20/40 " ) , meaning that this person needs to approach to a distance of to read letters that a person with normal acuity could read at .
In an even more approximate manner , this person could be said to have " half " the normal acuity of 6/6 .
At exactly 6 metres ' distance from the patient , the letters on the 6/6 line shall subtend 5 minutes of arc ( such that the individual limbs of the letters subtend 1 minute of arc ) , which means that the chart should be sized such that these letters are 8.73 mm tall and the topmost ( 6/60 )
" E " should be 87.3 mm tall .
Putting it another way , the eye should be at a distance 68.76 times the height of the top ( 6/60 ) letter .
The formula is formula_1 where formula_2 is the optotype height or width ( which are the same due to the optotype being on a square grid ) , formula_3 is the distance from eye to chart , and formula_4 is the angle subtended by the optotype , which is 5 arcminutes as specified by Snellen .
Another calculation for United States clinics using 20-foot chart distances ( slightly more than 6 m ) , and using a 17 mm model eye for calculations , and a letter which subtends 5 minutes of arc , gives a vertical height of the 20/20 letter to be 8.75 mm .
Acuity charts are used during many kinds of vision examinations , such as " refracting " the eye to determine the best eyeglass prescription .
During such examinations , acuity ratios are never mentioned .
The largest letter on an eye chart often represents an acuity of 6/60 ( 20/200 ) , the value that is considered " legally blind " in the US .
Some individuals with moderate myopia may not be able to read the large E without glasses , but have no problem reading the 6/6 ( 20/20 ) line or 6/4.5 ( 20/15 ) line with glasses .
By contrast , legally blind individuals have a visual acuity of 6/60 ( 20/200 ) or less when using the best corrective lens .
ELECTRONIC CHART Section::::Electronic chart .
To ensure adequate illumination of the Snellen charts , various medical device manufacturers had developed Snellen chart products with backlight or projection .
DIGITAL CHART Section::::Digital chart .
Since computer monitors typically have good lighting for reading and LCD / LED monitors have high DPI , or dots per inch ( between 96 to 480 ) , they are suitable for displaying optotypes .
Commonly digital chart products support randomizing optotypes displayed to prevent patients from cheating through memorizing the chart .
In Google Play and App Store ( iOS ) , there are Snellen chart apps for smart phones and tablets .
SEE ALSO
* E chart * Golovin – Sivtsev table
* Jaeger chart *
Landolt C
* Lea test
* LogMAR chart * Monoyer chart
* Sloan letters * Visual acuity
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Snellen Chart
* Chart Projector *
Acuity Pro * Visual Acuity Charts
* Validation of a Portable Electronic Visual Acuity System