DOUBLE JEOPARDY ( 1999 FILM )
Double Jeopardy is a 1999 American neo noir adventure crime thriller film directed by Bruce Beresford and starring Tommy Lee Jones , Ashley Judd , and Bruce Greenwood .
The film is about a woman wrongfully imprisoned for murder who , while eluding her parole officer , tracks down her husband who had framed her .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Libby Parsons ( Ashley Judd ) and her husband Nick ( Bruce Greenwood ) are wealthy residents of Whidbey Island , Washington .
With her best friend , Angela Green ( Annabeth Gish ) offering to look after her 4-year - old son , Matty ( Benjamin Weir ) , Libby and Nick go off sailing for the weekend on their yacht .
After a session of love making , Libby falls asleep .
She wakes to find her husband missing and blood all over her hands , clothes , legs , and the boat 's floors .
A Coast Guard vessel appears and Libby is spotted holding a bloody knife she found lying on the deck .
Even with Nick 's body unaccounted for , Libby is arrested , humiliated in the media , tried , and convicted of her husband 's murder .
Libby asks Angela to look after Matty for the duration of her prison sentence .
At first , Angela brings Matty to see Libby in prison , but after a while , these visits cease and she disappears .
Libby uses search skills and the ability to deceive people to track Angela to her phone in San Francisco .
She calls Angela and speaks with Matty .
Libby hears a door open in the background , then Matty exclaims , " Daddy ! "
right before the line goes dead .
Libby realizes that Nick possibly faked his death and framed her , leaving Matty as the sole beneficiary of his life insurance policy , as people convicted for murder are not allowed to collect the life insurance on their victims .
After unsuccessfully attempting to get investigative help , she is told by a fellow inmate named Margaret ( Roma Maffia ) that if she were to get paroled for good behavior , she could kill Nick with impunity due to the Double Jeopardy Clause in the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution .
She spends the next six years in prison building up her body and committing herself to finding Matty .
Libby is paroled after six years and begins searching for Nick and Matty , while living in a halfway house under the close supervision of parole officer Travis Lehman ( Tommy Lee Jones ) .
Lehman is a very tough officer .
He is a former law professor whose wife and daughter left him after the family was in a car accident with him driving under the influence of alcohol .
Libby violates her curfew and is caught breaking into Matty 's school on Whidbey Island to try to get Angela 's records .
However , as Lehman is delivering Libby back to prison via a car ferry , he handcuffs her to the car door handle , and goes for a drink .
He leaves the keys and Libby drives the car back and forth trying to knock off the handcuffs .
Lehman returns ; they struggle and the car goes overboard .
He uncuffs her underwater .
Libby then knocks out Lehman and swims to shore while he is rescued by ferry personnel .
She goes to her family farm where her mother gives her cash to enable her to search for her husband and child .
Libby discovers that Angela has recently died in Colorado in a home gas explosion , which looks like an accident staged by Nick .
Then Libby recognizes a Wassily Kandinsky painting in a newspaper photo .
Tracing it through an art dealer 's database ( which nearly again allows her capture by Lehman ) leads her to New Orleans , where she finds Nick running a luxury hotel under an assumed name , Jonathan Devereaux .
Libby confronts Nick after making a winning bid of $ 10,000 on him at a bachelor 's auction during a fund raising party hosted at his hotel .
She demands he return Matty in exchange for her silence about his real identity , while he claimed that he faked his death to collect insurance as his original business was going under .
Their parley is cut short when Lehman shows up at the hotel party to warn Nick that his wife is a fugitive .
In the French Quarter , Libby is later tipped off by a bartender who recognizes her from a wanted poster but lets her escape the police as no reward is offered .
Nick agrees to bring Matty to a meeting in Lafayette Cemetery No . 1 .
There he uses a decoy boy to distract Libby , knocks her unconscious , and locks her in a casket inside a mausoleum .
Using a .38 caliber handgun she had snatched from Lehman , Libby manages to shoot the hinges off the lid of the casket and escape the mausoleum by throwing a flower vase through a stained glass window .
While tracking Libby in New Orleans , Lehman himself becomes suspicious of Nick 's death and begins to believe Libby 's story , based on the clues uncovered in his search .
He finds a picture of a different Nicholas Parsons when searching the Washington State DMV records to prove his suspicions , and later confirms them when he uncovers six DMV records under that name , including Nick 's DMV application and photograph .
After intercepting and capturing Libby later in the city as she makes her way to Nick 's hotel , the two end up teaming up .
Lehman visits Nick in his office under the pretense of asking for money to keep his identity secret .
He records a remark by Nick that he had murdered his wife , the only witness to his true past , and then Libby enters , holding Nick at gunpoint .
Nick is given a choice of surrendering to the authorities or getting shot by his vengeful wife , who he believes would go free for this deed because of double jeopardy .
Nick pulls out a hidden gun , shoots Lehman , and fires at Libby .
Lehman manages to bring Nick down before he can shoot Libby .
Nick gets the upper hand in the scuffle , but before he can kill the wounded parole officer , Libby shoots Nick dead .
Lehman promises to help Libby get fully pardoned , and together they travel to Matty 's boarding school in Georgia .
Matty ( Spencer Treat Clark ) , now eleven years old , recognizes his mother , and they embrace with Lehman watching them .
CAST * Tommy Lee Jones as Travis Lehman * Ashley Judd as Elizabeth " Libby " Parsons * Bruce Greenwood as Nicholas " Nick " Parsons /
Simon Ryder / Jonathan Devereaux * Annabeth Gish as Angie Green / Angie Ryder * Roma Maffia as Margaret Skolowski * Jay Brazeau as Bobby Long * Michael Gaston as Cutter * Bruce Campbell as Bartender at Party * Daniel Lapaine as Handsome Internet Expert * Dave Hager as Jim Mangold
* Benjamin Weir as Matty Parsons -
Age 4 * Spencer Treat Clark as Matty Parsons - Age 11 * Davenia McFadden as Evelyn Lake
* Betsy Brantley as Prosecutor * Babz Chula as Ruby PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
Jodie Foster was originally attached to star in the film as Libby Parsons after Michelle Pfeiffer , Meg Ryan and Brooke Shields all declined the role , and Bruce Beresford met with her several times about the script :
She said to me once , when we were having . .
.not
an argument , we had different points of view over something , and she said , ' We 'll have to do it my way , I 'm afraid . '
And I said , ' Why , Jodie ? '
And she said , ' Because I 'm so intelligent .
I 'm such an intelligent person that there is no point in disagreeing with me because I 'm always right . '
I thought she was joking , but she was n't !
[ laughs ]
She had this extraordinary opinion of her own IQ .
However , Foster then became pregnant so Ashley Judd stepped in .
Greg Kinnear was offered the part of Nick Parsons , but he passed and Bruce Greenwood eventually took over .
According to Beresford , Robert Benton did an uncredited ten - day rewrite shortly before production began .
The song the band plays at the funeral in the cemetery scene is the American folksong , " St. James Infirmary Blues . "
LEGAL ACCURACY Section::::Legal accuracy .
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution states plainly : "
[ N]or shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb . . . .
" The four essential protections included are prohibitions against , for the same offense :
retrial after an acquittal ; after a conviction ; or after certain mistrials ; and multiple punishment .
The Double Jeopardy Clause has no bearing on separate crimes of the same nature .
Harvard Professor Alan Dershowitz criticized the movie for allegedly misrepresenting the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment .
" There are two separate incidents , " Dershowitz claims .
" She was falsely accused the first time .
And maybe she can sue for that or get some credit .
But then she committed an entirely separate , or at least planned to commit , an entirely separate crime the second time .
And there 's just no defense of double jeopardy for doing it the second time . "
However , regardless of the accuracy of the movie 's interpretation of the double jeopardy clause , since Nick was about to kill Lehman and Libby when Libby killed Nick , Libby likely would have been acquitted by reason of self - defense .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received mixed to generally negative reviews .
It is rated 25 % on Rotten Tomatoes , as its " consensus " states : " A talented cast fails to save this unremarkable thriller . "
Some noted that Jones portrayed a watered - down version of his character from The Fugitive .
Roger Ebert gave the film two and a half stars out of four , indicating a lukewarm reception .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
However , some critics reacted to this film with positive reviews .
Leonard Maltin gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , calling it " slick entertainment " .
Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that the film is a " well - acted diversion , directed by Bruce Beresford ( Driving Miss Daisy ) with an intelligent grasp of the moment - to - moment emotion " .
For her performance in the film Ashley Judd won Favorite Actress at the 6th Blockbuster Entertainment Awards .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was a box office success , spending three weeks as the No . 1 film , and grossing $ 116 million domestically and $ 61 million overseas .
VHS AND DVD RELEASE Section::::VHS and DVD release .
Double Jeopardy was released on VHS and DVD by Paramount Home Video on February 22 , 2000 .
The DVD includes a behind - the - scenes featurette and its original theatrical trailer .
It is presented in its original 2.35:1 widescreen format .
SEE ALSO
*
It Is the Law *
Scorpion 's Revenge REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Straight Dope article on Double Jeopardy , including discussion of this film