JERRY MOUSE Jerry Mouse is a fictional character and one of the title characters ( the other being Tom Cat ) in Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer 's series of Tom and Jerry theatrical cartoon short films .
Created by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera , Jerry is a brown anthropomorphic house mouse , who first appeared as a mouse named Jinx in the 1940 MGM animated short Puss Gets the Boot .
Hanna gave the mouse 's original name as " Jinx " , while Barbera claimed the mouse went unnamed in his first appearance .
HISTORY
TOM AND JERRY CARTOONS Section::::History . Section::::Tom and Jerry cartoons .
The name " Jerry " was chosen by MGM animator John Carr , who submitted " Tom and Jerry " as potential names for the duo after an important Loews Inc. distributor in Texas asked for follow - ups to Puss Gets the Boot .
While the idea of a cat - and - mouse duo was considered shopworn by the 1940s , Hanna and Barbera decided to expand upon the standard expected hunter / prey relationship .
Their Jerry Mouse , an " incurable scene stealer " , served more or less as the protagonist of most of the films ; instead of being a " cowering victim " of his pursuer , Tom , he took delight in besting , and often torturing , his antagonist ( though sometimes , Tom is just following orders or is even just minding his own business and is antagonized by Jerry ) .
Hanna and Barbera considered Tom and Jerry " the best of enemies " , whose rivalry hid an unspoken amount of mutual respect .
In later Tom and Jerry cartoons , Jerry acquired a young ward : a small grey mouse called " Tuffy " or " Nibbles " depending upon the cartoon , who was left on Jerry 's doorstep as a foundling baby in the 1946 short The Milky Waif .
Jerry and Tuffy were also featured together in a sub - series of Tom and Jerry cartoons set in 17th century France which featured the characters as musketeers .
The first of these shorts , The Two Mouseketeers , won the 1951 Academy Award for Best Short Subject : Cartoons .
Hanna and Barbera served as writer / directors of the Tom and Jerry cartoons until 1956 , when they also became the producers .
Fourteen Tom and Jerry cartoons between 1940 and 1954 were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Short Subject : Cartoons , with seven of the shorts winning that award .
MGM shut down its animation department in 1957 , but new Tom and Jerry cartoons were produced by Gene Deitch and later Chuck Jones during the 1960s .
Jerry would also appear in later Tom and Jerry productions made for television , a series of direct - to - video features , and , a 1992 theatrical film .
Later productions eschewed much of the violence the 1940s and 1950s shorts were known for , and in several of the television shows Jerry was given a red bow tie and a kinder disposition .
Tom and Jerry are n't always enemies ; they have been known to team up on occasion .
ANCHORS AWEIGH Section::::Anchors Aweigh .
On his own , Jerry Mouse appears in a fantasy sequence in the 1945 Gene Kelly MGM musical film Anchors Aweigh .
Jerry appears as the ruler of a kingdom where music is banned because he feels he lacks talent , and Kelly persuades the mouse into performing a song - and - dance number with him .
Kelly and MGM had originally wanted Walt Disney 's Mickey Mouse as Kelly 's dance partner for the sequence , but Disney was unwilling to license the character .
Hanna and Barbera achieved the effect of Kelly dancing with Jerry by rotoscoping : live - action plates of Kelly dancing alone were shot first , and the action traced frame by frame so that Jerry 's movements would match .
The success of the animated segment of Anchors Aweigh , which was noted as " stealing the show " in contemporary trade reviews , led to two more live - action / animated projects for Hanna and Barbera and MGM : an underwater ballet sequence featuring both Tom and Jerry in Esther Williams ' 1953 film Dangerous
When Wet , and the " Sinbad the Sailor " sequence of Kelly 's 1956 film Invitation to the Dance .
TOM & JERRY KIDS Section::::Tom & Jerry Kids .
In 1990 , this version of Jerry wears a red bowtie , and has a tuft of hair on his head .
He often taunts Tom ( as a kitten ) any chance he gets .
Sometimes , in a few episodes , he is friends with / allies of Tom .
VOICE ACTORS
* William Hanna : Vocal effects in the Hanna - Barbera era ( 1940–1958 ) shorts ( also ( archival recording from classic shorts ) ) and
speaking in The Lonesome Mouse , The Tom and Jerry Show ( 2014 TV series )
( archival recording from classic shorts )
* Sara Berner :
Baby Puss vocal effects , speaking and singing voice for Jerry in Anchors Aweigh
* Lillian Randolph ( voice of Mammy Two Shoes ) : when Jerry and Tuffy disguise to fool Tom in the 1946 short : The Milky Waif * Paul Frees : speaking in His Mouse
Friday and Blue Cat Blues
* Allen Swift : vocal effects in the Gene Deitch era ( 1961–1962 ) shorts
* Mel Blanc : vocal effects in the Chuck Jones era ( 1963–1967 ) shorts , The Tom and Jerry Show ( 2014 TV series )
( archival recording from classic shorts )
* June Foray : vocal effects in the Chuck Jones era ( 1965–1967 ) shorts
* Stan Freberg : The Cat Above and the Mouse
Below
* Dale McKennon : singing in Cat and Dupli - cat
* John Stephenson :
The Tom and Jerry Show ( 1975 TV series )
* Frank Welker :
The Tom and Jerry Comedy Show , Tom & Jerry Kids and *
Billy Bletcher : some vocal effects in the 1945 short : Mouse in Manhattan * Dana Hill : speaking and singing in .
* Samuel Vincent : Tom and Jerry Tales
* Charlie Adler : Tom and Jerry in War of the Whiskers Section::::Voice actors .
Jerry has had a number of voice actors over the years .
Ever since his debut in Puss Gets the Boot his vocal effects were provided by co - creator William Hanna during the Hanna - Barbera era .
Sara Berner also did vocal effects for Jerry in the short Baby Puss ( 1943 ) and voiced him in the short
The Zoot Cat ( 1944 ) , as well as Anchors Aweigh ( 1945 ) in a dance sequence with him and Gene Kelly .
Billy Bletcher provided some vocal effects for Jerry in the short Mouse in Manhattan .
A sequence in the short
The Milky Waif ( 1946 ) features Jerry and Nibbles disguising themselves as a pair of black people , in which the former is voiced by Lillian Randolph ( same voice as Mammy Two Shoes ) .
Paul Frees did Jerry 's speaking voice in the shorts His Mouse Friday ( 1951 ) and Blue Cat Blues ( 1956 ) .
When the MGM cartoon studio shut down in 1957 , Gene Deitch and European animation studio Rembrandt Studio took over , and voice actor Allen Swift did Jerry 's voice during the 1961 - 62 .
During the Chuck Jones era in 1963 - 1967 , his voice was provided by Mel Blanc and June Foray .
Stan Freberg did his voice in the short
The Cat Above and the Mouse
Below ( 1964 ) and Dale McKennon did Jerry 's singing voice in Cat and Dupli - cat ( 1967 ) .
In The Tom and Jerry Show ( 1975 ) , Jerry was voiced by John Stephenson .
Frank Welker voiced him in The Tom and Jerry Comedy Show ( 1980 - 1982 ) , Tom and Jerry Kids ( 1990 - 1994 ) , and ( 2002 ) .
Dana Hill voiced Jerry in ( 1992 ) .
Other voice actors include Samuel Vincent in Tom and Jerry Tales ( 2006 - 2008 ) and Charlie Adler in Tom and Jerry in War of the Whiskers video game ( 2002 ) .
In The Tom and Jerry Show ( 2014 TV series ) , Jerry 's vocal effects are provided by archival recordings of William Hanna and Mel Blanc from the original theatrical shorts .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
Tom and Jerry were planned to appear as a cameo in the deleted scene " Acme 's Funeral " from the 1988 film Who Framed Roger Rabbit .
SEE ALSO
* Tom and Jerry * List of Hanna - Barbera characters
* Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer cartoon studio REFERENCES