ULSTER BANK Ulster Bank is a large commercial bank , and one of the traditional Big Four Irish banks .
The Ulster Bank Group is subdivided into two separate legal entities , Ulster Bank Limited ( UBL – registered in Northern Ireland ) and Ulster Bank Ireland DAC ( UBIDAC – registered in the Republic of Ireland ) .
The Group 's headquarters ( and UBIDAC 's ) is located on George 's Quay , Dublin , in the Republic of Ireland whilst the official headquarters of UBL is in Donegall Square East , Belfast , in Northern Ireland , and it maintains a large sector of the financial services in both the UK and the Republic of Ireland .
Established in 1836 , Ulster Bank was acquired by the Westminster Bank in 1917 .
As a direct subsidiary of National Westminster Bank ( NatWest ) , it became part of The Royal Bank of Scotland Group in 2000 .
It has 146 branches in the Republic of Ireland and 90 in Northern Ireland with over 1,200 non - charging ATMs .
The Group has over 3,000 employees and over 1.9 million clients .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Ulster Bank was founded as The Ulster Banking Company in Belfast in 1836 .
The bank was formed by a breakaway faction of shareholders in the newly formed National Bank of Ireland , founded in 1835 , who objected to the latter bank 's plan to invest profits from the bank in London rather than in Belfast .
The founding directors of the bank were John Heron , Robert Grimshaw , John Currell a linen bleacher from Ballymena , and James Steen , a Belfast pork curer .
NOTE DESTRUCTION Section::::Note destruction .
In 2002 three Ulster Bank employees were arrested on charges of theft and money laundering .
The three were responsible for the destruction of old banknotes at the bank 's former Waring Street cash centre .
Between November 2001 and February 2002 they were accused of stealing approximately £ 900,000 of used banknotes designated for disposal .
The money was then placed in various bank and building society accounts .
On 23 January 2004 the men were jailed for two and a half years for the theft of £ 770,000 .
Lord Chief Justice Sir Brian Kerr criticised the bank 's security measures during the trial .
FIRST ACTIVE
Section::::First Active .
In 2003/2004 , Ulster Bank Group purchased First Active , Ireland 's oldest building society , for € 887 million .
In 2009 , the First Active branch network and business of several hundred thousand savers and borrowers was merged with Ulster Bank , and the brand name was retired in 2010 .
COMPUTER FAILURE
Section::::Computer Failure .
In June 2012 a computer system failure prevented customers from accessing accounts .
Initial estimates that the problem would be sorted out within a week were wildly optimistic with thousands of customers still unable to access their accounts into late July 2012 , with ongoing issues still not resolved by mid August 2012 .
This RBS / NatWest / Ulster Bank issue has proved to be one of the largest IT failures the world has ever known .
Ulster Bank ( the smallest part of the RBS group ) has initially set aside £ 28 M for compensation to customers .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
In March 2014 it was reported that the RBS Group was considering merging the bank in the Republic of Ireland with some of its rivals in order to reduce its holding .
RBS Group 's annual results for 2013 revealed Ulster Bank had operating losses of £ 1.5 billion and accounted for a fifth of the parent group 's total bad debt charges .
In October 2014 RBS confirmed it would retain Ulster Bank following improved market conditions in Ireland .
SERVICES Section::::Services .
Ulster Bank provide a full range of banking and insurance services to personal , business and commercial customers .
In Northern Ireland the bank is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by both the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority .
Ulster Bank Limited is a member of the Financial Services Compensation Scheme and the British Bankers ' Association .
In Ireland , the bank is regulated by the Central Bank of Ireland .
The bank provides Visa Debit cards to customers with their current accounts , having previously issued Maestro ( formerly Switch ) and Laser debit cards to NI and ROI customers respectively , in addition to other financial services .
It launched 15 new commitments to its retail customers in September 2010 .
Ulster Bank is used by RBS to deposit funds invested through the popular Royal Deposit Plan ; one of RBS current structured investments .
CORPORATE IDENTITY Section::::Corporate identity .
From 1968 until 2005 , Ulster Bank 's logo was three chevrons – identical to that of the National Westminster Bank , its owner .
The bank changed to the RBS " daisy wheel " logo and typeface style in October 2005 .
The bank is one of the four banks that issue Pound sterling banknotes in Northern Ireland .
BANKNOTES Section::::Banknotes .
In common with the other Big Four banks of Northern Ireland , Ulster Bank retains the right to issue its own banknotes .
These are pound sterling notes and equal in value to Bank of England notes , and should not be confused with banknotes of the former Irish pound .
Ulster Bank 's current notes all share the same design of a view of Belfast harbour flanked by landscape views ; the design of the reverse is dominated by the bank 's coats - of - arms .
The principal difference between the denominations is their colour and size .
Notes incorporate the RBS " daisy wheel " logo , having incorporated the NatWest chevrons until 2006 .
* 5 pound note , grey * 10 pound note , blue - green * 20 pound note , purple * 50 pound note ,
blue In November 2006 Ulster Bank issued its first commemorative banknote – an issue of one million £ 5 notes commemorating the first anniversary of the death of former Northern Irish and Manchester United footballer , George Best .
This was the first Ulster Bank banknote to incorporate the RBS " daisy wheel " , and the entire issue was taken by collectors within hours of becoming available in bank branches .
In 2019 , Ulster Bank will be issuing a new series of banknotes printed in polymer , and will be replacing its paper equivalents currently in circulation .
SPONSORSHIP Section::::Sponsorship .
On 8 February 2008 , Ulster Bank Group Chief Executive , Cormac McCarthy , announced a three - year sponsorship deal worth over £ 1 m for the Belfast Festival at Queen 's .
It was hailed as a " new dawn " for the festival which had been suffering underfunding .
Ulster Bank was the first overall sponsor of The Balmoral Show in 2009 , Northern Ireland 's largest agricultural show .
Ulster Bank announced official sponsorship of the GAA All - Ireland Senior Football Championship in April 2008 .
SEE ALSO
* NatWest Holdings * NatWest Markets
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Ulster Bank Group * Ulster Bank Limited Registered in Northern Ireland , No .
R733 * Ulster Bank Ireland DAC Registered in the Republic of Ireland , No . 25766