HEATHROW TERMINAL 4 TUBE STATION Heathrow Terminal 4 is a London Underground station at Heathrow Airport on the Heathrow branch of the Piccadilly line .
The station is situated in Travelcard Zone 6 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station opened on 12 April 1986 to serve the then recently opened Heathrow Terminal 4 .
It is situated on a unidirectional loop tunnel which was constructed between the existing Hatton Cross and Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 stations .
The station is one of four on the London Underground with only one platform , and is the only one with one - way train service .
It is adjacent to Heathrow Terminal 4 railway station used by main line TfL Rail services ( Elizabeth Line from December 2018 ) .
In - service routing took trains from Hatton Cross to Terminal 4 then Terminals 1 , 2 , 3 and back to Hatton Cross .
On 7 January 2005 , both the loop track and the station were closed temporarily in order to allow the construction of a new rail junction to link to the new Heathrow Terminal 5 station .
All trains reverted to using the original westbound track from Hatton Cross direct to Heathrow Terminals 1 , 2 , 3 which was used prior to the opening of Heathrow Terminal 4 .
For passengers travelling to or from Heathrow Terminal 4 , a shuttle bus was provided from Hatton Cross tube station .
This situation continued until 17 September 2006 when the loop line and station were reopened after construction finished , with new security and customer announcement technologies in place at the station .
CURRENT ROUTING
Section::::Current routing .
Heathrow Terminal 4 tube station is located on a unidirectional clockwise loop that branches off after Hatton Cross westbound , and rejoins the Heathrow branch eastbound to the west of Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 .
Since the opening of Heathrow Terminal 5 station , alternate Heathrow branch trains runs via the Terminal 4 loop , whilst the other alternate trains run directly to Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 , and Heathrow Terminal 5 .
Until 2012 , free transfer was not possible between terminals , in contrast to the Heathrow Express .
In January 2012 , free travel was introduced for Oyster card holders between the three Heathrow stations .
But to travel from Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 or Terminal 5 to Terminal 4 one must change trains at Hatton Cross .
This journey is free , despite Hatton Cross itself not being part of the free travel zone .
CONNECTIONS Section::::Connections .
Two London Buses routes serve the station : 482 and 490 .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Heathrow Terminal 4 railway station
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Platform of Terminal 4 station .