BLAIR WALDORF
Blair Cornelia Waldorf is the lead character of Gossip Girl , introduced in the original series of novels and also appearing in the television and manga adaptations .
Described as " a girl of extremes " by creator Cecily von Ziegesar , she is a New York City socialite and a comical overachiever who possesses both snobbish and sensitive sides .
Due to her position as queen bee of Manhattan 's social scene , Blair 's actions and relations are under constant scrutiny from the mysterious Gossip Girl , a popular blogger .
Leighton Meester , who portrayed the character in the television drama , has described Blair as being insecure about her social status .
At times , this anxiety creates flaws and complexities which contribute to character development .
In Meester 's view , the true Blair is ultimately a good girl at heart .
Blair has been compared to vintage film and literary figures , including Becky Sharp and Lizzie Eustace .
She is commonly likened to Lila Fowler of Francine Pascal 's Sweet Valley High series .
Meester 's portrayal has also drawn comparisons to roles played by Joan Collins and Audrey Hepburn .
She is the most critically acclaimed character of the franchise , while the television character has drawn real - life attention surrounding fashion and her love life .
CHARACTER IN PRINT Section::::Character in print .
Gossip Girl is a series of novels about socially prominent young adults in New York City .
The story primarily follows Blair Waldorf and her best friend Serena van der Woodsen during their years in high school and college .
Due to her fame on the Upper East Side , Blair is featured on the website of " Gossip Girl , " an anonymous gossip blogger whose posts appear occasionally throughout the story .
NOVEL SERIES Section::::Novel series .
In the first book , Blair is introduced as a privileged , comically vain overachiever .
She is described as an alluring brunette , and occasionally models her appearance and demeanor after famous actresses , including Marilyn Monroe and , most often , Audrey Hepburn .
In early novels , the character is also written as bulimic .
Blair is largely motivated by matters surrounding family , romance , and ambition .
However , her tendency to overachieve can lead to feelings of paranoia , with dramatic or comical results .
In a review for The New Yorker , Janet Malcolm remarked that Blair 's issues made her " both a broader caricature and a more real person " than the other Gossip Girl characters .
In a 2009 interview , Gossip Girl creator Cecily von Ziegesar claimed to identify with Blair the most , stating , " She is so unpredictable and dramatic .
Such a bitch , but we understand why she is a bitch
and we like her anyway " .
STORY LINES Section::::Story lines .
Throughout most of the series ' run , Blair grapples with a number of changes within her family .
One year prior to the opening novel , Blair 's parents divorced after her father ran off with another man .
When her mother remarries , and her father leaves the country , Blair has difficulty accepting her stepfather , Cyrus Rose .
In addition , her stress over these matters occasionally affects her other relationships .
However , Blair ultimately remains close to her father Harold , who she often turns to for comfort .
By contrast , she maintains a somewhat tenser relationship with her mother Eleanor .
It is also revealed that Blair has struggled with bulimia .
In the opening novel , Blair learns of an affair between her friend Serena and her boyfriend Nate .
This marks the beginning of the story 's primary love triangle , which recurs throughout the series .
Blair 's romantic life has various effects on her character development .
After Nate repeatedly hurts her , she eventually refuses to take him back until she believes in his ability to commit to her .
In pursuing Nate , however , Blair herself cheats on her new boyfriend Pete , which results in her losing both of them .
She eventually begins to acknowledge her mistakes , with her father 's help .
She later grows closer to Chuck Bass ( which initially occurred in the series ' television adaptation ) , who she 'd previously known for years , which leads them to briefly date one another .
Blair is noted for an over - achieving nature , which often appears in humorous scenes .
In a review for New York magazine , Emily Nussbaum lauded one of Blair 's fantasies , which involves " joining the Peace Corps , getting a killer tan , winning the Nobel Peace Prize , and having dinner with the president , ' who would then write her a recommendation to Yale , and then Yale would fall all over themselves to accept her . '
"
The New Yorker Janet Malcolm remarked that unlike some of her forerunners in film and literature , " Blair already has all the money and position anyone could want .
She is pure naked striving , restlessly seeking an object , any object , and never knowing when enough is enough . "
Blair encounters a setback during her interview at Yale by revealing the recent stress in her life , and then kissing her interviewer on the cheek upon dismissal .
Her father then makes a donation to the school , though Blair is still wait - listed .
In the twelfth book , I Will Always Love You , it is revealed that she has been admitted to the university .
In addition to her feelings for Nate , Blair is sometimes said to feel competitive with Serena in other areas , including matters of beauty and popularity .
This also leads to an occasional envy on Blair 's part .
It is unclear how much of Blair 's perception of Serena is in line with reality ; the narrative describes both characters as " hands down the two hottest girls on the Upper East Side , and maybe all of Manhattan , or even the whole world . "
MANGA SERIES
Section::::Manga series .
In 2010 , Yen Press began publishing a manga adaptation titled Gossip Girl : For Your Eyes Only , written and illustrated by HyeKyung Baek .
This series adapts notable scenarios from the novel — including the triangle with Nate and Serena — but also features new material .
After losing her position as queen bee , Blair attempts to regain her former status while adjusting to a less privileged lifestyle .
In addition to this series , Blair also appears in a manga adaptation of the novel Gossip Girl :
Psycho Killer , a parody of horror stories .
TELEVISION SERIES Section::::Television series .
In 2007 , Gossip Girl was adapted for television .
According to Cecily von Ziegesar , the television character is largely faithful to the original .
Among the aspects to be maintained are her admiration for Audrey Hepburn and her interest in Yale University .
However , the series is also noted for its deviations from the source material , including the exclusion of Blair 's brother Tyler .
The show also explores romances between Blair and multiple male leads , resulting in occasional love triangles .
In the fifth season , Blair is revealed to be pregnant with Prince of Monaco , Louis Grimaldi 's child .
However the child later dies before birth after a car crash
Blair and Chuck were in .
Among fans and the media , Blair 's bond with Chuck Bass was commonly known by the portmanteau " Chair " , while her relationship with Dan Humphrey was referred to as " Dair " .
The nicknames and viewer interest in these relationships were recognized by the show 's producers .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
To prepare for the part of Blair , actress Leighton Meester , a natural blonde , dyed her hair brown before auditioning , and also studied the first novel .
She has described the character as multi - faceted , labeling her " a little bit of everything which is pretty amazing . "
Like von Ziegesar , Meester has also claimed to relate to Blair on certain levels .
Prior to the show 's debut in 2007 , the actress stated that , " The only way to play Blair , or any character , and make her human , is to find what she is inside me .
And I know I have my insecurities , too . "
She went on to say that , " The way Blair and I are not alike when it comes to insecurities is : She pays so much attention to hers ! "
Meester 's casting was described by Yahoo !
as a star - making role which moved her " into the pop culture vanguard , " while Cecily von Ziegesar has called her a perfect choice .
In December 2010 , Meester revealed plans to leave the show in 2012 .
E !
Online and other outlets speculated that her departure would possibly mark the end of the series .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
In of Gossip Girl , Blair is introduced as the Upper East Side 's beautiful and popular queen bee .
She is the daughter of Eleanor Waldorf , a famous fashion designer .
She is dating Nate Archibald , and is best friends with Serena van der Woodsen .
She also finds a close companion in Nate 's best friend and her childhood friend Chuck Bass , who becomes a partner for her schemes .
When Serena returns home from boarding school , Blair learns from Nate that he lost his virginity to a drunken Serena over a year ago .
Blair retaliates by publicly revealing Serena 's connection to a rehab hospital .
She then learns that the actual patient is Serena 's younger brother , Eric , who had been committed after a suicide attempt .
Afterward , a remorseful Blair reconciles with Serena .
After learning that Nate no longer loves her , Blair sleeps with Chuck , eventually falling for him .
This leads to a heated affair and an eventual love triangle .
Her inability to choose creates much of the first season 's story line .
There are brief mentions of Blair 's past struggle with anorexia - bulimia that are never mentioned again past the first season .
She also begins a brief power struggle with freshman Jenny Humphrey .
After she unites with Chuck and Nate in order to save Serena from the scheming Georgina Sparks , Chuck realizes that his feelings for Blair are real and suggests that they spend the summer together in Tuscany .
However , he is discouraged by his father at the last minute , and stands Blair up .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
At the launch of the second season , Blair was described by creators as the queen at the center of the Gossip Girl chess game .
A large portion of her story line in revolves around her love - hate relationship with Chuck Bass , which was labeled " the heart of GG " by People magazine .
While competing with Serena , Blair forms an unexpected friendship with Jenny , who states that they each work for everything they achieve , while Serena often glides through life .
During their interviews at Yale University , Blair and Serena apologize for their ill feelings and resume their friendship .
In the episode " O Brother , Where Bart Thou ? " , Chuck is devastated by news of his father 's death , prompting Blair to offer her support while telling Chuck that she loves him .
He initially shuns her advances , but later turns to her for comfort .
However , the two stop seeing each other due to Chuck 's uncle , Jack Bass , convincing him he has an inability to commit to a relationship .
After being rejected by Yale , Blair finds unexpected encouragement from Nate .
She is later accepted into New York University , and her competitive relationship with Georgina is eventually renewed .
As the season ends , Blair crowns Jenny the new queen of Constance Billard School .
In the season finale , it is discovered that Blair slept with Chuck 's uncle Jack and that Chuck had slept with Vanessa Abrams .
Chuck then departs for Europe .
He later returns to New York and reconciles with Blair while declaring his love for her , and the two finally begin a committed relationship .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
In the third season , Blair joins Vanessa , Georgina , and Jenny 's brother Dan at NYU .
Much of her story line concerns her inability to attain her previous status at her new school .
She finds emotional support from her mother , as well as Chuck .
However , she and Chuck separate once again when Blair feels that he manipulated her while competing with his uncle ( Chuck made a deal with Jack that Blair could sleep with him and in exchange , Chuck gets his hotel back that Jack initially stole to ' destroy Chuck ' ) .
She later transfers to Columbia University , and learns that an emotionally reformed Chuck was responsible for her enrollment .
They later team up as part of a role - playing scheme to help Serena 's mother and Chuck 's adopted mother , Lily .
In the season finale , Chuck attempts to propose to Blair , but is interrupted by Dan , who reveals that Chuck had slept with Jenny .
Two weeks later , Blair and Serena depart for Paris intending to spend the summer together .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
In Blair and Chuck become competitive once again , but eventually resume their sexual relations before recognizing their love for one another .
When the relationship interferes with their business interests , she and Chuck break up once more .
Chuck promises he 'll wait for her , and both affirm their belief that their love will reunite them in the end .
Blair then teams up with Dan when the two share common goals .
They also end up working together at W. magazine , where friction develops between the two .
On Valentine 's Day , she discovers that Chuck has romantic feelings for Raina Thorpe , the daughter of his business rival .
Later , she and Dan spend the evening talking on their cell phones while watching Rosemary 's Baby .
Blair later quits W. and is shown asleep with Dan in his Brooklyn flat .
Later , upon growing curious of their feelings for one another , Blair and Dan share a kiss before the mid - season hiatus .
Blair eventually decides that she wants to be with Chuck , but shuns him once again after he tries to humiliate Dan .
She is later courted by a prince from Monaco named Louis .
During a private confrontation , a drunken Chuck punches a window after he finds out Prince Louis has proposed to Blair , which cuts Blair 's face as it shatters .
Afterward , Blair chooses to accept a proposal from Louis .
Blair later attempts to warn Chuck about potential trouble in his family .
She is then abducted by an enemy of the Basses , Raina 's father Russell Thorpe .
Chuck later rescues Blair and apologizes for his violent actions .
Following a night out together , the two have sex before Chuck advises Blair to return to Louis , believing that she will be happier with him .
However , the season ends with the revelation that Blair may be pregnant .
REACTION TO TRIANGLE New York Post applauded the development , feeling that Blair had " more chemistry " with Dan than with Chuck .
New York magazine 's Chris Rovzar called Blair and Dan 's story line " believable " , citing their common ground in education and taste .
Rovzar further stated , " Since they live in a world where both only seem to have half a dozen real friends ( if that ) , is it so crazy they 'd end up together ? "
An article from The Huffington Post declared that " Dan and Blair together are like Harry Burns and Sally Albright reincarnated — the couple was obviously inspired by When Harry Met Sally .
" It further commented that the couple paralleled Pacey and Joey 's relationship from Dawson 's Creek and concluded that Dan and Blair were " the most inspired storyline and couple of the show " .
Entertainment Weekly stated that Dan and Blair were like stars in an " updated version of You 've Got Mail " .
Tierney Bricker of E ! ranked all 25 Gossip Girl couples placing ' Dair ' as the third best couple after Blair and Serena ( # 1 ) and ' Chair ' ( # 2 ) .
Bricker stated that " [ Dan and Blair ] , out of all the main characters , were the most well - suited for each other .
In real life , they would 've been ' endgame ' . "
Dawn Fallik of The Wall Street Journal was less positive , asserting that " both characters have been so Blandified that there 's no fun left in the show .
" A writer for E ! Online 's Team WWK labeled the Dan / Blair relationship " nomance nonsense " .
With regard to Chuck and Blair , Meester stated , " I can really relate to it — not necessarily because it 's this dramatic , tumultuous relationship , but because the way they love each other is very real , and not for the sake of being dramatic .
It 's actual love .
There 's nobody for each other but them . "
Meester also expressed fondness for Dan and Blair , however , stating , " I think they 're good for each other in a lot of ways , in a way that Chuck and Blair are n't .
"
Badgley claimed that he thought " Blair [ was ] Dan 's soul mate " and further stated that he thought the Blair and Dan storyline was " the most exciting for Dan as a person " .
When Hollywoodlife.com asked Ed Westwick , who played Chuck Bass , which character he thought loved Blair more , Chuck or Dan , Westwick pointed to Badgley , saying " definitely him . "
Producers initially noticed chemistry between Blair and Dan in the episode " Bad News Blair " .
According to producer Joshua Safran , the creators planned to revisit their relationship once the timing was right .
Safran also stated that the outcome was n't necessarily decided ahead of time . "
One thing we are very conscious of — and I know some fans get upset about this — is we really try to treat the characters as living , breathing , well - rounded individuals .
And we 're often surprised by where their journeys take them ; they open new doors for us all the time , " he said .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Following the of Safran spoke on behalf of the series regarding the scene in which Chuck became violent with Blair .
In response to these comments , Carina MacKenzie of Zap2it stated , " We 're left wondering if Safran missed the part where she went home bleeding because Chuck was using physical intimidation to release his own emotions . "
While reviewing the episode , Tierney Bricker of Zap2it felt that there were " really no excuses for Chuck Bass anymore . "
MacKenzie concluded that Chuck 's behavior throughout fit the signs of an abusive relationship , citing examples from HelpGuide.org , a non - profit health resource .
She noted Chuck 's public humiliation of Blair , his attempt to pawn her during a business deal , and his use of physical intimidation .
MacKenzie also called the show 's explanation " disturbing , particularly given the young , female target demographic of Gossip Girl and The CW . "
In a review for the Los Angeles Times , Judy Berman addressed Safran 's description of Blair during the scene . "
Considering how terrified Blair looked at the end of their encounter , and how quickly she got out of there , the show is sending a mixed message at best . "
She went on to state , " We have no right to expect Gossip Girl to be a paragon of morality , or even realism , but the idea that true love requires taking a shard of glass to the face is disturbing even in this alternate , soap - opera dimension . "
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
In the fifth season premiere , Blair continues to plan her wedding , but begins to encounter problems in her relationship with Louis .
It is later revealed that she is pregnant .
Blair tells Chuck that the child is Louis ' , and states that part of her wanted Chuck to be the father .
Dan becomes Blair 's confidante and is shown to be in love with her , though she remains oblivious to his feelings and states that there is nothing more than friendship between them .
Though she insists that she is in love with Louis , Blair begins to seek Chuck out as the season progresses .
The two eventually declare their love for each other prior to a car accident in her limousine while being chased by paparazzi .
Though both recover , Blair suffers a miscarriage from the crash .
After the crash Blair decides that she must commit herself to Louis , converting to Catholicism and cutting off any connection with Chuck .
At the wedding , Gossip Girl releases a recording of Blair confessing her love for Chuck .
Nevertheless , Louis and Blair get married , making Blair a Princess of Monaco , though Louis informs her that they will have a loveless marriage of convenience .
She then receives support from Dan , leading them to share a kiss on Valentine 's Day .
Amidst these developments , Blair grows conflicted between her feelings for Dan and Chuck .
After taking steps to end her marriage , she chooses to begin a romantic relationship with Dan .
By the end of the season , however , after a debate about which love is the best — with Dan she feels safe , with Chuck she feels vulnerable —
Blair declares that she is still in love with Chuck , and chooses to pursue him .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
In the final season , Blair resumes her romantic relationship with Chuck , while Chuck and his father Bart — who is revealed to be alive in the previous season — become bitter rivals .
Blair pursues her career as head of Waldorf Designs , with several mishaps , before staging a successful line .
In the penultimate episode , Bart falls to his death while trying to attack Chuck atop a building .
Afterward , Blair and Chuck depart together .
In the series finale , Blair marries Chuck which results in her not having to testify against him in his father 's murder case .
Five years later , Blair is shown to be running her mother 's successful fashion line and she works with Jenny in a line called " J for Waldorf " , and she and Chuck are shown to have a son named Henry .
RECEPTION
IN PRINT Section::::Reception .
Section::::In print .
While covering the book series , Janet Malcolm of The New Yorker labeled the character " an antiheroine of the first rank , " and asserted that " the series belongs to awful Blair , who inspires von Ziegesar 's highest flights of comic fancy . "
She also compared Blair to vintage film and literary figures such as Becky Sharp of Vanity Fair , and Lizzie Eustace of The Eustace Diamonds .
In addition , several critics have likened Blair to the character Lila Fowler of the earlier Sweet Valley High series .
In the 2007 book Children 's Literature and Culture , writer Harry Edwin Eiss chastised the depiction of Blair 's bulimia .
" If handled properly , the inclusion of her illness could have provided a powerful lesson for young adult readers who worry about their weight and food consumption .
Unfortunately , Cecily von Ziegesar , the author of the series , presents a seriously flawed treatment of the problem .
In a failed attempt at humor , the writer regards Blair 's sickness as just another source of gossip , " he said .
Emily Nussbaum of New York magazine had similar comments , calling the bulimia " more of an icky weakness than a full - fledged pathology . "
However , she went on to commend Blair as " hilariously self - centered " .
Julie Opipari of Manga Maniac Cafe gave the initial Gossip Girl manga a negative review , citing displeasure with the characters and plot .
However , she acknowledged that this gave her a greater appreciation for Blair in the second volume , noting that Blair " really had to learn how to rough it " after losing her privileged lifestyle .
She went on to state that " Blair is one character that is fun to hate on .
So imagine my surprise when I actually started to like her by the end of the book " .
ON SCREEN Section::::On screen .
The show 's breakout character , Blair Waldorf has garnered much media recognition .
Yahoo !
proclaims Blair a member of " television 's pantheon of razor - witted , solipsistic high school Alpha females . "
While commenting on Meester , New York magazine 's 2008 cover story of the series states , " Her villain - you - want - to - root - for is the most sophisticated performance on the show . "
In another 2008 article , People magazine commented that " Meester has burst out of this ensemble to stardom . "
Variety described her performance as similar to that of " a predatory junior Joan Collins who practically breathes fire out of her pinched , perfectly WASP - ish nostrils . "
FHM Online ranked the actress the " Hottest TV Star " of autumn 2008 , stating that as Blair Waldorf , " Leighton Meester has stolen the spotlight with her mind - blowing good looks and amazing performance . "
OK !
magazine likened her character to Audrey Hepburn 's portrayal of Holly Golightly .
The physical similarity was also noted by USA Today .
In its 2009 " Hot List " , Rolling Stone cited Blair as " the reason we love the back - stabby soap most . "
Regarding the fictional fame of Blair 's friend Serena , Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly asserted that " Serena may be the star of the media but Blair is quickly becoming the star of this show . "
While citing Serena 's long - revered allure , Glamour and its readers compared the two characters in 2008 , with Blair being recognized as more beautiful than Serena .
In a review from The Atlantic , Blair and Serena 's friendship was praised as " it offered a relationship whose depth and complexity approached Rory and Paris ' [ from Gilmore Girls ] . "
In May 2009 , Blair received attention from Forbes , which interviewed her via the series ' writers .
Television Without Pity listed Meester in their " Golden Globes 2009 :
Overlooked TV Shows and Performances " article , labeling Blair " so multi - faceted , well - dressed and beautifully played that she elevates this teen soap to something we do n't even feel guilty about admitting we love .
"
Meester won the Teen Choice Award for " Choice TV Actress Drama " in 2009 , and again in 2010 .
In 2009 , she was voted the " Best Mean Girl " in Zap2it first poll of the best television characters in the 2000s .
In February 2012 , Zap2it held another poll to determine TV 's Most Crushworthy .
Blair was elected TV 's Most Crushworthy 1 % Female over Temperance " Bones " Brennan .
The 1 percenters are people that " have everything going for them with their fantastic good looks and their opulent lifestyle " .
Her relationship with Chuck Bass was included in TV Guide list of " The Best TV Couples of All Time " as well as Entertainment Weekly " 30 Best ' Will They /
Won't They ? '
TV Couples " .
The character 's wardrobe — credited to designers Abigail Lorick and Eric Daman — was popular , earning mentions from periodicals such as InStyle and New York , along with recognition from websites .
TV Guide listed Blair among its " Best Dressed TV Characters of 2007 " .
Entertainment Weekly named Blair Waldorf and Chuck Bass the " Most Stylish " characters of 2008 .
Lifetime television ranks Blair first in its listing of " The Top 10 Best - Dressed TV Characters " , while Glamour has named her among its best - dressed TV characters of all time .
In a Vanity Fair interview , costume designers Eric Daman and Meredith Markworth - Pollack named Audrey Hepburn and Vogue editor - in - chief Anna Wintour as their inspirations when dressing Meester as Blair .
The designers also cited New York socialites Tinsley Mortimer and Arden Wohl as influences .
TV Guide named her the sixth most fashionable TV character .
REFERENCES Books