PHOEBE BUFFAY Phoebe Buffay - Hannigan is a fictional character , portrayed by Lisa Kudrow , one of the six main characters from the American sitcom Friends , created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman .
She appeared in each of the show 's 236 episodes , from its premiere on September 24 , 1994 to its finale on May 6 , 2004 .
She is a masseuse and musician , notable for her offbeat and sometimes ditzy behavior .
She was Monica Geller 's roommate before Rachel Green .
Phoebe is best friends with Monica and Rachel , along with their neighbors , Chandler Bing and Joey Tribbiani , and also Monica 's brother Ross Geller .
She plays guitar and sings at Central Perk .
During the show 's ninth season , Phoebe is introduced to Mike Hannigan , played by actor Paul Rudd , by Joey , and the two begin a romantic relationship .
The two later get engaged , then married .
She was born on February 16th .
She is the daughter of Frank Buffay and Lily Buffay and
her birth - mother 's name was Phoebe Abbott .
She has a twin sister named Ursula Buffay .
She can speak several languages , including French and Italian .
For her portrayal of Phoebe Buffay , Kudrow received a Golden Globe Award nomination and won a Primetime Emmy Award , a Screen Actors Guild Award , a Satellite Award , and an American Comedy Award .
ROLE Section::::Role .
In the pilot episode , Phoebe is introduced as one of the six original friends , including neighbors
Joey ( Matt LeBlanc ) and Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) , former roommate Monica ( Courteney Cox ) , Rachel Green ( Jennifer Aniston ) , and Monica 's brother , Ross ( David Schwimmer ) .
She is a musician at their typical meeting place , Central Perk , where she plays guitar and sings self - written songs .
During the first season , she has a myriad of boyfriends , including Tony , a physicist named David , played by Hank Azaria , and a psychologist named Roger , played by Fisher Stevens .
Phoebe 's twin sister , Ursula Buffay , a character originally created for and appearing in the American sitcom
Mad About You as a waitress , is also introduced in the first season , in " The One With Two Parts " .
Ursula is also portrayed by Kudrow .
Phoebe works as a temporary secretary for Chandler for a brief period of time in " The One With The Ick Factor " .
It is revealed that the woman Phoebe believed was her mother , Lily Buffay , committed suicide when Phoebe was about 14 , by means of carbon monoxide poisoning .
During the second season , it is revealed that Phoebe was married to a supposedly gay Canadian ice dancer , Duncan Sullivan , in order to allow him to get a green card , for six years .
The two agree to get a divorce after he comes to the realization that he is , in fact , heterosexual , and wants to get married to another woman , in " The One With Phoebe 's Husband " .
Phoebe is also temporarily replaced as the primary singer for Central Perk by a professional singer named Stephanie Schiffer , played by singer Chrissie Hynde .
Phoebe 's song " Smelly Cat " is introduced in the same episode . "
Smelly Cat " is discovered by a record company , and Phoebe stars in a fictional music video for the track , in which her voice is dubbed over by another singer .
Although the facets of Phoebe 's character are manifold and extremely complex , Phoebe can generally be classified as kind - hearted , but ditzy and whimsical .
Due in no small part to her extremely traumatic childhood , Phoebe has developed a child - like naïvité in an attempt to shield her from the world 's evils .
In addition to being a vegetarian and an avid tree hugger , she also displays a remarkable lack of experience with the " darker sides " of life .
In season 2 , it is shown that her deceased mother Lily would always turn off films before anything traumatic would happen , including the death of Old Yeller or Bambi 's mother being shot .
It is also revealed that she was never told the truth about Santa Claus .
Phoebe is shown to have a very strained relationship with her sister Ursula , who she almost never gets in touch with .
Despite multiple efforts to get her crass twin sister ( who is one minute older than her ) to care about family affairs or other things that concern her , Phoebe nearly always goes home empty - handed and none the wiser .
When it is revealed Ursula performs in porn under Phoebe 's name , the latter eventually gets her revenge by cashing in Ursula 's pay slips .
Very in tune with her emotions and those of others , Phoebe sometimes serves as a rock to her friends .
She especially shows a great deal of maternal instinct towards her younger brother Frank , despite the latter 's lack of intelligence .
Much to the dismay of her friends ( especially Ross ) , Phoebe dabbles in metaphysics and other superstitions throughout the series .
She is convinced she can feel the presence of her dead grandmother in her old apartment , she senses the spirit of her mother in a lost cat , reads tea leaves , and dismisses Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution as " too easy " .
One of the running jokes during the show is also Phoebe 's seemingly infinite criminal track record .
She repeatedly makes reference to her underworld connections and crimes she committed while living on the streets .
Similar to the short - lived Monica / Chandler / Richard love triangle , Phoebe had two serious romantic interests that overlapped with each other at one point during the series .
David ( Hank Azaria ) , known as " The scientist guy " , has a romance with Phoebe in the first season of the series , but breaks her heart when he decides to leave for Minsk on a three - year research trip .
He makes a few more appearances throughout the series , most notably trying to get back together with her and kissing her when they get interrupted by Phoebe 's then - boyfriend Mike ( Paul Rudd ) .
Mike had been introduced to Phoebe in the ninth season of the show , when Joey forgot he was supposed to find Phoebe a double date and decided to shout for a random guy called " Mike " in the coffee shop instead .
After a whirlwind romance , Phoebe and Mike eventually break up and she briefly reunites with David in Barbados .
Mike beats David to the punch , however , and proposes to Phoebe before the latter gets a chance .
Although she initially rejects both , she definitively breaks up with David and eventually marries Mike .
JOKES AND SARCASM
" SMELLY CAT " Section::::Jokes and sarcasm .
Section::::"Smelly Cat " .
The show 's running gag and one of Phoebe 's trademark characteristics is her song " Smelly Cat , " which she performs at Central Perk .
The song is about a cat who is shunned by society because of its foul stench as a result of flatulence ( " What are they feeding you ? " ) .
However Phoebe sympathizes with it because she can relate to being an outcast .
The verses consist of Phoebe rattling off a list of ways in which the cat is disliked ( " They wo n't take you to the vet " , " you 're obviously not their favorite pet " , etc . )
while the chorus ends with the uplifting message to anyone who is different or unique that " it 's not your fault " .
In the episode , " The One Where Eddie Moves In , " Phoebe is discovered by a record producer who wants to make a music video for " Smelly Cat " .
Phoebe is delighted with the end result , somehow missing what her friends spot immediately - that the voice used in the video belongs to another woman .
Phoebe turns down the opportunity , feeling bad for the woman who will not get any recognition for her voice because she does not have the " right look " - declaring that the woman IS , in fact , Smelly Cat .
In the episode , " The One With Phoebe 's Ex - Partner , " Phoebe 's former singing partner , Leslie , portrayed by E.G. Daily , wants them to get back together .
The partnership fails again when Leslie sells the song " Smelly Cat " to a commercial agency against Phoebe 's wishes .
Phoebe teaches the song to Chrissie Hynde , who releases it in a 1999 album .
On August 26 , 2015 , Kudrow performed the song as a duet with Taylor Swift during Swift 's concert in Los Angeles as a part of her 1989 World Tour .
AGE Section::::Age .
Her age seemed to have differed throughout the series .
In " The One with the Mugging " , it is implied that Phoebe is older than Ross , seeing as she was fourteen when he was 12 .
This episode made her possibly the oldest in the group .
In " The One with the Jellyfish " ( Season 4 ) , Phoebe states that she is twenty - nine , placing her birth in approximately 1968 .
However , in " The One Where They 're Going to Party , " ( Season 4 ) , Ross states he is also 29 , which does not work with the previously mentioned two - year age gap .
According to " The One with Frank Jr. " , Phoebe was born on February 16 ; however , in Season 9 ( " The One with Phoebe 's Birthday Dinner " )
Phoebe 's birthday is sometime in early November , since they could not make the reservations and the dinner had to be moved back to October 31 .
In " The One Where They All Turn Thirty "
( Season 7 ) , it is revealed that Phoebe was born a year earlier than she thought , believing she was 30 but was truly 31 , which further adds to the inconsistency of her age throughout the show 's run .
Phoebe also tries on at least one occasion to manipulate the other friends into celebrating her birthday again within months of a previous birthday party .
" REGINA PHALANGE " Section::::"Regina Phalange " .
Phoebe occasionally uses the alter ego Regina Phalange .
The first reference to Regina Phalange is during season 5 following Ross saying " Rachel " instead of " Emily " at his wedding .
She pretends to be " Doctor Phalange " , Ross ' brain doctor , claiming that names are interchangeable in his mind .
When the friends go to Vegas , Phoebe introduces herself to the blackjack dealer as Regina Phalange .
When Phoebe , Rachel , and Melissa go out to lunch ( The One with Rachel 's Big Kiss ) , and Melissa asks if she was in a sorority , she pretends to be a member of " Thigh Mega Tampon " , a fictional sorority that was allegedly shut down when Regina Phalange died of alcohol poisoning .
She also used her fake name to show Chandler and Monica how easily people lie about their names and to help Chandler with his interviewing skills in season 8 episode 4 , when Joey says , " Hi , I 'm Ken Adams
" she replies , " Regina Phalange " .
In the season 10 episode " The One Where Joey Speaks French " , Phoebe attempts to spare Joey from humiliation by introducing herself as " Régine Philange " and stating that Joey is speaking an obscure regional dialect from her " hometown " of " Estée Lauder " .
She immediately switches to French and claims that Joey is her younger brother who is " un peu retardé " ( a little retarded ) , and requesting that the casting director humor Joey 's French - speaking abilities .
The last reference is in the series finale when Phoebe successfully stalls Rachel 's plane to Paris by saying there is a problem with the " left phalange " , causing everyone on the plane to evacuate .
The passengers are eventually convinced to return to the plane .
When a woman skeptically asks an airport employee if " the phalange " was fixed , he replies , " Yes , the phalange is fixed !
As a matter of fact , we put a whole lot of extra phalanges onboard , just in case ! "
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Phoebe 's pregnancy during Season 4 was to account for Lisa Kudrow 's actual pregnancy .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Kathy Griffin , Jane Lynch , and Megan Mullally all auditioned for the role of Phoebe .
Lisa Kudrow won the role because the producers liked her recurring role as Ursula , the waitress in Mad About You .
The characters were connected to make them twin sisters .
The producers said they liked the elements of Lisa in Ursula , but they needed Phoebe to be a lot more humorous .
SEE ALSO
* List of Friends characters RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Both the character and Kudrow 's performance received critical praise .
TV Guide ranked her # 11 on their list of " TV 's Top 100 Characters " .
Entertainment Weekly voted Phoebe Buffay on Friends as Lisa Kudrow 's best performance .
REFERENCES