MARY
EDWARDS WALKER
Mary Edwards Walker ( November 26 , 1832 – February 21 , 1919 ) , commonly referred to as Dr. Mary Walker , was an American abolitionist , prohibitionist , prisoner of war and surgeon .
She is the only woman to ever receive the Medal of Honor .
In 1855 , she earned her medical degree at Syracuse Medical College in New York , married and started a medical practice .
She volunteered with the Union Army at the outbreak of the American Civil War and served as a surgeon at a temporary hospital in Washington , D.C. , even though at the time women and sectarian physicians were considered unfit for the Union Army Examining Board .
She was captured by Confederate forces after crossing enemy lines to treat wounded civilians and arrested as a spy .
She was sent as a prisoner of war to Richmond , Virginia until released in a prisoner exchange .
After the war , she was approved for the Medal of Honor , for her efforts to treat the wounded during the Civil War .
Notably , the award was not expressly given for gallantry in action at that time , and in fact was the only military decoration during the Civil War .
Walker is the only woman to receive the medal and one of only eight civilians to receive it .
Her name was deleted from the Army Medal of Honor Roll in 1917 ( along with over 900 other male MOH recipients ) ; however , it was restored in 1977 .
After the war , she was a writer and lecturer supporting the women 's suffrage movement until her death in 1919 .
EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION
Section::::Early life and education .
Mary Edwards Walker was born in the Town of Oswego , New York , on November 26 , 1832 , the daughter of Alvah ( father ) and Vesta ( mother ) Walker .
She was the youngest of seven children : she had five sisters and one brother .
Alvah and Vesta raised both their son and their daughters in a progressive manner that was revolutionary for the time .
Their nontraditional parenting nurtured Mary 's spirit of independence and sense of justice that she actively demonstrated throughout her life .
While they were devoted Christians , the Walkers were " free thinkers " who raised their children to question the regulations and restrictions of various denominations .
The Walker parents also demonstrated non - traditional gender roles to their children regarding sharing work around the farm : Vesta often participated in heavy labor while Alvah took part in general household chores .
Walker worked on her family farm as a child .
She did not wear women 's clothing during farm labor because she considered it too restricting .
Her mother reinforced her views that corsets and tight lacings were unhealthy .
Her elementary education consisted of attendance at the local school that her parents had started .
The Walkers were determined that their daughters be as well - educated as their son , so they founded the first free schoolhouse in Oswego in the late 1830s .
After finishing primary school , Mary and two of her older sisters attended Falley Seminary in Fulton , New York .
Falley was not only an institution of higher learning , but a place that emphasized modern social reform in gender roles , education , and hygiene .
Its ideologies and practices further cemented Mary 's determination to defy traditional feminine standards on a principle of injustice .
In her free time , Mary would pore over her father 's medical texts on anatomy and physiology ; her interest in medicine is attributable to her exposure to medical literature at an early age .
As a young woman , she taught at a school in Minetto , New York , eventually earning enough money to pay her way through Syracuse Medical College , where she graduated with honors as a medical doctor in 1855 , the only woman in her class .
She married a fellow medical school student , Albert Miller , on November 16 , 1855 , shortly before she turned 23 .
Walker wore a short skirt with trousers underneath , refused to include " obey " in her vows , and retained her last name , all characteristic of her obstinate nonconformity .
They set up a joint practice in Rome , New York .
The practice did not flourish , as female physicians were generally not trusted or respected at that time .
They later divorced , on account of Miller 's infidelity .
Walker briefly attended Bowen Collegiate Institute ( later named Lenox College ) in Hopkinton , Iowa , in 1860 , until she was suspended for refusing to resign from the school 's debating society , which until she joined had been all male .
DRESS REFORM Section::::Dress reform .
Inspired by her parents ' novel standard of dressing for health purposes , Walker was infamous for contesting traditional female wardrobe .
In 1871 , she wrote , " The greatest sorrows from which women suffer to - day are those physical , moral , and mental ones , that are caused by their unhygienic manner of dressing !
"
She strongly opposed women 's long skirts with numerous petticoats , not only for their discomfort and their inhibition to the wearer 's mobility but for their collection and spread of dust and dirt .
As a young woman , she began experimenting with various skirt - lengths and layers , all with men 's trousers underneath .
By 1861 , her typical ensemble included trousers with suspenders under a knee - length dress with a tight waist and full skirt .
While encouraged by her family , Walker 's wardrobe choices were often met with criticism .
Once , while a schoolteacher , she was assaulted on her way home by a neighboring farmer and a group of boys , who chased her and attacked her with eggs and other missiles .
Female colleagues in medical school criticized her choices , and patients often gawked at her and teased her .
She nevertheless persisted in her mission to reform women 's dress .
Her view that women 's dress should " protect the person , and allow freedom of motion and circulation , and not make the wearer a slave to it " made her commitment to dress reform as great as her zeal for abolitionism .
She famously wrote to the women 's journal , The Sibyl : A Review of the Tastes , Errors , and Fashions of Society , about her campaign against women 's fashion , amongst other things , for its injuries to health , its expense , and its contribution to the dissolution of marriages .
Her literature contributed to the spread of her ideas , and made her a popular figure amongst other feminists and woman physicians .
In 1870 , Dr. Walker was arrested in New Orleans and mocked by men because she was dressed as a man .
The arresting officer Mullahy twisted her arm and asked her if she had ever had sex with a man .
Dr. Walker was released from custody when she was recognized at Police Court .
New Orleans Republican February 22 , 23 , 1870 .
AMERICAN
CIVIL WAR Section::::American Civil War .
Despite having kept a private practice for many years , Walker volunteered at the outbreak of American Civil War as a surgeon - first for the Army , but was rejected because she was a woman .
She was offered the role of a nurse but declined and chose to volunteer as a surgeon for the Union Army as a civilian .
The U.S. Army had no female surgeons , and at first , she was allowed to practice only as a nurse .
During this period , she served at the First Battle of Bull Run ( Manassas ) , July 21 , 1861 , and at the Patent Office Hospital in Washington ,
D.C. She worked as an unpaid field surgeon near the Union front lines , including at the Battle of Fredericksburg and in Chattanooga after the Battle of Chickamauga .
As a suffragist , she was happy to see women serving as soldiers , and alerted the press to the case of Frances Hook , in Ward 2 of the Chattanooga hospital , a woman who served in the Union forces disguised as a man .
Walker was the first female surgeon of the Union army .
She wore men 's clothing during her work , claiming it to be easier for high demands of her work .
In September 1862 , Walker wrote to the War Department requesting employment as a spy , but her proposal was declined .
In September 1863 , she was employed as a " Contract Acting Assistant Surgeon ( civilian ) " by the Army of the Cumberland , becoming the first female surgeon employed by the U.S. Army Surgeon .
Walker was later appointed assistant surgeon of the 52nd Ohio Infantry .
During her service , she frequently crossed battle lines and treated civilians .
On April 10 , 1864 , she was captured by Confederate troops , and arrested as a spy , just after she finished helping a Confederate doctor perform an amputation .
She was sent to Castle Thunder in Richmond , Virginia , and remained there until August 12 , 1864 , when she was released as part of a prisoner exchange .
While she was imprisoned , she refused to wear the clothes provided her , said to be more " becoming of her sex " .
Walker was exchanged for a Confederate surgeon from Tennessee on August 12 , 1864 .
She went on to serve as supervisor of a female prison in Louisville , Kentucky , and as the head of an orphanage in Tennessee .
LATER CAREER Section::::Later career .
After the war , Walker was awarded a disability pension for partial muscular atrophy suffered while she was imprisoned by the enemy .
She was given $ 8.50 a month , beginning June 13 , 1865 , but in 1899 that amount was raised to $ 20 per month .
She became a writer and lecturer , supporting such issues as health care , temperance , women 's rights , and dress reform for women .
She was frequently arrested for wearing men 's clothing , and insisted on her right to wear clothing that she thought appropriate .
She wrote two books that discussed women 's rights and dress .
She replied to criticism of her attire : " I do n't wear men 's clothes , I wear my own clothes . "
Walker was a member of the central woman 's suffrage Bureau in Washington , and solicited funds to endow a chair for a woman professor at Howard University medical school .
She attempted to register to vote in 1871 , but was turned away .
The initial stance of the movement , following her lead , was to claim that women already had the right to vote , and Congress needed only to enact enabling legislation .
After a number of fruitless years advocating this position , the movement promoted the adoption of a constitutional amendment .
This was diametrically opposed to her position , and she fell out of favor with the movement .
She continued to attend suffrage conventions and distribute her own literature , but was virtually ignored by the rest of the movement .
Her penchant for wearing masculine clothing , including a top hat , only exacerbated the situation .
She received a more favorable reception in England than in the United States .
In 1907 , Walker published " Crowning Constitutional Argument " , in which she argued that some States , as well as the federal Constitution , had already granted women the right to vote .
She testified on women 's suffrage before committees of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1912 and 1914 .
After a long illness , Walker died at home on February 21 , 1919 , at the age of eighty - six .
She was buried at Rural Cemetery in Oswego , New York , in a plain funeral , with an American flag draped over her casket , and wearing a black suit instead of a dress .
Her death in 1919 came one year before the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which guaranteed women the right to vote .
HONORS AND AWARDS MEDAL OF HONOR Section::::Honors and awards .
Section::::Medal of Honor .
After the war , Walker sought a retroactive brevet or commission to validate her service .
President Johnson directed Secretary of War Edwin Stanton to study the legality of the issue , and he solicited an opinion from the Army 's Judge Advocate General , who determined that there was no precedent for commissioning a female , but that a " commendatory acknowledgment " could be issued in lieu of the commission .
This led Johnson to personally award the Medal of Honor as an alternative .
Thus , Walker was not formally recommended for the Medal of Honor , and this unusual process may also explain why authorities overlooked her ineligibility , ironically on the grounds of lacking a commission .
In 1916 , the U.S. Congress created a pension act for Medal of Honor recipients , and in doing so created separate Army and Navy Medal of Honor Rolls .
The Army was directed to review eligibility of prior recipients in a separate bill not related to the pension rolls , but which had been requested by the Army in order to retroactively police undesirable awards .
The undesirable awards resulted from the lack of regulations on the medal ; the Army had published no regulations until 1897 , and the law had very few requirements , meaning that recipients could earn a medal for virtually any reason , resulting in nearly 900 awards for enlistment extensions not in combat .
The Army 's Medal of Honor Board deliberated from 1916 to 1917 , and struck 911 names from the Army Medal of Honor Roll , including those of Dr. Mary Edwards Walker and William F. " Buffalo Bill " Cody .
The latter were considered ineligible for the Army Medal of Honor because the 1862 , 1863 , and 1904 laws strictly required recipients to be officers or enlisted members .
In Walker 's case , she was a civilian contract surgeon , and was not a commissioned officer .
Nevertheless , the Medal of Honor Board most certainly discriminated against Walker because it declined to revoke the Medal of at least two other contract surgeons who were equally ineligible .
One of these was Major General Leonard Wood , a former Chief of Staff of the Army who was a civilian contract surgeon in the same status as Walker when he was recommended for the award .
This was known to the Medal of Honor Board , as board president General Nelson Miles had twice recommended Wood 's medal and knew that he was ineligible .
The disenrolled recipients were not ordered to return their medals per a recommendation from the Army Judge Advocate General , who noted that Congress did not grant the Army the jurisdiction to enforce this provision of the statute , rendering both the repossession and criminal penalties inoperative .
Although several sources attribute President Jimmy Carter with restoring Walker 's medal posthumously in 1977 , this is probably incorrect , since the action was taken well below the Secretary of the Army , at the level of the Army 's Assistant Secretary for Manpower and Reserve Affairs , which was acting on a recommendation from the Board for Correction of Military Records .
In fact , both the Ford and Carter Administrations opposed the restoration ; the Carter White House reacted with confusion to the announcement of the Board 's decision .
A recent historical work documented that the Board for Correction probably exceeded its authority in making a unilateral restoration of the medal , since the Board is merely a delegation of the authority of the Secretary of the Army , and thus can not contradict a standing law much less a law that expressly required the revocation of Walker 's medal .
Therefore , the decision was controversial because it raised separation of powers issues ; the Board 's mandate was only to correct errors or injustices within its authority , not act against the authority of public law .
This very point was illustrated by the awarding of Garlin Conner 's Medal of Honor in early 2018 , which also originated from the Board for Correction , but instead went through the President and required a statutory waiver from Congress — seen to be a requirement because the Board lacked the authority to contravene a public law and the associated statutes of limitations .
Walker felt that she had been awarded the Medal of Honor because she had gone into enemy territory to care for the suffering inhabitants , when no man had the courage to do so , for fear of being imprisoned .
ATTRIBUTION AND CITATION Section::::Attribution and citation .
Rank and organization :
Contract Acting Assistant Surgeon ( civilian ) , U. S. Army .
Places and dates : Battle of Bull Run , July 21 , 1861 ; Patent Office Hospital , Washington , D.C. , October 1861 ; Chattanooga , Tenn. , following Battle of Chickamauga , September 1863 ; Prisoner of War , April 10 , 1864 – August 12 , 1864 , Richmond , Va. ; Battle of Atlanta , September 1864 .
Entered service at : Louisville ,
Ky. Born : 26 November 1832 , Oswego County
, N.Y. Citation : Where as it appears from official reports that Dr. Mary E. Walker , a graduate of medicine , " has rendered valuable service to the Government , and her efforts have been earnest and untiring in a variety of ways , " and that she was assigned to duty and served as an assistant surgeon in charge of female prisoners at Louisville , Ky. , upon the recommendation of Major - Generals Sherman and Thomas , and faithfully served as contract surgeon in the service of the United States , and has devoted herself with much patriotic zeal to the sick and wounded soldiers , both in the field and hospitals , to the detriment of her own health , and has also endured hardships as a prisoner of war four months in a Southern prison while acting as contract surgeon ; and Whereas by reason of her not being a commissioned officer in the military service , a brevet or honorary rank can not , under existing laws , be conferred upon her ; and Whereas in the opinion of the President an honorable recognition of her services and sufferings should be made .
It is ordered , That a testimonial thereof shall be hereby made and given to the said Dr. Mary E. Walker , and that the usual medal of honor for meritorious services be given her .
NATIONAL WOMEN 'S HALL OF FAME Section::::National Women 's Hall of Fame .
Walker was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame in 2000 .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
During World War II , a Liberty ship , the SS Mary Walker , was named for her .
In 1982 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a twenty - cent stamp in her honor , marking the anniversary of her birth .
The medical facilities at SUNY Oswego are named in her honor ( Mary Walker Health Center ) .
On the same grounds a plaque explains her importance in the Oswego community .
There is a United States Army Reserve center named for her in Walker , Michigan .
The Whitman - Walker Clinic in Washington , D.C. , is named in honor of Walker and the poet Walt Whitman , who was a nurse in D.C. during the Civil War .
The Mary Walker Clinic at Fort Irwin National Training Center in California is named in honor of Walker .
The Mary E. Walker House is a thirty - bed transitional residence run by the Philadelphia Veterans Multi - Service & Education Center for homeless women veterans .
In May 2012 , a 900-pound bronze statue honoring Walker was unveiled in front of the Oswego , New York Town Hall .
WORKS
* Reissued in paperback with a new introduction in 2003 .
WORKS ABOUT HER * DiMeo , Nate .
Mary Walker Would Wear What She Wanted The Memory Palace Podcast Episode 76 , October 19 , 2015 .
( Podcast detailing Mary Walker , her early life and accomplishments . )
* Gall - Clayton , Nancy .
I 'm Wearing My Own Clothes !
( Full - length play commissioned and produced by Looking for Lilith Theatre Company , July 2017 .
http://lookingforlilith.org/unheardoutloud/clothes/ ) SEE ALSO
* Mollie Bean * Mary Ann Bickerdyke
* Malinda Blalock * Albert Cashier * Sarah Emma Edmonds
* Sarah Taylor ( soldier ) * Loreta Janeta Velazquez * Laura J. Williams
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Bloch , Raphael S. Healers and Achievers : Physicians Who Excelled in Other Fields and the Times in Which They Lived .
[ Bloomington , IN ] :
Xlibris Corp , 2012 .
* Conner , Jane Hollenbeck .
Sinners , Saints , and Soldiers in Civil War Stafford .
Stafford , Va. :
Parker Pub . , 2009 .
* Eggleston , Larry G. Women in the Civil War : Extraordinary Stories of Soldiers , Spies , Nurses , Doctors , Crusaders , and Others .
Jefferson , North Carolina : McFarland and Company , Inc. , Publishers , 2003 .
* Fitzgerald , Stephanie .
Mary Walker : Civil War Surgeon and Feminist .
Minneapolis , Minn. :
Compass Point Books , 2009 .
* Frank , Lisa Tendrich .
Women in the American Civil War .
Santa Barbara , Calif : ABC - CLIO , 2008 .
* Goldsmith , Bonnie Zucker .
Dr. Mary Edwards Walker :
Civil War Surgeon & Medal of Honor Recipient .
Edina , Minn : ABDO Pub , 2010 .
* Graf , Mercedes , and Mary Edwards Walker .
A Woman of Honor : Dr. Mary E. Walker and the Civil War .
Gettysburg , PA : Thomas Publications , 2001 .
* Hall , Richard C. Women on the Civil War Battlefront .
Lawrence , Kansas : University Press of Kansas , 2006 .
* Hall , Marjory .
Quite Contrary : Dr. Mary Edwards Walker .
New York :
Funk & Wagnalls , 1970 .
* Harper , Judith E. Women During the Civil War : An Encyclopedia .
New York :
Routledge , 2004 .
* Joinson , Carla .
Civil War Doctor :
The Story of Mary Edwards Walker .
Greensboro , N.C. :
Morgan Reynolds Pub . , 2006 .
* LeClair , Mary K. , Justin D. White , and Susan Keeter .
Three 19th - Century Women
Doctors :
Elizabeth Blackwell , Mary Walker , Sarah Loguen Fraser .
Syracuse , N.Y. : Hofmann , 2007 .
* Massey , Mary Elizabeth .
Women in the Civil War .
Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 1994 .
* Mendoza , Patrick M. Extraordinary People in Extraordinary Times : Heroes , Sheroes and Villains .
Englewood , Colo : Libraries Unlimited , 1999 .
*
Mikaelian , Allen , and Mike Wallace .
Medal of Honor : Profiles of America 's Military Heroes from the Civil War to the Present .
New York : Hyperion , 2002 .
* Nash , J. V. Famous Eccentric Americans .
Girard , Kan : Haldeman - Julius Publications , 1930 .
* Schroeder - Lein , Glenna R.
The Encyclopedia of Civil War Medicine .
Armonk , N.Y. :
M.E. Sharpe , Inc , 2008 .
* Snyder , Charles McCool .
Dr. Mary Walker : The Little Lady in Pants .
New York :
Arno Press , 1974 .
* Tsui , Bonnie .
She Went to the Field :
Women Soldiers of the Civil War .
Guilford , Connecticut : TwoDot , 2006 .
* United States , Mary Edwards Walker , Edward T. Taylor , and Jane Addams .
Woman Suffrage , No . 1 : Hearings Before the Committee on the Judiciary , House of Representatives , Sixty - Second Congress , Second Session , Statement of Dr. Mary E. Walker .
February 14 , 1912 .
Washington : Govt .
Print .
Off , 1912 .
* Walker , Dale L. Mary Edwards Walker :
Above and Beyond .
New York :
Forge , 2005 .
* Walker , Mary Edwards .
Hit :
Essays on Women 's Rights .
Amherst , N.Y.
: Humanity Books , 2003 .
EXTERNAL LINKS