CAR PHONE
A car phone is a mobile radio telephone specifically designed for and fitted into an automobile .
This service originated with the Bell System , and was first used in St. Louis on June 17 , 1946 .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The original equipment weighed , and there were initially only 3 channels for all the users in the metropolitan area .
Later , more licenses were added , bringing the total to 32 channels across 3 bands ( See IMTS frequencies ) .
This service was used at least into the 1980s in large portions of North America .
On October 2 , 1946 , Motorola communications equipment carried the first calls on Illinois Bell Telephone Company 's new car radiotelephone service in Chicago .
Due to the small number of radio frequencies available , the service quickly reached capacity .
In Finland , car phone service was first available in 1971 on the zero - generation ARP ( Autoradiopuhelin , or Car Radiophone ) service .
This was succeeded in 1982 by the 1 G system NMT ( Nordic Mobile Telephone ) , used across Scandinavia and in other often remote areas .
In North America , car phone typically used the Mobile Telephone Service ( MTS ) , which was first used in St. Louis , or Improved Mobile Telephone Service ( IMTS ) before giving way to analog cellular service ( AMPS ) in 1984 .
AMPS technology was discontinued in the United States in 2008 .
Since a traditional car phone uses a high - power transmitter and external antenna , it is ideal for rural or undeveloped areas where mobile handsets may not work well or at all .
However , due to current US Federal Communications Commission regulations , carriers must pay penalties for activating any equipment that is not an E911 compliant device , such as analog .
In the 1980s , the car phone was more popular than the regular mobile phone .
However , as mobile phones became lighter and more affordable during the mobile phone boom in the 1990s , car phones became less common .
By the 2000s , car phones had become uncommon due to the convenience of mobile phones along with in - car mobile phone integrative technologies such as Bluetooth .
There were still some car phones available as recently as 2008 , including the Nokia 810 and the Motorola VC6096 for use with GSM networks and a car phone made by NAL Research for the Iridium satellite network .
Motorola provided US customers with the m800 and m900 car phones , for use with CDMA and GSM networks respectively .
Some car phones had color screens and supported high speed data connections as well as the ability to access SIM cards stored in other phones via Bluetooth .
Recently , most automobiles feature integrated , " hands - free " systems to utilize a consumer 's cellular phone , via a Bluetooth wireless link or use an integrated transceiver .
The systems use an internally mounted microphone , and the car 's audio system , and may feature voice activation and control .
In many countries , restricting cell phone use while driving is on an upward trend .
SEE ALSO
* Teleaid , automatic emergency call system
* OnStar , emergency notification system REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS