BLOOMINGDALE 'S Bloomingdale 's Inc. is an American department store chain ; it was founded by Joseph B. and Lyman G. Bloomingdale in 1861 .
It became a division of the Cincinnati - based Federated Department Stores in 1994 , through which it is affiliated with the Macy 's department store chain ; the holding company was renamed Macy 's , Inc. in 2007 .
As of November 3 , 2018 , there are 35 full - line stores , 3 home , clearance and specialty stores and 17 outlet stores with the Bloomingdale 's nameplate in operation throughout the United States .
Its headquarters and flagship store are located at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue in the New York City borough of Manhattan .
EXPANSION Section::::Expansion .
The retail market boomed in the 1980s .
New stores opened along the East Coast , Florida , Chicago , and in Dallas , Texas .
On February 14 , 2008 , parent company , Macy 's , Inc. , announced plans to enter the Phoenix market with a 180,000 square foot store by 2009 .
Arizona would have been the thirteenth state to have a Bloomingdale 's store location , with this store being the tenth in the western U.S. and 41st throughout the chain .
On September 10 , 2008 , Bloomingdale 's announced plans to open three stores , two of which will be modeled after the SoHo store : a 3-level , anchor store at The Shops at Georgetown Park in Washington , D.C. by August 2011 , a 3-level store at Westfield Valley Fair in San Jose , CA by Fall 2011 , and a store in Santa Monica Place , in Santa Monica , CA ( which opened on August 6 , 2010 ) .
The store is reported to be modeled after the chain 's concept store in New York 's SoHo neighborhood to carry select contemporary men 's and women 's apparel .
Twelve days later the first proposed overseas locations for the chain were announced .
A September 22 , 2008 , press release from Macy 's , Inc. told of plans for two Bloomingdale 's locations ( a three - level apparel and accessories store , as well as a separate one level home store ) to open in February 2010 in Dubai , United Arab Emirates .
As is the case for rival Saks Fifth Avenue , the international presence for Bloomingdale 's will be operated under license by a local interest — in this case , Al Tayer Group LLC , a leading UAE - based conglomerate .
Bloomingdale 's CEO announced that the Dubai store will most likely be the only store outside of the US since Bloomingdale 's has no further plans to expand to other countries .
On November 3 , 2011 , Bloomingdale 's announced it opened a new store in Glendale Galleria in late 2013 as part of the mall 's remodeling plan .
Bloomingdale 's announced that they had replaced the Bloomingdale 's store of in Stanford Shopping Center in Palo Alto , CA , with a new store .
The store opened in 2014 .
On November 12 , 2015 , Bloomingdale 's opened up their very first store in Hawaii at Ala Moana Center in Honolulu , HI .
The three - story , store replaced a former Sears , and includes special services , such as smart fitting rooms , charging lounges and dining services at its 40 Carrots restaurant .
STORE CLOSURES Section::::Store closures .
On January 4 , 2012 , Bloomingdale 's announced it would close four stores .
The most significant closure was at the Mall of America in Bloomington , Minnesota , where Bloomingdale 's was one of the mall 's first anchors .
Additionally , a home store at Oakbrook Center in Oak Brook , Illinois and full line stores in Perimeter Mall in Dunwoody , Georgia and at White Flint Mall in North Bethesda , Maryland have closed their doors .
On January 3 , 2013 , Bloomingdale 's announced that they would close the Las Vegas Home store at Fashion Show Mall .
GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* Nordstrom * Neiman Marcus
* Saks Fifth Avenue REFERENCES