ANGUIS FRAGILIS
Anguis fragilis , the slowworm , is a legless lizard native to Eurasia .
It is also called a deaf adder , a blindworm or , regionally , a long - cripple ; to distinguish it from the Peloponnese slowworm , it is also sometimes called a common slowworm .
The ' blind ' in ' blindworm ' refers to the lizard 's small eyes , similar to a blindsnake ( although the slowworm 's eyes are functional ) .
Slowworms are semifossorial ( burrowing ) lizards , spending much of the time hiding underneath objects .
The skin of slowworms is smooth with scales that do not overlap one another .
Like many other lizards , slowworms autotomize , meaning that they have the ability to shed their tails to escape predators .
While the tail regrows , it does not reach its original length .
They are common in gardens and can be encouraged to enter and help remove pest insects by placing black plastic or a piece of tin on the ground .
On warm days , one or more slowworms will often be found underneath these heat collectors .
One of the biggest causes of mortality in slowworms in suburban areas is the domestic cat , against which it has no defence .
PHYSICAL TRAITS Section::::Physical traits .
These reptiles are mostly active during the twilight and occasionally bask in the sun , but are more often found hiding beneath rocks and logs .
They are carnivorous and , because they feed on slugs and worms , they can often be found in long grass and other damp environments .
The females give birth to live young ( ovoviviparous birth ) .
In the days leading up to birth , the female can often be seen basking in the sun on a warm road .
Although these lizards are often mistaken for snakes , a number of features differentiate them .
The most important one is that they have small eyes with eyelids that , like other lizards , blink .
Unlike snakes , they may also have visible ears .
They shed their skin in patches , whereas most snakes shed their whole skin .
Slowworms may also shed their tails ( autotomy ) as a defence mechanism , by breaking one of their tail vertebrae in half .
Also , the pattern of their ventral scales is totally different from that of snakes .
SIZE AND LONGEVITY Section::::Size and longevity .
Adult slowworms grow to be about 50 cm long , and are known for their exceptionally long lives ; the slowworm may be the longest - living lizard , living about 30 years in the wild and up to at least 54 years in captivity ( this record is held by a male slowworm that lived at the Copenhagen Zoo from 1892 until 1946 , the age when first obtained is unknown ) .
The female often has a stripe along the spine and dark sides , while the male may have blue spots dorsally .
Juveniles of both sexes are gold with dark brown bellies and sides with a dark stripe along the spine .
PROTECTED STATUS IN THE UK
Section::::Protected status in the UK .
In the United Kingdom , the slowworm has been granted protected status , alongside all other native British reptile species .
The slowworm has been decreasing in numbers , and under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 , it is illegal to intentionally kill , injure , sell or advertise to sell them .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
The slowworm is not native to Ireland , but is believed to have been illegally introduced in the 1970s .
It has been sighted only in parts of County Clare , mainly in the Burren region .
TAXONOMY
*
Anguis fragilis
* A.
f. fragilis * A. f. colchicus Section::::Taxonomy .
The subspecies A. f. fragilis is found all over Europe , while A. f. colchicus is found in southeastern Europe , the Caucasus , and Iran .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Glass lizard REFERENCES