CULTURE OF INDONESIA
The culture of Indonesia has been shaped by long interaction between original indigenous customs and multiple foreign influences .
Indonesia is centrally - located along ancient trading routes between the Far East , South Asia and the Middle East , resulting in many cultural practices being strongly influenced by a multitude of religions , including Hinduism , Buddhism , Confucianism , Islam and Christianity , all strong in the major trading cities .
The result is a complex cultural mixture very different from the original indigenous cultures .
Examples of the fusion of Islam with Hindu include Javanese Abangan belief , the fusion of Hinduism , Buddhism and animism in Bodha , and the fusion of Hinduism and animism in Kaharingan ; others could be cited .
Balinese dances have stories about ancient Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms , while Islamic art forms and architecture are present in Sumatra , especially in the Minangkabau and Aceh regions .
Traditional art , music and sport are combined in a martial art form called Pencak Silat .
The Western world has influenced Indonesia in science , technology and modern entertainment such as television shows , film and music , as well as political system and issues .
India has notably influenced Indonesian songs and movies .
A popular type of song is the Indian - rhythmical dangdut , which is often mixed with Arab and Malay folk music .
Despite the influences of foreign culture , some remote Indonesian regions still preserve uniquely indigenous culture .
Indigenous ethnic groups Mentawai , Asmat , Dani , Dayak , Toraja and many others are still practising their ethnic rituals , customs and wearing traditional clothes .
TRADITIONAL PERFORMING ARTS MUSIC Section::::Traditional performing arts .
Section::::Music .
Indonesia is home to with those from the islands of Java , Sumatra and Bali being frequently recorded .
The traditional music of central and East Java and Bali is the gamelan .
On 29 June 1965 , Koes Plus , a leading Indonesian pop group in the 1960s , 1970s and 1980s , was imprisoned in Glodok , West Jakarta , for playing Western - style music .
After the resignation of President Sukarno , the law was rescinded , and in the 1970s the Glodok prison was dismantled and replaced with a large shopping mall .
Kroncong is a musical genre that uses guitars and ukulele as the main musical instruments .
This genre had its roots in Portugal and was introduced by Portuguese traders in the 15th century .
There is a traditional Keroncong Tugu music group in North Jakarta and other traditional Keroncong music groups in Maluku , with strong Portuguese influences .
This music genre was popular in the first half of the 20th century ; a contemporary form of Kroncong is called Pop Kroncong .
Angklung musical orchestra , native of West Java , received international recognition as UNESCO has listed the traditional West Java musical instrument made from bamboo in the list of intangible cultural heritage .
The soft Sasando music from the province of East Nusa Tenggara in West Timor is completely different .
Sasando uses an instrument made from a split leaf of the Lontar palm ( Borassus flabellifer ) , which bears some resemblance to a harp .
DANCE Section::::Dance .
Indonesian dance reflects the diversity of culture from ethnic groups that composed the nation of Indonesia .
Austronesian roots and Melanesian tribal dance forms are visible , and influences ranging from neighbouring Asian countries ; such as India , China , and Middle East to European western styles through colonisation .
Each ethnic group has their own distinct dances ; makes total dances in Indonesia are more than 3000 Indonesian original dances .
However , the dances of Indonesia can be divided into three eras ; the Prehistoric Era , the Hindu / Buddhist Era and the Era of Islam , and into two genres ; court dance and folk dance .
There is a continuum in the traditional dances depicting episodes from the Ramayana and Mahabharata from India , ranging through Thailand , all the way to Bali .
There is a marked difference , though , between the highly stylised dances of the courts of Yogyakarta and Surakarta and their popular variations .
While the court dances are promoted and even performed internationally , the popular forms of dance art and drama must largely be discovered locally .
During the last few years , Saman from Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam has become rather popular and is often portrayed on TV .
Reog Ponorogo is also a dance that originated from the district Ponorogo , East Java , which is a visualisation of the legendary story Wengker kingdom and the kingdom of Kediri .
A popular line dance called Poco - poco was originated in Indonesia and also popular in Malaysia , but at early April 2011 Malaysian Islamic clerics banned the poco - poco dance for Muslims due to them believing it is traditionally a Christian dance and that its steps make the sign of the cross .
DRAMA AND THEATRE Section::::Drama and theatre .
Wayang , the Javanese , Sundanese , and Balinese shadow puppet theatre shows display several mythological legends such as Ramayana and Mahabharata , and many more .
Wayang Orang is Javanese traditional dance drama based on wayang stories .
Various Balinese dance drama also can be included within traditional form of Indonesian drama .
Another form of local drama is Javanese Ludruk and Ketoprak , Sundanese Sandiwara , and Betawi Lenong .
All of these drama incorporated humor and jest , often involving audiences in their performance .
Randai is a folk theatre tradition of the Minangkabau people of West Sumatra , usually performed for traditional ceremonies and festivals .
It incorporates music , singing , dance , drama and the silat martial art , with performances often based on semi - historical Minangkabau legends and love story .
Bangsawan is a Malay folk theatre found in the province of Riau .
Modern performing art also developed in Indonesia with their distinct style of drama .
Notable theatre , dance , and drama troupe such as Teater Koma are gain popularity in Indonesia as their drama often portray social and political satire of Indonesian society .
MARTIAL ARTS Section::::Martial arts .
The art of Pencak Silat was created and firstly developed in the islands of Java and Sumatra .
It is an art for survival and practised throughout Indonesian archipelago .
Centuries of tribal wars in Indonesian history had shaped silat as it was used by the ancient warriors of Indonesia .
Silat was used to determine the rank and position of warriors in old Indonesian kingdoms .
Contacts with Indians and Chinese has further enriched silat .
Silat reached areas beyond Indonesia mainly through diaspora of Indonesian people .
People from various regions like Aceh , Minangkabau , Riau , Bugis , Makassar , Java , Banjar , etc .
moved into and settled in Malay Peninsula and other islands .
They brought silat and passed it down to their descendants .
The Indonesian of half - Dutch descent are also credited as the first to have brought the art into Europe .
Silat was used by Indonesian independence fighters during their struggle against the Dutch colonial rule .
Unfortunately after Indonesia achieving their independence , silat became less popular among Indonesian youth compare to foreign martial arts like Karate and Taekwondo .
This probably because silat was not taught openly and only passed down among blood relatives , the other reason is the lack of media portrayal of the art .
Efforts have been made to introduce and reintroduce the beauty of silat to Indonesian youth and the world .
Exhibitions and promotions by individuals as well as state - sponsored groups helped the growing of silat 's popularity , particularly in Europe and United States .
Indonesian 2009 Silat movie Merantau is one of Indonesian efforts to introduce silat to international scene .
Another martial art from Indonesia is Tarung Derajat .
It is a modern combat system created by Haji Ahmad Drajat based on his experience as a street fighter .
Tarung Drajat has been acknowledge as a national sport by KONI in 1998 and is now used by Indonesian Army as part of their basic training .
TRADITIONAL VISUAL ARTS PAINTING
Section::::Traditional visual arts .
Section::::Painting .
What Indonesian painting before the 19th century are mostly restricted to the decorative arts , considered to be a religious and spiritual activity , comparable to the pre-1400 European art .
Artists ' names are anonymous , since the individual human creator was seen as far less important than their creation to honour the deities or spirits .
Some examples are the Kenyah decorative art , based on endemic natural motifs such as ferns and hornbills , found decorating the walls of Kenyah long houses .
Other notable traditional art is the geometric Toraja wood carvings .
Balinese painting are initially the narrative images to depict scenes of Balinese legends and religious scripts .
The classical Balinese paintings are often decorating the lontar manuscripts and also the ceilings of temples pavilion .
Under the influence of the Dutch colonial power , a trend toward Western - style painting emerged in the 19th century .
In the Netherlands , the term " Indonesian Painting " is applied to the paintings produced by Dutch or other foreign artists who lived and worked in the former Netherlands - Indies .
The most famous indigenous 19th century
Indonesian painter is Raden Saleh ( 1807–1877 ) , the first indigenous artist to study in Europe .
His art is heavily influenced by Romanticism .
In the 1920s Walter Spies settled in Bali , he is often credited with attracting the attention of Western cultural figures to Balinese culture and art .
His works has somehow influenced Balinese artists and painters .
Today Bali has one of the most vivid and richest painting traditions in Indonesia .
The 1920s to 1940s were a time of growing nationalism in Indonesia .
The previous period of romanticism movement was not seen as a purely Indonesian movement and did not develop .
Painters began to see the natural world for inspiration .
Some examples of Indonesian painter during this period are the Balinese Ida Bagus Made and the realist Basuki Abdullah .
The Indonesian Painters Association ( Persatuan Ahli - Ahli Gambar Indonesia or PERSAGI , 1938–1942 ) was formed during this period .
PERSAGI established a contemporary art philosophy that saw art works as reflections of the artist 's individual or personal view as well as an expression of national cultural thoughts .
From the 1940s on , artists started to mix Western techniques with Southeast Asian imagery and content .
Painters that rooted in the revolutionary movement of the World War and the post - World War period started to appear during this period , such as Sudjojono , Affandi , and Hendra .
During the 1960s , new elements were added when abstract expressionism and Islamic art began to be absorbed by the art community .
Also during this period , group of painters that are more concerned about the reality of Indonesian society began to appear , taking inspiration from the social problem such as division between the rich and the poor , pollution , and deforestation .
The national identity of Indonesia was stressed by these painters through the use of a realistic , documentary style .
During the Sukarno period this socially - engaged art was officially promoted , but after 1965 it lost popularity due to its presumed communist tendencies .
Three art academies offer extensive formal training in visual art :
Bandung Institute of Technology founded in 1947 ; the Akademi Seni Rupa Indonesia ( Indonesian Fine Arts Academy ) or ASRI , now known as ISI , in Yogyakarta was inaugurated in 1950 ; and the Institut Kesenian Jakarta ( Jakarta Arts Institute ) or IKJ , was opened in 1970 .
SCULPTURE Section::::Sculpture .
Indonesia has a long history of stone , bronze and Iron Ages arts .
The megalithic sculptures can be found in numerous archaeological sites in Sumatra , Java to Sulawesi .
The native Indonesians tribes have their own distinct tribal sculpture styles , usually created to depict ancestors , deities and animals .
The pre - Hindu - Buddhist and pre - Islamic sculptures can be traced in the artworks of indigenous Indonesian tribes .
The most notable sculptures are those of Asmat wooden sculpture of Papua , the Dayak wooden mask and sculpture , the ancestral wooden statue of Toraja , also the totem - like sculpture of Batak and Nias tribe .
The stone sculpture artform particularly flourished in 8th - to-10th - century Java and Bali , which demonstrate the influences of Hindu - Buddhist culture , both as stand - alone works of art and also incorporated into temples .
Most notable sculpture of classical Hindu - Buddhist era of Indonesia are the hundreds of meters of relief and hundreds of stone buddhas at the temple of Borobudur in central Java .
Approximately two miles of exquisite relief sculpture tell the story of the life of Buddha and illustrate his teachings .
The temple was originally home to 504 statues of the seated Buddha .
This site , as with others in central Java , show a clear Indian influence .
The examples of notable Indonesian Hindu - Buddhist sculptures are ; the statues of Hindu deities ; Shiva , Vishnu , Brahma , Durga , Ganesha and Agastya enthroned in rooms of Prambanan temples , the Vishnu mounting Garuda statue of king Airlangga , the exquisite statue of Eastern Javanese Prajnaparamita and 3.7 meters tall Dvarapala dated from Singhasari period , and also the grand statue of Bhairava Adityawarman discovered in Sumatra .
Today , the Hindu - Buddhist style stone sculptures are reproduced in villages in Muntilan near Borobudur also in Trowulan the former capital site of Majapahit in East Java , and Bali , and sold as garden or pool ornament statues for homes , offices and hotels .
Today in Indonesia , the richest , most elaborate and vivid wooden sculpture and wood carving traditions can be found in Bali and Jepara , Central Java .
Balinese handicrafts such as sculptures , masks , and other carving artworks are popular souvenir for tourist that have visited Indonesia .
On the other hand , the Jepara wood carving are famous for its elaborately carved wooden furnitures , folding screens also pelaminan gebyok ( wedding throne with carved background ) .
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Architecture .
For centuries , the Indonesian vernacular architecture has shaped settlements in Indonesia which commonly took form of timber structures built on stilts dominated by large roof .
The most dominant foreign influences on Indonesian architecture were Indian , although European influences have been particularly strong since the 19th century and modern architecture in Indonesia is international in scope .
As in much of South East Asia , traditional vernacular architecture in Indonesia are built on stilts , with the significant exceptions of Java and Bali .
Notable stilt houses are those of the Dayak people in Borneo , the Rumah Gadang of the Minangkabau people in western Sumatra , the Rumah Bolon of the Batak people in northern Sumatra , and the Tongkonan of the Toraja people in Sulawesi .
Oversized saddle roofs with large eaves , such as the homes of the Batak and the tongkonan of Toraja , are often bigger than the house they shelter .
The fronts of Torajan houses are frequently decorated with buffalo horns , stacked one above another , as an indication of status .
The outside walls also frequently feature decorative reliefs .
The 8th - century Borobudur temple near Yogyakarta is the largest Buddhist temple in the world , and is notable for incorporating about 2,672 relief panels and 504 Buddha statues into its structure , telling the story of the life of the Buddha .
As the visitor ascends through the eight levels of the temple , the story unfolds , the final three levels simply containing stupas and statues of the Buddha .
The building is said to incorporate a map of the Buddhist cosmos and is a masterful fusion of the didactic narrative relief , spiritual symbolism , monumental design and the serene meditative environs .
The whole monument itself resembles a giant stupa , but seen from above
it forms a mandala .
The nearby 9th - century temple complex at Prambanan contains some of the best preserved examples of Hindu temple architecture in Java .
The temple complex comprises eight main shrines , surrounded by 224 smaller shrines .
The Indian influence on the site is clear , not only in the style of the monument , but also in the reliefs featuring scenes from the Ramayana which adorn the outer walls of the main temples , and in the votive statuary found within .
CRAFTS
Section::::Crafts .
Indonesia is considered as home of world handicraft .
Every ethnic group has its own uniqueness , style , and philosophy of crafting .
Most of them are made from wooden , bone , fabric , stone , and paper .
These natural materials were crafted using hands into profitable and aesthetic items .
Handicraft manufacturing serves not only as an important economic sector , but also a tradition and has a social function as well .
The handicraft industry employs thousands of people in towns and villages across the country .
About half a billion dollar worth of handicraft is exported every year , and many more is consumed domestically .
There are many varieties of handicraft from other regions .
West Sumatra and South Sumatra are particularly noted for their songket cloths .
Villages in the Lesser Sunda Islands produce ikat while provinces in Kalimantan are long known for their basketry and weaving using rattan and other natural fabrics .
Wood art produced by the Asmat people of Papua is highly valued .
Cities along Java 's northern coast , Cirebon , Pekalongan , and Rembang are known as centres of batik .
Cirebon and Jepara are important cities in furniture , producing rattan and carved wood respectively , while Tasikmalaya is known for embroidery .
Pasuruan also produces furniture and other products and support stores and galleries in Bali .
Bandung and Surabaya , both modern , cosmopolitan , and industrialised cities — much like Jakarta but on a lesser scale — are creative cities with a variety of innovative startups .
Several Indonesian islands are famous for their batik , ikat and songket cloth .
Once on the brink of disappearing , batik and later ikat , found a new lease on life when former President Suharto promoted wearing batik shirts on official occasions .
In addition to the traditional patterns with their special meanings , used for particular occasions , batik designs have become creative and diverse over the last few years .
Other noted Indonesian crafts are Jepara wood carving and Kris .
In 2005 , UNESCO recognised Kris as one of Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity from Indonesia .
LITERATURE
Section::::Literature .
Pramoedya Ananta Toer was Indonesia 's most internationally celebrated author , having won the Magsaysay Award as well as being considered for the Nobel Prize in Literature .
Other important figures include the late Chairil Anwar , a poet and member of the " Generation 45 " group of authors who were active in the Indonesian independence movement .
Tight information controls during Suharto 's presidency suppressed new writing , especially because of its ability to agitate for social reform .
In the book Max Havelaar , Dutch author Multatuli criticised the Dutch treatment of the Indonesians , which gained him international attention .
Modern Indonesian authors include Seno Gumira Adjidarma , Andrea Hirata , Habiburrahman El Shirazy , Ayu Utami , Gus tf Sakai , Eka Kurniawan , Ratih Kumala , Dee , Oka Rusmini .
Some of their works have translated to other languages .
Amazint POETRY Section::::Poetry .
There is a long tradition in Indonesia , particularly among ethnically Malay populations , of extemporary , interactive , oral composition of poetry .
These poems are referred to as pantun .
Contemporary Indonesian poets include among others , Sutardji Calzoum Bachri , Rendra , Taufiq Ismail , Afrizal Malna , Binhad Nurrohmat , Joko Pinurbo , Sapardi Djoko Damono .
RECREATION AND SPORTS Section::::Recreation and sports .
Many traditional games are still preserved and popular in Indonesia , although western culture has influenced some parts of them .
Among three hundred officially recognised Indonesian cultures , there are many kinds of traditional games : cockfighting in Bali , annual bull races in Madura , and stone jumping in Nias .
Stone jumping involves leaping over a stone wall about up to 1.5 m high and was originally used to train warriors .
Pencak Silat is another popular form of sport , which was influenced by Asian culture as a whole .
Another form of national sport is sepak takraw .
The rules are similar to volleyball : to keep the rattan ball in the air with the players ' feet .
Popular modern sports in Indonesia played at the international level include football ( soccer ) , badminton and basketball .
Badminton is one of Indonesia 's most successful sports .
Indonesian badminton athletes have played in Indonesia Open Badminton Championship , All England Open Badminton Championships , and many international events , including the Summer Olympics and won Olympic gold medals since badminton was made an Olympic sport in 1992 .
Rudy Hartono is a legendary Indonesian badminton player , who won All England titles seven times in a row ( 1968 through 1974 ) .
Indonesian teams have won the Thomas Cup ( men 's world team championship ) thirteen of the twenty - two times that it has been contested since they entered the series in 1957 .
In the internationally popular sport of football ( soccer ) , Indonesian teams have been active in the Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) .
Sporting events in Indonesia are organised by the Indonesian National Sport Committee ( KONI ) .
The Committee , along with the government of Indonesia , have set a National Sports Day on every 9 September with " Sports for All " as the motto .
Indonesia has hosted the Southeast Asian Games four times , in 1979 , 1987 , 1997 and 2011 , and won overall champion title in each of these years .
As of 2011 , Indonesia has won champion titles 10 times overall out of 18 SEA Games it has attended since debuted in 1977 .
The country also hosted the 1993 Asian Basketball Championship .
FOODS Section::::Foods .
The cuisine of indonesia has been influenced by Chinese culture and Indian culture , as well as by Western culture .
However , in return , Indonesian cuisine has also contributed to the cuisines of neighbouring countries , notably Malaysia and Singapore , where Padang or Minangkabau cuisine from West Sumatra is very popular .
Also Satay ( Sate in Indonesian ) , which originated from Java , Madura , and Sumatra , has gained popularity as a street vendor food from Singapore to Thailand .
In the 15th century , both the Portuguese and Arab traders arrived in Indonesia with the intention of trading for pepper and other spices .
During the colonial era , immigrants from many countries arrived in Indonesia and brought different cultures as well as cuisines .
Most native Indonesians eat rice as the main dish , with a wide range of vegetables and meat as side dishes .
However , in some parts of the country , such as Irian Jaya and Ambon , the majority of the people eat sago ( a type of tapioca ) and sweet potato .
The most important aspect of modern Indonesian cuisine is that food must be halal , conforming to Islamic food laws .
Haraam , the opposite of halal , includes pork and alcohol .
However , in some regions where there is a significant non - Muslim population , non - halal foods are also commonly served .
Indonesian dishes are usually spicy , using a wide range of chili peppers and spices .
The most popular dishes include nasi goreng ( fried rice ) , Satay , Nasi Padang ( a dish of Minangkabau ) and soy - based dishes , such as tofu and tempe .
A unique characteristic of some Indonesian food is the application of spicy peanut sauce in their dishes , as a dressing for Gado - gado or Karedok ( Indonesian style salad ) , or for seasoning grilled chicken satay .
Another unique aspect of Indonesian cuisine is using terasi or belacan , a pungent shrimp paste in dishes of sambal oelek ( hot pungent chili sauce ) .
The sprinkling of fried shallots also gives a unique crisp texture to some Indonesian dishes .
Chinese and Indian cultures have influenced the serving of food and the types of spices used .
It is very common to find Chinese food in Indonesia such as Dim Sum and noodles , and Indian cuisine such as Tandoori chicken .
In addition , Western culture has significantly contributed to the extensive range of dishes .
However , the dishes have been transformed to suit Indonesian tastes .
For example , steaks are usually served with rice .
Popular fast foods such as Kentucky Fried Chicken are served with rice instead of bread and sambal ( spicy sauce ) instead of ketchup .
Some Indonesian foods have been adopted by the Dutch , like Indonesian rice table or ' rijsttafel ' .
POPULAR MEDIA
CINEMA
Section::::Popular media .
Section::::Cinema .
The largest chain of cinemas in Indonesia is 21Cineplex , which has cinemas spread throughout twenty - four cities on the major islands of Indonesia .
Many smaller independent cinemas also exist .
In the 1980s , the film industry in Indonesia was at its peak , and dominated the cinemas in Indonesia with movies that have retained a high reputation , such as Catatan Si Boy and Blok M and actors like Onky Alexander , Meriam Bellina , Nike Ardilla and Paramitha Rusady .
The film Tjoet Nja ' Dhien ( 1988 ) winning 9 Citra Awards at the 1988 Indonesian Film Festival .
It was also the first Indonesian movie chosen for screening at the Cannes Film Festival , where it was awarded Best International Film in 1989 .
However , the film industry failed to continue its successes in the 1990s , when the number of movies produced decreased significantly , from 115 movies in 1990 to just 37 in 1993 .
As a result , most movies produced in the 1990s contained adult themes .
In addition , mov to dominate Indonesian cinema .
The industry started to recover in the late 1990s , with the rise of independent directors and many new movies produced , such as Garin Nugroho 's Cinta dalam Sepotong Roti , Riri Riza and Mira Lesmana 's Petualangan Sherina and Arisan !
by Nia Dinata .
Another form of recovery is the re - establishment of the Indonesian Film Festival ( FFI ) , inactive for twelve years , and the creation of the Jakarta International Film Festival .
Daun di Atas Bantal ( 1998 )
receivedAsia Pacific Film Festival in Taipei .
TELEVISION RADIO Section::::Radio .
The state radio network Radio Republik Indonesia ( RRI ) was founded in 1945 .
It consists of a network of regional stations located in all thirty - three provinces of the archipelago .
In most cities and large towns there are also many commercial stations .
Since 2006 , several digital radio stations have been based in Jakarta and Surabaya , using Digital Audio Broadcasting ( DAB ) and Hybrid HD - Radio .
RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY Section::::Religion and philosophy .
Islam is Indonesia 's main religion , with almost 88 % of Indonesians declared Muslim according to the 2000 census , making Indonesia the most populous Muslim - majority nation in the world .
The remaining population is 9 % Christian ( of which roughly two - thirds are Protestant with the remainder mainly Catholic , and a large minority Charismatic , 2 % Hindu , and 1 % Buddhist .
The Pancasila , the statement of two principles which encapsulate the ideology of the Indonesian state , affirms that " The state shall be based on the belief in the one and only God " .
CELEBRATIONS Section::::Celebrations . !
Date ( Gregorian Calendar ) ! !
Date ( Religious Calendar ) ! !
English Name ! !
Local Name ! !
Remarks SEE
ALSO
* Adat * Demographics of Indonesia *
Tabuik
* List of museums and cultural institutions in Indonesia REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Kuncaraningrat .
( 1985 ) Javanese culture Singapore :
Oxford University Press ,