CONE
A cone is a three - dimensional geometric shape that tapers smoothly from a flat base ( frequently , though not necessarily , circular ) to a point called the apex or vertex .
A cone is formed by a set of line segments , half - lines , or lines connecting a common point , the apex , to all of the points on a base that is in a plane that does not contain the apex .
Depending on the author , the base may be restricted to be a circle , any one - dimensional quadratic form in the plane , any closed one - dimensional figure , or any of the above plus all the enclosed points .
If the enclosed points are included in the base , the cone is a solid object ; otherwise it is a two - dimensional object in three - dimensional space .
In the case of a solid object , the boundary formed by these lines or partial lines is called the lateral surface ; if the lateral surface is unbounded , it is a conical surface .
In the case of line segments , the cone does not extend beyond the base , while in the case of half - lines , it extends infinitely far .
In the case of lines , the cone extends infinitely far in both directions from the apex , in which case it is sometimes called a double cone .
Either half of a double cone on one side of the apex is called a nappe .
The axis of a cone is the straight line ( if any ) , passing through the apex , about which the base ( and the whole cone ) has a circular symmetry .
In common usage in elementary geometry , cones are assumed to be right circular , where circular means that the base is a circle and right
means that the axis passes through the centre of the base at right angles to its plane .
If the cone is right circular the intersection of a plane with the lateral surface is a conic section .
In general , however , the base may be any shape and the apex may lie anywhere ( though it is usually assumed that the base is bounded and therefore has finite area , and that the apex lies outside the plane of the base ) .
Contrasted with right cones are oblique cones , in which the axis passes through the centre of the base non - perpendicularly .
A cone with a polygonal base is called a pyramid .
Depending on the context , " cone " may also mean specifically a convex cone or a projective cone .
Cones can also be generalized to higher dimensions .
FURTHER TERMINOLOGY Section::::Further terminology .
The perimeter of the base of a cone is called the " directrix " , and each of the line segments between the directrix and apex is a " generatrix " or " generating line " of the lateral surface .
( For the connection between this sense of the term " directrix " and the directrix of a conic section , see Dandelin spheres . )
The " base radius " of a circular cone is the radius of its base ; often this is simply called the radius of the cone .
The aperture of a right circular cone is the maximum angle between two generatrix lines ; if the generatrix makes an angle θ to the axis , the aperture is 2θ .
A cone with a region including its apex cut off by a plane is called a " truncated cone " ; if the truncation plane is parallel to the cone 's base , it is called a frustum .
An " elliptical cone " is a cone with an elliptical base .
A " generalized cone " is the surface created by the set of lines passing through a vertex and every point on a boundary ( also see visual hull ) .
MEASUREMENTS AND EQUATIONS VOLUME Section::::Measurements and equations .
Section::::Volume .
The volume formula_1 of any conic solid is one third of the product of the area of the base formula_2 and the height formula_3
In modern mathematics , this formula can easily be computed using calculus – it is , up to scaling ,
the integral formula_5 Without using calculus , the formula can be proven by comparing the cone to a pyramid and applying Cavalieri 's principle – specifically , comparing the cone to a ( vertically scaled ) right square pyramid , which forms one third of a cube .
This formula can not be proven without using such infinitesimal arguments – unlike the 2-dimensional formulae for polyhedral area , though similar to the area of the circle – and hence admitted less rigorous proofs before the advent of calculus , with the ancient Greeks using the method of exhaustion .
This is essentially the content of Hilbert 's third problem – more precisely , not all polyhedral pyramids are scissors congruent ( can be cut apart into finite pieces and rearranged into the other ) , and thus volume can not be computed purely by using a decomposition argument .
CENTER OF MASS Section::::Center of mass .
The center of mass of a conic solid of uniform density lies one - quarter of the way from the center of the base to the vertex , on the straight line joining the two .
RIGHT CIRCULAR CONE VOLUME Section::::Right circular cone .
Section::::Volume .
For a circular cone with radius r and height h , the base is a circle of area
formula_6
and so the formula for volume becomes SLANT HEIGHT Section::::Slant height .
The slant height of a right circular cone is the distance from any point on the circle of its base to the apex via a line segment along the surface of the cone .
It is given by formula_8 ,
where formula_9 is the radius of the base and formula_3 is the height .
This can be proved by the Pythagorean theorem .
SURFACE AREA Section::::Surface area .
The lateral surface area of a right circular cone is formula_11 where formula_9 is the radius of the circle at the bottom of the cone and formula_13 is the slant height of the cone .
The surface area of the bottom circle of a cone is the same as for any circle , formula_6 .
Thus , the total surface area of a right circular cone can be expressed as each of the following :
* Radius and height * Radius and slant height * Circumference and slant height *
Apex angle and height CIRCULAR SECTOR Section::::Circular sector .
The circular sector obtained by unfolding the surface of one nappe of the cone has :
* radius
R
* arc length L
* central angle φ in radians
EQUATION FORM
Section::::Equation form .
A right solid circular cone with height formula_3 and aperture
formula_35 , whose axis is the formula_36 coordinate axis and whose apex is the origin , is described parametrically as where formula_38 range over formula_39 , formula_40 , and formula_41 , respectively .
In implicit form , the same solid is defined by the inequalities where More generally , a right circular cone with vertex at the origin , axis parallel to the vector formula_44 , and aperture formula_35 , is given by the implicit vector equation
formula_46 where where formula_49 , and formula_50 denotes the dot product .
ELLIPTIC CONE
Section::::Elliptic cone .
In the Cartesian coordinate system , an elliptic cone is the locus of an equation of the form
It is an affine image of the right - circular unit cone with equation formula_52
From the fact , that the affine image of a conic section is a conic section of the same type ( ellipse , parabola ... )
one gets : *
Any plane section of an elliptic cone is a conic section .
Obviously , any right circular cone contains circles .
This is also true , but less obvious , in the general case ( see circular section ) .
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY Section::::Projective geometry .
In projective geometry , a cylinder is simply a cone whose apex is at infinity .
Intuitively , if one keeps the base fixed and takes the limit as the apex goes to infinity , one obtains a cylinder , the angle of the side increasing as arctan , in the limit forming a right angle .
This is useful in the definition of degenerate conics , which require considering the cylindrical conics .
HIGHER DIMENSIONS Section::::Higher dimensions .
The definition of a cone may be extended to higher dimensions ( see convex cones ) .
In this case , one says that a convex set C in the real vector space R is a cone ( with apex at the origin ) if for every vector x in C and every nonnegative real number a , the vector ax is in C.
In this context , the analogues of circular cones are not usually special ; in fact one is often interested in polyhedral cones .
SEE ALSO
* Bicone * Cone ( linear algebra )
* Cone ( topology )
* Cylinder ( geometry ) * Democritus * Generalized conic
* Hyperboloid * Pyrometric cone * Quadric * Rotation of axes
* Ruled surface * Translation of axes
NOTES REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Spinning Cone from Math Is
Fun * Paper model cone
* Lateral surface area of an oblique cone
* Cut
a Cone An interactive demonstration of the intersection of a cone with a plane