FORD ESCAPE
The Ford Escape is a compact crossover vehicle sold by Ford since 2000 over three generations .
Ford released the original model in 2000 for the 2001 model year — a model jointly developed and released with Mazda of Japan — who took a lead in the engineering of the two models and sold their version as the Mazda Tribute .
Although the Escape and Tribute share the same underpinnings constructed from the Ford CD2 platform ( based on Mazda GF underpinnings ) , the only panels common to the two vehicles are the roof and floor pressings .
Powertrains were supplied by Mazda with respect to the base inline - four engine , with Ford providing the optional V6 .
At first , the twinned models were assembled by Ford in the US for North American consumption , with Mazda in Japan supplying cars for other markets .
This followed a long history of Mazda - derived Fords , starting with the Ford Courier in the 1970s .
Ford also sold the first generation Escape in Europe and China as the Ford Maverick , replacing the previous Nissan - sourced model .
Then in 2004 , for the 2005 model year , Ford 's luxury Mercury division released a rebadged version called the Mercury Mariner , sold mainly in North America .
The first iteration Escape remains notable as the first SUV to offer a hybrid drivetrain option , released in 2004 for the 2005 model year to North American markets only .
Mainstream production of the first generation Escape / Tribute ended in late 2006 .
For Asia - Pacific markets , both received respective facelifts in 2006 and had production fully transferred to Ford Lio Ho in Taiwan .
Extended production of the Mazda lasted until 2010 , with the Ford lingering on until 2012 .
Second generations of the Ford Escape , Mercury Mariner , and Mazda Tribute were released in 2007 for the 2008 model year , but mostly restricted to North America .
In other markets , the first generation models were either replaced by updated first series versions built in Taiwan , and/or by the unrelated Mazda CX-7 ( 2006 ) and Ford Kuga ( 2008 ) .
The North American second generations were merely reskins of the first , with carry - over mechanicals , but with restyled hanging panels and a redesigned interior .
Unlike the collaborative approach taken with the previous model , this time the design and engineering was carried out by Ford .
A hybrid option was again available .
The Mercury version lasted until late 2010 , withdrawn from the market as part of the closure of the Mercury brand , with Mazda 's Tribute ending production in late 2011 .
Ford ended manufacture of the second series Escape in 2012 .
Ford released a third generation in 2012 for the 2013 model year , again , limited to North America .
This time , rather than issuing an indigenous , albeit Mazda - derived model , Ford rebadged the Europe - designed Ford Kuga .
Although still manufactured in the US , and fitted with slightly different powertrains , the third generation Escape is fully aligned with the Kuga as per the " One Ford " plan of having only one vehicle per segment internationally .
FIRST GENERATION
( 2001–2007 ) Section::::First generation ( 2001–2007 ) .
The first generation of Ford Escape was released in 2000 for the 2001 model year .
It was jointly developed with Mazda , in which Ford owned a controlling interest , and was released simultaneously with the Mazda Tribute .
Both are built on the Ford CD2 platform , in turn based on the Mazda GF platform .
At the time , larger sport - utility vehicles tended to use pickup truck - based , body - on - frame designs .
Other car makers , Jeep , Toyota and Honda had been offering smaller unibody designs , the Jeep Cherokee ( XJ ) , RAV4 and CR - V respectively .
Solid rear axles were commonly used on the full - sized truck - based SUVs and Jeep Cherokee due to their ability to carry heavy loads at the expense of a comfortable ride and good handling .
Ford and Mazda decided to offer a car - like , unibody design with a fully independent suspension and rack and pinion steering similar to the RAV4 and CR - V , the Escape .
Although not meant for serious off - roading , a full - time all - wheel - drive ( AWD ) system supplied by Dana was optional , which included a locking center differential activated by a switch on the dashboard .
The AWD system normally sends most of the power from the engine to the front wheels .
If slipping is detected at the front , more power will be sent to the rear wheels in a fraction of a second .
The four wheel drive system was a newer version of Ford 's " Control Trac " 4x4 system , dubbed the Control Trac II 4WD in the Escape .
This system allowed the front wheels to receive 100 % of the torque until a slip was detected .
Using a Rotary Blade Coupling , the rear wheels could be sent up to 100 % of the power in fractions of a second .
When switching the system from " Auto " to " On , " the front and rear axles are locked at a 50/50 split ; the reaction time necessary to engage the rear wheels is reduced via an integrated bypass clutch .
The Control Trac II system allows for a four - wheel drive vehicle without the use of a center differential .
The entire braking system was built by Continental Teves , including the ABS and various related suspension components .
CKD production began in 2002 at Ford Lio Ho Motor Co. in Taiwan for various Asian markets .
One main difference between the Tribute and the Ford Escape is that the Tribute 's suspension is tuned for a firmer ride than the Escape , in order to correspond with Mazda 's sporty image .
FORD 2000–2004 ( BA , ZA )
In North America , it slotted below the larger , truck - based Explorer in Ford 's lineup , but was larger than the small SUV offerings from Honda and Toyota .
Although it is technically a crossover vehicle , it is marketed by Ford as part of its traditional SUV lineup ( Escape , Explorer , Expedition ) rather than its separate crossover lineup ( Edge , Flex ) .
Section::::Ford .
From 2001 to 2004 , the Ford Escape was sold in Europe under the Maverick name , and replaced a rebadged version of the Nissan Mistral / Terrano II .
Only two versions were made , the 2.0 L Zetec inline 4 engine with manual transmission and 3.0 L Duratec V6 with automatic transmission , both using gasoline as fuel .
The absence of a diesel version did not help sales and the vehicle was temporarily discontinued in late 2003 .
However , the Maverick , in the UK for example , was only available in XLT trim .
Plus , the dashboard was not the same as the US Escape ; it was instead taken from the Mazda Tribute .
The Maverick was reintroduced in 2005 in certain European markets with the Duratec V6 engine .
It was announced that the Maverick would be assembled in Russia for the Russian market .
As of 2006 , the Maverick was no longer sold in Europe , leaving Ford without a compact SUV until the 2008 Ford Kuga was introduced .
The Maverick was primarily designed for on - road use – sold with normal road tires , and to be used with front - wheel drive most of the time .
Crash - test results for the Escape have been mixed .
In the New Car Assessment Program administered by the USA - based National Highway Traffic Safety Administration , the car received five out of five stars for driver protection and four out of five stars for passenger protection in a frontal impact .
The SUV received five stars for both driver and rear passenger in the side impact test .
In the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety 's frontal offset test , 2001–2004 Escapes received a score of " Marginal " .
In the side impact crash test , vehicles equipped with the optional side air bags received a score of " Good " in the , while those without the optional air bags received a score of " Poor " .
All Escapes are equipped with a passive ' Immobiliser ' called SecuriLock .
This feature includes an ' RFID ' chip embedded in the key which is read by the car each time the vehicle is started .
If the vehicle fails to receive a valid confirmation signal from the key , the vehicle will not run , even if the key is perfectly cut to match the original .
Theft , injury , and collision losses reported to insurance companies for the Escape are among the lowest in its class .
North America
In the United States , all Escapes included standard equipment such as power windows , power door locks , anti - lock braking system ( ABS ) , keyless entry , a folding rear - bench seat , 16-inch wheels , and air conditioning .
In addition , an Escape buyer could choose from one of several different trim levels that were available , which included : XLS ( 2001–2007 ) : As the most basic trim level of the Escape , the XLS included : the 2.0-liter Zetec ( 2001–2004 ) and the 2.3-liter DuraTec ( 2005–2007 ) engines ,
a five - speed manual transmission , 15-inch steel wheels , an AM / FM stereo with cassette and CD players ( later , a six - disc , in - dash CD changer ) and four speakers , high - back front bucket seats , and cloth - and - vinyl seating surfaces .
Options include 15- or 16-inch alloy wheels , the 3.0-liter V6 engine ( 2001–2004 ) , and a four - speed automatic transmission ( some of which was available as the XLS Popular Group ) .
XLT ( 2001–2007 ) : As the top - of - the - line trim level of the Escape in 2001 , and the most popular trim level of the Escape throughout its entire run ( 2001–2007 ) , the XLT added the following equipment to the base XLS trim level : 16-inch alloy wheels , cloth seating surfaces , and an enhanced interior .
Options included an AM / FM stereo with a six - disc , in - dash CD changer ( which later became standard equipment on all Escapes ) , the 3.0-liter V6 engine , a four - speed automatic transmission , a power sunroof , leather - and - vinyl - trimmed seating surfaces , and the seven - speaker premium audio system with amplifier and rear - mounted subwoofer .
XLT Sport ( 2002–2007 ) :
The XLT Sport was one of the more popular trim levels of the Escape from 2002 to 2007 .
It added equipment to the standard XLT equipment : the V6 engine , four - speed automatic transmission , sport interior trim , and 16-inch machined alloy wheels .
Options were the same as the standard XLT trim level .
Limited ( 2003–2007 ) : As the top - of - the - line trim level of the Escape from 2002–2007 , the Limited trim level added the following equipment to the XLT Sport trim level : an AM / FM stereo with six - disc
in - dash CD / MP3 changer , the seven - speaker premium audio system with amplifier and rear - mounted subwoofer , low - back front bucket seats , leather - trimmed seating surfaces , dual power heated front bucket seats , a security system , color - keyed exterior trim , luxury interior trim , and a unique front grille .
Options were limited , but included a power sunroof .
Hybrid ( 2005–2007 ) :
Based on the midrange XLT trim level , the Hybrid included : the 2.3-liter DuraTec inline - four engine with an electric motor , power front bucket seats , low - back front bucket seats , enhanced partially - recycled cloth seating surfaces , and unique 16-inch alloy wheels .
Options included a powered sunroof , a unique integrated GPS navigational system with hybrid information system , Sirius Satellite Radio , the seven - speaker premium audio system with amplifier and rear - mounted subwoofer , leather - trimmed seating surfaces , and a " two - tone " exterior paint scheme , with silver - painted lower exterior trim and front and rear bumpers .
2004–2006 ( ZB )
The Escape and Tribute were updated in February 2004 for the 2005 model year with a new base engine ( the 2.3 L Duratec 23 ) , which replaced the Zetec 2.0 L 4-cylinder .
The most powerful engine remained the Duratec 3.0 L V6 , with new engine mounts .
Ford also added advanced airbag and seatbelt safety systems , an intelligent AWD system , and exterior changes , which included a redesigned front bumper .
The 2005 model year was the first with an automatic transmission available on the base four - cylinder models .
The automatic shifter was moved from the column to the console on all models equipped with automatic transmissions .
Ford also deleted the recline feature on the rear seats to improve the safety of occupants in the rear seats in the case of a rear crash .
2006–2008
( ZC ; Asia - Pacific )
A revamped ZC Escape designed in Taiwan went on sale in the second half of 2006 for the Asian and Pacific markets ( except South Korea , where the North American - market Escape is sold ) .
Major external changes included a redesigned front bumper , grille , headlights and hood , and rear bumper , as well as LED taillights .
On the inside , changes included a floor - mounted automatic - transmission shifter , in place of the column shifter , as well as a redesigned center stack containing audio and climate controls .
Climate control is automatic on all models except the XLS .
The Limited model also featured full color - coded bumpers , wheel arches and side moldings , as well as side mirrors with integrated LED indicators .
Rear drum brakes have been replaced by disc brakes all round .
The 3.0 L V6 has been modified to reduce fuel consumption by over 10 % , while the 2.3 L 4-cylinder has improved midrange torque and an electronic throttle , as well as a slight increase in power to .
Both engines had been certified to meet Euro III emission regulations .
A four - speed automatic carried over and was the sole transmission choice .
Two different four - speed automatic transmissions were used , CD4E for 3.0 L V6 and GF4AX - EL for 2.3 L 4-cylinder .
2008–2009 ( ZD ; Asia - Pacific )
The ZD Escape went on sale in mid-2008 , bringing numerous changes .
In Australia , the V6 engine was dropped , leaving only the 2.3-liter four - cylinder .
The model range was also simplified , with only a single specification available .
Changes to the body included an all - new front bumper , grille , headlights and bonnet , featuring an enlarged Ford emblem set upon a three - bar chrome grille .
At the rear , new , slimmer tail lights were featured , which were arranged horizontally , rather than vertically .
In addition , the B - pillar was now painted black , rather than body - colour .
Compared with the previous model , all external bumpers , mirrors , and cladding were painted the same colour as the body ( previously , this was only available on the upscale Limited model ) .
Equipment levels have also improved .
Compared to the base model ZC Escape , the ZD included standard side airbags , automatic climate control , 16 " alloy wheels , and mirrors with integrated indicators .
Unlike most other competitors in its class , curtain airbags and electronic stability control were not available .
2009–2012
( ZD ; Asia - Pacific )
In 2009 , another facelift of the ZD Escape brought about a new grille and front bumper .
Chrome trim was completely removed from the grille , replaced with a smaller , black honeycomb grille as the last ever Ford Escape .
In its final years , it was sold side by side with its successor , Ford Kuga until the Kuga replaced it in 2013 .
MAZDA 2000–2004
The Tribute made its debut at the 2000 Los Angeles Auto Show as a compact crossover SUV , a segment pioneered by the Toyota RAV4 in 1994 .
It was the first SUV offered by Mazda since the Mazda Navajo , a rebadged two - door Ford Explorer which was retired after the 1994 model year .
In Japan , Mazda had an SUV called the Mazda Proceed Levante , a rebadged Suzuki Escudo , but the Tribute was Mazda 's first original SUV .
The Ford plant in Claycomo , Missouri assembled Tribute for the North American market , alongside Ford Escape .
The Mazda plant in Hofu , Japan and the Ford Lio Ho plant in Taiwan assembled Tribute for their respective markets .
Section::::Mazda .
The 2001–2006 Mazda Tribute was available as front- or four - wheel drive and featured a plain - looking but comfortable roomy interior , decent handling and car - like ride .
The Tribute and Escape debuted in 2000 , offering front or all wheel drive and a choice of a transversely mounted 2.0 L Ford Zetec 4-cylinder engine with 129 PS ( 95 kW)/183 N·m ( 135 lb·ft ) , or 3.0 L Ford Duratec V6 with 203 PS ( 150 kW)/265 N·m ( 195 lb·ft ) .
The 2.0 L 4-cylinder engine had Timing belt driven Camshafts , while the 3.0 L Duratec V6 featured a maintenance - free timing chain .
2004–2006
Both the Escape and Tribute were refreshed in 2004 for the 2005 model year .
The base engine became the Mazda 2.3 L MZR 4 with 153 PS ( 114 kW)/206 N·m ( 152 lb·ft ) , and the top remained the 3.0 L Duratec V6 , now with torque down to 261 N·m ( 193 lb·ft ) .
In North American - built models , a floor - mounted automatic transmission shifter replaced the column shifter .
However , Japanese - built models continued with a column shifter .
Mazda decided to halt production after the 2006 model year Mazda Japan released a limited version , the Mazdaspeed Tribute , in the year 2004 with a 2.3-liter MZR engine that has 220 PS ( 164.05 kW)/
254 N·m ( 195 lb·ft ) that is utilized by a column shifter .
However , Mazda Japan decided to end its production in 2005 .
2006–2008
( Asia - Pacific )
A significantly face - lifted version of the Tribute was released in the second half of 2006 for Asia Pacific markets .
The updated Tribute featured a larger , bolder grille , with an enlarged Mazda emblem , as well as restyled front bumper and headlights .
Side mirrors featured integrated indicators .
On the inside , changes included a new floor - mounted automatic - transmission shifter , in place of the old column shifter ( Asia - Pacific model only ; US - built Tribute gained the floor shifter in 2005 ) .
The dash was updated with a brand - new radio and automatic climate control with digital read - out , on certain models .
Mechanically , the rear drum brakes were replaced by disc brakes .
Engines remain the same , but the V6 has been modified to reduce fuel consumption by over 10 % , while the 4-cylinder has improved mid - range torque and an electronic throttle .
Both engines had been certified to meet Euro III emission regulations .
Starting from 2006 , Mazda stopped selling and producing Tribute in Japan , and replaced it with the similar - sized CX-7 .
In 2008 , Mazda Australia also discontinued the Tribute , the absence of the Tribute being filled by the Mazda CX-7 introduced in the previous year .
For other Asia - Pacific markets , the production of Tribute was shifted to the Ford Lio Ho plant in Zhongli , Taiwan , which also produces Tribute 's twin , Ford Escape , for Asia - Pacific markets .
This arrangement continued until early 2010 , when the Tribute for the Asia - Pacific markets ceased production , being fully replaced by the CX-7 imported from Japan .
MERCURY Section::::Mercury .
Introduced in 2004 for the 2005-model - year refresh of the Ford Escape in the US , Ford 's Mercury division released a luxury version called the Mercury Mariner .
The Mariner sits above the Escape in the Ford - Mercury - Lincoln hierarchy .
The Mariner is Mercury 's first car - based SUV , and is slotted below the Mountaineer in the lineup .
The Mariner was officially offered in the US , Mexico , Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , and the UAE .
The Mercury includes stylistic differences , such as a two - tone interior , turn signal repeaters borrowed from the European - market Ford Maverick ( the Escape 's name in Europe ) , monotone cladding , and the signature Mercury " waterfall " front grille .
Unlike its counterparts , a manual transmission was not part of the powertrain lineup .
The Mariner was the first Mercury with a four - cylinder since the Mercury Cougar was dropped in 2002 .
For 2006 , the lineup was expanded with the introduction of the Mariner Hybrid .
Sales ended after the 2007 model , replaced by a second generation , again a rebadged Ford Escape .
On September 7 , 2006 , Ford delivered a special " Presidential Edition " Mercury Mariner Hybrid to former President Bill Clinton .
Its custom features include : LED lighting , 110-volt outlet , rear bucket seats , center console & rear seat fold - out writing desks , personal DVD players for each seat , refrigerator , increased rear seat legroom .
There have also been several undisclosed security modifications made to the vehicle .
The Mariner Hybrid powertrain was identical to its sibling , the Ford Escape Hybrid .
It was launched to the U.S. market in 2006 and was discontinued in 2010 ( in the second generation ) with the rest of the brand .
The Mariner hybrid sold a total of 12,300 units .
Like the Ford Escape Hybrid , the Mariner Hybrid is a " full " hybrid electric system , meaning the system can switch automatically between pure electric power , pure gasoline engine power , or a combination of electric battery and gasoline engine operating together , for maximum performance and efficiency at all speeds and loads .
When braking or decelerating , the Mariner 's hybrid system uses regenerative braking , where the electric drive motor becomes a generator , converting the vehicle 's momentum back to electricity for storage in the batteries .
With , the Mariner Hybrid has nearly the same acceleration performance as the conventional V6 Mariner .
Again , just like the Escape Hybrid , it gets a respectable average of and is sometimes said to be the most fuel efficient sport utility vehicle on the road .
HYBRID
Section::::Hybrid .
The Ford Escape Hybrid and Mercury Mariner Hybrid are the gasoline - electric hybrid powered versions that launched in the U.S. in 2004 for the 2005 model year .
Built in Kansas City , Missouri , it was the first hybrid SUV to hit the market .
The Ford Escape Hybrid was the first American - built hybrid and the first hybrid vehicle from an American automaker , joined by the Chevrolet Silverado / GMC Sierra Hybrids during the same model year .
According to the Environmental Protection Agency , the first generation Ford Escape Hybrid is 70 % more efficient than the regular Escape .
The Mercury Mariner Hybrid is a rebadged version of the Escape Hybrid .
It features revised front - end styling and a more luxurious interior .
Escape hybrid versions can be identified by the " Hybrid " badges located on the front driver 's and passenger 's doors as well as near the right tailgate .
In addition , the driver 's side window in the cargo area is smaller in size in order to accommodate a ventilation slot for the high voltage battery .
There was also a " Special Appearance Package " available as an option on the 2005–2007 Hybrid models .
This package replaced the traditional lower cladding of the Escape with a silver finish .
Standard equipment on the Escape Hybrid includes : an eight - way power adjustable driver 's seat , dual - zone automatic air conditioning , cruise control , a six - CD stereo , 16-inch alloy wheels , power door locks with remote keyless entry , and power windows .
Ford built 17,000 Escape Hybrids in the second half of 2004 , four times as many as it had originally planned .
Starting in 2005 New York City and other cities in the world began using the Ford Escape Hybrid as taxicabs .
The Ford Escape Hybrid won the North American Truck of the Year award in 2005 .
The Escape Hybrid uses technology similar to that used in the Toyota Prius .
Ford engineers realized their technology may conflict with patents held by Toyota , which led to a 2004 patent - sharing accord between the companies , licensing Ford 's use of some of Toyota 's hybrid technology in exchange for Toyota 's use of some of Ford 's diesel and direct - injection engine technology .
Ford maintains that Ford received no technical assistance from Toyota in developing the hybrid powertrain , but that some hybrid engine technologies developed by Ford independently were found to be similar to technologies previously patented by Toyota , so licenses were obtained .
Aisin Seiki Co. Ltd. , a Japanese automotive components supplier belonging to the Toyota Group , supplies the HD-10 hybrid continuously variable transmission for the Escape Hybrid .
While Toyota produces its third - generation Prius transmission in - house , Aisin is the only supplier of hybrid transmissions to other manufacturers .
Friction has arisen concerning Aisin 's allocation of limited production capacity and engineering resources to Ford .
Sanyo Electric Co. built the , 330 volt 5.5 Ah ( would make it 1.8kWh storage ) , 250-cell nickel metal hydride ( NiMH ) battery pack for the 2005 Escape Hybrid .
The Escape Hybrid is a full hybrid , meaning the system can switch automatically between pure electric power , pure gasoline engine power , or a combination of electric battery and gasoline engine operating together , for maximum performance and efficiency at all speeds and loads .
When braking or decelerating , the Escape 's hybrid system uses regenerative braking , where the electric drive motor becomes a generator , converting the vehicle 's momentum back to electricity for storage in the batteries .
The Escape Hybrid 's 133 horsepower ( 99 kW )
Atkinson cycle gasoline I4 engine and electric motor combine to give , which gives the Hybrid Escape nearly the same acceleration performance as the conventional V6 Escape due to the electric motor 's torque being available from zero rpm .
The hybrid is said to give approximately 75 % greater efficiency , the FWD version has EPA ratings of 30 mpg and 28 highway , with combined 29 mpg .
The AWD version EPA ratings 28 city and 26 highway , combined 27 mpg in city traffic , and has demonstrated it can travel 400–500 miles ( 644–805 km ) on a single mpg ( 7.6L-8.1 L/100 km ; 35–37 mpg ) on the highway .
To obtain these mileage figures , the owners manual states that pure gasoline , not ethanol blends , must be used .
Unlike conventional vehicles , hybrids often achieve better figures in the city because they do not waste power idling and can recover some power when stopping ( by using regenerative braking ) that would be wasted in a conventional vehicle .
In 2006 , Ford showed an Escape that could run on E85 fuel .
SECOND GENERATION ( 2008–2012 )
Section::::Second generation ( 2008–2012 ) .
The second generation Ford Escape debuted at the 2006 Los Angeles International Auto Show .
The North American - market Escape and its Mazda Tribute and Mercury Mariner siblings were redesigned in order to stay competitive with other new compact SUVs , however most of the internals have been carried over for the 2008 model year .
The Escape still uses the CD2 platform .
Ford also included an electronic stability control system standard on the 2008 Escape .
The updated Escape received some styling cues from the Explorer , Edge , and Expedition .
Changes include a new grille with larger headlamps in the front fascia , while the sides were revised with cleaner lines and rounder wheel arches .
The interior is also completely redesigned , including the newest standard Ford family navigation system .
The 2008 Escape and its Mercury Mariner sibling were the first vehicles to feature Ford 's pull - drift steering mode , an enhancement made possible by applying software control to the Electric Power Steering ( EPS ) system .
On June 23 , 2010 , it was announced that Ford would end production on the second generation Escape in 2011 and move production to its Louisville Assembly Plant in Louisville , Kentucky , where it was slated to be succeeded by a Taiwanese version of its European CUV counterpart , the Ford Kuga .
FORD Section::::Ford .
A new concept version for the Asian market , called the Ford Escape Adventure Concept , was revealed at the 2007 Tokyo Motor Show .
It features a revised front and rear fascia , incorporating Ford 's three - bar grille styling theme and restyled LED tail lamps .
The 2.3 L Duratec 23 was replaced by a new 2.5 L Duratec 25 , which boosted standard power to and of torque , while increasing fuel economy by 1 mpg ( ~2L/100 km ) on both urban and extra - urban cycles .
The optional 3.0 L Duratec 30 V6 was thoroughly updated , resulting in a increase , bringing power output to and of torque .
The Duratec 30 also sees a fuel economy improvement .
The " Escape " badge is entirely removed from the front doors .
The Hybrid is also upgraded to use the 2.5 L ( albeit still using the Atkinson cycle for better fuel economy ) .
Efficiency improved to city and highway according to the USEPA .
The 2.5 L engine brings the Hybrid 's power output up by when the electric motor is added in .
Other mechanical changes include a new rear stabilizer bar , revised suspension tuning , upgrades to the 3.0 L V6 that brought power to 240 hp , and a new exhaust system on all Escapes .
The braking system for the Hybrid versions has been revised with a vacuum assist unit that reviewers have said give the brakes a consistent feel over the entire travel of the brake pedal .
Previous versions of the Hybrid were reported to have a slightly mushy brake feel , primarily due to the fact that for the first part of the brake travel and braking the system is regenerating power instead of engaging the brake pads against the rotors .
However , the brakes , when tested , gave the Escape extremely long stops .
Also in 2009 , Ford 's SYNC system is standard on the Hybrid , Hybrid Limited , and conventional Limited models , and optional on the XLS and XLT .
The Escape underwent some minor aerodynamic changes for 2009 , including a revised front chin spoiler and rear tire spoilers .
Along with the addition of rear tire spoilers is an optional 17 " chrome - clad wheel equipped with a new Michelin " Low - Rolling - Resistance - Tire " , slightly increasing ground clearance and improving traction over the standard 16 " wheels and tires .
Another new feature is Ford 's Easy - Fuel capless fuel filling system .
As of August 2009 the Escape was among the four Ford vehicles , along with the Focus , F - Series and Ranger , to benefit the most from the Cash for Clunkers program , where it showed a 49 percent increase in sales .
In 2009 for the 2010 model year , the Escape will add three new features that will be standard on all trims : Ford 's MyKey , trailer sway controls and Integrated Spotter Mirror for better blind spot viewing .
Everything else added in the 2008 and 2009 model years will be carried over , but the optional orders have been renamed to Rapid Specification Codes ( 100s for XLS , 200s for XLT , and 300s for Limited ) .
New optional features for 2010 : active park assist ( APA ) is a new feature available since mid-2009 as an option on the 2010 Ford Escape Limited ( currently only optional on the Ford Flex , Lincoln MKT , and Lincoln MKS ) .
Active Park Assist will detect an available parallel parking space and automatically steer the vehicle into the space ( hands free ) while the driver controls the accelerator , gearshift and brakes .
The system will visually and audibly instruct the driver to park the vehicle .
Active Park Assist system uses sensors on the front and rear of the vehicle to guide the vehicle into a parking space .
Rear - view camera system – uses an exterior camera embedded in the rear of the vehicle that sends images to a video display in the rearview mirror or the navigation system screen to help enhance visibility directly behind the vehicle when it is in reverse .
No cosmetic changes were made for the 2011 model year .
The only minor change is the standardization of SYNC Traffic & Directions on any models coming equipped with Sync .
There are no cosmetic or equipment changes for the 2012 model year .
The third - generation Escape was unveiled at the 2012 North American International Auto Show in Detroit .
Previously unavailable Electronic Stability Control system became standard on the second generation .
In Insurance Institute for Highway Safety crash tests the Escape along with its cousins , the Mercury Mariner and the Mazda Tribute , are rated " Good " in both frontal and side impact crash tests .
They are rated " Good " for rear crash protection as well and were given the " Top Safety Pick " award until 2010 .
In roof strength tests the Escape receives a " Marginal " rating while hybrid models are rated " Poor " .
MAZDA Section::::Mazda .
In 2007 for the 2008 model year , the Tribute was significantly revamped , like its Ford Escape and Mercury Mariner siblings .
Originally set to be renamed the Mazda CX-5 , the vehicle kept the Tribute name .
The changes were significant , but fell short of a " clean sheet " redesign , as the vehicles remained on the CD2 platform , and kept the old 2.3 L MZR I4 , and 3.0 L AJ V6 engines .
Visible changes include all new sheet metal and interior .
The interior was significantly upgraded using all new components and higher quality materials , and was generally praised by automotive journalists .
However , unlike the first generation of the Tribute , which had unique exterior and interior from its siblings , the new model only differs from its siblings in the " nose " ( front fenders , hood , and front fascia ) , tail lights and detailing .
Notable changes to the exterior include higher belt line , and more pronounced wheel arches .
Overall the car was to look larger and more substantial than the previous model .
As a cost - saving measure , the rear brake was reverted to drum brake , with predictable criticisms .
The 2008 Mazda Tribute ( non - hybrid ) was first unveiled at the 2007 Montreal International Auto Show , and the 2008 Mazda Tribute went on sale in March 2007 .
A new addition was the Hybrid model which was previously only available on the Ford Escape and Mercury Mariner .
The Tribute received additional major changes to improve performance for the 2009 model year , mostly by way of mechanical upgrades .
Most significantly , all new engines replaced the increasingly outmatched 2.3L I4 and 3.0L V6 .
Mazda 's new MZR 2.5L I4 replaced the 2.3L , boosting horsepower to and of torque at 4000 rpm .
Despite increased horsepower , fuel economy also increased by on both urban and extra - urban cycles .
The optional 3.0 L ( AJ ) V6 was thoroughly updated , resulting in a increase , bringing power output to and of torque .
It also sees a 1 mpg improvement .
The Tribute Hybrid was dropped after the 2009 model year .
Another significant change was the switch to Ford 's new 6F 6-speed automatic , which became standard on all V6 equipped models and optional on the I4 .
As well , new front and rear stabilizer bars were added for 2009 to improve ride handling after complaints about diminished performance following the 2008 changes .
Others changes included redesigned seats , daytime running lamps , optional steering mounted audio controls , and other additional features .
The Tribute was discontinued in November 2011 at the end of the 2011 model year , replaced by the Mazda CX-5 for 2012 .
MERCURY Section::::Mercury .
For the 2008 model year the Mariner was significantly updated with a new look although it remained on the Ford CD2 platform used by the previous generation .
The first 2008 Mercury Mariner was unveiled at the South Florida International Auto Show on October 6 , 2006 .
The changes included a new seats , headlights , taillights , a new liftgate , a higher beltline and new doors and wheels .
The interior was also significantly updated with higher quality materials and more refined features .
The engines remained the same but the 3.0 L Duratec V6 has been modified to reduce fuel consumption by 10 % .
The 2009 Ford Escape and Mercury Mariner were unveiled at the 2008 Washington Auto Show .
Sporting a 2.5-liter engine and 6-speed automatic transmission that replaced the four - speed automatic transmission , the new powertrain improved the EPA fuel economy by 1 mile per gallon and increased power by 11 % to .
Also , the existing 3.0-liter Duratec V6 was bumped from to .
The new engine was also the new basis for Ford 's hybrid models , including the Ford Escape Hybrid and Mercury Mariner Hybrid . "
For every eight Escape and Mariner vehicles we sell , one of them is a hybrid , and the appeal is growing , " says Sue Ciscke , Ford senior vice president , Sustainability , Environment and Safety Engineering .
For the 2010 model year , the Mariner added Ford 's MyKey and trailer sway controls as standard on all trim levels .
The Mariner engine has a Flex - Fuel option on all of them which features being able to use E85 fuel and/or regular unleaded only on the optional V6 engine .
Ford has also done away with the Euro - style turn signal repeaters for this model year .
For the 2011 model year , the Mariner featured HD Radio as a standard , but continued with the same features as the 2010 models .
This version of the Mariner was its last , as Ford discontinued the Mercury brand due to declining sales .
Ford ended production of the Mariner in October 2010 .
The last one rolled off the assembly line on October 5 , 2010 .
HYBRID
Section::::Hybrid .
The second generation Ford Escape Hybrid received some styling tweaks inside and out .
The major cosmetic changes included new bumpers , grille , headlights and taillights to match Ford 's new edge style .
But the drivetrain was essentially the same mechanically but has had extensive software modifications .
For 2009 , a larger , more powerful engine was introduced , together with a revised suspension , addition of stability control , the debut of " Sync " voice - control system and a capless fuel filler system .
The batteries and other hybrid components in a 2009 Escape hybrid added about 136 kg ( 300 lbs ) to the vehicle .
However , the added weight was blamed for an adverse effect in handling .
Furthermore , from 2009 onward , rear disc brakes of previous years were swapped for drum brakes , which was criticized as a " strange step backward " .
The second generation Escape Hybrid was offered in two levels of specification , an undesignated base model and the more expensive " Limited " trim .
The base included : a 60/40 split - fold rear bench seat , AdvanceTrac with roll stability control , and a single - disc four - speaker CD / MP3 stereo with Sirius Satellite Radio compatibility .
The " Limited " adds : a chrome front grille , heated front seats , a six - way power driver 's seat and full leather upholstery , rear park assist , ambient lighting , and 16-inch six - spoke alloy wheels .
For the 2009 model year , Ford SYNC became standard on both Hybrid trims and the Ford Escape Hybrid replaced the " ESCAPE " badges on doors with " HYBRID , " while relocating the logo for Ford hybrid models from near the driver 's side doors next to the " HYBRID " text .
2010 models saw the addition of MyKey , trailer sway controls , and integrated spotter mirror for better blind spot viewing .
New optional extras are active park assist and a rear - view camera .
Ford announced the development of a prototype E85 Hybrid Escape , the first flexible fuel hybrid electric vehicle capable of running on 85 % ethanol .
In 2007 Ford produced 20 demonstration Escape Hybrid E85s for real - world testing in fleets around the U.S. From 2009 , the gas engine was 2.5L Atkinson - cycle four cylinder engine with 155 hp at 6,000 rpm with an electric motor that produces 94 hp at 5,000 rpm .
The maximum combined output of both was 177 hp .
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) rated the fuel economy for the 2010 Escape Hybrid ( FWD ) at city , and highway .
The following table compares fuel economy , carbon footprint , and petroleum consumption between the hybrid version and other drivetrains of the Escape family as estimated by the EPA and the U.S. Department of Energy .
The Escape Hybrid met both California 's SULEV and PZEV standards , with tailpipe emissions better than 90 % less than the average 2003 new car and zero evaporative emissions .
By early 2012 Ford discontinued the production of the Escape Hybrid due to the introduction of the third generation Escape .
Two of the new 2013 model year Escapes have direct - injected and turbocharged EcoBoost units ( of 1.6 and 2.0 liters ) that deliver a higher fuel economy than the 2012 model .
A total of 122,850 Escape Hybrids were built since 2005 , along with 12,300 units of its sibling the Mercury Mariner Hybrid , discontinued in 2010 .
Plug - in
hybrid
Three companies have converted Ford Escape Hybrids to plug - in under a contract with the NYSERDA and delivered them in 2007 : Electrovaya of Toronto Canada , Hymotion also of Toronto Canada , Hybrids Plus of Boulder Colorado , United States .
Ford developed a research Escape Plug - in Hybrid and delivered the first of a fleet of 20 to Southern California Edison ( SCE ) in December 2007 to begin road testing .
This project is a collaboration aimed to explore the future of plug - in hybrids and evaluate how the vehicles might interact with the home and the utility 's electrical grid .
Some of the vehicles will be evaluated " in typical customer settings " , according to Ford .
Ford also developed the first ever flexible - fuel plug - in hybrid SUV , which was delivered to the United States Department of Energy in June 2008 .
This plug - in version of the Escape Hybrid runs on gasoline or E85 and is also part of the demonstration fleet Ford developed in a partnership with Southern California Edison and the Electric Power Research Institute .
Both the E85 version and the conventional gasoline engine version use a 10 kwh lithium - ion battery , which allows for a range at or less .
When the battery 's charge drops to 30 % , the vehicle switches to its four - cylinder engine , assisted by the batteries , operating as a regular hybrid electric vehicle .
The vehicle has a display system which shows the driver how efficient the vehicle is at any given time .
If the vehicle uses its engine and is running in traditional hybrid mode , fuel economy is rated at in the city and on the highway .
This fleet of 20 Ford Escape Plug - ins has been running in field testing with utility company fleets in California , New York , Ohio , North Carolina , Alabama , Georgia , Massachusetts , Michigan , and Quebec , Canada .
About 130 more will be produced for testing with financing from a $ 30 million grant from the U.S. Department of Energy .
Sales are scheduled for 2012 .
On August 2009 Ford delivered the first Escape Plug - in equipped with intelligent vehicle - to - grid ( V2 G ) communications and control system technology to American Electric Power of Columbus , Ohio .
This technology allows the vehicle operator to program when to recharge the vehicle , for how long and at what utility rate .
The battery systems communicate directly with the electrical grid via smart meters provided by utility companies through wireless networking .
During the two years since the demonstration program began , the fleet of Escape Plug - ins has logged more than , and Ford plans to equip all 21 plug - in hybrid Escapes with the vehicle - to - grid communications technology .
The Ford demonstration vehicles and Hybrids Plus conversions are similar .
The conversion involves the replacement of the original NiMH battery , located on the floor of the trunk , with a larger capacity Li - ion battery , in the same location and substantially the same volume as the original battery .
The Electrovaya and Hymotion conversions retain the original battery , and augment its capacity with a Li - ion battery that occupies a significant portion of the trunk .
In all cases , the conversion also involves the addition of a charger and of a power plug .
THIRD GENERATION ( 2013–PRESENT )
Section::::Third generation ( 2013–present ) .
The third generation was designed and rebadged by Ford of Europe alongside the largely identical European - market Ford Kuga .
It was released to North American markets in 2012 for the 2013 model year .
Other markets that previously used the " Escape " nameplate have switched to " Kuga " under the One Ford program .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
rowspan =
" 2 " Calendar year !
colspan =
" 2 " US sales !
Ford Escape !
Mercury Mariner REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ford 's Escape page