FRUIT OF THE POISONOUS TREE
Fruit of the poisonous tree is a legal metaphor in the United States used to describe evidence that is obtained illegally .
The logic of the terminology is that if the source ( the " tree " ) of the evidence or evidence itself is tainted , then anything gained ( the " fruit " ) from it is tainted as well .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The doctrine underlying the name was first described in Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States , 251 U.S. 385 ( 1920 ) .
The term 's first use was by Justice Felix Frankfurter in Nardone v. United States ( 1939 ) .
Such evidence is not generally admissible in court .
For example , if a police officer conducted an unconstitutional ( Fourth Amendment ) search of a home and obtained a key to a train station locker , and evidence of a crime came from the locker , that evidence would most likely be excluded under the fruit of the poisonous tree legal doctrine .
The testimony of a witness who is discovered through illegal means would not necessarily be excluded , however , due to , which allows certain evidence or testimony to be admitted in court if the link between the illegal police conduct and the resulting evidence or testimony is sufficiently attenuated .
It is believed that a witness who freely and voluntarily testifies is enough of an independent intervening factor to sufficiently " attenuate " the connection between the government 's illegal discovery of the witness and the witness 's voluntary testimony itself .
( United States v. Ceccolini , 435 U.S. 268 ( 1978 ) )
The " fruit of the poisonous tree " doctrine is an extension of the exclusionary rule , which , subject to some exceptions , prevents evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment from being admitted in a criminal trial .
Like the exclusionary rule , the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine is intended to deter police from using illegal means to obtain evidence .
The doctrine is subject to four main exceptions .
The tainted evidence is admissible if :
* it was discovered in part as a result of an independent , untainted source ; or * * it would inevitably have been discovered despite the tainted source ; or * * the chain of causation between the illegal action and the tainted evidence is too attenuated ; or * * the search warrant was not found to be valid based on probable cause , but was executed by government agents in good faith ( called the good - faith exception ) .
*
This doctrine was also used by the European Court of Human Rights in Gäfgen v. Germany .
In certain cases continental European countries have similar laws ( e.g. in cases of torture ) , while the doctrine itself is generally not known .
Illegally obtained evidence is used by the courts to ensure that the judgment is factually correct , however the person obtaining the illegal evidence typically faces independent consequences .
SEE ALSO
* Commonwealth v. Matos * Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States * Mapp v. Ohio , * Wong Sun v. United States ,
* Nix v. Williams , * Parallel construction * Sugar bowl ( legal maxim )
* Section 24(2 ) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms REFERENCES