BACITRACIN Bacitracin is a mixture of related cyclic peptides produced by organisms of the licheniformis group of Bacillus subtilis var Tracy , first isolated in 1945 .
These peptides disrupt Gram - positive bacteria by interfering with cell wall and peptidoglycan synthesis .
Bacitracin is primarily used as a topical preparation ( as it can cause kidney damage when used internally ) .
Antibiotics such as bacitracin have been shown to act as dermatological irritants and may slow healing .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Bacitracin is used in human medicine as a polypeptide antibiotic and is " approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for use in chickens and turkeys , " though use in animals contributes to antibiotic resistance .
As bacitracin zinc salt , in combination with other topical antibiotics ( usually polymyxin B and neomycin ) as an ointment ( " triple antibiotic ointment , " with a common brand name Neosporin ) , it is used for topical treatment of a variety of localized skin and eye infections , as well as for the prevention of wound infections .
A non - ointment form of ophthalmic solution is also available for eye infections .
Although allergic cross reaction with sulfa drugs has been occasionally reported , bacitracin - containing topical preparations remain a possible alternative to silver sulfadiazine ( Silvadene ) for burn patients with a sulfa allergy .
Bacitracin can also be bought in pure form for those with allergies to the polymyxin B and neomycin components of the combination product .
Bacitracin is also commonly used as an aftercare antibiotic on tattoos and circumcision .
It is preferred over combination products such as Neosporin because of its fewer ingredients , which lowers chances of an allergic reaction .
In 2005–06 , it was the sixth - most - prevalent allergen in patch tests ( 9.2 % ) .
It was voted Allergen of the Year in 2003 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society .
In infants , bacitracin is rarely administered intramuscularly for the treatment of staphylococcal pneumonia and empyema when due to organisms shown susceptible to bacitracin .
This use is extremely limited , since bacitracin is nephrotoxic and the concentration of bacitracin in the blood must be followed closely .
Bacitracin can be used to distinguish Streptococcus pyogenes from other " strep " bacteria , with S. pyogenes being sensitive to bacitracin and others resistant .
In this case bacitracin is used to distinguish S. pyogenes from other β - hemolytic streptococci .
It is also commonly used to distinguish Haemophilus influenzae colonies amongst respiratory flora ; since H. influenzae is intrinsically resistant to bacitracin , colonies form within the zone of inhibition .
SPECTRUM OF ACTIVITY AND SUSCEPTIBILITY
DATA Section::::Spectrum of activity and susceptibility data .
Bacitracin is a NARROW spectrum antibiotic .
It targets Gram - positive organisms , especially those that cause skin infections .
The following represents susceptibility data for a few medically significant microorganisms .
* Staphylococcus aureus – ≤0.03 μg / mL –
700 μg / mL * Staphylococcus epidermidis – 0.25 μg / mL – > 16 μg / mL
* Streptococcus pyogenes – 0.5 μg / mL –
> 16 μg / mL MECHANISM OF ACTION Section::::Mechanism of action .
Bacitracin interferes with the dephosphorylation of C - isoprenyl pyrophosphate , and a related molecule known as bactoprenol pyrophosphate ; both of these lipids function as membrane carrier molecules that transport the building - blocks of the peptidoglycan bacterial cell wall outside of the inner membrane .
Some have claimed that bacitracin is a protein disulfide isomerase inhibitor , but this is disputed by in vitro studies .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The drug 's unique name derives from the fact that it was isolated by John T. Goorley from a girl named Margaret Treacy ( 1936–1994 ) :
The surname was misspelled and the name was shortened to the more common spelling Tracy One strain isolated from tissue debrided from a compound fracture of the tibia was particularly active .
We named this growth - antagonistic strain for the patient , " Tracy I. " When cell - free filtrates of broth cultures of this bacillus proved to possess strong antibiotic activity and to be non - toxic , further study seemed warranted .
We have called this active principle " Bacitracin . "
It was approved by FDA in 1948 .
SYNTHESIS Section::::Synthesis .
Bacitracin is synthesised via what is called nonribosomal peptide synthetases ( NRPSs ) , which means that ribosomes are not directly involved in its synthesis .
bacABC is involved in synthesis .
Bacitracin is commercially manufactured by growing the bacteria Bacillus subtilis var
Tracy
I in a container of liquid growth medium .
Over time , the bacteria synthesizes the antibiotic and secretes the antibiotic into the medium .
The antibiotic is then extracted from the medium using chemical processes .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Bacitracin is composed of a mixture of related compounds with varying degrees of antibacterial activity .
Notable fractions include bacitracin A , A1 , B , B1 , B2 , C , D , E , F , G , and X. Bacitracin A has been found to have the most antibacterial activity .
Bacitracin B1 and B2 have similar potencies and are approximately 90 % as active as bacitracin A. Other bacitracin components including F and X do not appear to be extensively studied .
REFERENCES