.45
COLT
The .45 Colt cartridge , which is sometimes called .45 Long Colt , .45 LC , or 11.43×33mmR , is a handgun cartridge dating to 1872 .
It was originally a black - powder revolver round developed for the Colt Single Action Army revolver .
This cartridge was adopted by the U.S. Army in 1873 and served as an official US military handgun cartridge for 14 years .
While it is sometimes referred to as .45 Long Colt or .45 LC , to differentiate it from the very popular and ubiquitous .45 ACP , and historically , the shorter .45 S&W Schofield , it was only an unofficial designation by Army quartermasters .
Current catalog listings of compatible handguns list the caliber as .45 LC and .45 Colt .
Both the Schofield and the .45 Colt were used by the Army at the same period of time prior to the adoption of the " M1887 Government " version of the .45 Schofield cartridge HISTORY Section::::History .
The .45 Colt was a joint development between Colt 's Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company , of Hartford , Connecticut , and the Union Metallic Cartridge Company of Bridgeport ,
Conn. Colt began work on the revolver in 1871 , and submitted a sample to the U.S. Army in late 1872 .
The revolver was accepted for purchase in 1873 .
The cartridge is an inside lubricated type .
The rebated heel type bullet design of its predecessor , the .44 Colt ( .452–.454 " diameter bullet ) , was eliminated , since it was an outside lubricated type , which would pick up dirt and grit during handling .
The .45 Colt replaced the .50 caliber Model 1871 Remington single shot pistol and the various cap - and - ball revolvers converted to take metallic cartridges in use at the time .
While the Colt remained popular , the Smith & Wesson M1875 Army Schofield Revolver was approved as an alternate , which created a logistic problem for the Army .
The S&W revolver used the .45 S&W Schofield , a shorter cartridge , which would also work in the Colt , however the Army 's S&W Schofield revolvers could not chamber the longer
.45
Colt , so in the mid 1880s Frankford Arsenal , then almost exclusive supplier of small arms ammunition to the U.S. Army , dropped production of the .45 Colt in favor of the .45 S&W round .
Adoption of the .45 M1887 Military Ball Cartridge resolved the Army 's ammunition logistic problems .
The M1887 Govt round was replaced by the .38 Long Colt in 1892 .
In 1909 , the .45 M1909 round was issued along with the .45 Colt New Service revolver .
This round was never loaded commercially , and is almost identical to the original .45 Colt round , except having a larger diameter rim .
The rim is large enough that it can not be loaded in adjacent chambers in the rod - ejector Colt model .
The .45 Colt remains popular with renewed interest in Cowboy Action Shooting .
Additionally , the round has seen resurgence as a cartridge in handgun hunting and Metallic Silhouette Shooting competitions beginning in the 1950s with the introduction of stronger , heavier framed handguns .
The cartridge 's popularity has also increased with the increased marketing of handguns that can also fire the .410 bore shotgun shell , such as the Taurus Judge and the S&W Governor .
The modern .45 Colt bullet has changed as well , and it is now .451 inches in diameter for jacketed bullets , and .452 for lead bullets .
The .45 Colt became the basis for other rounds , such as the .454 Casull .
CARTRIDGE LOADS Section::::Cartridge loads .
The .45 Colt originally was a black - powder cartridge , but modern loadings use smokeless powder .
The original black - powder loads called for of black powder behind a lead bullet .
These loads developed muzzle velocities of up to .
Because of this power and its excellent accuracy , the .45 Colt was the most - used cartridge at the time of its introduction , succeeding the .44 WCF ( or the .44 - 40 Winchester ) .
The .45 Colt at that time did not enjoy the .44 - 40 's advantage of a Winchester rifle chambered for it , allowing use of the same cartridge in both pistol and rifle .
The rumor was that early .45 Colt cartridges had a very minimal rim , and would not eject reliably .
Currently manufactured brass has a rim of adequate diameter for such uses .
Modern Winchesters , Marlins and replicas have remedied this omission almost 100 years after the fact , and the .45 Colt is now available in modern lever - action rifles .
While this has been one of numerous arguments to explain the lack of a rifle chambered in .45 Colt , in fact , Colt would not authorize the use of their .45 Colt in other manufacturers ' arms .
It required the expiration of those original patents for the .45 Colt to become available in a rifle .
However , this does not explain the absence of a .45 Colt chambering ( or indeed any of Colt 's own cartridges ) in the Colt - Burgess lever - action or Colt Lightning slide - action rifles , lending more credence to there being a basic problem with Colt 's revolver cartridges .
( It is notable that modern
.45 Colt cartridge rims are still quite narrow , but feature an extractor groove cut into the base of the case , a feature common to most modern cartridges but not at all common in the late 1800s . )
Today 's standard factory loads develop around of muzzle energy at about , making it roughly equivalent to modern .45 ACP loads .
There are Cowboy Action Shooting loads which develop muzzle velocities of around .
Cartridges of the World states that .45 Colt should never be loaded to more than 800 fps .
HIGH PRESSURE
AMMUNITION Section::::High pressure ammunition .
Some handloads and factory manufactured cartridges put this round in the same class as the .44 Magnum using special revolvers .
These loads can not be used in any original Colt Single Action Army or replica thereof , such as those produced by Uberti , Beretta , the Taurus Gaucho , or the Ruger New Vaquero , as these guns are built on the smaller frame with thinner cylinder walls .
These loads should be used only in modern large - frame revolvers such as the Ruger Blackhawk , Redhawk , Ruger 's original Vaquero ( sometimes erroneously referred to as the " Old Model " which would differentiate it from the " New Model " , a completely different kind of design change ) .
Thompson Center Contender " Magnum " .45
Colt loadings can also be safely fired from any gun chambered in either the .454 Casull and .460 S&W Magnum cartridges , though proper feeding may be an issue in repeating rifles chambered for either the .454 or .460 as the OAL is significantly shorter .
Modern rifles with strong actions ( such as the Winchester Model 1894 , Marlin Model 1894 , and new clones of the Winchester Model 1892 ) chambered for the cartridge can safely handle the heavier loadings .
HANDLOADING
Section::::Handloading .
Colt .45 revolvers made until early WWII had barrels with .454 " groove diameters .
After this diameters of .451–.452 " were produced .
Using .454 " diameter bullets in the smaller barrels will work but will generate higher pressures .
Cases used with .454 " bullets may have to be full length resized to work in newer guns .
Speer handloading guidance states that the loads they show should be used only in handguns made specifically for modern smokeless powder .
The loads mentioned in No . 10 reloading manual state that they do not exceed 15,000 psi .
This is the equivalent of + P loading as normal pressure for the .45 Colt is 14,000 psi .
In a section specifically titled " 45 Colt for Ruger or Contender only " Speer makes reference to velocities up to 1300 feet per second with 200 grain bullets .
They also state that pressures do not exceed 25,000 psi ( CUP ) .
This is well beyond a pressure that can destroy even modern guns chambered in .45 Colt with the exception of the large frame Ruger Blackhawk , Ruger Redhawk , Freedom Arms Models 83 and 97 , and the Dan Wesson .
USES Section::::Uses .
Colt began work on their 1873 Single Action Army Model in 1871 .
Sample cartridges submitted for Army tests were made by UMC , using the Benet cup primers ; commercial ammunition used the Berdan - type primer , followed by the more common Boxer priming .
Original UMC loads used a powder charge and bullet .
This was reduced to of powder , and later , by the Army , to .
The .45 Colt cartridge remains in use years after its introduction .
It is used as a hunting load on animals the size of deer and black bear .
Heavier handloads will take the same range of big game animals as the .44 Magnum .
Several two - barrel derringers are sold that are chambered in .45 Colt , and some of these derringers can chamber
a .410 bore shotgun shell without any modifications being required .
Revolvers chambered in .410 shotgun , such as the Taurus Judge and the Smith & Wesson Governor , are usually chambered for the .45 Colt as well .
A popular use for the .45 Colt today is in Cowboy Action Shooting , where the round is often fired from either original or replicas of the 1873 Colt Single - Action Army .
Winchester , Marlin Firearms , Henry Repeating Arms , Chiappa Firearms , Rossi , Uberti , Cimarron Firearms and other manufacturers produce lever - action rifles chambered in .45 Colt .
Colt has resumed production of the Single - Action Army , and many SAA replicas and near - replicas as well as modern - design single - actions by Ruger are chambered for this cartridge .
INFLUENCE ON OTHER CARTRIDGES Section::::Influence on other cartridges .
The .45 Colt became the basis for the much more powerful .454 Casull cartridge , with the .454 Casull having a slightly longer case utilizing a small rifle primer in place of the large pistol primer .
Any .454 Casull revolver will chamber and fire .45
Colt and .45 Schofield , but not the inverse due to the Casull 's longer case .
The .460 S&W Magnum is a longer version of the .454 Casull and the .45 Colt .
Likewise , .460 Magnum revolvers can chamber and fire the three lesser cartridges , but again , not the reverse .
GALLERY
SEE
ALSO * 11 mm caliber
* List of handgun cartridges
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Article on the .45 Colt and the handloading
therof
* John Linebaugh discusses loading the .45 Colt * Ballistics By The Inch .45 Colt results .