TECHNICAL FOUL
In basketball , a technical foul ( also colloquially known as a " T " or a " Tech " ) is any infraction of the rules penalized as a foul which does not involve physical contact during the course of play between opposing players on the court , or is a foul by a non - player .
The most common technical foul is for unsportsmanlike conduct .
Technical fouls can be assessed against players , bench personnel , the entire team ( often called a bench technical ) , or even the crowd .
These fouls , and their penalties , are more serious than a personal foul , but not necessarily as serious as a flagrant foul ( an ejectable offense in leagues below the NBA , and potentially so in the NBA ) .
Technical fouls are handled slightly differently under international rules than under the rules used by the various competitions in the United States .
First , illegal contact between players on the court is always a personal foul under international rules , whereas in the USA , such contact is , with some exceptions , a technical foul when the game clock is not running and/or when the ball is dead .
Second , in FIBA play ( except for the half - court 3x3 variant , in which individual personal foul counts are not kept ) , players foul out after five total fouls , technical and personal combined ( since 2014 , one technical can be included towards the total ; two technicals in a game results in ejection ) .
The latter rule is similar to that in college , high school , and middle school basketball in the United States .
However , in leagues that play 48-minute games such as the NBA , and in some leagues such as the WNBA , players are allowed six personal fouls before being disqualified , and technical fouls assessed against them do not count toward this total .
However , unsportsmanlike technicals in the NBA carry a fine , its severity depending on the number of technicals the player has already obtained , and players are suspended for varying amounts of time after accumulating sixteen technicals in the regular season or seven in the playoffs .
In most American competitions , ejection of the offender , that of the player , coach , or otherwise , is the penalty for being assessed two technical fouls in a game , if charged directly to him /
her ( some technicals committed by a player are charged to the team only ) .
In addition , any single flagrant technical foul , or a disqualifying foul in FIBA , incurs ejection .
FIBA rules do not provide for ejection for any number of non - flagrant technicals ( known as unsportsmanlike fouls under that body 's rules ) against a player , except in 3x3 , in which two unsportsmanlike fouls result in ejection .
FIBA rules call for ejection when a coach draws two technicals , or a third is called on the bench .
INFRACTIONS Section::::Infractions .
Many infractions can result in the calling of a technical foul .
One of the most common is the use of profane language toward an official or another player .
This can be called on either players who are currently active in the play of the game , or seated on a team 's bench .
It can also be assessed to a coach or another person associated with the team in an official capacity such as a trainer or an equipment manager .
Additionally , coaches or players can be assessed a technical foul for disputing an official 's call too vehemently , with or without the use of profanity .
This verbal unsporting technical foul may be assessed regardless of whether the ball is dead or alive .
Other offenses can result in technical fouls , such as : * Allowing players to lock arms in order to restrict the movement of an opponent ( usually a team technical )
* Baiting or taunting an opponent *
Disrespectfully addressing or contacting an official or gesturing in such a manner as to indicate resentment
* Faking being fouled ( flopping )
* Fighting or threatening to fight * Goaltending a free throw
* Grasping either basket during pre - game or halftime warm - ups during the time of the officials ' jurisdiction , including attempting to dunk or stuff a dead ball ( whether successful or not ) prior to or during the game or during any intermission of the game .
Beginning in 2015–16 , dunking is permitted during warmup periods in NCAA play , although hanging on the rim remains illegal .
* Illegal substitution or entering the game at an impermissible time * Intentionally hanging on the basket at any time ( except to prevent an injury )
* Kicking or striking the basketball at any time using the foot ( in an unsportsmanlike manner ; unintentional kicking is a violation only )
* Knowingly attempting a free throw or accepting a foul to which the player was not entitled * Lifting or jumping onto a teammate to gain a height advantage
* Remaining out of bounds to gain an advantage * Removing the jersey or pants within the visual confines of the playing area
* Use of television monitoring or replay equipment , computers , or electronics such as megaphones for coaching purposes during the game
* Using tobacco or smokeless tobacco Violations of the rules for delaying the game ( in the NBA , NCAA , and NFHS ) usually incur a team warning for a first offense , followed by a team technical , or sometimes a player technical , if the same team delays a second time , to include :
* Going out of bounds during an opponent 's throw - in without contact ( warning , then a technical foul ) , or touching an opposing thrower - in ( intentional foul on the violator in NFHS , and is the warning for being out - of - bounds ) or the ball ( a technical on the offender in NFHS , and is the warning for being out - of - bounds ) as it is held entirely in out - of - bounds
* Huddling at the foul line for an excessive time ( warning , then a technical in NFHS )
* Not being ready to start play after a time - out , or to begin a quarter or half , or to shoot a free throw(s ) at such times ( a special protocol , known as the " resumption - of - play procedure " , is used in NFHS , where violations instead of technicals are initially called in some such situations )
* Refusing to immediately pass the ball to the nearer official when a whistle blows
* Failing as the free thrower to be in the free - throw semicircle when the official is ready to administer the free throw ( unless the resumption - of - play procedure is in effect in NFHS , supra )
* Throwing the ball into the stands or otherwise preventing a ball from being made live promptly after a made goal to allow one 's team to set up on defense ( if a blatantly unsportsmanlike act , a technical foul against the player ; otherwise , a warning to that team and team technicals thereafter ) .
This includes throwing the ball to an official when such act is not required — such would likely incur a warning .
In addition , throwing the ball at an opponent 's head may also be considered a technical foul . and more technical issues , such as : * Beginning the game with a starting player not so designated * Failure to supply the scorer with names and numbers of team players prior to the start of the scheduled contest , or at least 10 minutes prior to the contest in some jurisdictions
* Having too many players on the court , or too few ( NBA ; NCAA and NFHS if intentional )
*
If the coach leaves his box , especially to argue .
There are times when a coach may go to the scorer 's table to correct a game error .
* Failing , as the coach , to replace a disqualified player within the allotted time ( charged to the coach )
* ( NBA only ) playing a " scratched " player ( a rule adopted in 2005 where up to two " scratches " are permissible on a 14-man roster ) * Refusing to occupy the proper bench * Remaining in or returning to the game after being disqualified *
In the NBA , a player may not be ejected if assessed a seventh or subsequent personal foul because of being forced to remain in the game because there are no eligible players on the bench .
Each such extra personal foul , though , also includes a technical foul penalty .
* Requesting an excess time - out
* Uniform violations , including illegal insignia or numbers ; having 2 or more players with the same number ; or having the wrong number for a player in the official scorebook Until 2001 , the NBA also had a unique rule , the illegal defense , which was designed to stop defenders from dropping back into a zone and thus preventing drives to the basket .
The penalty , after a warning , was a technical foul charged to the offending team and one shot for the offense , except that if the first violation occurred within 24 seconds of the end of a period , the technical was assessed without warning .
Beginning with the , the NBA changed the illegal defense rule to the " defensive 3-second rule , " which prohibits a defender from being in the shooting lane for three seconds , unless guarding an opponent within arm 's reach ( or the man with the ball , regardless of distance ) .
The penalty is the same as it was for an illegal defense , except that no warning is issued .
The WNBA implemented this rule in 2013 .
Additionally , home teams can be assessed technical fouls resulting from their partisans ' misconduct for excessive use of artificial noise , the playing of music by their band , or for dangerous offenses such as throwing items ( particularly ice or coins ) onto the court .
Usually a fight or lesser altercation between players results in a " double technical " , in which a technical foul is issued to both players involved .
If any player leaves the team bench during a fight , he can be charged with a technical foul and ejected , as can any coach that does so without the beckoning of an official .
Rules against fighting vary from high school to college to the ( W)NBA , but all levels penalize severely for such conduct , to include suspensions and ( in the [ W]NBA ) heavy fines .
NFHS and NCAA require the automatic ejection of bench personnel leaving the team area during a fight , whether or not these players actually participate in the fight .
Beginning with the , the NBA began to crack down on general complaining .
Technical fouls can now be issued for the following :
* Making aggressive gestures anywhere on the court
* Disagreement in which a player demonstrates how he was fouled
* Running toward an official to complain about a call * Excessive inquiries about a call PENALTY Section::::Penalty .
In college basketball , NFHS , and lower divisions , the penalty for technical fouls has increased over the years .
Initially , the opposing team was awarded one free throw .
This later increased to one free throw and possession of the ball .
For a while , " bench technicals " assessed on a non - active player , assistant coach , or anyone else on the team bench were considered more serious and resulted in the award of two shots .
( Coaches have their own technical fouls , although they may be ejected and/or suspended if they have a mix of technicals totaling two or three fouls , depending on seriousness . )
Today , high school basketball ( NFHS in the United States ) provides for two free throws and possession of the ball at the division line opposite the scorer 's table , regardless of circumstances , for a technical foul .
International basketball provides a similar penalty .
Before the 2015–16 season , college basketball awarded two shots for all technical fouls , with the ball then put in play at the point of interruption ( POI ) , the spot and circumstances where play was stopped for the technical .
Since 2015–16 , the NCAA awards only one free throw for so - called " Class B " technicals , such as hanging on the rim or delay of game ; " Class A " technical fouls still result in two free throws .
In the WNBA and NBA , the penalty remains one free throw for the opposing team , with play resuming from the point of interruption .
The shot clock is reset to 14 seconds if it read less than such at the time of the foul .
The team awarded the foul shots for a technical may select the player(s ) to shoot them ( this rule differs slightly from level to level and internationally ) , as opposed to personal fouls , where the player fouled , unless injured , must shoot his own foul shots .
In the WNBA and NBA , technical fouls are split into two classes , unsportsmanlike and non - unsportsmanlike .
A player assessed an unsportsmanlike technical foul is fined , and accumulating sixteen unsportsmanlike technical fouls during the regular season will result in a one - game suspension .
For every two technical fouls received thereafter during that regular season , the player or coach 's suspension increases by one game .
Penalties for unsportsmanlike technical fouls are even higher for playoff games .
Players and coaches will be fined for every unsportsmanlike technical foul they receive .
Those who accumulate seven unsportsmanlike technical fouls will be suspended for one game .
For every two unsportsmanlike technical fouls received thereafter , the player or coach 's next suspension increases by one game .
Non - unsportsmanlike conduct technical fouls are defined per NBA Rule 12 , Section V , Paragraph c , and none count towards a fine , ejection or suspension .
These fouls are assessed for excessive time - outs , defensive three seconds , scratched player dressing and playing , excessive personal fouls because team is out of players , shattering backboards , or delay of game .
An offensive player who intentionally hangs on the backboard , unless it is legal for safety reasons , is fined $ 500 but is only assessed a non - unsportsmanlike conduct technical foul .
NOTABLE INSTANCES Section::::Notable instances .
One of the most famous technical fouls ever assessed was called on Chris Webber of the University of Michigan late in the 1993 NCAA championship game .
Down by two points to North Carolina with only seconds remaining , Webber called a time - out when Michigan had none left .
The resulting excessive time - out technical foul , for which North Carolina guard Donald Williams made both foul shots , ended any hopes Michigan had of claiming the championship .
In what has been called the greatest game ever played , Game 5 of the 1976 NBA Finals between the Phoenix Suns and Boston Celtics , the Suns found themselves one point down with one second left in double overtime , no time - outs remaining and possession of the ball under their defensive basket after a John Havlicek bucket .
Faced with the near - impossibility of sinking an 80-foot desperation shot , Suns guard Paul Westphal hit upon an unusual solution .
He intentionally called a time - out the Suns did not have .
While this gave the Celtics a free throw , which Jo Jo White successfully converted to increase the lead to two , it gave the Suns possession at halfcourt , and enabled Gar Heard to sink an 18-footer as time expired to force a third overtime .
NBA rules were changed the following year to prevent a repeat occurrence .
An instance where many technical fouls could have been called , but were not ( instead , the game was abandoned , a remedy available to the officials when too many players would have or have been disqualified or ejected for the game to continue , or when a team continually commits technical fouls in order to make a travesty of proceedings ) , was the Pacers – Pistons brawl involving players and spectators on November 19 , 2004 , in an NBA game between the Indiana Pacers and Detroit Pistons .
Ron Artest of the Pacers and Ben Wallace of the Pistons began scuffling after Artest fouled Wallace hard .
This escalated into a brawl where players from both teams became involved , and grew worse after Artest retreated to the scorer 's table and was hit by a cup thrown by a spectator .
Artest and several teammates and opponents then ran into the stands and fought with fans .
Had technical fouls been formally assessed , the result would likely have been the ejection of both teams ' entire squads ( except for Pistons player Tayshaun Prince , who was the only player from either team to remain on the bench for the entire incident ) .
In the end , nine players were suspended for a total of 146 games , including Artest for the remainder of the season .
In a 2007 game against the Dallas Mavericks , San Antonio 's Tim Duncan was charged a technical foul by referee Joe Crawford for laughing at him while sitting on the bench ( " gesturing in such a manner as to indicate resentment , " as indicated above ) .
As he had already picked up a technical foul on the previous play , also while sitting on the bench , this led to his ejection .
Upon further review it was determined that this technical foul was inconsistent with the league 's game management , and NBA commissioner David Stern suspended Crawford for the rest of the season .
Duncan was fined $ 25,000 for the incident .
The most technical fouls ever charged to a team in a single professional game is 6 ( all in the second half ) , to Aris Thessaloniki in a game against Olympiacos of the Greek A1 League on February 10 , 2008 .
Rasheed Wallace holds the record for the most technical fouls received during one season in the NBA .
In the 2000–01 season , he received 41 technical fouls in 80 regular season and postseason games played .
Wallace also holds the all - time mark for most technical fouls by a player in a career with 317 , a record previously held by Dennis Rodman .
There have been a few instances in the NBA when a team 's entire bench has either been injured or fouled out , and one of the five remaining eligible players fouls out , resulting in the technical foul that effectively acts as a bonus free throw situation .
The Atlanta Hawks ' Cliff Levingston ( fouled out , but one of the five remaining players was ejected ) and the Los Angeles Lakers ' Robert Sacre ( fouled out ) have both taken advantage of the disqualified player rule .
Under NBA Rule 3-I - a ( player fouls out ) and 3-I - b
( player injured or ejected ) , the player was assessed with a technical foul for remaining in the game or returning to the game after fouling out .
SEE ALSO
* Flagrant foul REFERENCES