SHELL V - POWER Shell V - Power is the brand name given to Shell 's enhanced high specification fuels for road motor vehicles including Shell V - Power Nitro+ and Shell V - Power Diesel .
Shell launched the fuel in March 2008 under the name Nitrogen - Enriched Shell V - Power , with nitrogen - containing detergents .
Initially used for higher octane Super Unleaded petrol / gasoline ( formerly known as Optimax in some regions ) , it is now additionally used for high specification diesel fuel .
V - POWER
PETROL Section::::V - Power petrol .
Petrol or gasoline is assessed , categorised and sold by an octane rating .
Generally , in most areas of the world , the Research Octane Number ( RON ) is used , but in North America , the Anti - Knock Index ( AKI ) is used .
Conventional ' standard ' " Super Unleaded " petrol in Europe , South Asia and Australia has an octane rating of 95 RON , and in North America " Premium Unleaded " is AKI / RdON / PON 91 - 93 ( RON 96–98 ) .
However , higher octane " Super Plus Unleaded " - often formulated with higher quality additives , is usually set at around 98 RON in mainland Europe ; but this can vary by market .
Most oil / petroleum companies now ' market ' their own Super Plus Unleaded petrols under a unique name - and
the current name for Shell Super Unleaded fuel is " V - Power " .
Like most Super Plus Unleaded petrols , V - Power also contains higher concentrations of detergents and other additives to help clean the engine and smooth its operation .
In the United Kingdom and Denmark ( where Super Plus Unleaded must be a minimum of 97 RON ) , V - Power has a rating of 99 RON ( whereas V - Power 's predecessor Shell Optimax was rated at 98 RON ) .
There are two other 99 RON fuel available in the UK , namely Tesco MOMENTUM99 and more recently Costco Premium Unleaded ( 99 RON ) .
In The Netherlands , V - Power used to have a 95 RON rating , although officials from Shell stated it effectively had a 97 RON rating .
Due to the limited categories of 92 RON , 95 RON , 98 RON and 100 RON . , it was officially rated at 95 .
These days , the RON rating of the V - power petrol in the Netherlands is rated at 98 .
In Germany , all Shell stations offer V - Power Racing 100 , rated at 100 RON .
In Greece , all Shell stations offer V - Power rated at 97 RON .
Most Shell stations also offer V - Power Racing ( 100 RON ) .
In Australia , from October 2006 , Shell and Coles Express re - branded Optimax to V - Power ( 98 RON ) .
V - Power Racing , the ultra - high performance variant has a rating of 100 RON although Shell have decided to phase out V - Power Racing from 21 July to mid August 2008 , instead recommending V - Power .
The previously obtainable higher grade V - Power Racing which contained 5 % ethanol to boost V - Power 's octane rating to 100 RON has now been phased out by Shell due to a " changing market " .
In the United States ( U.S. ) , at around 2004 , all U.S. Shell " Premium " gas was rebranded as " V - Power " .
In 2015 , Shell re - branded V - Power to the newly launched V - Power Nitro+ .
In Canada , from June 2005 , Shell Canada re - branded Optimax Gold to V - Power .
In 2015 , Shell Canada re - branded V - Power to V - Power Nitro+ ..
In Canada , Shell V - Power NiTRO+ premium gasoline does not contain ethanol .
In Hong Kong , as there is no oil refinery plant located in Hong Kong , Gasoline was imported from Singapore , which is 98 RON .
However , V - Power sold in gas stations rumored reach 167 RON ( the highest native RON for consumer grade commercial petrol across worldwide ) .
Such figure is not supported by actual test , nor is it confirmed by Shell and which is contradicted from a reading material for Legislators of Legislative Council .
In New Zealand , from 2007 , Shell rebranded 95 Premium Unleaded as V - Power .
It was still rated at 95 RON .
Shell sold its New Zealand retail operations in 2010 to a consortium which later became Z Energy , and upon re - branding Shell V - Power was replaced with ZX Premium Unleaded .
In Sweden , Shell V - Power was previously 99 RON , but is now been re - branded under the new owner St1 from June 2011 to " Shell V - Power E5 " making it 98 RON with a mix of 5 % ethanol .
In Argentina , from 2009 , Shell rebranded 95 Super fuel as V - Power and also the Diesel premium for V - Power diesel .
In the Philippines , Pilipinas Shell launches the new premium fuel grade , Shell V - Power Nitro+ Gasoline ( formerly Shell Super Premium ) and Shell V - Power Nitro+ Racing ( formerly Shell V - Power ) .
In Indonesia , from April 2013 , Shell rebranded 95 Super Extra as V - Power with additional additives .
While it is still rated at 95 RON .
In 2016 Shell V - Power in Indonesia will increase from 95 RON to 98 RON and 100 RON .
In Malaysia , it is RON97
but in Singapore , where Shell offers RON98 , the octane is higher for V - Power Racing .
In Philippines , on June 8 , 2017 , V - Power Nitro+ was replaced with V - Power with Dynaflex technology .
V - POWER DIESEL Section::::V - Power Diesel .
V - Power Diesel is Shell 's version of an enhanced diesel fuel , similar , say to BPs ' Ultimate Diesel ' .
Like BP Ultimate Diesel , Shell V - Power Diesel is designed for modern compression - ignition diesel engines , to facilitate enhanced engine performance along with increased engine protection , for more consistent operation and engine longevity .
One characteristic of V - Power diesel is that it is a lot clearer and odourless than normal diesel , mainly due to the synthetic GTL component .
The fuel is slightly less dense than regular diesel so , per volume , the unit energy is actually lower than regular diesel .
This is offset , as the fuel tends to ignite more readily ( and thus has a higher cetane rating ) than regular diesel , and a side benefit of this is that it tends to produce less soot during combustion .
Shell also markets a different " premium " diesel in Canada labeled V - Power , which they state " Is specially formulated for year - round Canadian weather conditions , with a cetane improver , a de - icer and a corrosion inhibitor . " .
This Canadian V - Power diesel is dispensed from a dedicated pump that injects a measured amount of NEMO 2061 additive into the diesel supply shared with the other diesel pumps at the service station .
As a result , it contains no GTL components beyond those that may already exist in the shared diesel supply .
Effective June 1 , 2012 , Pilipinas Shell launches the new premium diesel fuel grade , Shell V - Power Nitro+ Diesel ( formerly Shell V - Power Diesel )
DEVELOPMENT IN MOTORSPORTS Section::::Development in motorsports .
Since 2004
Shell V - Power has been sponsoring Scuderia Ferrari that participates in Formula One .
Shell V - Power also sponsored Audi Sport Team Joest factory team until 2009 .
Part of the campaign , especially targeted to sell " V - Power Nitro+ " brand of the fuels ( higher priced than usual and similar to blend used on the track ) is organizing Formula One events in cities without a track .
For example , on the streets of Warsaw , Poland , where Scuderia Ferrari driver Felipe Massa drove the race car used in 2013 Formula One Championship .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
All Shell V - Power fuels featured in .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Shell V - Power official website
* Shell V - Power - Products and Services - global V - Power portal