TORREY PINES STATE NATURAL RESERVE
Torrey Pines State Natural Reserve is 2,000 acres of coastal state park located in the community of La Jolla , in San Diego , California , off North Torrey Pines Road .
Although it is located within San Diego city limits , it remains one of the wildest stretches of land ( 8 km² ) on the Southern California coast .
It is bordered immediately on the south by Torrey Pines Municipal Golf Course and on the north by the city of
Del Mar. The reserve was designated a National Natural Landmark in 1977 .
The reserve consists of a plateau with cliffs that overlook Torrey Pines State Beach , and a lagoon that is vital to migrating seabirds .
Many different kinds of wildlife and flora are found within the reserve , including bobcats , foxes , skunks , raccoons , coyotes , rabbits , cacti , coastal chaparral , and the rare Torrey pine .
The eight miles of trails within the park offer an attraction for hikers and beach - goers and
a small museum sits at the top of the hill .
From the cliffs or many places along the beach , it is possible to see La Jolla to the south and Del Mar to the north .
During whale migrations , it is sometimes possible to see whales from the cliffs .
At the southern end of the beach is a large rock that projects into the ocean , called Flat Rock .
South of the rock is San Diego 's unofficial nude beach , Black 's Beach .
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PARK Section::::Establishment of the Park .
The area was once home to the Kumeyaay people .
City father George Marston persuaded the San Diego City Council in 1899 to pass an ordinance preserving 364 acres of the pueblo land as a park .
Later between 1908 and 1911 , newspaperwoman and philanthropist Ellen Browning Scripps bought additional land and donated it to the city .
In 1916 , Guy Fleming visited the park and after examining the current condition , pushed for preservation of the park and eventually became the District Superintendent for the Southern California State Park System .
The Torrey Pines Lodge was completed in 1923 and a year later , more lands were added to the park .
Now consisting of over 1,000 acres of cliffs , beach , and more , the park became open to the public .
In 1956 , it was decided that the park be handed over to the State of California for higher protection because it is a state reserve .
In 1970 , 197 acres and 1,500 trees were added due to fear of human expansion .
Later in 1975 , the Torrey Pines Docent Society was started to help promote preservation of the park , in addition to the Visitors Center .
In 2007 , the park 's name was changed to Torrey Pines State Natural Reserve .
The park size is now over 2,000 acres .
The official Torrey Pines website provides more detail on the establishment of the Torrey Pines Reserve .
ECOLOGY
TORREY PINE
Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Torrey Pine .
The Pinus torreyana torreyana , also known as the Torrey pine woodland , is the rarest pine in North America .
The plant has vanished over time due to the drying period over the last 10 years and has an intricate root system that helps attach it to the overbearing bluffs .
Torrey Pines is the sole location worldwide where this subspecies grows ( including a small coastal strip immediately north of the Reserve in
Del Mar. A closely related subspecies occurs on Santa Rosa Island .
OTHER SPECIES , CLIMATE Section::::Other species , climate .
While chiefly known as habitat to this extremely rare and endangered species , the Torrey Pine Reserve also is home to a wide variety of vegetation and wildlife .
The Torrey Pines Reserve has a rather unusual climate due to the Santa Ana winds causing the vegetation to be drier .
Plants such as Coastal sage scrub , Coastal Strand , and Salt marsh also thrive at Torrey Pines .
More information on the different plants that grow at this park is provided on the official Torrey Pines website .
TRAILS
Section::::Trails .
The Torrey Pines State Natural Reserve offers 8 trails to hikers that vary in terms of length , difficulty , and scenery .
San Diego Tourism Authority says that three popular trails at the park are Guy Fleming Trail , Razor Point Trail , and Beach Trail .
The Guy Fleming Trail is 0.7 miles and is the easiest trail at the park .
The trail provides diverse scenery from Peñasquitos Marsh to views of La Jolla and is well known for whale sightings in the winter .
The Razor Point Trail is a 1.4-mile loop that provides hikers with a view of ravines and badlands while overlooking the ocean .
The Beach Trail is a ¾ mile walk that leads one down to the Torrey Pines State Beach .
Although it is the least scenic trail , it is very popular due to taking hikers straight to the wide - open beach .
Other trails at the park are the Parry Grove Trail , Yucca Point Trail , High Point Trail , Broken Hill Trail , and Discovery Trail .
The official Torrey Pines website provides more information on the other trails .
ACCIDENTS Section::::Accidents .
In 2008 , a 57-year - old tourist from Henderson , Nevada died from a cliff that gave way .
The man was struck on the head by basketball - sized boulders , and after the victim was dug out of the debris , a crew performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation to try to save his life .
The man died hours later .
Torrey Pines is known for its sandy , unstable cliffs and this was not the first time a cliff had collapsed .
On January 18 , 2014 , a 65-year - old hiker fell about half a mile down a trail at Torrey Pines and broke his ankle .
The injury was so drastic that the man needed a cliff rescue .
SEE ALSO
* Los Peñasquitos Lagoon
* San Diego Historical Landmarks in La Jolla
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES * Torrey Pines State Reserve ( 2008 )
Torrey Pines State Reserve
* C.Michael Hogan ( 2008 )
Torrey Pine : Pinus torreyana , Globaltwitcher , ed .
Nicklas Stromberg
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website * Torrey Pines Association * Torrey Pines SR California State Park