CREATINE KINASE Creatine kinase ( CK ) , also known as creatine phosphokinase ( CPK ) or phosphocreatine kinase , is an enzyme ( ) expressed by various tissues and cell types .
CK catalyses the conversion of creatine and utilizes adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) to create phosphocreatine ( PCr ) and adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) .
This CK enzyme reaction is reversible and thus ATP can be generated from PCr and ADP .
In tissues and cells that consume ATP rapidly , especially skeletal muscle , but also brain , photoreceptor cells of the retina , hair cells of the inner ear , spermatozoa and smooth muscle , PCr serves as an energy reservoir for the rapid buffering and regeneration of ATP in situ , as well as for intracellular energy transport by the PCr shuttle or circuit .
Thus creatine kinase is an important enzyme in such tissues .
Clinically , creatine kinase is assayed in blood tests as a marker of damage of CK - rich tissue such as in myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) , rhabdomyolysis ( severe muscle breakdown ) , muscular dystrophy , autoimmune myositides , and acute kidney injury .
TYPES Section::::Types .
In the cells , the " cytosolic " CK enzymes consist of two subunits , which can be either B ( brain type ) or M ( muscle type ) .
There are , therefore , three different isoenzymes : CK - MM , CK - BB and CK - MB .
The genes for these subunits are located on different chromosomes : B on 14q32 and M on 19q13 .
In addition to those three cytosolic CK isoforms , there are two mitochondrial creatine kinase isoenzymes , the ubiquitous and sarcomeric form .
The functional entity of the latter two mitochondrial CK isoforms is an octamer consisting of four dimers each .
While mitochondrial creatine kinase is directly involved in formation of phospho - creatine from mitochondrial ATP , cytosolic CK regenerates ATP from ADP , using PCr .
This happens at intracellular sites where ATP is used in the cell , with CK acting as an in situ ATP regenerator . !
gene !
protein Isoenzyme patterns differ in tissues .
Skeletal muscle expresses CK - MM ( 98 % ) and low levels of CK - MB ( 1 % ) .
The myocardium ( heart muscle ) , in contrast , expresses CK - MM at 70 % and CK - MB at 25–30 % .
CK - BB is predominantly expressed in brain and smooth muscle , including vascular and uterine tissue .
ATOMIC STRUCTURES OF MITOCHONDRIAL AND CYTOSOLIC CREATINE KINASE FAMILY MEMBERS Section::::Atomic structures of mitochondrial and cytosolic Creatine Kinase family members .
A number of genuine CK structures have been solved by high - resolution electron microscopy and protein X - ray crystallography by the two research groups led by Dr. Theo Wallimann at the Biol .
Dept .
ETH Zurich and by Dr. Wolfgang Kabsch at MPI in Heidelberg .
The first X - ray structure of a creatine kinase ( CK ) family member solved was that of sarcomeric muscle - type mitochondrial CK ( s - mtCK
( in 1996 )
( Fritz - Wolf et al . 1996 ) , later followed by the structure of ubiquitous u - mtCK in 2000 .
( Eder et al . 2000 ) .
Both mitochondrial CK isoforms are building highly symmetrical octameric structures with 4-fold symmetry .
( Schnyder et al . 1990 ;
Schnyder et al . 1991 ) .
The atomic structure of cytosolic brain - type BB - CK was solved at 1.4 !
Angstoms in 1999 .
( Eder et al . 1999 ) .
Cytosolic BB - CK , as well as muscle - type MM - CK are both forming banana - shaped symmetric dimers , with one active site in each subunit .
( Hornemann et al . 2000 ) .
FUNCTIONS Section::::Functions .
The mitochondrial creatine kinase ( CK ) is present in the mitochondrial intermembrane space , where it regenerates phosphocreatine ( PCr ) from mitochondrially generated ATP and creatine ( Cr ) imported from the cytosol .
Apart from the two mitochondrial CK isoenzyme forms , that is , ubiquitous mtCK ( present in non - muscle tissues ) and sarcomeric mtCK ( present in sarcomeric muscle ) , there are three cytosolic CK isoforms present in the cytosol , depending on the tissue .
Whereas MM - CK is expressed in sarcomeric muscle , that is , skeletal and cardiac muscle , MB - CK is expressed in cardiac muscle , and BB - CK is expressed in smooth muscle and in most non - muscle tissues .
Mitochondrial mtCK and cytosolic CK are connected in a so - called PCr / Cr - shuttle or circuit .
PCr generated by mtCK in mitochondria is shuttled to cytosolic CK that is coupled to ATP - dependent processes , e.g. ATPases , such as acto - myosin ATPase and calcium ATPase involved in muscle contraction , and sodium / potassium ATPase involved in sodium retention in the kidney .
The bound cytosolic CK accepts the PCr shuttled through the cell and uses ADP to regenerate ATP , which can then be used as energy source by the ATPases ( CK is associated intimately with the ATPases , forming a functionally coupled microcompartment ) .
PCr is not only an energy buffer but also a cellular transport form of energy between subcellular sites of energy ( ATP ) production ( mitochondria and glycolysis ) and those of energy utilization ( ATPases ) .
Thus , CK enhances skeletal , cardiac , and smooth muscle contractility , and is involved in the generation of blood pressure .
LABORATORY TESTING Section::::Laboratory testing .
CK is often determined routinely in a medical laboratory .
It used to be determined specifically in patients with chest pain but this test has been replaced by troponin .
Normal values at rest are usually between 60 and 174 IU / L , where one unit is enzyme activity , more specifically the amount of enzyme that will catalyze 1 μmol of substrate per minute under specified conditions ( temperature , pH , substrate concentrations and activators . )
This test is not specific for the type of CK that is elevated .
Creatine kinase in the blood may be high in health and disease .
Exercise increases the outflow of creatine kinase to the blood stream for up to a week , and this is the most common cause of high CK in blood .
Furthermore , high CK in the blood may be related to high intracellular CK such as in persons of African descent .
Finally , high CK in the blood may be an indication of damage to CK - rich tissue , such as in rhabdomyolysis , myocardial infarction , myositis and myocarditis .
This means creatine kinase in blood may be elevated in a wide range of clinical conditions including the use of medication such as statins ; endocrine disorders such as hypothyroidism ; and skeletal muscle diseases and disorders including malignant hyperthermia , and neuroleptic malignant syndrome .
Furthermore , the isoenzyme determination has been used extensively as an indication for myocardial damage in heart attacks .
Troponin measurement has largely replaced this in many hospitals , although some centers still rely on CK - MB .
SEE ALSO
* Reference ranges for blood tests
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Simply stated at mdausa.org
* CPK isoenzymes test * CK at Lab Tests Online