FOOTLOOSE ( 1984 FILM )
Footloose is a 1984 American musical drama film directed by Herbert Ross .
It tells the story of Ren McCormack ( Kevin Bacon ) , an upbeat Chicago teen who moves to a small town in which , as a result of the efforts of a local minister ( John Lithgow ) , dancing and rock music have been banned .
The film is loosely based on actual events that took place in the small , rural , and religious community of Elmore City , Oklahoma .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ren McCormack , a teenager raised in Chicago , moves with his mother to the small town of Bomont to live with his aunt and uncle .
Soon after arriving , Ren befriends Willard Hewitt , and from him learns the city council has banned dancing and rock music .
He soon begins to fall for a rebellious teenage girl named Ariel , who has an abusive boyfriend , Chuck Cranston , and a strict father , Shaw Moore , who is a reverend of the local church .
After trading insults with Chuck , Ren is challenged to a game of chicken involving tractors .
Ren wins when his shoelace becomes stuck and prevents him from jumping from the tractor .
Reverend Moore distrusts Ren , and he grounds Ariel , forbidding her to see him .
Ren and his classmates want to do away with the no - dancing law and have a senior prom .
He drives Ariel , Willard , and Ariel 's best friend , Rusty , to a country bar about 100 miles away from Bomont to experience the joy and freedom of dancing , but once there , Willard is unable to dance and gets into a jealous fight with a man who dances with Rusty .
Later , Ren teaches Willard to dance .
Ren decides to challenge the anti - dancing ordinance so that the senior class can hold a senior prom .
He goes before the city council and reads several Bible verses to cite scriptural support for the worth of dancing to rejoice , exercise , or celebrate .
Although Reverend Moore is moved , the council votes against Ren 's proposal .
Vi , Moore 's wife , is supportive of the movement and explains to Moore that he can not be everyone 's father and that he is hardly being a father to Ariel .
She also says that dancing and music are not the problem .
Moore feels betrayed that even his wife does not believe in him even though she assures him that she always did , telling him , " Shaw , it 's
20 years now I 've been a minister 's wife .
And I 've been quiet , supportive , unobtrusive ; and after 20 years I still think you 're a wonderful , wonderful preacher .
You can lift a congregation up so high they have to look down to see Heaven .
But it 's the one - to - one where you need a little work . "
Despite further discussion with Ren about his own family losses in comparison to Moore 's losses and Ariel 's opening up about her own sinful past , even going so far as to admit that she has had sexual relations , Moore can not bring himself to change his stance .
His son Bobby was killed in a car crash while returning from a night of dancing , resulting in Moore 's arranging to ban music and dancing in the community .
However , he has a change of heart after seeing some of the townsfolk burning books that they think are dangerous to the youth .
Realizing the situation has gotten out of hand , Moore stops the book - burning , rebukes the people , and sends them home .
The following Sunday , Moore asks his congregation to pray for the high school students putting on the prom , which is set up at a grain mill just outside the Bomont town limits .
Shaw and Vi listen outside , dancing for the first time in years .
Chuck and his friends arrive and start a fight with Willard , who with Ren knocks them out .
Ren , Ariel , Willard , and Rusty rejoin the party and happily dance the night away .
CAST * Kevin Bacon as Ren McCormack
* Lori Singer as Ariel Moore
* John Lithgow as Rev. Shaw Moore
* Dianne Wiest as Vi Moore * Chris Penn as Willard Hewitt
* Sarah Jessica Parker as Rusty
* John Laughlin as Woody
* Elizabeth Gorcey as Wendy Jo * Frances Lee McCain as Ethel McCormack
* Jim Youngs as Chuck Cranston
* Timothy Scott as Andy Beamis PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Dean Pitchford wrote the screenplay ( and most of the lyrics ) for Footloose , Herbert Ross directed the movie , and Paramount Pictures co - produced and distributed the film .
Michael Cimino was hired by Paramount to direct the film when negotiations with Ross initially stalled .
After four months working on the film , the studio fired Cimino , who was making extravagant demands for the production , including demanding an additional $ 250,000 for his work , and ended up rehiring Ross .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Tom Cruise and Rob Lowe were both slated to play the lead .
The casting directors were impressed with Cruise because of the famous underwear dance sequence in Risky Business , but he was unavailable for the part because he was filming All the Right Moves .
Lowe auditioned three times and had dancing ability and the " neutral teen " look that the director wanted , but injury prevented him from taking the part .
Bacon had been offered the main role for the Stephen King movie Christine at the same time that he was asked to do the screen test for Footloose .
He chose to take the gamble on the screen test .
After watching his earlier movie Diner , the director persuaded the producers to go with Bacon .
The film also starred Lori Singer as Reverend Moore 's independent daughter Ariel , a role for which Madonna also auditioned .
Daryl Hannah turned down the offer to play Ariel in order to play Madison in Splash .
Elizabeth McGovern turned down the role to play Deborah Gelly in Once Upon a Time in America .
Melanie Griffith , Michelle Pfeiffer , Jamie Lee Curtis , Rosanna Arquette , Meg Tilly , Julia Louis - Dreyfus , Heather Locklear , Meg Ryan , Jennifer Jason Leigh , Jodie Foster , Phoebe Cates , Tatum O'Neal , Bridget Fonda , Lori Loughlin , Diane Lane and Brooke Shields were all considered for the role of Ariel .
Dianne Wiest appeared as Vi , the Reverend 's devoted yet conflicted wife .
The film featured an early film appearance by Sarah Jessica Parker as Ariel 's friend Rusty , for which she received a Best Young Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture Musical , Comedy , Adventure or Drama nomination at the Sixth Annual Youth in Film Awards .
It was also an early role for Chris Penn as Willard Hewitt , who is taught how to dance by his friend Ren .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The film was shot at various locations in Utah County , Utah .
The high school and tractor scenes were filmed in and around Payson and Payson High School .
The church scenes were filmed in American Fork and the steel mill was the Geneva Steel mill in Vineyard .
The drive - in scenes were filmed in Provo at what was then the " High Spot " restaurant .
The restaurant closed in the late 1980s and there is now an auto parts store located at 200 N 500
W.
The final sequence was filmed in Lehi with the Lehi Roller Mills featured in the final sequence .
For his dance scene in the warehouse , Bacon said he had four stunt doubles : " I had a stunt double , a dance double [ Peter Tramm ] and two gymnastics doubles . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was released in cassette , 8-track tape , vinyl , and CD format .
The soundtrack was also re - released on CD for the 15th anniversary of the film in 1999 .
The re - release included four new songs : "
Bang Your Head ( Metal Health ) " by Quiet Riot , " Hurts So Good " by John Mellencamp , " Waiting for a Girl Like You " by Foreigner , and the extended 12 " remix of " Dancing in the Sheets " .
The album includes " Footloose " and
" I 'm Free " , both by Kenny Loggins , " Holding Out for a Hero " by Bonnie Tyler ,
" Girl Gets Around " by Sammy Hagar , " Never " by Australian rock band Moving Pictures , "
Let 's Hear It for the Boy " by Deniece Williams , " Somebody 's Eyes " by Karla Bonoff , and " Dancing In The Sheets " by Shalamar , and the love theme , " Almost Paradise " by Mike Reno from Loverboy and Ann Wilson of Heart .
Some of the songs were composed by Eric Carmen and Jim Steinman and the soundtrack went on to sell over 9 million copies in the USA .
The first two tracks both hit No . 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 and received 1985 Academy Award nominations for Best Music ( Original Song ) .
" Footloose " also received a 1985 Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Original Song – Motion Picture .
The late film composer Miles Goodman has been credited for adapting and orchestrating the film 's score .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received mixed reviews from critics .
Chicago Sun - Times critic Roger Ebert called it " a seriously confused movie that tries to do three things , and does all of them badly .
It wants to tell the story of a conflict in a town , it wants to introduce some flashy teenage characters , and part of the time it wants to be a music video . "
Dave Denby in New York rechristened the film " Schlockdance " , writing : " Footloose may be a hit , but it 's trash - high powered fodder for the teen market ...
The only person to come out of the film better off is the smooth - cheeked , pug - nosed Bacon , who gives a cocky but likeable Mr. Cool performance . "
Jane Lamacraft reassessed the film for Sight and Sound " Forgotten pleasures of the multiplex " feature in 2010 , writing " Nearly three decades on , Bacon 's vest - clad set - piece dance in a flour mill looks cheesily 1980s , but the rest of Ross 's drama wears its age well , real song - and - dance joy for the pre - Glee generation . "
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film received an approval rating of 51 % based on 39 reviews , with an average rating of 5.6/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 42 out of 100 based on 12 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Despite mixed critical reviews , the film grossed $ 80,035,403 domestically .
ACCOLADES * 2004
: AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs : * " Footloose " –
# 96 MUSICAL ADAPTATION Section::::Musical adaptation .
In 1998 , a musical version of Footloose premiered .
Featuring many of the songs from the film , the show has been presented on London 's West End , on Broadway , and elsewhere .
The musical is generally faithful to the film version , with some slight differences in the story and characters .
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
Paramount announced plans to fast - track a musical remake of Footloose .
The remake was written and directed by Craig Brewer .
Filming started in September 2010 .
It was budgeted at $ 25 million .
The release date was October 14 , 2011 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Footloose at The Numbers * Footloose Review , history and filming locations