WHITE SPIRIT White spirit ( UK ) or mineral spirits ( US , Canada ) , also known as mineral turpentine ( AU / NZ ) , turpentine substitute , petroleum spirits , solvent naphtha ( petroleum ) , Varsol , Stoddard solvent , or , generically , " paint thinner " , is a petroleum - derived clear liquid used as a common organic solvent in painting .
A mixture of aliphatic , open - chain or alicyclic C7 to C12 hydrocarbons , white spirit is insoluble in water and is used as an extraction solvent , as a cleaning solvent , as a degreasing solvent and as a solvent in aerosols , paints , wood preservatives , lacquers , varnishes , and asphalt products .
In western Europe about 60 % of the total white spirit consumption is used in paints , lacquers and varnishes .
White spirit is the most widely used solvent in the paint industry .
In households , white spirit is commonly used to clean paint brushes after use , to clean auto parts and tools , as a starter fluid for charcoal grills , to remove adhesive residue from non - porous surfaces , and many other common tasks .
The word " mineral " in " mineral spirits " or " mineral turpentine " is meant to distinguish it from distilled spirits ( distilled directly from fermented grains and fruit ) or from true turpentine ( distilled tree resin ) .
TYPES AND GRADES Section::::Types and grades .
Three different types and three different grades of white spirit exist .
The type refers to whether the solvent has been subjected to hydrodesulfurization ( removal of sulfur ) alone ( type 1 ) , solvent extraction ( type 2 ) or hydrogenation ( type 3 ) .
Each type comprises three grades : low flash grade , regular grade , and high flash grade ( flash refers to flash point ) .
The grade is determined by the crude oil used as the starting material and the conditions of distillation .
In addition there is type 0 , which is defined as distillation fraction with no further treatment , consisting predominantly of saturated C9 to C12 hydrocarbons with a boiling range of 140–200 ° C .
Stoddard solvent is a specific mixture of hydrocarbons , typically > 65 % C10 or higher hydrocarbons , developed in 1924 by Atlanta dry cleaner W. J. Stoddard and Lloyd E. Jackson of the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research as a less flammable petroleum - based dry cleaning solvent than the petroleum solvents then in use .
Dry cleaners began using the result of their work in 1928 and it soon became the predominant dry cleaning solvent in the United States , until the late 1950s .
Turpentine substitute is generally not made to a standard and can have a wider range of components than products marketed as white spirit , which is made to a standard ( in the UK , British Standard BS 245 , in Germany , DIN 51632 ) .
Turpentine substitute can be used for general cleaning but is not recommended for paint thinning as it may adversely affect drying times due to the less volatile components ; while it may be used for brush cleaning its heavier components may leave an oily residue .
In Australia , white spirit is normally sold under the generic name of Shellite ( etymology unknown ) , and is composed of C6 to C10 straight alkanes , classing it as light pure naptha .
It is used for fuel and cleaning .
CHEMICAL NUMBERS Section::::Chemical numbers . !
CAS ! !
EINECS ! !
Name ! !
Descriptive name!!Ref PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Physical properties .
Type 1 white spirit is mainly used in most of the Europe and Stoddard solvent is used in the US , both of which correspond to each other .
+ White spirit types 1 - 3 physical properties !
Property !
T1 :
Low flash !
T2 :
Regular !
T3 :
High flash Initial boiling point ( IBP ) ( ° C ) 130–144 145–174 175–200 Final boiling point ( ° C ) colspan="3 "
align="center " IBP+21 , max . 220 Average relative molecular mass 140 150 160 Relative density ( 15 ° C ) 0.765 0.780 0.795 Flash point ( ° C ) 21–30 31–54 >
55 Vapour pressure ( kPa , 20 ° C ) 1.4 0.6 0.1 Volatility ( n - butyl acetate=1 ) 0.47 0.15 0.04 Autoignition temperature ( ° C ) 240 240 230 Explosion limits ( Flammable Range ) ( % by volume in air ) 0.6–6.5 0.6–6.5
0.6–8
Vapour density ( air=1 ) 4.5–5 4.5–5 4.5–5 Refractive index ( at 20 ° C ) 1.41–1.44 1.41–-1.44 1.41–1.44 Viscosity ( cps , 25 ° C ) 0.74–1.65 0.74–1.65 0.74–1.65 Solubility ( % by weight in water ) < 0.1 < 0.1 < 0.1 Kauri - butanol value 29–33 29–33 29–33 Aniline point ( ° C )
60–75
60–75
60–75
Reactivity colspan="3 " reaction with strong oxidizing agents
Odor threshold ( mg / m ) — 0.5–6 4 USE Section::::Use .
White Spirit is a petroleum distillate used as a paint thinner and mild solvent .
In industry , mineral spirits are used for cleaning and degreasing machine tools and parts , and in conjunction with cutting oil as a thread cutting and reaming lubricant .
Mineral spirits are an inexpensive petroleum - based replacement for the vegetable - based turpentine .
It is commonly used as a paint thinner for oil - based paint and cleaning brushes , and as an organic solvent in other applications .
Mineral turpentine is chemically very different from turpentine , which mainly consists of pinene , and it has inferior solvent properties .
Artists use mineral spirits as an alternative to turpentine since it is less flammable and less toxic .
Because of interactions with pigments in oil paints , artists require a higher grade of mineral spirits than many industrial users , including the complete absence of residual sulfur .
Mineral spirits were formerly an active ingredient in the laundry soap Fels Naptha , used to dissolve oils and grease in laundry stains , and as a popular remedy for eliminating the contagious oil urushiol in poison ivy .
It was removed as a potential health risk .
Mineral spirits have a characteristic unpleasant kerosene - like odor .
Chemical manufacturers have developed a low odor version of mineral turpentine which contains less of the highly volatile shorter hydrocarbons .
Odorless mineral spirits are mineral spirits that have been further refined to remove the more toxic aromatic compounds , and are recommended for applications such as oil painting , where humans have close contact with the solvent .
In screen printing ( also referred to as silk - screening ) , mineral spirits are often used to clean and unclog screens after printing with oil - based textile and plastisol inks .
They are also used to thin inks used in making monoprints .
Mineral spirits are often used inside liquid - filled compasses and gauges .
Mineral spirits are used for re - gripping golf clubs .
After the old grip is removed , the mineral spirits are poured into the new grip and shaken .
After the mineral spirits are poured on , the new underlying tape and the new grip are slid on .
After an hour of drying out , the new grip and club are ready to use .
Although not normally marketed as a fuel , white spirit can be used as an alternative to kerosene in portable stoves , since it is merely a light grade of kerosene .
It can not be used as an alternative to white gas , which is a much more volatile gasoline - like fuel .
White spirits are a major ingredient in some popular automotive fuel / oil additives , such as Marvel Mystery Oil , as they are capable of dissolving varnish and sludge buildup .
Mineral spirits are commonly used for cutting fluid in ultraprecision lathes ( commonly referred to as diamond turning machines ) .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
White spirit is mainly classed as an irritant .
It has a fairly low acute toxicity by inhalation of the vapour , dermal ( touching the skin ) and oral routes ( ingestion ) .
However , acute exposure can lead to central nervous system depression resulting in lack of coordination and slowed reactions .
Exposure to very high concentrations in enclosed spaces can lead to general narcotic effects ( drowsiness , dizziness , nausea etc ... ) and can eventually lead to unconsciousness .
Oral ingestion presents a high aspiration hazard .
Prolonged or repeated skin exposure over a long period of time can result in severe irritant dermatitis , also called contact dermatitis .
Exposure to white spirit in direct contact with the skin for several hours can cause severe chemical burns .
Exposure to an average white spirit concentration of 240 mg / m ( 40 ppm ) for more than 13 years ( of continuous exposure time ) can lead to chronic central nervous system effects .
Similar long - term studies have been made in which some of the observed effects included memory impairment , poor concentration , increased irritability etc .
White spirit is implicated in the development of chronic toxic encephalopathy ( CTE ) among house painters .
In severe cases CTE may lead to disability and personality changes .
These effects in painters were first studied in 1970 's in Nordic studies .
Owing to the volatility and low bioavailability of its constituents , white spirit , although it is moderately toxic to aquatic organisms , is unlikely to present significant hazards to the environment .
It should not however , be purposely poured down the sink or freshwater drain .
People can be exposed to Stoddard solvent in the workplace by breathing it in , swallowing it , skin contact , and eye contact .
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( Permissible exposure limit ) for Stoddard solvent exposure in the workplace as 500 ppm ( 2900 mg / m ) over an 8-hour workday .
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a Recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 350 mg / m over an 8-hour workday and 1800 mg / m over 15 minutes .
At levels of 20,000 mg / m , Stoddard solvent is immediately dangerous to life and health .
SEE ALSO
* Naphtha , a combination of aliphatic hydrocarbons
C5-C12 * Coleman fuel , a form of white gas used as a stove fuel
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * ICPS safety sheet White Spirit ( Stoddard Solvent ) —
World Health Organization * Environmental Health Criteria 187 — World Health Organization
* Chemicals Used In Drycleaning Operations - Environmental Enlightenment * CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards