THE TUSSAUDS GROUP
The Tussauds Group is now part of Merlin Entertainments , the world 's second largest leisure group , after Disney .
It is based in Poole , Dorset from where it manages a portfolio of brands and over 50 attractions including the Madame Tussauds waxworks , Legoland Theme Parks , Legoland Discovery Centers , Sea Life Centres , Gardaland in Italy , Heide Park Resort in Germany , The Dungeons , The London Eye , The Blackpool Tower attractions , The Orlando Eye , Warwick Castle , Alton Towers , Thorpe Park , and Chessington World of Adventures .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Between 1900 and 1977 , Madame Tussaud 's was the main asset for the Tussauds group .
This changed in 1978 when the business was acquired by S. Pearson and Son , now Pearson PLC .
Chessington Zoo was already owned by Pearson and became a Tussauds attraction .
In the same year Warwick Castle was acquired .
Rock Circus opened in the London Pavilion in 1989 .
Several small acquisitions were made before 1990 , when Alton Towers was bought for £ 60 million .
In 1995 , Port Aventura in Spain opened , in which Tussauds had a 40 % stake and managed the theme park .
The stake was sold in 1998 to enable the purchase of Thorpe Park , in South East England - management of Port Aventura ceased with its sale .
In 1999 , after being part of Pearson for twenty years , Charterhouse Development Capital acquired the group .
In 2000 , the London Eye launched , owned by British Airways but managed by Tussauds .
In 2001 the group purchased Heide Park in Germany , and Rock Circus was closed .
In 2005 , the group was sold to Dubai International Capital for £ 800 million ( $ 1.5 billion ) .
In 2006 , the group purchased the London Eye outright .
In May 2007 , The Blackstone Group purchased The Tussauds Group for US$ 1.9 billion and merged it into Merlin Entertainments with management by Merlin .
Dubai International Capital then held 20 % of Merlin Entertainment .
The Tussauds Group as a separate entity ceased to exist .
On 17 July 2007 , Madame Tussauds was sold to private investor Nick Leslau and his investment firm Prestbury under a sale and leaseback agreement .
Although the attraction sites are owned by Prestbury , they continue to be operated by Merlin based on a renewable 35-year lease .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Merlin Entertainments
* Madame Tussauds *
The London Eye
* Alton Towers Resort
* Heide Park Resort * Thorpe Park Resort
* Chessington World of Adventures Resort
* Warwick Castle