REESE 'S PIECES
Reese 's Pieces are a peanut butter candy manufactured by The Hershey Company ; they are oblate spheroid in shape and covered in candy shells that are colored yellow , orange , or brown .
They can be purchased in plastic packets , cardboard boxes , or cup - shaped travel containers .
The candy was introduced in 1977 , and introduced to Canada in 1980 .
The then relatively new product became very popular with the 1982 release of E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial , in which the candy is featured .
These are also sold in the UK , but still manufactured in the US .
They contain genetically modified sugar beets , corn , and soya beans .
Reese 's Pieces are a product extension of the Reese 's Peanut Butter Cups line ; this new product was designed to capitalize on the success of the chocolate - covered peanut butter cups , though unlike the cups , they have no chocolate .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
The candies were first manufactured using panning machines that had been used to make Hershey - ets , a chocolate - filled candy that had been discontinued .
Designers knew that they wanted a peanut - flavored candy but had some problems with the filling .
Original plans called for filling the candy shells with peanut butter , but the oil leaked out into the shell , leaving it soft , rather than crunchy .
The developer of the project turned the problem over to a team of outside scientists , who created a peanut - flavored penuche filling .
More experimentation was needed to determine the correct thickness of the shell .
Finally , the colors of the candy coating were designed to coordinate with the color of the Reese 's package .
The goal color distribution is 50 % orange , 25 % brown , and 25 % yellow .
E.T.
THE EXTRA - TERRESTRIAL Section::::E.T.
the Extra - Terrestrial .
In 1982 , the Mars candy bar company rejected an offer for the inclusion of its key product M&M 's in the new Steven Spielberg movie , E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial .
Hershey accepted the offer , and with the film 's blockbuster success its product sales dramatically increased , perhaps as much as 300 % .
PRODUCT LINE
EXPANSION
Section::::Product line expansion .
In 2010 , The Hershey Company expanded the Pieces line to include York Peppermint Pattie Pieces , Hershey 's Special Dark Pieces , and Almond Joy Pieces .
Hershey 's Milk Chocolate with Almonds Pieces became the fourth expansion of this line in 2012 .
SEE ALSO
* Galaxy Minstrels
* M&M 's * Smarties — chocolate candies that were not sold in the U.S.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official product page