TATA MOTORS Tata Motors Limited ( formerly TELCO , short for Tata Engineering and Locomotive Company ) is an Indian multinational automotive manufacturing company headquartered in Mumbai .
It is a subsidiary of Tata Group , an Indian conglomerate .
Its products include passenger cars , trucks , vans , coaches , buses , sports cars , construction equipment and military vehicles .
Tata Motors has auto manufacturing and assembly plants in Jamshedpur , Pantnagar , Lucknow , Sanand , Dharwad , and Pune in India , as well as in Argentina , South Africa , Great Britain and Thailand .
It has research and development centres in Pune , Jamshedpur , Lucknow , and Dharwad , India and in South Korea , Great Britain and Spain .
Tata Motors ' principal subsidiaries purchased the English premium car maker Jaguar Land Rover ( the maker of Jaguar and Land Rover cars ) and the South Korean commercial vehicle manufacturer Tata Daewoo .
Tata Motors has a bus - manufacturing joint venture with Marcopolo S.A. ( Tata Marcopolo ) , a construction - equipment manufacturing joint venture with Hitachi ( Tata Hitachi Construction Machinery ) , and a joint venture with Fiat Chrysler which manufactures automotive components and Fiat Chrysler and Tata branded vehicles .
Founded in 1945 as a manufacturer of locomotives , the company manufactured its first commercial vehicle in 1954 in a collaboration with Daimler - Benz AG , which ended in 1969 .
Tata Motors entered the passenger vehicle market in 1988 with the launch of the TataMobile followed by the Tata Sierra in 1991 , becoming the first Indian manufacturer to achieve the capability of developing a competitive indigenous automobile .
In 1998 , Tata launched the first fully indigenous Indian passenger car , the Indica , and in 2008 launched the Tata Nano , the world 's cheapest car .
Tata Motors acquired the South Korean truck manufacturer Daewoo Commercial Vehicles Company in 2004 and purchased Jaguar Land Rover from Ford in 2008 .
Tata Motors is listed on the ( BSE ) Bombay Stock Exchange , where it is a constituent of the BSE SENSEX index , the National Stock Exchange of India , and the New York Stock Exchange .
The company is ranked 226th on the Fortune Global 500 list of the world 's biggest corporations as of 2016 .
On 17 January 2017 , Natarajan Chandrasekaran was appointed chairman of the company Tata Group .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Tata entered the commercial vehicle sector in 1954 after forming a joint venture with Daimler - Benz of Germany .
After years of dominating the commercial vehicle market in India , Tata Motors entered the passenger vehicle market in 1991 by launching the Tata Sierra , a sport utility vehicle based on the Tata Mobile platform .
Tata subsequently launched the Tata Estate ( 1992 ; a station wagon design based on the earlier Tata Mobile ) , the Tata Sumo ( 1994 , a 5-door SUV ) and the Tata Safari ( 1998 ) .
Tata launched the Indica in 1998 , the first fully indigenous Indian passenger car .
Although initially criticized by auto analysts , its excellent fuel economy , powerful engine , and an aggressive marketing strategy made it one of the best - selling cars in the history of the Indian automobile industries .
A newer version of the car , named Indica V2 , was a major improvement over the previous version and quickly became a mass favourite .
Tata Motors also successfully exported large numbers of the car to South Africa .
The success of the Indica played a key role in the growth of Tata Motors .
In 2004 , Tata Motors acquired Daewoo 's South Korea - based truck manufacturing unit , Daewoo Commercial Vehicles Company , later renamed Tata Daewoo .
On 27 September 2004 , Tata Motors rang the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange to mark the listing of Tata Motors .
In 2005 , Tata Motors acquired a 21 % controlling stake in the Spanish bus and coach manufacturer Hispano Carrocera .
Tata Motors continued its market area expansion through the introduction of new products such as buses ( Starbus and Globus , jointly developed with subsidiary Hispano Carrocera ) and trucks ( Novus , jointly developed with subsidiary Tata Daewoo ) .
In 2006 , Tata formed a joint venture with the Brazil - based Marcopolo , Tata Marcopolo Bus , to manufacture fully built buses and coaches .
In 2008 , Tata Motors acquired the English car maker Jaguar Land Rover , manufacturer of the Jaguar and Land Rover from Ford Motor Company .
In May 2009 , Tata unveiled the Tata World Truck range jointly developed with Tata Daewoo ; the range went on sale in South Korea , South Africa , the SAARC countries , and the Middle East at the end of 2009 .
Tata acquired full ownership of Hispano Carrocera in 2009 .
In 2009 , its Lucknow plant was awarded the " Best of All " Rajiv Gandhi National Quality Award .
In 2010 , Tata Motors acquired an 80 % stake in the Italian design and engineering company Trilix for € 1.85 million .
The acquisition formed part of the company 's plan to enhance its styling and design capabilities .
In 2012 , Tata Motors announced it would invest around 6 billion in the development of Futuristic Infantry Combat Vehicles in collaboration with DRDO .
In 2013 , Tata Motors announced it will sell in India , the first vehicle in the world to run on compressed air ( engines designed by the French company MDI ) and dubbed " Mini CAT " .
In 2014 , Tata Motors introduced first Truck Racing championship in India " T1 Prima Truck Racing Championship " .
On 26 January 2014 , the Managing Director Karl Slym was found dead .
He fell from the 22nd floor to the fourth floor of the Shangri - La Hotel in Bangkok , where he was to attend a meeting of Tata Motors Thailand .
On 2 November 2015 , Tata Motors announced Lionel Messi as global brand ambassador at New Delhi , to promote and endorse passenger vehicles globally .
On 27 December 2016 , Tata Motors announced the Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar as brand ambassador for its commercial vehicles range .
On 8 March 2017 , Tata Motors announced that it has signed a memorandum of understanding with Volkswagen to develop vehicles for India 's domestic market .
On 3 May 2018 , Tata Motors announced that it sold its aerospace and defense business to another Tata Group Entity , Tata Advanced Systems , to unlock their full potential .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
Tata Motors has vehicle assembly operations in India , Great Britain , South Korea , Thailand , Spain and South Africa .
It plans to establish plants in Turkey , Indonesia , and Eastern Europe .
TATA MOTORS CARS Section::::Tata Motors Cars .
Tata Motors Cars is a division of Tata Motors which produces passenger cars under the Tata Motors marque .
Tata Motors is among the top four passenger vehicle brands in India with products in the compact , midsize car , and utility vehicle segments .
The company 's manufacturing base in India is spread across Jamshedpur ( Jharkhand ) , Pune ( Maharashtra ) , Lucknow ( Uttar Pradesh ) , Pantnagar ( Uttarakhand ) ,
Dharwad ( Karnataka ) and Sanand ( Gujarat ) .
Tata 's dealership , sales , service , and spare parts network comprises over 3,500 touch points .
Tata Motors has more than 250 dealerships in more than 195 cities across 27 states and four Union Territories of India .
It has the third - largest sales and service network after Maruti Suzuki and Hyundai .
Tata also has franchisee / joint venture assembly operations in Kenya , Bangladesh , Ukraine , Russia , and Senegal .
Tata has dealerships in 26 countries across 4 continents .
Tata is present in many countries , it has managed to create a large consumer base in the Indian Subcontinent , namely India , Bangladesh , Bhutan , Sri Lanka and Nepal .
Tata is also present in Italy , Spain , Poland , Romania , Turkey , Chile , South Africa , Oman , Kuwait , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , United Arab Emirates , Bahrain , Iraq , Syria and Australia .
TATA DAEWOO Section::::Tata Daewoo .
Tata Daewoo ( officially Tata Daewoo Commercial Vehicle Company and formerly Daewoo Commercial Vehicle Company ) is a commercial vehicle manufacturer headquartered in Gunsan , Jeollabuk - do , South Korea , and a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors .
It is the second - largest heavy commercial vehicle manufacturer in South Korea and was acquired by Tata Motors in 2004 .
The principal reasons behind the acquisition were to reduce Tata 's dependence on the Indian commercial vehicle market ( which was responsible for around 94 % of its sales in the MHCV segment and around 84 % in the light commercial vehicle segment ) and expand its product portfolio by leveraging on Daewoo 's strengths in the heavy - tonnage sector .
Tata Motors has jointly worked with Tata Daewoo to develop trucks such as Novus and World Truck and buses including GloBus and StarBus .
In 2012 , Tata began developing a new line to manufacture competitive and fuel - efficient commercial vehicles to face the competition posed by the entry of international brands such as Mercedes - Benz , Volvo , and Navistar into the Indian market .
TATA HISPANO Section::::Tata Hispano .
Tata Hispano Motors Carrocera , S.A. was a bus and coach manufacturer based in Zaragoza , Aragon , Spain , and a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors .
Tata Hispano has plants in Zaragoza , Spain , and Casablanca , Morocco .
Tata Motors first acquired a 21 % stake in Hispano Carrocera SA in 2005 , and purchased the remaining 79 % for an undisclosed sum in 2009 , making it a fully owned subsidiary , subsequently renamed Tata Hispano .
In 2013 , Tata Hispano ceased production at its Zaragoza plant .
JAGUAR
LAND ROVER Section::::Jaguar Land Rover .
Jaguar Land Rover PLC is a British premium automaker headquartered in Whitley , Coventry , United Kingdom , and has been a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors since June 2008 , when it was acquired from Ford Motor Company of USA .
Its principal activity is the development , manufacture and sale of Jaguar luxury and sports cars and Land Rover premium four - wheel - drive vehicles .
Jaguar Land Rover has two design centres and three assembly plants in the United Kingdom .
Under Tata ownership , Jaguar Land Rover has launched new vehicles including the Range Rover Evoque , Jaguar F - Type , the Jaguar XE , the Jaguar XJ ( X351 ) , the second - generation Range Rover Sport , and Jaguar XF , the fourth - generation Land Rover Discovery , Range Rover Velar and the Range Rover ( L405 ) .
TML DRIVELINES Section::::TML Drivelines .
TML Drivelines Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors engaged in the manufacture of gear boxes and axles for heavy and medium commercial vehicles .
It has production facilities at Jamshedpur and Lucknow .
TML Forge division is also a recent acquisition of TML Drivelines .
TML Drivelines was formed through the merger of HV Transmission and HV Axles .
TATA TECHNOLOGIES Section::::Tata Technologies .
Tata Technologies Limited ( TTL ) is a 43%-owned subsidiary of Tata Motors which provides design , engineering , and business process outsourcing services to the automotive industry .
It is headquartered in Pune ( Hinjewadi ) and also has operations in London , Detroit and Thailand .
Its clients include Ford , General Motors , Honda , and Toyota .
The British engineering and design services company Incat International , which specialises in engineering and design services and product lifecycle management in the automotive , aerospace , and engineering sectors , is a wholly owned subsidiary of TTL .
It was acquired by TTL in August 2005 for 4 billion .
In 2017 , TAL , a subsidiary of Tata Motors , manufactured India 's first industrial articulated robot for micro , small , and medium enterprises .
EUROPEAN TECHNICAL CENTRE Section::::European Technical Centre .
The Tata Motors European Technical Centre ( TMETC ) is an automotive design , engineering , and research company based at Warwick Manufacturing Group ( WMG ) on the campus of the University of Warwick in Great Britain .
It was established in 2005 and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors .
It was the joint developer of the World Truck .
In September 2013 , it was announced that a new National Automotive Innovation Campus would be built at WMG at Warwick 's main campus at a cost of £ 100 million .
The initiative will be a partnership between Tata Motors , the university , and Jaguar Land Rover , with £ 30 million in funding coming from Tata Motors .
JOINT VENTURES
TATA
MARCOPOLO Section::::Joint ventures .
Section::::Tata Marcopolo .
Tata Marcopolo is a bus - manufacturing joint venture between Tata Motors ( 51 % ) and the Brazil - based Marcopolo S.A. ( 49 % ) .
The joint venture manufactures and assembles fully built buses and coaches targeted at developing mass rapid transportation systems .
It uses technology and expertise in chassis and aggregates from Tata Motors , and know - how in processes and systems for bodybuilding and bus body design from Marcopolo .
Tata Marcopolo has launched a low - floor city bus which is widely used by transport corporations in many Indian cities .
Its manufacturing facility is based in Dharwad , Karnataka State , India .
FIAT - TATA Section::::Fiat - Tata .
Fiat - Tata is an India - based joint venture between Tata and Fiat Automobiles which produces Fiat and Tata branded passenger cars , as well as engines and transmissions .
Tata Motors has gained access to Fiat 's diesel engine and transmission technology through the joint venture .
The two companies formerly also had a distribution joint venture through which Fiat products were sold in India through joint Tata - Fiat dealerships .
This distribution arrangement was ended in March 2013 ; Fiats have since been distributed in India by Fiat Automobiles India Limited , a wholly owned subsidiary of Fiat .
TATA HITACHI CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY Section::::Tata Hitachi Construction Machinery .
Tata Hitachi Construction Machinery is a joint venture between Tata Motors and Hitachi which manufactures excavators and other construction equipment .
It was previously known as Telcon Construction Solutions .
TATA MOTORS EUROPEAN TECHNICAL CENTRE
Section::::Tata Motors European Technical Centre .
The TATA Motors European Technical Centre is an automotive design , engineering , and research company .
Company based at Warwick Manufacturing Group ( WMG ) on the campus of the University of Warwick in Great Britain .
It was established in 2005 and is wholly owned subsidiary of Tata Motors .
It was the joint developer of the World Truck .
In September 2013 it was announced that a new National Automotive Innovative Campus would be built at WMG at Warwicks main campus at a cost of 100 million pounds .
The initiative will be a partnership between Tata Motors , the University , and Jaguar Land Rover , with the 30 million pounds in funding coming from Tata Motors .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
For details of Tata Motors passenger cars , see Tata Motors Cars .
For details of Land Rover and Jaguar products , see Jaguar Land Rover .
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
*
Tata Ace
*
Tata Ace Zip *
Tata Super Ace
* Tata TL / Telcoline/207
pick - up truck
*
Tata 407 Ex and Ex2 * Tata 709
Ex *
Tata 807 ( Steel cabin chassis , cowl chassis , medium bus chassis , steel cabin + steel body chassis ) *
Tata 809 Ex and Ex2 * Tata 909 Ex and Ex2 * Tata 1210 SE and SFC ( Semi Forward )
* Tata 1210 LP ( Long Plate )
* Tata 1109 ( Intermediate truck/ LCV bus )
* Tata 1512c ( medium bus chassis ) * Tata 1515c/1615 ( medium bus chassis ) * Tata 1612c/1616c/1618c ( heavy bus chassis ) * Tata 1618c ( semilow - floor bus chassis ) *
Tata 1623 ( rear - engined low - floor bus chassis )
* Tata 1518C ( Medium truck ) 10 ton
* Tata 1613/1615c ( medium truck )
*
Tata 1616/1618c ( heavy duty truck )
* Tata 2515c/2516c,2518c ( heavy duty 10 wheeler truck )
* Tata Starbus ( branded buses for city , intercity , school bus , and standard passenger transportation )
* Tata Divo ( Hispano Divo )
* Tata CityRide ( 12- to 20-seater buses for intracity use ) *
Tata 3015 ( heavy truck )
* Tata 3118 ( heavy truck )
( 8×2 )
*
Tata 3516 ( heavy truck )
* Tata 4018 ( heavy truck )
* Tata 4923 ( ultraheavy truck ) ( 6×4 )
* Tata Novus ( heavy truck designed by Tata Daewoo )
* Tata Prima ( Tata Daewoo )
* Tata Ultra ( ICV Segment )
* Tata Winger - Maxivan MILITARY
VEHICLES
* Tata LSV ( Light Specialist Vehicle )
*
Tata Mine Protected Vehicle ( 4×4 )
* Tata 2 Stretcher Ambulance * Tata 407 Troop Carrier * Tata LPTA 713 TC ( 4x4 ) * Tata LPT 709 E * Tata SD 1015 TC ( 4x4 ) * Tata LPTA 1615 TC ( 4x4 )
* Tata LPTA 1621 TC ( 6x6 )
* Tata LPTA 1615 TC ( 4x2 )
* Tata LPTA 5252 TC ( 12x12 )
*
Tata Sumo 4x4
*
Tata Xenon
* Tata 207 Section::::Military vehicles .
Tata Motors proposed overhaul of armoured fighting vehicles and infantry main combat vehicles in 2015 .
The inter - ministerial committee was chaired by Secretary in the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion ( DIPP ) approved most of the proposals from the defense Manufacturing sector in India .
ELECTRIC VEHICLES Section::::Electric vehicles .
Tata Motors has unveiled electric versions of the Tata Indica passenger car powered by TM4 electric motors and inverters , as well as the Tata Ace commercial vehicle , both of which run on lithium batteries .
Tata Motors ' UK subsidiary , Tata Motors European Technical Centre , has bought a 50.3 % holding in electric vehicle technology firm Miljøbil Grenland / Innovasjon of Norway for 1.93 million , and plans to launch the electric Indica hatchback in Europe next year .
In September 2010 , Tata Motors presented four CNG – Electric Hybrid low - floored Starbuses to the Delhi Transport Corporation , to be used during the Commonwealth Games .
These were the first environmentally friendly buses to be used for public transportation in India .
NOTABLE
VEHICLES TATA NANO Section::::Notable vehicles .
Section::::Tata Nano .
The Nano was launched in 2009 as a city car intended to appeal as an affordable alternative to the section of the Indian populace that is primarily the owner of motorcycles and has not bought their first car .
Initially priced at ₹100,000 ( US$ 1,500 ) , the vehicle attracted a lot of attention for its relatively low price .
In 2018 , Cyrus Mistry , Chair of the Tata Group , called the Tata Nano a failed project , with production ending in May 2018 .
TATA ACE Section::::Tata Ace .
Tata Ace , India 's first indigenously developed sub - one - ton minitruck , was launched in May 2005 .
The minitruck was a huge success in India with auto analysts claiming that Ace had changed the dynamics of the light commercial vehicle ( LCV ) market in the country by creating a new market segment termed the small commercial vehicle segment .
Ace rapidly emerged as the first choice for transporters and single truck owners for city and rural transport .
By October 2005 , LCV sales of Tata Motors had grown by 36.6 % to 28,537 units due to the rising demand for Ace .
The Ace was built with a load body produced by Autoline Industries .
By 2005 , Autoline was producing 300 load bodies per day for Tata Motors .
Ace is still a top seller for TML with 500,000 units sold by June 2010 .
In 2011 , Tata Motors invested Rs 1000 crore in Dharwad Plant , Karnataka , with the capacity of 90,000 units annually and launched two models of 0.5-T capacity as Tata Ace Zip , Magic Iris .
Ace has also been exported to several Asian , European , South American , and African countries and all - electric models are sold through Polaris Industries ' Global Electric Motorcars division .
In Sri Lanka , it is sold through Diesel and Motor Engineering ( DIMO ) PLC under the name of DIMO Batta .
TATA 407 Section::::Tata 407 .
The Tata 407 is a light commercial vehicle ( LCV ) that has sold over 500,000 units since its launch in 1986 .
In India , this vehicle dominates market share of the LCV category , accounting for close to 75 % of LCV sales .
SEE ALSO
* Singur Tata Nano controversy
* Tata Group * Automotive industry in India
*
Tata Revotron engine
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Tata official site * Tata Defense