THE PEOPLE 'S COURT
The People 's Court is an American arbitration - based reality court show presided over by retired Florida State Circuit Court Judge Marilyn Milian ( her 16th season as the show 's arbitrator by September 5 , 2016 ) .
Milian , the show 's longest - reigning arbiter , handles small claims disputes in a simulated courtroom set .
The People 's Court as of September 5 , 2016 , having entered its 32nd season ranks as the second - longest running courtroom series in history , behind Divorce Court and the third highest rated after Judge Judy and Hot Bench .
Its current production life entered its 20th season on September 5 , 2016 .
CONCEPTION Section::::Conception .
When John Masterson devised the original camera - in - court concept in 1975 , he first pitched it to Monty Hall , the producer and host of the game show
Let 's Make a Deal , and his partner , producer - writer Stefan Hatos .
They put a young associate , Stu Billett , in charge of selling it , but the networks were not interested .
Billett later went out on his own and refined the concept into a show shot in a studio rather than a real courtroom .
Small - claims court participants agreed to drop their court cases and accept binding arbitration in a simulated courtroom .
The networks expressed interest , but still did not buy it ; however , it did sell into the first - run syndication market .
The series was executive produced by Ralph Edwards , who also created and hosted the documentary show This Is Your Life , and Stu Billett , who later went on to create Moral Court .
John Masterson , whom many consider a pioneer and originator of " reality TV " also created Bride and Groom and Breakfast in Hollywood .
The People 's Court is the first court show to use binding arbitration , introducing the format into the genre in 1981 .
The system has been duplicated by most of the show 's successors in the judicial genre .
Moreover , The People 's Court is the first popular , long - running reality in the judicial genre .
It was preceded only by a few short - lived realities in the genre ; these short - lived predecessors were only loosely related to judicial proceedings , except for one : Parole ( 1959 ) took footage from real - life courtrooms holding legal proceedings .
Prior to The People 's Court , the vast majority of TV courtroom shows used actors , and recreated or fictional cases ( as did radio before that ) .
Among examples of these types of court shows include Famous Jury Trials and Your Witness .
The People 's Court has had two incarnations .
The show 's first life was presided over solely by former Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Joseph Wapner .
His tenure lasted from the show 's debut on September 14 , 1981 , until May 17 , 1993 , when the show was cancelled due to low ratings .
This left the show with a total of 2,484 half - hour episodes and 12 seasons .
The show was taped in Los Angeles during its first life .
After being cancelled , reruns aired in syndication until September 9 , 1994 , and on the USA Network from October 16 , 1995 , to June 6 , 1997 .
On September 8 , 1997 , after being out of production for four years , The People 's Court was revived for a second life in first - run syndication as a 60-minute program .
Former lawyer and Mayor of New York Ed Koch was chosen as arbiter , which he maintained for two seasons .
By the 1999–2000 season , former New York State Supreme Court Judge Jerry Sheindlin ( husband of Judy Sheindlin from Judge Judy ) succeeded Koch .
Sheindlin only lasted one and a half seasons and was replaced towards the end of the 2000–01 season .
Since spring 2001 , Marilyn Milian has been the judge .
FIRST VERSION ( 1981 - 93 ) Section::::First version ( 1981 - 93 ) .
The People 's Court pilot episode was taped on October 23 , 1980 , with a second pilot episode taped on January 13 , 1981 .
It debuted in syndication on September 14 , 1981 .
The judge from the show 's original 12 years ( including the 1980 pilot ) , was Joseph Wapner .
Rusty Burrell was his bailiff , Jack Harrell was the announcer , and Doug Llewelyn was the host and court reporter , who announced the matter of the dispute at the beginning of each trial .
He also interviewed the plaintiff and the defendant after the court ruling , to gauge their responses to the verdict .
Llewelyn often ended each episode with a jaunty " If you 're in a dispute with another party and you ca n't seem to work things out , do n't take the law into your own hands ; you take 'em to court , " which became something of a 1980s catchphrase .
If a case ended with a verdict for the defendant , however , Llewelyn instead ended the episode by saying , " If someone files a lawsuit against you and yet you 're convinced you 've done nothing wrong , do n't be intimidated .
The best policy is to go to court and stand up for your rights . "
The cases often had pun - related names , such as " The Case of the Overdone Underthings " and " A Head with a Beer on It " .
Judge Wapner greeted his litigants by saying , " I know you 've been sworn .
I 've read your complaint ...
" Occasionally , if an episode wrapped up a few minutes early , Judge Wapner fielded questions from the courtroom observers , or the legal consultant explained the legal reasons behind Wapner 's decisions .
The People 's Court deals in small - claims matters .
When the show premiered in 1981 , litigants could not sue for more than US$ 1,500 , which was the limit for small - claims court at the time in California .
As the laws in California changed , so did this amount .
Starting in 1990 , litigants could sue for up to US$ 5,000 , which is now the law in most states .
Researchers for the show examined small - claims filings in Southern California and approached the plaintiff and defendant in interesting cases .
The producers offered to have Judge Wapner arbitrate the dispute if they would agree to dismiss their action and be bound by Judge Wapner 's decision .
Through this approach , the show could get real people with real cases .
Though the show is decorated and run like a real courtroom , it is not a real court or part of any judicial system , but instead a form of binding arbitration .
The losing party does not actually need to pay the judgment , as such .
Instead ( as is stated in the disclaimer at the end of each show ) , both parties are paid from a fund ( set up by Ralph Edwards - Stu Billett Productions ) .
This fund was based on the amount of the lawsuit claim , but an exact formula was not stated .
The fund was to be first divided equally , then any monetary judgment ordered was subtracted from the loser 's half ( and presumably both halves in the case of cross judgments ) .
Each litigant received at least what remained of their half in shows concluding with that disclaimer .
The disclaimer did not call this fund an " appearance fee " , a term which appeared later in connection with The People 's Court and other court shows .
There may have been a later period when The People 's Court paid the judgment , plus expenses and only a modest appearance fee to each litigant .
CANCELLATION Section::::Cancellation .
After 12 seasons on The People 's Court , Wapner was not invited back to the court show in 1993 .
The producers of The People 's Court wished to revamp the series , but they did n't notify him of the decision , which he eventually learned of from his brother - in - law , who read about it in The San Francisco Chronicle .
Wapner expressed holding great resentment and bitterness at the court show 's producers for finding out this way , and additional resentment over being let go when , according to him , the show was still doing well .
However , although the show had a good run ratings - wise , the ratings had dropped to an all - time low at around the time The People 's Court was cancelled .
Wapner stated that he was told years later that the producers did not want to hurt his feelings , but that it was exactly what they did .
He also stated that he was not notified when the producers decided to revamp the series , and that he held no opinions on The People 's Court judges who succeeded him as he never watched the program .
He did , however , note that the two People 's Court judges who succeeded him , Ed Koch and Jerry Sheindlin , only lasted two seasons each , whereas he lasted 12 seasons .
He also emphasized that judges need to be respectful of litigants .
SECOND VERSION ( 1997-PRESENT )
Section::::Second version ( 1997-present ) .
On September 8 , 1997 , a new version of The People 's Court debuted in first - run syndication as a 60-minute program .
The series as a whole reached its 32nd season on September 5 , 2016 , with its 20th season in its current production cycle .
By that point , the 1997 revival has already outlasted its original version , which ran 12 seasons .
The show 's second life has been headed by three judges since its debut .
ED KOCH ( SEASONS ONE - TWO , 1997 - 99 ) Section::::Ed
Koch ( seasons one - two , 1997 - 99 ) .
When the new People 's Court premiered in 1997 , former New York newscaster Carol Martin of WCBS - TV hosted from a studio with Harvey Levin , who was involved with the prior edition of the series as a legal consultant , serving as a co - host in the field taking questions and opinions from people at the Manhattan Mall , then returning to the studio at the end of the show for a wrap - up .
Curt Chaplin was hired to serve as the show 's announcer and to fill Doug Llewelyn 's position as the court reporter , although with the addition of a host , his role was limited to interviewing the litigants after the conclusion of each case .
Former New York City Mayor Ed Koch presided over the court from September 8 , 1997 , to June 25 , 1999 ( with reruns airing until September 10 ) .
Several months into the run , Martin departed the series and Levin became the series ' sole host .
The studio segments were done away with and Levin hosted the entire episodes from the viewing area , which eventually moved from the Manhattan Mall to the Times Square visitors ' center .
Since Levin is now based in Los Angeles with TMZ , the viewing area has moved to the Third Street Promenade in Santa Monica , California , while production of The People 's Court has moved to Connecticut .
The opening outlines of the taped cases are shown to people in the outdoor viewing area on a monitor .
Their responses are edited into the program .
JERRY SHEINDLIN ( SEASONS THREE - FOUR , 1999-MARCH 2001 ) Section::::Jerry Sheindlin ( seasons three - four , 1999-March 2001 ) .
Judge Jerry Sheindlin ( husband of former New York Family Court Judge Judith Sheindlin , the presiding judge over the court show Judge Judy ) sat on the bench from September 13 , 1999 , to March 9 , 2001 , and ratings on the show lagged .
The bailiff for both of these judges ' tenures was Josephine Ann Longobardi .
MARILYN MILIAN ERA ( SINCE SEASON FOUR , 2001–PRESENT )
Section::::Marilyn Milian era
( since season four , 2001–present ) .
On March 12 , 2001 , late in The People 's Courts fourth season , retired Florida State Circuit Court Judge Marilyn Milian replaced Sheindlin as presiding judge on the court show .
Under Milian , People 's Court ratings improved significantly .
Milian is the first Latina judge to preside over a courtroom series .
Milian is also the show 's youngest and first female arbitrator .
By the completion of the 16th season of The People 's Court ( 2012–13 ) , Milian had completed 12 and a half seasons presiding over the series , officially making her the longest reigning judge over the program — outlasting Joseph Wapner 's reign of 12 seasons .
Now in its 20th revival season , Milian enters her 16th season presiding over the series .
For the remainder of the 2000–01 season , Davey Jones took over the role as bailiff , replacing Longobardi .
In September 2001 , Jones was replaced by Douglas McIntosh , who remains in the position .
In 2008 , The People 's Court , under Milian 's reign , was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award under a new Courtroom / Legal Show category created by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences .
In 2009 and 2010 , the show was nominated again for the Daytime Emmy Award under the same category , but did not win .
On May 1 , 2013 , The People 's Court had again been nominated for an Outstanding Legal / Courtroom Program Daytime Emmy , but again did not win .
The People 's Court finally won a Daytime Emmy in 2014 and again in 2015
The show taped in Manhattan for the first 15 seasons of the revival , and began taping in Stamford , Connecticut , in the 16th season ( 2012–13 ) , where it continues to originate .
For the show 's 20th season , Doug Llewelyn returned to the series for the first time since the end of the original series .
He resumed his previous role as reporter , replacing Curt Chaplin , who remains in his announcer role .
For his first show back , Judge Milian welcomed him " home " and handed him his suit jacket and microphone .
SERIES
OVERVIEW OPENING MONOLOGUE
Section::::Series overview .
Section::::Opening monologue .
When the original People 's Court first hit the air , the monologue was : Later , the show opened with :
In the 1997 revival , during the time when Jerry Sheindlin was the judge , the line was : When Marilyn Milian replaced Sheindlin in 2001 , the previous introduction was revised : Later , Milian 's introduction was revised : Then the opening was changed to :
After a few months the soundbites of Judge Milian 's voice were dropped from the opening , and the wording of Curt Chaplin 's introduction was slightly changed : In September 2009 , the new opening was revealed when the new season premiered : LITIGANT COMPENSATION Section::::Litigant compensation .
At the end of each show , the following disclaimer appears : Both the plaintiff and the defendant have been paid from a fund for their appearance .
The amount , if any , awarded in the case , is deducted from this fund , and the remainder is divided equally between both litigants .
The amount of the fund is dependent on the size of the judgment .
No information is given as to what relation the amount of the fund bears to the size of the judgment , nor the amount of the fund if a verdict for the defense is rendered .
In a talk - show appearance , Judge Wapner gave a few more specifics as to how compensation was typically calculated .
In his words , if the plaintiff won , the show would pay his / her judgment and give the defendant $ 50 for his time , whereas if the defendant won , the parties would " split $ 500 " .
In 1989 , a litigant sued the producers , claiming , " I was only willing to appear because they guaranteed me $ 1,500 .
I never would have appeared on that show and made a fool out of myself for a chintzy $ 250 . "
( In response , an associate producer said that before going on the show , participants are given a packet of information " where everything is clearly outlined to the nth degree . " )
The New York Post reported on some of the details surrounding compensation for a lawsuit filed by Claudia Evart . "
The show pays all damages awarded to defendants and plaintiffs , as well as a $ 250 appearance fee . "
PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
The 1981–93 life of the show was initially taped at Golden West Broadcasters and , later , Metromedia in Los Angeles , before moving to The Production Group .
In New York City , The People 's Court first taped episodes at the NEP / Image studios in the former Grand Ballroom of the Hotel Pennsylvania , which was also the studio for the talk show Maury .
In 1998 , the show began taping at the MTI Studios on the 8th floor at 401 Fifth Avenue , where the courtroom received a makeover .
In 2006 , the MTI Studios were sold to NEP / Image .
At the end credits of some episodes , the show is said to be taped at the NEP / Image studios .
The former MTI studios are officially part of NEP Broadcasting 's NEP Penn Studios .
In 2012 , the show moved to the Connecticut Film Center in Stamford .
The aired episodes are sometimes spliced together in a different order from which they are taped ( a common procedure on some hour - long shows ) .
This is why the judge 's blouse color may change and why fewer courtroom observers may be seen during the second half of the show than during the first half .
For the 2012 season , the show started broadcasting in widescreen standard definition .
The People 's Court is " A Ralph Edwards - Stu Billett Production " in association with Telepictures Productions and distributed by Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution , a division of AT&T Inc ..
The original series was distributed by Telepictures , and later Lorimar - Telepictures , all of which are now part of AT&T. THEME MUSIC Section::::Theme music .
The theme music , " The Big One ( People 's Court Theme ) " , was composed by Alan Stanley Tew .
The uptempo theme music , with prominent piano theme and bongo drum rhythm , has been sampled by many artists , including Nelly .
It has also been featured in several films and television shows , including the 1977 pornographic film Barbara Broadcast , the 1979 low - budget film Malibu High , the BCTV current affairs show Webster !
, SpongeBob SquarePants , The Simpsons , " Blue Harvest " , the sixth - season premiere episode of Family Guy , the December 5 , 2005 , and December 21 , 2009 , editions of WWE Raw in Tampa , Florida , Malibu High , Boy Meets World , and Popular . RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
As of September 2017 , The People 's Court ranks third behind number one Judge Judy and number two Hot Bench in the ratings for TV court shows .
BRITISH VERSION Section::::British version .
A British version of the show was produced by STV Productions ( then known as " SMG TV Productions " ) to replace Trisha Goddard 's talk show on ITV in 2005 .
The court reporter was Carol Smillie , the male judge was Jerome Lynch , and the female judge was Rhonda Anderson .
The show was considered a failure and not renewed .
SEE ALSO
* Judge Mathis
* Divorce Court
* La Corte del
Pueblo
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* People 's Court Raw * ' People 's Court ' : the Show the Networks Spurned ( includes photo of Stu Billett )
* Certain Cases on ' People 's Court ' Come Readily to Wapner 's Mind ( includes photos of the show with Judge Wapner ) * ' People 's Court ' Returns to the Air but Without Wapner ( includes photo of former NYC Mayor ' Judge ' Ed Koch ) * Judge Wapner vs. Judge Judy : What A Match That Would Have Been