MAGNETIC HILL ( MONCTON )
The Magnetic Hill is an example of a gravity hill , a type of optical illusion created by rising and descending terrain .
It is located at the northwestern edge ( in the Magnetic Hill Area ) of the city of Moncton in the Canadian province of New Brunswick .
The general area is at the base of a ridge named " Lutes Mountain " , which rises several hundred feet above the surrounding Petitcodiac River valley .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the 19th century , a cart path was built from the city in the south onto the ridge .
The path was subsequently expanded during the early 20th century and during the age of the automobile , ca .
1931 , it was noticed that at one point near the base of the ridge when driving south , motorists were required to accelerate in order to prevent rolling backward ( i.e. , what appears to be uphill ) .
The novelty became known as " Magnetic Hill " and was more - or - less an amusing local attraction for residents and visitors to try .
Eventually with the rise in tourism after the Second World War , along with local highway construction which saw a " Mountain Road " bypass built further west from Magnetic Hill , the roughly 1 kilometre segment of gravel road became one of Moncton 's prime tourist attractions ( along with the tidal bore on the Petitcodiac River ) .
Magnetic Hill is now a historic property .
To experience Magnetic Hill today , drivers must pay a fee to drive their cars to the end of the road ( which has been preserved ) .
When a car is placed in neutral , it will begin to roll backwards , apparently uphill .
Observers will also note that water in the adjacent drainage ditches also seemingly runs " uphill . "
Magnetic Hill is one of several Canadian icons mentioned in the Stompin ' Tom Connors song " Cross Canada " , later covered ( as " C - A - N - A - D - A " ) by Raffi on his Bananaphone album .
SEE ALSO
* Magnetic Hill Concert Site
* Magnetic Hill Area * Magnetic Hill Zoo * Magic Mountain * List of magnetic hills
* Gravity hill * Lutes Mountain , New Brunswick
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS