OPEN WATER ( FILM )
Open Water is a 2003 American survival horror thriller film .
The story concerns an American couple who go scuba diving while on vacation in the Caribbean , only to find themselves stranded miles from shore in shark - infested waters when the crew of their boat accidentally leaves them behind .
The film is claimed to be loosely based on the true story of Tom and Eileen Lonergan , who in 1998 went out with a scuba diving group , Outer Edge Dive Company , on the Great Barrier Reef , and were accidentally left behind because the dive - boat crew failed to take an accurate headcount .
The film was financed by the husband and wife team of writer / director Chris Kentis and producer Laura Lau , both avid scuba divers .
It cost $ 120,000 to make and was bought by Lions Gate Entertainment for $ 2.5 million after its screening at the Sundance Film Festival .
Lions Gate spent a further $ 8 million on distribution and marketing .
The film ultimately grossed $ 55 million worldwide ( including $ 30 million from the North American box office alone ) .
Before filming began , the Lonergans ' experience was re - created for an episode of ABC 's 20/20 , and the segment was repeated after the release of Open Water .
Clips from the film were also featured on NBC in " Troubled Waters " , a Dateline episode ( July 7 , 2008 ) with Matt Lauer interviewing two professional divers , Richard Neely and Ally Dalton , who were left adrift at the Great Barrier Reef by a dive boat on May 21 , 2008 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Daniel Kintner and Susan Watkins are a couple frustrated that their hard - working lives do not allow them to spend much time together .
They decide to head out on a scuba - diving vacation to help improve their relationship .
On their second day , they join a group scuba dive .
A head count is taken , and the passenger total is recorded as 20 .
Daniel and Susan decide to separate briefly from the group while underwater .
Half an hour later , the group returns to the boat .
Two members of the group are inadvertently counted twice , so the dive master thinks everyone is back on board , and the boat leaves the site .
However , Daniel and Susan are still underwater , unaware that the others have returned .
When they resurface , the boat has gone .
They believe the group will soon return to recover them .
Stranded at sea , it slowly dawns on Daniel and Susan that their boat is not coming back for them .
They bicker , battle bouts of hunger and mental exhaustion , and realize that they have probably drifted far from the dive site .
They also realize that sharks have been circling them below the surface .
Soon , jellyfish appear , stinging them both , while sharks come in close .
Susan receives a small shark bite on the leg , but does not immediately realize it .
Daniel goes under and discovers a small fish feeding on the exposed flesh of her bite wound .
He does not tell Susan .
Later , a shark bites Daniel and the wound begins to bleed profusely .
Susan removes her weight belt and uses it to apply pressure to Daniel 's wound .
He appears to go into shock .
The tight - fitting neoprene wet suits are apparently keeping them from fully realizing they have been sustaining small bites .
After night falls , sharks return and attack Daniel during a storm , killing him .
The next morning , Daniel and Susan 's belongings are finally noticed on the boat by a crew member .
He remembers the couple and realizes they must have been left at the dive site .
A search for the couple begins .
Susan realizes Daniel is dead and releases him into the water , where sharks attack and pull him down in a feeding frenzy .
After putting on her mask , she looks beneath the surface and sees several large sharks now circling her .
Susan looks around one last time for any sign of coming rescue .
Seeing none , she removes her scuba gear and goes underwater to drown before the sharks can attack .
Elsewhere , a fishing crew cut open a newly - caught shark 's stomach , finding a diving camera , apparently that of Daniel and Susan .
One of the fishermen asks offhandedly to another , " Wonder if it works ? "
CAST * Blanchard Ryan as Susan Watkins * Daniel Travis as Daniel Kintner * Saul Stein as Seth
* Michael E. Williamson as Davis
* Cristina Zenato as Linda
* John Charles as Junior * Estelle Lau as Affected - Ear Diver PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The filmmakers used live sharks , as opposed to the mechanical ones used in Jaws decades ago or the computer - generated fish in Deep Blue Sea .
The film strives for authentic shark behavior , shunning the stereotypical exaggerated shark behavior typical of many films .
The movie was shot on digital video .
As noted above , the real - life events that inspired this story took place in the southern Pacific Ocean , and this film moves the location to the Atlantic Ocean , being filmed in the Bahamas , the United States Virgin Islands , the Grenadines , and Mexico .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Open Water received mostly positive reviews .
The film has a 72 % " Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 192 reviews with an average rating of 6.6/10 .
The consensus reads : " A low budget thriller with some intense moments . "
On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 63 out of 100 , determined from 38 critics ' reviews , signifying " generally favorable reviews .
Most critics praised the film for intensity and expertly minimalist filmmaking , while it was not well received by the audience .
Writing in the Chicago Sun - Times , Roger Ebert praised the film highly : " Rarely , but sometimes , a movie can have an actual physical effect on you .
It gets under your defenses and sidesteps the
' it 's only a movie ' reflex and creates a visceral feeling that might as well be real " .
In a much less favorable review , A. O. Scott in The New York Times lamented that it " succeeds in mobilizing the audience 's dread , but it fails to make us care as much as we should about the fate of its heroes " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Open Water was made for a budget recorded by Box Office Mojo as $ 120,000 , grossed $ 1 million in 47 theaters on its opening weekend and made a lifetime gross of $ 55 million .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Award !
Category !
Subject !
Result rowspan=231st
Saturn Awards
Best Horror or Thriller Film
Best Actress
rowspan=2Blanchard Ryan rowspan=3Fangoria
Chainsaw Awards
Best Actress
Best Wide - Release Film
rowspan=4
align
= center Worst Film
rowspan=2Golden Trailer Awards
Best Thriller
Best Independent " SEQUELS " *
In 2006 , a film marketed as a sequel titled was released in that year , which however has a plot completely unrelated to Open Water , and is actually an independent film without any sharks in the story .
* A third film in the series titled , Open Water 3 : Cage Dive was released in 2017 , following the first film 's plot of being a survival shark film .
SEE ALSO
* Survival film , about the film genre , with a list of related films
* Low budget film
* List of killer shark films REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS