BRIGHTON BEACH Brighton Beach is an oceanside neighborhood in the southern portion of the New York City borough of Brooklyn , along the Coney Island peninsula .
According to the 2010 United States Census report , the Brighton Beach and Coney Island area , combined , had more than 110,000 residents .
Brighton Beach is bounded by Coney Island proper at Ocean Parkway to the west , Manhattan Beach at Corbin Place to the east , Sheepshead Bay at the Belt Parkway to the north , and the Atlantic Ocean to the south along the beach and boardwalk .
It is known for its high population of Russian - speaking immigrants , and as a summer destination for New York City residents due to its beaches along the Atlantic Ocean and its proximity to the amusement parks in Coney Island .
HISTORY EARLY DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Early development .
Brighton Beach is included in an area from Sheepshead Bay to Sea Gate that was purchased from the Natives Americans in 1645 for a gun , a blanket and a kettle .
Brighton Beach was located on sandy terrain , and before development in the 1860s , had mostly farms .
The area was part of the " Middle Division " of the town of Gravesend , which was the sole English settlement out of the original six towns in Kings County .
By the mid-18th century , thirty - nine lots in the division had been distributed to the descendants of English colonists .
In 1868 , William A. Engeman built a resort in the area .
The resort was given the name " Brighton Beach " in 1878 by Henry C. Murphy and a group of businessmen , who chose to name as an allusion to the English resort city of Brighton .
With the help of Gravesend 's surveyor William Stillwell , Engeman acquired all 39 lots for the relatively low cost of $ 20,000 .
This hotel , with rooms for up to 5,000 people nightly and meals for up to 20,000 people daily , was close to the then - rundown western Coney Island , so it was mostly the upper middle class that went to this hotel .
The , double - decker Brighton Beach Bathing Pavilion was also built nearby and opened in 1878 , with the capacity for 1,200 bathers . "
Hotel Brighton " , also known as the " Brighton Beach Hotel " , was situated on the beach at what is now the foot of Coney Island Avenue .
The Brooklyn , Flatbush , and Coney Island Railway , the predecessor to the New York City Subway 's present - day Brighton Line , opened on July 2 , 1878 , and provided access to the hotel .
Adjacent to the hotel , Engeman built the Brighton Beach Race Course for thoroughbred horse racing .
In December 1887 , an extremely high tide washed over the area , creating a new , temporary connection between Sheepshead Bay and the ocean .
Wrote the Brooklyn Daily Eagle : " Unless [ Engeman ] is very lucky
the next races on the Brighton Beach track will be conducted by the white crested horses of Neptune . "
After that extremely high tide , and a decade of beach erosion , the Brighton Beach Hotel , by then owned by the Railway , faced the possibility of being " undermined and carried away .
"
A plan termed " highly ingenious and novel " was initiated by the superintendent of the Railway , J.L. Morrow , and its Secretary , E.L. Langford , to elevate and move the building as a whole , 495 feet further inland .
This was accomplished by lifting the estimated 5000 ton , building , using 13 hydraulic jacks , after which 24 lines of railroad track – a mile and a half length in total – were laid under it , and 112 railroad " platform cars " ( flat cars ) pulled by six steam locomotives were used to pull the hotel away from the sea .
This careful engineering ( by B.C. Miller ) made the move successful ; it began on April 2 , 1888 , and continued for the next nine days , and was the largest building move of the 19th century .
Anton Seidl and the Metropolitan Opera brought their popular interpretations of Wagner to the Brighton Beach Music Hall , where John Philip Sousa was in residence , and the New Brighton Theater was a hotspot for vaudeville .
Visitors for tea at Reisenweber 's Brighton Beach Casino would be served by Japanese waitresses in full costume .
At an enormous private club , the Brighton Beach Baths , members could swim , access a private beach , and play handball , mah - jongg , and cards .
The village , along with the rest of Gravesend , was annexed into the 31st Ward of the City of Brooklyn in 1894 .
EARLY 20TH CENTURY Section::::Early 20th century .
In 1905 , Brighton Beach Park opened its own area of amusements , calling it Brighton Pike .
Brighton Pike offered a boardwalk , games , live entertainment ( including the Miller Brothers ' wild - west show ( 101 Ranch ) , and a huge steel roller coaster .
The park was shut down in 1919 after it burned down .
The actual beach remained popular , though .
Brighton Beach was re - developed as a fairly dense residential community with the final rebuilding of the Brighton Beach railway to rapid transit standards , becoming the Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit Corporation ( BMT )
Brighton Line ( ) of the New York City Subway .
The subway system in the neighborhood is above ground on an elevated structure .
The opening of the BMT Brighton Line had conflicting consequences : although it made Brighton Beach viable as a year - round community , it was now much more feasible for visitors to return home in the evening rather than spend the night .
This led to the closure of the Brighton Beach Hotel in 1924 .
The years just before and following the Great Depression brought with them a neighborhood consisting mostly of first-
and second - generation Jewish - Americans and , later , Holocaust concentration camp survivors .
Of the estimated 55,000 Holocaust survivors living in New York City as of 2011 , most live in Brighton Beach .
To meet the bursting cultural demands , the New Brighton Theater converted itself to the States ' first Yiddish theater in 1919 .
LATE 20TH CENTURY AND SOVIET IMMIGRATION Section::::Late 20th century and Soviet immigration .
After World War II , the quality of life in Brighton Beach decreased significantly as the poverty rate and the ratio of older residents to younger residents increased .
Due to the 1970s fiscal crisis , government workers and the middle class had moved to suburban areas , while people subdivided houses into single room occupancy residences for the poor , the elderly , and the mentally ill .
Brighton Beach suffered from arson as much as it did from constant drug trades .
During the summer , however , people from all around the city went to Brighton Beach 's beach next to the Atlantic Ocean .
In the mid-1970s , Brighton Beach became a popular place to settle for the Soviet immigrants , mostly Jews from Russia and Ukraine .
So many ex - Soviets immigrated to Brighton Beach that the area became known as " Little Odessa " ( after the Ukrainian city on the Black Sea ) .
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the subsequent significant changes in the social and economic circumstances of post - Soviet states led thousands of former Soviet citizens to immigrate to the United States .
Many more of the Soviet and post - Soviet immigrants , who primarily spoke Russian , chose Brighton Beach as a place to settle .
A large number of Russian - speaking , immigrant - oriented firms , shops , restaurants , clubs , offices , banks , schools , and children 's play centers opened in the area .
The value of real estate in Brighton Beach started to rise again , even though drugs remained a social issue in the area through the early 1990s .
In the early 2000s , a high - income ocean - front condominium complex , the " Oceana " , was constructed .
This address has become the destination of wealthy businessmen , entertainers , and senior officials from the former Soviet Union , and with their purchase of units at the Oceana , area housing prices have risen .
Since the early 2010s , a significant number of Central Asian immigrants have also chosen Brighton Beach as a place to settle .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
The proximity of Brighton Beach to the city 's beaches — Brighton Beach Avenue runs parallel to the Coney Island beach and boardwalk — and the fact that the neighborhood is directly served by a subway station makes it a popular summer weekend destination for New York City residents .
RUSSIAN - SPEAKING CULTURES
Section::::Russian - speaking cultures .
As apartment buildings started to be built in large numbers in the 1930s , many of those who moved into the neighborhood were Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe , often by way of the Lower East Side .
They came from many countries , but also set the stage for a later wave of immigration from the Soviet Union that started in the 1970s , when Brighton Beach became known as " Little Odessa , " and " Little Russia " .
An annual festival , the Brighton Jubilee , celebrates the area 's Russian - speaking heritage .
The area has also been called " the land of pelmeni , matryoshkas , tracksuits , and ... vodka " due to its large population of Soviet immigrants .
In 2006 , Alec Brook - Krasny was elected for the 46th District of the New York State Assembly , which includes Brighton Beach , becoming the country 's first elected Soviet - born politician .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
, Brighton Beach had a middle class , mostly Jewish , older population .
27 % of Brighton Beach was of age 62 or older , while the national average of persons aged 62 or older was 13.9 % .
Since the 1990s , however , the neighborhood 's ethnic demographics have been changing , with a large influx of mainly Muslim immigrants from Central Asia , such as Uzbeks .
In subsequent years , the proportion of whites leveled out , the proportion of the black population decreased significantly , and the proportion of the Asian population increased to 14 % as of 2014 .
, increasing numbers of Muslim Central Asians were moving into Brighton Beach , and based on the historic Soviet influence over these area , these immigrants also speak Russian .
According to the United States Census report of 2010 , Brighton Beach and Coney Island , combined , had 111,063 residents as of 2009 .
In that year , the median age of residents of Brooklyn was 34.2 and in New York City as a whole , it was 36.0 years , while in the combined Brighton Beach and Coney Island area it was 47.9 years .
hence , the area is distinguished by a higher median age of its population .
As DiNapoli and Bleiwas note in a city report , " the number of residents aged 65 years and older in [ this area ] rose by 4.1 percent , so that senior citizens accounted for more than one - quarter of the area 's population " at that date .
According to the census , the population density in Brighton Beach , per se ( 52,109 people per square mile ) , was almost twice the average population density of New York City ( 27,012 people per square mile ) , though the average household size was 2.1 people , lower than the city average of 2.6 people .
The average income of households in the area was $ 36,574 , while the average income in the whole city was $ 55,217 , according to the 2010 census .
In Brighton Beach , 21 % of the population lives below the poverty line , compared to only 15.4 % citywide .
Most of the population of Brighton Beach are immigrants .
Less than a quarter ( 23.3 % ) of Brighton Beach residents were born in the United States , and nearly three - quarters were born abroad ( 72.9 % ) .
Because of this , English language proficiency in Brighton Beach is lower than the city average .
More than a third ( 36.1 % ) of the population of Brighton Beach does not speak or understand English , while citywide , only one in fourteen people ( 7.2 % ) can not speak or understand English .
Based on data from the 2010 United States Census , the population of Brighton Beach was 35,547 , an increase of 303 ( 0.9 % ) from the 35,244 counted in 2000 .
Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of .
The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 69.7 % ( 24,774 ) White , 1.0 % ( 352 )
African American , 0.2 % ( 61 )
Native American , 12.9 % ( 4,580 )
Asian , 0.0 % ( 10 ) Pacific Islander , 0.4 % ( 139 ) from other races , and 1.2 % ( 442 ) from two or more races .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 14.6 % ( 5,189 ) of the population .
THEATER Section::::Theater .
The Brighton Ballet Theater , established in 1987 , is one of the most famous Russian ballet schools in the United States .
More than 3,000 children have trained in ballet , modern and character dances , and folk dances here .
A Russian - speaking theater near the waterfront , , features performances by actors from the U.S. , Russia , and other countries .
CRIME Section::::Crime .
Brighton Beach is patrolled by the New York City Police Department 's 60th Precinct .
The crime statistics for 2014 indicated that there were 10 murders , 21 rapes , 267 robberies , 314 felony assaults , 193 burglaries , 592 grand larcenies , and 68 grand larcenies auto in the 60th Precinct in this time frame .
Brighton Beach is considered a hot spot for the " Russian Mafia " , though public perception has been that organized crime " has largely gone away .
" In the 1970s , the most notorious leg of the mafia was the Potato Bag Gang , which served as a robbery gang for larger Russian crime syndicates in New York City .
Marat Balagula was a crime boss from Brighton Beach who denies having any connection to the American Mafia or the Russian - speaking Mafia .
The major Russian criminal element in Brighton Beach was the international Russian mafia group , known as vor v zakone or " vory , " and the first vory crime boss in Brighton Beach was Evsei Agron , who controlled the area 's crime during the 70s and 80s until his death in 1985 .
After the fall of the Soviet Union in the 90s , many ethnic Russian criminals illegally entered the United States , coming especially to Brighton Beach .
The infamous vor Vyacheslav Ivankov , who dominated the Brighton Beach underworld until his arrest in 1995 , arrived during this wave .
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Transportation .
The New York City Subway 's serve the neighborhood at the Brighton Beach and Ocean Parkway stations .
Both are located on the elevated Brighton Line structure over Brighton Beach Avenue .
Buses serving Brighton Beach include the .
The B68 is the successor route to the Coney Island and Brooklyn Railroad , a streetcar and horsecar line that originated in Prospect Park .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Brighton Beach is served by the New York City Department of Education .
Primary and middle schools within Brighton Beach include PS 225 The Eileen E. Zaglin School for grades K-8 , and the P.S. 253 Ezra Jack Keats International School .
In 1983 , the Community School District 21 operated PS 225 , PS 253 , and Junior High School 302 .
During that year , over 62 % of its students read at or above their grade level , far above the national average .
Schools near Brighton Beach within Coney Island are PS 100 , The Coney Island School for grades K-5 and Intermediate School 303 Herbert S. Eisenberg .
William E. Grady Vocational High School , a vocational high school , is located in Brighton Beach .
Abraham Lincoln High School , an academic high school , is in Coney Island .
In 1983 Lincoln was the zoned academic high school of Brighton Beach .
Other nearby high schools include the Rachel Carson High School for Coastal Studies and The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences .
Brooklyn Public Library also operates the Brighton Beach Library .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The neighborhood has been mentioned or appears many times in popular culture :
* Films : * Brighton Beach is featured in the Russian spy - comedy film Weather Is Good on Deribasovskaya , It Rains Again on Brighton Beach ( 1992 ) .
* The film Little Odessa ( 1994 ) is set in Brighton Beach .
*
In the film Maximum Risk ( 1996 ) , starring Jean - Claude Van Damme , the main character faces off against the Russian Mob in Brighton Beach .
*
The film Requiem for a Dream ( 2000 ) is largely set in Brighton Beach .
*
In the film Two Lovers ( 2008 ) , the action takes place in Brighton Beach .
* Brighton Beach is featured in the 2005 drama Lord of War starring Nicolas Cage , where the protagonist and his family immigrated to from Ukraine in order to escape the Soviet Union .
* Literature : *
In Robin Cook 's novel Vector ( 2000 ) , disillusioned former Russian biochemical worker Yuri Davydov develops weapons - grade anthrax in the basement of his Brighton Beach home .
* Hubert Selby 's novel Requiem for a Dream is set in Brighton Beach during the 1970s .
* Plays : *
Neil Simon 's play Brighton Beach Memoirs ( 1983 ) , which won two Tony awards in 1983 , as well as its 1986 film adaptation , are both set against the backdrop of Brighton Beach during the Great Depression , in 1937 .
* Television : * A Lifetime reality TV show called Russian Dolls , documenting the lives of young Russian - Americans and a group of Brighton Beach housewives spending time in a popular Russian nightclub , Rasputin Restaurant , premiered August 11 , 2011 .
* Video Games : *
A fictionalized version of Brighton Beach , known as Hove Beach , is a neighborhood in the 2008 video game Grand Theft Auto IV .
NOTABLE RESIDENTS Section::::Notable residents .
Notable current and former residents of Brighton Beach include : * Marat Balagula ( born 1943 ) , neighborhood mob boss during the 1980s * Adele Cohen ( born 1942 ) , member of the New York State Assembly , representing the 46th district , from to 1998 to 2006 * Eddie Daniels ( born 1941 ) , clarinettist and saxophonist * Neil Diamond ( born 1941 ) , songwriter , musician artist grew up in Brighton Beach * Howard Greenfield ( 1936–1986 ) , songwriter * Alfred Harvey ( 1913 - 1994 ) , founder of Harvey Comics * David B. Hollander ( 1913 - 2009 ) , longest active pulpit rabbi in America * Vyacheslav Ivankov ( 1940–2009 ) , alleged crime boss
* Jack Kirby ( 1917–1994 ) , comic book artist , co - creator of Captain America during the early 1940s and the Fantastic Four , X - Men , and Incredible Hulk in the 1960s
* Sergei Kobozev ( 1964 - 1995 ) , Russian boxer * Arthur Miller ( born 1915 - 2005 ) ,
writer * Lea Bayers Rapp ( born 1946 ) , author , journalist , playwright * Vladimir Reznikov , Russian - American hitman , murdered outside of the infamous Odessa Restaurant in 1986 .
* Lynn Ross ( stage name ) , dancer in the original 1957 Broadway production of West Side Story
* Neil Sedaka ( born 1939 ) , songwriter * Willi Tokarev ( born 1934 ) , Russian singer - songwriter *
The Tokens , vocal group formed in 1955 at Abraham Lincoln High School * Jerry Wurf , U.S. labor leader and president of the American Federation of State , County and Municipal Employees ( AFSCME ) from 1964 to 1981 .
SEE ALSO
* Jackson – Vanik amendment
* Russian diaspora REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Coney Island History :
The Rise and Fall of Engeman 's Brighton Beach Resort at Heart of Coney Island EXTERNAL LINKS