SHAGGY ROGERS
Norville " Shaggy " Rogers is a fictional character in the Scooby - Doo franchise .
He is a cowardly slacker and the long - time best friend of his equally cowardly Great Dane , Scooby - Doo .
Like Scooby - Doo , Shaggy is more interested in eating than solving mysteries .
CHARACTER DESCRIPTION
Section::::Character description .
Shaggy has a characteristic speech pattern , marked by his frequent use of the filler word " like " and , when startled , his exclamations of " Zoinks ! " .
His nickname derives from the shaggy style of his sandy - blond hair .
He also sports a rough goatee .
His signature attire consists of a green v - neck T - shirt and maroon bell - bottom pants , both of which fit loosely .
In The 13 Ghosts of Scooby - Doo and early made - for - TV movies , he wore a red v - neck and blue jeans .
Both Scooby and Shaggy are readily bribed with Scooby Snacks due to their mutual large appetites .
Both display tendencies toward loafing and cowardice .
Both justify their hunger by insisting that " Being in a constant state of terror makes us constantly hungry ! "
in Scooby - Doo on Zombie Island .
Shaggy 's favorite dish is " extra cheese pizza with pickles " ( as revealed in the TV movie Scooby - Doo !
Abracadabra - Doo ) .
In " Bedlam in the Big Top " , he says he used to be in track and in " What a Night for a Knight " , that he was a gymnast – both of which hint at his uncanny skills in quickly evading villains and the reason he is invariably assigned the role of bait in Freddy 's traps .
Due to being in track he has shown , in some instances , to be able to run even faster than Scooby , even when the latter is running on all fours .
An early episode " A Clue for Scooby - Doo " , from the inaugural series Scooby - Doo , Where Are You ! , reveals that his taste for unlikely food combinations ( chocolate - covered hot dogs and liverwurst " a la mode " , for example ) is a consequence of an infant Shaggy receiving a garbage disposal unit for his first toy .
In Scooby - Doo ! and the Monster of Mexico , Fred states that the reason Shaggy eats so much ( and maintains his slender physique ) is his " high metabolism " .
Shaggy has shown himself capable of impressive feats of athleticism through fear alone ; however , these abilities are invariably of a comic nature , with Shaggy only seeming capable of such feats when panicked .
In Scooby - Doo !
Camp Scare , in frustration at being trapped , he shakes the iron bars of an old - fashioned jail cell so hard they collapse .
Shaggy 's typical immediate reaction to experiences or perceptions of supposed supernatural occurrences is terror - struck cowardice .
This was explained in the Legend of the Phantosaur as a possible type of panic disorder ; in this instance , he was temporarily cured with hypnotherapy .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The four teenage lead characters of Scooby - Doo were inspired by four of the main characters from the 1959–63 American sitcom The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis , with Shaggy having been derived from the character Maynard G. Krebs , as played by Bob Denver .
Maynard 's beatnik - style goatee , general appearance , and use of the word " like " as a form of punctuation all found their way into the character of Shaggy , with the base personality of the character updated to make him a hippie rather than a beatnik .
Casey Kasem , the first voice actor for Shaggy , said that he originally felt uncomfortable after being assigned to Shaggy .
Kasem stated that while he was " hip to what hippies were about " , he had never before portrayed a hippie character .
Kasem had wanted to portray Fred Jones , and Frank Welker had wanted to portray Shaggy .
Instead , the CBS network assigned Kasem to Shaggy and Welker to Fred .
Unsure of what the voice of a hippie would sound like , Kasem based his vocal style and mannerisms for Shaggy on those of Richard Crenna 's character Walter Denton from the radio / television sitcom Our Miss Brooks .
Kasem stated that as he continued to voice Shaggy , the character evolved .
Kasem explained that the " voice dynamics " improved and that his laughs increasingly gained quality .
Kasem added that Shaggy in 2002 is " more frightened today than he was at the beginning . "
Kasem convinced the producers that Shaggy should be a vegetarian , like himself , in 2002 .
ACTORS Section::::Actors .
Radio disc - jockey , comedian , and actor Casey Kasem created the character 's voice .
Kasem voiced Shaggy for 28 years , from Scooby - Doo , Where Are You !
in 1969 until the Bravo Dooby Doo episode of Johnny Bravo in 1997 .
Starting with What 's New , Scooby - Doo ?
in 2002 and in 2003 , Kasem resumed the role and continued to do so until his retirement in 2009 .
Billy West voiced the character in the film Scooby - Doo on Zombie Island ( 1998 ) .
Scott Innes ( who has also voiced Scooby and Scrappy - Doo ) voiced Shaggy in the 1999–2001 direct - to - video films , and in video games until 2009 .
Innes reprised Shaggy in Harvey Birdman , Attorney at Law , and a DirecTV commercial featuring the Scooby gang in 2008 .
Scott Menville voiced Shaggy in Shaggy & Scooby - Doo Get a Clue ! .
As of 2010 , Matthew Lillard , who also played Shaggy in the 2002 and 2004 live - action films , took over the voice of Shaggy .
Lillard also played Shaggy in Robot Chicken and MAD .
Nick Palatas played Shaggy in the 2009 and 2010 live - action films .
Voiced By :
* Casey Kasem ( 1969–1997 ; 2002–2009 )
* Billy West ( 1998 ; Scooby - Doo on Zombie Island )
* Scott Innes ( 1999–2009 ; 2017 )
* Matthew Lillard ( 2004–2007 ; Scooby - Doo 2 : The Video Game , Robot Chicken ; 2010–present ) * Scott Menville ( 2006–2008 ; Shaggy & Scooby - Doo Get a Clue ! )
Portrayed
By : * Matthew Lillard ( 2002–2004 ; Scooby - Doo , ) * Cascy Beddow ( 2004 ; ( younger ) )
* Nick Palatas ( 2009–2010 ; Scooby - Doo !
The Mystery Begins , Scooby - Doo !
Curse of the Lake Monster )
RELATIVES
Section::::Relatives .
Relatives of Shaggy shown during the series include : * Samuel Chastain Rogers and Wendy Rogers ( " Mom and Pops " ) : Shaggy 's parents .
Shaggy 's father is a police officer in most incarnations , except for Mystery Incorporated .
At one point , Shaggy 's parents lived in Plymouth , Massachusetts .
In Mystery Incorporated , however , Shaggy 's parents are Colton and Paula Rogers .
Casey Kasem ( using his natural , American Top 40 voice ) voiced " Pops " from The New Scooby and Scrappy - Doo Show through to Mystery Incorporated .
Grey DeLisle voices Paula in Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated .
* Maggie " Sugie " Rogers : Shaggy 's younger sister .
Seen in A Pup Named Scooby - Doo .
* Wilfred : Maggie 's husband , and Shaggy 's brother - in - law .
* Gaggy Rogers : Shaggy 's uncle , who likes to play practical jokes .
Voiced by Alan Young .
* Uncle Shagworthy : Shaggy 's rich uncle .
Not only does he look like his nephew – he has the same appetite and cowardice .
He keeps his most precious possession , food , in a secret refrigerator with valuable jewels .
Voiced by Casey Kasem .
* Great Uncle Nat ( Nathaniel ) :
Shaggy 's great - uncle .
Voiced by Lennie Weinrib .
* Uncle Beauregard :
Shaggy 's late uncle , who left his entire fortune and his Southern mansion and plantation to Shaggy in his will .
He was referred to in Scooby - Doo Meets the Boo Brothers , although he never made an appearance when he was living .
He appeared as a ghost and was one of the villains in the movie .
* Fearless Shagaford : Shaggy 's uncle , who owns the Fearless Detective Agency ( see Fearless Fosdick ) * Uncle Albert Shaggleford :
Shaggy 's rich uncle , an inventor who has only appeared in Shaggy and Scooby - Doo Get a Clue ! .
Voiced by Casey Kasem .
* McBaggy Rogers : Shaggy 's pilgrim ancestor .
He settled in present - day Plymouth , Massachusetts and is the owner of Scooby 's ancestor , Yankee - Doodle Doo .
McBaggy made an appearance in The New Scooby and Scrappy - Doo Show episode Wedding Bell Boos .
*
Betty Lou Shaggbilly : Shaggy 's Southern cousin .
*
Nathaniel : Shaggy 's great grandfather , whose portrait appeared in the episode " The Loch Ness Mess " of The New Scooby - Doo Movies .
* Benjamin : Shaggy 's great great grandfather , who 's portrait also Appeared in " The Loch Ness Mess " .
* Matilda : Shaggy 's great great grandmother , her portrait appeared in " The Loch Ness Mess " .
* Tawny Rogers : A Western cousin who appears in Scooby - Doo !
Shaggy 's Showdown .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In some of the Scooby - Doo series , Shaggy is born in Coolsville , Ohio .
When he was old enough to go to school he adopted Scooby – Doo from the Knittingham Puppy Farm .
Later on , he met Fred Jones , Daphne Blake , and Velma Dinkley .
They became friends and they decided to be a team named Mystery Inc.
( short for Mystery Incorporated ) .
In Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated , he is born in and is a citizen of Crystal Cove .
His parents ' names are Colton and Paula Rogers .
He is a member of the new Mystery Incorporated .
Shaggy and Scooby make a cameo appearance in the 2003 live - action / animated film , where they berate Matthew Lillard over his portrayal of Shaggy in the 2002 live - action film .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
Shaggy appears as a playable character , along with Scooby , in the crossover video game Lego Dimensions .
Shaggy 's character includes the Mystery Machine .
Matthew Lillard reprises his role for the game .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Some viewers of the original Scooby - Doo believed that Shaggy smoked marijuana due to his antics , mannerisms , vocabulary , general behavior and constant hunger .
In a Newsweek article , Casey Kasem was asked if he had ever observed that subtext in the series and Kasem responded that " there was n't anything like that at all " , explaining " guess it 's because , I do n't know
, it was a wholesome show from beginning to end " and was not aware of the fan viewpoint until the interviewer brought it up .
Parodying the subtext , the makers of the Scooby - Doo film shot several scenes referring to Shaggy 's supposed drug use , but few of those scenes were included in the final film product .
One scene in the film has a character tell Shaggy that her name is Mary Jane , a slang name for marijuana , and he responds , " Like , that is my favorite name " .
Matthew Lillard , the current voice of Shaggy , does not think he smokes marijuana : " He just seems like that .
He acts a little goofy and high , he 's lovable and scared — and just happens to have the munchies . "
In addition , in an online radio interview with host Stu Shostak , series creators Joe Ruby and Ken Spears recalled that they never intended for Shaggy to be a smoker of marijuana , and " took umbrage " to the inclusion of allusions to such in the 2002 Scooby - Doo live - action feature film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Hanna - Barbera website