STUCK IN THE MIDDLE WITH YOU
" Stuck in the Middle with You " ( sometimes known as " Stuck in the Middle " ) is a song written by Scottish musicians Gerry Rafferty and Joe Egan and originally performed by their band Stealers Wheel .
The band performed the song on the BBC 's Top of the Pops in May 1973 , and the song charted at number 8 in the UK Singles Chart .
It also became an international hit , reaching number 6 in the US Billboard Hot 100 .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
" Stuck in the Middle " was released on Stealers Wheel 's 1972 eponymous debut album .
Gerry Rafferty provided the lead vocals , with Joe Egan singing harmony .
It was produced by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller .
Rafferty 's lyrics are a dismissive tale of a music industry cocktail party written and performed as a parody of Bob Dylan 's paranoia .
The band was surprised by the single 's chart success .
The single sold over one million copies , eventually peaking at number 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , number 8 in the UK , and number 2 in Canada .
The band appeared playing the song on BBC 's Top of the Pops on 18 May 1973 .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The video portrays the band performing in a corner of a large , empty building .
Their performance is intercut with shots of Egan , miming to a vocal track by Rafferty ( who had by then left the band ) , at a small banquet table with a number of garishly - dressed and made - up supper guests .
These include an actual clown , a bespectacled bowler - hatted gent devouring spaghetti and a lavishly dressed woman eating cream cakes and grapes .
The clown , who has difficulty eating a plastic chicken , continually squeezes Egan out whenever he tries to take food from the table .
The guitar solo is played on a guitar played flat with an empty beer bottle used as a slide .
Eventually , the other band members appear , driving off the strange characters so that Egan can sit down at last .
PERSONNEL
* Gerry Rafferty - guitar , lead vocals * Joe Egan - keyboards , lead vocals * Paul Pilnick - lead guitar * Tony Williams - bass * Rod Coombes - drums CHART PERFORMANCE WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
align="left"Chart ( 1973 ) !
align="left"Peakposition align="left"Australia
Canada RPM Top Singles Netherlands ( Dutch Top 40 ) Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) New Zealand ( Listener ) South Africa ( Springbok Radio )
align="center"5 UK
align="left"US Billboard Hot 100 align="left"US Billboard Adult Contemporary YEAR - END CHARTS
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Leif Garrett released a version of the song on his 1980 album , Ca n't Explain .
The song is used in Quentin Tarantino 's 1992 debut film Reservoir Dogs , during the scene in which the character Mr. Blonde ( played by Michael Madsen ) taunts and tortures bound policeman Marvin Nash
( Kirk Baltz ) while singing and dancing to the song .
In an interview with Rolling Stone , Tarantino recalled :
" That was one of those things where I thought [ the song ] would work really well , and [ during ] auditions , I told the actors that I wanted them to do the torture scene , and I 'm gon na use ' Stuck in the Middle With You , ' but they could pick anything they wanted , they did n't have to use that song .
And a couple people picked another one , but almost everyone came in with ' Stuck in the Middle With You , ' and they were saying that they tried to come up with something else , but that 's the one .
The first time somebody actually did the torture scene to that song , the guy did n't even have a great audition , but it was like watching the movie .
I was thinking , ' Oh my God , this is gon na be awesome ! ' " American baroque pop band San Fermin performed a version of the song in July 2015 for The A.V. Club A.V. Undercover series .
In one episode of the show Malcolm in the Middle , Hal is shown listening to the song on a record as various events occur around him .
A cover by Grace Potter is the opening theme of Netflix series Grace and Frankie and the movie Bean .
In an episode of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia titled " Charlie Catches a Leprechaun , " Charlie re - enacts the scene from Reservoir Dogs in the basement while the song plays .
An episode of Supernatural is titled " Stuck in the Middle ( With You ) , " in which the characters re - enact a scene from Reservoir Dogs .
A disco cover version by Louise was a chart hit in 2001 .
Alternative rock band Lazlo Bane covered the song for their 2007 cover album Guilty Pleasures .
Their version was used in the 2014 film Let 's Be Cops and released on the soundtrack album .
In " I Am the Future , " the season finale of Happy ! , Happy re - enacts the scene from Reservoir Dogs by tickling another imaginary friend while the song is playing to find out why and where Very Bad Santa is .
In 1997 Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune suggested that the Sheryl Crow song " All I
Wanna Do " , released on her 1993 debut album Tuesday Night Music Club , was " a re - write " of " Stuck in the Middle With You . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS