OTIS WILLIAMS Otis Williams ( born Otis Miles Jr. ; October 30 , 1941 ) is an American baritone singer .
Nicknamed " Big Daddy " , he is occasionally also a songwriter and a record producer .
Williams is best known as the founder and last surviving original member of the Motown vocal group
The Temptations , a group in which he continues to perform ; he also owns the rights to the Temptations name .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Williams was born Otis Miles , Jr. in Texarkana , Texas to Otis Miles and Hazel Louise Williams , an unmarried couple who separated shortly after their son 's birth .
While he was still a toddler , his mother married and moved to Detroit , Michigan , leaving the younger Otis Miles to be raised by both of his grandmothers in Texarkana .
Hazel Williams moved her son to Detroit when he was ten years old , where he lived with his mother and his stepfather .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Becoming interested in music as a teenager , Otis Miles , Jr. adopted his mother 's maiden name for his stage name , and as Otis Williams put together a number of singing groups .
These groups included Otis Williams and the Siberians , the El Domingoes and the Distants .
In 1959 , The Distants scored a local hit , co - written by Williams and their manager / producer Johnnie Mae Matthews , called " Come On " , with lead vocals by Richard Street .
Future Distants recordings were not as successful , and after an offer from Berry Gordy of Motown Records , Williams and his friends / bandmates Elbridge " Al " Bryant and Melvin Franklin quit the Distants .
Eddie Kendricks and Paul Williams from The Primes later joined Williams , Bryant , and Franklin to create the Elgins , who signed to Motown in March 1961 as " The Temptations " .
The Temptations eventually became one of the most successful acts in black music over the course of its nearly five - decade existence , over which time notable singers such as David Ruffin , Dennis Edwards , former Distant Richard Street , Damon Harris , Ron Tyson , Ali - Ollie Woodson , Theo Peoples , Ray Davis and former Spinners singer G.C. Cameron have all been members .
In fact , the group 's lineup changes were so frequent , stressful and troublesome that Williams and Melvin Franklin promised each other they would never quit the group .
Franklin would remain in the group until 1994 , when he became physically incapable of continuing .
Franklin died on February 23 , 1995 , leaving Otis Williams , then 53 , as the last surviving original member of the Temptations quintet .
Williams is the co - author , with Patricia Romanowski , of Temptations , a 1988 book that served as both his autobiography and a history of the group .
Ten years later , the book was adapted into a NBC television miniseries The Temptations .
Williams was portrayed by actor Charles Malik Whitfield .
Although he has served the longest tenure in the Temptations , Williams rarely sings lead , focusing instead on his role as the group 's leader and organizer , and as the background " baritone in the middle " .
The Smokey Robinson and Eddie Kendrick written track " Do n't Send Me Away " from the LP
The Temptations with a Lot o ' Soul ( 1967 ) , the intro on early group song " Check Yourself " ( 1961 ) and the Norman Whitfield - penned tune " I Ai n't Got Nothing " from 1972 's
All Directions are extremely rare showcases for Williams singing lead .
Williams has provided non - singing ( spoken word ) contributions to some Temptation songs , including " I 'm Gon na Make You Love Me " ( 1968 , a hit duet with Diana Ross and Eddie Kendricks sharing the lead vocals ) , and during the opening verse of " Masterpiece " ( 1973 ) .
In 1989 , Otis Williams was inducted into The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of The Temptations .
Williams received an honorary doctorate from Stillman College in May 2006 .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Williams married Josephine Rogers in 1961 ; the couple 's son , Otis Lamont , was born the same year .
He and Josephine divorced in 1964 .
Otis Lamont Williams was a construction worker who died in a workplace accident in Detroit in 1983 .
Williams was engaged to Patti LaBelle , she ended the engagement when he wanted her to quit music and become a house wife .
Williams was married to Ann Cain from 1967 to 1973 .
He married his third wife , Arleata " Goldie " Williams ( née Carter ) , in 1983 .
Arleata Williams ' daughter Elan Carter became 1994 's Playboy 's Playmate of the Month for June 1994 .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
Charles Malik Whitfield portrayed Williams in the 1998 NBC - TV miniseries The Temptations .
*
Ai nt Too Proud :
The Life and Times of the Temptations , a musical based on Williams ' memoir
The Temptations premiered at Berkeley Repertory Theater in September 2017 .
Williams was played by Derrick Baskin .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Otis Williams ' official website
* Otis Williams interview by Pete Lewis , ' Blues & Soul ' March 2010 * Otis Williams on AngelFire * Interview with Otis Williams by Gary James at Classic Bands .