RING FINGER
The ring finger is the finger on which it is the custom in a particular culture for a wedding ring to be placed during a wedding ceremony and on which the wedding ring is subsequently worn to indicate the status of the wearer as a married person .
It is commonly the finger between the middle finger and the little finger , and is so named because in some cultures it is the finger on which one usually wears a wedding ring after marriage .
In some cultures the wedding ring is worn on the " ring finger " of the left hand and in others it is on the right hand .
Traditionally , a wedding ring was worn only by the bride / wife , but in recent times more men also wear a wedding ring .
It is also the custom in some cultures to wear an engagement ring on the ring finger .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The origin of the selection of the fourth finger as the ring finger is not definitively known .
According to László A. Magyar , the names of the ring finger in many languages reflect an ancient belief that it is a magical finger .
It is named after magic or rings , or called nameless ( for example , in Chinese : 無名指 , unnamed finger ) .
In Sanskrit and other languages like Finnish or Russian , the ring finger is called respectively - " Anamika " , " nimetön " and " Безымянный " ( " nameless " ) .
In Arabic and Hebrew , the ring finger is called respectively - bansur ( meaning " victory " ) - and kmitsa ( meaning " taking a handful " ) .
In anatomy , the ring finger is called digitus medicinalis , the fourth finger , digitus annularis , digitus quartus , or digitus IV .
It may also be referred to as the third finger , excluding the thumb .
In Latin , the word anulus means " ring " , digitus means " finger " , and quartus means " fourth " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before medical science discovered how the circulatory system functioned , people believed that a vein ran directly from the fourth finger on the left hand to the heart .
Because of the hand – heart connection , they chose the descriptive name vena amoris , Latin for the vein of love , for this particular vein .
Based upon this name , their contemporaries , purported experts in the field of matrimonial etiquette , wrote that it would only be fitting that the wedding ring be worn on this finger .
By wearing the ring on the fourth finger of the left hand , a married couple symbolically declares their eternal love for each other .
In Britain , only women tended to wear a wedding ring until the 1st and 2nd World Wars , when married male soldiers started to wear rings to remind them of their partner .
CONTEMPORARY CUSTOMS WESTERN CUSTOMS Section::::Contemporary customs .
Section::::Western customs .
In Western cultures , a wedding ring is traditionally worn on the fourth finger , commonly called the " ring finger " .
This developed from the Roman " anulus pronubis " when a man would give a ring to the woman at their betrothal ceremony .
Blessing the wedding ring and putting it on the bride 's finger dates from the 11th century .
In medieval Europe , during the Christian wedding ceremony the ring was placed in sequence on the thumb , index , middle , and ring fingers of the left hand .
The ring was then left on the ring finger .
In a few European countries , the ring is worn on the left hand prior to marriage , then transferred to the right during the ceremony .
For example , a Greek Orthodox bride wears the ring on the left hand prior to the ceremony , then moves it to the right hand after the wedding .
In England , the 1549 Prayer Book declared " the ring shall be placed on the left hand " .
By the 17th and 18th centuries the ring could be found on any finger after the ceremony — even on the thumb .
The wedding ring is generally worn on the ring finger of the left hand in the former British Empire , certain parts of Western Europe , certain parts of Catholic Mexico , Bolivia , Chile and Central and Eastern Europe .
These include : Australia , Botswana , Canada , Egypt , Ireland , New Zealand , South Africa , the UK , and the US ; France , Italy , Portugal , Sweden , Finland , Catalonia and Valencia ( not the rest of Spain ) ; Czech Republic , Slovakia , Switzerland , Croatia , Slovenia , and Romania .
The wedding ring is worn on the ring finger of the right hand in some Orthodox and a small number of Catholic European countries , some Protestant Western European , as well as some Central and South American Catholic countries .
In Eastern Europe , these include : Bulgaria , Greece , Georgia , Latvia , Lithuania , Macedonia , Russia , Serbia and Ukraine .
In Central or Western Europe , these include : Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Germany , Hungary , Poland , Netherlands [ if not Catholic ] , Norway , and ( Catholic )
Spain ( except in Catalonia and Valencia ) .
In Central or South America , these include : Colombia , Cuba , Peru , Venezuela .
The ring is worn on the right hand until the actual wedding day , when it is moved to the left hand in Turkey , Lebanon , and Syria as well as in Romania and Brazil .
NON - WESTERN
CUSTOMS Section::::Non - Western customs .
In Sinhala and Tamil culture , the groom wears the wedding ring on his right hand and bride wears it on her left hand ring finger .
This can be seen in countries like Sri Lanka where there is a rich Sinhala and Tamil cultural influence in the society .
A wedding ring is not a traditional part of the religious Muslim wedding and wedding rings are not included in most Islamic countries , However , if a wedding ring is worn in an Islamic country , it may be worn on either the left ( such is the custom in Iran ) or the right ring finger ( as in Jordan ) .
As opposed to the wedding ring , use of a ring to denote betrothal or engagement is quite prevalent in Muslim countries , especially those in West and South Asia .
Muslim engagement rings are typically worn on the right finger by men , and the left finger by women .
In a traditional Jewish wedding ceremony , the wedding ring is placed on the bride 's righthand index finger , but other traditions place it on the middle finger or the thumb , most commonly in recent times .
Today , the ring usually is moved to the left hand ring finger after the ceremony .
Some Jewish grooms have adopted wearing a wedding ring .
However , in Orthodox Judaism , most men do not wear wedding rings .
Rings are not traditional in an Indian wedding .
However , in modern society it is becoming a practice to wear rings for engagements and not for actual marriage .
Though the left hand is considered inauspicious for religious activities , a ring ( not to be called wedding ring ) is still worn on the left hand .
Men generally wear the rings on the right hand and the women on the left hands .
SEE ALSO
* Digit ratio , comparative lengths of the index finger and ring finger and androgen levels in utero REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Archive of a 1998 article in a Flemish newspaper about the place of the wedding ring in the Low Countries