SEAT BELT LEGISLATION Seat belt legislation requires the fitting of seat belts to motor vehicles and the wearing of seat belts by motor vehicle occupants to be mandatory .
Laws requiring the fitting of seat belts to cars have in some cases been followed by laws mandating their use , with the effect that thousands of deaths on the road have been prevented .
Different laws apply in different countries to the wearing of seat belts .
NATIONAL COMPARISONS
AUSTRALIA Section::::National comparisons .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , after the introduction of mandatory front outboard mounting points in 1964 , the use of seat belts by all vehicle passengers was made compulsory in the states of Victoria and South Australia in 1970 and 1971 , respectively .
By 1973 , the use of fitted seat belts by vehicle occupants was made compulsory for the rest of Australia and some other countries during the 1970s and 1980s .
The subsequent dramatic decline in road deaths is generally because of seat belt laws and subsequent road safety campaigns .
Seat belts are not required for bus occupants , reversing drivers , and those driving some slow moving vehicles .
The laws for these differ depending on the state or territory with jurisdiction .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
All provinces in Canada have primary enforcement seat belt laws .
In 1976 , Ontario was the first province to pass a law which required vehicle occupants to wear seat belts .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , seat belts must be worn at all times if they are fitted to a vehicle unless reversing .
Passengers may be exempt from wearing a seat belt for different reasons .
Since September 18 , 2006 , children travelling in the UK must also use an appropriate child seat in addition to the standard seat belt , unless they are 12 years old and/or have reached at least in height .
In the UK , a requirement for anchorage points was introduced in 1965 , followed by the requirement in 1968 to fit three - point belts in the front outboard positions on all new cars and all existing cars back to 1965 .
Successive UK Governments proposed , but failed to deliver , seat belt legislation throughout the 1970s .
Front seat belts were compulsory equipment on all new cars registered in the UK from 1972 , although it did not become compulsory for them to be worn until 1983 .
Rear seat belts were compulsory equipment from 1986 and became compulsory for them to be worn in 1991 .
However , it has never been a legal requirement for cars registered before those dates to be fitted with seat belts .
In one such attempt in 1979 similar claims for potential lives and injuries saved were advanced .
William Rodgers , then Secretary of State for Transport in the Callaghan Labour Government ( 1976–1979 ) , stated : " On the best available evidence of accidents in this country - evidence which has not been seriously contested - compulsion could save up to 1000 lives and 10,000 injuries a year . "
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , seat belt legislation varies by state .
The state of Wisconsin introduced legislation in 1961 requiring seat belts to be fitted to the front outboard seat positions of cars .
Seat belts have been mandatory equipment since the 1968 model year per Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208 .
New York State passed the first law in the US mandating the use of seat belts in 1984 under the leadership of John D. States , an orthopedic surgeon who dedicated his career to improving automotive safety .
Depending on which state a driver is in , not wearing a seat belt in the front seat is either a primary offense or a secondary offense , with the exception of New Hampshire , which does not have a law requiring people over age 18 to wear a seat belt .
In the front seat , the driver and each passenger must wear a seat belt , one person per belt .
In some states , such as New York , New Hampshire , and Michigan , belts in the rear seats are not mandatory for people over the age of 16 , though it is extremely advised .
The driver and front - seat passengers aged 16 or older can be fined up to $ 50 each for failure to buckle up .
In California , you must be 15 years or older to accompany the driver in the front seat .
Children 14 and younger must sit in the rear seat until they reach the age of 15 .
A primary offense means that a police officer can pull a driver over for the seat belt law violation alone , and secondary offense indicates that one can be punished for a seat belt law violation only if they are already pulled over for another reason .
By January 2007 25 states and the District of Columbia had primary seat belt laws , 24 had secondary seat belt laws , and New Hampshire had no laws .
In 2009 , Public Health Law Research published several evidence briefs summarizing the research assessing the effect of a specific law or policy on public health .
One stated , " Safety belt laws work , but there is strong evidence to support that primary enforcement safety belt laws are more effective than secondary enforcement laws in increasing seat belt use and reducing crash injuries . "
Another found that " there is strong evidence that enhanced seat belt enforcement interventions can substantially increase seat belt use and its associated benefits . "
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Section::::Developing countries .
In many developing countries , pedestrians , cyclists , rickshaw operators and moped users represent the majority of road users .
In India , all cars manufactured after March 25 , 1994 are equipped with front seat belts .
The rule was extended for rear seats in 2002 .
The usage of seat belts is to be implemented by the respective states , with most states making seat belt usage for front seat passengers mandatory in 2002 .
Older vehicles that did not originally have seat belts were exempted .
However , enforcement is weak in most parts of the country .
In Indonesia , belts are only mandatory for front seats .
Many low entry car models are not equipped with rear seat belts .
In Malaysia , the first stage of safety belt laws was implemented in 1979 .
This was expanded in January 2009 to include rear passengers .
Passenger vehicles registered prior to January 1 , 1995 , and those weighing more than 3.5 tons are exempted from this rule .
The third and fourth stages , which will deal with baby and child seats and the number of passengers in a vehicle , have not taken effect .
In the Philippines , a seat belt law , Republic Act No . 8750 , was approved in August 5 , 1999 .
The law took effect in 2000 and requires all public and private vehicles , except motorcycles and tricycles , to have their front seats equipped with seat belts .
Front seats as defined by the law includes the first row of seats behind the driver for public utility buses .
Those below the age of six are prohibited to occupy the front seats of motor vehicles even if wearing a seat belt .
Jeepneyminibus
* - actually only vehicles registered after 15 June 1976 ; in previous registered vehicles fitting is optional † - required by the law , but no penalty for violation at the time ‡ - required by the law , but low enforcement ♣ - definitely introduced by this date , possibly earlier EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
Studies by road safety authorities conclude that seat belt legislation has reduced the number of casualties in road accidents .
Experiments using both crash test dummies and human cadavers also indicated that wearing seat belts should lead to reduced risk of death and injury in car crashes .
Studies of accident outcomes suggest that fatality rates among car occupants are reduced by between 30 and 50 percent if seat belts are worn .
The US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) estimates that death risks for a driver wearing a lap - shoulder seat belt are reduced by 48 percent .
The same study indicated that in 2007 , an estimated 15,147 lives were saved by seat belts in the United States and that if seat belt use were increased to 100 percent , an additional 5024 lives would have been saved .
An earlier statistical analysis by the NHTSA claimed that seat belts save over 10,000 lives every year in the US .
According to a more recent fact sheet produced by the NHTSA : By 2009 , despite large increases in population and the number of vehicles , road deaths in Victoria had fallen below 300 , less than a third of the 1970 level , the lowest since records were kept , and far below the per capita rate in jurisdictions such as the United States .
This reduction was generally attributed to aggressive road safety campaigns beginning with the seat belt laws .
A 2008 study in the Journal of Health Economics found that mandatory seat belt laws in the U.S. " significantly increased seatbelt use among high school age youths by 45 - 80 % " and " significantly reduced traffic fatalities and serious injuries resulting from fatal crashes by 8 and 9 % , respectively .
"
The authors note that these " results suggest that if all states had primary enforcement seatbelt laws then regular youth seatbelt use would be nearly universal and youth fatalities would fall by about 120 per year . "
OPPOSITION Section::::Opposition .
A number of groups and individuals are opposed to seat belt legislation .
The most common grounds for opposition are : *
The view that laws requiring the wearing of seat belts are an infringement of individual liberty .
* Claims that official estimates of the number of lives saved by seat belts are overstated or fail to take into account additional risks for other road users .
RISK COMPENSATION AND OTHER THEORIES Section::::Risk compensation and other theories .
The most common basis for disputing estimates of the benefits of seat belts is risk compensation and risk homeostasis , advanced by researchers John Adams and Gerald Wilde .
The idea of this theory is that , if the risk of death or injury from a car crash is reduced by the wearing of seat belts , drivers will respond by reducing the precautions they take against crashes .
Adams accepts the hypothesis that wearing seat belts improves a vehicle occupant 's chances of surviving a crash .
In order to explain the disparity between the agreed improvement in crash survival and the observed results , Adams and Wilde argue that protecting someone from the consequences of risky behaviour may tend to encourage greater risk taking .
Wilde states , " to compel a person to use protection from the consequences of hazardous driving , as seat belt laws do , is to encourage hazardous driving .
A fine for non - compliance will encourage seat belt use , but the fact that the law fails to increase people 's desire to be safe encourages compensatory behaviour . "
Studies and experiments have been carried out to examine the risk compensation theory .
In one experiment subjects were asked to drive go - karts around a track under various conditions .
It was found that subjects who started driving belted did not drive any slower when subsequently unbelted , but those who started driving unbelted did drive consistently faster when subsequently belted .
A study of habitual non - seat belt wearers driving in freeway conditions found evidence that they had adapted to seat belt use by adopting higher driving speeds and closer following distances .
In another study , taxi drivers who were habitual non - wearers were timed over a route with passengers who did , and others who did not , insist on the driver wearing a belt .
They completed the route faster when belted .
In addition to risk compensation , Adams has suggested other mechanisms that may lead to inaccurate or unsupportable predictions of positive benefits from seat belt legislation .
* Case - control studies based on voluntary use of safety aids can attribute to the aid benefits that actually come from the risk - averse nature of those likely to use them voluntarily ( confounding ) , particularly early adopters .
* Fatality rates are subject to considerable stochastic noise , and comparison of single years or short periods can be misleading .
INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY
Section::::Individual liberty .
Opponents have objected to the laws on libertarian principles .
Some do so on the grounds that seat belt laws infringe on their civil liberties .
For example , in a 1986 letter to the editor of the New York Times , a writer argued that seat belt legislation was " coercive " and that " a mandatory - seat - belt law violates the right to bodily privacy and self - control " .
A counterpoint to the libertarian view is that by reducing death and serious injury , mandatory seat belt use and enforcement of seat belt laws results in substantial social benefits .
For example , an analysis by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that in 2010 non - fatal injuries to motor vehicle occupants cost the United States $ 48 billion in medical expenses and lost work .
An example is an unbelted driver who kills or injures another road user because he / she slides out of proper seating position and can not regain control of the vehicle during slippery conditions .
Another notable scenario is of rear - seated passengers being forced forward in a crash and thus inadvertently harming the driver or front passenger .
A University of Wisconsin study demonstrated that car accident victims who had not worn seat belts cost the hospital ( and the state , in the case of the uninsured ) on average 25 % more .
SIDE - EFFECTS OF SEAT BELTS Section::::Side - effects of seat belts .
Neck injuries can be caused by the deceleration from a high speed .
The passengers head continues to move forward while the body is restrained , potentially causing paralyzing injuries .
A study of such injuries notes , " Seatbelts save lives .
However , they may cause injury to adjacent structures and when they malfunction can cause injury to the abdominal viscera , bony skeleton and vascular structures .
The motor industry has attempted to reduce these injuries by modification of vehicle design and safety equipment . "
SEE ALSO
* Car accident
*
Click It or Ticket * Clunk Click Every Trip * Road safety NOTES REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
* Wilde G.S. Target Risk PDE Publications , 1994
* The Isles report " Seat belt savings : Implications of European Statistics " , UK DoT , 1981 , Sourced from Death on the Streets , Cars and the Mythology of Road Safety by Robert Davis , Leading Edge Press , North Yorkshire UK , 1992 and " Report questions whether seat belts save lives " by M. Hamer , New Scientist ,
7 February 1985 p7
* Evaluation of Automobile Safety Regulations : The case of Compulsory Seat Belt Legislation in Australia .
by J.A.C. Coneybeare , Policy Sciences 12:27 - 39 , 1980
* Compulsory Seat Belt Use : Further Inferences , by P. Hurst Accident Analysis and Prevention . , Vol 11 : 27 - 33 , 1979 * Wilde G. S. Risk Homeostasis and Traffic Accidents Propositions , Deductions and Discussion of Dissension in Recent Reactions , Ergonomics 1988 Vol , 31 , 4:439
* Methodological Issues in Testing the Hypothesis of Risk Compensation by Brian Dulisse , Accident Analysis and Prevention Vol .
25 ( 5 ) :
285 - 292 , 1997
* RS 255
The initial impact of seat belt legislation in Ireland by R. Hearne , An Foras Forbatha , Dublin , 1981
*
The efficacy of seat belt legislation : A comparative study of road accident fatality statistics from 18 countries , by J. Adams .
Department of Geography University College , London 1981 * Casualty Reductions ,
Whose Problem ?
By F. West - Oram , Traffic Engineering and Control , September 1990 *
The Puzzle of Seat Belts Explained , Press Release of the Annual Conference of the British Psychological Society , April 1999
* Reconsidering the effects of seat belt Laws and Their Enforcement Status by T.S. Dee Accident Analysis and Prevention . , Vol 30(1 ) : 1 - 10 , 1998