HIVES
Hives , also known as urticaria , is a kind of skin rash with red , raised , itchy bumps .
They may also burn or sting .
Often the patches of rash move around .
Typically they last a few days and do not leave any long - lasting skin changes .
Fewer than 5 % of cases last for more than six weeks .
The condition frequently recurs .
Hives frequently occur following an infection or as a result of an allergic reaction such as to medication , insect bites , or food .
Psychological stress , cold temperature , or vibration may also be a trigger .
In half of cases the cause remains unknown .
Risk factors include having conditions such as hay fever or asthma .
Diagnosis is typically based on the appearance .
Patch testing may be useful to determine the allergy .
Prevention is by avoiding whatever it is that causes the condition .
Treatment is typically with antihistamines such as diphenhydramine and ranitidine .
In severe cases , corticosteroids or leukotriene inhibitors may also be used .
Keeping the environmental temperature cool is also useful .
For cases that last more than six weeks immunosuppressants such as ciclosporin may be used .
About 20 % of people are affected .
Cases of short duration occur equally in males and females while cases of long duration are more common in females .
Cases of short duration are more common among children while cases of long duration are more common among those who are middle aged .
Hives have been described at least since the time of Hippocrates .
The term urticaria is from the Latin urtica meaning " nettle " .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Welts ( raised areas surrounded by a red base ) from hives can appear anywhere on the surface of the skin .
Whether the trigger is allergic or not , a complex release of inflammatory mediators , including histamine from cutaneous mast cells , results in fluid leakage from superficial blood vessels .
Welts may be pinpoint in size , or several inches in diameter .
Angioedema is a related condition ( also from allergic and nonallergic causes ) , though fluid leakage is from much deeper blood vessels in the subcutaneous or submucosal layers .
Individual hives that are painful , last more than 24 hours , or leave a bruise as they heal are more likely to be a more serious condition called urticarial vasculitis .
Hives caused by stroking the skin ( often linear in appearance ) are due to a benign condition called dermatographic urticaria .
CAUSE
Section::::Cause .
Hives can also be classified by the purported causative agent .
Many different substances in the environment may cause hives , including medications , food and physical agents .
In perhaps more than 50 % of people with chronic hives of unknown cause , it is due to an autoimmune reaction .
MEDICATIONS Section::::Medications .
Drugs that have caused allergic reactions evidenced as hives include codeine , sulphate of morphia , dextroamphetamine , aspirin , ibuprofen , penicillin , clotrimazole , trichazole , sulfonamides , anticonvulsants , cefaclor , piracetam , vaccines , and antidiabetic drugs .
The antidiabetic sulphonylurea glimepiride , in particular , has been documented to induce allergic reactions manifesting as hives .
Drug - induced hives has been known to have an effect on severe cardiorespiratory failure .
FOOD Section::::Food .
The most common food allergies in adults are shellfish and nuts .
The most common food allergies in children are shellfish , nuts , eggs , wheat , and soy .
One study showed Balsam of Peru , which is in many processed foods , to be the most common cause of immediate contact urticaria .
A less common cause is exposure to certain bacteria , such as Streptococcus species or possibly Helicobacter pylori .
INFECTION OR ENVIRONMENTAL AGENT Section::::Infection or environmental agent .
Hives including chronic spontaneous hives can be a complication and symptom of a parasitic infection , such as blastocystosis and strongyloidiasis among others .
The rash that develops from poison ivy , poison oak , and
poison sumac contact is commonly mistaken for urticaria .
This rash is caused by contact with urushiol and results in a form of contact dermatitis called urushiol - induced contact dermatitis .
Urushiol is spread by contact , but can be washed off with a strong grease- or oil - dissolving detergent and cool water and rubbing ointments .
DERMATOGRAPHIC URTICARIA
Section::::Dermatographic urticaria .
Dermatographic urticaria ( also known as dermatographism or " skin writing " ) is marked by the appearance of weals or welts on the skin as a result of scratching or firm stroking of the skin .
Seen in 4–5 % of the population , it is one of the most common types of urticaria , in which the skin becomes raised and inflamed when stroked , scratched , rubbed , and sometimes even slapped .
The skin reaction usually becomes evident soon after the scratching , and disappears within 30 minutes .
Dermatographism is the most common form of a subset of chronic hives , acknowledged as " physical hives " .
It stands in contrast to the linear reddening that does not itch seen in healthy people who are scratched .
In most cases , the cause is unknown , although it may be preceded by a viral infection , antibiotic therapy , or emotional upset .
Dermographism is diagnosed by taking a tongue blade and drawing it over the skin of the arm or back .
The hives should develop within a few minutes .
Unless the skin is highly sensitive and reacts continually , treatment is not needed .
Taking antihistamines can reduce the response in cases that are annoying to the patient .
PRESSURE OR DELAYED PRESSURE Section::::Pressure or delayed pressure .
This type of hives can occur right away , precisely after a pressure stimulus or as a deferred response to sustained pressure being enforced to the skin .
In the deferred form , the hives only appear after about six hours from the initial application of pressure to the skin .
Under normal circumstances , these hives are not the same as those witnessed with most urticariae .
Instead , the protrusion in the affected areas is typically more spread out .
The hives may last from eight hours to three days .
The source of the pressure on the skin can happen from tight fitted clothing , belts , clothing with tough straps , walking , leaning against an object , standing , sitting on a hard surface , etc .
The areas of the body most commonly affected are the hands , feet , trunk , abdomen , buttocks , legs and face .
Although this appears to be very similar to dermatographism , the cardinal difference is that the swelled skin areas do not become visible quickly and tend to last much longer .
This form of the skin disease is , however , rare .
CHOLINERGIC OR STRESS Section::::Cholinergic or stress .
Cholinergic urticaria ( CU ) is one of the physical urticaria which is provoked during sweating events such as exercise , bathing , staying in a heated environment , or emotional stress .
The hives produced are typically smaller than classic hives and are generally shorter - lasting .
Multiple subtypes have been elucidated , each of which require distinct treatment .
COLD - INDUCED Section::::Cold - induced .
The cold type of urticaria is caused by exposure of the skin to extreme cold , damp and windy conditions ; it occurs in two forms .
The rare form is hereditary and becomes evident as hives all over the body 9 to 18 hours after cold exposure .
The common form of cold urticaria demonstrates itself with the rapid onset of hives on the face , neck , or hands after exposure to cold .
Cold urticaria is common and lasts for an average of five to six years .
The population most affected is young adults , between 18 and 25 years old .
Many people with the condition also suffer from dermographism and cholinergic hives .
Severe reactions can be seen with exposure to cold water ; swimming in cold water is the most common cause of a severe reaction .
This can cause a massive discharge of histamine , resulting in low blood pressure , fainting , shock and even loss of life .
Cold urticaria is diagnosed by dabbing an ice cube against the skin of the forearm for 1 to 5 minutes .
A distinct hive should develop if a patient suffers cold urticaria .
This is different from the normal redness that can be seen in people without cold urticaria .
Patients with cold urticaria need to learn to protect themselves from a hasty drop in body temperature .
Regular antihistamines are not generally efficacious .
One particular antihistamine , cyproheptadine ( Periactin ) , has been found to be useful .
The tricyclic antidepressant doxepin has also been found to be an effective blocking agent of histamine discharge .
Finally , a medication named ketotifen , which keeps mast cells from discharging histamine , has also been employed with widespread success .
SOLAR URTICARIA
Section::::Solar urticaria .
This form of the disease occurs on areas of the skin exposed to the sun ; the condition becomes evident within minutes of exposure .
WATER - INDUCED Section::::Water - induced .
This type of urticaria is also termed rare , and occurs upon contact with water .
The response is not temperature - dependent and the skin appears similar to cholinergic form of the disease .
The appearance of hives is within one to 15 minutes of contact with the water , and can last from 10 minutes to two hours .
This kind of hives do not seem to be stimulated by histamine discharge like the other physical hives .
Most researchers believe this condition is actually skin sensitivity to additives in the water , such as chlorine .
Water urticaria is diagnosed by dabbing tap water and distilled water to the skin and observing the gradual response .
Aquagenic urticaria is treated with capsaicin ( Zostrix ) administered to the chafed skin .
This is the same treatment used for shingles .
Antihistamines are of questionable benefit in this instance , since histamine is not the causative factor .
Chizzola maculae is a very specific skin lesion due to fluoride exposure .
The size of a coin , these lesions may resemble small blue bruises or be wholly pink .
Doctors George Waldbott and V. A. Cecilioni named the lesions after a town in Italy , where they were common in young women and children .
According to Waldbott , chizzola maculae are early symptoms of fluoride intoxication .
EXERCISE
Section::::Exercise .
The condition was first distinguished in 1980 .
People with exercise urticaria
( EU ) experience hives , itchiness , shortness of breath and low blood pressure five to 30 minutes after beginning exercise .
These symptoms can progress to shock and even sudden death .
Jogging is the most common exercise to cause EU , but it is not induced by a hot shower , fever , or with fretfulness .
This differentiates EU from cholinergic urticaria .
EU sometimes occurs only when someone exercises within 30 minutes of eating particular foods , such as wheat or shellfish .
For these individuals , exercising alone or eating the injuring food without exercising produces no symptoms .
EU can be diagnosed by having the patient exercise and then observing the symptoms .
This method must be used with caution and only with the appropriate resuscitative measures at hand .
EU can be differentiated from cholinergic urticaria by the hot water immersion test .
In this test , the patient is immersed in water at 43 ° C ( 109.4 ° F ) .
Someone with EU will not develop hives , while a person with cholinergic urticaria will develop the characteristic small hives , especially on the neck and chest .
The immediate symptoms of this type are treated with antihistamines , epinephrine and airway support .
Taking antihistamines prior to exercise may be effective .
Ketotifen is acknowledged to stabilise mast cells and prevent histamine release , and has been effective in treating this hives disorder .
Avoiding exercise or foods that cause the mentioned symptoms is very important .
In particular circumstances , tolerance can be brought on by regular exercise , but this must be under medical supervision .
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Pathophysiology .
The skin lesions of urticarial disease are caused by an inflammatory reaction in the skin , causing leakage of capillaries in the dermis , and resulting in an edema which persists until the interstitial fluid is absorbed into the surrounding cells .
Hives is caused by the release of histamine and other mediators of inflammation ( cytokines ) from cells in the skin .
This process can be the result of an allergic or nonallergic reaction , differing in the eliciting mechanism of histamine release .
ALLERGIC HIVES
Section::::Allergic hives .
Histamine and other proinflammatory substances are released from mast cells in the skin and tissues in response to the binding of allergen - bound IgE antibodies to high - affinity cell surface receptors .
Basophils and other inflammatory cells are also seen to release histamine and other mediators , and are thought to play an important role , especially in chronic urticarial diseases .
AUTOIMMUNE HIVES Section::::Autoimmune hives .
Over half of all cases of chronic idiopathic hives are the result of an autoimmune trigger .
Roughly 50 % of patients with chronic urticaria spontaneously develop autoantibodies directed at the receptor FcεRI located on skin mast cells .
Chronic stimulation of this receptor leads to chronic hives .
Patients often have other autoimmune conditions , such as autoimmune thyroiditis , celiac disease , type 1 diabetes , rheumatoid arthritis , Sjögren 's syndrome or systemic lupus erythematosus .
INFECTIONS Section::::Infections .
Hive - like rashes commonly accompany viral illnesses , such as the common cold .
They usually appear three to five days after the cold has started , and may even appear a few days after the cold has resolved .
NONALLERGIC
HIVES
Section::::Nonallergic hives .
Mechanisms other than allergen - antibody interactions are known to cause histamine release from mast cells .
Many drugs , for example morphine , can induce direct histamine release not involving any immunoglobulin molecule .
Also , a diverse group of signaling substances , called neuropeptides , have been found to be involved in emotionally induced hives .
Dominantly inherited cutaneous and neurocutaneous porphyrias ( porphyria cutanea tarda , hereditary coproporphyria , variegate porphyria and erythropoietic protoporphyria ) have been associated with solar urticaria .
The occurrence of drug - induced solar urticaria may be associated with porphyrias .
This may be caused by IgG binding ,
not IgE. DIETARY HISTAMINE POISONING Section::::Dietary histamine poisoning .
This is termed scombroid food poisoning .
Ingestion of free histamine released by bacterial decay in fish flesh may result in a rapid - onset , allergic - type symptom complex which includes hives .
However , the hives produced by scombroid is reported not to include wheals .
STRESS AND CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC
HIVES Section::::Stress and chronic idiopathic hives .
Chronic idiopathic hives has been anecdotally linked to stress since the 1940s .
A large body of evidence demonstrates an association between this condition and both poor emotional well - being and reduced health - related quality of life .
A link between stress and this condition has also been shown .
A recent study has demonstrated an association between stressful life events ( e.g. bereavement , divorce , etc . ) and chronic idiopathic urticaria and also an association between post - traumatic stress and chronic idiopathic hives . DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The cause of chronic hives can rarely be determined .
In some cases regular extensive allergy testing over a long period of time is requested in hopes of getting new insight .
No evidence shows regular allergy testing results in identification of a problem or relief for people with chronic hives .
Regular allergy testing for people with chronic hives is not recommended .
ACUTE VERSUS CHRONIC
* urticaria is defined as the presence of evanescent wheals which completely resolve within six weeks .
Acute urticaria becomes evident a few minutes after the person has been exposed to an allergen .
The outbreak may last several weeks , but usually the hives are gone in six weeks .
Typically , the hives are a reaction to food , but in about half the cases , the trigger is unknown .
Common foods may be the cause , as well as bee or wasp stings , or skin contact with certain fragrances .
Acute viral infection is another common cause of acute urticaria ( viral exanthem ) .
Less common causes of hives include friction , pressure , temperature extremes , exercise , and sunlight .
* urticaria ( ordinary urticaria ) is defined as the presence of evanescent wheals which persist for greater than six weeks .
Some of the more severe chronic cases have lasted more than 20 years .
A survey indicated chronic urticaria lasted a year or more in more than 50 % of sufferers and 20 years or more in 20 % of them .
Section::::Acute versus chronic .
Acute and chronic hives are visually indistinguishable .
RELATED CONDITIONS
ANGIOEDEMA Section::::Related conditions .
Section::::Angioedema .
Angioedema is similar to hives , but in angioedema , the swelling occurs in a lower layer of the dermis than in hives , as well as in the subcutis .
This swelling can occur around the mouth , eyes , in the throat , in the abdomen , or in other locations .
Hives and angioedema sometimes occur together in response to an allergen , and is a concern in severe cases , as angioedema of the throat can be fatal .
VIBRATORY ANGIOEDEMA Section::::Vibratory angioedema .
This very rare form of angioedema develops in response to contact with vibration .
In vibratory angioedema , symptoms develop within two to five minutes after contact with a vibrating object , and abate after about an hour .
Patients with this disorder do not suffer from dermographism or pressure urticaria .
Vibratory angioedema is diagnosed by holding a vibrating device such as a laboratory vortex machine against the forearm for four minutes .
Speedy swelling of the whole forearm extending into the upper arm is also noted later .
The principal treatment is avoidance of vibratory stimulants .
Antihistamines have also been proven helpful .
MANAGEMENT
Section::::Management .
The mainstay of therapy for both acute and chronic hives is patient education , avoiding triggers and using antihistamines .
Chronic hives can be difficult to treat and lead to significant disability .
Unlike the acute form , 50–80 % of people with chronic hives have no identifiable triggers .
But 50 % of people with chronic hives will experience remission within 1 year .
Overall , treatment is geared towards symptomatic management .
Individuals with chronic hives may need other medications in addition to antihistamines to control symptoms .
Patients who experience hives with angioedema require emergency treatment as this is a life - threatening condition .
Treatment guidelines for the management of chronic hives have been published .
According to the 2014 American practice parameters , treatment involves a step wise approach .
Step 1 consists of second generation , H1 receptor blocking antihistamines .
Systemic glucocorticoids can also be used for episodes of severe disease but should not be used for long term due to their long list of side effects .
Step 2 consists of increasing the dose of the current antihistamine , adding other antihistamines , or adding a leukotriene receptor antagonist such as montelukast .
Step 3 consists of adding or replacing the current treatment with hydroxyzine or doxepin .
If the individual does n't respond to steps 1–3 then they are considered to have refractory symptoms .
At this point , anti - inflammatory medications ( dapsone , sulfasalazine ) , immunosuppressants ( cyclosporin , sirolimus ) or other medications like omalizumab can be used .
These options are explained in more detail below .
ANTIHISTAMINES
Section::::Antihistamines .
Non - sedating antihistamines that block the histamine H1 receptors are the first line of therapy .
First generation antihistamines such as diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine block both central and peripheral H1 receptors and can be sedating .
Second generation antihistamines such as loratadine , cetirizine , or desloratadine selectively antagonize the peripheral H1 receptors and are less sedating , less anticholinergic , and generally preferred over the first generation antihistamines .
People who do n't respond to the maximum dose of H1 antihistamines may benefit from increasing the dose , then to switching to another non - sedating antihistamine , then to adding a leukotriene antagonist , then to using an older antihistamine , then to using systemic steroids and finally to using ciclosporin or omalizumab .
H2-receptor antagonists are sometimes used in addition to H1-antagonists to treat urticaria , but there is limited evidence for their efficacy .
SYSTEMIC STEROIDS Section::::Systemic steroids .
Oral glucocorticoids are effective in controlling symptoms of chronic hives however they have an extensive list of adverse effects such as adrenal suppression , weight gain , osteoporosis , hyperglycemia , etc .
Therefore , their use should be limited to a couple of weeks .
In addition , one study found that systemic glucocorticoids combined with antihistamines did not hasten the time to symptom control compared with antihistamines alone .
LEUKOTRIENE - RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS Section::::Leukotriene - receptor antagonists .
Leukotrienes are released from mast cells along with histamine .
The medications , montelukast and zafirlukast block leukotriene receptors and can be used as add on treatment or in isolation for patients with CU .
It is important to note that these medications may be more beneficial for patients with NSAID induced CU .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Other options for refractory symptoms of chronic hives include anti - inflammatory medications , omalizumab , and immunosuppressants .
Potential anti - inflammatory agents include dapsone , sulfasalazine , and hydroxychloroquine .
Dapsone is a sulfone antimicrobial agent and is thought to suppress prostaglandin and leukotriene activity .
It is helpful in therapy - refractory cases and is contraindicated in patients with G6PD deficiency .
Sulfasalazine , a 5-ASA derivative , is thought to alter adenosine release and inhibit IgE mediated mast cell degranulation , Sulfasalazine is a good option for people with anemia who can not take dapsone .
Hydroxychloroquine is an antimalarial agent that suppresses T lymphocytes .
It has a low cost however it takes longer than dapsone or sulfasalazine to work .
Omalizumab was approved by the FDA in 2014 for patients 12 years old and above with chronic hives .
It is a monoclonal antibody directed against IgE. Significant improvement in pruritus and quality of life was observed in a phase III , multicenter , randomized control trial .
Immunosuppressants used for CU include cyclosporine , tacrolimus , sirolimus , and mycophenolate .
Calcineurin inhibitors , such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus , inhibit cell responsiveness to mast cell products and inhibit T cell activity .
They are preferred by some experts to treat severe symptoms .
Sirolimus and mycophenolate have less evidence for their use in the treatment of chronic hives but reports have shown them to be efficacious .
Immunosuppressants are generally reserved as the last line of therapy for severe cases due to their potential for serious adverse effects .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Afamelanotide is being studied as a hives treatment .
Opioid antagonists such as naltrexone have tentative evidence to support their use .
SEE ALSO
* Urticarial vasculitis
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Urticaria photo library at Dermnet