SISTER ACT Sister Act is a 1992 American comedy film directed by Emile Ardolino and written by Joseph Howard , with musical arrangements by Marc Shaiman .
It stars Whoopi Goldberg as a lounge singer forced to join a convent after being placed in a witness protection program .
It also features Maggie Smith , Kathy Najimy , Wendy Makkena , Mary Wickes , and Harvey Keitel .
Sister Act was one of the most financially successful comedies of the early 1990s , grossing $ 231 million worldwide .
The film spawned a franchise , which consists of a 1993 sequel , , and a musical adaptation , which premiered in 2006 .
A remake of Sister Act is in the works .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the film 's prologue , Deloris Wilson is a young student at a Catholic school ; she seems more focused on music groups and being the class clown than her studies .
As an adult , she is a lounge singer at a nightclub in Reno , Nevada , performing under the name Deloris Van Cartier .
One night , she witnesses her mobster boyfriend Vince LaRocca execute his chauffeur as a rat .
Lieutenant Eddie Souther persuades her to go into a witness protection program with Saint Katherine 's Parish , a convent in a run - down San Francisco neighborhood , as her safe house .
The stoic Reverend Mother finds Deloris uncouth , but Monsignor O'Hara , the neighborhood priest , persuades her to accept her .
Deloris , given the name Sister Mary Clarence as part of her cover , struggles to adapt to austere convent life .
However , she befriends several of the nuns , including jolly Sister Mary Patrick , meek Sister Mary Robert , and the elderly deadpan Sister Mary Lazarus , who works as choir director .
After Mary Clarence is chastised for sneaking out to a bar , the Reverend Mother assigns her to join the convent choir , who are known to be dreadful , to keep her out of trouble .
On her first day , Mary Clarence is elected by Mary Lazarus to become the choir director , after its members learn she has a background in music .
With Sister Mary Lazarus ' help , she helps to rearrange the choir and trains them to become better singers .
When the choir perform at Mass one Sunday , they sing " Hail Holy Queen " beautifully in a traditional manner , before shifting into a gospel and rock - and - roll - infused interpretation of the hymn .
Although the Reverend Mother is infuriated , O'Hara congratulates the choir 's unorthodox performance for bringing in people , including teenagers , off the streets and into the church .
This leads Mary Clarence to convince him to have the nuns head outside and clean up the neighborhood .
The choir continue to amaze parishioners and visitors with their music , including a performance of " My Guy " ( appropriately rewritten as " My God " ) , and soon help to transform the neighborhood .
This , however , makes Souther slightly annoyed at Deloris for nearly exposing her location on national television because of the nuns ' work .
Eventually , the convent learns from O'Hara that Pope John Paul II is coming by the church to see the choir himself , as part of his visit to the United States .
Believing herself to be no longer required , the Reverend Mother decides to hand in her resignation because of Mary Clarence 's work unintentionally undermining her authority .
This shocks Deloris , having discovered she will have to leave soon as Vince 's trial comes closer .
Souther soon arrests a police detective within his own department , upon discovering he was on Vince 's payroll and had uncovered information on Deloris ' location .
Rushing to San Francisco to warn Deloris that her cover is blown , Souther arrives just as Vince 's men abduct her .
When the nuns learn of the kidnapping , the Reverend Mother reveals the truth of Mary Clarence 's real identity .
Upon hearing them feel at a loss without her help in the choir , she decides to have them come with her and risk their lives to save her .
Arriving at Vince 's casino , the group searches for Deloris and find her , after she manages to escape from Vince and his men once again .
The group quickly attempts to confuse the mobsters while sneaking out Deloris , but end up becoming trapped in the casino lounge .
Not wishing to risk the group 's lives , Deloris prepares to sacrifice herself , and even Vince and his men have difficulty bringing themselves to shoot Deloris while she 's in a nun 's habit .
The delay is long enough for the police led by Souther , to arrive and arrest Vince and his men .
Despite being annoyed at the risk and other things Deloris did to the convent , the Reverend Mother thanks her for what she has done and decides to remain at the convent to continue her work .
Returning to San Francisco , the choir , led by Deloris , sing " I Will Follow Him " to packed audience in the refurbished Saint Katherine 's , receiving a standing ovation from all , including the Pope .
CAST
* Whoopi Goldberg as Deloris Van Cartier
/ Sister Mary Clarence * Isis Carmen Jones as Little Deloris Wilson * Maggie Smith as Reverend Mother * Kathy Najimy as Sister Mary Patrick
* Wendy Makkena as Sister Mary Robert ( singing voice : Andrea Robinson )
* Mary Wickes as Sister Mary Lazarus
* Bill Nunn as Lt .
Eddie Souther
* Harvey Keitel as Vince LaRocca
* Robert Miranda as Joey * Richard Portnow as Willy
* Rose Parenti as Sister Alma
* Joseph Maher as Monsignor O'Hara
* Jim Beaver as Clarkson * Jenifer Lewis as Michelle * Charlotte Crossley as Tina
* A.J. Johnson as Lewanda * Lois de Banzie as Immaculata * Max Grodénchik as Ernie * Joseph G. Medalis as Henry Parker
* Michael Durrell as Larry Merrick * Toni Kalem as Connie LaRocca * Eugene Greytak as Pope John Paul II * Guy Boyd ( uncredited ) as Detective Tate Choir nuns * Ellen Albertini Dow * Carmen Zapata
* Pat Crawford Brown * Prudence Wright Holmes * Georgia Creighton * Susan Johnson * Ruth Kobart
* Susan Browning
* Darlene Koldenhoven * Sheri Izzard
* Edith Diaz
* Beth Fowler
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Screenwriter Paul Rudnick pitched Sister Act to producer Scott Rudin in 1987 , with Bette Midler in mind for the lead role .
The script was then brought to Disney .
However , Midler later turned down the role , fearing that her fans would not want to see her play a nun .
Eventually , Whoopi Goldberg signed on to play the lead .
As production commenced , the script was rewritten by a half dozen screenwriters , including Carrie Fisher , Robert Harling , and Nancy Meyers .
With the movie no longer resembling his original script , Rudnick asked to be credited with a pseudonym in the film , deciding on " Joseph Howard . "
The church in which Deloris takes sanctuary is St. Paul 's Catholic Church , located at Valley and Church Streets in Noe Valley , an upper - middle - class neighborhood of San Francisco .
The storefronts on the opposite side of the street were converted to give the area a ghetto look .
Though the order of the nuns in the film is hinted at being a Carmelite one by Sister Mary Patrick , their religious habit is similar in appearance to that of the Sisters of St. Joseph of the Third Order of St. Francis ( minus the cross ) .
Members of the real - life Order , however , no longer wear their traditional habit .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's soundtrack was released by Hollywood Records on June 9 , 1992 in conjunction with the film , and contained the musical numbers performed by actors in the film itself , pre - recorded songs that were used as part of the background music , and instrumental music composed by Marc Shaiman for the film .
The soundtrack album debuted at # 74 and eventually reached # 40 on the Billboard Top 200 Albums Chart where it charted for 54 weeks .
The album received a Gold certification from the RIAA for shipment of 500,000 copies on January 13 , 1993 .
*
" The Lounge Medley " ( " ( Love Is Like a
) Heat Wave"/"My Guy"/"I Will Follow Him " ) — Deloris & The Ronelles
* * " The Murder " ( instrumental ) * * " Getting Into the Habit " ( instrumental ) * * " Rescue Me " —
Fontella Bass
* * " Hail Holy Queen " — Deloris & The Sisters
* * " Roll With Me Henry " —
Etta James
* * " Gravy For My Mashed Potatoes " — Dee
Dee Sharp
* * " My Guy ( My God ) " — Deloris & The Sisters
*
* " Just a Touch Of Love ( Everyday ) " — C+C Music Factory
*
* " Deloris Is Kidnapped " ( instrumental ) * * " Nuns to the Rescue " ( instrumental ) * * " Finale :
I Will Follow Him ( ' Chariot ' ) " — Deloris & The Sisters
* * " Shout " — Deloris & The Sisters & The Ronelles
* * " If My Sister 's in Trouble " — Lady Soul
*
* The singing voice for the character of " Mary Robert " was performed by vocalist Andrea Robinson .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received a generally positive reception from critics , holding a 71 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 24 reviews .
The film received two Golden Globe nominations : * Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy *
Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical ( Goldberg )
American Film Institute recognition :
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100
Laughs — Nominated BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was a box office success , grossing $ 139,605,150 domestically and $ 92,000,000 in foreign countries , effectively grossing $ 231,605,150 worldwide , becoming the eighth - highest - grossing film worldwide in 1992 .
It sat at the # 2 spot for four weeks , behind Lethal Weapon 3 , Patriot Games and Batman Returns in succession .
CONTROVERSY AND LAWSUIT Section::::Controversy and lawsuit .
On June 10 , 1993 , actress Donna Douglas and her partner Curt Wilson in Associated Artists Entertainment , Inc. , filed a $ 200 million lawsuit against Disney , Whoopi Goldberg , Bette Midler , their production companies , and Creative Artists Agency claiming the film was plagiarized from a book A Nun in the Closet owned by the partners .
Douglas and Wilson claimed that in 1985 they had developed a screenplay for the book .
The lawsuit claimed that there were over 100 similarities and plagiarisms between the movie and the book / screenplay owned by Douglas and Wilson .
The lawsuit further claimed that the developed screenplay had been submitted to Disney , Goldberg , and Midler three times during 1987 and 1988 .
In 1994 , Douglas and Wilson declined a $ 1 million offer in an attempt to win the case .
The judge found in favor of Disney and the other defendants .
Wilson stated at the time , " They would have had to copy our stuff verbatim for us to prevail . "
In November 2011 , a nun named Queen Mother Dr. Delois Blakely filed a lawsuit against the Walt Disney Company and Sony Pictures claiming that " The Harlem Street Nun , " an autobiography she wrote in 1987 , was the basis for the 1992 film .
She alleged that a movie executive expressed an interest in the rights to the movie after she wrote a three - page synopsis .
She is suing for " breach of contract , misappropriation of likeness and unjust enrichment .
" Blakely dropped the original lawsuit in January 2012 to serve a more robust lawsuit in late August 2012 with the New York Supreme Court , asking for $ 1 billion in damages from Disney .
In early February , 2013 , the New York Supreme Court dismissed the lawsuit with prejudice , awarding no damages to Blakely .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Region 1 DVD was released on November 6 , 2001 ; however , the disc has no anamorphic enhancement , similar to early DVDs from Buena Vista .
Special Features include the film 's theatrical trailer ; music videos for " I Will Follow Him " by Deloris and the Sisters , and " If My Sister 's in Trouble " by Lady Soul , both of which contain clips from the film ; and a featurette titled " Inside Sister Act : The Making Of " .
The all - region Blu - ray including both films was released on June 19 , 2012 , with both films presented in 1080p .
The 3-disc set also includes both films on DVD with the same bonus features as previous releases .
MUSICAL
Section::::Musical .
The musical Sister Act , directed by Peter Schneider and choreographed by Marguerite Derricks , premiered at the Pasadena Playhouse in Pasadena , California on October 24 , 2006 and closed on December 23 , 2006 .
It broke records , grossing $ 1,085,929 to become the highest grossing show ever at the venue .
The production then moved to the Alliance Theatre in Atlanta , Georgia , where it ran from January 17 to February 25 , 2007 .
The musical then opened in the West End at the London Palladium on June 2 , 2009 , following previews from May 7 .
The production was directed by Peter Schneider , produced by Whoopi Goldberg together with the Dutch company Stage Entertainment , and choreographed by Anthony Van Laast , with set design by Klara Zieglerova , costume design by Lez Brotherston and lighting design by Natasha Katz .
Following a year - long search , 24-year - old actress Patina Miller was cast as Deloris , alongside Sheila Hancock as the Mother Superior , Ian Lavender as Monsignor Howard , Chris Jarman as Shank , Ako Mitchell as Eddie , Katie Rowley Jones as Sister Mary Robert , Claire Greenway as Sister Mary Patrick and Julia Sutton as Sister Mary Lazarus .
The musical received four Laurence Olivier Awards nominations including Best Musical .
On October 30 , 2010 the show played its final performance at the London Palladium and transferred to Broadway .
The musical opened at the Broadway Theatre on April 20 , 2011 , with previews beginning March 24 , 2011 .
Jerry Zaks directed the Broadway production with Douglas Carter Beane rewriting the book .
Patina Miller , who originated the role of Deloris in the West End production , reprised her role , making her Broadway debut .
She was later replaced by Raven - Symoné , also making her Broadway debut .
The Original Broadway cast featured Victoria Clark ( Mother Superior ) , Fred Applegate ( Monsignor ) , Sarah Bolt ( Sister Mary Patrick ) , Chester Gregory ( Eddie ) , Kingsley Leggs ( Curtis ) , Marla Mindelle ( Sister Mary Robert ) and Audrie Neenan ( Sister Mary Lazarus ) .
The musical received five Tony Award nominations including Best Musical .
The musical closed in August 2012 after playing 561 performances .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS