LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR OF TEXAS
The Lieutenant Governor of Texas is the second - highest executive office in the government of Texas , a state in the U.S.
It is the second most powerful post in Texas government because its occupant controls the work of the Texas Senate and controls the budgeting process as a leader of the Legislative Budget Board .
Under the provisions of the Texas Constitution , the Lieutenant Governor is President of the Texas Senate .
Unlike with most other states ' senates and the U.S. Senate , the Lieutenant Governor regularly exercises this function rather than delegating it to the president pro tempore or a Majority Leader .
By the rules of the Senate , the Lieutenant Governor establishes all special and standing committees , appoints all chairpersons and members , and assigns all Senate legislation to the committee of his choice .
The Lieutenant Governor decides all questions of parliamentary procedure in the Senate .
He or she also has broad discretion in following Senate procedural rules .
The Lieutenant Governor is an ex officio member of several statutory bodies .
These include the Legislative Budget Board , the Legislative Council , the Legislative Audit Committee , the Legislative Board and Legislative Council , which have considerable sway over state programs , the budget and policy .
The Lieutenant Governor is also a member of the Legislative Redistricting Board ( together with the Speaker of the House , Attorney General , Comptroller , and Land Commissioner ) , which is charged with adopting a redistricting plan for the Texas House of Representatives , Texas Senate , or U.S. House of Representatives after the decennial census if the Legislature fails to do so .
In the case of a vacancy in the Lieutenant Governor 's office , the Senate elects one of its members to act as President of the Senate until the next statewide office election , in effect becoming the Lieutenant Governor .
A Senator elected as presiding officer in this way retains his district seat and the voting privileges entailed with his Senate election .
The Lieutenant Governor is sworn - in on the third Tuesday every four years , the same as the Governor .
Dan Patrick has been the Lieutenant Governor of Texas since January 20 , 2015 .
The term of office was two years from 1846 to 1972 .
Voters then increased it to four years , effective for the 1974 election .
The Lieutenant Governor assumes the powers of the Governor of Texas when the governor is out of the state or otherwise unable to discharge the office .
The Lieutenant Governor is elected separately from the Governor , rather than on the same ticket ; it is therefore possible for the Governor and Lieutenant Governor to be from different political parties ( which was the case during Governor George W. Bush 's first term and also during Bill Clements 's two non - consecutive terms ) .
The Lieutenant Governor becomes Governor if the elected Governor resigns , dies or is removed from office via impeachment and conviction .
Former Governor Rick Perry took office upon George W. Bush 's resignation on December 21 , 2000 .
Bush became US President on January 20 , 2001 .
When Perry became lieutenant governor on 19 January 1999 , he became the first Republican since Albert Jennings Fountain in 1873 to serve as lieutenant governor , and the first Republican to be elected as Lieutenant Governor since James W. Flanagan in 1869 .
COMPARED TO OTHER LIEUTENANT GOVERNORS Section::::Compared to other lieutenant governors .
Texas is one of the few states that vests significant power in the office of lieutenant governor , making it among the most influential .
By contrast , the lieutenant governor position in other states has few ( if any ) legislative responsibilities , akin to the Vice President of the United States .
The consequence is that the Governor of Texas is weaker than other states ' governors .
SEE ALSO
* List of Lieutenant Governors of Texas REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Duties and Powers of the Lieutenant Governor