JASON BOURNE Jason Bourne
( ) is a fictional character created by novelist Robert Ludlum .
Bourne is the antihero in a series of novels and subsequent film adaptations .
He first appeared in the novel
The Bourne Identity ( 1980 ) , which was adapted for television in 1988 .
The novel was adapted in 2002 into a feature film under the same name and starred Matt Damon in the lead role .
The character originally featured in three novels by Ludlum , released between 1980 and 1990 , followed by nine novels written by Eric Van Lustbader since 2004 .
Along with the first feature film , The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) , Jason Bourne also appears in three sequel movies The Bourne Supremacy ( 2004 ) , The Bourne Ultimatum ( 2007 ) , and Jason Bourne ( 2016 ) , with Damon again in the lead role .
Jeremy Renner stars in the fourth film of the franchise , The Bourne Legacy , released in August 2012 .
Damon stated in interviews that he would not do another Bourne film without Paul Greengrass , who had directed the second and third installments .
Greengrass agreed to direct Damon in the fifth installment in the franchise , Jason Bourne .
Greengrass jointly wrote the screenplay with editor Christopher Rouse .
PROFILE
BACKSTORY
Section::::Profile .
Section::::Backstory .
Jason Bourne is but one of many aliases used by David Webb , a career Force Reconnaissance Marine Captain Foreign Service Officer and a specialist in Far Eastern affairs .
Before the events in The Bourne Identity , Webb had a Thai wife named Dao and two children named Joshua and Alyssa in Phnom Penh .
Webb 's wife and two children were inadvertently killed during the Vietnam War when a fighter plane strayed into Cambodia , dropped two bombs , and strafed a spot near the Mekong River .
However , unknown to Bourne , Joshua survived .
Due to Cambodia 's neutrality in the war , every nation disclaimed the plane , and , therefore , no one took responsibility for the incident .
Infuriated by both the utter injustice and randomness of his loss , Webb went to Saigon and , under the careful guidance of friend and CIA officer Alexander Conklin , ended up training for an elite Top Secret Special Forces unit called Medusa .
Within that select organization Webb was known only by his code name , Delta One .
MEDUSA Section::::Medusa .
An assassination team or death squad , Medusa was created to infiltrate Northern Vietnam and assassinate members of the Viet Cong and its collaborators .
Its members were criminals ; its leader , a man called Delta , ran Medusa with an iron fist .
He became well known for his ruthlessness , his disregard for orders , and his disturbing success rate on his missions , resulting in the kidnapping of Webb 's brother , U.S. Army Lieutenant Gordon Webb , during his tour of duty in Saigon .
During the mission to save David Webb 's brother , an original " Medusa " team member named Jason Charles Bourne was discovered to be a double agent who alerted a large number of North Vietnamese soldiers to their whereabouts .
When Delta found Bourne after killing his way through the North Vietnamese , he simply executed Bourne in the jungles of Tam Quan .
Bourne 's murder was never exposed due to the Top Secret status of Medusa .
OPERATION TREADSTONE Section::::Operation Treadstone .
Years later , a black ops arm of the CIA was formed to eliminate the notorious Carlos the Jackal and called Treadstone Seventy - One , named after a building on New York 's Seventy - First Street , and Webb was called up by the creator of Treadstone and Medusa , David Abbott , who was nicknamed The Monk , ( short for The Silent Monk of Covert Operations ) to be its principal agent .
At this point , Webb ( Delta ) takes the identity of Jason Bourne due to the actual Bourne 's status as MIA in the war as well as the fact that Bourne was in reality a ruthless killer with a long criminal record .
The point of all this was to turn Jason Bourne into something more than he really was , a contract assassin who would be known all over the world for terminating the lives of just about anyone .
The assassin 's alias was Cain .
The reasoning for creating such a myth was to create competition for the well - known assassin named Carlos , or Carlos the Jackal ( real name Ilich Ramírez Sánchez ) who at that time was considered the world 's best and most famous assassin .
The name Cain was chosen because it had some significance for what he was doing .
During Vietnam , Cain was used instead of Charlie in the phonetic alphabet ( Alpha , Bravo , Charlie , Delta , Echo , Foxtrot ... )
because Charlie became synonymous with Viet Cong .
So Delta dropped back one letter to Cain , which stood for Charlie .
In Spanish , Charlie is Carlos ; Carlos was Venezuelan .
The myth of Cain was created by having Cain take credit for any well - publicized killings that took place in Asia , and later in Europe , regardless of the circumstances .
By creating this myth , Cain was to drive the reclusive Carlos out in the open " long enough to put a bullet in his head " .
To add insult to Carlos 's name , Cain stole the credit for Carlos 's kills , even when Cain had no part in them .
FILM PROFILE Section::::Film profile .
In the film series , Jason Bourne was born as David Webb on September 13 , 1970 in Nixa , Missouri ( although in Ultimatum , he was given a false date of April 15 , 1971 , as a coded reference to a specific site ) .
He joined the United States Army and was eventually selected for Delta Force in 1998 .
His father , Richard Webb , a senior CIA analyst , created the Treadstone program , a black ops project intended to train and deploy elite assassins .
He was monitored by the CIA , which murdered his father with a car bomb in Beirut in a bid to recruit Webb .
The ploy worked ; Webb approached the CIA and was brought into the program by Neil Daniels , a supervisor in the Treadstone program , and was monitored by Dr. Albert Hirsch , who supervised the medical assessment of the Treadstone agents .
He was brought into a secret recruitment center in New York City , where Hirsch ordered him tortured for days — via waterboarding and sleep deprivation — to break his spirit and allow him to be molded into an assassin .
He was officially accepted when he murdered an unidentified man ( implied to be the real Jason Bourne ) without questioning .
After that , he was given a new identity as Jason Bourne , and his birth identity was dropped .
After heavy training , in which he learned several languages and mastered several martial arts skills , Bourne was placed in the Treadstone program , whose missions were run by the CIA 's Alexander Conklin .
His first assignment , an unofficial one , was in Berlin , Germany , where he assassinated Vladimir Neski , a Russian politician who was intending to expose the theft of $ 20 million in black funds stolen from the CIA by Treadstone 's Director , Ward Abbott , and a Russian oligarch , Yuri Gretkov .
Under Conklin 's orders , Bourne murdered Neski and his wife and arranged it as a murder - suicide .
Bourne worked in the program for three years , during which he was considered its top agent because he could adapt to his surroundings , think laterally , and execute assassinations that looked like accidents .
He was stationed in Paris , France , maintaining a secluded life while performing assassinations , mostly around Europe .
His official handler was a logistics agent , Nicky Parsons , also stationed in Paris , with whom he was implied to have some sort of a romantic relationship kept secret from his Treadstone employers .
The turning point in his life came when he was ordered to murder Nykwana Wombosi , an exiled African warlord who was blackmailing the CIA into reinstating him as head of his state , lest he expose several CIA secrets .
Using an alias , John Michael Kane , Bourne gathered information on Wombosi .
He infiltrated the warlord 's yacht and hid inside it for five days , surfacing on a cold night in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea , intending to arrange the murder to look like he was killed by a crew member to avoid suspicion .
However , Wombosi was surrounded by his children , and Bourne was unable to bring himself to kill him .
He tried to abandon the mission by leaving the boat , but an unknown shooter shot him twice in the back , sending him off the yacht into the sea and triggering amnesia , causing Webb / Bourne to forget his identity .
APPEARANCES NOVELS Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Novels .
The series has included fourteen novels which have been written by two authors , Robert Ludlum and Eric Van Lustbader .
Ludlum 's series include the first three books , dubbed the Bourne trilogy .
After Ludlum 's death in 2001 , Lustbader took over the character in his own series of novels , which span eleven books so far , with a twelfth ( The Bourne Nemesis ) currently being completed .
WRITTEN BY
ROBERT LUDLUM
THE BOURNE IDENTITY ( 1980 )
Section::::Written by Robert Ludlum .
Section::::The Bourne Identity ( 1980 ) .
A man is found floating unconscious in the Mediterranean Sea near Marseille by Italian fishermen with two gunshot wounds in his back .
He wakes and discovers he is suffering from extreme memory loss .
Film negative embedded in his hip leads him to a bank in Zurich where he learns he is known by the name Jason Bourne .
As he tries to reclaim his memory , Bourne attracts the attention of hostile people for reasons unknown to him .
At a hotel , while cornered , Bourne takes a young woman , Marie St. Jacques , hostage to escape .
Marie is an employee of the Government of Canada .
Bourne and Marie discover that " Jason Bourne " is the cover identity of a contract assassin , and that both the CIA and another contract killer known as Carlos the Jackal have an interest in him .
Marie is convinced that this man she has come to know can not be the ruthless killer that all their discoveries seem to imply .
She compels Bourne to continue searching for his true identity and , in the end , he finds the truth .
Through this time , Bourne has the phrase " Cain is for Charlie , and Delta is for Cain " continually flash through his mind , propelling him in the direction of his mission .
THE BOURNE SUPREMACY ( 1986 ) Section::::The Bourne Supremacy ( 1986 ) .
Having recovered his memory and retired from the CIA , David Webb now teaches Asian studies at a university in Maine and lives with Marie .
She is taken captive seemingly by a powerful Chinese drug lord , but in reality , by the United States government using the fictitious drug lord as cover .
The scheme is an attempt to turn Webb back into his former self , the mythical Jason Bourne , to go after a Bourne impostor in China .
The phony Bourne has been credited with a Far East political assassination that could , in a worst - case scenario , cause a Chinese civil war over the ownership of Hong Kong .
THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM ( 1990 ) Section::::The Bourne Ultimatum ( 1990 ) .
As Carlos the Jackal enters old age and his infamy fades , he decides that he will do two things before he dies : kill Jason Bourne and destroy the KGB facility of Novgorod , where the Jackal was trained and later turned away .
Webb 's family is forced to hide in the Caribbean while Webb himself works with old friend and CIA officer Alex Conklin to hunt down and kill the Jackal first .
Webb poses as an important member of Medusa , now a nearly omnipotent economic force that controls the commander of NATO , leading figures in the Defense Department , and large NYSE firms .
The plan is to use Medusa 's resources to contact the Jackal .
Webb just misses the Jackal several times before Webb feigns his own death and convinces the Jackal that he has succeeded .
Following this , the Jackal turns to his second goal .
Webb tracks the Jackal down with the help of Conklin and a KGB agent as the Jackal begins destroying the KGB compound .
In a final confrontation , the Jackal is led into a dam lock in which he drowns and Webb returns to his family .
WRITTEN
BY ERIC VAN LUSTBADER
THE BOURNE LEGACY ( 2004 )
Section::::Written by Eric Van Lustbader .
Section::::The Bourne Legacy ( 2004 ) .
With the climactic events of The Bourne Ultimatum behind him , Jason Bourne is able to once again become David Webb , now professor of linguistics at Georgetown University .
However , this serenity does not last for long .
When a silenced gunshot narrowly misses Webb 's head , the Bourne persona reawakens in him .
His first objective is to reach his long - time friend and handler at the CIA , Alex Conklin .
However , unknown to Bourne , a Hungarian by the name of Stepan Spalko has now drawn Jason into a web — one which he can not escape as easily as his professional façade .
And the man who nearly killed him in Georgetown continues his deadly , intensely personal pursuit .
THE BOURNE BETRAYAL ( 2007 ) Section::::The
Bourne Betrayal ( 2007 ) .
Jason Bourne takes a mission to rescue his only friend in the CIA , Martin Lindros , who disappeared in Africa while tracking shipments of uranium .
Once safely back in America , Lindros persuades Bourne to help track the money trail of terrorists buying the nuclear material in Odessa .
But once there , Bourne is hampered by confusing flashbacks of unfamiliar places and events and he wonders if someone is brainwashing him in order to throw him off the trail , or worse , if the man he saved in Africa is really Martin Lindros .
Now , Bourne must gather evidence while trying to stay one step ahead of the terrorists who wo n't let anyone stand in their way .
THE BOURNE SANCTION ( 2008 )
Section::::The Bourne Sanction ( 2008 ) .
Jason Bourne returns to Georgetown University , and the mild world of his alter ego , David Webb , hoping for normality .
But , after so many adrenaline - soaked years of risking his life , Bourne finds himself chafing under the quiet life of a linguistics professor .
Aware of his frustrations , his academic mentor , Professor Spector , asks for help investigating the murder of a former student .
The young man died carrying information about a group 's terrorist activities , including an immediate plan to attack the United States .
The organization , the Black Legion , and its plot have also popped up on the radar of the Central Intelligence Agency , whose new director Veronica Hart is struggling to assert her authority .
Sensing an opportunity to take control of the CIA by showing Hart 's incompetence , National Security Agency operatives attempt to accomplish what the CIA never could do , hunt down and kill Jason Bourne .
In Europe , Bourne 's investigation into the Black Legion turns into one of the deadliest and most tangled operations of his double life — while an assassin is getting closer by the minute .
THE BOURNE DECEPTION ( 2009 ) Section::::The Bourne Deception ( 2009 ) .
Bourne 's nemesis , Arkadin , is still hot on his trail , and the two continue their struggle , reversing roles of hunter and hunted .
When Bourne is ambushed and badly wounded , he fakes his death and goes into hiding .
In safety , he takes on a new identity , and begins a mission to find out who tried to assassinate him .
Jason begins to question who he really is , how much of him is tied up in the Bourne identity , and what he would become if that was suddenly taken away from him .
Meanwhile , an American passenger airliner is shot down over Egypt by what seems to be an Iranian missile .
A massive global investigative team is assembled to get at the truth of the situation before it can escalate into an international scandal .
Bourne 's search for the man who shot him intersects with the search for the people who brought down the airliner , leading Bourne into one of the most deadly and challenging situations he has ever encountered .
With the threat of a new world war brewing , Bourne finds himself in a race against time to uncover the truth and find the person behind his assault , all the while being stalked by his unknown nemesis .
THE BOURNE OBJECTIVE ( 2010 ) Section::::The Bourne Objective ( 2010 ) .
The Bourne Objective is the eighth novel in the Bourne series , and the fifth written by Eric Van Lustbader .
The book was released in 2010 , sequel to The Bourne Deception .
The killing of an art dealer dredges up snatches of Jason Bourne 's impaired memory , in particular the murder of a young woman who entrusted him with a strangely engraved ring .
Now he 's determined to find its owner and purpose .
But Bourne never knows what terrible acts he 'll discover he committed when he digs into the past .
The trail will lead him to a vicious Russian mercenary , Leonid Arkadin , also a graduate of the Central Intelligence training program Treadstone .
The covert course was shuttered by Congress for corruption , but not before it produced Bourne and Arkadin , giving them equal skills , equal force , and equal cunning .
As Bourne 's destiny circles closer to Arkadin 's , it becomes clear that someone else has been watching and manipulating them .
THE BOURNE DOMINION ( 2011 ) Section::::The Bourne Dominion ( 2011 ) .
Jason Bourne is searching for an elusive cadre of terrorists planning to destroy America 's most strategic natural resources — and needs the help of his longtime friend , General Boris Karpov .
Karpov , the newly appointed head of Russia 's most feared spy agency , FSB-2 , is one of the most determined , honorable , and justice - hungry men that Bourne knows .
But Karpov has made a deal with the devil .
In order to remain the head of FSB-2 , he must hunt down and kill Bourne .
Now , these two trusted friends are on a deadly collision course .
From the Colombian highlands to Munich , Cádiz , and Damascus , the clock is counting down to a disaster that will cripple America 's economic and military future .
Only Bourne and Karpov have a chance to avert the catastrophe — but if they destroy each other first , that chance will be gone forever .
THE BOURNE IMPERATIVE ( 2012 ) Section::::The Bourne Imperative ( 2012 ) .
The tenth book in the series was published on June 5 , 2012 .
The man Jason Bourne fished out of the freezing sea is near death , half - drowned and bleeding profusely from a gunshot wound .
He awakens with no memory of who he is or why he was shot , and Bourne is eerily reminded of his own amnesia .
Then Bourne discovers that the Mossad agent named Rebeka is so determined to find this injured man that she has gone off the grid , cut her ties to her agency , and is now being stalked by Mossad 's most feared killer .
The answers to these mysteries may lie back in southeast Lebanon , in a secret encampment to which Bourne and Rebeka escaped following a firefight weeks ago .
The complex trail links to the mission given to Treadstone directors Peter Marks and Soraya Moore : find the semi - mythic terrorist assassin known as Nicodemo .
In the course of Bourne 's desperate , deadly search for a secret that will alter the future of the entire world , he will experience both triumph and loss , and his life will never be the same .
Now everything turns on the amnesiac .
Bourne must learn his identity and purpose before both he and Rebeka are killed .
From Stockholm to Washington , D.C. , from Mexico City to Beijing , the web of lies and betrayals extends into a worldwide conspiracy of monumental proportions .
THE BOURNE RETRIBUTION ( 2013 ) Section::::The Bourne Retribution ( 2013 ) .
The eleventh book in the series was published on December 3 , 2013 .
Bourne 's friend Eli Yadin , head of Mossad , learns that Ouyang Jidan , a senior member of China 's Politburo , and a major Mexican drug lord may have been trafficking in more than drugs .
Yadin needs Bourne to investigate .
Bourne agrees , but only because he has a personal agenda : Ouyang Jidan is the man who ordered Rebeka — one of the very few people Bourne has ever truly cared about — murdered .
Bourne is determined to avenge her death , but in the process he becomes enmeshed in a monstrous worldwide scheme involving the Chinese , Mexicans , and Russians .
Bourne 's desperate search for Ouyang takes him from Tel Aviv to Shanghai , Mexico City , and , ultimately , a village on China 's coast where a clever trap has been laid for him .
Bourne finds himself pursued on all sides and unsure whom he can trust .
THE BOURNE ASCENDANCY ( 2014 ) Section::::The Bourne Ascendancy ( 2014 ) .
The twelfth book in the Bourne series was published on June 10 , 2014 .
Bourne has been hired to impersonate a high - level government minister at a political summit meeting in Qatar , shielding the minister from any assassination attempts .
Suddenly , armed gunmen storm the room , killing everyone but Bourne .
Their target , however , is n't the minister Bourne impersonates ...
it is Bourne himself .
Kidnapped and transported to an underground bunker , Bourne finds himself face - to - face with an infamous terrorist named El Ghadan ( " Tomorrow " ) .
El Ghadan holds as his captive Soraya Moore , former co - director of Treadstone , and a close friend to Bourne , along with her two - year - old daughter .
Meanwhile , the President of the United States is in the midst of brokering a historic peace treaty between the Israelis and the Palestinians — an event that El Ghadan is desperate to prevent .
He demands that Bourne carry out a special mission : kill the President .
If Bourne refuses , Soraya and her daughter will die .
Bourne must make a monstrous choice : save Soraya and her daughter , or save the President .
THE BOURNE ENIGMA ( 2016 ) Section::::The Bourne Enigma ( 2016 ) .
The Bourne Enigma is the thirteenth novel in the Bourne series , published on June 21 , 2016 .
On the eve of Russian general Boris Karpov 's wedding , Jason Bourne receives an enigmatic message from his old friend and fellow spymaster .
In Moscow , what should be a joyous occasion turns bloody and lethal .
Now Bourne is the only one who can decipher Karpov 's cryptogram .
He discovers that Karpov has betrayed his sovereign to warn Bourne of a crippling disaster about to be visited on the world .
Bourne has only four days to discover the nature of the disaster and stop it .
The trail Karpov has been following leads Bourne to Cairo and the doorstep of Ivan Borz , the elusive international arms dealer infamous for hiding behind a never - ending series of false identities , a man Bourne has been hunting ever since he abducted former Treadstone director Soraya Moore and her two - year - old daughter and brutally murdered Soraya 's husband .
Bourne must travel to war - torn Syria and then Cyprus as he chases the astonishing truth .
The clock is ticking , and Bourne has less than four days to solve Karpov 's riddle — and hunt down Borz — if he hopes to prevent a cataclysmic international war . . .
THE BOURNE INITIATIVE ( 2017 ) Section::::The Bourne Initiative ( 2017 ) .
The Bourne Initiative is the fourteenth novel in the Bourne series , and was published in July 2017 .
Gen. Boris Karpov , head of the feared Russian FSB , is dead .
But Karpov has reached out from the grave with an unstoppable cyber operation he conceived in the months before his murder , aimed at the heart of the United States — a way to steal the president 's nuclear launch codes .
Who has taken over the operation ?
Karpov trusted only one man : Jason Bourne .
But can Bourne be working against his own country ?
Gen. Arthur MacQuerrie , chief of the Dreadnaught Section of NSA and Morgana Broussard , head of the mysterious Meme , LLC , are convinced of Bourne 's treasonous act , and will do everything in their power to kill him .
Flushed from cover , hunted by the best assassins in the business , wounded and nearly killed , Bourne 's only hope is to join forces with his bitterest enemy , a Somali magus named Keyre , whose terrorist forces Bourne once decimated .
Now Keyre is more powerful than ever , with a burgeoning international network — a man who can help Bourne , but to what end ?
Lying in wait is the young woman Bourne saved from Keyre 's torture , who now calls herself the Angelmaker .
Both seductive and deadly , the Angelmaker loves Bourne , watches over him , but from whom does she take her orders ?
Is she ally or adversary ?
These are questions Bourne must answer before he can unravel the mystery of Boris Karpov 's last legacy , a weaponized code that may very well bring about the unthinkable : a violent end to America .
THE BOURNE NEMESIS ( 2018 ) Section::::The Bourne Nemesis ( 2018 ) .
The Bourne Nemesis is the fifteenth novel in the Bourne series , and will be published in 2018 .
Jason Bourne returns .
He 's fought against the NSA , Black off - site cyber operations , a Somali terrorist organisation and been accused of treason against the US .
Now the Russians have planted a mole to uncover Bourne 's secrets and launch cyber - warfare against the United States .
Meanwhile , Bourne 's former colleague , Soroya Moore , needs his help .
Six highly skilled field agents have disappeared , the body parts of three found in a national park in Georgia .
Facing death and destruction in the shadows of civilisation , Bourne will battle his deadliest nemesis yet .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
In 1988 a two - part made - for - television movie of The Bourne Identity aired on ABC .
It starred Richard Chamberlain in the role of Jason Bourne and Jaclyn Smith as Marie St. Jacques .
The TV movie was largely faithful to Robert Ludlum 's novel , both in plot as well as in the portrayal of the character of Jason Bourne .
FILM Section::::Film .
The Jason Bourne novels were adapted into a series of films – The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) , The Bourne Supremacy ( 2004 ) , The Bourne Ultimatum ( 2007 ) , The Bourne Legacy ( 2012 ) , and Jason Bourne ( 2016 ) .
The films retain the titles and some base elements but otherwise feature different plots independent of the novels .
In these films , Bourne is portrayed by Matt Damon .
Bourne does not appear in The Bourne Legacy , with the exception of his picture being featured in the film as well as brief discussions of how he 's caused problems to the organization he worked for .
As a result , the film focuses on the fallout in the intelligence community from Bourne 's actions in Ultimatum .
Legacy features Jeremy Renner as Aaron Cross , an operative in a different clandestine program evolved from Treadstone .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
A video game titled Robert Ludlum 's The Bourne Conspiracy was released in 2008 for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 .
The Ludlum estate obtained the rights to the video game franchise and sold it to Electronic Arts in 2009 .
EA planned to make several Bourne games .
Their first game was to have been developed by Starbreeze Studios , but has since been shelved .
Radical Entertainment were reportedly developing a Bourne game titled Treadstone after a former animator of the now - defunct developer released a rough test reel , but it has since been canceled .
FRANCHISE OVERVIEW Section::::Franchise overview .
The Bourne franchise consists of several novels , movies , and a video game , all featuring one of the several versions of the Jason Bourne character .
* Novels : *
The Bourne Identity ( 1980 )
*
The Bourne Supremacy ( 1986 ) * The Bourne Ultimatum ( 1990 ) * The Bourne Legacy ( 2004 ) *
The Bourne Betrayal ( 2007 )
*
The Bourne Sanction ( 2008 )
*
The Bourne Deception ( 2009 )
*
The Bourne Objective ( 2010 )
*
The Bourne Dominion ( 2011 )
*
The Bourne Imperative ( 2012 ) *
The Bourne Retribution ( 2013 )
*
The Bourne Ascendancy ( 2014 )
*
The Bourne Enigma ( 2016 )
*
The Bourne Initiative ( 2017 )
*
The Bourne Nemesis ( 2018 )
* Films : * The Bourne Identity ( 1988 TV film ) * The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) * The Bourne Supremacy ( 2004 ) * The Bourne Ultimatum ( 2007 ) * The Bourne Legacy ( 2012 ) * Jason Bourne ( 2016 )
* Video Games : *
The Bourne Conspiracy ( 2008 ) REFERENCES