DEMAND CURVE
In economics , the demand curve is the graph depicting the relationship between the price of a certain commodity and the amount of it that consumers are willing and able to purchase at any given price .
It is a graphic representation of a market demand schedule .
The demand curve for all consumers together follows from the demand curve of every individual consumer : the individual demands at each price are added together , assuming independent decision - making .
Demand curves are used to estimate behaviors in competitive markets , and are often combined with supply curves to estimate the equilibrium price ( the price at which sellers together are willing to sell the same amount as buyers together are willing to buy , also known as market clearing price ) and the equilibrium quantity ( the amount of that good or service that will be produced and bought without surplus / excess supply or shortage / excess demand ) of that market .
In a monopolistic market , the demand curve facing the monopolist is simply the market demand curve .
Demand curves are usually considered as theoretical structures that are expected to exist in the real world , but real world measurements of actual demand curves are difficult and rare .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
According to convention , the demand curve is drawn with price on the vertical ( y ) axis and quantity on the horizontal ( x ) axis .
The function actually plotted is the inverse demand function .
The demand curve usually slopes downwards from left to right ; that is , it has a negative association .
The negative slope is often referred to as the " law of demand " , which means people will buy more of a service , product , or resource as its price falls .
The demand curve is related to the marginal utility curve , since the price one is willing to pay depends on the utility .
However , the demand directly depends on the income of an individual while the utility does not .
Thus it may change indirectly due to change in demand for other commodities .
However , with Veblen goods , such as status symbols , the utility value of the good is largely the price and demand is higher at higher prices and the demand curve may curve upwards .
With a Giffen good the price is taken by the market as a signal of quality , irrespective of the true nature of the product , and hence demand may be very low when priced low and increase at higher price points .
LINEAR DEMAND CURVE Section::::Linear demand curve .
The demand curve is often graphed as a straight line where a and b are parameters : formula_1 .
The constant " a " embodies the effects of all factors other than price that affect demand .
If income were to change , for example , the effect of the change would be represented by a change in the value of " a " and be reflected graphically as a shift of the demand curve .
The constant " b " is the slope of the demand curve and shows how the price of the good affects the quantity demanded .
The graph of the demand curve uses the inverse demand function in which price is expressed as a function of quantity .
The standard form of the demand equation can be converted to the inverse equation by solving for P :
formula_2 . More plainly , in the equation formula_3 , " a " is the intercept where price is zero ( where the demand curve intercepts the Y - axis ) , " b " is the slope of the demand curve , " Q " is quantity and " P " is price .
There is movement along a demand curve when a change in price causes the quantity demanded to change .
It is important to distinguish between movement along a demand curve , and a shift in a demand curve .
Movements along a demand curve happen only when the price of the good changes .
When a non - price determinant of demand changes the curve shifts .
These " other variables " are part of the demand function .
They are " merely lumped into intercept term of a simple linear demand function . "
Thus a change in a non - price determinant of demand is reflected in a change in the x - intercept causing the curve to shift along the x axis .
SHIFT Section::::Shift .
The shift of a demand curve takes place when there is a change in any non - price determinant of demand , resulting in a new demand curve .
Non - price determinants of demand are those things that will cause demand to change even if prices remain the same — in other words , the things whose changes might cause a consumer to buy more or less of a good even if the good 's own price remained u. Some of the more important factors are the prices of related goods ( both substitutes and complements ) , income , population , and expectations .
However , demand is the willingness and ability of a consumer to purchase a good under the prevailing circumstances ; so , any circumstance that affects the consumer 's willingness or ability to buy the good or service in question can be a non - price determinant of demand .
As an example , weather could be a factor in the demand for beer at a baseball game .
When income increases , the demand curve for normal goods shifts outward as more will be demanded at all prices , while the demand curve for inferior goods shifts inward due to the increased attainability of superior substitutes .
With respect to related goods , when the price of a good ( e.g. a hamburger ) rises , the demand curve for substitute goods ( e.g. chicken ) shifts out , while the demand curve for complementary goods ( e.g. tomato sauce ) shifts in ( i.e. there is more demand for substitute goods as they become more attractive in terms of value for money , while demand for complementary goods contracts in response to the contraction of quantity demanded of the underlying good ) .
DEMAND SHIFTERS
* Changes in disposable income , the magnitude of the shift also being related to the income elasticity of demand .
* Changes in tastes and preferences — tastes and preferences are assumed to be fixed in the short - run .
This assumption of fixed preferences is a necessary condition for aggregation of individual demand curves to derive market demand .
* Changes in expectations .
* Changes in the prices of related goods ( substitutes and complements )
* Population size and composition
* N.B. Whilst variations in the price of the actual product affects the overall quantity demanded , economists do not consider price to affect the demand curve .
CHANGES THAT DECREASE OR
INCREASE DEMAND Section::::Changes that decrease or increase demand .
A number of business publications have published opinion pieces on the actions that raise demand .
FACTORS AFFECTING MARKET DEMAND Section::::Factors affecting market demand .
Market demand is the summation of individual demand curves .
In addition to the factors which can affect individual demand there are three factors that can affect market demand ( cause the market demand curve to shift ) : * a change in the number of consumers , * a change in the distribution of tastes among consumers , * a change in the distribution of income among consumers with different tastes .
Some circumstances which can cause the demand curve to shift in include :
* Decrease in price of a substitute
* Increase in price of a complement
* Decrease in income if good is normal good * Increase in income if good is inferior good MOVEMENT ALONG
A DEMAND CURVE Section::::Movement along a demand curve .
There is movement along a demand curve when a change in price causes the quantity demanded to change .
It is important to distinguish between movement along a demand curve , and a shift in a demand curve .
Movements along a demand curve happen only when the price of the good changes .
When a non - price determinant of demand changes the curve shifts .
These " other variables " are part of the demand function .
They are " merely lumped into intercept term of a simple linear demand function . "
Thus a change in a non - price determinant of demand is reflected in a change in the x - intercept causing the curve to shift along the x axis .
DISCRETENESS OF AMOUNTS Section::::Discreteness of amounts .
If a commodity is sold in whole units , and these are valuable for a consumer , then the individual demand curve can hardly be approximated by a continuous curve .
It is a set function of the price , defined by a price above which no unit is bought , a price range for which one is bought , etc .
UNITS OF MEASURES Section::::Units of measures .
If the local currency is dollars , for example , then the units of measurement of the variable " price " are " dollars per unit of the good " and the units of measurement of " quantity " are " units of the good per time ( e.g. , per week or per year ) .
Thus quantity demanded is a flow variable .
PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND ( PED ) Section::::Price elasticity of demand ( PED ) .
PED is a measure of the sensitivity of the quantity variable , Q , to changes in the price variable , P. Elasticity answers the question of how much the quantity will change in percentage terms for a 1 % change in the price , and is thus important in determining how revenue will change .
PED is negative because of the inverse relationship between the price of a good and the quantity of the good demanded , a consequence of the law of demand .
The elasticity of demand indicates how sensitive the demand for a good is to a price change .
If the absolute value of PED is between zero and 1 , demand is said to be inelastic ; if the absolute value of PED equals 1 , the demand is unitary elastic ; and if the absolute value of Price elasticity of demand is greater than 1 , demand is elastic .
A low coefficient implies that changes in price have little influence on demand .
A high elasticity indicates that consumers will respond to a price rise by buying a lot less of the good and that consumers will respond to a price cut by buying a lot more ... TAXES AND SUBSIDIES Section::::Taxes and subsidies .
A sales tax on the commodity does not directly change the demand curve , if the price axis in the graph represents the price including tax .
Similarly , a subsidy on the commodity does not directly change the demand curve , if the price axis in the graph represents the price after deduction of the subsidy .
If the price axis in the graph represents the price before addition of tax and/or subtraction of subsidy then the demand curve moves inward when a tax is introduced , and outward when a subsidy is introduced .
SEE ALSO
* Demand ( economics ) * Effect of taxes and subsidies on price
*
Feasibility condition
* Hicksian demand *
Inverse demand function
* Law of demand
* Marshallian demand
* Price point
* Sonnenschein – Mantel – Debreu theorem * Supply and demand REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pricing to the demand curve