GREAT STORM OF 1987
( £ billion today)France : 23 billion francs(£ billion today )
The Great Storm of 1987 was a violent extratropical cyclone that occurred on the night of 15–16 October , with hurricane - force winds causing casualties in England , France and the Channel Islands as a severe depression in the Bay of Biscay moved northeast .
Among the most damaged areas were Greater London , the East Anglian coast , the Home Counties , the west of Brittany and the Cotentin Peninsula of Normandy which weathered gusts typically with a return period of 1 in 200 years .
Forests , parks , roads and railways were strewn with fallen trees as well as schools being closed .
The British National Grid suffered heavy damage , leaving thousands without power .
At least 22 people were killed in England and France .
The highest measured gust of was recorded at Pointe Du Roc , Granville , France and the highest gust in the UK of was recorded at Shoreham - by - Sea .
That day 's weather reports had failed to indicate a storm of such severity , an earlier , correct forecast having been negated by later projections .
The apparent suggestion by the BBC 's Michael Fish of a false alarm is celebrated as a classic gaffe , though he claims he was misquoted .
The storm has been termed a weather bomb due to its rapid development .
Major improvements were later implemented in atmospheric observation , relevant computer models , and the training of forecasters .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
On the Sunday before the storm struck , the farmers ' forecast had predicted bad weather on the following Thursday or Friday , 15–16 October .
By midweek , however , guidance from weather prediction models was somewhat equivocal .
Instead of stormy weather over a considerable part of the UK , the models suggested that severe weather would reach no farther north than the English Channel and coastal parts of southern England .
During the afternoon of 15 October , winds were very light over most parts of the UK .
The pressure gradient was slack .
A depression was drifting slowly northwards over the North Sea off eastern Scotland .
A trough lay over England , Wales and Ireland .
Over the Bay of Biscay , a depression was developing .
FIRST
WARNINGS Section::::First warnings .
The first gale warnings for sea areas in the English Channel were issued at 0630 UTC on 15 October and were followed , four hours later , by warnings of severe gales .
At 1200 UTC on 15 October , the depression which originated in the Bay of Biscay was centred near 46 ° N , 9 ° W and its depth was 970 mb .
By 1800 UTC , it had moved north - east to about 47 ° N , 6 ° W , and deepened to 964 mb .
At 2235 UTC , winds of Force 10 were forecast .
By midnight , the depression was over the western English Channel , and its central pressure was 953 mb .
At 0140 on 16 October , warnings of Force 11 were issued .
The depression now moved rapidly north - east , filling a little as it did , reaching the Humber Estuary at about 0530 UTC , by which time its central pressure was 959 mb .
Dramatic increases in temperature were associated with the passage of the storm 's warm front .
In the sea areas , warnings of severe weather were both timely and adequate , although forecasts for land areas left much to be desired .
During the evening of 15 October , radio and TV forecasts mentioned strong winds , but indicated that heavy rain would be the main feature , rather than wind .
By the time most people went to bed , exceptionally strong winds had not been mentioned in national radio and TV weather broadcasts .
Warnings of severe weather had been issued , however , to various agencies and emergency authorities , including the London Fire Brigade .
Perhaps the most important warning was issued by the Met Office to the Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) at 0135 UTC , 16 October .
It warned that the anticipated consequences of the storm were such that civil authorities might need to call on assistance from the military .
WINDS
Section::::Winds .
A highest gust of is estimated from satellite data at Quimper , Brittany , with the highest measured gust at at Pointe du Roc , Granville Normandy .
In south - east England , where the greatest damage occurred , gusts of or more were recorded continually for three or four consecutive hours .
During this time , the wind veered from southerly to south - westerly .
To the north - west of this region , there were two maxima in gust speeds , separated by a period of lower wind speeds .
During the first period , the wind direction was southerly .
During the latter , it was south - westerly .
Damage patterns in south - east England suggested that tornadoes accompanied the storm .
In the UK , winds at Shoreham - by - Sea , Sussex reached before the anemometer failed .
Many anemometers were reliant on mains power , and ceased recording as the south east of the United Kingdom was blacked - out by power cuts , thus losing much valuable data .
Winds with an estimated 200-year return period hit the counties of Kent , Sussex , Hampshire and along the coastal strip of Essex , Suffolk and South Eastern Norfolk .
North of a line from Portland Bill , Dorset to Cromer , Norfolk the return period of the respective gusts were under 10 years .
Sustained winds speeds greater than 75 mph were recorded for over an hour in southern Britain .
According to the Beaufort scale of wind intensities , this storm had winds of hurricane force 12 ( 73 mph or greater ) ; as the term hurricane refers to tropical cyclones originating in the North Atlantic or North Pacific , the descriptor " great storm " has tended to be reserved for those storms in recent years reaching this velocity .
Hurricanes have a very different wind profile and distribution from storms , and significantly higher precipitation levels .
IMPACT UNITED KINGDOM Section::::Impact .
Section::::United Kingdom .
The storm made landfall in Cornwall , and tracked north - east towards Devon and then over the Midlands , going out to sea via The Wash.
The strongest gusts , of up to , were recorded along the south - eastern edge of the storm , hitting mainly Hampshire , Sussex , Essex and Kent .
The Royal Sovereign lighthouse off Eastbourne recorded wind speeds on its instruments at the highest velocity it could measure , .
The storm caused substantial damage over much of England , felling an estimated 15 million trees ( including six of the seven eponymous oaks in Sevenoaks , historic specimens in Kew Gardens , Wakehurst Place , Nymans Garden , Hyde Park , London and Scotney Castle and most of the trees making up Chanctonbury Ring ) .
At Bedgebury National Pinetum , Kent almost a quarter of the trees were brought down .
There have been many claims that the damage to forestry was made worse by broadleaf trees still being in leaf at the time of the storm , though this was not borne out by an analysis by the Forestry Commission .
Fallen trees blocked roads and railways and left widespread structural damage primarily to windows and roofs .
Several hundred thousand people were left without power , not fully restored until more than two weeks later .
Local electric utility officials later said they lost more wires in the storm than in the preceding decade .
At sea , as well as many small boats being wrecked , a Sealink cross - channel ferry , the MV Hengist , was driven ashore at Folkestone and the bulk carrier MV Sumnea capsized at Dover , Kent .
The National Grid sustained heavy damage during the event , as crashing cables short - circuited , which in some cases overheated the main system .
Its headquarters faced the choice of keeping the Grid online to help London as the storm approached but risk an incremental system breakdown , failure and burnout , or to shut down most of South East England including London and avert that risk .
The headquarters made the decision , the first one like it since before World War II : to shut down the South East power systems to maintain the network as soon as signs of overheating began .
In London , many of the trees lining streets , particularly plane trees , were blown down overnight , blocking roads and crushing parked cars .
Building construction scaffolding and billboards collapsed in many places , and many buildings were damaged .
The following morning , the BBC 's largest broadcasting site , Lime Grove Studios in White City , was unable to function due to a power failure — ITV 's TV - am and BBC1 's Breakfast Time programmes were broadcast from different emergency facilities in emergency formats .
TV - am broadcast from Thames Television 's Euston Road studios , while BBC newsreader Nicholas Witchell had to broadcast from the BBC1 continuity studio at BBC Television Centre , with the wall decorations used for Children 's BBC hastily taken down .
Much of the public transport in the capital was not functioning , and people were advised against trying to go to work .
TV - am host Anne Diamond did go back to the regular TV - am studio with reporter Kay Burley , whilst Richard Keys remained in the Thames Television studio in case the power supply situation became even worse , and indeed , power did go back down at around 8:15am .
FRANCE Section::::France .
The départements of Finistère , Morbihan , Côtes - d'Armor and Ille - et - Vilaine in Brittany , and the Cotentin Peninsula ( Manche and part of Calvados ) in Normandy were the areas in France most affected by the storm , which followed a line from Morbihan and Rennes to Deauville .
1.79 million homes were left without electricity supply and water , and a quarter of Brittany 's forest was destroyed .
The total damage was estimated at ₣23 billion .
Météo France announced " " ( a little storm coming in from the Azores ) , which reached Brittany 's coast at about 18:00 , later than expected .
This depression caused little damage , with only winds .
A much deeper depression hit Ushant on the extreme western tip of Brittany at midnight .
It was measured at 948 hPa ( or 948 mb ) at the Brest - Guipavas weather station , the lowest reading in its records dating back to 1945 .
Weather stations on the coast at pointe du Raz , pointe Saint - Mathieu and Penmarch gave no readings , as they were damaged by the high winds .
The wind speed measured at Brest was .
The centre of the storm crossed Brittany from Penmarch to Saint - Brieuc at , with gusts of wind up to at Quimper , at Ouessant and at la pointe de Penmarch and Granville .
Waves were measured at off Ushant and Belle Île .
Similar strength storms in France since 1960 : * Tempête Vivian in 1990 ( generally milder ) * Cyclones Lothar and Martin in December 1999 , which claimed 140 lives , equally severe in Germany , more southern neighbouring countries also saw multiple deaths .
* Cyclone Klaus which struck worse southern France and northern Spain in 2009 and claimed 26 lives .
The church at Concarneau was damaged but never rebuilt , and was finally demolished a few years later .
The MS Herald of Free Enterprise was caught in the storm off Cape Finisterre as it was making its way for scrapping in Taiwan .
The ship was cast adrift after its tow rope parted , finally resuming its journey on 19 October 1987 .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
The storm cost the insurance industry £ 2 billion , making it the second most expensive UK weather event on record to insurers after the Burns ' Day Storm of 1990 .
Peak wind velocities were in the early hours of the morning , which may have helped reduce the death toll .
The storm hit the Isle of Wight at 02:00 .
Shanklin Pier on the south - east coast of the island was broken into three pieces as a result of mountainous waves .
Plans to rebuild the pier were soon abandoned , and the rest of the pier was demolished by contractors shortly afterwards .
A monument now stands in front of what used to be the pier entrance .
A great deal of effort and money was put into the post - storm clean - up of forests and wooded areas .
The writer Oliver Rackham and the charity Common Ground were active in trying to prevent unnecessary destruction of trees which , although fallen , were still living .
Some landowners , such as the National Trust , did not attempt complete clearing and replanting , realising that there was a unique opportunity to study the patterns of natural regeneration after such an event .
A number of wild boar may have escaped from captivity during the storm , after enclosures were damaged by falling trees .
These boar have since bred and established populations in woods across southern England .
A more positive aspect could be found among some British gardeners ; as Heather Angel wrote in the Royal Horticultural Society 's Journal : In some places this natural disaster has resulted in splendid vistas- views long since forgotten by some and never before seen by a whole new generation .
Because of gaps left by fallen trees , visitors to Arundel Castle , the ancestral home of the Dukes of Norfolk , can now look out over the picturesque town ...
At the renowned woodland rhododendron garden at Leonardslee , Sussex , the gale ... opened magnificent views by removing about a thousand trees which owner Robin Loder said he would never have had the courage to thin out himself .
Following the storm meteorologists at the University of Reading led by Professor Keith Browning developed the Sting jet concept .
During reanalysis of the storm they identified a mesoscale flow where the most damaging winds were shown to be emanating from the evaporating tip of the hooked cloud head on the southern flank of the cyclone .
This cloud , hooked like a scorpion 's tail , gives the wind region its name the " Sting Jet " .
CRITICISM OF THE MET OFFICE Section::::Criticism of the Met Office .
The Met Office was severely criticised by most of the national press for failing to forecast the storm correctly .
The Met Office conducted an internal inquiry , scrutinised by two independent assessors , and a number of recommendations were made .
Chiefly , observational coverage of the atmosphere over the ocean to the south and west of the UK was improved by increasing the quality and quantity of observations from ships , aircraft , buoys and satellites .
Continued refinements were made to the computer models used in forecasting , and changes were made in the training of forecasters .
In addition , reforms in the way the Met Office reports warnings of severe weather were implemented , leading to substantially more warnings being issued in the future .
Further deployment of improved tracking devices and improvements in the computer model simulations were supported by the purchase of an additional Cray supercomputer .
Warnings for the Burns ' Day Storm just over two years later were accurate and on time , although the model forecast hinged on observations from two ships in the Atlantic near the developing storm the day before it reached the UK .
BBC meteorologist Michael Fish drew particular criticism for reporting several hours before the storm hit : Earlier on today , apparently , a woman rang the BBC and said she heard there was a hurricane on the way ; well , if you 're watching , do n't worry , there is n't , but having said that , actually , the weather will become very windy , but most of the strong winds , incidentally , will be down over Spain and across into France .
Fish has subsequently claimed that his comments about a hurricane had nothing to do with the UK ; they referred to Florida , USA , and were linked to a news story immediately preceding the weather bulletin , but had been so widely repeated out of context that the British public remains convinced that he was referring to the approaching storm .
According to Fish , the woman in question was actually a colleague 's mother who was about to go on holiday in the Caribbean , and had called regarding ( the already long - dissipated ) Hurricane Floyd to see if it would be safe to travel .
Fish has also claimed that " nobody phoned up " and that she was a " non - existing woman " , apparently contradicting the previous declaration , when interviewed about Anita Hart 's claims of being the woman who made the call .
Fish went on to warn viewers that it would be " very windy " across the south of England , but predicted that the storm would move further south along the English Channel and the British mainland would escape the worst effects .
The remainder of his warning is frequently left out of re - runs , which only adds to the public 's misconception of that day 's forecasting .
His analysis has been defended by weather experts .
In particular , the lack of a weather ship in the Southwest Approaches , due to Met Office cutbacks , meant the only manner of tracking the storm was by using satellite data , as automatic buoys had not been deployed at the time .
Ironically , earlier forecasts as far back as the preceding weekend had correctly identified that gale - force winds would affect Southern England .
However , later runs of the model had indicated a more southerly track for the low pressure system , incorrectly indicating that the strongest winds would be confined to Northern and Central France .
The French meteorological office used a different computer weather model to the British , and the French model proved more accurate in predicting the severity of the storm in the Channel .
In the wake of the storm the Met Office set up the National Severe Weather Warning Service .
CLIMATOLOGICAL CONTEXT
Section::::Climatological context .
It is claimed this storm was the worst since the Great Storm of 1703 , which has been challenged as a myth .
Storms of this strength regularly form over the North Atlantic , where they typically track to the north of Scotland .
Storms of such a strength have a return period of 30 to 40 years .
The unusual aspect of the storm was that it struck the densely populated southeast of England .
That winds in the South East had return periods of 1 in 200 years does not mean the winds of this strength occur once every 200 years , but that the winds have a 0.5 % probability of happening in a given year .
Following this storm 1.3 million incidents of damage were reported , which is only exceeded by the Gale of January 1976 where destruction covered a wider area of the UK , with 1.5 million incidents of damage reported .
The Burns ' Day storm hit the United Kingdom in January 1990 , less than three years later and with comparable intensity .
WIDER IMPACTS BLACK MONDAY
Section::::Wider impacts .
Section::::Black Monday .
Following the storm few dealers made it to their desks and stock market trading was suspended twice and the market closed early at 12.30pm .
The disruption meant the City was unable to respond to the late dealings at the beginning of the Wall Street fall - out on Friday 16 October , when the Dow Jones Industrial Average recorded its biggest - ever one - day slide at the time , a fall of 108.36 .
City traders and investors spent the weekend , 17–18 October , repairing damaged gardens in between trying to guess market reaction and assessing the damage .
19 October , Black Monday , was memorable as being the first business day of the London markets after the Great Storm .
CULTURAL REFERENCES
*
The storm features in an important scene near the end of Possession : A Romance , the Man Booker Prize - winning novel by A. S. Byatt .
*
The novelist
W. G. Sebald recalls the storm towards the end of The Rings of Saturn , as he is visiting Ditchingham Hall in Norfolk , where the storm did great damage to estate trees .
*
The BBC drama Our Friends in the North features a character , Eddie Wells MP , dying of a heart attack as the storm hits Westminster .
* Richard Poole repeatedly mentions the storm in the Death in Paradise episode " A Stormy Occurrence " .
* Michael Fish 's controversial weather forecast featured in the London 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony , playing on the perceived British love of talking about the weather .
*
The BBC drama New Tricks , series 1 , episode 1 ( aired 1 April 2004 ) is based on a murder that occurred just before the storm , which had gone unsolved because the storm had " messed up " the evidence .
*
The narrator in the novel Max Gate by Damien Wilkins is telling the story , set in 1928 , from the vantage point of 1987 , in the aftermath of the storm .
* The main character in the 1994 novel by Tim Binding , In the Kingdom of Air , is a BBC meteorologist .
The novel takes place during the Great Storm of 1987 .
*
In a section of Zadie Smith 's 2000 novel White Teeth , two of the main character 's houses are destroyed by the storm .
SEE ALSO
* List of natural disasters in Great Britain and Ireland
* Hurricane Charley ( 1986 )
* Burns ' Day Storm * Glanrhyd Bridge collapse * Hurricane Ophelia ( 2017 ) NOTES * Common Misconceptions , Part 1 - Return Periods * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Met Office report
* BBC news report , On This Day , including video * Details of the damage in France * Useful maps of the storm * Teachers TV , Great Storm 1987