BALDUR 'S GATE II :
SHADOWS OF AMN Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn is a role - playing video game developed by BioWare and published by Interplay Entertainment .
It is the sequel to Baldur 's Gate ( 1998 ) and was released for Microsoft Windows in September 2000 .
Like Baldur 's Gate , the game takes place in the Forgotten Realms — a fantasy campaign setting — and is based on the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition rules .
Powered by BioWare 's Infinity Engine , Baldur 's Gate II uses an isometric perspective and pausable real - time gameplay .
The player controls a party of up to six characters , one of whom is the player - created protagonist , while the others are certain characters recruited from the game world .
Set in the fictional Forgotten Realms , much of Baldur 's Gate II takes place in and around Athkatla , a city in the country of Amn .
Opening shortly after the events of Baldur 's Gate , the game continues the story of the protagonist , Gorion 's Ward , whose unique heritage has now gained him or her the attention of Jon Irenicus , a powerful and sinister mage .
The storyline revolves around the machinations of Irenicus and the player 's encounters with him .
Development began in January 1999 .
BioWare set out to improve upon the first Baldur 's Gate in every way possible .
From a list of constructive criticism — compiled from the suggestions of fans , reviews , and internal suggestions — a list of features to be added to the game was distilled : some of these were 800 x 600 resolution , 3D support , and character kits .
In Baldur 's Gate , the game 's engine and content were being developed at the same time ; whereas in Baldur 's Gate II , the engine was running from the start .
Having a completed engine meant they could direct their efforts towards producing content , instead of focusing on basic functionality .
Shadows of Amn received critical acclaim , being praised for its gameplay , artwork , and voice acting , and is often noted as one of the greatest role - playing games of all time .
GameSpy , GameSpot , and IGN awarded it their " Role - Playing Game of the Year " awards for 2000 , and the game has sold more than two million units .
An expansion pack , , was released in 2001 .
Besides adding a large dungeon and enhancements to the game , this well - received expansion concluded the Child of Bhaal saga .
Shadows of Amn and Throne of Bhaal have also been included together in various compilations .
In 2013 , an enhanced version of Baldur 's Gate II was released , bearing the title and using an updated version of the Infinity Engine .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn is an Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition computer role - playing game .
The central quest of the game consists of about 50 to 60 hours of play , while the full game , including all side quests , is estimated to be between 200 and 300 hours .
The player controls a party of up to six characters , one of whom is the protagonist ; if the protagonist dies , a saved - game must be loaded , or a new game begun .
The game begins with character creation , where , through a series of configuration screens , the player creates a player character protagonist , choosing such things as class , ability scores , appearance , and alignment .
Alternatively , an existing character from Baldur 's Gate or ( the Baldur 's Gate expansion ) can be imported .
Once in the game world , the player may recruit certain non - player characters ( NPCs ) to travel with him or her , though only five may do so at a time ; and , depending on who is present in the group , bickering , romance , and side quests can result .
NPCs in the party often converse with the player or with one another , and at times interject into the player 's conversations with others .
The game is played from an isometric perspective , and the screen , which does not need to remain centered on the protagonist , can be scrolled with the mouse or keyboard .
Areas are revealed as they are explored by the player 's characters .
A fog of war effect hides explored areas when the player 's characters move away from them .
The player can also change the formation in which the party moves .
Clicking an area exit , such as a doorway or staircase , causes another area to be loaded .
Clicking on the edge of an outside area causes the party to travel there ; the game then presents the player with the World Map , from which the player may select a destination .
The player interacts with characters and objects by clicking on them .
Clicking on the ground causes the player 's selected characters to move .
The gameplay , though in real - time , can be paused , whereupon commands may be issued to controllable characters , who will attempt to execute them when the game is unpaused .
The game can also be set to pause automatically at certain times .
Dialogue is started by NPCs at certain scripted times , or by the player 's clicking on NPCs who are not immediately hostile .
When speaking to an NPC , the player must often choose what to say from a list of responses .
The dialogue may lead to quests or important information .
When the player clicks on a hostile being , the currently selected characters will advance to attack it .
Information about characters , creatures , items , and buildings in the game environment is shown on a tool tip , which appears when the mouse pointer is held over game elements .
When a character in the group gains the necessary experience points , he or she gains a level .
Experience points are awarded for certain player actions , such as killing enemies or completing quests .
The party also has a reputation , which is affected by the player 's moral actions , and which , along with the party leader 's charisma attribute , influences how NPCs in the game world react to the player .
The characters in the party will also complain if the party 's reputation conflicts with their alignment .
Resting heals the characters in the party and refreshes those who are fatigued ; also , resting allows a character to memorize spells .
The game contains over 300 spells available for memorization .
With the exception of sorcerers , magic - users must memorize spells before they can be cast .
Spell - casting takes time and may be disrupted by attacks or other spells .
The player can access sub - screens through the interface : area and world maps ; the journal , which tracks important information , such as quests and the game 's plot ; the inventory page , which is used to manage and equip items ; the record screen , which is used to view information about , as well as level up , characters in the party ; the mage book and priest scroll screens , where spells can be inspected and memorized ; and the options screen , where settings may be altered , saved - games loaded , or the game saved or quit .
CLASSES AND KITS Section::::Classes and kits .
During character creation the player chooses a class : fighter , ranger , paladin , thief , bard , mage , cleric , druid , barbarian , monk , or sorcerer ( the last three of which are new for the sequel ) .
Different classes have different special abilities and restrictions ; a thief character , for instance , can find and remove traps , but thieves have limitations on which weapons and armor they may use , and can not be of lawful good alignment .
Most classes also have a subset of kits , or specializations within a class , to choose from .
Kits have special advantages and , usually , disadvantages ; for example , the cavalier — one of the kits of the paladin class — specializes in fighting monsters such as dragons and demons , but can not use missile weapons .
At some point in the game , the player may join or take over a stronghold .
The type of stronghold is determined by the protagonist 's class .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
The game also has a multiplayer mode , in which up to six human players can adventure through the game , controlling player - made characters as well as recruited NPCs .
The content of the game is otherwise the same , and one player controls the protagonist .
PLOT SETTING Section::::Plot .
Section::::Setting .
The Forgotten Realms , the high fantasy campaign setting in which Baldur 's Gate II is set , is a fictional world similar to a medieval Earth , but with its own peoples , geography , and history .
In the Realms , as its inhabitants call it , fantastic creatures and magic are common .
Baldur 's Gate II takes place mainly in Amn , a country on the subcontinent of Faerûn .
This country , known commonly as the Merchant Kingdom , lies south of Baldur 's Gate ; wealth and trade are the chief concerns of the region .
The capital city of Athkatla , around which a fair portion of the game revolves , is the most important in Amn and is ruled by the anonymous Council of Six .
The local thieves ' guild , the Shadow Thieves , also has considerable power .
The group , which operates all along the Sword Coast , is based in Athkatla .
Another powerful organization in Amn are the Cowled Wizards , who regulate the use of magic in the region .
The Shadow Thieves , the Cowled Wizards , and the Harpers , a semi - secret conglomeration of good organizations , all factor prominently into the story and provide side quests .
Besides Athkatla , other places the player will pass through include : an island , on which stands both the port town of Brynnlaw and the asylum Spellhold ; the Underdark ; the city of Suldanessellar ; and the Astral Plane .
There are also other places , which may be explored : the Umar Hills , where people have been disappearing ; a temple ruins , fallen under the shadow of the Shade Lord ; the de'Arnise Keep , home of the de'Arnises but recently overrun by trolls ; the town of Trademeet , under attack by animals ; a druid grove connected to Trademeet 's woes ; the Windspear Hills , where the player becomes entangled in the intrigues of Firkraag , a dragon ; the underwater Sahuagin city ; and the Planar Prison .
Baldur 's Gate II is set in the year 1369 DR ( Dale Reckoning ) , and thus takes place not long after the Time of Troubles ( 1358 DR ) , when the Tablets of Fate , powerful magic items which maintain a balance between good and evil , were stolen .
Lord Ao , the Overdeity , forced the gods to become mortal until the Tablets were found ; some gods died while in this mortal state .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Bhaal , the God of Murder , was one such god , slain by an adventurer named Cyric , who himself became a god .
But Bhaal foresaw his destruction and walked the land before the other gods .
He left behind him " a score of mortal progeny , " whose later deaths , when they were slain by heroes , would fuel his rebirth .
The game 's protagonist is one of these offspring ; but , through the choices of the player , may be either good or evil .
The character grew up in the library fortress of Candlekeep , watched over by the mage Gorion .
Imoen , who grew up there as well , became a close friend .
The story of the first Baldur 's Gate followed their adventure along the Sword Coast , where the hero learned of their heritage and defeated their half - brother Sarevok , a fellow child of Bhaal .
Some notable characters in Shadows of Amn include :
Gaelan Bayle , who offers the party the help of the Shadow Thieves ; Aran Linvail , the leader of the Shadow Thieves ; Saemon Havarian , who sails the party to an island ; Adalon , a silver dragon whose eggs have been stolen and given to drow ; Elhan ; and Queen Ellesime , the ruler of Suldanessellar .
Jon Irenicus and his sister Bodhi are the chief antagonists , Irenicus being the main villain of the game .
Celebrated Forgotten Realms character Drizzt Do'Urden also makes an appearance ; and if the player solicits his aid , he and his companions will later help the player .
In Baldur 's Gate II , several characters from the first game reappear , of which the following can join the player 's party : Imoen , who grew up with the protagonist in Candlekeep ; Jaheira , who , with her husband Khalid , was a friend of Gorion 's ; Minsc , a warrior who carries with him a hamster named Boo ; Edwin , a Red Wizard of Thay ; and Viconia , a dark elf cleric .
There are also many new NPCs who may join the party : Aerie , a winged elf who has lost her wings and was sold to the circus by slavers at a young age ; Keldorn , an older paladin and a powerful and respected member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart ; Mazzy , an honorable halfling fighter and " the nearest thing to a paladin that a halfling can aspire to " ; Nalia , who is of the upper class , but , though conscious of class distinction , tries to help those less fortunate than herself ; Valygar , who is of a family noted for its talented magic - users , but hates the art ; Anomen , a member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart , and whose wish is to become a full knight ; Cernd , a druid ; Haer'Dalis , a tiefling bard and one of the actors of an acting troupe ; Jan , a gnome , of the Jansen family ; Yoshimo , a thief from the land of Kara - Tur ; and Korgan , an evil dwarven fighter .
STORY Section::::Story .
Shortly after the events of Baldur 's Gate , the hero and companions are overcome and taken captive .
When the game opens , the player character awakens in a cage and is then experimented on by a wizard , who is aware of the player character 's heritage and speaks of " untapped power " .
The wizard is distracted as his complex is attacked by Shadow Thieves , and disappears to fight them .
Imoen , appearing from a side room , frees the player character .
Jaheira and Minsc are also held in cells close by .
The characters fight their way through the underground complex , learning more and more of their captor 's despicable character and that his name is Irenicus .
At length , escaping the complex , they emerge into the city of Athkatla and witness Irenicus fighting off some of his attackers , whom he destroys .
An argument then ensues , during which Imoen angrily attacks Irenicus using magic .
The Cowled Wizards appear and , after a fight , arrest both Irenicus and Imoen for the unsanctioned use of magic , and teleport both of them away .
In the slums of Athkatla , a man named Gaelan Bayle offers the party the help of a powerful organization , who can find Imoen or Irenicus for the large sum of 20,000 gold pieces .
The party is approached by and offered the help of another rival guild headed by Bodhi ; it is the player 's choice whom to side with .
Meanwhile , Imoen and Irenicus have been removed to an asylum called Spellhold , which is situated on an island .
But Irenicus soon breaks his bonds and prepares to experiment on Imoen .
Back in Athkatla , the party raises the money necessary and receives assistance from whichever organization it has decided to work with , and gains passage to the island on a ship sailed by the dubious and treacherous Saemon Havarian .
The heroes then manage to get inside Spellhold , but are there captured by Irenicus , who has taken control of the prison and had planned all along to bring the protagonist there .
Irenicus then subjects the protagonist to a ritual , taking the latter 's soul .
Imoen , who turns out to be a Child of Bhaal as well , had earlier undergone Irenicus 's ritual , and her soul has gone to Bodhi , Irenicus 's sister .
Bodhi then abandons the party to the maze beneath Spellhold , so that she can hunt them after a space of time , saying also , as bait , that Irenicus may yet be foiled .
When they face her , the now soulless protagonist loses control and transforms into a creature called the Slayer , one of the avatar forms of Bhaal .
Bodhi , quite taken aback , retreats to tell Irenicus of it .
The player character returns to their normal self after a short while .
Soon , with the aid of Spellhold 's inmates , the party battles Irenicus , forcing him to retreat .
The party follows , and reaches the surface via the Underdark .
Upon reaching the surface , the party encounters the army of the elven city of Suldanessellar .
The elves can not return to the city , for Irenicus has magically hidden it .
To gain access to it , the party secures the Rhynn Lanthorn from Bodhi , who has stolen the artifact ; upon Bodhi 's death , Imoen 's soul is restored .
The Rhynn Lanthorn lights the way to Suldanessellar , which has been invaded by Irenicus and his minions .
The party proceeds through the city and , at the Tree of Life , learns that Irenicus is draining the power of the Tree , which will doom Suldanessellar .
The heroes defeat him , but because Irenicus still has the protagonist 's soul , the protagonist is dragged with the wizard into Hell , and the rest of the party are dragged along also .
When they defeat Irenicus , they return to life and are honored by the elves of Suldanessellar .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Baldur 's Gate II was developed by BioWare and published by Black Isle Studios , a division of Interplay Entertainment .
The game uses the same Infinity Engine as Baldur 's Gate ( 1998 ) , but with many improvements .
Other games that used this engine were Black Isle Studios ' ( 1999 ) and Icewind Dale ( 2000 ) .
BioWare dedicated Baldur 's Gate II to Daniel Walker , who died in 1999 and was the company 's second employee .
Though a success , both commercially and critically , Baldur 's Gate was the first role - playing game designed by BioWare , and they applied what they learned in the process to Baldur 's Gate II .
They also felt they did not have enough time to reach their design goals with the first game , due to developing both the content of the game and the Infinity Engine at the same time .
In Baldur 's Gate II , it was determined that the designers should be allowed " adequate time " so that the game might " reach its full potential " .
Throughout its development , BioWare focused " on ensuring that Baldur 's Gate II is significantly better than Baldur 's Gate in every way possible , and to make it appeal not only to fans of the original game but also to make it accessible to new fans who never played the original game " .
Development of Baldur 's Gate II began in January 1999 .
From the suggestions of fans on message boards and newsgroups , reviews of Baldur 's Gate , and internal suggestions , a list of constructive criticism was compiled ; from this list , a slightly shorter one of features to be added to the game was made .
Some of the items on this list were : support for higher resolutions , such as 800 by 600 pixels and above ; 3D support ; non - pausing dialogue in multiplayer ; drop off panels in the interface ; character kits ; dual - wielding of weapons ; a streamlined journal and annotable map ; deathmatch ; and inclusion of famous AD&D monsters such as the dragon .
Not many features had to be cut , and they kept as many as they could .
Because of the engine 's mature state of development , most features were fairly easy to add .
Co - Lead Designer James Ohlen wrote that having a completed engine meant they could direct their efforts towards producing content , instead of focusing on " basic functionality " .
Producer Ben Smedstad said , " The engine was up and running since day one , which is a huge morale booster .
When a monster is complete , we put it into the ' override ' directory and it appears in the game !
This is a huge change from working on the original . "
Late in the project , deathmatch was removed , while non - pausing dialogue , which proved " the most problematic feature " , was removed early on before being reintroduced in early 2000 .
Baldur 's Gate II reused the Infinity Engine , which had powered Baldur 's Gate , but the engine was improved in many ways since development on Baldur 's Gate II began : optional 800 x 600 resolution as well as the old 640 x 480 resolution .
Drop - away side panels were implemented ; and for spells and special effects , 3D support was added .
Pathfinding had been improved in the Baldur 's Gate expansion , , and was improved further in Shadows of Amn through a feature called " bumping " , which allowed a character to move another one out of the way if the path was blocked .
Also , to aid pathfinding even more , paths in dungeons were widened , so that characters would get stuck less often .
The interface was also refined a bit .
To avoid some of the design mistakes made in Baldur 's Gate , guidelines were drawn up for each department ; the level designers had the longest set of guidelines .
These lists continually changed and evolved as the development progressed .
The main design guidelines for the entire project were that the players should feel like their actions have an effect on the game world , and good versus evil options should be available depending on which path the player takes .
Guidelines for the story were to keep the focus on the player 's character , keep the player updated on the activities on the game 's villain , add a significant plot twist , and make the ending of the game open enough so that there would be room for more sequels .
Environment guidelines were to break the game into chapters , make some locations key to the central plot , keep areas interesting and easy to quickly navigate , and showcase areas before they were available to explore to capture player interest .
For the game systems , guidelines focused on character customization and a well - crafted reward system .
The writing guidelines were concerned mainly with dialogue : limiting the number of sentences NPCs spoke at a time , keeping the number of player response choices at three as often as possible , avoiding profanity and accents , and having a small set of random dialogue for unimportant NPCs .
Many early design decisions did not follow the guidelines , and programming constraints were not always followed by other departments , such as design and art , leading to slowdowns in some parts of the game that were difficult or impossible to fix .
The process for creating levels was long and complicated .
It began with the creation of a general layout of the area to be built by designers .
They would pass this concept map to the artists , who added models to it , beginning with the largest objects and ending with small items such as individual pieces of furniture .
After everything was put in place by the art team , designers took over again , inserting graphical enhancements , effects , and collision detection code .
With a functional level , creatures , items , traps , and triggers were added last , then scripts were written for everything to control behavior .
The team found it quite difficult to keep track of changes made to levels , and there were sometimes communication problems between different parts of the team , such as the artists and designers , resulting in inconsistencies between their work .
Ray Muzyka , the co - executive producer , wrote , " We learned to make sure all elements of the team are talking to each other and working as a group , rather than as a bunch of individuals !
" They did feel they had done a good job automating the level creation process , as levels were rapidly designed . "
A designer , " wrote Muzyka , " might submit a level description and receive it , art complete , a month later ready for scripting , but missing some key features ( almost always a door ) .
We would then have to determine whether the omission was important enough to have the art piece redone , or whether we could simply tweak the design of the level to fit the finished art .
" Areas were made more compact than before , the amount of " dead space " being curtailed , facilitating faster travel between key areas because less distance has to be traveled .
Marcia Tofer , Art Director for Shadows of Amn , worked with a team of 8 to 12 people to create the game 's artwork , such as the backgrounds , monsters , etc .
Tofer observed that the city of Baldur 's Gate had been their first attempt at city building and what they learned there served to make Athkatla " far more diverse and interesting " .
City renders took from 18 to 24 hours , though they used hardware that was powerful for those days : multiple Dual Pentium IIIs at 500 MHz , coupled with 512 MB of memory .
In traditional mediums like text or film and television , what is read or seen is effectively controlled by the creators .
Games are a visual medium , wrote Luke Kristjanson , one of the writers and designers on Shadows of Amn , but they are unlike the traditional ones of film and television .
For Baldur 's Gate , the developers knew what would be seen on the critical path , but not when players would see it , or whether the right amount of significance would be placed upon it .
In Shadows of Amn , several tools were used to remedy these shortcomings .
One of these were in - game cutscenes , which were like small plays , " adding suspense and depth to the world and overall story " .
Cutscenes had been used in Baldur 's Gate , but were used " more effectively " in Shadows of Amn .
Another technique was to increase , to a greater degree than Baldur 's Gate , the interactivity of the characters that travel with the player .
While the characters in Baldur 's Gate possessed " banter " , there was a very great increase of this in Shadows of Amn .
However , it was not merely an increase in the amount of dialogue and text .
NPCs interject , reinforcing " the importance of events [ and ] contributing their own motivations " .
They recognize critical junctures in the game , since those are of significance to them as well .
They even make comments to each other — as Kristjanson put it : " If Imoen thinks that Jaheira is being too strict she 'll say so , and if Jaheira thinks Imoen is being immature she 'll counter , and if Minsc thinks the both of them would benefit from getting hamsters of their own [ ... ] he wo n't hesitate to offer that little nugget of wisdom . "
Producer Ben Smedstad , speaking of " crunch time " during the latter stages of a game 's development , noted that it was important to begin it at the right time , not too early , nor too late .
By July 2000 , Shadows of Amn had entered its second phase of crunch , where the hours ran from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Mondays to Fridays , and from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Saturdays .
Their first crunch phase had been a normal working week , but hours of 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays , and 12 p.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturdays . "
As long as it takes " would be the philosophy of the last phase , encompassing the last week of development .
Smedstad said that the second phase , which they were working under in July 2000 , is where the stress really begins , and that the third phase is actually not as bad as one might think , because by then people are used to the lengthy hours .
During the game 's development , a quality assurance department was added to BioWare , and the game 's publishers lent their assistance in testing . "
Because of its immense size , " wrote Muzyka , " Baldur 's Gate II was a tester 's nightmare
— this was compounded by the fact that we did n't do enough testing as areas were being developed .
" The game contained about 290 quests , each of which had to be tested in both single- and multi - player modes .
BioWare used a method , introduced to them by Feargus Urquhart , Douglas Avery , and Chris Parker of Black Isle Studios , in which the game 's quests were listed on whiteboards , with a cross placed beside each quest .
Pairs consisting of a designer and tester worked their way through the quests , each pair covering about 6 quests per day .
When a quest was verified , its cross was removed .
Muzyka wrote : In the final days of working on BG2 there was a strangely serene feeling in the office .
We did n't experience the headlong panic that is sometimes prevalent while finishing a game , but we certainly did experience considerable stress as we built 21 final candidates in 3 days .
After a few long nights with the whole team playing the game over and over again , we reached a point where we built a good final candidate .
Then it was sent to the duplicators !
AUDIO Section::::Audio .
The game 's music was composed by Michael Hoenig , a German composer who played with Tangerine Dream .
He also composed the music for the first Baldur 's Gate .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Baldur 's Gate II was announced in November 1999 .
The game went gold on September 14 , 2000 , and shipped on September 21 .
A Collector 's Edition was also released .
It included the game , an additional CD , which contained unique armor and weapons and music from the soundtrack , a cloth map , eight character trading cards , and a Black Isle Studios writing tablet .
EXPANSION PACK Section::::Expansion pack .
Baldur 's Gate II :
Throne of Bhaal , an expansion pack for Shadows of Amn , was developed by BioWare and published by Black Isle Studios , and released in June 2001 .
Throne of Bhaal takes the protagonist 's history further , and , being the final chapter , concludes the Baldur 's Gate saga .
It also added a variety of features to the base game : a new dungeon called Watcher 's Keep , which can be accessed from both Shadows of Amn and Throne of Bhaal ; new features and enhancements , such as high - level class abilities , a higher experience point cap , and the Wild Mage character class ; and new items and spells .
Throne of Bhaal was well received : it holds a Metacritic score of 88 and a GameRankings score of 88.73 , and won the " PC Role - Playing " award at the 2002 Interactive Achievement Awards .
Reviewers generally praised Throne of Bhaal and thought it a spectacular conclusion to the Baldur 's Gate saga .
RE - RELEASES Section::::Re - releases .
Shadows of Amn was re - released , along with its expansion , Throne of Bhaal , as Baldur 's Gate II :
The Collection in 2003 .
In 2004 , they were bundled with the original Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale as Black Isle Compilation Part Two .
In 2006 , they were re - released with Baldur 's Gate and Tales of the Sword Coast as Baldur 's Gate : 4 in 1 Boxset .
They were also included in The Forgotten Realms Deluxe Edition , Ultimate Dungeons & Dragons , and Dungeons & Dragons Anthology : The Master Collection .
In 2010 , Baldur 's Gate II Complete was released in digital format on GOG.com .
This version includes both Shadows of Amn and Throne of Bhaal .
Bundled with it are the game manuals in PDF format , high - definition wallpapers , artwork , avatars , and the Shadows of Amn and Throne of Bhaal soundtracks .
ENHANCED EDITION Section::::Enhanced Edition .
Baldur 's Gate II : Enhanced Edition was announced was on March 15 , 2012 , and released on November 15 , 2013 .
Developed by Overhaul Games , it is an enhanced version of Baldur 's Gate II and uses an updated version of the Infinity Engine .
The PC version holds a Metacritic score of 78 and a GameRankings score of 77.26 ; and the iOS version a Metacritic score of 70 and a GameRankings score of 71.25 .
RECEPTION SALES Section::::Reception .
Section::::Sales .
In the United States , Baldur 's Gate II entered PC Data 's computer game sales charts at # 5 during the September 17–23 period .
It rose to second place the following week , behind , while its Collector 's Edition captured the seventh position .
In its first 14 days , Baldur 's Gate II drew in revenues of $ 4 million across all SKUs in North America , a sales record for an Interplay computer title .
The game and its Collector 's Edition were ranked 11th and 19th , respectively , on PC Data 's monthly chart for September .
Entering its third week , the game fell to fifth place on the weekly chart .
However , it remained in the top 10 throughout the October 5–28 period , and finished seventh for the month .
Afterwards , it was absent from PC Data 's weekly top 10 and monthly top 20 .
PC Data reported Baldur 's Gate IIs sales at 199,914 copies and its revenues at $ 9.2 million in the United States by the end of 2000 .
It returned to the firm 's monthly charts in 2001 , with a 15th - place finish for January .
On Media Control 's computer game sales rankings for the German market , Baldur 's Gate II debuted at # 3 in October 2000 .
It climbed to second place the following month , before dropping to 12th in December .
The Verband der Unterhaltungssoftware Deutschland ( VUD ) presented it with a " Gold " award by the end of 2000 , indicating sales of at least 100,000 units across Germany , Austria and Switzerland .
Media Control proceeded to rank the game 10th , 17th and 23rd during the first three months of 2001 , respectively .
In the United Kingdom , Baldur 's Gate II claimed # 2 for its release month of November 2000 , according to Chart - Track .
It fell to tenth place in December , and exited the top 10 in January 2001 .
The combined global sales of Baldur 's Gate , , and Baldur 's Gate II surpassed 3.5 million copies by March 2001 .
Baldur 's Gate II alone reached almost 1.5 million sales by December 2002 , and more than 2 million by November 2005 .
According to the NPD Group , the game totaled 480,000 sales ( $ 19.6 million ) in the United States by August 2006 .
At that time , Edge declared it the country 's 31st - best - selling computer game released since January 2000 .
CRITICAL REVIEWS
Section::::Critical reviews .
Baldur 's Gate II received critical acclaim upon its release , and is listed as the sixth highest - scoring PC game on the review aggregator Metacritic .
GameSpot 's reviewer stated that , while it is a very long game , its fine points are what make it so great , and that the game was in a class by itself .
IGN concluded with a similar sentiment , saying that the game was incomparable and without peers .
GameSpot later called Baldur 's Gate II " a towering achievement in the history of role - playing games " .
Though extolling the game immensely and finding only small issues , Computer Gaming Worlds reviewer noted that he would not trap himself with the " best RPG ever " phrase , but conceded that it " certainly ranks up there with greats like Fallout , Planescape : Torment , and Betrayal at Krondor " .
Eurogamer lavished much praise upon the game , and noted that " the story and quests are captivating , the gameplay tried and tested , and the overall feel is professional and entertaining " .
In a 2007 Gamasutra article on the " Platinum and Modern Ages " of computer role - playing games ( CRPGs ) , Matt Barton noted contemporary reviewers ' universal praise for the game , and said , " I consider it the finest CRPG ever designed " .
According to GameSpy , " this is easily one of the finest CRPGs ever made and an experience that no RPG fan should miss " .
GameSpot and IGN felt the game was superior to its predecessor , Baldur 's Gate .
Computer Games Magazine and Gameplanet noted that it improved upon Baldur 's Gate in almost every way .
" Polish " or " polished " was a description applied to the game by some reviewers .
RPGamer , somewhat more critical of the game than others , concluded : " Maybe it 's a bit thin in some areas , but it 's still an exemplary game that is well worth the time invested " .
Baldur 's Gate IIs gameplay was called " addicting " by GamePro .
RPGamer said that while the game was generally the same as the original Baldur 's Gate , the combat was much improved , with less frustration and more strategic options .
Computer Gaming World agreed , saying players would put more consideration into designing and implementing combat plans .
Eurogamer noted that the interface was " incredibly easy to use " .
IGN 's reviewer observed that many a time the game posed tough decisions that made him think .
He also praised the clarity of the quests and ease of moving from one goal to the next .
Some reviewers , however , felt the non - player characters in the game were not as powerful as player - made characters .
GameSpy said the game is much more difficult than Baldur 's Gate and requires more strategy and planning than the original does .
GameSpot felt the opening level of the game fell flat , but that it got much better once the player reached Athkatla .
IGN also noted that the introductory section of the game , while good , was nowhere near as fun as the adventures in Athkatla .
The game 's plot was met positively by most reviewers , GameSpy calling it " epic " and GameSpot a " great story " .
Eurogamer felt the story quite outdid the original .
Computer Gaming World , too , observed that it was much improved , adding that the plot style was reminiscent of The Lord of the Rings .
He felt the story was somewhere between Planescape : Torment and Icewind Dale in terms of depth .
RPGamer 's reviewer , on the other hand , felt that the plot was lackluster , but approved of the side quests , which , he said , could turn into " minor epics " of their own .
The game 's graphics were well received .
GamePro praised them , saying , " the backdrops are stunning and the spell effects are impressive " .
IGN echoed this statement , calling the difference between Baldur 's Gate and Shadows of Amn " like looking at a still oil painting , and then turning to see the scene in living motion on a big screen TV " .
Eurogamer , too , commended the artwork .
GameSpot thought both the pre - rendered backgrounds and the animations for characters and monsters were well done .
FiringSquad said the game 's artwork surpassed that of Planescape : Torment , and called the background artwork " fantastic " .
FiringSquad also praised the voice acting of Baldur 's Gate II , saying , " Characters sound alive and vivacious ( or depressed , crazy — whatever suits them ) " and adding that the quality of the voices drew the player more deeply into the game .
IGN called the voice acting " outstanding " and said the variety of personalities would cause players to become " attached " to the characters , only noting with disapproval the dearth of new voices for the player 's protagonist .
Reviewers generally found the game 's music to be well - done ; though RPGamer felt it was " inoffensive but unimpressive " .
Gameplanet criticized the game 's poor support for online multiplayer , saying it was " unstable and quite frustrating " .
FiringSquad felt that the lack of communication between players in combat during online games was problematic , but that local area network play would be more satisfying .
PC Zone said that multiplayer was as unimpressive as it had been in the first game in the series and said the game needed multiplayer maps .
IGN , however , felt that multiplayer play was solidly implemented and fun .
Pathfinding was sometimes criticized .
Criticism was also directed at bugs in the game , such as frequent crashes when trying to access certain locations .
According to GameSpy , Baldur 's Gate II is " not 100 % stable " .
GameSpot noted that the game 's loading times were somewhat long and that the game crashed on occasion , but said that these problems are not significant .
IGN , though noting that the game slowed down during combat when a lot of animations were happening simultaneously due to spells or " dazzling backgrounds " , said that there were almost no other technical problems .
GameSpot also felt that the small number of character portraits to choose from was a disappointment and was displeased that the game reused special effects , audio , and graphics from the first game .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
GameSpot , GameSpy , and IGN awarded Baldur 's Gate II their " Role - Playing Game of the Year " awards in 2000 , and it won GameSpot 's Readers ' Choice Game of the Year award for that year .
It received three " Gaming Globe " awards from Eurogamer in 2001 :
Best Game , Best Art Direction , and Best Male Supporting Character ( for Minsc ) .
The game won the " Character or Story Development " award at the 2001 Interactive Achievement Awards , and was also nominated for " Game of the Year , " " Game Play Engineering , " " PC Game of the Year , " and " PC Role - Playing . "
IGN placed it at No . 25 on their 2005 " Top 100 Games of All Time " list .
In 2006 , though not ranking in the top five games , it earned an " honorable mention " in Gamasutra 's Quantum Leap Awards .
Baldur 's Gate II was inducted into GameSpot 's " Greatest Games of All Time " list .
In 2009 , Game Informer put Baldur 's Gate II at No . 88 on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time , " calling it " the best Dungeons & Dragons game ever made .
" This is up one place from their top 100 list in 2001 .
Empire ranked it No . 19 on their list of the 100 Greatest Games .
At the end of 2009 , Baldur 's Gate II , though not quite making the Top 12 list , received an honorable mention in Gamasutra 's Game of the Decade , where readers voted for their best game of the 2000s .
In 2010 , on IGN 's Top 25 Modern PC Games , Baldur 's Gate II was ranked No . 2 .
In 2013 , it was placed at No . 46 on GamingBolt 's " Top 100 greatest video games ever made .
" IGN ranked Baldur 's Gate II No . 1 on their list of " The Top 11 Dungeons & Dragons Games of All Time " in 2014 .
Ian Williams of Paste rated the game No . 2 on his list of " The 10 Greatest Dungeons and Dragons Videogames " in 2015 .
IGN ranked Baldur 's Gate II No . 3 on their " Top 100 RPGs of All Time " list .
In 2016 , PC Gamer noted the game on their " best RPGs of all time .
" It was placed at No . 9 on Game Informer 's " Top 100 RPGs Of All Time " list , and was included among PCGamesN 's " best RPGs on PC " as well .
NOVEL Section::::Novel .
There is a novelization of the game by Philip Athans .
Published in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast , it focuses solely on Abdel , the last of the Bhaalspawn .
The novel is the second in the series ; the first , also by Athans , is a novelization of Baldur 's Gate , and the third , by Drew Karpyshyn , of the Throne of Bhaal expansion .
SEE ALSO
* List of Dungeons & Dragons video games
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website ( archived ) * Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn ( at BioWare ) ( archived )