CARRIER OIL Carrier oil , also known as base oil or vegetable oil , is used to dilute essential oils and absolutes before they are applied to the skin in massage and aromatherapy .
They are so named because they carry the essential oil onto the skin .
Diluting essential oils is a critical safety practice when using essential oils .
Oils alone are volatile because they begin to dissipate as soon as they are applied .
The rate of dispersion will vary based on how light or heavy the carrier oil is .
Carrier oils do not contain a concentrated aroma , unlike essential oils , though some , such as olive , have a mild distinctive smell .
Neither do they evaporate like essential oils , which are more volatile .
The carrier oils used should be as natural and unadulterated as possible .
Many people feel organic oils are of higher quality .
Cold - pressing and maceration are the two main methods of producing carrier oils .
There is a range of different carrier oils , each with a various therapeutic properties .
Choosing an oil will depend on the area being massaged , the presenting conditions and the clients sensitivity and requirements .
For massage , viscosity is a major consideration ; for example , grape seed oil is typically very thin , while olive oil is much thicker .
Sunflower , sweet almond and grape seed oils have viscosities midway between these extremes .
Carrier oils can be easily blended to combine their properties of viscosity , acceptability , lubrication , absorption , aroma and so forth .
Infused oils are a combination of a carrier oil and plant material and they can be either commercially or domestically prepared .
A base oil , often sunflower , is placed in an airtight container with the appropriate plant material for a time .
Calendula and carrot oils are produced in this way .
High quality oils sold for culinary use are often eminently suitable for massage use , and are economical ; those obtained by cold pressing are preferred .
All carrier oils should be kept cool , and away from strong light , to retard rancidification .
Rancid oils should be avoided .
Refrigerating oils helps preserve their freshness but some oils should not be refrigerated ( e.g. avocado ) .
Very cold oils may appear cloudy , but regain their clear state on returning to room temperature .
Sources passionately disagree on the suitability of mineral oil as a carrier oil .
In the United States , food grade mineral oil is highly refined and purified to meet the stringent requirements of the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) .
Mineral oil marked as " USP " also meets the standards of the U.S. Pharmacopeia .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
True carrier oils are generally cold - pressed or macerated vegetable oils taken from , among others :
* Apricot oil * Grape seed oil *
Avocado oil
* Olive oil * Sesame
oil
* Evening primrose oil * Canola ( rapeseed oil )
* Camellia seed oil * Sunflower oil * Marula
oil * Jojoba oil * Emu oil * Castor oil * Borage seed oil
* Nuts :
* Walnut oil *
Peanut oil * Pecan oil * Macadamia oil
*
Fractionated coconut oil *
Hazelnut oil * Cocoa butter
* Sweet almond
oil SAFETY ASPECTS Section::::Safety aspects .
Peanuts are legumes , not " true " nuts , but they share with true nuts the risk of causing allergic reactions , even in minute amounts .
Pure peanut and nut - derived oils are not usually allergenic ( as they do not typically contain the proteinaceous part of the plant ) , but avoiding them may be safer , as serious peanut and nut allergy is widespread , oil purity can not be guaranteed , and other hypoallergenic oils are easily substituted .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS