POWERTRAIN
In a motor vehicle , the term powertrain or powerplant describes the main components that generate power and deliver it to the road surface , water , or air .
This includes the engine , transmission , drive shafts , differentials , and the final drive ( drive wheels , continuous track as in military tanks or caterpillar tractors , propeller , etc . ) .
More recently in hybrid powertrains the battery , the electric motor and the control algorithm are also seen as elements of the powertrain .
A motor vehicle 's driveline or drivetrain consists of the parts of the powertrain excluding the engine .
It is the portion of a vehicle , after the prime mover , that changes depending on whether a vehicle is front - wheel , rear - wheel , or four - wheel drive , or less - common six - wheel or eight - wheel drive .
In a wider sense , the powertrain includes all of its components used to transform stored ( chemical , solar , nuclear , kinetic , potential , etc . )
energy into kinetic energy for propulsion purposes .
This includes the utilization of multiple power sources and non – wheel - based vehicles .
DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Developments .
The most recent developments in powertrain are driven by the electrification of it in multiple components .
Electrical energy needs to be provided , usually this leads to larger batteries .
Electrical engines can be found as isolated component or as part of other elements , e.g. the axle .
In hybrid powertrains the torque generated by the combustion engine and the electric motor have to be brought together and distributed to the wheels .
The control of this process can be quite involved but the rewards are greatly improved acceleration and much lower emissions .
Powertrain development for diesel engines involves the following : exhaust gas recirculation ( EGR ) , and advanced combustion .
Spark ignition engine development include : fuel injection , including the gasoline direct injection variant , as well as improving volumetric efficiency by using multi - valves per cylinder , variable valve timing , variable length intake manifolds , and turbocharging .
Changes also include new fuel qualities ( no sulphur or aromates ) to allow new combustion concepts .
So - called " combined combustion systems " ( CCV ) or " diesotto " cycles are based on synthetic fuels ( synthetic diesel , biomass to liquid ( BTL ) or gas to liquid ( GTL ) ) .
BEVs , FCEVs and PHEV powertrains are expected to reach parity with ICE powertrains in 2025 .
MANUFACTURING Section::::Manufacturing .
The manufacturing of powertrain components and systems is important to industry , including the automotive and other vehicle sectors .
Competitiveness drives companies to engineer and produce powertrain systems that over time are more economical to manufacture , higher in product quality and reliability , higher in performance , more fuel efficient , less polluting , and longer in life expectancy .
In turn these requirements have led to designs involving higher internal pressures , greater instantaneous forces , and increased complexity of design and mechanical operation .
The resulting designs in turn impose significantly more severe requirements on parts shape and dimension ; and material surface flatness , waviness , roughness , and porosity .
Quality control over these parameters is achieved through metrology technology applied to all of the steps in powertrain manufacturing processes .
FRAMES AND POWERTRAINS Section::::Frames and powertrains .
In automotive manufacturing , the frame plus the " running gear " makes the chassis .
Later , a body ( sometimes referred to as " coachwork " ) , which is usually not necessary for integrity of the structure , is built on the chassis to complete the vehicle .
Commercial vehicle manufacturers may have " chassis only " and " cowl and chassis " versions that can be outfitted with specialized bodies .
These include buses , motor homes , fire engines , ambulances , etc .
The frame plus the body makes a glider ( a vehicle without a powertrain ) .
FINAL DRIVE Section::::Final drive .
The final drive is the last in the set of components which delivers torque to the drive wheels .
In a road vehicle , it incorporates the differential .
In a railway vehicle , it sometimes incorporates the reversing gear .
Examples include the Self - Changing Gears RF 28 ( used in many first - generation diesel multiple units of British Railways ) and RF 11 used in the British Rail Class 03 and British Rail Class 04 diesel shunting locomotives .
SEE ALSO
* Car safety
* Electric vehicle * Electric vehicle conversion
* Giubo * Gear train * Hybrid vehicle drivetrain REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* New powertrain technologies conference , 27 and 28- March-2007 .
* http://www.caradvice.com.au/105/car-frame-chassis/ * Honda F1 Race Car Frame .
* Drivetrain Quiz * HIL Test Bench ( Delphi Motor )
Technical Paper : A Closed - Loop Drive - train Model