DUEL OF THE FATES
" Duel of the Fates " is a musical theme recurring in the Star Wars prequel trilogy and the Expanded Universe .
It was composed by John Williams and recorded for the film soundtrack by the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) and the London Voices .
This symphonic piece is played with both a full orchestra and a choir .
The lyrics are based on a fragment of an archaic Welsh poem Cad Goddeu ( Battle of the Trees ) , and sung in Sanskrit .
The piece debuts during the final lightsaber duel in .
With the music video for this theme , the LSO became the only classical group to ever have a video debut on MTV 's Total Request Live . "
Duel of the Fates " lasted 11 days on the countdown .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
" Duel of the Fates " was composed by John Williams and recorded by the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) and the London Voices for the film soundtrack .
The symphonic piece is played with both a full orchestra and a choir .
The lyrics are based on a fragment of an archaic Welsh poem Cad Goddeu ( Battle of the Trees ) , and sung in Sanskrit .
The translation was loose and Williams arranged it by ear , while rearranging the syllables , so the pronunciation of the Sanskrit is n't accurate and the meaning of the stanza is lost in the actual singing .
Although Williams conducted " Duel of the Fates " to appear as a concert suite in the end credits ( rather than the film ) , Williams did record similar cues using the ostinato motif , and in one instance , a ' cut down ' version , labelled the " Great Duel " .
John Williams stated the chorus was introduced to give a religious , temple - like feel to the epic lightsaber duel .
Williams compared the setting of the battle to a pagan altar , and that the duel itself " seems like a dance or a ballet , a religious ceremony of some kind , probably ending in the death of one of the combatants " .
For Episode
I , John Williams recorded a choirless version of " Duel of the Fates " , then recorded the choir performing on its own , then layered the vocals over the choirless recordings .
APPEARANCES IN STAR WARS Section::::Appearances in Star Wars .
The music had its debut during the final lightsaber duel between Qui - Gon Jinn , Obi - Wan Kenobi , and Darth Maul in .
An abridged version is played in when Anakin Skywalker used a speederbike to search for his mother .
The piece " Battle of the Heroes " , which was played in , during the battle sequence between the Jedi Master Yoda , and Emperor Palpatine , the Dark Lord of the Sith , in the senate chamber on Coruscant , and the simultaneous battle between Anakin Skywalker ( Darth Vader ) and Obi - Wan Kenobi on Mustafar , had a piece of Duel of the Fates , but rewritten in a tragic mode .
Lucas had expressed in a documentary of The Phantom Menace that he wanted to use Duel of the Fates in Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith as he liked how it the feeling of the work .
However , he decided not to use it mainly because it did not match the tragic mood of the duel between Anakin Skywalker and Obi - Wan Kenobi .
Duel of the Fates makes an appearance during the Yoda / Darth Sidious fight scene .
For this instance , John Williams re - recorded the choir and layered it over the vocal - less recording from Episode I. " Duel of the Fates " can be heard in a number of Star Wars video games , including , , , , , , , and Angry Birds Star Wars II .
The theme also plays during Soulcalibur IV , whenever The Apprentice fights within either of the game 's three Star Wars - themed stages , as well as during his extended ending . "
Duel of the Fates " also plays when Darth Maul appears during the Jedi Training Academy show featured at Disney 's Hollywood Studios and Disneyland .
A special of Lego Star Wars called " The Empire Strikes Out " features a short section of Duel of the Fates , in which Darth Maul hums along with the music while declaring how " awesome " he is .
Another Lego Star Wars special , entitled The Yoda Chronicles : Menace of the Sith , also featured Duel of the Fates .
Count Dooku plays the music on a radio during a demonstration of the Sith clone Jek-14 's power .
Darth Maul complains that Duel of the Fates is his theme song , to which Asajj Ventress replies " Can somebody say diva ? " .
It also appears in in the episode " The Future of the Force " when Ahsoka Tano fights the inquisitors , and again in Twilight of the Apprentice when Ahsoka duels Maul .
" Duel of the Fates " can also be heard softly in the background when Maul appears in .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The music video for this theme debut on Total Request Live , leading the London Symphony Orchestra to become the only classical group to have a video debut on Total Request Live . "
Duel of the Fates " lasted 11 days on the countdown .
USE OUTSIDE OF STAR WARS Section::::Use outside of Star Wars .
" Duel of the Fates " has also been used to reference and satirize Star Wars .
For instance , in The Simpsons episode " Please Homer , Do n't Hammer ' Em " , the song plays in a sequence parodying Star Wars , during an allergen - stick battle between Bart Simpson and Seymour Skinner .
The song was also used as the theme for the 2003 Broadcast of the Drum Corps International World Championships on PBS .
" Duel of the Fates " was used in the original BBC broadcast of Top Gear Series 9 Episode 2 in 2007 , during the segment in which host James May drives a Bugatti Veyron to its top speed at the Volkswagen test track at Ehra - Lessien .
Tottenham Hotspur F.C. uses " Duel of the Fates " to announce the appearance of the players from the tunnel .
J.P. Anderson 's Band Rabbit Junk used a sample of " Duel of the Fates " in the song " Demons " , which appears on the album Reframe .
The Boston Pops performed the piece as the Montreal Canadiens and Boston Bruins entered Gillette Stadium for the 2016 NHL Winter Classic .
SEE ALSO
* Star Wars music * " Battle of the Heroes " REFERENCES