WHILE MY GUITAR GENTLY WEEPS
" While My Guitar Gently Weeps " is a song by the English rock band the Beatles from their 1968 double album
The Beatles ( also known as " the White Album " ) .
It was written by George Harrison , the band 's lead guitarist .
The song serves as a comment on the disharmony within the Beatles following their return from studying Transcendental Meditation in India in early 1968 .
This lack of camaraderie was reflected in the band 's initial apathy towards the composition , which Harrison countered by inviting his friend and occasional collaborator , Eric Clapton , to contribute to the recording .
Clapton overdubbed a lead guitar part , although he was not formally credited for his contribution .
Harrison wrote "
While My Guitar Gently Weeps " as an exercise in randomness inspired by the Chinese I Ching .
The song conveys his dismay at the world 's unrealised potential for universal love , which he refers to as " the love there that 's sleeping " .
Harrison first recorded it with a sparse backing of acoustic guitar and harmonium – a version that appeared on the 1996 Anthology 3 outtakes compilation and , with the addition of a string arrangement by George Martin , on the Love soundtrack album in 2006 .
The full group recording was made in September 1968 , at which point the song 's folk - based musical arrangement was replaced by a production in the heavy rock style .
The recording was one of several collaborations between Harrison and Clapton during the late 1960s and was followed by the pair co - writing the song " Badge " for Clapton 's group Cream .
On release , the song received praise from several music critics , and it has since been recognised as an example of Harrison 's continued maturity as a songwriter beside his Beatles bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney .
Rolling Stone ranked " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " 136th on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , seventh on the " 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " , and at number 10 on its list of " The Beatles 100 Greatest Songs " .
Clapton 's performance was ranked 42nd in Guitar Worlds 2008 list of the " 100 Greatest Guitar Solos " .
In 2011 it was voted the sixth best collaboration of all time in a Rolling Stone readers poll .
Harrison and Clapton often performed the song together live , during which they shared the lead guitar role over the closing section .
Live versions featuring the pair were included on the Concert for Bangladesh album in 1971 and Live in Japan in 1992 .
Backed by a band that included McCartney and Ringo Starr , Clapton performed the song at the Concert for George in November 2002 , a year after Harrison 's death .
BACKGROUND AND INSPIRATION Section::::Background and inspiration .
George Harrison wrote " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " after his return from India , where the Beatles had been studying Transcendental Meditation under Maharishi Mahesh Yogi during the spring of 1968 .
The visit had allowed Harrison to re - engage with the guitar as his primary instrument , after focusing on the Indian sitar for the previous two years , and also marked the start of a prolific period for him as a songwriter .
Inspiration for the song came to him when he was visiting his parents in Warrington , Cheshire , and he began reading the I Ching , or " The Book of Changes " .
As Harrison put it , " [ the book ] seemed to me to be based on the Eastern concept that everything is relative to everything else , as opposed to the Western view that things are merely coincidental . "
Embracing this idea of relativism , he committed to writing a song based on the first words he saw upon opening a book , which happened to be " gently weeps " .
Harrison continued to work on the lyrics after this initial writing session .
The song reflects the disharmonious atmosphere within the Beatles following their return from India .
Harrison had led the band in their highly publicised endorsement of Transcendental Meditation and viewed this spiritual pursuit as superior in importance to their career momentum .
When discussing another song he wrote at this time , " Not Guilty " , Harrison said it referred to " the grief I was catching " from John Lennon and Paul McCartney for leading them to Rishikesh and supposedly hindering the group 's career and the launch of their Apple record label .
Eric Clapton , with whom Harrison collaborated on several recordings throughout 1968 as a distraction from the Beatles , said that " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " conveyed Harrison 's spiritual isolation within the group .
Author Jonathan Gould writes that , although in the past each of the Beatles had become temporarily subsumed in fads and personal interests , the level of Harrison 's commitment to Indian spirituality as an alternative to the band was unprecedented .
A demo that Harrison recorded at his home in Esher includes an unused verse : " I look at the trouble and hate that is raging /
While my guitar gently weeps /
As I 'm sitting here , doing nothing but ageing …
" This version also includes the line "
The problems you sow are the troubles you 're reaping " , which he similarly discarded .
An early acoustic guitar and harmonium performance of the song features a slightly different third verse : " I look from the wings at the play you are staging /
While my guitar gently weeps /
As I 'm sitting here , doing nothing but ageing …
" This version was released on the 1996 compilation Anthology 3 and was used as the basis of the 2006 Love remix , with a string arrangement by George Martin .
COMPOSITION MUSIC Section::::Composition .
Section::::Music .
" While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was one of the few Beatles compositions from early 1968 that changed markedly from demo form to the official recording .
Harrison 's demos suggest the influence of folk music , yet the Beatles ' version is in the heavy rock style typical of much of the band 's late 1960s work .
While noting the importance of Harrison 's return to the guitar during this period , Gould describes the song as " virtually a declaration of his recommitment to rock " .
The song as originally issued by the Beatles is in the key of A minor , changing to A major over the bridges .
Aside from the intro , the composition is structured into two rounds of verse and bridge , with an instrumental passage extending the second of these verse sections , followed by a final verse and a long instrumental passage that fades out on the released recording .
All the sections consist of an even sixteen bars or measures , which are divided into four phrases .
The chord progression over the verses includes a shift to a 7 ( Am / G ) on " all " ( bass note G ) and a 6 ( D ( major 3rd F ) ) after " love " ( bass note F ) to a 6 ( F ) on " sleeping " ( bass note F ) .
According to musicologist Dominic Pedler , the 8–7–6–6 progression represents a hybrid of the Aeolian and Dorian modes .
The change to the parallel major key is heralded by a C chord as the verse 's penultimate chord ( replacing the D used in the second phrase of each verse ) before the E that leads into the bridge .
Musicologist Alan Pollack views this combination of C and E as representing a sense of " arrival " , after which the bridge contains " upward [ harmonic ] gestures " that contrast with the bass descents that dominate the verse .
Such contrasts are limited by the inclusion of minor triads ( III , VI and II ) played over the E chord that ends the bridge 's second and fourth phrases .
LYRICS Section::::Lyrics .
In his lyrics to " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , Harrison revisits the theme of universal love and the philosophical concerns that were evident in his overtly Indian - influenced compositions , particularly " Within You Without You " .
The song is a lament for how a universal love for humankind is latent in all individuals yet remains unrealised .
In the description of theologian Dale Allison , the song " conveys spiritual angst and an urgent religious point of view without being explicitly theological " .
Harrison sings of surveying " you all " and seeing " the love there that 's sleeping " .
Musicologist Walter Everett comments that the change from the minor - mode verse to the parallel major might express hope that " unrealized potential " described in the lyrics is to be " fulfilled " , but the continued minor triads " seem to express a strong dismay that love is not to be unfolded " .
During the bridges , Harrison adopts a repetitive rhyming scheme in the style of Bob Dylan to convey how humankind has become distracted from its ability to manifest this love .
He sings of people that have been " inverted " and " perverted " from their natural perspective .
According to Harrison biographer Joshua Greene , the song 's message reflects the pessimism encouraged by world events throughout 1968 , such as the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy in the United States , and the Soviet Russian oppression of Czechoslovakia .
Allison writes that the lyrics represent the " antithesis of spiritual triumphalism " , in which Harrison " mourns because love has not conquered all " .
RECORDING EARLY ATTEMPTS AND BASIC TRACK
Section::::Recording .
Section::::Early attempts and basic track .
The Beatles recorded " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " several times during the sessions for their self - titled double album , also known as " the White Album " .
The recording sessions , which began in late May 1968 , were characterised by a lack of cooperation among the four band members , and by what Lennon 's bandmates regarded as the overly intrusive presence of his new romantic partner , Yoko Ono .
In this atmosphere , Harrison had initially been reluctant to present his new compositions to the group .
Take 1 on 25 July – the version later issued on Anthology 3 – was a solo performance by Harrison , playing his Gibson J-200 acoustic guitar , with an overdubbed harmonium part .
Sessions on 16 August and 5 September produced full band recordings of the song .
In the case of the 16 August version , an overdubbing session on 3 September marked the first time that the Beatles had used eight - track recording at EMI Studios .
At the same session , Harrison overdubbed a backwards ( or " backmasked " ) guitar solo , as he had done two years before on " I 'm Only Sleeping " , on the Revolver album , but he was not satisfied with the results .
The Beatles then remade the basic track on 5 September – a session that marked Ringo Starr 's return to the group after he had walked out on 22 August , upset at the unpleasant atmosphere .
While Harrison led the band in welcoming back their drummer , by installing a large flower display all over Starr 's drum kit , he continued to think that his bandmates were not giving their best to the song .
OVERDUBS Section::::Overdubs .
On 6 September , during a ride from Surrey into London , Harrison asked Clapton to play guitar on the track .
Clapton , who recognised Harrison 's talent as a songwriter , and considered that his abilities had long been held back by Lennon and McCartney , was nevertheless reluctant to participate ; he later recalled that his initial response was : " I ca n't do that .
Nobody ever plays on Beatles records .
"
Harrison convinced him , and Clapton 's lead guitar part , played on Harrison 's Gibson Les Paul electric guitar " Lucy " ( a recent gift from Clapton ) , was overdubbed that evening .
Recalling the session in his 2007 autobiography , Clapton says that , while Lennon and McCartney were " fairly non - committal " , he thought the track " sounded fantastic " , adding : " I knew George was happy , because he listened to it over and over in the control room . "
Harrison recalled that Clapton 's presence also ensured that his bandmates " tr[ied ] a bit harder " and " were all on their best behaviour " .
The Beatles carried out the remaining overdubs , which included an ascending piano motif , played by McCartney , over the introduction , Hammond organ by Harrison , and further percussion by Starr .
McCartney also added a second bass part , played on his Fender Jazz Bass rather than on either of his preferred Höfner or Rickenbacker models .
MIXING
Section::::Mixing .
Still wary that his contribution might present too much of a departure from the band 's sound , Clapton requested that Harrison give the lead guitar track a more " Beatley " sound when mixing the song .
During final mixing for the White Album , on 14 October , the guitar part was run through an ADT circuit with " varispeed " , with engineer Chris Thomas manipulating the oscillator to achieve the desired " wobbly " effect .
According to Everett , Lennon 's tremolo - rich guitar part , recorded on 5 September , was retained only in the song 's coda .
Clapton 's guitar contribution has been described as making this a " monumental " track .
As particularly notable features , Everett highlights the increasing lengths of thrice - heard first scale degrees ( 0:17–0:19 ) , the restraint shown by rests in many bars then unexpected appearances ( as at 0:28–0:29 ) , commanding turnaround phrases ( 0:31–0:33 ) , expressive string bends marking modal changes from C to C ( 0:47–0:53 ) , power retransition ( 1:21–1:24 ) , emotive vibrato ( 2:01–2:07 ) , and a solo ( 1:55–2:31 ) with a " measured rise in intensity , rhythmic activity , tonal drive and registral climb " .
In October 1968 , Harrison reciprocated by co - writing " Badge " with Clapton and playing on Cream 's recording of the track .
Released on Cream 's final album , Goodbye , " Badge " reflected Harrison 's pop sensibilities and helped Clapton transition from the heavy blues style and its reliance on extended soloing , and onto the more song - based approach that he and Harrison admired in the Band 's 1968 album Music from Big Pink .
RELEASE AND RECEPTION Section::::Release and reception .
Apple Records released The Beatles on 22 November 1968 .
One of four Harrison compositions on the double album , " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was sequenced as the penultimate track on side one in the LP format , between Lennon 's " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " and " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " .
The song was issued as the B - side of " Ob - La - Di , Ob - La - Da " , a McCartney - written song that had also tested the Beatles ' patience during the White Album sessions .
This single was an international hit , topping charts in Australia , Austria , Switzerland and West Germany , but was not released in Britain or the United States .
According to music critic Tim Riley , Harrison 's writing contributions " regain[ed ] the promise " evident in his three songs on the Beatles ' 1966 album Revolver .
Recalling the release in his 1977 book
The Beatles
Forever , Nicholas Schaffner said that , in returning to pop / rock songwriting after his excursions into the Indian classical style , Harrison 's four White Album songs " firmly established him as a contender " beside Lennon and McCartney .
In Schaffner 's description , " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was the most instantly popular of " a quartet of more conventionally accessible pop songs [ written by Harrison ] that many felt were among the finest on the album " .
Among contemporary reviews , Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone said that " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was " one of George Harrison 's very best songs " , and likened it to " Blue Jay Way " in that it " recalls California , the simple Baja California beat , the dreamy words of the Los Angeles haze , the organic pace lapping around every room as if in invisible waves " .
Wenner found the lyrics " slightly self - righteous and preaching " , representing " a general set of incidents , a message , like a sermon , impersonally directed to everyone " , and concluded : " I am willing to bet something substantial that the lead guitarist on this cut is Eric Clapton , yet another involution of the circular logic on which this song [ is ] so superbly constructed as a musical piece .
" In his review for the International Times , Barry Miles said the song was a " great tune " with " nice hi - hats " but a " lifeless " guitar part .
Alan Smith of the NME credited the " warm voice " and " very strong melody " to McCartney and said that the track was one of the " highlights ... moving into a slightly Hendrix thing " and was bound to be " Another hit for somebody " .
Three weeks later , Smith acknowledged that the singer and composer was in fact Harrison , and added : " the words are evocative and the melody line is creeping into my mind to stay . "
Geoffrey Cannon wrote in The Guardian : " George Harrison has seen the truth , and is anxious that we should see our truth .
He 's a preacher , man of fire .
When his songs speak of ' you ' , the address is direct .
He achieves his character in '
While My Guitar Gently Weeps ' , which , with Phil Ochs 's ' Tape from California ' , is the first track I know that succeeds in making magnanimous love serious and touching .
"
" While My Guitar Gently Weeps " became a staple of US rock radio during the early 1970s , on a par with songs such as " Layla " by Clapton 's short - lived band Derek and the Dominos , Led Zeppelin 's " Stairway to Heaven " and the Who 's " Wo n't Get Fooled Again " .
In 1973 , it appeared on the Beatles ' double album compilation 1967–1970 , as one of only three tracks representing the White Album .
Capitol Records included it on The Best of George Harrison in 1976 ; a year before this , Harrison released a sequel to the song , titled " This Guitar ( Ca n't Keep from Crying ) " , which also served as the final single issued by Apple in its original incarnation .
The Beatles ' recording also appeared on the soundtrack to Withnail and I , a 1987 comedy film set in late-1960s London and produced by Harrison 's company HandMade Films .
Despite his reluctance to record " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , McCartney later identified it as one of his favourite selections on the 1995–96 Anthology outtakes series , and he grouped the song with " Something " and " Here Comes the Sun " as candidates for Harrison 's " greatest track " .
Starr paired it with " Something " as " Two of the finest love songs ever written " , adding : " they 're really on a par with what John and Paul or anyone else of that time wrote .
" In their written tributes to Harrison following his death in November 2001 , Mick Jagger and Keith Richards each expressed their admiration for the song .
Jagger said : " It 's lovely , plaintive .
Only a guitar player could write that ...
" In 2018 , the music staff of Time Out London ranked " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " at number 20 on their list of the best Beatles songs .
HARRISON LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Harrison live performances .
Harrison played "
While My Guitar Gently Weeps " at every one of his comparatively rare concerts as a solo artist .
Writing for Mojo in 2003 , Ashley Kahn attributed the track 's " classic " status to its evocation of " a band falling out of harmony " and , with regard to the enduring musical bond between Harrison and Clapton , its standing as " their song " .
At Harrison 's Concert for Bangladesh , held at Madison Square Garden in New York on 1 August 1971 , Clapton performed the song on a Gibson Byrdland , a hollow - body guitar more suited to jazz or country music than rock .
He later said that this was a poor decision and , as with his substandard playing at the event , one indicative of his descent into heroin addiction .
The Concert for Bangladesh Revisited with George Harrison and Friends , DVD , 2005 .
The version performed by Harrison during his set at the 1987 Prince 's Trust Concert reunited him with Starr and Clapton , and features an extended coda with the guitars of Harrison and Clapton interweaving .
On their 1991 tour of Japan , Harrison and Clapton performed " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " with additional background vocals .
An edit combining parts of the 14 December and 17 December Tokyo Dome performances of the song was included on Harrison 's 1992 double album Live in Japan .
Harrison also featured the song in the set list for his only other tour as a solo artist , a series of North American concerts over November – December 1974 with Ravi Shankar .
Harrison shared the lead guitarist 's role with Robben Ford , often extending the piece to eight minutes .
While it was a popular inclusion in a set list that barely acknowledged Harrison 's past as a former Beatle , his alteration of some of the lyrics – so that his guitar " gently smiles " and " tries to smile " – disappointed many concert - goers and reviewers .
Author Simon Leng comments that on Harrison 's return to Madison Square Garden towards the end of the tour , his playing on the song nevertheless received a standing ovation .
COVER VERSIONS
Section::::Cover versions .
Canadian guitarist Jeff Healey covered " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " on his 1990 album Hell to Pay .
Harrison participated in the recording , contributing on acoustic guitar and backing vocals .
Also issued as a single , Healey 's version peaked at number 27 in Canada , number 85 in the UK and number 25 in New Zealand .
During the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II concert at Buckingham Palace Garden on 3 June 2002 , McCartney performed the song with Clapton , as a tribute to Harrison .
The performance appears on the DVD release Party at the Palace .
On 29 November the same year , Clapton , backed by a large band that included McCartney , Starr , Dhani Harrison , Jeff Lynne and Marc Mann , performed " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " at the Concert for George in memory of Harrison .
Author Ian Inglis writes that while Clapton was already " permanently associated " with " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " due to his presence on the White Album recording and the Concert for Bangladesh and Live in Japan versions , his long , closing solo at the Concert for George contained " perhaps the most expressive " playing of all those versions .
American musician
Todd Rundgren covered " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " for the 2003 album .
Rundgren said of his contribution to the multi - artist tribute : " [ Before the Beatles ] , I 'd never heard the term ' lead guitarist . '
George created the job description for my first paying gig , the vocation that I 'm still lucky enough to practice today … "
Johnny Loftus of AllMusic views the recording as one of the collection 's highlights , saying that Rundgren " effortlessly replicates the grandeur " of the Beatles ' track .
As his personal tribute to Harrison , Peter Frampton released a version of the song on his 2003 album Now .
In 2004 , when Harrison was inducted posthumously into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist , " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was played in tribute by a large band that included Tom Petty , Lynne , Steve Winwood , Mann , Dhani Harrison and Steve Ferrone .
The performance concluded with an extended guitar solo by Prince , who was also being inducted into the Hall of Fame .
Among other cover versions , the song has also been recorded by guitarists such as Marc Ribot , Phish and Charlie Byrd , and on ukulele by Jake Shimabukuro .
Toto did a cover version for their album Through the Looking Glass and in a live performance in Live in Amsterdam .
Santana did a cover for his twentieth album , in 2010 , featuring singer India Arie and cellist Yo - Yo Ma .
Released as a single , it charted on Billboards Adult Contemporary .
In 2016 , Regina Spektor performed the song for the soundtrack to the film Kubo and the Two Strings , accompanied by Kevin Kmetz on a shamisen .
2016
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::2016 music video .
In June 2016 , Apple Corps and Cirque du Soleil released a music video for " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " .
The video was created for the tenth anniversary re - staging of Cirque du Soleil 's Love theatrical production .
The video was directed by Dandypunk , André Kasten and Leah Moyer .
Ryan Reed , describing the clip for rollingstone.com , wrote that " Dandypunk 's hand - drawn illustrations depict Harrison 's lyrics falling off the page into the air , transporting LOVE performer Eira Glover into a series of fantastical locations .
Projection mapping – and no CGI – was used to create the clip . "
PERSONNEL Section::::Personnel .
According to Ian MacDonald , Walter Everett and John Winn : White Album version
* George Harrison – double - tracked vocals , backing vocal , acoustic guitar ,
Hammond organ
* John Lennon – electric guitar with tremolo
* Paul McCartney – harmony vocal , piano , bass guitar
* Ringo Starr – drums , tambourine , castanets * Eric Clapton – lead guitar Anthology 3 version * George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar , harmonium NOTES
REFERENCES
SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Full lyrics for the song at the Beatles ' official website