ARC - FAULT CIRCUIT INTERRUPTER
An arc - fault circuit interrupter ( AFCI ) also known as an arc - fault detection device ( AFDD ) is a circuit breaker that breaks the circuit when it detects an electric arc in the circuit it protects to prevent electrical fires .
An AFCI selectively distinguishes between a harmless arc ( incidental to normal operation of switches , plugs , and brushed motors ) , and a potentially dangerous arc ( that can occur , for example , in a lamp cord which has a broken conductor ) .
AFCI breakers have been required for circuits feeding electrical outlets in residential bedrooms by the electrical codes of Canada and the United States since the beginning of the 21st century ; the U.S. National Electrical Code has required them to protect most residential outlets since 2014 , and the Canadian Electrical Code has since 2015 .
In parts of the world using 230 V , where the higher voltage implies lower currents , specifically Western Europe and the UK , adoption is slower , and their use is optional , except in high risk cases .
In the USA , arc faults are one of the leading causes for residential electrical fires .
Each year in the United States , over 40,000 fires are attributed to home electrical wiring .
These fires result in over 350 deaths and over 1,400 injuries each year .
Conventional circuit breakers only respond to overloads and short circuits , so they do not protect against arcing conditions that produce erratic , and often reduced current .
An AFCI is selective so that normal arcs do not cause it to trip .
The AFCI circuitry continuously monitors the current and discriminates between normal and unwanted arcing conditions .
Once detected , the AFCI opens its internal contacts , thus de - energizing the circuit and reducing the potential for a fire to occur .
OPERATING PRINCIPLE
Section::::Operating principle .
The electronics inside an AFCI breaker detect electrical current alternating at characteristic frequencies , usually around 100 kHz , known to be associated with wire arcing , which are sustained for more than a few milliseconds .
A combination AFCI breaker provides protection against parallel arcing ( line to neutral ) , series arcing ( a loose , broken , or otherwise high resistance segment in a single line ) , ground arcing ( from line , or neutral , to ground ) , overload protection and short circuit protection .
AFCI receptacles contain electronic components to monitor a circuit for the presence of dangerous arcing conditions .
Based upon an established threshold in the sine wave , the AFCI can be triggered to quickly react and de - power a circuit if dangerous arcing is detected .
When installed as the first outlet on a branch circuit , AFCI receptacles provide series arc protection for the entire branch circuit .
They also provide parallel arc protection for the branch circuit starting at the AFCI receptacle .
Unlike AFCI breakers , AFCI receptacles may be used on any wiring system regardless of the panel .
US AND CANADA ELECTRICAL CODE REQUIREMENTS Section::::US and Canada electrical code requirements .
Starting with the 1999 version of the National Electrical Code in the United States , and the 2002 version of the Canadian Electrical Code in Canada , the national codes require AFCIs in all circuits that feed outlets in bedrooms of dwelling units .
As of the 2014 NEC , AFCI protection is required on all branch circuits supplying outlets or devices installed in dwelling unit kitchens , along with the 2008 NEC additions of family rooms , dining rooms , living rooms , parlors , libraries , dens , bedrooms , sunrooms , recreation rooms , closets , hallways , laundry areas , and similar rooms and areas .
They are also required in dormitory units .
This requirement may be accomplished by using a " combination type " breaker — a specific kind of circuit - breaker defined by UL 1699—in the breaker panel that provides combined arc - fault and overcurrent protection or by using an AFCI receptacle for modifications / extensions , as replacement receptacles or in new construction , at the first outlet on the branch .
Not all U.S. jurisdictions have adopted the NEC 's AFCI requirements so it is important to check local code requirements .
The AFCI is intended to prevent fire from arcs .
AFCI circuit breakers are designed to meet one of two standards as specified by UL 1699 : " branch " type or " combination " type ( note : the Canadian Electrical Code uses different terminology but similar technical requirements ) .
A branch type AFCI trips on 75 amperes of arcing current from the line wire to either the neutral or ground wire .
A combination type adds series arcing detection to branch type performance .
Combination type AFCIs trip on 5 amperes of series arcing .
AFCI receptacles are an alternative solution to AFCI breakers .
These receptacles are designed to address the dangers associated with both types of potentially hazardous arcing : parallel and series .
AFCI receptacles offer the benefit of localized test and reset with such buttons located on the face of the device .
This is very convenient and saves a journey to the breaker panel .
In 2002 , the NEC removed the word " receptacle " , leaving " outlets " , with the effect that lights and other wired - in devices such as ceiling fans within bedrooms were added to the requirement .
The 2005 code made it clearer that all outlets must be protected despite discussion in the code - making panel about excluding bedroom smoke detectors from the requirement .
" Outlets " as defined in the NEC includes receptacles , light fixtures and smoke alarms , among other things .
Basically , any point where electricity is used to power something is an outlet .
As of January 2008 , only " combination type " AFCIs meet the NEC requirement .
The 2008 NEC requires the installation of combination - type AFCIs in all 15 and 20 ampere residential circuits with the exception of laundries , kitchens , bathrooms , garages , and unfinished basements , though many of these require GFCI protection .
The 2014 NEC adds kitchens and laundry rooms to the list of rooms requiring AFCI circuitry , as well as any devices ( such as lighting ) requiring protection .
230
V COUNTRIES
Section::::230 V countries .
In the UK the 2018 edition of the wiring regulations is the first edition to make any mention of arc fault devices , and indicate they may be installed if the design has an unusually high risk of fire from arc faults .
The annexes relating to testing indicate than when AFDDs are installed , their correct operation must be verified before completion , but the method of testing is not described .
This is in contrast to RCDs where a number of trip times at different fault current levels must be verified .
The German Wiring rules VDE 100 , recommend AFDDs for high risk situations , and lists old peoples care homes , community centres and Kindergartens as examples .
LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
AFCIs are designed to protect against fires caused by electrical arc faults .
While the sensitivity of the AFCIs helps in the detection of arc faults , these breakers can also indicate false positives by identifying normal circuit behaviors as arc faults .
For instance , lightning strikes provide voltage and current profiles that resemble arc faults , and vacuum cleaners and some laser printers trip AFCIs .
This nuisance tripping reduces the overall effectiveness of AFCIs .
Research into advancements in this area is being pursued .
Also , AFCIs provide no specific protection against glowing connections also known as a High Resistance Connection , excess current , high line voltages or low line voltages .
AFCI circuit breakers include a standard inverse - time circuit breaker .
Glowing connections occur when relatively high current exists in a relatively large resistance object .
Heat comes from power dissipation .
This energy , when dissipated in a small junction area , can generate temperatures above 1000 ° C ( 1800 ° F ) and can ignite most flammable materials .
Bad wiring junctions can occur in utilization equipment , cords , or in - situ wiring and especially in a defective switch , socket , plug , wiring connection and even at the circuit breaker or fuse panels .
Terminal screws loosened by vibration , improper tightening or other causes offer increased resistance to the current , with consequent heating and potential thermal creep , which will cause the termination to loosen further and exacerbate the heating effect .
In North America , high resistance junctions are sometimes observed at the terminations of aluminum wire circuits , where oxidation has caused increased resistance , resulting in thermal creep .
No technology located in a circuit breaker or fuse panel could detect a high - resistance wiring fault as no measurable characteristic exists that differentiates a glow fault from normal branch circuit operation .
Power Fault Circuit Interrupters ( PFCI ) located in receptacles are designed to prevent fires caused by glowing connections in wiring or panels .
From the receptacle a PFCI can detect the voltage drop when high current exists in a high resistance junction .
In a properly designed and maintained circuit , substantial voltage drops should never occur .
Proper wire terminations inside utilization equipment , such as appliances , and cords prevent high - resistance connections that could lead to fires .
An AFCI does not detect high line voltage due to an open neutral in a multiwire branch circuit .
A multiwire branch circuit has both energized wires of a 120 - 240 V split phase service .
If the neutral is broken , devices connected from a 120 V leg to the neutral may experience excess voltage , up to twice normal .
AFCIs do not detect low line voltage .
Low line voltage can cause electromechanical relays to repeatedly turn off and on .
If current is flowing through the load contacts it causes arcing across the contacts as they open .
The arcing can oxidize , pit and melt the contacts .
This process can increase the contact resistance , superheat the relay and lead to fires .
Power fault circuit interrupters are designed to prevent fires from low voltage across loads .
AFCIs are also known to be sensitive ( false tripping ) to the presence of radio frequency energy , especially within the so - called high frequency spectrum ( 3 - 30 MHz ) which include legitimate Citizens Band and Amateur Radio operations .
Sensitivities and mitigation have been known since 2013 .
INTERFERENCE
WITH POWER LINE NETWORKING
Section::::Interference with power line networking .
AFCIs may interfere with the operation of some power line communication technologies .
SEE ALSO * GFCI
( Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter )
* DFCI ( Dual Function Circuit Interrupter )
-Dual function circuit interrupters utilize both GFCI and AFCI detection technology .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Underwriters Labs summary on UL 1699 standard on AFCIs * The Electrical Safety Foundation International on AFCIs * AFCI Educational Web site * CPSC AFCI Fact Sheet *
AFCIs :
Emerging Technology Solutions for Fires Resulting from Electrical Arcing from IAEI News : The Magazine * EFCI / OFCI on Popular Science
* Arc Fault Testing and Arc Fault Scenarios , Underwriters Laboratory .
Six types of AFCIs are listed .