DEION SANDERS
Deion Lin Sanders Sr .
(; born August 9 , 1967 ) ,
nicknamed " Primetime " , is an American athlete and sports analyst who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) for 14 seasons .
During his football career , he was a member of the Atlanta Falcons , the San Francisco 49ers , the Dallas Cowboys , the Washington Redskins , and the Baltimore Ravens .
He also had a part - time career as a baseball outfielder for nine seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , where he played professionally for the New York Yankees , the Atlanta Braves , the Cincinnati Reds , and the San Francisco Giants .
Sanders won two Super Bowl titles and made one World Series appearance in 1992 , making him the only individual to appear in both a Super Bowl and a World Series .
Sanders attended Florida State University , where he was recognized as a two - time All - American in football , and also played baseball and ran track .
He was drafted by the Falcons in the first round of the 1989 NFL Draft and played football primarily at cornerback , but also as a kick returner , punt returner , and occasionally wide receiver .
During his career , he was named to nine Pro Bowls and made consecutive Super Bowl appearances in XXIX with the 49ers and XXX with the Cowboys , winning both .
He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2011 .
Following the conclusion of his athletic career , Sanders currently works as an analyst for CBS Sports and the NFL Network .
He is also the offensive coordinator at Trinity Christian - Cedar Hill high school , which his sons attend .
Sanders founded the Prime Prep Academy charter school in 2012 where he coached until the school closed in 2015 due to financial insolvency .
Additionally , he stars in the show Deion Family Playbook which debuted in 2014 .
EARLY
LIFE HIGH SCHOOL Section::::Early life .
Section::::High school .
Sanders was born in Fort Myers , Florida .
He attended North Fort Myers High School in North Fort Myers , and was a letterman and All - State honoree in football , basketball and baseball .
In 1985 , Sanders was named to the Florida High School Association All - Century Team which selected the top 33 players in the 100-year history of high school football in the state .
The Kansas City Royals selected Sanders out of North Fort Myers High School in the sixth round of the 1985 Major League Baseball draft .
He did not sign with the Royals .
COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::College career .
Sanders enrolled at Florida State University and played three sports for the Florida State Seminoles : football , baseball , and track .
Beginning his freshman year , he started in the Seminoles ' secondary , played outfield for the baseball team that finished fifth in the nation , and helped lead the track and field team to a conference championship .
Under head coach Bobby Bowden , Sanders was a two - time consensus All - American cornerback in 1987 and 1988 , and a third team All - American in 1986 , intercepting 14 passes in his career , including three in bowl games , and managed to return one interception 100 yards for a touchdown breaking Fred Biletnikoff 's interception return record by one yard .
He won the Jim Thorpe Award in 1988 .
He was also a standout punt returner for Florida State , leading the nation in 1988 with his punt return average , and breaking the school 's record for career punt return yards .
Sanders made an interception with 5 seconds left to seal Florida State 's 13 - 7 win over Auburn in the 1989 Sugar Bowl , during the 1988 postseason .
Based on those accolades , his jersey at Florida State , # 2 , was retired in 1995 .
He finished his career with 126 punt returns for 1,429 yards .
Bowden would later state that Sanders was his " measuring stick for athletic ability " .
While playing baseball under head coach Mike Martin at Florida State , Sanders hit .331 in 1986 ; he was known more for base stealing , compiling 27 stolen bases in 1987 .
Sanders once played the first game of a baseball doubleheader , ran a leg of a 4 × 100 relay , then returned to play another baseball game .
PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL CAREER Section::::Professional baseball career .
Sanders played a nine - year , part - time baseball career , playing left and center field in 641 games with four teams .
He was originally drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the sixth round of the 1985 draft , but did not sign with them .
The New York Yankees selected Sanders in the 30th round of the 1988 Major League Baseball draft , and he signed with the team on June 22 .
He opened the 1989 season with the Albany - Colonie Yankees of the Class AA Eastern League .
Though Sanders planned to leave the Yankees in July to attend NFL training camp , he became embroiled in a contract dispute with the Falcons , and used the Yankees as leverage .
He received a promotion to the major leagues , and spent the summer with the Columbus Clippers of the Class AAA International League .
Sanders made his major league baseball debut on May 31 , 1989 .
Sanders made the Yankees ' Opening Day roster for the 1990 season .
On May 22 , 1990 , Sanders became involved in a dispute with Chicago White Sox ' catcher Carlton Fisk .
Sanders started by stepping up to the plate with one out and a runner on third , drawing a dollar sign in the dirt before the pitch and then failed to run to first base after hitting a routine pop fly to shortstop , trotting back to the dugout instead .
The Yankee fans booed , and Fisk told Sanders to " run the f**king ball out " and called Sanders a " piece of s**t . "
Later in the game , Sanders told Fisk that " the days of slavery are over . "
Fisk was furious . "
He comes up and wants to make it a racial issue , there 's no racial issue involved .
There is a right way and a wrong way to play this game . "
By mid - July , Sanders expressed that he was unsure if he would remain with the Yankees or report to training camp for the upcoming NFL season .
He requested a $ 1 million salary for the 1991 season , and the Yankees ended negotiations on a contract extension with Sanders .
He left the team , finishing the 1990 season with a .158 batting average and three home runs in 57 games .
In September 1990 , the Yankees placed Sanders on waivers with the intention of giving him his release , as Yankees ' general manager Gene Michael said that Sanders ' football career was stunting his baseball development .
Sanders later signed with the Atlanta Braves for the 1991 MLB season .
On July 31 , Sanders hit a key three - run homer to spark a comeback win against the Pittsburgh Pirates during the Braves ' run to the National League West Division title .
However , he had to leave the Braves the very next day to report to the Atlanta Falcons because of a clause in his NFL contract and missed the postseason .
Before the 1992 season , Sanders reworked his NFL deal , whereby he still reported to the Falcons for training camp in August , but was allowed to rejoin the Braves for the postseason .
During the 1992 season , his best year in the majors , Sanders hit .304 for the team , stole 26 bases , and led the NL with 14 triples in 97 games .
During the 1989 season , he hit a major league home run and scored a touchdown in the NFL in the same week , becoming the only player ever to do so .
Sanders is also the only man to play in both a Super Bowl and a World Series .
Sanders and Bo Jackson were the pre - eminent multi - sport athletes of their time , but prior to the 1990 season , they had never squared off against each other in a professional game .
That changed in 1990 , when Jackson and Sanders met five times on the diamond — the most memorable of which came on July 17 , in what was billed as " The Bo and Prime Time Show . "
After Bo Jackson 's three - homer night , Sanders said , " He 's
( Bo 's ) one of the best athletes who ever put on a uniform . "
In four games of the 1992 World Series , Sanders batted .533 with 4 runs , 8 hits , 2 doubles , and 1 RBI while playing with a broken bone in his foot .
Despite Sanders ' performance , the Braves ultimately lost to the Toronto Blue Jays in six games .
In Game 3 , he narrowly avoided being a victim of what would have been only the second triple play in World Series history ( following Bill Wambsganss 's unassisted triple play in 1920 ) .
With Sanders on second base and Terry Pendleton on first , David Justice hit a deep fly ball to center field that Blue Jays center fielder Devon White unexpectedly caught with a leaping effort .
Pendleton passed Sanders on the bases for the second out , but umpire Bob Davidson called Sanders safe after he scampered back to second base .
Replays showed that Toronto third baseman Kelly Gruber tagged him on the heel before he returned to second .
In 1997 , Sanders finished second in the NL with 56 stolen bases in 115 games while with the Cincinnati Reds before leaving baseball for three years .
Sanders returned to the Reds in 2001 , but was released after playing in only 29 games and batting just .173 .
Following his release from the Reds , he signed a minor league contract with the Toronto Blue Jays triple - A affiliate , Syracuse Chiefs .
Sanders was hitting .252 for Syracuse before the Washington Redskins found a loophole in his contract which compelled him to return to the Redskins .
Sanders ' football contract had been negotiated to allow for him to play both baseball and football , but the terms of the contract stated that Sanders could miss NFL training camp and the first few games of the season only if he were playing Major League Baseball .
Since he was not then on an MLB roster , Sanders had to leave Syracuse and return to the Redskins so he would not violate his NFL contract .
But before arriving at training camp , Sanders informed Redskins personnel he was retiring from professional baseball .
In his final professional baseball game , Sanders hit a solo home run and an RBI single in Syracuse 's 12 - 6 win over the Toledo Mud Hens .
As those in MLB and the NFL urged Sanders to concentrate on only one sport , he would often explain , " football is my wife and baseball is my mistress . "
PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL CAREER DRAFT AND ATLANTA FALCONS Section::::Professional football career .
Section::::Draft and Atlanta Falcons .
At the 1989 NFL Scouting Combine , Sanders ran a 4.27 second 40-yard dash .
He was the fifth pick overall in the 1989 NFL Draft by the Atlanta Falcons , where he played until 1993 .
Despite fumbling ( and recovering ) his first NFL punt return ( which was re - kicked on a penalty ) , Sanders ran for a touchdown on his second attempt of his first game .
During his time in Atlanta , he intercepted 24 passes ( including a career - high 7 in 1993 ) , three of which he returned for touchdowns .
In 1992 , he also led the league in kickoff return yards ( 1,067 ) , yards per return ( 26.7 ) and return touchdowns ( 2 ) .
On October 11 , 1992 , Sanders played in a Falcons game in Miami and then flew to Pittsburgh , hoping to play in the Braves ' League Championship Series game against the Pirates that evening and become the first athlete to play in two professional leagues in the same day .
Sanders ultimately did not , however , appear in the baseball game that night .
Over his five years with the Falcons , Sanders scored ten touchdowns ( three defensive , three kick returns , two punt returns , and two receptions ) .
SAN FRANCISCO
49ERS Section::::San Francisco 49ers .
After five seasons Sanders signed on to play the 1994 season with the San Francisco 49ers , where he had arguably his best season as a professional football player , recording six interceptions and returning them for an NFL - best and a then - NFL record 303 yards and three touchdowns .
Two of his interceptions were returned for a gain of at least 90 yards , making him the first player to do this in NFL history .
On October 16 , 1994 , Sanders made his dramatic return to the Georgia Dome in a 49er uniform .
After getting into a scuffle with his former Falcon teammate Andre Rison , Sanders intercepted a pass from quarterback Jeff George and returned it 93 yards while mockingly staring down the entire Falcons sideline before high - stepping into the end zone .
Sanders was later voted the 1994 NFL Defensive Player of the Year and recorded an interception in the 49ers 49–26 victory over the San Diego Chargers in Super Bowl XXIX , earning him his first championship ring .
DALLAS COWBOYS Section::::Dallas Cowboys .
Following his successful season with the 49ers , Sanders , along with his agent Eugene Parker , courted numerous teams in need of a cornerback .
The several teams in the " Deion Sweepstakes " , as it was called by the media , were the Philadelphia Eagles , Oakland Raiders , Miami Dolphins , New Orleans Saints , San Francisco 49ers and the Dallas Cowboys , who had lost their starting cornerback Kevin Smith to injury for the rest of the season .
On September 9 , 1995 ( which fell in Week 2 of that NFL season ) , Sanders signed a lucrative contract with the Dallas Cowboys ( seven years , $ 35 million with a $ 12.999 million signing bonus , because owner Jerry Jones was superstitious of the number 13 ) , essentially making him , at the time , the highest - paid defensive player in the NFL .
Sanders later stated in his book Power , Money & Sex :
How Success Almost Ruined My Life that the Oakland Raiders offered him more money than any other team , but he chose to play in Dallas for more time on the offensive side of the ball , a chance to win back - to - back Super Bowls , and because of his friendship with Cowboys wide receiver Michael Irvin .
Arthroscopic surgery kept him sidelined until his debut in Week 9 , which was once again in Atlanta against the Falcons ; the Cowboys won , 28 - 13 .
He went on to help the Cowboys win their third title in four years in Super Bowl XXX against the Pittsburgh Steelers , where he returned a punt for 11 yards and caught a 47-yard reception on offense , setting up Dallas ' first touchdown of the game and a 27–17 victory .
Sanders played four more seasons with Dallas , earning Pro Bowl selection in all of them .
On June 2 , 2000 , he was released in a salary cap move .
WASHINGTON REDSKINS Section::::Washington Redskins .
Soon after being released by the Cowboys , the Washington Redskins and Daniel Snyder signed Sanders to a hefty $ 56 million , 7-year contract .
At the end of the 2000 season and an above - average statistical year , Sanders abruptly retired after only playing one year with the Redskins .
BALTIMORE RAVENS Section::::Baltimore Ravens .
In 2004 , Sanders announced that he was going to end his retirement , after being lured back to football by Ravens cornerback Corey Fuller , linebacker Ray Lewis and best friend Joe Zorovich .
A major reason for doing so was to play with Ray Lewis .
He signed a 1-year deal with the Baltimore Ravens to be a nickelback .
Sanders chose to wear the number 37 , which matched his age at the time , to preemptively let people know that he was well aware of his relative senior status as an NFL player ( additionally , the number 21 , used by Sanders throughout his career , was already being worn by Ravens Pro Bowl cornerback Chris McAlister ) .
Against the Buffalo Bills in Week 7 of 2004 , Sanders scored his ninth career interception return touchdown , moving him into a tie for second place with Ken Houston and Aeneas Williams , and behind Rod Woodson ( with 12 ) for all - time in the statistical category .
In January 2006 , after playing two seasons as a corner and safety for Baltimore in which the Ravens did not qualify for the postseason , Sanders once again retired from the NFL and became an analyst for the NFL Network .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
During his 14-year NFL career , Sanders was a perennial All - Pro and one of the strongest pass defenders ever to play the game .
However , he was also known for being a relatively poor tackler and not much of a factor in run support .
Sanders also occasionally lined up with his team 's offense .
During the 1996 season , Sanders skipped the baseball season , concentrating on football , and attended the first NFL training camp of his career to better familiarize himself with the nuances of the wide receiver position .
He became only the second two - way starter ( after the Cardinals ' Roy Green ) in the NFL since Chuck Bednarik for the first half of the season due .
Sanders is the only man to play in both a Super Bowl and a World Series , to hit an MLB home run and score an NFL touchdown in the same week , and to have both a reception and an interception in the Super Bowl .
He is one of two players to score an NFL touchdown six different ways .
During his career , Sanders intercepted 53 passes for 1,331 yards ( a 25.1 yards per return average ) , recovered four fumbles for 15 yards , returned 155 kickoffs for 3,523 yards , gained 2,199 yards on 212 punt returns , and caught 60 passes for 784 yards .
Sanders amassed 7,838 all - purpose yards and scored 22 touchdowns :
nine interception returns , six punt returns , three kickoff returns , three receiving , and one fumble recovery .
His 19 defensive and return touchdowns was an NFL record ( now held by Devin Hester with 20 return touchdowns ) .
In the postseason , Sanders added 5 more interceptions , as well as 3 receptions for 95 yards , 4 carries for 39 yards , and two touchdowns ( one rushing and one receiving ) .
He was selected to eight Pro Bowls and won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award in 1994 .
* College Football News named Sanders # 8 in its list of 100 Greatest College Football Players of All - Time .
*
The Sporting News named Sanders # 37 in their Top 100 Football Players of the Century released in 1999 .
* ESPN named Sanders # 74 in its list of the 100 Great Athletes of the Century released in 1999 .
* NFL.com named Sanders # 34 on NFL 's Top 100 list released in late 2010 *
On November 11 , 2010 , Sanders was inducted into the Atlanta Falcons ' Ring of Honor .
*
On February 5 , 2011 , Sanders was announced as a Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee in his first year of eligibility .
*
On May 17 , 2011 , Sanders was announced as a College Football Hall of Fame inductee .
*
On August 6 , 2011 , Sanders was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame .
Sanders also had a rushing TD in the playoffs ( against the Philadelphia Eagles in January 1996 ) .
This makes him ( including post season )
one of only two players in NFL history ( Bill Dudley being the other ) to score a touchdown six different ways ( interception return , punt return , kickoff return , receiving , rushing , and a fumble recovery ) .
On February 6 , 2011 , at Super Bowl XLV in Arlington , Texas , Sanders performed the pre - game coin toss .
Sanders did not attend classes or take final exams during the fall semester of his senior year at Florida State , yet played in the Sugar Bowl against Auburn .
This caused the Florida State Legislature to create the ' Deion Sanders rule ' , whereby a football athlete at any state university could not play in a bowl game if he failed to successfully complete the previous semester .
In 1995 , he signed with the Dallas Cowboys for a minimum yearly base salary and a nearly $ 13 million signing bonus in an attempt to circumvent the NFL 's salary cap .
This caused the NFL to institute its own ' Deion Sanders rule ' whereby a prorated portion of a player 's signing bonus counted against the salary cap .
MEDIA APPEARANCES AND POP CULTURE FAME Section::::Media appearances and pop culture fame .
Sanders became known for sporting a " do - rag " or bandana and for his high - stepping into the end zone followed by his touchdown dance celebrations .
At the end of his Hall of Fame speech , he put a bandana on his bust .
His " Prime Time " nickname was given to him by a friend and high - school teammate , Florida Gators defensive back Richard Fain .
The two played pickup basketball games together during the prime time television hour , and Sanders ' athletic display during those games earned him the nickname .
His other nickname is " Neon Deion " .
Following his first Super Bowl victory with the San Francisco 49ers , Sanders hosted Saturday Night Live , broadcast on February 18 , 1995 .
In January 1995 , Sanders became the official spokesman of the Sega Sports line of video games .
Sanders has also appeared in television commercials for such companies as Nike , Pepsi , Burger King , Pizza Hut , and American Express .
These included a Road Runner Pepsi ad , with Sanders as Wile E. Coyote , and a Pizza Hut commercial in which he appeared with Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones .
He also makes a cameo as himself in the film Celtic Pride .
Sanders , known for his custom - made showy suits and flashy jewelry , frequently capitalized on his image .
On December 26 , 1994 , Sanders released Prime Time , a rap album on
Bust It Records ( MC Hammer 's label , of whom Sanders is a friend ) that featured the singles " Must Be the Money " and " Prime Time Keeps on Tickin ' " .
The album was universally panned by critics , and despite Sanders ' fame , neither the album nor its singles charted in the Top 40 .
Sanders also appeared in Hammer 's " Too Legit to Quit " music video , and his alter - ego " Prime Time " showed up in Hammer 's " Pumps and a Bump " video .
Hammer , a big sports fan , had launched a new enterprise during his career called Roll Wit It Entertainment & Sports Management and boasted such clients as Evander Holyfield , Deion Sanders and Reggie Brooks .
In 1995 , Hammer released " Straight to My Feet " ( with Deion Sanders ) from the Street Fighter soundtrack ( released in December 1994 ) .
The song charted # 57 in the UK .
After retiring from the NFL in 2004 , Sanders worked as a pre - game commentator for CBS ' The NFL Today until 2004 , when contract negotiations failed .
Sanders turned down a 30 % salary increase demanding to be paid $ 2.5 million , the highest of any NFL TV analyst .
He was replaced by Shannon Sharpe .
During Sanders ' run , he participated in several sketches .
The first was " Primetime and 21st " , a mock street corner where Sanders ( not yet a regular panelist ) would give his opinions .
Another was his " Sanders Claus " persona , one of numerous sketches that involved young kids in football jerseys , representing NFL players , receiving a sarcastic gift from Sanders .
Deion actually debuted as " Sanders Claus " in a set of Nike commercials .
Sanders still takes presents at Christmas time to local children 's hospitals in his area dressed as " Sanders Claus " .
Sanders frequently made guest appearances on ESPN , especially on the ESPN Radio Dallas affiliate , and briefly hosted a show called The New American Sportsman .
He also hosted the 2002 Miss USA pageant .
Sanders also was co - host of the 2004 GMA Music Awards broadcast , taped in late April 2004 , and slated for air on UPN in May 2004 .
When negotiations with fellow Viacom property CBS failed ( see above ) two weeks before the broadcast , and he signed a deal with ESPN , UPN promptly canceled the broadcast , and the show aired on the i Network in December 2004 ( both UPN and CBS are now owned by CBS Corporation ) .
Sanders works at NFL Network as an analyst on a number of the network 's shows .
Prior to the Sunday night game , Sanders , alongside host Rich Eisen and Steve Mariucci , breaks down all the action from the afternoon games on NFL GameDay .
At the conclusion of all the action on Sunday , Sanders , Mariucci , Michael Irvin and host Fran Charles recap the day 's action with highlights , analysis and postgame interviews .
For the 2010 season , Sanders joined Eisen , Mariucci and Marshall Faulk on the road for Thursday Night Kickoff presented by Lexus , NFL Network 's two - hour pregame show leading into Thursday Night Football .
The group broadcasts live from the stadium two hours prior to all eight live Thursday Night Football games and returns for the Sprint halftime show and Kay Jewelers postgame show .
Sanders also has a segment called " Let 's Go Primetime " on NFL Network .
In 2008 , Sanders and his wife starred in the reality show , centering on them and their five children living in the small town of Prosper , Texas .
Sanders appeared as himself in the fourth season of The League , playing a prospective buyer of Andre 's apartment .
In 2014 , Sanders was featured in an episode of Running Wild with Bear Grylls , where he and Grylls hiked in the desert of southern Utah for two days , rappelling down canyon walls and later climbing up a mesa .
Sanders served as an alumni captain for Team Sanders in the 2014 Pro Bowl .
In 2014 , he rejoined CBS Sports as a studio analyst for Thursday games only .
He still works for the NFL Network on Sundays .
Sanders and his girlfriend Tracey Edmonds were featured together on an episode of Tiny House Nation that first aired on January 21 , 2017 .
OTHER BUSINESS AND ENTERTAINMENT VENTURES
Section::::Other business and entertainment ventures .
In addition to his sports career , Sanders also had a career in music as a rapper .
He released his debut album , Prime Time , through Hammer 's Bust
It Records label via Capitol Records , in 1994 .
Sanders moved on to other ventures after his retirement .
In 2003 , Sanders took interest in Devin Hester , a return specialist from Miami .
Sanders mentored Hester , counseling and advising him during various points of his collegiate career .
The Chicago Bears drafted Hester in the second round of the 2006 NFL Draft .
Since then , Hester has broken the record for the most total returns for touchdowns in NFL history with 15 punt returns and 5 kick off returns .
Hester has cited Sanders as one of his major inspirations and idols , and thanked him for his training and advice .
Hester , also known as " Anytime " , occasionally performs Sanders ' signature touchdown dance and high - steps in homage to his mentor .
Sanders also tried to adopt a high school running back , Noel Devine , who was one of the top recruits in 2007 .
Sanders was advised against this , but responded , " He does n't have parents ; they died .
God put this young man in my heart .
This is not about sports .
This is about a kid 's life . "
He now mentors Devine , and was a factor in Devine 's extended wait to sign a letter - of - intent to West Virginia University .
Devine eventually signed to play football for the Mountaineers .
Sanders has also been a mentor to Baltimore Ravens wide receiver Michael Crabtree , as well as former Dallas Cowboys wide receiver , Dez Bryant .
In January 2004 , Sanders was hired as an assistant coach to the Dallas Fury , a women 's professional basketball team in the National Women 's Basketball League , even though Sanders had never played organized basketball either in college or the professional level .
On September 2 , 2005 , in response to the after - effects of Hurricane Katrina , Sanders challenged all professional athletes in the four major sports to donate $ 1,000 each to relief efforts , hoping to raise between $ 1.5 and $ 3 million total .
Sanders said " Through unity , we can touch thousands ...
I have friends and relatives that feel this pain .
Help in any way you can . "
In April 2006 , Sanders became an owner of the Austin Wranglers , an Arena Football League team .
Sanders has occasionally served as a celebrity spokesperson , such as representing Monitronics , a security system firm , at an industry conference in the spring of 2010 .
In 2012 , he co - founded Prime Prep Academy , a grouping of charter schools in Texas .
The school was plagued by ethical , legal , and financial issues , and closed on January 30 , 2015 , due to financial insolvency .
DISCOGRAPHY US Hip - HopUS Heatseekers PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Sanders has been married twice — to Carolyn Chambers ( 1989–1998 ) , with whom he has two children and Pilar Biggers - Sanders ( 1999–2013 ) with whom he has three children .
Sanders , along with J.M. Black , published his autobiography , Power , Money & Sex :
How Success Almost Ruined My Life .
World Publishing 1998 .
The book was inspired after he began counseling with Bishop T.D. Jakes .
He notes his agent Eugene E. Parker as another person who influenced his life .
He appeared with his family on the NBC show Celebrity Family Feud which premiered on June 24 , 2008 .
On September 22 , 2011 , he served Pilar Biggers - Sanders with divorce papers .
He then backed away from the story and denied he and Pilar would be divorcing .
By December 17 , 2011 , he had followed through with filing for divorce .
On March 12 , 2013 , he was awarded primary custody of his two sons and Pilar was awarded primary custody of their daughter .
However , one week later , a judge awarded custody of their daughter to him as well .
During the divorce battle , Pilar made several accusations of abuse against him on social media and in interviews , leading him to file a Defamation of Character lawsuit against her .
In 2015 , he seemed to have won when the court awarded him a $ 2.2 million judgment against his ex - wife in the case .
However , in August , 2017 , on appeal the case went against him .
Sanders is presented as a devout Christian speaker with a fee range of $ 30,001-$50,000 .
He has been in a relationship with Tracey Edmonds since 2012 .
Sanders has made an effort to coach at several different stops .
His first being with the charter school Prime Prep Academy in 2012 which he helped found , but was later fired as the coach after a school staffer alleged Sanders assaulted the staffer .
Sanders denied the claim and the charter school later shut down in 2015 due to financial mismanagement .
In 2015 , Sanders was named the CEO of FOCUS Academies and granted the head coaching position at the Triple A Academy where Sanders led them to face his alma mater North Fort Myers high school in Florida and featured a key matchup between several ranked recruits ..
On August 17 , 2017 it was announced by CBS Sports that Deion Sanders would be switching coaching positions at a new high school to become the offensive coordinator at Trinity Christian - Cedar Hill high school in Cedar Hill , Texas .
The move was significant for Sanders as both his sons play at the high school .
Sanders will serve on the staff as offensive coordinator under former Dallas Cowboy Aveion Cason .
SEE ALSO
* List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders
* List of athletes who played in Major League Baseball and the National Football League
*
Leon Sandcastle
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Baltimore Ravens profile ( archived from 2005 )