ALCOHOL INHALATION
Alcohol inhalation is a method of administering alcohol ( also known formally as ethanol ) or alcoholic drinks directly into the respiratory system , with aid of a vaporizing or nebulizing device .
It is chiefly applied for recreational use , when it is also referred to as alcohol smoking , but it has medical applications for testing on laboratory rats and treatment of pulmonary edema in humans .
RECREATIONAL USE Section::::Recreational use .
To inhale alcohol , it must be first converted from liquid into gaseous state ( vapor ) or aerosol ( mist ) .
For recreational use , a variety of methods have been invented .
Alcohol can be vaporized by pouring it over dry ice in a narrow container and inhaling with a straw .
Another method is to pour alcohol in a corked bottle with a pipe , and then use a bicycle pump to make a spray .
Alcohol can be vaporized using a simple container and open - flame heater .
Medical devices such as asthma nebulizers and inhalers were also reported as means of application .
The practice gained popularity in 2004 , with marketing of the device dubbed AWOL
( Alcohol without liquid ) , a play on the military term AWOL
( Absent Without Leave ) .
AWOL , created by British businessman Dominic Simler , was first introduced in Asia and Europe , and then in United States in August 2004 .
AWOL was used by nightclubs , at gatherings and parties , and it garnered attraction as a novelty , as people ' enjoyed passing it around in a group ' .
AWOL was gimmicked as an alcohol " vaporizer " , implying that it would heat the liquid until it entered a gaseous state , but is in fact a nebulizer , a machine that agitates the liquid into an aerosol .
AWOL 's official website states that " AWOL and AWOL 1 are powered by Electrical Air Compressors while AWOL 2 and AWOL 3 are powered by electrical oxygen generators " , which refer to a couple of mechanisms used by the nebulizer drug delivery device for inhalation .
Although the AWOL machine is marketed as having no downsides , such as the lack of calories or hangovers , Amanda Shaffer of Slate describes these claims as " dubious at best " .
Although inhaled alcohol does reduce the caloric content , the savings are minimal .
After expressed safety and health concerns , sale or use of AWOL machines was banned in a number of American states .
The AWOL device was later followed by new products for alcohol inhalation , such as " Vaportini " , created in 2009 , which uses simple thermal vaporization .
EFFECTS AND HEALTH CONCERNS Section::::Effects and health concerns .
There are possible health and safety risks of inhaling alcohol vapor .
Inhalation devices make it " substantially easier to overdose on alcohol " than drinking , because the alcohol bypasses the stomach and liver and goes directly into the bloodstream , and because the user does not have a reliable way of determining how much alcohol they have taken in .
Inhaled alcohol can not be purged from the body by vomiting , which is the body 's main protection against alcohol poisoning .
Inhaled alcohol can dry out nasal passages and make them more susceptible to infection .
There is also a potential increased risk of addiction .
MEDICAL APPLICATIONS Section::::Medical applications .
Inhalation of vapor obtained by nebulization of water and ethanol in oxygen has been used in treatment of pulmonary edema in humans .
Alcohol vapor acts as an anti - foaming agent in the lungs , so the sputum becomes more liquid , and can be easily expelled .
The method has also been used to reduce the alcohol withdrawal syndrome in patients who had intestinal tract surgeries .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
In the United States , many state legislatures have banned alcohol inhalation machines .
Support for such legislation comes from groups fighting underage drinking and drunk driving , including alcohol companies such as Diageo and industry groups such as the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States ( DISCUS ) , among others .
SEE ALSO
* Carbogen * Nebulizer REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Campbell , Lynn .
Opposition mounts to alcohol inhalers .
Des Moines Register , February 21 , 2005 .
* Currier , Joel .
Lawmakers take sober view of vaporized - alcohol machine .
St. Louis Post - Dispatch , February 20 , 2005 .
* Diageo .
Diageo Supports Ban on " Alcohol Without Liquid
" ( AWOL ) Machine .
Diageo press release , January 26 , 2005 .
* Kliner , Kate .
Liquor minus liquid : Why a new way of consuming alcohol may never make it to Tempe .
Arizona State University Devil , February 10 , 2005 .
* Monticelli , Sergio .
Corn craze :
Ethanol huffing sweeps Stanford .
Stanford Daily , March 7 , 2016 .
* AWOL - inhaling alcohol ( gizmag ) * Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research - Can calories from ethanol contribute to body weight preservation by malnourished rats ?
* Perspectives : do alcohol calories count ?
Resting energy expenditure and substrate oxidation in human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV)-infected asymptomatic men : HIV affects host m ...