DRINKING STRAW
A drinking straw or drinking tube is a small pipe that allows its user to more conveniently consume a beverage .
A thin tube of paper , plastic ( such as polypropylene and polystyrene ) , or other material is used by placing one end in the mouth and the other in the beverage .
A combination of muscular action of the tongue and cheeks reduces air pressure in the mouth and above the liquid in the straw , whereupon atmospheric pressure forces the beverage through the straw .
Drinking straws can be straight or have an angle - adjustable bellows segment .
Plastic straws do not account for a significant amount of unrecycled plastic waste .
Desite that , numerous campaigns in the 2010s have led to companies considering a switch to paper straws and countries imposing bans on plastic straws .
However , 90 % of all ocean plastic comes from just 10 rivers in Asia and Africa .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first known straws were made by the Sumerians , and were used for drinking beer , probably to avoid the solid byproducts of fermentation that sink to the bottom .
The oldest drinking straw in existence , found in a Sumerian tomb dated 3,000 BCE , was a gold tube inlaid with the precious blue stone lapis lazuli .
Argentines and their neighbors have , for several hundred years , used ( for drinking mate tea )
a similar metallic device called a bombilla , that acts as both a straw and a sieve .
The use of plastic straws became popular following World War 2 due to the inexpensiveness of the materials , as well as the cheapness of the drinks and/or meals that were provided with the plastic straws .
RYEGRASS STRAW Section::::Ryegrass straw .
In the 1800s , the rye grass straw came into fashion because it was cheap and soft , but it had an unfortunate tendency to turn to mush in liquid .
WAX PAPER STRAW Section::::Wax paper straw .
Marvin C. Stone patented the modern drinking straw , made of paper , in 1888 , to address the shortcomings of the rye grass straw .
He came upon the idea while drinking a mint julep on a hot day in Washington , D.C. ; the taste of the rye was mixing with the drink and giving it a grassy taste , which he found unsatisfactory .
He wound paper around a pencil to make a thin tube , slid out the pencil from one end , and applied glue between the strips .
He later refined it by building a machine that would coat the outside of the paper with wax to hold it together , so the glue would n't dissolve in bourbon .
Early paper straws had a narrow bore similar to that of the grass stems then in common use .
It was common to use two of them , to reduce the effort needed to take each sip .
( The cocktail straw , which is sometimes used in pairs , may be derived from such early straws . )
Modern plastic straws are made with a larger bore , and only one is needed for ease of drinking .
TYPES *
A basic drinking straw is straight for its full length .
* A bendable straw or " bendy straw " ( known in the industry as an " articulated straw " ) has a concertina - type hinge near the top for convenience .
This variation was invented by Joseph Friedman in 1937 .
* Candy straws , such as licorice straws ( or lico - straws ) , are made from some type of chewy candy .
* cereal straws are made by Kellogg 's .
* " color - changer " straws change color
when cold ( or hot ) liquid passes through them .
At some restaurants , frozen beverages like slush or frappes are served with color changing straws .
Many of these are larger in diameter than typical straws to aid in drinking the thicker beverages .
* A " crazy ( or " krazy " ) straw " is hard , transparent or translucent plastic and has a number of twists and turns at the top .
When liquid is sucked through the straw , it quickly flows through the winding path , creating a mildly amusing spectacle , popular with children .
The crazy straw may have some therapeutic benefit for people with autism .
* Extendo - straws come in small plastic wrappings like miniature straws , but can extend to reach the bottom of the carton .
* Flavor straws are a form of drinking straw with a flavoring included , designed to make drinking milk more pleasant for children .
They were first marketed in the United States in 1956 as Flav - R - Straws .
In recent years , newer variations of the original idea have been resurrected in forms such as Sipahhs , and Magic Milk Straws that contain hundreds of flavored pellets encased within a stiff plastic straw .
* A miniature straw is often attached to a drink box .
* " Sanitary " straws are individually wrapped to avoid contamination .
Straws were originally marketed as a means for people to reduce the risk of contracting an illness from improperly washed containers , glasses , or cups .
* A spoon straw features a cut - away shape at one end that functions as a miniature spoon .
It is intended for slush drinks and milkshakes .
Their original purpose was to avoid ice clogging up the submerged end of the straw .
* A wide straw is used for sipping bubble tea .
The larger diameter is necessary to accommodate the drink 's characteristic tapioca pearls , and can also be used for stirring .
The tip of these straws are sometimes cut at an angle creating a point .
This allows the straw to puncture the plastic cover of the cup .
Wider than normal straws are said to give a better taste .
McDonald 's says they use wider straws "
so all that Coke taste can hit all your taste buds " .
* An Edible and Compostable straw made by SORBOS .
They are aromatized and flavoured .
MATERIALS
* Polystyrene straws
* Polypropylene is becoming favored over polystyrene for manufacturing plastic drinking straws as polystyrene is brittle and tends to crack easily .
Polystyrene is also denser than water , causing straws to sink when placed into beverages .
Polypropylene straws , by contrast , are much more durable and do not sink .
* Silicone is a newer material used in drinking straws .
Silicone straws are marketed for their freezability , invulnerability to cracking or peeling , and insulation for hot and cold drinks .
* Metal straws , popular among campers , are made from stainless steel , aluminum , and even titanium - carry - cases with straw cleaning - brushes are available
* Paper has been used and is used more frequently , as unrecycled plastic waste from straws has been seen to be a problem .
* Polylactic acid ( PLA ) , a biodegradable plastic , require 68 % fewer fossil fuel resources to produce than plastic and are compostable but require very specific conditions to break down fully ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
Section::::Environmental impact .
Plastic drinking straw production contributes to petroleum consumption , and the used straws become part of global plastic pollution when discarded , most after a single use .
One anti - straw advocacy group has estimated that about 500 million straws are used daily in the United States alone – an average 1.6 straws per capita per day .
This statistic has been criticized as inaccurate , because it is a guess made by Milo Cress , who was 9 years old at the time , after some phone conversations with straw manufacturers .
This figure has been widely cited by major news organizations .
In 2017 the market research firm Fredonia Group estimated the number to be 390 million .
The 10 largest emitters of oceanic plastic pollution ( which does include plastic straws ) are , from the most to the least , China , Indonesia , Philippines , Vietnam , Sri Lanka , Thailand , Egypt , Malaysia , Nigeria , and Bangladesh , By weight , drinking straws account for approximately 0.022 % of the plastic waste that gets dumped in bodies of water each year .
The nonbiodegradable plastic material of plastic drinking straws is also harmful due to the microplastics that come from them .
As plastics enter into the environment from being improperly disposed of , they can be transported via water into soil ecosystems , and others , where they break down into smaller , more hazardous pieces than the already harmful plastic straw .
Straws are typically made from polypropylene , mixed with colorants and plasticizers , and do not biodegrade in the environment .
Since the material is strong it can however be reused or recycled into other products .
Waste straws in Uganda are collected from beer and soft drink depots , cleaned , and woven into mats for picnics and prayers or joined to form bags .
Environmentally more friendly alternatives to plastic straws , some even reusable , exist , although not always readily available : * Bamboo straws
* Glass straws
* Metal straws * Stainless steel straws - cases with straw cleaning - brushes are available * Straw straws * Paper straws * Pasta straws
* Silicone straws * BPA - free straws Environmental groups have encouraged consumers to object to " forced " inclusion of plastic straws with food service .
Campaigns advocate providing a non - plastic straw to consumers who request one , especially as some people have disabilities that prevent sipping from the rim .
Pro - environment critics say that plastic straw bans are insufficient to address the issue of plastic waste , as mostly symbolic .
People with disabilities worry that banning plastic straws will make less accessible and many argue that alternatives to plastic straws ( metal , paper , glass etc . ) are n't good enough alternatives to plastics as they can be choking hazards , have allergy risks and be inflexible .
The movement follows the discovery of plastic particles in oceanic garbage patches and larger plastic waste - reduction efforts that focused on banning plastic bags in some jurisdictions .
It has been speeded by viral videos , including one featuring a sea turtle bleeding as a plastic straw is removed from its nostril .
PLASTIC STRAW BANS AND PROPOSALS CANADA
Section::::Plastic straw bans and proposals .
Section::::Canada .
After the British proposition , fellow Commonwealth nation Canada was considering banning the straws too .
An unofficial online survey showed that over 70 % of voters agreed with a plastic straw ban .
Starting in 2019 , a ban of plastic straws will go into effect in the City of Vancouver , due to a vote in May 2018 that included banning other single - use items .
EUROPEAN UNION Section::::European Union .
In May 2018 , the European Union proposed a ban on single - use plastics including straws , cotton buds , cutlery , balloon sticks and drink stirrers .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
On April 19 , 2018 , ahead of Earth Day , a proposal to phase out single - use plastics was announced during the meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government .
This will include plastic drinking straws , which can not be recycled and contribute to ocean deterioration , damaging ecosystems and wildlife .
It is estimated that as of 2018 , about 23 million straws are used and discarded daily in the UK .
A few months before , Queen Elizabeth II banned the plastic straws and other one - use plastic items from her palaces .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In 2015 , Williamstown , Massachusetts banned straws that are not recyclable or compostable as part of its Article 42 polystyrene regulations .
On November 7 , 2017 , the city of Santa Cruz , California implemented a ban on all non - recyclable to - go containers , straws , and lids but allowed for 6 months for all businesses to come into compliance before enforcement would occur .
On January 1 , 2018 , the city of Alameda , California citing the Santa Cruz effort , implemented an immediate ban on all straws , except if requested by a customer , and gave business until July 1 , 2018 when it would be required that all straws to be of compostable paper and that all other to - go containers be recyclable .
In the first half of 2018 , three towns in Massachusetts banned petrochemical plastic straws directly in the case of Provincetown , and as part of broader sustainable food packaging laws in Andover and Brookline .
The city of Seattle implemented a ban on non - compostable disposable straws on July 1 , 2018 .
A drinking straw ban has been proposed in New York City since May 2018 .
Local regulations have also been passed in Malibu , California ; Davis , California ; San Luis Obispo , California ; Miami Beach , Florida ; and Fort Myers , Florida .
A statewide California law restricting the providing of single - use plastic straws will go into effect on January 1 , 2019 .
Under the law , restaurants will only be allowed to provide single - use plastic straws upon request .
The law will apply to sit - down restaurants but exempts fast - food restaurants , delis , coffee shops , and restaurants that do takeout only .
The law will not apply to to - go cups and takeaway drinks .
A restaurant will receive warnings for its first two violations , then a $ 25 per day fine for each subsequent violation , up to a maximum of $ 300 in a year .
In a statement released upon his signing the legislation into law , Governor Jerry Brown said " It is a very small step to make a customer who wants a plastic straw ask for it .
And it might make them pause and think again about an alternative .
But one thing is clear , we must find ways to reduce and eventually eliminate single - use plastic products . "
VOLUNTARY CONVERSIONS
Section::::Voluntary conversions .
After consideration of a ban in the UK , in 2018 , after a two month trial of paper straws at a number of outlets in the UK , McDonald 's announced they would be switching to paper straws for all locations in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
and testing the switch in U.S. locations in June 2018 .
A month after the Vancouver ban passed ( but before it took effect )
Canada 's second - largest fast food chain , A&W announced they would have plastic straws fully phased out by January 2019 in all of their locations .
Various independent restaurants have also stopped using plastic straws .
Starbucks announced conversion by 2020 to no - straw lids for all cold drinks except for frappucinos , which will be served with straws made from paper or other sustainable materials .
However , the new lids will actually have more plastic than the old lid - straw combination .
Hyatt Hotels announced straws would be provided by request only , starting September 1 , 2018 .
Royal Caribbean plans to offer only paper straws on request by 2019 , and IKEA said it would eliminate all single - use plastic items by 2020 .
Other conversions include Waitrose , London City Airport , and Burger King UK stores starting September 2018 .
A few other cruise lines , air lines , beverage companies , and hotels , have also made partial or complete reductions , but most companies in those industries have not , as of May 2018 .
FICTION Section::::Fiction .
Nicholson Baker 's novel , The Mezzanine ( 1988 ) , includes a detailed discussion of various types of drinking straws experienced by the narrator and their relative merits .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of beer and bread ( and Sumerian straws )
* How plastic drinking straws are made *
# stopsucking campaign