CHEVROLET EQUINOX
The Chevrolet Equinox is a series of mid - size , later compact crossover SUV from Chevrolet , introduced in 2004 for the 2005 model year .
FIRST GENERATION ( 2005–2009 )
Section::::First generation ( 2005–2009 ) .
The Chevrolet Equinox was introduced in 2004 for the 2005 model year .
Originally , the Equinox was shown at the 2003 Detroit Auto Show .
The Pontiac Torrent was introduced in 2005 for the 2006 model year .
The Pontiac Torrent was originally shown at the 2005 Los Angeles Auto Show .
Riding on the GM Theta platform , the unibody is mechanically similar to the Saturn Vue and the Suzuki XL7 .
However , the Equinox and the Torrent are larger than the Vue , riding on a wheelbase , longer than the Vue .
Front - wheel drive is standard , with optional all - wheel drive .
They are not designed for serious off - roading like the truck - based Chevrolet Tahoe and Chevrolet TrailBlazer .
For the 2006 model year , GM updated the Equinox for the first time , as GM badges were added on the front doors .
The first generation Equinox and Torrent were produced exclusively at the CAMI Automotive GM / Suzuki joint venture plant in Ingersoll , Ontario , Canada .
The 3.4 L LNJ V6 engine is made in China ( by Shanghai GM ) , while the Aisin AF33 transmission is made in Japan .
Starting with the 2008 model year , the Equinox Sport and Pontiac GXP were available with a 3.6 L V6 engine that was made in the United States .
Production ended in May 2009 .
The Chevrolet Equinox was not sold in Mexico during the 2009 model year .
PONTIAC TORRENT Section::::Pontiac Torrent .
While the Torrent shares its basic body structure and mechanicals with the Equinox , it does have a different front and rear styling .
The suspension ( FE2 ) and electronic power steering were both modified to feel firmer and sportier .
The Torrent was discontinued after the 2009 model year as part of the discontinuation of the Pontiac brand , with the last one rolling off the assembly line on September 2 , 2009 .
A Buick Theta crossover SUV was to be made , effectively taking place of the Pontiac Torrent .
Instead , GM replaced the Torrent with the GMC Terrain , which shares the Theta platform with the second generation Equinox .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Years !
Engine !
Power !
Torque 2005–20093.4 L LNJ V6
2008–20093.6
L LY7 V6 SPORT TRIMS Section::::Sport Trims .
For the 2008 and 2009 model years , GM offered sportier versions of the Equinox and Torrent ; called Sport and GXP , respectively .
Featuring the new 3.6 LY7 DOHC V6 engine paired with a new 6-speed automatic transmission ( with Manual Tap Up / Down shifting capability ) .
This larger and more powerful ( or 40 % increase ) engine allowed acceleration from 0 to in under seven seconds .
These models also received a lowered ride height with a performance - tuned suspension and unique front and rear body kits .
The lower stance is accented by the 18 inch 5-spoke chrome wheels and the absence of the roof rack , giving them a smoother design flow compared to the standard models .
The GXP had twin hood scoops , hydraulic power - assisted steering ( as opposed to the electric power - assisted standard Torrent ) , improved interior trim with unique gauges , and a dual chrome - tipped exhaust .
Optional features included navigation , heated sport leather seats , DVD entertainment system , a sunroof and all - wheel drive .
GM stated the Equinox Sport was the first vehicle to reflect its more cautious naming standards .
Instead of using the Super Sport badge as it had in the past on higher performance vehicles ( such as this one ) , GM opted to reserve the SS nomenclature for special models worthy of its namesake .
GM also prominently promoted the GXP in television advertisements by touting its horsepower advantage over the BMW X3 , in an effort to brand Pontiac more as a direct , low - cost rival to BMW .
EQUINOX
LTZ Section::::Equinox LTZ .
An Equinox LTZ model was added .
It is differentiated by its 17-inch chrome - clad aluminum wheels , bright chrome door handles and bright chrome luggage rack side rail inserts .
Standard interior features include heated front seats , leather seating inserts , head curtain side impact air bags , AM / FM stereo with six - disc in - dash CD changer and MP3 CD playback capability , and a Pioneer premium seven - speaker audio system .
Equinox LTZ came with the same ride and handling package as LS and LT models .
2008
MODEL FEATURES Section::::2008 model features .
Changes to 2008 Equinox and Torrent models included the relocation of the compass readout from the inside rearview mirror to the driver information center ( on models so - equipped ) , and three new exterior colors : Navy Blue Metallic , Black Granite Metallic , and Golden Teal Metallic .
OnStar was standard on the 2008 Equinox and Torrent .
This system included for Turn - by - Turn Navigation , the first factory - installed , fully integrated GPS navigation system from OnStar .
The 2008 models included an enhanced ride and handling package with stiffer shocks , bushings , and tuned spring rates .
Four - wheel disc brakes with ABS and tire pressure monitoring system was standard .
An Electronic Trailer Sway Control was introduced that integrated into the standard StabiliTrak system .
This can detect the occurrence of trailer sway that may be caused by improper trailer weight balance or excessive vehicle speed .
If the trailer begins to sway , StabiliTrak will apply brakes individually , independent of the driver controlling the brake pedal , to assist stabilizing the vehicle .
Under these conditions a light will flash to signal the driver to reduce vehicle speed .
If trailer sway continues , the system will reduce engine torque to reduce the speed of the vehicle .
Head curtain side air bags were optional .
OLYMPIC - THEMED SPECIAL EDITIONS
Section::::Olympic - themed Special Editions .
For the 2008 model year , in tribute to the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympic Games , the Equinox and Torrent each received a special edition ; the Team Canada Edition and the Podium Edition , respectively .
This package added chrome - clad wheels , sunroof , premium sound system , and special badging .
These trims were sold only in Canada .
SECOND GENERATION ( 2010–2017 )
Section::::Second generation ( 2010–2017 ) .
The second generation Equinox was announced by GM on December 21 , 2008 , and debuted at the 2009 North American International Auto Show in Detroit .
The 2010 Equinox went on sale in June 2009 .
It is built on a stiffened version of the same " Theta " platform used in the previous model .
The second generation Equinox was built with a pair of upgraded gasoline direct injection engines , with better fuel economy claimed by GM .
Earlier 2010 models had the GM badges on the front doors , but were later deleted .
Marketing of Chevrolet Equinox resumed in Mexico during late November 2009 , for the 2010 model year after a year of absence .
Sales of the Chevrolet Equinox to Mexico were stopped after the 2011 model year .
However , in October 2015 the Equinox was reintroduced in Mexico to replace the Captiva Sport for the 2016 model year .
The second generation Equinox is available standard with a 2.4-liter I4 engine produced in Tonawanda , New York and Spring Hill , Tennessee , with a 3.0-liter V6 engine is available as an option .
Both powertrains contain six - speed automatics and optional all - wheel - drive systems , with front - wheel - drive being standard .
The second generation Equinox is Chevrolet 's third best - selling vehicle in North America , after the Silverado and Cruze , respectively .
MODEL YEAR CHANGES 2013 Section::::Model year changes .
Section::::2013 .
For the 2013 model year , a new direct - injected 3.6L V-6 became available on LT and LTZ models , providing 301 horsepower ( 225 kW ) and 272 lb.-ft . of torque ( 369 Nm ) .
This engine offered 14 percent more horsepower and 22 percent more torque than the previous 3.0L V-6 , with the same EPA - estimated fuel economy .
A new FE2 suspension package was offered , matched with the 3.6L V-6 and packaged with 18-inch or 19-inch chrome - clad wheels on LTZ models .
The 2013 model year introduced Chevrolet MyLink telematics system to the Equinox .
Additional new features for 2013 models included a dual - player DVD entertainment system , a Power convenience package , a safety package with lane departure warning system , forward collision warning and rear park assist , as well as three new exterior colors ; Champagne Silver Metallic , Atlantis Metallic and Tungsten Metallic . 2014 Section::::2014 .
For the 2014 model year , chrome - clad wheels became standard on LTZ models , and two new exterior colors , Red Rock Metallic and Silver Topaz Metallic became available .
2015
Section::::2015 .
The 2015 model year saw the addition of OnStar with 4 G LTE and built - in Wi - Fi hotspot , which included a 3GB / three - month data trial , standard on LT and LTZ models , with navigation available on LTZ and 2LT .
Blue Velvet Metallic and Sea Grass Metallic were added as the list of available exterior colors .
2016
Section::::2016 .
For 2016 , the Chevrolet Equinox received its first mid - cycle refresh along with its cousin the GMC Terrain , which was unveiled at the 2015 Chicago Auto Show on February 12 , 2015 .
The refreshed Equinox received a new grille , headlights and front fascia as well as reworked tail lights .
In the interior , the Equinox gained a new gear selector , a second storage shelf underneath the dashboard , as well as deletion of the door lock buttons from the dashboard .
A new level trim , L , was introduced as the base level , as LS was made the second level , followed by LT and another new trim Premier ( replacing LTZ for 2017 ) .
Both LT1 , LT2 , and LTZ level trims were discontinued .
Premier took the place of LTZ .
More features are in LTZ and LS trims , while LT is unchanged from 2015 .
However , the OnStar delete feature was removed along with the discontinuation of five color palates , the CD / AM / FM / MP3 / WMA Playback audio system , the rear seat entertainment system and one set of 19-inch chrome wheels .
In its place are the Chevrolet MyLink system that became standard on all trims , four new color palates , and new 17- and 18-inch wheel trims .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Years !
Engine !
Power !
Torque 2010–20112.4 L Ecotec LAF I4182
hp ( 136 kW)172 lb·ft ( 233 N·m )
2012–20172.4
L Ecotec LEA I4182
hp ( 136 kW172 lb·ft ( 233 N·m ) 2010–20123.0 L High Feature LF1 or LFW
V6264
hp ( 197 kW)222 lb·ft ( 301 N·m )
2013–20173.6
L High Feature LFX V6301
hp ( 224 kW)272 lb·ft ( 369 N·m ) EPA FUEL ECONOMY RATINGS Section::::EPA fuel economy ratings .
Skepticism about the Equinox 's EPA fuel economy ratings has been raised after a number of road tests at the model 's launch achieved 20 to 30 % lower fuel economy than the official EPA ratings .
After achieving in a road test , Edmunds InsideLine stated , " ...
our testing did n't come close to achieving [ the EPA 's numbers ] , even though we 're usually within 1 mpg of the EPA combined number .
" Car and Driver recorded another figure and noted its " ... fuel economy that wo n't live up to the / EPA ratings in real - world use ... " .
Green Car Reports recorded as much as on a road trip , driving almost exclusively highway miles in " Eco " mode ; this is about 20 % below the published highway EPA rating .
AutoWeek only averaged .
The Truth About Cars published an editorial suggesting that GM " inflated " the Equinox 's fuel economy ratings for public relations purposes and that the trip computer inaccurately reports fuel economy reported to the driver .
Motorweek , however , managed to achieve with their test car during mixed driving .
LeftlaneNews.com was also able to average average in mixed city and highway driving .
THIRD GENERATION ( 2018–PRESENT )
Section::::Third generation ( 2018–present ) .
Chevrolet unveiled the third - generation Equinox on the autumnal equinox on September 22 , 2016 .
Gasoline - powered variants of the 2018 Chevrolet Equinox went on sale in early 2017 , while diesel - powered variants arrived in autumn 2017 .
The third - generation Equinox is available with up to three engine choices .
Gasoline engines are identical to the 2016 Chevrolet Malibu : a 1.5L turbocharged inline four - cylinder ( I4 ) engine that produces 170 horsepower ( 12 hp less than the 2.4L engine in the previous Equinox but more torque ) , a 2.0L turbocharged I4 engine that produces 252 horsepower ( 48 hp less than the 3.6L V6 engine in the previous Equinox ) , or a 1.6L turbo - diesel I4 engine that produces 136 horsepower ( the latter will also be available in future Chevrolet Cruze models as well ) .
The 3.6L V6 engine option did not carry on to the third generation .
The 2.0L unit will also be paired with a nine - speed automatic transmission .
New safety features introduced in the third - generation Equinox include a surround - view camera , forward collision warning , low - speed automatic braking , a Safety Alert Seat that uses vibration pulses to help alert the driver and avoid crashes , as well as a Rear Seat Alert system that alerts drivers who had opened the back door at the start of a trip to check the back seat once they get to their destination , a feature first introduced on the 2017 GMC Acadia .
The third - generation Equinox also introduced new AWD system from GKN Driveline , which allows the driver to disengage the driveshaft to reduce friction and rotational inertia during the times the AWD is not needed .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim levels .
Chevrolet has released preliminary specifications for the 2018 Equinox .
The third - generation Equinox will be available in four distinct trim levels : L , LS , LT , and Premier , all of which in the United States will only offer a single engine option ( 1.5L Turbocharged Inline Four - Cylinder : I4 ) .
Each trim level will feature its own list of standard equipment : L/1SM : 1.5L Turbocharged Inline Four - Cylinder ( I4 ) engine , six - speed automatic transmission , Seventeen - inch all - season tires , seventeen - inch aluminum alloy wheels , Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system ( Seven - inch ( 7.0 " ) color touch - screen display , AM / FM radio , Bluetooth with A2DP wireless streaming stereo audio , Apple CarPlay and Android Auto , USB integration , and OnStar 4 G LTE connectivity ) , rear view backup camera system , six - speaker audio system , power windows and door locks , keyless entry , keyless access system , keyless ignition with push - button start , and premium cloth seating surfaces .
There are no available options for this trim , being the " base " Chevrolet Equinox trim .
The base trim is available only with Front - Wheel - Drive ( FWD ) .
LS/1LS : Sixteen - inch compact spare tire with steel spare wheel .
Available options are limited for this trim , being one of the less - expensive Chevrolet Equinox trims .
LT/1LT :
Sirius XM Satellite Radio , power - adjustable front driver 's bucket seat , remote start , High Intensity Discharge ( HID ) front head lamps , and leather - wrapped transmission gear selector .
Available options include an eight - inch ( 8.0 " )
Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system , and advanced driver assistance technologies .
Premier/1LZ :
Eighteen - inch all - season tires , Eighteen - inch aluminum alloy wheels
Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system ( Eight - inch ( 8.0 " ) color touch - screen display , AM - FM radio , HD Radio , SiriusXM
Satellite Radio , Bluetooth with A2DP streaming stereo audio , Apple CarPlay and Android Auto , wireless charging capabilities , USB integration , and OnStar 4 G LTE connectivity ) , remote vehicle starter system , leather - trimmed seating surfaces , heated dual front bucket seats , rear park assist system , leather - wrapped steering wheel , front - mounted fog lamps , LED front headlamps and LED rear tail lamps , and power rear tailgate .
Available options include a GPS navigation radio , a Bose premium seven - speaker audio system , and advanced driver assistance technologies .
Also there will be one appearance package available on the Equinox known as the Redline Edition .
The Redline Edition is only available on the LT trim without the panoramic sunroof or diesel engine .
The Redline Edition will be available in October 2017 .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Model Year !
Type / model !
Power !
Torque HOLDEN EQUINOX Section::::Holden Equinox .
Holden launched the Holden Equinox ( EQ series ) in Australia in November 2017 , with the first cars scheduled to arrive in December .
It is available with a 1.5 L turbocharged engine on the base LS and LS+ models , while the more potent 2.0 L turbocharged model is available for all other models - LT , LTZ and LTZ - V.
The 1.6 L turbo - diesel engine will launch in 2018 .
It is produced at GM 's Ramos Arizpe assembly facility in Mexico , and replaced the Korean - built five - seat Captiva .
The Australasian Equinox will be sold alongside the seven - seat Holden Acadia , known as the GMC Acadia in the Americas , rather than the Chevrolet Traverse , which sits above the Equinox in select Chevrolet markets .
On October 17 , 2018 , Holden halted production on the Equinox due to slow sales and unsold inventory at its dealerships .
FUEL CELL Section::::Fuel Cell .
The Chevrolet Equinox Fuel cell vehicle uses hydrogen for fuel with water as its only exhaust .
The Equinox Fuel Cell uses the fourth - generation hydrogen technology found in the Chevrolet Sequel concept , which was unveiled in September 2009 .
The fuel cell is designed for only of driving , but is engineered to be operable in subfreezing temperatures throughout its life .
GM states that the Equinox Fuel Cell is about heavier than the original Equinox and has one inch less ground clearance .
To reduce weight , it has aluminum doors and a carbon fiber hood .
It uses headlights from the Pontiac Torrent .
A dashboard mounted screen calculates the fuel savings to that of a gasoline - powered Equinox .
It also includes a kilowatt meter and a fuel cell energy display .
The fuel cell has four vapor outlets that replace the exhaust pipe .
Three carbon - fiber fuel tanks store up to a maximum of 9.25 pounds ( 4.2 kg ) of gaseous hydrogen at 10,000 psi ( 70 MPa ) , and give the Equinox a range of .
The Equinox Fuel Cell is certified by the EPA as a zero - emission vehicle ( ZEV ) .
GM built 115 Chevrolet Equinox Fuel Cell vehicles and deployed them in 2007–2008 in several target areas including New York and California as part of a comprehensive plan dubbed " Project Driveway " .
The Equinox Fuel Cell includes safety features such as ABS , traction control system , and GM 's OnStar telematics service , which offers drivers advice on operating the cars as well as information on nearby hydrogen filling stations .
The car meets all 2007 federal safety standards .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
Motor Trend assessed the vehicle 's performance as nearly the same as the 3.6 litre gasoline powered equivalent , while bemoaning the dearth of high pressure hydrogen filling stations near Riverside , California in 2008 .
NATURAL GAS VERSION Section::::Natural gas version .
In 2013 , Nat G CNG Solutions and AGA Systems announced that they had begun offering a Compressed Natural Gas ( CNG ) version of the Chevy Equinox and the GMC Terrain using the 2.4 L Direct Injection engine .
The natural gas version is a " bi - fuel " CNG vehicle , meaning it runs on either gasoline or natural gas , giving it extended range .
The Terrain / Equinox were the first direct injection natural gas vehicles ever approved by the US EPA .
Silver Eagle Distributors , a distributor of Anheuser - Busch products , was the launch customer for the natural gas version with an initial order of up to 100 of the natural gas GMC Terrains .
CenterPoint Energy was an early customer of the natural gas Chevy Equinox .
CNG CONFIGURATIONS Section::::CNG configurations .
The CNG version was available for newly purchased Equinox through select dealers or as a retrofit on 2013 and 2014 models .
Nat G CNG Solutions offered the vehicle in two options : a two - seater " cargo version " and a five - seat " passenger version .
" The cargo version has an 837-mile combined gasoline / natural gas ( 9.2 gge of CNG ) while the passenger version has a 775-mile combined highway range ( 6.8 gge of CNG ) .
EMISSIONS AND PERFORMANCE Section::::Emissions and performance .
The companies claimed that the natural gas version had tested at the EPA lab at 31 mpg highway on natural gas and had achieved a Bin 3 emissions equivalent to the Toyota Prius .
ELECTRIC VEHICLE Section::::Electric vehicle .
Amp Electric Vehicles sells an all - electric conversion of the Chevrolet Equinox .
They have sold their first electric Equinox to Dayton Power & Light , and had a five - year , 1,000 SUV order from Northern Lights Energy in Iceland .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
Calendar year !
Equinox ( US ) !
Torrent ( US )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Chevrolet Official site * Chevrolet Official site ( Canada )