SIXTH AVENUE Sixth Avenue – officially Avenue of the Americas , although this name is seldom used by New Yorkers – is a major thoroughfare in New York City 's borough of Manhattan , on which traffic runs northbound , or " uptown " .
It is commercial for much of its length .
Sixth Avenue begins four blocks below Canal Street , at Franklin Street in TriBeCa , where the northbound Church Street divides into Sixth Avenue to the left and the local continuation of Church Street to the right , which then ends at Canal Street .
From this beginning , Sixth Avenue traverses SoHo and Greenwich Village , roughly divides Chelsea from the Flatiron District and NoMad , passes through the Garment District and skirts the edge of the Theater District while passing through Midtown Manhattan .
Sixth Avenue 's northern end is at Central Park South , adjacent to the Artists Gate traffic entrance to Central Park at Center Drive .
Historically , Sixth Avenue continued north of Central Park , but that segment was renamed Lenox Avenue in 1887 and co - named Malcolm X Boulevard in 1987 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Sixth Avenue was laid out in the Commissioners ' Plan of 1811 .
As originally designed , Sixth Avenue 's southern terminus was at Carmine Street in Greenwich Village , and it continued northward to 147th Street in Harlem .
Central Park was added to the street grid in 1857 , and created an interruption in Sixth Avenue between 59th and 110th Streets .
Proposals to extend the street south of Carmine Street were discussed by the city 's Board of Aldermen as early as the mid-1860s .
The IRT Sixth Avenue Line elevated railway ( the " El " ) was constructed on Sixth Avenue in 1878 , darkening the street and reducing its real - estate value .
In the early and mid 1800s Sixth Avenue passed by the popular roadhouse and tavern , Old Grapevine , at the corner of 11th Street , which at the time was the northern edge of the city .
In late 1887 , the Harlem portion of what was then considered Sixth Avenue was renamed Lenox Avenue for philanthropist James Lenox ; it was later co - named Malcolm X Boulevard , in honor of the slain civil rights leader , a century later .
Starting in 1926 , as part of the construction of the Holland Tunnel , Sixth Avenue was widened and extended from Minetta Lane to Canal Street .
Smaller side streets in the extension 's path were also demolished or incorporated into the extended avenue .
The Sixth Avenue extension also allowed for the construction of the Independent Subway System ( IND ) 's Eighth Avenue line , which was to run below Sixth Avenue south of Eighth Street .
To accommodate the new subway , buildings were condemned and demolished to extend Sixth Avenue southward .
Construction of the extension resulted in considerable dislocation to existing residents , as ten thousand people were evicted to make way for the Sixth Avenue extension .
One historian stated that most of the displaced residents were " Italian immigrants who knew no other home in America " .
According to the WPA Guide to New York City , the extension resulted in blank side walls facing the " uninspiring thoroughfare " and small leftover spaces .
Dozens of buildings , including the original Church of Our Lady of Pompeii , were demolished .
The Sixth Avenue extension was opened to traffic in 1930 , and the subway line was completed two years later .
Sixth Avenue , the only numbered avenue to extend south of Houston Street , thus became the southernmost numbered avenue in Manhattan .
House numbering of existing buildings was adjusted .
By the 1930s , a coalition of commercial establishments and building owners along Sixth Avenue campaigned to have the El removed .
The El was closed on December 4 , 1938 and came down in stages , beginning in Greenwich Village in 1938–39 .
The replacement Sixth Avenue subway , which ran between Houston and 53rd Streets with a transfer to the Eighth Avenue line at West Fourth Street , opened in 1940 .
The demolition of the Sixth Avenue elevated railway also resulted in accelerated commercial development of the avenue in Midtown .
Beginning in the 1960s , the avenue was entirely rebuilt above 42nd Street as an all - but - uninterrupted avenue of corporate headquarters housed in glass slab towers of International Modernist style .
Among the buildings constructed was the CBS Building at 52nd Street , by Eero Saarinen ( 1965 ) , dubbed " Black Rock " from its dark granite piers that run from base to crown without a break ; this designated landmark is Saarinen 's only skyscraper .
On March 10 , 1957 , Sixth Avenue was reconfigured to carry one - way traffic north of its intersection with Broadway in Herald Square .
The rest of the avenue followed on November 10 , 1963 .
In the mid-1970s , the city " spruced up " the street , including the addition of patterned brick crosswalks , repainting of streetlamps , and new pedestrian plazas .
Special lighting , rare throughout the rest of the city , was also installed .
RENAMING AND CO - NAMING
Section::::Renaming and co - naming .
The avenue 's official name was changed to Avenue of the Americas in 1945 by the City Council , at the behest of Mayor Fiorello La Guardia , who signed the bill into law on October 2 , 1945 .
The intent was to honor " Pan - American ideals and principles " and the nations of Central and South America , and to encourage those countries to build consulates along the avenue .
It was felt at the time that the name would provide greater grandeur to a shabby street , and to promote trade with the Western Hemisphere .
After the name change , round signs were attached to streetlights on the avenue , showing the national seals of the nations honored .
However , New Yorkers seldom used the avenue 's newer name , and in 1955 , an informal study found that locals used " Sixth Avenue " more than eight times as often as " Avenue of the Americas " .
The street has been labelled as both " Avenue of the Americas " and " Sixth Avenue " in recent years .
Most of the old round signs with country emblems were gone by the late 1990s , and the ones remaining were showing signs of age .
NOTABLE BUILDINGS AND EVENTS Section::::Notable buildings and events .
Sights along Sixth Avenue include Juan Pablo Duarte Square ; with the polychrome High Victorian Gothic Jefferson Market Courthouse , currently occupied by the Jefferson Market Library ; the surviving stretch of grand department stores of 1880 to 1900 in the Ladies ' Mile Historic District that runs from 18th Street to 23rd Street ; the former wholesale flower district ; Herald Square at 34th Street , site of Macy 's department store ; Bryant Park from 40th to 42nd Streets ; and the corporate stretch above 42nd Street , which includes the Bank of America Tower , W. R. Grace Building , International Center of Photography , Rockefeller Center — including the Time - Life Building ,
News Corp. Building , Exxon Building and McGraw - Hill Building , as well as Radio City Music Hall .
The Steinway Hall of New York was moved to 1133 Sixth Avenue in 2016 .
Sixth Avenue is the site of the annual Village Halloween Parade in Greenwich Village and the Dominican Day Parade in Midtown .
MASS TRANSIT Section::::Mass transit .
Sixth Avenue is served by the New York City Subway with the IND Sixth Avenue Line ( ) north of Houston Street , and the IND Eighth Avenue Line ( ) south of Greenwich Avenue .
The Harlem portion of Sixth Avenue ( Lenox Avenue ) is served by the IRT Lenox Avenue Line ( ) north of Central Park North ( 110th Street ) .
The PATH 's Uptown Hudson Tubes to New Jersey also run under Sixth Avenue ( JSQ–33 , HOB-33 , and JSQ-33 ( via HOB ) trains ) from 9th to 33rd Streets .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The avenue is referenced both in the name and in the lyrics of " 6th Avenue Heartache " by The Wallflowers .
SEE ALSO
* 6½ Avenue REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* New York Songlines : Sixth Avenue – a virtual walking tour