THE SCORPION KING
The Scorpion King is a 2002 American historical fantasy film directed by Chuck Russell , starring The Rock , Kelly Hu , Grant Heslov , and Michael Clarke Duncan .
It is a spin - off from The Mummy franchise , which takes place before The Mummy Returns and follows the story of Mathayus and his rise to become the Scorpion King .
The events of The Scorpion King take place 5,000 years before those in The Mummy and The Mummy Returns , and reveal Mathayus ' origins and his rise to power as the Scorpion King .
The name is a reference to a historical king of the Protodynastic Period of Egypt , King Scorpion .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
" Before the time of the pyramids , " a horde from the East — led by the ruthless Memnon , who by their law , is king for being their greatest warrior — invades the prehistoric world .
His many victories come from the help of a sorcerer who predicts the outcomes of battles , leaving only a few free tribes to oppose him .
Mathayus , his half - brother Jesup , and their friend Rama , the only three true remaining Akkadians , are hired by King Pheron of the free tribes to kill Memnon 's sorcerer for twenty blood rubies .
This bargain upsets both Pheron 's son Takmet , as the rubies are the last of their treasury , and Nubian King Balthazar , who dislikes the Akkadians .
The Akkadians manage to sneak into Memnon 's camp but are ambushed by his guards , having been tipped off by Takmet , who killed his own father and defected to Memnon 's side .
Jesup and Rama are hit by arrows , but Mathayus manages to sneak into the sorcerer 's tent , where he sees that the sorcerer is actually a sorceress , Cassandra .
Mathayus is ambushed and meets Memnon , who executes Jesup in front of him .
Cassandra warns Memnon against killing Mathayus , saying the gods wish him to survive the night and defying them will incur their wrath and cost him his victories .
To circumvent this , Memnon has Mathayus buried to his neck in the desert to be devoured by fire ants at dawn .
Mathayus manages to escape with help from a horse thief , Arpid .
Deciding to finish his mission and avenge his brother , Mathayus sneaks into Memnon 's stronghold , Gomorrah , and manages to enter Memnon 's palace with help from a street urchin .
He briefly meets Memnon 's sympathetic court magician , Philos , who hides him and directs him to the courtyard where Memnon is training .
Mathayus tries to shoot Memnon from the watchtower , but he is forced to save the street urchin from having his hand amputated for theft , alerting the guards to his presence .
Mathayus barely manages to escape Gomorrah , abducting Cassandra along the way , aware that Memnon will come for her .
Cassandra tries to escape from Mathayus and tells him that she has been Memnon 's prisoner since she was a child .
Sympathetic towards her for saving his life , Mathayus allows her the choice of leaving , but warns her of worse dangers and that she is likely safer with him .
Meanwhile , Memnon sends his right - hand man , Thorak , and a group of guards to kill Mathayus and retrieve Cassandra .
Mathayus manages to slay them all under the cover of a sandstorm and in a cave .
While dying , Thorak manages to stab Mathayus in the leg with a scorpion blood - laced arrow ; Cassandra uses her magic to save Mathayus ' life .
As an insult , Mathayus sends Thorak 's blood - stained pendant to Memnon .
Mathayus , Arpid and Cassandra run into Philos , who had earlier managed to flee from Memnon 's palace and has perfected an explosive powder .
However , they are ambushed by the rebels , now under the rule of Balthazar .
Though Mathayus defeats Balthazar in a fight and earns his grudging respect and sanctuary , Cassandra has a vision of Memnon and his army slaughtering the entire rebel camp .
She informs Mathayus and then prophesies that when the moonlight reaches Memnon 's palace , the King on High will become the invincible Scorpion King , and Memnon believes himself to be the one destined to become the Scorpion King .
Furthermore , she informs Mathayus that if he faces Memnon , he will likely die , but Mathayus assures her that he will make his own destiny and they sleep together .
The next morning , however , Cassandra returns to Memnon in order to stall and possibly kill him .
Mathayus , with help from Balthazar , Arpid , Philos and the army of rebels , launches an all - out assault on Memnon 's stronghold , facing Memnon personally before he can kill Cassandra .
Balthazar confronts and kills Takmet , avenging Pheron , and takes on the full force of Memnon 's forces alone .
The battle rages on until Mathayus is shot by a guard , as predicted by Cassandra .
As Memnon takes his place in the House of Scorpio to become the Scorpion King , Cassandra kills the guard while Mathayus retrieves his bow , pulls the arrow out of his shoulder and uses it to shoot the exhausted Memnon , sending him off the edge of the roof .
At the same time , Philos and Arpid use the explosive powder to destroy the palace 's foundation stone , bringing down the bulk of Memnon 's forces .
Memnon is consumed by the flames as he falls to his death .
With the battle over , the remnants of Memnon 's army bow before Mathayus , who by their law is their new king , the Scorpion King .
In the aftermath , Mathayus and Balthazar share a good - natured farewell as the latter returns to his own kingdom .
Cassandra tells Mathayus that she sees a period of peace and prosperity coming , but warns him that it will not last forever .
Undeterred , Mathayus decides that they will make their own destiny .
CAST * Dwayne Johnson as Mathayus * Steven Brand as Memnon
* Michael Clarke Duncan as Balthazar * Kelly Hu as Cassandra * Bernard Hill as Philos
* Grant Heslov as Arpid * Ralf Moeller as Thorak
* Branscombe Richmond as Jesup * Peter Facinelli as Takmet * Roger Rees as King Pheron * Sherri Howard as Queen Isis * Conrad Roberts as Chieftain * Joseph Ruskin as Tribal Leader * Esteban Cueto as Third Akkadian * Nils Allen Stewart as Torturer RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The Scorpion King holds a 41 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 135 reviews .
The sites ' critical consensus states , " Action adventure does n't get much cheesier than The Scorpion King . "
Metacritic gave the film a weighted average score of 45 based on 30 reviews .
Roger Ebert , film critic of the Chicago Sun - Times , gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , writing " A wise move , too , because The Scorpion King is set ' thousands of years before the Pyramids , ' so property values in Gomorrah were a good value for anyone willing to buy and hold . "
James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film two stars ( out of four ) , saying : " It 's possible to make an engaging action / adventure picture of this sort , but The Scorpion King is n't it . "
Dennis Harvey of Variety gave a positive review , saying the film " rouses excitement mostly from stuntwork and their agility rather than CGI excess . "
Nathan Rabin of The Onion 's A.V. Club gave the film a mildly positive review , calling it " prototypical summer - movie fare , designed to be consumed , enjoyed , and forgotten all at once . "
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a score of C+ , calling it " plodding and obvious " but adding that The Rock " holds it together . "
Jonathan Foreman of the New York Post gave a negative review , saying that The Scorpion King " has none of the qualities — epic sweep , relative originality and heartfelt bloodthirstiness — that made Conan so trashily entertaining . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Scorpion King grossed $ 12,553,380 on its opening day and $ 36,075,875 in total over the weekend , from 3,444 theaters for an average of $ 10,475 per venue , and ranking at # 1 at the box office .
It then dropped 50 percent in its second weekend , but remained at # 1 , earning another $ 18,038,270 .
The film closed on June 27 , 2002 , with a total domestic gross of $ 91,047,077 , and an additional $ 74,286,103 internationally , for a total worldwide gross of $ 165,333,180 , against a budget of $ 60 million , making it a moderate box office success .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack to The Scorpion King was released on March 26 , 2002 , just before the film was released on April 19 .
It is filled with various bands performing either previous released tracks or their b - sides .
The album has been certified Gold by the RIAA .
TRACK LISTING
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
The film spawned two video games : for the Nintendo GameCube and the PlayStation 2 which served as a prequel to the film 's events ; and a sequel , , for the Game Boy Advance , in which Cassandra is abducted by the ruthless sorcerer Menthu and his lackey , the witch
Isis ( not to be confused with Queen Isis from the film ) , prompting Mathayus to undergo a quest to uncover the legendary Sword of Osiris and use it to defeat Menthu and Isis once and for all and rescue Cassandra .
PREQUEL AND SEQUELS Section::::Prequel and sequels .
Following the film 's release , there were initial plans for a sequel with Johnson to return as Mathayus and go up against a new villain , Sargon , but these plans eventually fell through and the project was shelved .
A direct - to - video prequel , , was released in 2008 with Michael Copon as Mathayus and Randy Couture as Sargon .
A sequel , , was released in 2012 with Victor Webster as Mathayus and Billy Zane as the villain , King Talus .
The fourth film in the franchise , , was released in 2015 .
Victor Webster reprised his role from the third film , while Michael Biehn , Rutger Hauer , Lou Ferrigno and former WWE female wrestler Eve Torres joined the cast .
Also , Will Kemp portrayed the villain of the film , Drazen .
A fifth film , Scorpion King : Book of Souls , was released in fall 2018 .
Zach McGowan played Mathayus .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS