FLOATING ISLAND
A floating island is a mass of floating aquatic plants , mud , and peat ranging in thickness from several centimetres to a few metres .
Floating islands are a common natural phenomenon that are found in many parts of the world .
They exist less commonly as a man - made phenomenon .
Floating islands are generally found on marshlands , lakes , and similar wetland locations , and can be many hectares in size .
NATURAL OCCURRENCES Section::::Natural occurrences .
Sometimes referred to as tussocks , floatons , or suds , natural floating islands are composed of vegetation growing on a buoyant mat of plant roots or other organic detritus .
Some cenotes in northern Mexico have natural floating islands .
They typically occur when growths of cattails , bulrush , sedge , and reeds extend outward from the shoreline of a wetland area .
As the water gets deeper the roots no longer reach the bottom , so they use the oxygen in their root mass for buoyancy , and the surrounding vegetation for support to retain their top - side - up orientation .
The area beneath these floating mats is exceptionally rich in aquatic lifeforms .
Eventually , storm events tear whole sections free from the shore , and the islands thus formed migrate around a lake with changing winds , eventually either reattaching to a new area of the shore , or breaking up in heavy weather .
In the Brazilian Amazon , floating islands form in lakes on the floodplains of white - water rivers .
They are known as Matupá and range in size from a few square meters to a few hectares .
In the traditional belief system of the indigenous population the Matupá are known as the house of the giant anaconda .
Explosive volcanic eruptions may create pumice rafts , which can float on the ocean for months or even years before becoming fully saturated and sinking .
In aquatic regions of Northwestern Europe several thousand acres of floating meadows ( German Schwingrasen , Dutch trilveen ) have been preserved , which are partly used as agricultural land , partly as nature reserves .
ARTIFICIAL ISLANDS Section::::Artificial islands .
Floating artificial islands are generally made of bundled reeds , and the best known examples are those of the Uros people of Lake Titicaca , Peru , who build their villages upon what are in effect huge rafts of bundled totora reeds .
The Uros originally created their islands to prevent attacks by their more aggressive neighbours , the Incas and Collas .
The Aztec capital , Tenochtitlan , was surrounded with chinampas , small artificial islands used for agriculture known as " floating gardens " ( though not really floating ) .
Floating gardens on a large scale have been demonstrated with aquaponics systems in China growing rice , wheat and canna lily on islands , with some installations exceeding .
Spiral Island was a more modern one - person effort to build an artificial floating island , on the Caribbean coast of Mexico .
Modern artificial islands mimicking the floating reedbeds of the Uros are increasingly used by local governments and catchment managers to improve water quality at source , reducing pollutants in surface water bodies and providing biodiversity habitat .
Examples include Gold Coast City Council in Australia .
Artificial floating reedbeds are commonly anchored to the shoreline or bottom of water body , to ensure the system does not float away in a storm event or create a hazard .
During World War II , the British Project Habakkuk proposed the construction of aircraft carriers made of ice - like Pykrete .
Its size and speed made it more of an artificial iceberg or island than a ship .
Commercial development of floating islands has begun taking place .
Floating habitat islands were installed with salicornia salt marsh plants at Sydney Olympic Park Authority in 2011 providing nesting sites for local and migratory birds including black swans , black - winged stilts , red - necked avocets , Pacific black ducks and chestnut teals , using the Aqua Biofilter product .
The world 's largest vegetated floating islands 4 acres in size were installed in 2004 using Aqua Biofilter ™ product with Canna ( plant ) at Lake Tai , China using materials including a combination of polyurethane open cell filter foam , closed cell polyethylene flotation foam , bamboo and coconut fibre filter foam mix with wicking ability to supply water to plant roots .
A commercially produced floating island was installed in the river otter enclosure at Zoo Montana in 2007 .
In 2009 and the beginning of 2010 , a few larger islands were launched to provide nesting habitat for Caspian tern colonies .
The largest of the islands , at a record - setting , was launched into the water at Sheepy Lake .
These islands are a collaboration between the United States Army Corps of Engineers , Oregon State University , and Floating Islands West , a Floating Island International license holder .
A recent US Army Corps of Engineers project was built in The Hideout , Pennsylvania as part of a watershed management project .
The floating island was created to mimic nature ; help improve water quality , including reducing phosphorus levels ; and buffer habitats against surges in nutrients and pollution .
Buoyancy in artificial floating reedbeds is commonly provided by polyethylene or polyurethane foam , or polyethylene plastic containing air voids .
Growth media include coconut fibre ; mats made of polyester or recycled PET bottles ; synthetic geotechnical mat ; jute ; soil ; and sand .
LOCATIONS
* Lake Victoria , Uganda * Danube delta lakes , Romania * Lake Titicaca , Bolivia and Peru * Eye island , Argentina * Lake Kyoga , Uganda * Lake Malawi , Africa * Loktak Lake , India
* Lake Yarbo , Winter Garden , Florida * Lake Buckeye , Winter Haven , Florida * Lake Idyl , Winter Haven , Florida
* Umbagog Lake , Maine and New Hampshire , United States
* Island Pond , Springfield , Massachusetts , United States * Lake Visitor , Montenegro * Lagoon of Islands , Tasmania , Australia
* Marais Audomarois , France * Vlasina Lake , Serbia
* Semeteš Lake , Serbia * Lake Upemba , Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Lake Chad , Africa * Inle Lake , Burma ( Myanmar )
* Lake Porkuni , Estonia
* Prairie Lake , Barron County , Wisconsin , United States
* Prashar Lake , Mandi , Himachal Pradesh , India * Çat Lake , Celikhan , Adiyaman , Turkey
* Aksakal Lake , Solhan , Bingol , Turkey * Hartbeespoort Dam , North West , South Africa
* Das schwimmende Land , Waakhausen , Germany
* Schwimmendes Moor , Jade , Germany
* Waterland , The Netherlands
*
Lochan Saorach , Scotland SEE
ALSO
* Artificial island * Crannog
* Freedom Ship * Great Raft
* Perelandra * Pumice raft
*
Seasteading
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Inca Heartland : A site with numerous pictures of floating artificial islands on Lake Titicaca .
* Tourism Keeping Peruvian Islands Afloat article by Roderick Eime * " Disagreement on whether to tether island that floats free in Massachusetts pond " : San Francisco Chronicle
* Floating on an island