FN FIVE - SEVEN
The FN Five - seven , trademarked as the Five - seveN , is a semi - automatic pistol designed and manufactured by FN Herstal in Belgium .
The pistol is named for its 5.7-mm ( .224 in ) bullet diameter , and the trademark capitalization style is intended to emphasize the manufacturer 's initials — FN .
The Five - seven pistol was developed in conjunction with the FN P90 personal defense weapon and the FN 5.7×28 mm cartridge .
The P90 was introduced in 1990 , and the Five - seven was introduced in 1998 as a pistol using the same 5.7×28 mm ammunition .
Developed as a companion pistol to the P90 , the Five - seven shares many of its design features : it is a lightweight polymer - based weapon with a relatively large magazine capacity , ambidextrous controls , low recoil , and the ability to penetrate body armor when using certain cartridge types .
Sales of the Five - seven were originally restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers , but since 2004 , the pistol has also been offered to civilian shooters for personal protection , target shooting , and similar uses .
Although offered only with sporting ammunition , the Five - seven 's introduction to civilian shooters was met with vocal opposition from gun control organizations such as the Brady Campaign , and the pistol has been subject to ongoing controversy in the United States .
The Five - seven is currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations , including Canada , France , Greece , India , Poland , Spain , and the United States .
In the United States , the Five - seven is in use with numerous law enforcement agencies , including the U.S. Secret Service .
In the years since the pistol 's introduction to the civilian market in the United States , it has also become increasingly popular with civilian shooters .
HISTORY DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Development .
The Five - seven pistol and its 5.7×28 mm ammunition were developed by FN Herstal in response to NATO requests for a replacement for the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge and associated pistols and submachine guns .
NATO called for two types of weapons chambered for a new cartridge — one a shoulder - fired weapon , and the other a handheld weapon .
According to NATO , these new weapons , termed personal defense weapons ( PDWs ) , were to provide " personal protection in last - resort situations when the user is directly endangered by the enemy [ ... ] .
" In 1989 , NATO published document D/296 , outlining a number of preliminary specifications for these weapons :
* The new cartridge was to have greater range , accuracy , and terminal performance than the 9×19 mm cartridge .
Additionally , it was to be capable of penetrating certain types of body armor .
*
The shoulder - fired personal defense weapon was to weigh less than 3 kg ( 6.6 lb ) , with a magazine capacity of at least 20 rounds .
*
The handheld personal defense weapon ( pistol ) was to weigh less than , although a weight of was deemed desirable ; it was to have a magazine capacity of no fewer than 20 rounds .
*
Both weapons were to be sufficiently compact to be carried hands - free on the user 's person at all times , whether in the cab of a vehicle or the cockpit of an aircraft , and were to perform effectively in all environments and weather conditions .
FN Herstal was the first small arms manufacturer to respond to NATO 's requirement ; FN started by developing a shoulder - fired personal defense weapon , the FN P90 , along with a small caliber , high velocity 5.7×28 mm cartridge type .
The original 5.7×28 mm cartridge , called the SS90 , went into production with the P90 in 1990 .
This cartridge type was discontinued in 1993 , and replaced with the 5.7×28 mm SS190 , which used a heavier and slightly shorter projectile weighing 2.0 g ( 31 grains ) .
The reduced length of the SS190 projectile allowed it to be used more conveniently in the Five - seven , which was under development at that time .
In 1993 , Jean - Louis Gathoye of FN filed a United States patent application for a delayed blowback operating system intended for the Five - seven pistol , and U.S. Patent 5,347,912 ( " Elements for decelerating the recoil of the moving parts of a fire arm " ) was received the following year .
In 1995 , FN officially announced development of the Five - seven pistol , and a prototype of the pistol was publicly displayed the following year .
With some improvements , a double - action only model of the pistol went into production in 1998 , and a single - action model called the Five - seven Tactical was then introduced shortly afterward .
The Five - seven first entered service in May 2000 , when the Cypriot National Guard ( ) purchased 250 pistols for their special forces group .
NATO EVALUATION
Section::::NATO evaluation .
In 2002 and 2003 , NATO conducted a series of tests with the intention of standardizing a PDW cartridge as a replacement for the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge .
The tests compared the relative merits of the FN 5.7×28 mm cartridge and the HK 4.6×30 mm cartridge , which was created by German small arms manufacturer Heckler & Koch as a competitor to the 5.7×28 mm .
The results of the NATO tests were analyzed by a group formed of experts from Canada , France , the United Kingdom , and the United States , and the group 's conclusion
was that the 5.7×28 mm was " undoubtedly " the more efficient cartridge .
However , the German delegation and others rejected the NATO recommendation that 5.7×28 mm be standardized , halting the standardization process indefinitely .
As a result , both the 4.6×30 mm and 5.7×28 mm cartridges ( and the associated weapons ) have been independently adopted by various NATO countries , according to preference ; the Five - seven pistol is currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations throughout the world .
PRESENT
Section::::Present .
Historically , sales of the Five - seven pistol were restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers , but in 2004 the new Five - seven IOM model was introduced and offered to civilian shooters for use with 5.7×28 mm sporting ammunition .
The IOM model incorporated several modifications to the weapon 's design , such as the addition of an M1913 accessory rail , a magazine safety mechanism , and fully adjustable sights .
Although offered only with sporting ammunition , the Five - seven 's introduction to civilian shooters was met with strong opposition from gun control organizations such as the Brady Campaign .
Further development of the Five - seven pistol led to the introduction of the Five - seven USG model , which was approved by the ATF as a sporting firearm in 2004 .
The USG model incorporates a conventionally shaped square trigger guard , a reversible magazine release , and other minor changes .
In 2013 , the Five - seven MK2 model was introduced , replacing the USG model .
The MK2 model has cocking serrations on the front of the slide , all black controls , and slightly different iron sights .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The Five - seven is a semi - automatic delayed blowback pistol chambered for FN 's 5.7×28 mm ammunition .
The pistol has a concealed hammer .
Polymer materials are used extensively in the pistol 's design , and even the steel slide is encased in a polymer shell .
In addition to providing reduced weight and greater resistance to corrosion , this also prevents unwanted light reflection .
The slide 's polymer shell gives the pistol the appearance of being constructed entirely of polymers , but the slide interior , barrel , trigger , springs , pins , and similar parts are all steel .
However , the pistol is unusually lightweight , weighing only 744 g ( 1.6 lb ) with a loaded 20-round magazine .
The Five - seven is a full - size pistol , having an overall length of , a height of , and a max width of .
It has the same grip angle as the distinguished Browning Hi - Power and M1911 pistols .
Despite the considerable length of the pistol 's 5.7×28 mm ammunition , the grip is not particularly unwieldy — the distance from the trigger to the back of the grip measures , which is identical to a U.S. Military issue M9 pistol chambered in 9×19 mm Parabellum .
The Five - seven barrel is cold hammer - forged and chrome - lined , with a total length of and a rifled length of .
The barrel has eight rifling grooves with a right - hand twist rate of 1:231 mm ( 1:9.1 in ) , and it weighs .
The small caliber gives the barrel a length in calibers of more than 20 , 58 % more than a comparable 9 mm barrel .
It has a stated service life of 20,000 rounds and the Five - seven is noted for being very accurate .
Current models of the Five - seven are single - action , having a short and light trigger pull of 20 to 30 N ( 4.4 to 6.6 lb ) .
They have a Picatinny rail for mounting accessories , and a magazine safety mechanism that prevents the pistol from firing without a magazine inserted .
The grip texture on current pistols is extensively checkered for a superior hold , and each side of the slide has a series of narrow ridges at the rear to aid grasping .
The trigger and trigger guard surfaces also have grooves to reduce finger slip , and the trigger guard is elongated to ease firing while wearing gloves .
The Five - seven is currently offered in two different frame finishes ( standard black or flat dark earth ) , and two different iron sight systems ( adjustable sights or low profile fixed sights ) .
AMMUNITION Section::::Ammunition .
Particularly significant to the design of the Five - seven pistol is the small caliber , high velocity bottlenecked cartridge it uses .
The 5.7×28 mm cartridge was created by FN Herstal in response to NATO requests for a replacement for the 9×19 mm Parabellum cartridge , which is commonly used in pistols and submachine guns .
The 5.7×28 mm cartridge weighs 6.0 g ( 93 grains)—significantly lighter than the average 9×19 mm cartridge ( M882 NATO total cartridge weight of 179 grains )
9×19
mm Parabellum — making extra ammunition less burdensome , or allowing more ammunition to be carried for the same weight .
Since the 5.7×28 mm cartridge also has a relatively small diameter , an unusually high number of cartridges can be contained in a magazine .
The cartridge has a loud report and produces considerable muzzle flash , but it has roughly 30 percent less recoil than the 9×19 mm cartridge , improving controllability .
Due to its high velocity , the 5.7×28 mm also exhibits an exceptionally flat trajectory .
One of the design intents for the standard 5.7×28 mm cartridge type , the SS190 , was that it have the ability to penetrate Kevlar protective vests — such as the NATO CRISAT vest — that will stop conventional pistol bullets .
Fired from the Five - seven , the 5.7×28 mm SS190 has a muzzle velocity of roughly 650 m / s ( 2,130 ft / s ) and is capable of penetrating the CRISAT vest at a range of , or 48 layers of Kevlar material ( roughly equivalent to two stacked Level II Kevlar vest panels ) at a range of .
It is also capable of penetrating a PASGT vest at a range of or a PASGT helmet at a range of .
FN states an effective range of and a maximum range of for the 5.7×28 mm cartridge when fired from the Five - seven pistol .
In testing conducted by Passaic County , New Jersey Sheriff 's Department , the 5.7×28 mm SS190 penetrated to a depth of in bare ballistic gelatin , and a depth of in gelatin protected with a Kevlar vest .
In testing , the SS190 and similar 5.7×28 mm projectiles consistently turn base over point ( " tumble " ) as they pass through ballistic gelatin and other media , using the 21.6-mm ( .85 in ) projectile length to create a larger wound cavity .
However , some are skeptical of the bullet 's terminal performance , and it is a subject of debate among civilian shooters in the United States .
The 5.7×28 mm projectile potentially poses less risk of collateral damage than conventional pistol bullets , because the projectile design limits overpenetration , as well as risk of ricochet .
The lightweight projectile also poses less risk of collateral damage in the event of a miss , because it loses much of its kinetic energy after traveling only , whereas a conventional pistol bullet such as the 9×19 mm retains significant energy beyond .
This range exceeds the engagement distances expected for the 5.7×28 mm cartridge 's intended applications , so the cartridge 's limited energy at long range is not considered to be disadvantageous .
Since the 5.7×28 mm SS190 projectile does not rely on fragmentation or the expansion of a hollow - point bullet , the cartridge and pistol are considered suitable for military use under the Hague Convention of 1899 , which prohibits the use of expanding bullets in warfare .
+ Ballistic performance summary for various 5.7×28 mm cartridges !
Cartridge type !
SS190 !
SS195LF !
SS197SR !
EA Protector !
EA Varmintor !
EA S4 !
Projectile weight !
Muzzle velocity !
Muzzle energy
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
The Five - seven pistol feeds from detachable box magazines , but it is unconventional in that it feeds cartridges into the chamber without the use of a barrel feed ramp , having a beveled chamber only — the pistol 's feeding is inherently reliable because of its use of bottlenecked cartridges .
The pistol is supplied with 20-round magazines as standard , or 10-round magazines for jurisdictions where magazines are restricted by law to a maximum capacity of 10 rounds .
The Five - seven will also accept an aftermarket extended 30-round magazine , which protrudes an additional from the base of the pistol .
With an additional cartridge in the chamber , the Five - seven pistol has a total capacity of 11 , 21 , or 31 rounds depending on which magazine type is used .
Magazine pouches for the Five - seven magazine are available from various manufacturers .
The Five - seven 's magazine can be disassembled for cleaning or lubrication by removing the polymer floorplate .
The magazine body is constructed of polymer , with steel inserts at the feed lips .
Unlike a conventional pistol magazine , it feeds from dual feed lips , with a follower that has the same appearance as that of an M16 rifle 's magazine , and which is loaded in the same manner : by pushing cartridges straight down into the magazine , rather than pushing them down and back .
This setup makes it very easy to load individual cartridges into the magazine .
The magazine floorplate has a slight finger spur , and four holes in the left side of the magazine body allow a convenient estimate of the amount of remaining ammunition .
CONTROLS Section::::Controls .
All controls ( excluding the trigger ) on the Five - seven USG and earlier models are grey polymer , in contrast to the black polymer frame and slide cover .
Similarly , all of the controls on the Five - seven FDE and Five - seven ODG models are black polymer , in contrast to the flat dark earth and olive drab polymer frames .
A takedown lever is located at the front on the left side of the weapon 's frame , and a slide release is located at the rear on the left side of the frame ; these controls are protected from accidental movements by slight projections in the frame contour .
A chamber indicator , in the form of a pin inside a tiny hole , is provided on the left side of the slide .
When a round has been chambered , this pin will protrude , which is sufficient to provide both visible and tactile indication of the chamber 's status .
Current models of the Five - seven have an ambidextrous manual safety device , which is located in an unconventional position : one control is found on each side of the frame above the trigger guard , where it is reachable with the trigger finger or support hand thumb .
A red dot is visible here when the safety is deactivated and the pistol is ready to fire ; when the safety is moved to the raised position , it is activated and the red dot is no longer visible .
The Five - seven 's push - button magazine release , located on the left side of the frame where the trigger guard intersects with the grip , is square - shaped and reversible for left - handed shooters .
The Five - seven can be disassembled quickly and easily , by using the left hand to retract and hold the slide rearwards , while simultaneously using the left - hand thumb to push and hold the takedown lever rearwards .
When the slide is released , it moves forward freely and the complete slide assembly can be disengaged from the frame , whereupon the barrel ( and captured recoil spring ) can be removed from the slide .
This level of disassembly is sufficient to perform thorough cleaning of the pistol , and FNH USA recommends no further disassembly except by an authorized armorer , FN Herstal , or FNH USA .
Reassembly of the pistol is done in the reverse order , except no use of the disassembly lever is necessary .
SIGHTS AND ACCESSORIES Section::::Sights and accessories .
The Five - seven has a sight radius of ; the pistol is currently offered with either adjustable sights or fixed sights .
The " three - dot " type adjustable sights consist of a 2.9-mm ( 0.12 in ) square notch rear and a 3.6-mm ( 0.14 in ) blade front , which has a height of .
The sights are targeted at , but can be adjusted for either windage or elevation .
The " three - dot " type C - More fixed sights , which are offered as a low profile alternative to the adjustable sights , can only be adjusted for windage .
The fixed sights are targeted at using SS195LF ammunition , and are available with or without tritium - illuminated inserts ( " night sights " ) to aid use of the pistol in dim lighting .
The Five - seven is supplied with a lockable hard case , a locking device and keys , a magazine release reversal tool , a sight adjustment tool ( not included with the fixed sights model ) , a cleaning kit , an owner 's manual , and three 20-round magazines ( or three 10-round magazines , where restricted by law ) .
The Five - seven can be used in conjunction with a wide range of firearm accessories ; holsters are offered by various manufacturers , and the pistol 's MIL - STD-1913 ( Picatinny ) accessory rail will accept tactical lights or laser aiming devices .
With the use of an extended , threaded barrel , the pistol can also be fitted with various sound suppressors developed by Advanced Armament Corporation , Gemtech , Silencerco , and other manufacturers .
The Gemtech SFN-57 , which was developed in 1998 specifically for use with the Five - seven , is a matte black aluminum suppressor with a length of , a diameter of , and a weight of .
Israeli manufacturer FAB Defense offers a complete PDW conversion kit for the Five - seven , designated the KPOS G2 FN 5.7 , that allows the pistol to be reconfigured into a shoulder - fired personal defense weapon , and CornerShot offers a weapon system compatible with the Five - seven that allows the shooter to aim and fire around corners without being exposed .
VARIANTS Five - seven Five - seven
Tactical
Five - seven IOM Five - seven USG Five - seven FDE
Five - seven
ODG CURRENT MODEL
Five - seven MK2 CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The Five - seven pistol and 5.7×28 mm ammunition were originally restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers , but in 2004 the new Five - seven IOM model was introduced , and offered to civilian shooters for use with 5.7×28 mm SS192 ammunition .
FNH USA has marketed the Five - seven to civilian shooters as a pistol suitable for personal protection , target shooting , and similar uses , but the Five - seven 's introduction to civilian shooters was strongly opposed by U.S. gun control organizations such as the Brady Campaign ; by the end of 2004 , sales of the Five - seven pistol had increased dramatically .
In early 2005 , the pistol was subject to controversy in the United States after the Brady Campaign stated that commercially available 5.7×28 mm SS192 ammunition penetrated a Level IIA Kevlar vest in testing .
The National Rifle Association ( NRA ) shortly countered the Brady Campaign 's claim by stating that the gun control group may not have adhered to standard testing procedures , and that FN offers armor - piercing varieties of the 5.7×28 mm cartridge only to military and law enforcement customers .
Varieties offered to civilians are classified by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) as not armor - piercing , and it was stated that the SS192 and SS196 cartridge variations were unable to penetrate various types of Kevlar vests in tests conducted by FNH USA .
Michael D. Barnes , then - president of the Brady Campaign , responded to the NRA 's statements on the Five - seven by challenging NRA Executive Vice President Wayne LaPierre to be shot with the pistol while wearing a Kevlar vest .
The NRA again responded to the Brady Campaign 's statements , saying that " Barnes demonstrated his group 's complete and utter disregard for gun safety and its flaming zeal to further restrict the rights of law - abiding gun owners . "
In the same year , two pieces of legislation were introduced in the United States Congress , specifically targeting the Five - seven pistol and 5.7×28 mm ammunition for a federal ban : the H.R. 1136 : PLEA Act was introduced in the House of Representatives by Rep. Eliot Engel ( D - NY ) , and the S. 527
: PLEA Act was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Frank Lautenberg ( D - NJ ) ; neither bill proceeded to a vote by the House or Senate .
In March 2007 , legislation was again introduced in the United States Congress by Rep. Engel , under the new designation H.R. 1784 : PLEA Act .
Once again , the bill failed to proceed to a vote .
In the following years , the Five - seven was subject to further controversy due to reports of the pistol 's use by drug cartels in the Mexican Drug War .
In the United States , the Five - seven has never been used to kill a police officer , but various news sources such as The Boston Globe and La Jornada reported incidents in which the pistol was used to shoot and kill police officers or civilians in Mexico .
According to the ATF , the Five - seven is one of the weapons favored by drug cartels in the Mexican Drug War , and a smuggled Five - seven pistol can sell for up to 66,000 pesos ( US$ 5,000 ) in Mexico .
From Mexico , the pistols have been smuggled into other South American countries ; in a July 2010 drive - by shooting in Envigado , Colombia , two cartel gunmen armed with Five - seven pistols opened fire on a group of bystanders outside a nightclub , leaving 9 people dead and 10 wounded .
In November 2009 , the Five - seven again became subject to controversy in the United States , following the shooting at Fort Hood military base , in Texas .
A U.S. Army psychiatrist , Major Nidal Malik Hasan , opened fire on fellow soldiers with a Five - seven pistol , killing 13 people and wounding 29 in the worst shooting ever to take place on an American military base .
Shortly after the shooting , FNH USA responded with a fact sheet dismissing allegations about the nature of the pistol , stating that it is only offered to civilians with sporting ammunition .
Later in the month , a number of gun control organizations such as the Brady Campaign wrote a collaborative letter to U.S. President Barack Obama , citing the weapon 's use by the Fort Hood shooter and Mexican drug cartels , and calling on him to ban importation of the Five - seven pistol and 5.7×28 mm ammunition .
In July 2010 , legislation was introduced in the United States Congress by Rep. Engel , for a third time , under the new designation H.R. 6030 : PLEA Act .
Like its previous incarnations , the H.R. 6030 bill failed to proceed to a vote by either the House of Representatives or Senate .
USERS
Section::::Users .
The first military organization to adopt the Five - seven was the Cypriot National Guard ( Greek : Εθνική Φρουρά ) , which purchased 250 pistols in May 2000 for its special forces group .
By 2009 , the Five - seven was in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations throughout the world .
In the United States , the Five - seven is currently used by over 300 law enforcement agencies , including the U.S. Secret Service .
Military and law enforcement organizations using the Five - seven include : !
width="100px
" Country !
Organization !
Model !
Quantity !
Date !
Reference rowspan=2 Ministry of Internal Affairs SEE ALSO
* CZ 52 –
Czech military pistol chambered for bottlenecked , high velocity 7.62×25 mm ammunition .
* Heckler & Koch UCP –
Competing 4.6×30 mm PDW - caliber pistol project briefly developed by Heckler & Koch in Germany .
* MP-443 Grach – Russian military pistol chambered for armor - piercing 9×19 mm 7N21 + P+ ammunition .
* QSZ-92 / QSW-06 – Chinese military pistols designed by Norinco , utilizing proprietary 5.8×21 mm armor - piercing ammunition .
* TT pistol – Soviet military pistol chambered for bottlenecked , high velocity 7.62×25 mm ammunition .
* Kel - Tec PMR-30 - A US high capacity pistol chambered for .22WMG .
* Vest buster
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* – FNH USA
* Owner 's Manual
* FNH Firearms Blog * " FNH USA Five - seveN Pistol 5.7×28 mm " – Tactical - Life Video