DISNEY SPRINGS Disney Springs ( previously known as Lake Buena Vista Shopping Village in 1975 , Walt Disney World Village in 1977 , Disney Village Marketplace in 1989 , and Downtown Disney in 1997 ) is an outdoor shopping , dining , and entertainment complex at the Walt Disney World Resort in Bay Lake , Florida , near Orlando .
The complex opened on March 22 , 1975 , and has been expanded and renamed at other times over the years , until 2013 , when plans were announced for a three - year renovation and expansion of the complex , and on September 29 , 2015 , the name officially changed to Disney Springs .
The complex includes four distinct areas : Marketplace , The Landing , Town Center , and West Side .
Buses and water taxis operated by Disney Transport provide transportation between Disney Springs and other areas of Walt Disney World .
HISTORY EARLY EXPANSION ; MULTIPLE REBRANDINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Early expansion ; multiple rebrandings .
The Lake Buena Vista Shopping Village , which opened on March 22 , 1975 , was originally envisioned as an area shopping mall .
Two years after its opening , the complex was renamed Walt Disney World Village .
With the advent of new management under Michael Eisner in 1984 , Disney began looking for ways to keep vacationers on Walt Disney World property longer , and prevent them from leaving for entertainment beyond Disney 's borders .
To compete with the popular Church Street Station clubs in downtown Orlando , Disney announced the addition of Pleasure Island , featuring nightclubs showcasing Disney 's quality and creativity , to Walt Disney World Village on July 21 , 1986 .
Construction began the following August and Pleasure Island was opened on May 1 , 1989 , the same day as the Disney 's Hollywood Studios theme park .
Later that year , the complex was renamed Disney Village Marketplace .
In the mid-1990s , the growth of Walt Disney World created the potential for further expansion , leading to a $ 1 billion investment in projects across the resort .
The first World of Disney store opened October 2 , 1996 , in Marketplace .
On June 20 , 1995 , major enhancements and expansions were announced for the area , with the Disney Village Marketplace and Pleasure Island being combined into a newly branded district named Downtown Disney .
The re - branding was introduced on September 7 , 1997 .
On September 15 , Downtown Disney West Side , a expansion , opened as a third shopping , dining , and entertainment area featuring venues such as La Nouba ( the former Cirque Du Soleil show in residence which closed at the end of 2017 ) , DisneyQuest , and Virgin Megastore .
Major changes to the complex also included the conversion of Mickey 's Character Shop into the World of Disney , becoming the world 's largest Disney store , in addition to the expansion and upgrade of the AMC Pleasure Island Theatres , as well as the opening of Rainforest Cafe and Planet Hollywood .
On September 27 , 2008 , the Pleasure Island nightclubs closed .
The Downtown Disney complex gained a sister district in California on January 12 , 2001 , with the addition of Downtown Disney at the Disneyland Resort .
Similar complexes also exist at other Disney resorts : Disney Village , which opened on April 12 , 1992 , at Disneyland Resort Paris ; Ikspiari , which opened on July 7 , 2000 , at the Tokyo Disney Resort ; and Disneytown at Shanghai Disney Resort .
RENOVATION , EXPANSION , AND RENAMING TO DISNEY SPRINGS Section::::Renovation , expansion , and renaming to Disney Springs .
On March 14 , 2013 , Walt Disney Parks and Resorts chairman Tom Staggs announced that Downtown Disney would be redesigned and renamed as Disney Springs .
The 3-year renovation and expansion project would include 150 new tenants , two parking structures , and a near - doubling of mall area .
Prior to this announcement , the last renovation of Downtown Disney had been in 1997 .
In order to facilitate the construction of the area and the increase in capacity , two large parking structures were constructed in previous surface parking lot areas .
New construction features include new bridges connecting the complex to Disney 's Saratoga Springs resort , with further bridges connecting The Landing to the Marketplace , The Springs , Town Center and West Side .
High Line structures were built across the West Side in order to provide both theme and shade .
In addition , a new bus terminal , with dedicated bus lanes on Buena Vista Drive , was built ; Buena Vista Drive was widened , and a new exit ramp built from Interstate 4 directly to Disney Springs , as part of the traffic upgrade .
The complex was renamed Disney Springs on September 29 , 2015 .
Town Center , built just south of The Landing in the surface parking lots , was opened on May 15 , 2016 , completing the major construction on the project .
With the completion of the renovation and expansion in early 2016 , Disney Springs consists of four districts : *
The Marketplace * The Landing ( 2015 renovation of former Pleasure Island )
* Town Center ( 2016 expansion )
* West Side AREAS Section::::Areas .
Disney Springs is divided into four areas :
Marketplace , The Landing , Town Center , and West Side .
The complex is bordered by Lake Buena Vista to the north and the parking garages and surface lots to the south .
Walt Disney Imagineering took inspiration for Disney Springs from real coastal towns found throughout Florida , such as St. Augustine and Coral Gables .
Creative director Dave Hoffman said about the area , " Each neighborhood reflects its function and [ the fictional ] time period when it was developed . "
According to the town 's fictional history , Disney Springs was settled in the mid-1800s by a cattle rancher who discovered the town 's namesake springs and the town subsequently expanded from the springs outwards .
MARKETPLACE Section::::Marketplace .
The Marketplace houses many shops and restaurants reminiscent of the American Craftsman - style of the 1930s .
The first restaurant in the Earl of Sandwich chain is located here .
T - Rex Cafe is a dinosaur - themed restaurant operated by Landry 's Restaurants , which features animatronic dinosaurs .
It opened on October 14 , 2008 .
Landry 's Restaurants also operates Rainforest Cafe at this location .
A walkway spanning the Village Lake and connecting Rainforest Cafe with the Lego Store — The Marketplace Causeway — was constructed and opened in 2015 .
THE LANDING Section::::The Landing .
The Landing depicts the fictional town 's transportation hub and marina .
The Landing features nautical - themed restaurants and shops , including Jock Lindsey 's Hangar Bar — an aviation - themed dive bar based on the character from the Indiana Jones films — and The Boathouse , which serves as the port for the amphibious automobiles that offer cruises of Lake Buena Vista .
The Landing was formerly the site of Pleasure Island , a nighttime entertainment district with two comedy clubs and four dance clubs .
These areas closed permanently on September 27 , 2008 .
On November 18 , 2010 , Disney announced a project named Hyperion Wharf , which was planned to replace the Pleasure Island complex .
Pleasure Island would have undergone extensive renovations and re - theming to transform into the early twentieth century wharf - themed entertainment area .
New shopping and dining locations would have also been added .
In July 2011 , it was announced that these plans were delayed .
The plans were later canceled because it was deemed better to totally overhaul the Downtown Disney area .
With the advent of Disney Springs , the former Pleasure Island was redesigned as The Landing in 2015 .
THE EMPRESS LILLY Section::::The Empress Lilly .
The structure originally known as
the Empress Lilly is a static full - size replica of a paddle steamer riverboat on Village Lake .
It is 220 feet long and 62 feet wide .
Though it resembles a paddle steamer boat , it is actually a boat - shaped building on a submerged concrete foundation .
It opened on May 1 , 1976 , when it was christened by Walt Disney 's widow , Lillian Disney , for whom it was named .
It originally housed four separate entertainment and dining areas .
In the mid-1990s , Levy Restaurants signed a contract to operate the " ship " for 20 years .
On April 22 , 1995 , the Empress Lilly closed .
All interiors were ripped out and the old smokestacks and paddlewheel were removed because they had rusted and rotted ; these were not replaced .
The restaurant opened as Fulton 's Crab House on March 10 , 1996 .
Fulton 's Crab House closed for major renovations in 2016 to be remodeled into a new restaurant , Paddlefish .
As part of the renovation , the exterior was altered greatly , while retaining the original shape of the ship , and new smokestacks and paddlewheels were installed .
TOWN CENTER Section::::Town Center .
Town Center depicts the fictional town 's central business district , featuring Spanish Revival architecture from the 1920s .
The Town Center area also features the namesake " springs " , which are artificial .
The area debuted in 2016 , having been built on former surface parking lots , and features many well known retailers .
The area will open in multiple phases , with the first phase having opened on May 15 , 2016 .
Retailers to have opened in the first phase of Town Center include Anthropologie , Uniqlo ( the first of its kind in the Southeastern United States ) , Sephora , L'Occitane en Provence , Pandora , UGG , Johnston & Murphy , ZARA and Kate Spade and Trophy Room among many others .
WEST SIDE
Section::::West Side .
West Side depicts the town 's exposition center , having been developed in the 1950s , according to the town 's fictional history .
Expansion of the existing AMC Theatres Pleasure Island 24 venue opened with Downtown Disney West Side in 1997 .
In late 2010 , renovations began which created theaters offering food service .
The complex was renamed AMC Downtown Disney 24 .
In 1997 , there were plans to open a Planet Movies by AMC entertainment complex at this location by combining the Planet Hollywood restaurant with a re - branded AMC megaplex .
These plans were abandoned due to Planet Hollywood 's continued financial problems .
The complex has now been renamed AMC Disney Springs 24 .
DisneyQuest was located in this area until it closed on July 2 , 2017 , and subsequently demolished .
The NBA Experience , which is being built on the DisneyQuest site , will open in summer 2019 .
There are also plans to reopen the theatre that once housed Cirque Du Soleil La Nouba , the Walt Disney World Resort 's show in residence , with
a new Cirque Du Soleil show that will pay homage to Disney 's rich history of animation , with a vivid story told in a way that only Cirque du Soleil can deliver . "
INCIDENTS
*
On April 22 , 2010 , a 61-year - old woman from Celebration , Florida , suffered a collapsed lung , fractured ribs , and back pain due to a boating accident near the Treehouse Villas .
The rented Sea Raycer that her husband was driving collided with a Disney ferryboat .
The Orange County Sheriff 's report states that the Sea Raycer crossed into the ferry 's right - of - way .
*
On December 25 , 2015 , a fight broke out at Bongo 's Cuban Cafe between a 70-year - old man and restaurant staff .
The man was escorted out of the restaurant after he grabbed a worker 's bicep , which left a mark .
The man was arrested a short time later outside Starbucks Coffee .
At some point during the fight , someone falsely reported hearing gunshots at the restaurant .
This rumor spread quickly , leading to mass panic .
The suspect was found without a weapon and was charged with battery .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS