NORMANDY AMERICAN CEMETERY AND MEMORIAL
The Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial ( ) is a World War II cemetery and memorial in Colleville - sur - Mer , Normandy , France , that honors American troops who died in Europe during World War II .
Almost 9,400 are buried there .
In 2007 , the American Battle Monuments Commission dedicated a new $ 30 million , 30,000 sf Visitors Center at the cemetery , relating the global significance and meaning of Operation Overlord .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On June 8 , 1944 , the U.S. First Army established the temporary cemetery , the first American cemetery on European soil in World War II .
After the war , the present - day cemetery was established a short distance to the east of the original site .
Like all other overseas American cemeteries in France for World War I and II , France has granted the United States a special , perpetual concession to the land occupied by the cemetery , free of any charge or any tax to honor the forces .
This cemetery is managed by the American Battle Monuments Commission , a small independent agency of the U.S. federal government , under Congressional acts that provide yearly financial support for maintaining them , with most military and civil personnel employed abroad .
The U.S. flag flies over these granted soils .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The cemetery is located on a bluff overlooking Omaha Beach ( one of the landing beaches of the Normandy Invasion ) and the English Channel .
It covers 172 acres , and contains the remains of 9,387 American military dead , most of whom were killed during the invasion of Normandy and ensuing military operations in World War II .
Included are graves of Army Air Corps crews shot down over France as early as 1942 and three American women .
Only some of the soldiers who died overseas are buried in the overseas American military cemeteries .
When it came time for a permanent burial , the next of kin eligible to make decisions were asked if they wanted their loved ones repatriated for permanent burial in the U.S. , or interred at the closest overseas cemetery .
NOTABLE INTERMENTS Section::::Notable interments .
Among the burials at the cemetery are three recipients of the Medal of Honor , including Theodore Roosevelt , Jr. , son of President Theodore Roosevelt .
After the creation of the cemetery , another son of President Roosevelt , Quentin , who had been killed in World War I , was exhumed and reburied next to his brother Theodore , Jr. Notable burials at the cemetery include :
* Lesley J. McNair , U.S. Army general , one of the two highest - ranking Americans to be killed in action in World War II
* Jimmie W. Monteith , Medal of Honor recipient
* Two of the Niland brothers , Preston and Robert * Frank D. Peregory , Medal of Honor recipient * Theodore Roosevelt , Jr. , son of President Theodore Roosevelt , Medal of Honor recipient * Quentin Roosevelt , son of President Theodore Roosevelt , aviator killed in action in World War I THE MEMORIAL Section::::The Memorial .
The names of 1,557 Americans who lost their lives in the Normandy campaign but could not be located and/or identified are inscribed on the walls of a semicircular garden at the east side of the memorial .
This part consists of a semicircular colonnade with a loggia at each end containing maps and narratives of the military operations .
At the center is a 22-foot bronze statue entitled The Spirit of American Youth Rising from the Waves by Donald De Lue , and an overhead mural by Leon Kroll .
Facing west at the memorial , one sees in the foreground the reflecting pool , the mall with burial areas to either side and the circular chapel beyond .
Behind the chapel are allegorical figures representing the United States and France .
An orientation table overlooks the beach and depicts the landings at Normandy .
The Memorial faces the United States at its nearest point to the cemetery ; a point between Eastport and Lubec , Maine . TIME CAPSULE Section::::Time capsule .
Embedded in the lawn directly opposite the entrance to the old Visitors ' Building is a time capsule which has been sealed and contains news reports of the June 6 , 1944 Normandy landings .
The capsule is covered by a pink granite slab upon which is engraved : To be opened June 6 , 2044 .
Affixed in the center of the slab is a bronze plaque adorned with the five stars of a General of the Army and engraved with the following inscription : ' In memory of General Dwight D. Eisenhower and the forces under his command .
This sealed capsule containing news reports of the June 6 , 1944
Normandy landings is placed here by the newsmen who were here , June 6 , 1969 .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE FILM *
In the horror film The Omen ( 1976 ) , the cemetery is used as a main photo poster with Damien standing next to the thousands of graves .
*
In Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) , the cemetery is featured at the beginning and end , showing World War II veteran Private James Francis Ryan accompanied by his family .
In the beginning of the film , he makes his way to the grave of Captain John Miller ( played by Tom Hanks ) .
At the end , Ryan salutes the grave and asks his wife if he lived a good life and was a good man .
( Both the grave and Captain John Miller are fictional ; the headstone for Miller was only brought to the cemetery for the movie . )
The Private Ryan story is based upon the story of the Niland Brothers , two of whom are buried in the cemetery ; references are also made to the five Sullivan brothers , who were all killed in the " Juneau incident " .
MUSIC
* Symphonic Prelude ( The Cemetery at Colleville - sur - Mer ) , by Mark Camphouse , portrays the battle in a way that battles are commonly depicted for bands : a slow introduction followed by a moderate tempo body and a majestic ending .
SEE ALSO
* List of military cemeteries in Normandy REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Complete List of Memorial Events for 65th Anniversary of D - Day * American D - Day : Omaha Beach , Utah Beach & Pointe
du
Hoc * World War II Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial , American Battle Monuments Commission
* Organization Les Fleurs de la Mémoire * World War I cemeteries.com a comprehensive guide to the military cemeteries and memorials around the world
* Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial at Find
a Grave
* " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot A " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot B " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot C " *
" Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot D " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot E " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot F " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot G " *
" Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot H " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot
I " * " Names of the people buried and GPS locations in Plot J "
* " Names of the people buried in the cemetery " * " Overview of the graves on the American Cemetery and Memorial Normandy by State * " Numbers by unit
( example first row : 463 graves of the 262 Infantry Regiment of the 66 Division ) . "