NEW JERSEY PLAN
The New Jersey Plan ( also known as the Small State Plan or the Paterson Plan ) was a proposal for the structure of the United States Government presented by William Paterson at the Constitutional Convention on June 15 , 1787 .
The plan was created in response to the Virginia Plan , which called for two houses of Congress , both elected with apportionment according to population .
The less populous states were adamantly opposed to giving most of the control of the national government to the more populous states , and so proposed an alternative plan that would have kept the one - vote - per - state representation under one legislative body from the Articles of Confederation .
The New Jersey Plan was opposed by James Madison and Edmund Randolph ( the proponents of the Virginia State Plan ) .
PROPOSALS Section::::Proposals .
Under the New Jersey Plan , the unicameral legislature with one vote per state was inherited from the Articles of Confederation .
This position reflected the belief that the states were independent entities and , as they entered the United States of America freely and individually , remained so .
The plan proposed the following : * The Articles of Confederation should be amended .
*
*
In addition to the existing powers under all of the Articles of Confederation , Congress gained authority to raise funds via tariffs and other measures , and to regulate interstate commerce and commerce with other nations .
Cases involving these powers would still be heard by state courts unless appealed to the federal judiciary .
*
*
Congress has the authority to collect taxes from states based on the number of free inhabitants and 3/5ths of slaves in that state .
However , this power requires the consent of some proportion of the states .
*
*
Congress elects a federal executive , consisting of multiple people , who can not be re - elected and can be recalled by Congress when requested by the majority of executives of the states .
*
* The federal judiciary is represented by a Supreme Tribunal , appointed by the federal executive , which has authority in federal impeachment cases and as the appeal of last resort in cases dealing with national matters ( such as treaties ) .
*
* The Articles of Confederation and treaties are the supreme law of the land , an early representation in the debates of the Supremacy Clause .
The federal executive is authorized to use force to compel non - compliant states to observe the law .
* * A policy of admission of new states should be established .
* * A singular policy for naturalization should be established .
* * A citizen of one state can be prosecuted under the laws of another state in which the crime was committed .
* Variations also proposed that state governments must be bound by oath to support the Articles , that a policy should be established to handle territorial disputes , and that the offenses deemed as treason should be defined .
CONSIDERATION Section::::Consideration .
Ultimately , the New Jersey Plan was rejected as a basis for a new constitution .
The Virginia Plan was used , but some ideas from the New Jersey Plan were added .
Perhaps the most important of these was introduced by the Connecticut Compromise , which established a bicameral legislature with the U.S. House of Representatives apportioned by population , as desired by the Virginia Plan , and the Senate granted equal votes per state , as desired by the New Jersey Plan .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS * Variant texts of the New Jersey Plan at the Avalon Project