FULL - SIZE CAR Full - size car is a marketing term used in North America for an automobile larger than a mid - size car .
Traditional U.S. full - size passenger cars were designed to be comfortable for six occupants and their luggage for long - distance driving .
The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) currently uses the term large car to denote full - size cars based on their combined interior passenger and luggage volume .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The American Heritage Dictionary describes " the standard or normal size " as a full - size car .
The traditional full - size passenger cars that were built by the U.S. automakers ( General Motors , Ford , Chrysler , and American Motors ) up to the 1970s " can carry six occupants plus vast amounts of luggage over long distances in great comfort , with more than adequate performance , and will give reasonable gas mileage under such conditions " .
Full - size cars were also denoted for their length , nearing in basic low - priced , family sedans .
The luxury models often tended to reach .
Previously , a wheelbase greater than was the criterion for full - size .
The term first appeared in the early 1960s to distinguish what also became known as " standard"-size cars from the new compact and intermediate models then being introduced .
The U.S. EPA defines " large " size as or more of combined passenger and cargo interior volume in sedans and or more in station wagons .
A majority of U.S. automakers manufactured full size automobiles were constructed using a body - on - frame platform ( with the exception of the Chrysler C platform and AMC 's Ambassador ) .
This design was phased out in 2011 when vehicles using the Ford Panther platform ended production .
Use of the full - size term in North America became popular after the introduction of compact - sized cars by the U.S.
" Detroit Big Three " for the 1960 model year , and then a few years later the introduction of what became known as mid - size cars .
While length and wheelbase varied ( increasing over time ) being considered full - size required a width as close as practical to the width limit over which the federal government required vehicles to have clearance lights .
The term was most correctly applied to cars close to the width limit carrying nameplates of the " Low Priced Three " , Chevrolet , Ford , and Plymouth .
Into the 1960s , this term was applied to the first level of cars targeted at " working people who wanted a roomy , reliable , economical car , with perhaps a little style thrown in . "
Manufacturers hoped their slightly more expensive brands such as Pontiac , Mercury , and Dodge , would be perceived by the public as more desirable than a full - size car even in situations where they were not any larger .
However , while the difference between a full - size car , a basic large Chevrolet , Ford , or Plymouth , and a luxury car such as Cadillac , Lincoln , or Imperial , was clear , both manufacturers and consumers had difficulty classifying those in between , such as large Pontiacs , Mercurys , or Dodges .
Manufacturers contributed to the lack of distinction by marketing models of their premium brands into the lower price ranges with what had previously been considered medium - priced brands .
For 1977 , General Motors downsized its full - size ( and higher priced ) cars , with overall width cut from approximately to the mid-70 inch range .
Chevrolet , Pontiac , and the less expensive Oldsmobile and Buick models had a 116-inch wheelbase .
More expensive Oldsmobile and Buick models , plus
the Cadillac had a wheelbase , but no more width .
The cars were well received by the press and the customers ; full sized Chevrolets that had lost the top of the sales chart in 1976 for the intermediate Oldsmobile Cutlass regained the top spot for 1977 .
Ford and Chrysler downsized for 1979 , the latter building its Chrysler R platform , which was comparable in size to the new platforms designed by GM and Ford .
By this time , a huge increase in gasoline prices had made it difficult to sell any large cars , downsized or not .
Chrysler had the huge misfortune of introducing two consecutive new designs of its largest cars , in 1974 and 1979 , during times when gasoline prices suddenly increased .
The EPA interior volumes for passenger and cargo for the most part resulted in mid - size , full - size , and luxury cars common in the mid-1970s all being classified as large cars .
The 1980s Chrysler M platform , classified as large cars at the time , were derived from the Dodge Aspen / Plymouth Volare ( F - body ) platform , originally marketed as " large compacts " .
While many modern cars are referred to as full - size , they do not qualify for the term as used in the 1960s and 1970s .
Consumer acceptance of large SUVs approaching 80 inches in width shows interest remains in vehicles capable of three - across seating with reasonable comfort , a strong point of a true full - size car .
Police cars in the United States are almost always full - size cars , such as the Ford Crown Victoria .
This is usually due to the amount of interior space for an arrestee as well as trunk volume for computer and electrical equipment .
Interior space and trunk volume also make such vehicles popular for taxi use .
Since the discontinuation of the Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor , the replacements have been variations of the Ford Taurus , Dodge Charger , and Chevrolet Impala .
DECLINE , RENAISSANCE , AND FURTHER DECLINE Section::::Decline , renaissance , and further decline .
The sales of full - size vehicles in the United States declined after the early 1970s fuel crisis .
By that time , full - size cars had grown to wheelbases of and overall lengths of around .
In the 1970s , due to the fuel crisis and the resulting rise in fuel costs , many people traded in their full - size cars for smaller models such as the Chevrolet Nova , Ford Maverick , and Plymouth Valiant , also it was during this time small Japanese cars such as the Toyota Corolla and Honda Civic gained popularity .
The perennial US small car manufacturer , American Motors , discontinued its full - size wheelbase AMC Ambassador in 1974 to focus development on its more compact models .
Starting in the late-1970s , the other American automakers began selling full - size cars with smaller exterior dimensions and smaller , more fuel efficient engines .
That , combined with gas being cheap once again in the late-1980s , full - size cars regained popularity .
Chrysler discontinued its full - size cars ( Dodge St. Regis , Chrysler Newport and New Yorker , Plymouth Gran Fury ) in 1981 .
With full - size cars only 8.3 percent of sales in 1994 compared to 65 percent in 1960 General Motors discontinued some of its full - size cars ( Chevrolet Impala SS / Chevrolet Caprice , Buick Roadmaster , Oldsmobile Ninety - Eight , and Cadillac Fleetwood ) in 1996 .
Buick still had Park Avenue and LeSabre , Oldsmobile had the Regency and the Eighty - Eight , and Cadillac still had the DeVille .
Oldsmobile discontinued full - size cars in 1999 , and Buick and Cadillac introduced the Lucerne and DTS , respectively , in 2006 .
The 2011 model year was the final year of production of the Ford Panther platform ( the Ford Crown Victoria / Ford Police Interceptor , Mercury Grand Marquis , and Lincoln Town Car ) , as well as the Lucerne .
During the 1980s and 1990s , full - size cars lost ground to other vehicle types as family vehicles .
Initially , full - size sedans and station wagons lost ground to vans , which offered additional seating and cargo capacity with lower fuel consumption .
During the 1990s , full - size sedans and wagons lost further ground to mid - size and full - size SUVs , as they had similar towing capacity and a V8 engine started becoming an option in mid - size versions .
In North America , full - size station wagons would vanish during the 1990s ; Ford was the first to discontinue theirs after the 1991 model year , with GM following suit after 1996 .
As fuel costs increase , more consumers select more efficient vehicles .
These include automobiles such as compact and mid - size vehicles powered by smaller , more efficient engines .
American - brand full - size sedans such as Buicks , and luxury full - size Cadillac DTS are still best - selling in the full - size segment .
However , there is a serious attack on full - size by automakers to replace the size with price range .
For example , a review by U.S. News & World Report , named " Best luxury large cars of 2008 " included only one large car ( Cadillac DTS ) while the others are mid - size cars .
This is mostly because , in Europe , full - size cars only exist as absolute luxury cars ( F segment ) .
In 2010 , less than a half percent of the new cars sold in Germany fit into this category .
In other European countries , even the D- and E segments ( making together the equivalent to U.S. mid - size cars ) are not common .
By the mid-2010s , full - size cars began seeing a steep decline in sales in North America , with the Nissan Maxima being the only nonluxury full - size sedan to see a sales increase in 2016 , in a year in which the model was completely redesigned .
This has led to speculation on Ford ending production of the Ford Taurus outside China ( leaving the Lincoln Continental as its only full - size offering in the United States ) .
This was confirmed in April , 2018 , when Ford announced the sales of all Ford - branded passenger cars with the exception of the Mustang and non - hatch Focus models would end by 2022 .
Reports surfaced that GM would discontinue six models to focus more on crossover production , four of them being the company 's four full - size sedans including the Chevrolet Impala .
Hyundai confirmed that they would stop selling the Hyundai Azera in the United States after 2017 , though part of this was related to the creation of Hyundai 's Genesis lineup that cannibalized sales of the Azera after 2008 ; its corporate sibling ( via Kia Motors ) , the Kia Cadenza , remains available , as does the unrelated Kia K900 .
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles is also considering axing the Chrysler 300 after 2020 , partially to reduce identical models sold in the same showrooms as Dodge , as well as the 300 having seen a steep decline in sales compared to the Dodge Charger .
OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
A " large family car " , the equivalent of a full - size car class in Australian terms , is often denoted by width .
Therefore , the Ford Falcon and Toyota Aurion are considered large cars in the Australian and New Zealand markets .
These cars are sometimes referred to as " family cars " in Australia , and are typically or more in length .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the term is not used .
These are equivalent to American " midsize " cars .
SEE ALSO
* Car classification
* Vehicle size class
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official US government car size class definitions
* use of " large cars " in " Best Luxury Large Cars 2008 from USA News