SEATTLE FAULT
The Seattle Fault is a zone of multiple shallow east - west thrust faults that cross the Puget Sound Lowland and through Seattle ( in the U.S. state of Washington ) in the vicinity of Interstate Highway 90 .
The Seattle Fault was first recognized as a significant seismic hazard in 1992 , when a set of reports showed that about 1,100 years ago it was the scene of a major earthquake of about magnitude 7 – an event that entered Native American oral legend .
Extensive research has since shown the Seattle Fault to be part of a regional system of faults .
NOTABLE EARTHQUAKE Section::::Notable earthquake .
First suspected from mapping of gravitational anomalies in 1965 and an uplifted marine terrace at Restoration Point ( foreground in picture above ) , the Seattle Fault 's existence and likely hazard were definitely established by a set of five reports published in Science in 1992 .
These reports looked at the timing of abrupt uplift and subsidence around Restoration Point and Alki Point ( distant right side of picture ) , tsunami deposits on Puget Sound , turbidity in lake paleosediments , rock avalanches , and multiple landslides around Lake Washington , and determined that all these happened about 1100 years ago ( between A.D. 900–930 ) , and most likely due to an earthquake of magnitude 7 or greater on the Seattle Fault .
Although the A.D. 900–930 earthquake was over a thousand years ago , local native legends have preserved an association of a powerful supernatural spirit – a'yahos , noted for shaking , rushes of water , and landsliding – with five locales along the trace of the Seattle Fault , including a " spirit boulder " called Psai - Yah - hus near the Fauntleroy ferry dock in West Seattle .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The Seattle Fault is the structural boundary where 50–60 millions of years old ( early Tertiary ) basalt of the Crescent Formation on the south has been uplifted – the Seattle Uplift – and is tipping into the Seattle Basin , where the Tertiary bedrock is buried under at least of relatively softer , lighter sedimentary strata of the younger Blakeley and Blakely Harbor formations .
This has resulted in a wide zone of complex faulting , with three or more main south - dipping thrust faults .
Most of the faulting is " blind " ( not reaching the surface ) , and generally difficult to locate because of the generally heavy vegetation or development .
Three principal strands have been identified , their location determined by high - resolution seismic reflection and aeromagnetic surveys .
The northernmost strand lies nearly along Interstate 90 and then under Lake Sammamish .
The central section of the fault zone – where it crosses the apparent location of the Olympic - Wallowa Lineament – shows marked variation in the location of the strands and of the underlying structure , but the nature and significance of this is not understood .
The fault extends for approximately 70 km ( 43 miles ) from near Fall City on the east , where it appears to be terminated by the South Whidbey Island Fault , to Hood Canal on the west ( not shown on the map ) .
However , boundaries defining the western termination zone is currently unclear ( see Puget Sound faults#Question of western termination ) .
It is the northern edge of the Seattle Uplift , of which the Tacoma Fault is the southern edge .
One model has the Seattle and Tacoma faults converging at depth to form a wedge , which is being popped up by approximately north – south oriented compression that ultimately derives from plate tectonics .
Another model ( see diagram ) interprets the Seattle Uplift as a sheet of rock that is being forced up a ramp .
Subsequent work suggests that the structure of the Seattle Fault may vary from east to west , with both models being applicable in different sections .
A later model has part of the north - thrusting sheet forming a wedge between the sedimentary formations of the Seattle Basin and the underlying bedrock .
The Seattle Fault is believed to date from about 40 million years ago ( late Eocene ) .
This is about the time that the strike - slip movement on the north - striking Straight Creek Fault to the east ceased , due to the intrusions of plutons .
It appears that when the Straight Creek Fault became stuck the north – south compressive force that it had accommodated by strike - slip motion was transferred to the crust of the Puget Lowland , which subsequently folded and faulted , and the various blocks jammed over one another .
Other scarps associated with the Seattle fault have been identified by LIDAR - based mapping ; trenching has generally shown the faulting to be more complex than was first realized .
Many of the details of the Seattle Fault , including recurrence rate , remain to be resolved .
A study of sediments in Lake Washington found evidence of seven large ( M > 7 ) earthquakes in the last 3500 years .
Surface scarps due to faulting are rarely observed in this area ( due to topography , vegetation , and urbanization ) ; a rare exception can be seen at Mee Kwa Mooks Park south of Alki Point .
This is the site of the West Seattle Fault ; the prominent rise there is due to uplift on the north side of the fault .
HAZARD
Section::::Hazard .
The Seattle Fault ( and the related Tacoma Fault ) is not the only source of earthquake hazard in the Puget Lowland .
Other faults in the near surface continental crust , such as the South Whidbey Island Fault ( near Everett ) , and the yet to be studied Olympia Fault ( near Olympia ) , though historically quiescent , are suspected of generating earthquakes of around magnitude 7 .
Others , such as the 2001 Nisqually earthquake , originate about below Puget Sound in the Benioff zone of the subducting Juan de Fuca Plate ; being so deep their energy is dissipated .
And there are the infrequent but very powerful great subduction events , such as the magnitude 9 1700 Cascadia earthquake , where the entire Cascadia subduction zone , from Cape Mendocino to Vancouver Island , slips .
But the Seattle and Tacoma faults are probably the most serious earthquake threat to the populous Seattle – Tacoma area .
A 2002 study of bridge vulnerability estimated that a magnitude 7 earthquake on the Seattle Fault would damage approximately 80 bridges in the Seattle – Tacoma area , whereas a magnitude 9 subduction event would damage only around 87 bridges in all of Western Washington .
The same study also found that with failure of just six bridges ( the minimum damage for a Benioff M 6.5 event ) there could be at least $ 3 billion lost in business revenue alone .
Subsequent retrofitting by the Washington Department of Transportation and the City of Seattle would likely reduce damage to key bridges .
But there is concern that such an earthquake on the Seattle Fault would devastate unreinforced masonry ( URM ) buildings , of which the City of Seattle is estimated to have around a thousand , concentrated in Capitol Hill , Pioneer Square , and the International District .
Other recent work indicates that the Seattle Fault can generate two types of earthquakes ; both pose " considerable hazard " to the Seattle metropolitan region .
The A.D. 900–930 earthquake is believed to be the only instance in the past 7,000 years of the type that causes a regional uplift .
The other type is more localized and shallower ( and therefore more damaging ) ; at least four such events are believed to have occurred in the past 3,000 years on the west end of the fault .
( The history of the central and eastern segments is not known . )
Calculations based on fault length and paleoseismological studies show that the Seattle Fault can generate a very damaging magnitude 7.0 earthquake .
In addition to extensive damage to unreinforced structures and structures built on fill ( such as much of Seattle 's Pioneer Square area , the industrial area , and the waterfront ) , computer modeling has shown that such earthquakes could cause a tsunami of about high on Elliott Bay .
The modeling shows that such a tsunami would also inundate the industrial areas on Commencement Bay 30 miles south ( Tacoma ) and low - lying areas on the Puyallup River delta .
There is also concern that a severe or prolonged event could cause failure of the Duwamish or Puyallup River deltas , where the main port facilities for Seattle and Tacoma are located ( Harbor Island and Commencement Bay ) .
SEE ALSO
* Geology of the Pacific Northwest
* Tacoma Fault
NOTES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * USGS Professional Paper 1560 :
Assessing Earthquake Hazards and Reducing Risk in the Pacific Northwest Technical , but readable .
And has many good pictures .
* USGS :
Reducing Earthquake Hazards in the Pacific Northwest
* USGS :
Earthquake ground motion movies
* Pinpointing devastation if Seattle Fault ruptures Seattle Times , February 20 , 2005 .
* Scenario for a Magnitude 6.7 Earthquake on the Seattle Fault Vivid and comprehensive .
* Washington State 's Bridge Seismic Retrofit Program * Earthquake Study : Four Vashon - Specific Scenarios Considerations for all islands .
* Puget Sound Tsunami Inundation Modeling ( NOAA ) * Elliott Bay inundation map ( DNR ) * Tsunami Hazard Map of the Elliott Bay Area ( NOAA )
* Additional inundation maps ( DNR Publications )
* Puget Sound Lidar Consortium Use of Lidar for locating faults .