CARLING BLACK LABEL Black Label is a Canadian brand of lager distributed by Carling and well - known throughout the former British Empire .
In several countries , it is also known as Carling Black Label , and in Sweden , it is known as Carling Premier .
In the United Kingdom it is now known as just Carling .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although its original focus was on ale , Carling has been brewing lager - style beers since the 1870s .
In 1927 , as part of an overall corporate re - branding effort under new president J. Innes Carling , the company renamed its already popular Black & White Lager to Black Label .
Three years later , Carling was purchased by Toronto business tycoon E. P. Taylor , who merged the company into his Canadian Breweries Limited ( CBL ) , which grew to be the world 's largest brewing company , at least for a time .
Under Taylor , Black Label was promoted as CBL 's flagship brand and went on to become the world 's first beer to be brewed on a mass international scale , becoming particularly popular in Commonwealth countries such as the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand and South Africa .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In response to a shift in popular taste away from ale , Carling added a three - storey lager plant to their main London , Ontario , brewery in 1877 .
Carling 's Lager ( later renamed Carling 's Bavarian Stock Lager , and then Carling 's Imperial Club Lager ) was the company 's first lager brand .
Carling 's Black & White Lager was introduced in the 1920s and later renamed Black Label Lager , in contrast to their recently launched Red Cap Ale .
Due to its strength and price , the brand quickly became popular with the country 's working class , perhaps most famously among the loggers and miners of Northern Ontario , where the brand gained a tough , blue - collar image .
Around 1990 , Black Label had an advertising campaign in Canada , which used the phrase " The Legend is Black . "
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
After the repeal of prohibition in 1933 , the Peerless Motor Car Company , looking for a way to diversify in the poor car market of the depression , purchased the American rights to Carling 's formulas , identifying labels , and trademarks .
Technicians and brewmasters were sent from Canada to convert a Peerless plant in Cleveland , Ohio , into the Brewing Corporation of America .
They first tried just brewing Carling 's Red Cap Ale , but sales were too slow to maintain the brewery , and sales did n't climb until the introduction of Black Label lager .
The philosophy behind Black Label was to have a high quality lager that was available nationwide but with a locally brewed budget price .
The strategy worked , and the next several decades led to rapid growth and expansion for the brewery and the Carling Black Label brand .
When Carling stopped producing Black Label to focus on a more profitable lager , they found their sales plummeting .
Carling re - introduced Black Label with a beautiful blonde named Mabel , portrayed by Jeanne Goodspeed , with the slogan " Hey Mabel , Black Label ! " .
The twenty - year marketing campaign cemented the name in the popular culture of America .
In 1979 , after several years of intense pressure from the larger American Brewers Miller and Anheuser - Busch , Carling - National was bought out by the Heileman Brewing Co. of La Crosse , Wisconsin .
Carling and the Black Label brand are currently owned by the Molson Coors Brewing Company .
Though no longer widely distributed in the U.S. , Black Label remains the official beer of Beer Frisbee .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Black Label was introduced to the United Kingdom in 1952 .
Originally , it was only available in bottles , but in 1965 , The Hill Top in Sheffield became the first pub to pour Carling on draught .
In the 1970s and 80s , Carling Black Label sales were driven to great heights , due partly to increased advertising support , in particular the classic " I bet he drinks " series of advertisements , and partly with the launch of Carling Black Label in cans .
Cans were important to Carling 's success as they helped open up the " take home " market .
The " I bet he drinks " series of ads showed someone doing something cool , clever or difficult , and having a bystander say " I bet he drinks Carling Black Label " .
With the help of this advertising campaign , it became Britain 's best - selling brand of beer in 1971 .
In the 1980s , many of the adverts featured comedians Mark Arden and Stephen Frost , also known as The Oblivion Boys , delivering the classic punchline .
One of the advertisements in the series , Dambusters from 1989 , was a parody of the 1955 film of the same name , and was ranked at number 12 on ITV 's list of the " Best Ever Ads " in 2005 , and at number 17 on Channel 4 's list of the " 100 Greatest TV Ads " in 2000 .
Campaign Live also ranked it at number 5 in their list of the " Top 10 Funniest TV Ads of All Time " in 2008 .
Carling has remained Britain 's best selling beer since 1985 .
The Black Label was dropped from the name in 1997 and the brand 's logo was updated .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa , Black Label began to take on a different tone with the anti - apartheid movement .
This was partly due to the fact that , at 5.5 % , it had more alcohol than the other brands of beer that generally had 5.0 % , as noted in the popular advertising catch phrase " only hard working students deserve an extra 0.5 percent . "
Furthermore , the connotation of black to the racial issue became a point of pride to the native Africans .
It used to be sold with the motto , " America 's Lusty , Lively Beer " , perhaps in reference to Canada , though it is seldom seen in the United States .
The motto came from an older advertising campaign in the United States .
Another famous Afrikaans slogan for Black Label in South Africa is , "
Black Label sê die bybel " , which means " The Bible says ( one should drink ) Black Label . "
The beer was parodied by South African T - shirt company Laughitoff .
The slogan was changed to " Black Labour , White Guilt " , which led to an unsuccessful trademark infringement lawsuit from SABMiller .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Carling Lager website