CIVIC HOLIDAY
Civic Holiday is the most widely used name for a public holiday celebrated in most of Canada on the first Monday in August , though it is only officially known by that term by the governments of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories .
Civic Holiday is recognized as a statutory holiday in those two territories .
The holiday is known by a variety of names in other provinces and municipalities , including British Columbia Day in British Columbia , New Brunswick Day in New Brunswick , and Saskatchewan Day in Saskatchewan .
The holiday is celebrated as Natal Day in Nova Scotia , in commemoration of the founding of the Halifax – Dartmouth area , and Terry Fox Day in Manitoba , in honour of the nationally renowned Manitoba - born athlete .
Despite its special designations in Nova Scotia and Manitoba , the day is not a statutory holiday in those provinces , nor in Prince Edward Island .
ALBERTA Section::::Alberta .
In 1974 the Government of Alberta , acting through Minister of Culture Dr. Horst A. Schmid , declared the first Monday in August an annual holiday to recognize and celebrate the varied cultural heritage of Albertans , known as " Heritage Day " .
This gave rise in 1976 to the Edmonton Heritage Festival , a three - day celebration of food , dance , and handicrafts of cultures from around the world .
Heritage Day has been an " optional " civic holiday , having been downgraded from a statutory holiday following the introduction of Family Day in 1990 .
BRITISH COLUMBIA Section::::British Columbia .
In 1974 , Surrey MLA Ernie Hall , part of the BC NDP government of Dave Barrett , introduced legislation in the provincial legislature to establish the day as a provincial statutory holiday .
ONTARIO Section::::Ontario .
The holiday was renamed " Simcoe Day " in Toronto in 1969 , in honour of John Graves Simcoe , the first Lieutenant - Governor of Upper Canada and the leading proponent of the Act Against Slavery , but a motion at the Ontario Municipal Association to extend the name change across Ontario failed .
According to a 2005 proclamation this name continues to apply in the present amalgamated city of Toronto .
Civic Holiday is now known by one of a number of local appellations such as : * " Colonel By Day " in Ottawa * " George Hamilton Day " in Hamilton *
" Joseph Brant Day " in Burlington * " Founders ' Day " in Brantford * " McLaughlin Day " in Oshawa * " Alexander Mackenzie Day " in Sarnia *
" James Cockburn Day " in Cobourg * " Peter Robinson Day " in Peterborough *
" John Galt Day " in Guelph as well as numerous other names in smaller municipalities .
When not given a local name , it is often referred to as " Civic Holiday " .
Although a work holiday is given to employees of the federal and many municipal governments , the Government of Ontario has not defined this day as a statutory holiday and it is mentioned in neither Ontario 's Employment Standards Act nor Retail Business Holidays Act .
Schools are generally already closed , regardless of the holiday 's status , because of summer vacation .
The Caribbean Cultural Festival , formerly known as Caribana , is held this holiday weekend in Toronto , coinciding with Emancipation Day .
QUEBEC , NEWFOUNDLAND & LABRADOR , YUKON Section::::Quebec , Newfoundland & Labrador , Yukon .
The first Monday in August is not generally observed as a holiday in Quebec , parts of Newfoundland and Labrador , or Yukon , but replacement summer holidays may be observed as follows :
* Quebec observes Saint - Jean - Baptiste Day on 24 June .
*
In Yukon , Discovery Day is observed on the third Monday of August instead , and commemorates the 1896 discovery of gold in the territory and the start of the Klondike Gold Rush .
*
In Newfoundland and Labrador , the Shops Closing Act provides for a civic holiday on the date of the Royal St. John 's Regatta ( usually the first Wednesday of August ) in St. John 's , the date of the Harbour Grace Regatta ( usually the fourth Saturday in July ) in Harbour Grace , and a date fixed by the applicable municipal council in all other municipalities .
Several of these communities use the first Monday in August as a civic holiday , while others have not selected any date .
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND Section::::Prince Edward Island .
The holiday is not an official holiday , although some businesses may close for the day .
Additionally , federal workers receive the day off and federal services are closed , but municipal and provincial services and workers have varying decisions made on their status , some choosing to have
Gold Cup Parade day off instead .
This leads to a drastic mix of openings and closings across the province .
The capital city of Charlottetown has its own Natal Day , in early June , which should not be confused with Nova Scotia 's Natal Day .
SEE ALSO
* Public holidays in Canada REFERENCES