CURTIS PRIDE Curtis John Pride ( born December 17 , 1968 ) is a former Major League Baseball outfielder who is deaf .
He is currently the head baseball coach at Gallaudet University .
He batted left - handed and threw right - handed .
In 2015 , Pride was named MLB 's Ambassador For Inclusion .
YOUTH Section::::Youth .
Deaf at birth from rubella , Pride developed oral skills early in his life and graduated from John F. Kennedy High School in Silver Spring , Maryland .
He excelled in baseball , basketball , and soccer in high school .
After high school , Curtis Pride attended the College of William and Mary .
He was the starting point guard on the basketball team .
He also was an excellent soccer player who played for the United States at the 1985 FIFA U-16 World Championship in China and scored two goals in the tournament , including the match winner against Bolivia .
He was named one of the top 15 youth prospects in the world for that year and was a 1986 Parade Magazine High School All American soccer player .
Pride uses his 5 % residual hearing to help him speak and is a fluent lip - reader .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Pride was originally signed by the New York Mets , but reached the major leagues with the Montreal Expos in 1993 .
At that time , he became the first deaf player in the majors since Dick Sipek in 1945 .
A left - handed hitter , with good plate discipline , and considerable speed , he never played regularly in the majors .
Instead , he pinch hit or played in the outfield , usually left or right , as an injury replacement , and is regarded as an excellent fielder with a strong arm .
His first Major League hit was September 17 , 1993 in Montreal .
Pride 's first four hits in his major league career were a double , triple , home run , and single .
Pride became a free agent before the 1996 season and signed with the Detroit Tigers , where he played well in a part - time outfield role .
With fewer than 300 plate appearances in 95 games , he compiled career - high numbers in batting average ( .300 ) , home runs ( 10 ) , RBI ( 31 ) , runs ( 52 ) , hits ( 80 ) , doubles ( 17 ) triples ( 5 ) , and stolen bases ( 11 ) .
He was expected to gain more at bats in future seasons as a result .
But 1997 found him on the disabled list and he was released and signed by the Red Sox .
After that , he played with the Braves , returned to Boston and Montreal , and saw a little action with the Yankees .
He was signed by the Anaheim Angels in the 2004 season and was called up from Triple - A Salt Lake Stingers .
In 2005 , he was signed to a minor league contract with the Angels and was called up after an injury to Vladimir Guerrero .
He was returned to the minors after Guerrero recovered from the injury .
After spending 2007 spring training as a non - roster invitee for the Angels , he was assigned to start the season as a member of the Salt Lake Bees .
Pride signed with the Southern Maryland Blue Crabs of the independent Atlantic League on April 15 , 2008 .
He was released by the Blue Crabs on August 23 , 2008 .
In an eleven - season major league career , Pride batted .250 ( 199-for-796 ) with 20 home runs and 82 RBI in 421 major league games .
COACHING CAREER
Section::::Coaching career .
In 2008 , Pride was selected to be the baseball coach at Gallaudet University .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
When he is not playing baseball , Pride and his wife Lisa are actively involved in the Together With Pride foundation , which aids hard - of - hearing children through a hearing aid bank , according to the foundation 's website .
There are several activities the foundation supports or hopes to support , such as a scholarship program , literacy , and mentoring .
In 1996 , Pride received the Tony Conigliaro Award , given annually to an MLB player who best overcomes adversity through the attributes of spirit , determination , and courage .
In 2016 , he won the prestigious Henry Viscardi Achievement Awards .
He keeps homes in both the Washington , D.C. area and Wellington , Florida .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links . , or Minor League Splits and Situational Stats , or Retrosheet , or Venezuelan Professional Baseball League , or FIFA : Curtis Pride , or Together with Pride website