MEET THE FOCKERS Meet the Fockers , sometimes referred to as Meet the Parents 2 , is a 2004 American comedy film directed by Jay Roach and the sequel to Meet the Parents .
The film stars Robert De Niro ( who was also one of the film 's producers ) , Ben Stiller , Dustin Hoffman , Barbra Streisand , Blythe Danner and Teri Polo .
It was followed by a sequel , Little Fockers , in 2010 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set two years after the events of the first film
, Gaylord " Greg " Focker and his fiancée Pam Byrnes decide to introduce their parents to each other .
They first fly to Oyster Bay , New York , on Long Island , to pick up Pam 's father , retired CIA operative Jack Byrnes , her mother Dina and one - year - old nephew
Little Jack ( the son of Bob and Debbie Banks ) .
But rather than going to the airport as planned , Jack decides to drive the family to Miami to meet the Fockers in his new RV .
Once they arrive , they are greeted by Greg 's eccentric but fun - loving and amiable father , Bernie , and mother , Roz , who is a sex therapist for elderly couples .
Concerned that Jack might be put off by the Fockers ' lifestyle , Greg convinces Roz to pretend that she is a yoga instructor for the weekend .
However , small cracks begin to form between Jack and the Fockers , due to their contrasting personalities .
The meet gets off to a bad start when a chase between the Fockers ' sexually active dog , Moses , and the Byrnes 's cat , Jinx , culminates with Jinx flushing Moses down the RV 's toilet , forcing Bernie to destroy it to save Moses .
Later , Bernie accidentally injures Jack 's back during a game of football .
Meanwhile , Pam informs Greg that she 's pregnant , and the two decide to keep it secret from Jack .
Jack again becomes suspicious of Greg 's character when they are introduced to the Fockers ' housekeeper , Isabel Villalobos , with whom Bernie reveals Greg had a sexual affair fifteen years before .
Jack later takes the RV to Isabel 's 15-year - old son , Jorge , to fix the toilet , but is disturbed by Jorge 's striking resemblance to Greg , and the fact that Jorge never met his father , and jumps to the conclusion that he might be Greg 's son with Isabel .
Meanwhile , Roz , Bernie and Dina realize Pam is pregnant , but promise not to tell Jack .
Growing envious of Bernie and Roz 's active sex life , Dina consults Roz on sex tips in order to seduce Jack , but none of them works .
Greg and Jack 's relationship is again put to the test when Greg is left alone to babysit Little Jack , whom Jack has been raising via the Ferber method .
Despite Jack 's strict instructions to leave Little Jack to self - soothe , Greg is unable to stand listening to Little Jack 's cries and tends to the boy to cheer him up by hugging him , putting Elmo 's World on TV , and acting funny , but inadvertently teaches him the word " asshole . "
Disaster strikes when Greg answers a brief phone call from Roz , which is long enough for Little Jack to wander out of his playpen ( which Jinx had opened ) , put on Scarface , and glue his hands to a bottle of rum .
After a furious argument with the Fockers and his own family ( though amends are quickly made ) , Jack resumes his spying on Greg and sends Greg and Jorge 's hair samples for a DNA test , while inviting Jorge to the Fockers ' planned engagement party in the hope of getting Greg to admit he is Jorge 's father .
At the engagement party , Jack , who automatically assumes that Greg knew about Jorge and has deliberately been keeping him a secret from Pam , introduces Greg to Jorge .
Later , when Greg denies knowing anything about Jorge , Jack still refuses to believe him and drugs him with truth serum to make him talk .
On stage , Greg uncontrollably blurts out that Pam is pregnant and that Jorge is his son in a Darth Vader - esqe matter before immediately losing consciousness .
The next morning , Pam questions Greg about Jorge , and Greg does not confirm or deny that he is Jorge 's father , but insists that he knew nothing about him before the previous evening .
Pam believes him , and is willing to work things out with him .
Jack reaches his breaking point with Greg 's dishonesty and demands that Pam and Dina leave the island with him .
Dina refuses and reveals Jack 's actions to everyone .
Everyone turns against Jack , with Pam announcing her intent to marry Greg regardless of him having Jorge with Isabel , and Dina admits that they were all aware of Pam 's pregnancy .
A shocked and hurt Jack leaves with his grandson .
Bernie and Greg pursue Jack , but are soon tasered and arrested by an overzealous deputy sheriff , Vern LeFlore , for speeding and refusing to remain in their car .
Meanwhile , Jack is informed that Greg is not Jorge 's father ( his real father turns out to be a baseball player who also resembles Greg ) , and attempts to defend Greg and Bernie , but the overzealous Leflore tasers and arrests him , too .
In their cell , Greg , Jack , and Bernie are released by the local judge , Ira , who is a client of Roz and a close friend of the Fockers .
Before they leave , Greg asks that Jack and Bernie stop their feud .
Jack admits that he made a mistake regarding Jorge and reveals his past career in the CIA to Bernie , before apologizing for his actions and making up with the two of them .
Greg and Pam are married that weekend by Pam 's ex - fiancé , Kevin , who is now an ordained interfaith minister .
During the party , Jack asks Roz for some sex tips and sneaks into the RV with Dina .
During the post - credit scene , Jack watches hidden baby - cam footage of the Fockers giving attention to Little Jack over Jack 's previous objections : Roz gives Little Jack chocolate , Bernie advises him to use his crying to disagree with everything Jack says , and Greg pretends to drunkenly tell Little Jack to keep it a secret that he left to smoke pot , not answer the phone , when he left Little Jack unattended and that Pam is not really pregnant and only said it so that Jack would let them get married .
Greg then pretends to only just discover the camera but then after making teasing gestures at it , Greg reveals that he knew about it all along and none of the things he said before was true .
CAST
* Robert De Niro as Jack Byrnes * Ben Stiller as Gaylord
" Greg " Focker * Dustin Hoffman as Bernard " Bernie " Focker * Barbra Streisand as Rozalin " Roz " Focker * Teri Polo as Pam Byrnes - Focker
* Blythe Danner as Dina Byrnes
* Spencer and Bradley Pickren as " Little " Jack Banks * Alanna Ubach as Isabel Villalobos
* Ray Santiago as Jorge Villalobos
* Tim Blake Nelson as Officer Vern LeFlore * Shelley Berman as Judge Ira * Owen Wilson as Kevin Rawley
* Cedric Yarbrough as Cletus the Prison Guard CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 39 % of 161 sampled critics gave the film positive reviews , with an average rating of 5.2/10 .
The site 's consensus is " Talented cast is wasted as the movie is content with recycling jokes from its predecessor , Meet the Parents . "
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 with reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 41 based on 34 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was a commercial success and is currently the highest - grossing film starring Robert De Niro .
The film grossed $ 46,120,980 on its opening weekend in North America ( 5,000 screens at 3,518 theaters , averaging $ 13,110 per theater , or $ 9,224 per screen ) .
At the end of the film 's 149 days of release , it grossed a total of $ 279,261,160 in North America , and $ 237,381,779 in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 516,642,939 , with an estimated 44 million tickets sold in the US .
The film 's budget was $ 80 million .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
* 2005
: Casting Society Of America , USA : Nominated for Best Feature Film Casting : Comedy .
* 2005 :
Teen Choice Awards : Nominated for Choice Movie :
Blush , Choice Movie Actor : Comedy , Choice Movie Actor : Comedy , Choice Movie : Liar .
* 2005 : MTV Movie Awards Won : Best Comedic Performance .
* 2005 :
ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards :
Won Top Box Office Films .
* 2005 : MTV Movie Awards in Mexico : Nominated for Best International Movie .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS