ORANGE ( WORD )
The word orange is both a noun and an adjective in the English language .
In both cases , it refers primarily to the orange fruit and the color orange , but has many other derivative meanings .
The word is derived from a Dravidian language , and it passed through numerous other languages including Sanskrit and Old French before reaching the English language .
The earliest uses of the word in English refer to the fruit , and the color was later named after the fruit .
Before the English - speaking world was exposed to the fruit , the color was referred to as " yellow - red "
( geoluread in Old English ) or " red - yellow " .
It is claimed that the word orange has no true rhyme .
There are , however , several half rhymes or near - rhymes , as well as some proper nouns and compound words or phrases that rhyme with it .
This lack of rhymes has inspired many humorous poems and songs .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word orange entered Middle English from Old French and Anglo - Norman orenge .
The earliest recorded use of the word in English is from the 13th century and referred to the fruit .
The earliest attested use of the word in reference to the color is from the 16th century .
It is generally thought that Old French borrowed the Italian melarancio ( " fruit of the orange tree " , with mela " fruit " ) as pume orenge ( with pume " fruit " ) .
Although pume orenge is attested earlier than melarancio in available written sources , lexicographers believe that the Italian word is actually older .
The word ultimately derives from a Dravidian language — possibly Tamil நாரம் nāram or Telugu నారింజ nāriṃja or Malayalam നാരങ്ങ‌ nāraŋŋa — via Sanskrit नारङ्ग nāraṅgaḥ " orange tree " .
From there the word entered Persian nārang and then Arabic nāranj .
The initial n was lost through rebracketing in Italian and French , though some varieties of Arabic lost the n earlier .
The place name Orange has a separate etymology .
The Roman - Celtic settlement was founded in 36 or 35 BC and originally named Arausio , after a Celtic water god .
The Principality of Orange was named for this place and not for the color .
Some time after the sixteenth century , though , the color orange was adopted as a canting symbol of the House of Orange - Nassau .
The color eventually came to be associated with Protestantism , as a result of the participation by the House of Orange on the Protestant side in the French Wars of Religion , the Irish campaigns , and the Dutch Eighty Years ' War . RHYME Section::::Rhyme .
It is widely accepted that no single English word is a full rhyme for orange , though there are half rhymes , such as hinge , lozenge , syringe , and porridge .
Although this property is not unique to the word — one study of 5,411 one - syllable English words found 80 words with no rhymes — the lack of rhyme for orange has garnered significant attention , and inspired many humorous verses .
Although sporange , a variant of sporangium , is an eye rhyme for orange , it is not a true rhyme as its second syllable is pronounced with an unreduced vowel , and often stressed .
There are a number of proper nouns which rhyme or nearly rhyme with orange , including The Blorenge , a mountain in Wales , and Gorringe , a surname .
US Naval Commander Henry Honychurch Gorringe , the captain of the USS Gettysburg who discovered Gorringe Ridge in 1875 , led Arthur Guiterman to quip in " Local Note " : Various linguistic or poetic devices provide for rhymes in some accents .
Compound words or phrases may give true or near rhymes .
Examples include door - hinge , torn hinge , or inch , and a wrench .
William Shepard Walsh attributes this verse featuring two multiple - word rhymes for orange to W.W. Skeat .
Enjambment can also provide for rhymes .
One example is Willard Espy 's poem , " The Unrhymable Word : Orange " .
Another example by Tom Lehrer relies on the cot –
caught merger via which many Americans pronounce orange as /ˈɑrəndʒ/ , as opposed to /ˈɔrəndʒ/ :
Rapper Eminem is noted for his ability to bend words so that they rhyme .
In his song " Business " from the album
The Eminem Show , he makes use of such word - bending to rhyme orange .
Nonce words are sometimes contrived to rhyme with orange .
Composers Charles Fox and Norman Gimbel wrote the song " Oranges Poranges " to be sung by the Witchiepoo character on the television programme H.R. Pufnstuf .
SEE ALSO
* Rhymes with Orange , a syndicated comic strip
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Orange Rhymez ! , a website that finds half - rhymes for orange