BATTLE OF THE ZAB
The Battle of the Zab ( ) took place on the banks of the Great Zab river in what is now Iraq on January 25 , 750 .
It spelled the end of the Umayyad Caliphate and the rise of the Abbasids , a dynasty that would last ( under various influences and with varying power ) until the 13th century .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In 747 a major rebellion broke out against the Umayyad Caliphate , which ruled most of the Middle East from 661 to 750 .
The principal cause of the rebellion was the increasing gap between the outlying peoples of the Caliphate and the Damascus - based Umayyad government .
The Umayyad - appointed governors of the Caliphate 's various provinces were corrupt and interested only with personal gains .
Additionally , the Umayyads claimed no direct descent from Muhammad , while the Abbasids did ( they descended from Muhammad 's uncle Abbas — a fact the latter used greatly during the revolution ) .
THE ARMIES Section::::The armies .
In 750 , the army of the Umayyad caliph Marwan II fought a combined force of Abbasid , Shia , iraqis , soldiers at the Zab .
Marwan 's army was , on paper at least , far larger and more formidable than that of his opponents , as it contained many veterans of earlier Umayyad campaigns against the Byzantine Empire ; its support for the caliph , however , was only lukewarm .
The morale of the Umayyads had been damaged by the series of defeats inflicted earlier in the rebellion , while the morale of the Abbasid armies had increased .
THE BATTLE Section::::The battle .
The Abbasid army formed a spear wall , a tactic they had adopted from their Syrian opponents , presumably from witnessing it in earlier battles .
This entailed standing in a battle line with their lances pointed at the enemy ( similar to the stakes used by English longbowmen at Agincourt and Crécy many centuries later ) .
The Umayyad cavalry charged , possibly believing that with their experience they could break the spear wall .
This was a mistake on their part , however , and they were all but butchered .
The Umayyad army fell into retreat , its morale finally shattered .
Many were cut down by the zealous Abbasids or were drowned in the wintertime River Zab .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Marwan himself escaped the battlefield and fled down the Levant , pursued relentlessly by the Abbasids , who met no serious resistance from the Syrians because the land had recently been laid waste by an earthquake and pestilence .
Marwan fled at last to Abusir / Busir , which is a small town on the Egyptian Nile delta .
It was there , a few months after the battle , that he was at last killed in a short battle and replaced as caliph by Abu al - Abbas as - Saffah , bringing to an end Umayyad rule in the Middle East .
REFERENCES
CITATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* " The Court of the Caliphs-
when Baghdad ruled the Muslim world " by Hugh Kennedy