LITTLE FINGER
The little finger , or pinky finger ( in American English ) , also known as the fifth digit , or pinkie , is the most ulnar and smallest finger of the human hand , opposite the thumb , and next to the ring finger .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " pinky " is derived from the Dutch word pink , meaning " little finger " .
In some places " pinky " is also a traditional name for the smallest ( youngest ) child in a family ( especially , when father and mother have 3 children ) .
The earliest recorded use of the term pinkie is in Scotland in 1808 , MUSCLES Section::::Muscles .
There are nine muscles that control the fifth digit : Three in the hypothenar eminence , two extrinsic flexors , two extrinsic extensors , and two more intrinsic muscles : * Hypothenar eminence : * Opponens digiti minimi muscle
* Abductor minimi digiti muscle
( adduction from third palmar interossei )
* Flexor digiti minimi brevis ( the " longus " is absent in most humans )
* Two extrinsic flexors : * Flexor digitorum superficialis * Flexor digitorum profundus
* Two extrinsic extensors :
* Extensor digiti minimi muscle
*
Extensor digitorum * Two intrinsic hand muscles : * Fourth lumbrical muscle
* Third Palmar interosseous muscle
Note :
the dorsal interossei of the hand muscles do not have an attachment to the fifth digit CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE GESTURES Section::::Cultural significance .
Section::::Gestures .
Among American children , a " pinky swear " or " pinky promise " is made when a person wraps one of their pinky fingers around another person 's pinky and makes a promise .
Among members of the Japanese yakuza ( gangsters ) , the penalty for various offenses is removal of parts of the little finger ( known as yubitsume ) .
In assorted cultures , some people extend their little finger when drinking from a teacup .
This practice is generally deprecated by etiquette guides as a sign of snobbery amongst the socially inferior , with various cultural theories as to the origin of the practice .
RINGS Section::::Rings .
The signet ring is traditionally worn on the little finger of a gentleman 's left hand , a practice still common especially in the United Kingdom , Australia , and European cultures .
A signet ring is considered part of the regalia of many European monarchies , and also of the Pope , with the ring always worn on the left little finger .
In modern times the location of the signet ring has relaxed , with examples worn on various different fingers , although little fingers still tend to be the most usual .
The Iron Ring is a symbolic ring worn by most Canadian engineers .
The Ring is a symbol of both pride and humility for the engineering profession , and is always worn on the pinky of the dominant hand .
In the United States , the Engineer 's Ring is a stainless steel ring worn on the fifth finger of the working hand by engineers who belong to the Order of the Engineer and have accepted the Obligation of an Engineer .
SEE ALSO
* Fifth metacarpal bone - the bone in the hand proximal to the little finger
* Pinky ring
*
Pinky swear - a type of oath involving the little finger
* Yubitsume - a Japanese ritual of apology by amputation of the little finger * Red string of fate - a Japanese belief that soulmates are bound by a string attached to the little finger REFERENCES