ENDEMISM Endemism is the ecological state of a species being unique to a defined geographic location , such as an island , nation , country or other defined zone , or habitat type ;
organisms that are indigenous to a place are not endemic to it if they are also found elsewhere .
The extreme opposite of endemism is cosmopolitan distribution .
An alternative term for a species that is endemic is precinctive , which applies to species ( and subspecific categories ) that are restricted to a defined geographical area .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word endemic is from New Latin endēmicus , from Greek ενδήμος , endēmos , " native " .
Endēmos is formed of en meaning " in " , and dēmos meaning " the people " .
The term " precinctive " has been suggested by some scientists , and was first used in botany by MacCaughey in 1917 .
It is the equivalent of " endemism " .
Precinction was perhaps first used by Frank and McCoy .
Precinctive seems to have been coined by David Sharp when describing the Hawaiian fauna in 1900 : " I use the word precinctive in the sense of ' confined to the area under discussion ' ... ' precinctive forms ' means those forms that are confined to the area specified . "
That definition excludes artificial confinement of examples by humans in far - off botanical gardens or zoological parks .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Physical , climatic , and biological factors can contribute to endemism .
The orange - breasted sunbird is exclusively found in the fynbos vegetation zone of southwestern South Africa .
The glacier bear is found only in limited places in Southeast Alaska .
Political factors can play a part if a species is protected , or actively hunted , in one jurisdiction but not another .
There are two subcategories of endemism : paleoendemism and neoendemism .
Paleoendemism refers to species that were formerly widespread but are now restricted to a smaller area .
Neoendemism refers to species that have recently arisen , such as through divergence and reproductive isolation or through hybridization and polyploidy in plants .
Endemic types or species are especially likely to develop on geographically and biologically isolated areas such as islands and remote island groups , such as Hawaii , the Galápagos Islands , and Socotra ; they can equally develop in biologically isolated areas such as the highlands of Ethiopia , or large bodies of water far from other lakes , like Lake Baikal .
Hydrangea hirta is an example of an endemic species found in Japan .
Endemics can easily become endangered or extinct if their restricted habitat changes , particularly — but not only — due to human actions , including the introduction of new organisms .
There were millions of both Bermuda petrels and " Bermuda cedars " ( actually junipers ) in Bermuda when it was settled at the start of the seventeenth century .
By the end of the century , the petrels were thought extinct .
Cedars , already ravaged by centuries of shipbuilding , were driven nearly to extinction in the twentieth century by the introduction of a parasite .
Bermuda petrels and cedars are now rare , as are other species endemic to Bermuda .
THREATS TO HIGHLY ENDEMISTIC REGIONS Section::::Threats to highly endemistic regions .
Principal causes of habitat degradation and loss in highly endemistic ecosystems include agriculture , urban growth , surface mining , mineral extraction , logging operations and slash - and - burn agriculture .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING