TOM AND JERRY ( VAN BEUREN )
Tom and Jerry are fictional characters that starred in a series of early sound cartoons produced by the Van Beuren Studios , and distributed by RKO Pictures .
The series lasted from 1931 to 1933 .
When Official Films purchased the Van Beuren library in the 1950s , the characters were renamed Dick and Larry to avoid confusion with Tom and Jerry , the famous MGM cartoon series of the 1940s and 1950s .
Today , animation historians refer to the characters as Van Beuren 's Tom and Jerry .
Today , all of these cartoons are in the public domain .
Joseph Barbera began his career as an animator and storyman on this series .
In 1940 , Barbera co - created with William Hanna another duo of cartoon characters using the same names : a cat and mouse named Tom and Jerry .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The characters were a Mutt and Jeff - like pair , one short ( Jerry ) and one tall ( Tom ) .
Each cartoon featured a different adventure and the plot varied from film to film .
Sometimes they were lawyers , hunters , plumbers , hobos , etc .
The duo were likely named after the stage play and/or the mixed drink of the same name , both of which predated the duo by a century .
Stylistically , the cartoons were similar to those made by Fleischer Studios , which like Van Beuren Studios was located in New York City .
According to Markstein 's Toonopedia , Fleischer staff sometimes moonlighted at Van Beuren 's , which was situated just across the road ( accounting for the many visual similarities between the two ) .
Tom and Jerry 's adventures were generally absurdist comedies , featuring bizarre imagery , racist themes , and more than a few ( minor ) sexual references .
One 1932 short ( Piano Tooners ) introduced a " flapper " character clearly derived from Fleischer 's Betty Boop , further demonstrating the stylistic relationship between the two studios .
Tom and Jerry , however , did not obtain popularity of the type Mickey Mouse , Betty Boop , and Bosko had , and the series was cancelled in 1933 .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography . !
Title ! !
Directors ! !
First release
SEE ALSO
* List of films in the public domain in the United States EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Before the Cat and Mouse : Van Beuren 's Tom and Jerry * Plane Dumb , a Tom and Jerry cartoon * Public Domain Movie Torrents with PDA iPod Divx PSP versions
* TOM & JERRY :
Antes del gato y el ratón ( Spanish )