AWAY GOALS RULE
The away goals rule is a method of breaking ties in association football and other sports when teams play each other twice , once at each team 's home ground .
By the away goals rule , the team that has scored more goals " away from home " will win if scores are otherwise equal .
This is sometimes expressed by saying that away goals " count double " in the event of a tie .
The away goals rule is most often invoked in two - leg fixtures , where the initial result is determined by the aggregate score — i.e. the scores of both games are added together .
In many competitions , the away goals rule is the first tie - breaker in such cases , with a penalty shootout as the second tie - breaker if each team has scored the same number of away goals .
Rules vary as to whether the away goals rule applies only to the end of normal time of the second leg , or applies in extra time as well .
It was first introduced by UEFA in 1965–66 European Cup Winners ' Cup .
RATIONALE Section::::Rationale .
Originally , the away goal rule was introduced in football as an expedited way of doing away with playoffs or tie breakers on neutral grounds to resolve a logistical , physical and calendar problem when two teams were so closely matched the final score over the two legs remained in absolute parity , which could remain even after a third game tie breaker .
Now , the away goals rule is intended to encourage the away team to be more aggressive .
In football , at least , it sometimes leads to a nervous first leg : the home team is unwilling to commit large numbers of players to attack lest they concede a goal , whilst the away team attempts to defend and snatch an away goal to aid them in the second leg .
Such tactics arguably make the second leg more exciting , after a low - scoring first leg leaves both sides with a chance to win .
There are sometimes debates over whether the away goals rule gives an unfair advantage to the team playing away first — with the other team squandering their home advantage in the first leg due to away goal fears — and this may be a factor in its somewhat patchy adoption for competitions .
There is also the issue that if extra time is played in the second leg , the away team gets an extra 30 minutes to take advantage of the away goals rule .
This can be countered by the fact that in extra time , the home team has the advantage of playing the extra 30 minutes at home .
Anecdotal evidence certainly suggests that most teams feel an away goal puts them in the driving seat , such as Liverpool being able to draw 1–1 at Arsenal in the 2008 UEFA Champions League quarterfinals ; Liverpool did eliminate Arsenal to advance to the semifinals .
Liverpool won the second game 4–2 , making the aggregate score for the tie Liverpool 5–3 Arsenal , therefore , the away goal scored by Liverpool in the first leg was not required .
Many commentators have described the importance of a team being away to score an away goal , even when losing that leg of the tie , as it mathematically does give that team a chance to redeem itself on home soil by leveling the tie on aggregate while using the away goal as a tiebreaker .
For example , in the 2007 UEFA Champions League round of 16 , while Bayern Munich lost the first leg 3–2 at Real Madrid , Bayern later won 2–1 at home to level the tie on aggregate , but it was Bayern 's away goals scored during their first leg loss that let them advance .
In a recent instance , at the 2013 UEFA Champions League semifinals , despite falling 4–1 in the first leg at Dortmund , Real Madrid would have been able to advance if at home it managed to hold Dortmund to 3–0 .
( Real Madrid scored two goals in the last ten minutes to win the second leg , 2–0 , but were unable to score the third goal that would have sent them through to the finals . )
In the other semifinal , however , after Barcelona was shut out at Bayern Munich , 4–0 , commentators considered Barcelona essentially eliminated , because Bayern could seal the tie by scoring one away goal even if Barcelona managed to score five goals .
The away goals rule results in the " lead " of the two - legged tie swinging back and forth .
For instance , in the 2005 UEFA Champions League round of 16 between Barcelona and Chelsea , Barcelona was ahead on aggregate after a 2–1 win in the first leg at home .
During the second leg held in London , Chelsea first scored three straight goals to take the lead on aggregate ( 4–2 ) , but Barcelona responded with two goals to level the aggregate score at 4–4 while taking the lead on away goals ( 2–1 ) .
Chelsea scored again , though , to advance on aggregate , 5–4 .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
The away goals rule is applied in many football competitions that involve two - leg fixtures , including the knockout stages of the UEFA Champions League , UEFA Europa League , CAF Champions League , CAF Confederation Cup and any two - legged playoffs in qualification for the FIFA World Cup or European Championships .
Major League Soccer in the U.S. and Canada introduced the away goals rule in the MLS Cup Playoffs , in which the conference semifinals and finals ( the quarterfinals and semifinals of the overall tournament ) are two - legged , for the first time in 2014 .
The rule was first applied in this competition when the Seattle Sounders defeated FC Dallas in the 2014 Western Conference Semifinals .
In CONMEBOL competitions before 2005 , for example , the Copa Libertadores , CONMEBOL used neither the away goals rule nor extra time in any of its competitions .
Ties that were level on aggregate went to an immediate penalty shootout .
Since 2005 , two - legged ties have been decided on points , followed by goal difference and the away goals rule ; if the result is still tied , the penalty shootout is used .
The Copa Libertadores finals became the only exception to the away goals rule and also only in the finals is employed extra time .
In Latin America , an example of a tournament that used the away goal rule was the Copa do Brasil ( Brazil Cup ) until the 2017 edition .
The away goals rule is sometimes used in round robin competitions ( that is , leagues or qualifying groups ) , where it may be used to break ties involving more than two teams .
For example , away goals are the third tiebreaker in the group stage of both the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup .
In Group C of the UEFA Champions League 2000–01 , Olympique Lyonnais took the second qualifying spot ahead of Olympiacos on away goals .
Because other tiebreakers take precedence , the away goals rule is rarely invoked in such tournaments .
In many group tournaments , the away goals rule is never applicable ; for example , in World Cup qualification .
The away goals rule was first applied in the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup when Budapest Honvéd beat Dukla Prague in the second round in 1965–66 .
It was introduced in the Fairs Cup in 1966–67 , and in the European Cup in 1967–68 for the first round , 1968–69 for the second round , and 1970–71 for later rounds .
Previously , ties level on aggregate had gone to a playoff on neutral ground .
ANOMALIES Section::::Anomalies .
If the two clubs contesting a two - legged fixture share the same stadium , each club may be the home club in one leg , and the rule may still apply .
For example , the 2003 UEFA Champions League Semi - Finals drew Inter Milan and AC Milan together .
Both legs were played at the San Siro , their shared stadium in Milan : * First leg : AC Milan 0 – 0
Inter Milan
* Second leg : Inter Milan 1 – 1 AC Milan
With an aggregate of 1–1 , AC Milan was declared the winner because they were the " away " side in the second game .
In this example , as in many such cases , most tickets for each leg will be reserved for the " home " side 's fans , so the designation was not totally arbitrary .
Not all competitions with the away goals rule suffer from this anomaly , however : the Copa do Brasil has developed its rules to avoid some anomalies , such as the above .
In that Cup , if two teams share either the same stadium or the same home town , neither is considered the home club and thus the away goals rule does not apply .
This exception was seen , for example , in the 2006 final between Flamengo and Vasco , when both legs were played at the Maracanã Stadium .
More anomalous was a qualification play - off for the 1991 World Youth Championship between Australia and Israel : Australia won on away goals even though , due to security concerns arising from the First Intifada , Israel 's " home " leg was played in Australia .
The same situation occurred in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification tie between the Bahamas and the British Virgin Islands , when the Bahamas advanced on the away goals rule even though both legs were played in the Bahamas .
There has been at least one case of a wrong application of the away goals rule by a referee in an international club tournament .
It happened in a second - round tie in the 1971–72 European Cup Winners ' Cup between Rangers and Sporting Clube de Portugal .
This fixture had the following scorelines : * First leg : Rangers 3 – 2
Sporting
* Second leg , after 90 minutes : Sporting 3 – 2 Rangers * Second leg , after extra time : Sporting 4 – 3 Rangers Since the teams were now level 6–6 on aggregate , the Dutch referee Laurens van Raavens ordered a penalty shootout , which Sporting won 3–0 .
Rangers appealed the loss , however , on the grounds that Van Raavens should not have ordered the shootout , since the Rangers goal in extra time in Lisbon gave them a lead of three away goals to two .
Rangers won the appeal and went on to win the Cup Winners ' Cup that season .
CONCACAF has a different rule for its CONCACAF Champions League , employing away goals at the end of full - time of the second leg , but not applying the rule at the end of extra time .
MLS adopted this version of the rule for its playoffs in 2014 .
For example , the semifinal of the 2008–09 CONCACAF Champions League between Cruz Azul and the Puerto Rico Islanders had the following scorelines : * First leg : Puerto Rico Islanders 2 – 0
Cruz Azul * Second leg , after 90 minutes : Cruz Azul 2 – 0 Puerto Rico Islanders * Second leg , after extra time : Cruz Azul 3 – 1 Puerto Rico Islanders Since CONCACAF does not apply
the away goals rule for goals scored after extra time , the game went to a penalty shootout , which Cruz Azul won 4–2 .
The away goals rule can also apply to forfeited matches .
Celtic lost their away tie to Legia Warsaw 4–1 in the 2014–15 UEFA Champions League third qualifying round .
In their home leg , Legia brought on an ineligible player which automatically gave Celtic a 3–0 win .
The forfeiture meant that the tie ended 4–4 , meaning Celtic qualified to the next round on away goals .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
Below is a summary of the variations of rules used in different competitions .
In most examples in the table below , a penalty shootout is used to determine the winner if all criteria used remain tied .
The exception is Primera División de México play - offs , where the higher seed , which has the better regular season record , wins the tie if the aggregate score is level .
+ Aggregate score is level after regulation ( 90 mins ) of second leg !
Away goals rule applied after regulation time ? !
Extra time played ? !
Away goals rule applied after extra time ? !
Examples align
= left FIFA World Cup qualificationUEFA Champions League and Europa League align = left MLS Cup PlayoffsAFC Champions League and AFC Cup align = left Copa Libertadores and Copa Sudamericana ( except finals)CAF Champions League and Confederation CupCONCACAF Champions League ( since 2018)Liga MX play - offs ( except final ) align = left EFL Cup semi - finals REFERENCES