RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENT MATRIX
A responsibility assignment matrix ( RAM ) , also known as RACI matrix ( ) or linear responsibility chart ( LRC ) , describes the participation by various roles in completing tasks or deliverables for a project or business process .
It is especially useful in clarifying roles and responsibilities in cross - functional / departmental projects and processes .
RACI is an acronym derived from the four key responsibilities most typically used : Responsible , Accountable , Consulted , and Informed .
KEY RESPONSIBILITY ROLES ( RACI MODEL )
Section::::Key responsibility roles ( RACI model ) .
R
= Responsible , A
= Accountable , C = Consulted , I =
Informed Responsible ( also Recommender )
Accountable ( also Approver or final approving authority )
Consulted ( sometimes Consultant or counsel )
Informed ( also Informee ) Very often the role that is accountable for a task or deliverable may also be responsible for completing it ( indicated on the matrix by the task or deliverable having a role accountable for it , but no role responsible for its completion , i.e. it is implied ) .
Outside of this exception , it is generally recommended that each role in the project or process for each task receive , at most , just one of the participation types .
Where more than one participation type is shown , this generally implies that participation has not yet been fully resolved , which can impede the value of this technique in clarifying the participation of each role on each task .
ROLE DISTINCTION Section::::Role distinction .
There is a distinction between a role and individually identified people : a role is a descriptor of an associated set of tasks ; may be performed by many people ; and one person can perform many roles .
For example , an organization may have ten people who can perform the role of project manager , although traditionally each project only has one project manager at any one time ; and a person who is able to perform the role of project manager may also be able to perform the role of business analyst and tester .
ASSIGNING PEOPLE TO FACILITIES
Section::::Assigning people to facilities .
The matrix is typically created with a vertical axis ( left - hand column ) of tasks ( from a work breakdown structure ) or deliverables ( from a product breakdown structure ) , and a horizontal axis ( top row ) of roles ( from an organizational chart ) .
+ Example of a responsibility assignment ( or RACI ) matrix !
Code !
Name !
Project sponsor !
Business analyst !
Project manager !
Technical architect !
Applications development
Another example from the maintenance and reliability community
+
Maintenance Crew KPI RACI Chart !
Tasks !
Maint Supervisors !
Maint Analyst !
Maint Planner !
Maint Technician !
Maint Supert !
Rel Specialist !
CMMS
Proj Engr ALTERNATIVES Section::::Alternatives .
There are a number of alternatives to the RACI participation types :
PARIS
PACSI
RASCI
RASI
RACIQ
RACI - VS
CAIRO
DACI RAPID RATSI
DRASCI
DCI
RASCEIO Section::::RASCEIO .
To be used when working on governance , risk , compliance ( GRC ) and outsourcing matters : VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
There are also a number of variations to the meaning of RACI participation types : RACI ( ALTERNATIVE SCHEME )
ARCI ( DECISIONS ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Comprehensive Series on RACI * Seventeen Varieties of RACI
* Animation introducing RACI
* Transform Your RACI ( Roles and Responsibilities ) Into a GANTT Chart
* Understanding Responsibility Assignment Matrix ( RACI Matrix )
* RACI Chart Explained