ENGINE SWAP
An engine swap is the process of removing a car 's original engine and replacing it with another .
This is done either because of failure , or to install a different engine , usually one that is more modern , this may make it more powerful and or efficient .
Older engines may also have a shortage of spare parts and so a modern replacement may be more easily and cheaply maintained .
Swapping to a diesel engine for improved fuel economy is a long established practice , with modern high efficiency and torque diesel engines
this does not necessarily mean a reduction in performance associated with older diesel engine swaps .
For the particular application of off - road vehicles the high torque at low speed of turbo diesels combined with good fuel economy makes these conversions particularly effective .
Older non - electronic fuel injection diesels were well known for their reliability especially in wet conditions .
An engine swap can either be to another engine intended to work in the car by the manufacturer , or one totally different .
The former is much simpler than the latter .
Fitting an engine into a car that was never intended to accept it may require much work and money ; modifying the car to fit the engine , modifying the engine to fit the car , and building custom engine mounts and transmission bellhousing adaptors to interface them along with a custom built driveshaft .
Some small businesses build conversion kits for engine swaps , such as the Fiat Twin cam into a Morris Minor or similar .
Swapping the engine may have implications on the cars safety , performance , handling and reliability .
The new engine may be lighter or heavier than the existing one which affects the amount of weight over the nearest axle and the overall weight of the car - this can adversely affect the car 's ride , handling and braking ability .
Existing brakes , transmission and suspension components may be inadequate to handle the increased weight and/or power of the new engine with either upgrades being required or premature wear and failure being likely .
Insurance companies may charge more or even refuse to insure a vehicle that has been fitted with a different engine to its initial configuration .
A common anecdote among tuners in the United States is that the easiest way to make a car faster is to drop in a General Motors small block engine as used in the Corvette .
The Chevrolet Vega ( and its Astre , Monza , and Skyhawk sisters ) is a candidate for a small block swap ; some have also seen big blocks , also .
Chevrolet engines have been used in such cars as Toyota Supras , BMWs , RX-7s , Mazda Miatas , Jaguar sedans , Datsun 240s , 260s , and 280Zs , Corvairs , and others .
In the Honda world , engine swaps include the Civic Si ( B16A ) , The Civic Type R ( B16B ) , Integra GSR(B18C ) , and the Integra Type R ( B18C5 ) engines .
More recently , swapping larger displacement Honda engines ( such as the J - series V6 ) has become more popular .
Swapping any of these motors into a lightweight 88 - 00 Honda Civic chassis can achieve greater performance .
Chrysler made many turbocharged vehicles in the 1980s , and these engines share much in common with the naturally aspirated ones .
It is quite common to obtain an engine from a vehicle such as a Dodge Daytona and swap it into a Dodge Aries .
The Mopar Performance arm even offered a kit to upgrade the Dodge Daytona to rear wheel drive with a Mopar V8 .
Engine swaps are also somewhat common within the Volkswagen tuning scene , often placing Type 2 ( Bus ) , Type 3 , and Type 4 ( Squareback ) engines in the Type 1 ( Beetle ) .
Water - cooled engines , such as the GTI 16-valve four , VR6 , or 1.8 T are commonly swapped into the Mark II GTI , Jetta , and Corrado .
Less common is the swap into a Mark 1 Golf or Cabriolet , giving an amazing power - to - weight ratio , even with minimally modified powerplants .
Porsche engines are also very popular one of the most popular is to take the engine from a Porsche 911 super 1600 .
In jurisdictions such as California , with strict , arbitrary smog rules , it may not be possible to register a late - model vehicle with an engine swap , even if it can be proven to produce less pollution than the original engine ( owing to " visual inspection " rules ) .
In the Super GT racing series , engine swaps can be considered a way of life for the upper tier GT500 cars , most of which are provided with specially modified racing engines from the manufacturers .
GT500 class rules themselves allow for any engine to be swapped into a car as long as it is from the same manufacturer .
Notable examples include Toyota swapping in highly tuned 4-cylinder engines originally from the Toyota Celica into their Toyota Supra GT500 race cars .
British sports cars ( such as MGs and Triumphs ) from the late 1960s and early 1970s were attractive light - weight cars that had excellent suspensions , but were known for troublesome electrical systems , barely adequate power levels and unreliability .
It is popular to take one of these classic sports cars and add a more powerful engine .
The all - aluminum Buick and Oldsmobile V8 engines are a traditional choice for these cars .
Swapping an MGB all - iron 1.8L 4-cylinder engine and 4-speed transmission for a Buick 215 V8 and a modern 5-speed transmission actually improves both cornering and acceleration because it reduces the overall weight of the car by about .
Power is approximately doubled ; torque increases even more .
Derivatives of that classic General Motors engine , the 3.5L , 3.9L , and 4.2L Rover V8s are also frequently used .
( The original Buick and Oldsmobile , the Rover , and the related Morgan - licensed V8 , are bolt - ins . )
Although more recent narrow sixty - degree Ford and GM V6 engines are more compact , they usually do n't equal the Rover engine 's power - to - weight ratio .
They can , however , be very cost effective and an easier fit , notably the Chevrolet 3.4L.
The cast iron block Ford 302 ( 5.0L ) V8 in particular results in spectacular power - to - weight ratios for straight - line acceleration .
With aluminium heads , intake , and water pump fitted , the Ford 302 only adds about to the front of an MGB , and is substantially more powerful and lighter weight than an MGC or TR6 iron - block six - cylinder .
An aluminium 302 performance block is available that weighs 60 lb ( 27 kg ) less than the common iron version , as is displacements of 331 and 347 ci , but they are significantly more expensive .
The Nissan SR20DET is an all - aluminium fuel - injected
DOHC turbocharged 4-cylinder .
This compact engine , along with the very compact , light , and powerful Mazda 13B rotary engine , have both been transplanted into too many different cars to list .
COMMON ENGINE SWAPS Section::::Common engine swaps .
Note : These are the most common examples and are not an exhaustive list , just a representative cross section . !
Engine !
Common swaps !
Notes
The early ' 90s six bolt engines are the most desirable because the connecting rods are much stronger and they do not suffer from crank walk and bearing failure seen in many of the later ( mid ' 90s ) seven bolt engines .
Also used in Formula 3 cars , so you may be able to fit these in a rear wheel drive car .
Honda J Engine Honda Civic , Honda S2000 , Mazda Miata , Hot rods , Kit cars Can be used in both front and rear wheel drive layouts , the latter can be done with a GM TH-400 automatic transmission , a Mazda Miata or Honda S2000 transmission .
Popular in certain circles because it puts out more torque than a four cylinder .
Honda F20C engine Hot rods , kit cars Becoming popular because it is designed for RWD applications .
Honda K engine Hot rods , Kit Cars , Mazda Miata , Austin Mini
Chevrolet Corvair engine VW Type 1 , VW Type 2 , Karmann Ghia , light aircraft , dune buggies Not suitable for front engined RWD layouts , because engine turns counter clockwise , like Honda .
Saab H engine Saab 99 , BMW 16v turbo engines are easily tunable and highly available .
May also fit in Triumph Herald and Triumph Dolomite , which as it is derived from the Triumph Slant-4 engine
and it could bolt up to the Triumph 5-speed .
Opel C20XE Austin Mini , hot rods , Lotus 7 style kit cars .
May be too powerful .
Can also be fitted in RWD layouts with an Opel Manta / Vauxhall Omega or Ford Type 9 5 speed transmission .
Toyota JZ engine Celica Supra
The xA61 version of the Supra have off the shelf adaptors for this car to swap out the 5 M engine , and fit 1/2JZ engine .
( With the off shelf adapters the swap bolts in )
Cadillac Northstar hot rods , kit cars , sand rails , dune buggies , light aircraft , Pontiac Fiero and other GM late models .
Bellhousing is similar but slightly different than the GM metric engines pattern .
Cummins B series Jeeps , rock crawlers , Dodge pickups , Ford pickups , Chevy pickups , Toyota pickups , off - road vehicles , and a wide variety of truck pulling vehicles General Motors GM 3800 engine series Jeeps , Chevrolet S10s , Pontiac Grand Am , Pontiac Fiero , hot rods , kit cars .
Ford Pinto engine & Cosworth Hot rods , kit cars , VW type 1
A common swap for many small Fords , with the Cosworth version being capable being tuned of 500BHP .
This is being replaced by the Zetec , Duratec and Ecoboost engines .
Toyota 4A series MR2s , Corollas , kit cars , Morris Minor .
Toyota 3RZ - FE Hiluxs , 4Runners , and other Toyota rock crawlers .
General Motors 60
°
V6 engine Hot rods , kit cars , Pontiac Fiero , MGBs , MG Midgets , other British sports cars
, Chevy S-10 Can be fitted in both front & rear wheel drive applications , sharing the bellhousing pattern as the Cadillac Northstar and Buick V6 .
That said , transverse & inline engines use different blocks .
Dodge Viper V10 hot rods , pick ups , kit cars Displacement is the same as the Big block Cadillac , at 500 cubic inches .
Chrysler Hemi engine hot rods , older Mopar vehicles , Kit cars , dragsters Chrysler LA engine hot rods , kit cars , muscle cars Comes in V6 , V8 and V10 configurations .
SEE
ALSO
* Bike - engined car
* Electric vehicle conversion
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
*
The Most Common Types of Replacement Engines * S10 V8 Engine Swap
* The British V8 Newsletter .
* British Sports Cars Conversions and Modifications * Volks - Swap - VW engine conversion message board
* Engine Swap Depot - Engine swap blog * VW air - cooled to water - cooled conversions - Engine swap Forum
* JDM engines Engine Swap Resoures
* The Foundation for California Community Colleges * Engine Swap Tech - Engine swap forum * - L67 engine swap page for various vehicles
* Toyota 3RZ - FE Swap and Knowledge - Toyota 3RZ - FE Swap and Knowledge
*
Honda Swap Combinations - Definitive Honda Engine Swap Guide
* 2JZGTE Wiring - Guide to Wiring your 2JZGTE
* Nissan 240SX JDM RB25DET
Swap Guide - Swap a Skyline Engine into your Nissan * VTEC Honda Swap Guide - Wire VTEC into your Honda Swap * 240SX 2JZGTE Swap Guide - Swap a Supra engine into your 240SX