CONGO ( FILM )
Congo is a 1995 science fiction action - adventure film loosely based on Michael Crichton 's novel of the same name .
It was directed by Frank Marshall .
It stars Laura Linney , Dylan Walsh , Ernie Hudson , Tim Curry , Grant Heslov and Joe Don Baker .
The film was released on June 9 , 1995 , by Paramount Pictures .
Congo received quite negative reviews but performed better than Paramount expected .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
While testing a communications laser in a remote part of the Congo jungle , TraviCom employees Charles Travis ( Bruce Campbell ) and Jeffrey Weems ( Taylor Nichols ) discover the ruins of a lost city near a volcanic site .
Karen Ross ( Laura Linney ) , assisting at TraviCom 's headquarters , does not hear back from their team and activates a remote camera at the camp , discovering the camp destroyed and numerous corpses ; something large suddenly knocks over and destroys the camera .
Karen alerts
TraviCom 's CEO and Charles ' father , R.B. Travis
( Joe Don Baker ) , who informs her that the group was really there looking for a rare blue diamond only found there which would greatly enhance their capabilities , but does not offer any hope to rescue them .
Travis implores Karen to lead an expedition and she makes Travis swear that he is sending her to look for Charles , not the diamond .
She warns him if he is lying , she will make him sorry .
Meanwhile , Peter Elliott ( Dylan Walsh ) , a primatologist at the University of California , Berkeley , and his assistant Richard ( Grant Heslov ) teach human communication to primates using a mountain gorilla named Amy ( voiced by Shayna Fox ) .
With a special backpack and glove , her sign language is translated to a digitized voice .
Despite the success , Peter is concerned that Amy is having nightmares and psychological problems , due to several drawings Amy has made of jungles and the Eye of Providence .
Peter attempts to gain funding to take Amy to Africa , but the university is reluctant , and Peter begins inquiring elsewhere .
Romanian philanthropist Herkermer Homolka ( Tim Curry ) offers to fund the expedition .
Karen , having learned of the trip , offers to fund it as well and to come along , hoping to discover the fate of her team .
In Africa , the group meets their expert guide Captain Monroe Kelly ( Ernie Hudson ) but they are captured by the local authorities and militia leader named Captain Wanta ( Delroy Lindo ) , who grants them passage for a sizable bribe .
Amy detests Karen Ross and repeatedly insults her as she is threatened by another female near Peter .
As the group boards another plane , Monroe reveals that Homolka has led previous safaris in search of the " Lost City of Zinj " , with disastrous results .
The group parachutes into the jungle just before their plane is shot down by Zairean soldiers .
On the ground , they encounter a native Ghost Tribe .
The tribe leads them to Bob Driscoll ( John Hawkes ) , a member of Charles ' expedition , who they have been attempting to revive from his catatonic state .
On seeing Amy , Bob begins screaming and soon dies .
They continue by boat , and learn that Homolka is interested in finding Zinj and its fabled diamond mine ( King Solomon 's Mines ) .
Homolka believes that Amy 's drawings suggest she has seen the mine and hopes she will lead them there .
After an attack by hippos , they find the ruined camp and Zinj nearby .
While searching the city , Richard is attacked and killed by a killer grey gorilla , which the rest of the team take down .
They take shelter at the ruined camp , other grey gorillas kept at bay by automated sentry guns set up by Karen .
When day breaks , they return to the city , discovering hieroglyphs that say that the people had taught the grey gorillas , a unique species due to the volcanic environment , to guard the mine and kill anyone that approached it .
The group suspects that the gorillas turned on their masters but still protect the mine now .
They find the diamond mine and Homolka starts to collect large diamonds , but a pack of gorillas appear and kill him .
Monroe , Karen , and Peter fight off the gorillas and flee deeper into the mine , where they discover Charles ' body , holding a giant blue diamond .
As Amy helps to fend off the gorillas , Karen is able to fit the diamond into a portable laser , using it to fire and ward off the gorillas .
The volcano begins to erupt , and Monroe , Karen , Peter and Amy escape as the city is flooded with lava , killing the gorillas .
Karen contacts Travis to report on finding the diamond and confirming Charles ' death .
When she sees Travis was only interested in the obtainment of the diamond all along and does not care about Charles at all , she uses her laser to destroy the TraviCom satellite .
In the nearby wreckage of a cargo plane , they find a usable hot - air balloon , and prepare to leave .
Peter sees Amy watch a troop of mountain gorillas nearby , and lets her go , telling her goodbye .
The three take off in the balloon , and Karen has Peter throw away the diamond as they leave .
CAST
* Laura Linney as Karen Ross , an electronics expert for TraviCom , and a former CIA operative , who hopes to find her ex - fiancé lost in a previous expedition to the Congo .
* Dylan Walsh as Peter Elliott , a primatologist of Berkeley , California who wants to return his gorilla , Amy , to her birthplace in the Congo 's Virunga region .
* Ernie Hudson as Captain Monroe Kelly , the " Great White Hunter " and mercenary who leads the group .
* Tim Curry as Herkermer Homolka , a Romanian man who offers to finance the expedition .
He poses as a wealthy philanthropist , but is soon revealed to be in dire financial straits .
His real aim is to find the mythical Lost City of Zinj , where he lost another expedition some years before .
* Grant Heslov as Richard , Peter 's research assistant .
* Joe Don Baker as R.B. Travis , TraviCom 's CEO , Charles ' father and Karen 's boss .
He wants to find the diamond mines to finance and expand his satellite technologies .
* Lorene Noh and Misty Rojas as the in - suit performers of Amy , a female mountain gorilla , born in the Virunga region , who is studied by Peter in the United States .
She likes to draw scenes from her dreams , in which the Lost City of Zinj often appears .
* Mary Ellen Trainor as Moira * Stuart Pankin as Boyd
* Carolyn Seymour as Eleanor Romy
* Romy Rosemont as Assistant * James Karen as College President * John Hawkes as Bob Driscoll * Peter Jason as Mr. Janus
* Jimmy Buffett as 727 Pilot * Kevin Zinter 727 Co - Pilot * Thom Barry as Samahani * Kevin Grevioux as Roadblock Officer * Bruce Campbell as Charles " Charlie " Travis , Karen 's ex - fiancé and R.B. 's son .
* Taylor Nichols as Jeffrey Weems , Charlie 's friend who was in the previous expedition with Charlie .
*
Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje as Kahega , Munro 's deputy and leader of the expedition 's African porters .
* Joe Pantoliano as Eddie Ventro , an American living in Central Africa who hires Munro , and organizes the group 's transportation and materials .
* Delroy Lindo as Captain Wanta ( uncredited ) , a corrupt African military officer whom the group must bribe in order to gain safe passage .
VOICES
* Shayna Fox as Amy * Frank Welker provided the vocal effects for gorillas .
* Gary A. Hecker and Peter Elliott provide the gorilla vocalization .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After the success of The First Great Train Robbery , Crichton decided to write a screenplay specifically for Sean Connery , as the character of Charles Munro , an archetypal " great white hunter " akin to H. Rider Haggard 's hero , Allan Quatermain .
The film was envisioned as an homage to classic pulp adventure tales , and Crichton successfully pitched the movie to 20th Century Fox in 1979 without a fleshed out story .
However , the film ran into problems when Crichton learned that he could not use a real gorilla to portray the character of Amy , which led to him leaving the project .
From there , it was offered to several directors including Steven Spielberg and John Carpenter who both declined .
A brief attempt was made to revive the project in the late 1980s but to no avail .
Eventually , Frank Marshall directed the film with little , if any , involvement from Crichton .
The film 's teaser credits John Patrick Shanley and Crichton as co - screenwriters , but the subsequent trailer and the film itself credit Shanley alone .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In the US the film grossed $ 81,022,101 .
The final worldwide gross $ 152,022,101 worldwide versus a $ 50,000,000 budget .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes retroactively collected 49 reviews to give the film an approval rating of 22 % .
Metacritic rated it 22/100 based on 19 reviews , meaning " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Roger Ebert of Chicago Sun - Times rated it 3 out of 4 stars .
He called the film a splendid example of a genre no longer much in fashion , the jungle adventure story .
It was also nominated for seven Golden Raspberry Awards .
Hal Hinson of the Washington Post called the film a " Spielberg knockoff ... shamelessly lifting themes and ideas from a handful of Steven 's greatest hits . "
Hinson also criticized Amy the gorilla as " the most disappointing ' performance ' of all " and opined that the supporting actors , Tim Curry and Ernie Hudson , stood out more than the lead actors .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Award !
Category !
Subject !
Result
rowspan=7Golden Raspberry Award Worst New Star rowspan=2Amy the Talking Gorilla Worst Supporting Actress
Worst Supporting Actor
Tim Curry Worst Original Song Jerry Goldsmith "
( Feel ) the Spirit of Africa " Worst Screenplay John Patrick Shanley Worst Picture Kathleen KennedySam Mercer Worst Director Frank Marshall rowspan=2Saturn Award
Best Science Fiction Film Kathleen KennedySam Mercer
Best Director Frank Marshall IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
A video game based on the film , , was released in 1996 .
A different game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Sega Genesis was in development , but was cancelled .
A pinball machine was produced that was based on the film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS