PYRAMID LAKE
( LOS ANGELES COUNTY , CALIFORNIA ) Pyramid Lake is a reservoir formed by Pyramid Dam on Piru Creek in the eastern San Emigdio Mountains , near Castaic , Southern California .
It is a part of the West Branch California Aqueduct , which is a part of the California State Water Project .
Its water is fed by the system after being pumped up from the San Joaquin Valley and through the Tehachapi Mountains .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1843 , gold was discovered near what is now Pyramid Lake , in the Santa Feliciana Canyon , just south of what is now Pyramid Dam .
The small find failed to trigger a rush to the mountainous countryside .
Only Francisco Lopes , owner of Rancho Temescal , a Mexican land grant , and a handful of ranchers attempted to settle the region .
This lake was created in 1972 , and completed in 1973 , as a holding reservoir for the California State Water Project .
The lake was named after a pyramid - shaped rock carved out by engineers building U.S. Route 99 .
Travelers between Los Angeles and Bakersfield christened the landmark " Pyramid Rock , " which still stands just adjacent to the dam .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Pyramid Lake is the deepest lake in the California Water Project system , built up along the steep canyon walls surrounding Piru Creek .
The reservoir lies on the border between the Angeles National Forest and the Los Padres National Forest , in the northwestern portion of Los Angeles County .
It is to the west of Interstate 5 ( I-5 ) south of Tejon Pass .
The former alignment of US 99 is below the waters here , replaced by I-5 . Just below the dam , Piru Creek returns to its natural state as it winds down through the Topatopa Mountains to feed into the Lake Piru reservoir and later the Santa Clara River .
Pumps carry water from Pyramid Lake to Castaic Lake , which is the terminus of the west branch of the aqueduct .
Pyramid and Castaic act as the upper and lower reservoirs for a 1,495-megawatt pumped storage hydroelectric plant .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The earth and rock dam was built by the California Department of Water Resources and was completed in 1973 .
Pyramid Lake is part of the California Aqueduct , which is part of the California State Water Project .
Outflow goes downstream to Castaic Lake , which is the terminus of this West Branch aqueduct line .
Pyramid and Castaic act as the upper and lower reservoirs for the Castaic Power Plant ; a 1,495 megawatt pumped storage hydroelectric plant .
It is the deepest lake in the California Water Project system .
Its name comes from the Pyramid Rock , created when a ridge was cut through in 1932 by the Ridge Route Alternate ( US 99 ) .
Pyramid Rock still exists directly in front of the dam .
RECREATION Section::::Recreation .
Pyramid Lake offers boating , fishing , jet skiing , and picnic areas ( including 5 unique sites that are accessible only by boat ) , and courtesy docks .
Vista del Lago Visitors Center overlooks the lake .
Access is from Interstate 5 exit on Vista Del Lago .
Fishing is allowed from every location at Pyramid Lake .
You can catch fish such as large mouth bass , small mouth bass , striped bass , blue gill , crappie , and some trout .
The California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment ( OEHHA ) has developed a safe eating advisory for fish caught in Putah Creek based on levels of mercury or PCBs found in local species .
SEE ALSO
* List of dams and reservoirs in California
* List of lakes in California REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * CA Dept . of Water Resources — DWR :
Pyramid Lake Recreation website *
Pyramid Lake Los Alamos campground info and reservation site