FOSTER 'S HOME FOR IMAGINARY FRIENDS Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends is an American animated television series created by Craig McCracken for Cartoon Network .
It was produced by Cartoon Network Studios and is the first show made by the network to be animated primarily with Adobe Flash and was done in Ireland by Boulder Media .
Set in a world in which imaginary friends coexist with humans , it centers on a boy named Mac who is pressured by his mother to abandon his imaginary friend Bloo .
After Mac discovers an orphanage dedicated to housing abandoned imaginary friends , Bloo moves into the home and is kept from adoption as long as Mac visits him daily .
The episodes revolve around Mac and Bloo as they interact with other imaginary friends and house staff and live out their day - to - day adventures , often getting caught up in various predicaments .
McCracken conceived the series after adopting two dogs from an animal shelter and applying the concept to imaginary friends .
The show first premiered on Cartoon Network on August 13 , 2004 , as a 90-minute television film .
On August 20 , it began its normal run of twenty - to - thirty - minute episodes on Fridays , at 7 p.m.
The series finished its run on May 3 , 2009 , with a total of six seasons and seventy - nine episodes .
McCracken left Cartoon Network shortly after the series ended .
Reruns air on Boomerang .
Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends received critical acclaim and became one of Cartoon Network 's most successful original series .
It received many industry accolades , including five Annie Awards and seven Emmy Awards , winning a total of twelve awards out of thirty - five nominations .
It has since been named by Entertainment Weekly as one of the best Cartoon Network shows and by IGN in their list of best animated series at number 85 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series is set in a universe in which childhood imaginary friends coexist with humans .
In the show 's universe , imaginary friends take physical form and become real as soon as children think them up .
Once children outgrow them , friends are relocated to the titular orphanage , where they stay until other children adopt them .
The home is run by the elderly Madame Foster , its lovable , kind founder ; her rabbit imaginary friend Mr. Herriman , the strict rule - abider and business manager ; and her granddaughter Frankie , who handles day - to - day operations .
In the series ' premiere episode , a young boy named Mac is pressured by his mother to abandon his imaginary friend Bloo , since she believes that he is too old to keep him .
Bloo sees an advertisement on television about Foster 's Home and tells Mac , who takes him there , only to find out the home is an orphanage and if Bloo were to reside there , he would be available to be adopted by another child .
Mac then bargains with Frankie , Herriman and Madame Foster and they agree to guard Bloo from adoption so long as Mac continues to visit the center daily .
During the series , Mac visits the home everyday after school .
The show focuses on the escapades experienced by the mischievous Bloo , Mac , and the array of eccentric , colorful characters inhabiting Foster 's , and the obstacles with which they are challenged .
CHARACTERS MAIN * Mac ( voiced by Sean Marquette ) – A bright , and imaginative eight - year - old boy who is Bloo 's creator and best friend .
Mac visits Foster 's every day .
He is very attached to Bloo and his biggest fear is never seeing him again .
Mac is often the voice of reason among his friends when they are making decisions .
Mac becomes extremely high and hyperactive when he eats sugar .
He also has a crush on Frankie .
* Bloo ( voiced by Keith Ferguson ) –
Mac 's imaginary friend .
He is blue - colored and resembles a simple , domed cylinder .
Bloo is often very self - centered , egotistic and narcissistic , as well as having a knack for getting in trouble .
Despite all this , he still has a good heart and apologizes for his wrongdoings .
Bloo loves paddle balls , even though he typically can not make the ball hit the paddle .
*
Wilt ( voiced by Phil LaMarr ) – A very tall , friendly and incredibly nice red - colored friend with only a right arm and a crooked left eye - stalk .
His overtly passive demeanor is often taken advantage of by the other imaginary friends .
He is a basketball player and fan , and is the former imaginary friend of Jordan Michaels ( a parody of Michael Jordan ) .
After an accident during a basketball game , Wilt left Jordan , fearing the latter would be disappointed by Wilt 's losing the game .
Years later , Wilt goes on a search to re - encounter Jordan .
* Eduardo ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) – A Latin American monster created by a young girl , Nina Valerosa , to protect her in a dangerous neighborhood .
Eduardo is big , hairy and violet - purple sloth who has horns , a snout , a pointy demon - like tail and large teeth .
Despite his large size , overwhelming strength , and menacing appearance , Eduardo is docile , timid and scared of almost anything .
However , he can be ferocious if angered or when danger befalls his friends .
* Coco ( voiced by Candi Milo ) – A chicken - like bird with palm tree - like hair who can only say or write her name .
A talent unique to her is her ability to lay colorful , plastic eggs containing a plethora of objects , at will .
Other characters usually understand her when she speaks .
Despite her appearance and quirky behavior , she can demonstrate intelligence and kindness .
Her creator is unknown , as she was found on a South Pacific island by two scientists named Adam and Douglas .
* Frankie Foster ( voiced by Grey DeLisle ) – Madame Foster 's redheaded granddaughter , addressed as " Miss Frances " by Mr. Herriman .
Frankie is the caregiver at Foster 's and helps keep everything in order .
She is usually very friendly , capable , easygoing , hard - working , thoughtful , caring , and sweet , but occasionally loses her patience with Bloo and Mr. Herriman .
According to her driver 's license , she was born on July 25 , 1984 .
* Mr. Herriman ( voiced by Tom Kane ) –
A gray and white elderly anthropomorphic lop ear rabbit friend imagined by Madame Foster who speaks with a British accent .
He wears a tailcoat , white gloves , a top hat and a monocle .
He presents himself as head of business affairs of the house and later as President of the house , and is extremely strict about rules and the maintenance of order in the home .
He frequently punishes Bloo for his various misdemeanors and scolds Frankie for her perceived laziness , despite all her hard work .
* Madame Foster ( voiced by Candi Milo ) – The caring founder of Foster 's and grandmother of Frankie .
She is the creator of Mr. Herriman .
Despite being elderly , Madame Foster has childlike boundless energy and occasionally becomes hyperactive and mischievous .
Section::::Characters . Section::::Main .
Other recurring characters include Terrence ( voiced by Tara Strong ) , Mac 's older brother who constantly bullies him ; Duchess ( voiced by Grey DeLisle ) , a friend with a Cubist - looking face and a pompous , narcissistic personality ; Cheese ( voiced by Candi Milo ) , a dim - witted and childish yellow friend who first appeared in season two ; and Goo ( voiced by Grey DeLisle ) , a talkative young girl who is highly imaginative and constantly creates new friends , first appearing in season three .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The show has seventy - nine episodes in six seasons ; it has also aired eighteen shorts .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was created by Craig McCracken , who had also created The Powerpuff Girls for Cartoon Network Studios .
McCracken developed the idea for the series after adopting two dogs from an animal shelter with his then - fiancée Lauren Faust and Mike Moon ; he adapted the concept of pet adoption to that of imaginary friends .
The show has an art style which is meant to evoke , according to McCracken , " that period of late 60 's psychedelia when Victorian stylings were coming into trippy poster designs " .
McCracken wanted Foster 's to be similar to The Muppet Show , which he believed was a " fun , character driven show that the whole family could enjoy " .
Animation for the show was done using a process involving Adobe software Illustrator , Flash and After Effects .
McCracken directed , executive produced and story edited the series .
Most of the episodes were produced at the Cartoon Network Studios in Burbank , California , while the rest were produced at Boulder Media Limited in Dublin , Ireland .
The theme song was composed by James L. Venable , who had originally collaborated with McCracken on The Powerpuff Girls .
Craig described the music as " psychedelic ragtime " .
Additional music was composed by Venable and Jennifer Kes Remington .
Collette Sunderman was the casting and recording director for the show .
Sean Marquette was cast as Mac , and Keith Ferguson was cast as Bloo .
The Powerpuff Girls voice actors Tom Kane , Tom Kenny and Tara Strong were cast in Foster 's as Mr. Herriman , Eduardo and Terrence , respectively .
Grey DeLisle was cast as Frankie Foster , Phil LaMarr was cast as Wilt , and Candi Milo was cast as Coco and Madame Foster .
From season two onwards , Milo also lent her voice to Cheese .
DeLisle also voiced Goo after the character 's debut in season three .
Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends premiered on August 13 , 2004 , at 7:30 pm E / P as a 90-minute special titled " House of Bloo 's " .
The series ' run began on August 20 on its normal timeslot of Fridays at 7 pm .
The special was Cartoon Network 's highest rated premiere at the time .
18 shorts were produced from 2006 to 2007 .
In addition to the premiere episode , two other specials were produced : " Good Wilt Hunting " , which premiered on November 23 , 2006 , at 7 pm , and " " , which premiered on November 27 , 2008 , at 8 pm .
The final episode , titled " Goodbye to Bloo " , aired on May 3 , 2009 , at 6:30 pm , preceded by a six - hour marathon of other episodes from the series .
McCracken expressed a certain sadness at the series ' end , but stated that he was " crazy proud of the work " that he and the production team had done " on Foster 's and the fact that it worked just the way [ they ] wanted it to " .
During its original run , Foster 's was one of Cartoon Network 's highest rated shows .
The show proved to be popular among both younger and older audiences .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends received critical acclaim .
Anita Gates of The New York Times praised the series ' premiere 90-minute episode and stated that the series would promise to be an " admirable tale of loyalty and adventure - based learning with a contagious sense of fun " .
Mike Pinsky , in a review on DVD Verdict , praised the art design and the characterizations , particularly singling out Cheese as possibly " the quintessence of Foster 's surreal charm " in his season two review .
David Cornelius of DVD Talk called the series " one of the best shows of any kind [ then ] on television , a winner for viewers of any age " and " a wildly inventive mix of creative wonder , comic genius , and well - crafted chaos " .
In a season two review , also on DVD Talk , Cornelius called the show " flat - out perfect " .
Joly Herman of Common Sense Media , an advocacy group focused on appropriate technology and media for children , was less enthusiastic about the show , rating it 2 stars out of 5 .
Herman praised the creativity and diversity of the characters and the show 's premise , but criticized the storyline and writing , which presented " confusing messages " for young children .
The series was named the 85th best animated series of all time by IGN , which called it very funny and endearing .
Entertainment Weekly named the show the 6th best Cartoon Network show in their top 10 list , praising its " catchy magical - realist setting " and the characters " you genuinely learned to care about " .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends received many industry accolades .
The series received twelve awards out of a total of thirty - five nominations .
At the Annie Awards , the show received a total of twenty nominations from 2004 to 2009 , and won five , including Best Animated Television Production in 2007 .
At the Emmy Awards , the show received nine nominations , and won seven awards , including five Outstanding Individual Achievements in Animation and one Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or More ) award .
At the 2005 Pulcinella Awards , Foster 's received the award for Best TV Series for All Audiences and Bloo was named " Best Character of the Year . "
At the 22nd TCA Awards , the show received a nomination for Outstanding Achievement in Children 's Programming .
At the 2007 Ottawa International Animation Festival , the series won Best Television Animation for Children .
TITLES IN DIFFERENT COUNTRIES Section::::Titles in different countries .
European Countries * Italy
– Gli amici immaginari di casa Foster * Netherlands – Foster 's Thuis voor Denkbeeldige Vriendjes * Romania – Casa Foster
pentru
prietenii imaginari
* France – Foster , la Maison des Amis Imaginaires
* Hungary – Fosterék háza képzeletbeli barátoknak
* Germany –
Fosters Haus für
Fantasiefreunde * Russia
– Фостер :
Дом для друзей из мира
фантазий Asian Countries * South Korea
– 상상 속 친구들의 모험 * China - 亲亲麻吉
( Simplified Chinese , only in iQiyi )
Spanish - speaking countries
* Latin America - Mansión Foster para Amigos Imaginarios * Spain - Foster , La Casa de Los Amigos Imaginarios MERCHANDISING AND MEDIA VIDEO GAMES Section::::Merchandising and media .
Section::::Video games .
There are two video games based on Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends .
The first has the same name as the show and was developed by Crave Entertainment for the Game Boy Advance .
It was released on October 17 , 2006 .
In the game , players control Mac or Bloo while collecting items to complete objectives .
Jack Devries of IGN rated it a 5.5 out of 10 , stating that it " falls short " and is " skippable " .
The second game , titled Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends : Imagination Invaders , was released on November 12 , 2007 , for the Nintendo DS by Midway .
In the game , the player controls Bloo , who performs tasks and completes quests while fighting against " Space Nut Boogies " .
Devries rated it 4 out of 10 , calling it " terrible to play " and " completely worthless " .
Characters from the show also appear on the games and .
On May 15 , 2006 , Cartoon Network introduced an online game , Big Fat Awesome House Party , which allowed players to create an online friend to join Bloo and the others in a one - year game online , earning points that would give them gifts , cards and other on - line " merchandise " for their albums .
A player 's friend , made from one of over 900,000 possible characters , could wind up in a future episode of Foster 's .
Over 13 million users were registered to play the game after its launch in May 2006 .
Because of its success and popularity , Cartoon Network announced in May 2007 that the game would continue for six more months , into November of that year .
PROMOTIONS AND OTHER PRODUCTS Section::::Promotions and other products .
From 2006 to 2008 , Cartoon Network furnished a Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends float as part of the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade .
The float was fashioned as a replica of the home .
On Thanksgiving Day , 2006 , characters from the show performed The Beatles ' " With a Little Help from My Friends " .
In 2007 , the characters ' performance of You 're My Best Friend by Queen .
In 2008 , the characters ' performance of Harry Nilsson 's theme song to The Courtship of Eddie 's Father was interrupted by Rick Astley singing "
Never Gon na Give You Up " , reproducing the Internet phenomena of Rickrolling .
In March 2006 , toys of characters from the show were featured in Burger King 's Kids Meals .
In December 2007 , Cartoon Network and Hot Topic retail stores in the United States set up a boutique for a product line based on the series , with over 693 locations featuring products such as clothing , accessories and DVD releases by Warner Home Video .
The episodes from the series are now available for download from Hulu , iTunes and Amazon Video .
The show 's second season was available on Netflix until March 2015 .
All 6 seasons were added to Hulu in May 2015 .
HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases . !
DVD title !
Season(s ) !
Episode count !
Release date REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS