LAKE GEORGE ( NEW YORK )
Lake George , nicknamed the Queen of American Lakes , is a long , narrow oligotrophic lake located at the southeast base of the Adirondack Mountains , in the northeastern portion of the U.S. state of New York .
It lies within the upper region of the Great Appalachian Valley and drains all the way northward into Lake Champlain and the St. Lawrence River drainage basin .
The lake is situated along the historical natural ( Amerindian ) path between the valleys of the Hudson and St. Lawrence Rivers , and so lies on the direct land route between Albany , New York and Montreal , Quebec , Canada .
The lake extends about on a north - south axis , is quite deep , and varies from in width , presenting a significant barrier to east - west travel .
Although the year - round population of the Lake George region is relatively small , the summertime population can swell to over 50,000 residents , many in the village of Lake George region at the southern end of the lake .
Lake George drains into Lake Champlain to its north through a short stream , the La Chute River , with many falls and rapids , dropping in its course — virtually all of which is within the lands of Ticonderoga , New York and near the site of the Fort Ticonderoga .
Ultimately the waters flowing via the Richelieu River drain into the St. Lawrence River downstream and northeast of Montreal , and then into the North Atlantic Ocean above Nova Scotia .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Lake George is located in the southeastern Adirondack State Park and is part of the St. Lawrence watershed .
Notable landforms include Anthony 's Nose , Deer 's Leap , Diver 's Rock ( a jump into the lake ) , and Double - Diver 's ( a jump ) , the Indian Kettles , and Roger 's Rock .
Some of the surrounding mountains include Black Mountain , Elephant Mountain , Pilot Knob , Prospect Mountain , Shelving Rock , Sleeping Beauty Mountain , Sugarloaf Mountain , and the Tongue Mountain Range .
Some of the lake 's more famous bays are Basin Bay , Kattskill Bay , Northwest Bay , Oneida Bay , and Silver Bay .
The lake is distinguished by " The Narrows " , an island - filled narrow section ( approximately long ) that is bordered on the west by the Tongue Mountain Range and the east by Black Mountain .
In all , Lake George is home to over 170 islands , 148 of them state - owned .
They range from the car - sized Skipper 's Jib to the larger Vicar 's and Long Islands .
Camping permits are attainable for the larger portion of islands .
The lake 's deepest point is , between Dome Island and Buck Mountain in the southern quarter of the lake .
The northern end of the lake that is located near Ticonderoga is considered the southern end of the Champlain Valley , which includes Lake Champlain , as well as the cities Plattsburgh , New York and Burlington , Vermont .
INVASIVE SPECIES Section::::Invasive species .
There are six known invasive species in Lake George .
The Asian clam first found in 2010 is the biggest threat , along with the Eurasian watermilfoil .
Other invasive species are the Chinese mystery snail , curly - leaf pondweed , spiny water flea , and zebra mussel .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The lake was originally named the Andia - ta - roc - te by local Native Americans .
James Fenimore Cooper in his narrative
Last of the Mohicans called it the Horican , after a tribe which may have lived there , because he felt the original name was too hard to pronounce .
The first European visitor to the area , Samuel de Champlain , noted the lake in his journal on July 3 , 1609 , but did not name it .
In 1646 , the French Canadian Jesuit missionary Isaac Jogues , the first European to view the lake , named it Lac du Saint - Sacrement ( Lake of the Holy Sacrament ) , and its exit stream , La Chute ( " The Fall " ) .
On August 28 , 1755 , William Johnson led British colonial forces to occupy the area in the French and Indian War .
He renamed the lake as Lake George for King George II .
On September 8 , 1755 the Battle of Lake George was fought between the forces of Britain and France resulting in a strategic victory for the British and their Iroquois allies .
After the battle , Johnson ordered the construction of a military fortification at the southern end of the lake .
The fort was named Fort William Henry after the King 's grandson Prince William Henry , a younger brother of the later King George III .
In September , the French responded by beginning construction of Fort Carillon , later called Fort Ticonderoga , on a point where La Chute enters Lake Champlain .
These fortifications controlled the easy water route between Canada and colonial New York .
A French army , and their native allies under general Louis - Joseph de Montcalm laid siege to Fort William Henry in 1757 and burned it down after the British surrender .
During the British retreat to Fort Edward they were ambushed and massacred by natives allied to the French , in what would become known as The Massacre at Fort William Henry .
On March 13 , 1758 , an attempted attack on that fort by irregular forces led by Robert Rogers was one of the most daring raids of that war .
The unorthodox ( to Europeans ) tactics of Rogers ' Rangers are seen as the inspiring the later creation of similar forces in later conflicts — including the United States Army Rangers .
Lake George 's key position on the Montreal – New York water route made possession of the forts at either end — particularly Ticonderoga — strategically crucial during the American Revolution .
Later in the war , British General John Burgoyne 's decision to bypass the easy water route to the Hudson River that Lake George offered and , instead , attempt to reach the Hudson though the marshes and forests at the southern end of Lake Champlain , led to the British defeat at Saratoga .
On May 31 , 1791 , Thomas Jefferson wrote in a letter to his daughter , " Lake George is without comparison , the most beautiful water I ever saw ; formed by a contour of mountains into a basin ... finely interspersed with islands , its water limpid as crystal , and the mountain sides covered with rich groves ... down to the water - edge : here and there precipices of rock to checker the scene and save it from monotony . "
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , Lake George was a common spot sought out by well - known artists , including Martin Johnson Heade , John F. Kensett , E. Charlton Fortune , Frank Vincent DuMond and Georgia O'Keeffe .
ETHAN ALLEN ACCIDENT Section::::Ethan Allen accident .
On October 2 , 2005 , at 2:55 p.m. , the Ethan Allen , a glass - enclosed tourist boat carrying 47 passengers and operated by Shoreline Cruises , capsized during calm weather on the lake .
According to reports from a local newspaper , 20 people ( mostly senior citizens ) died .
Initial reports indicated that the tour group was from Canada , but these reports were later found to be incorrect .
It was later determined that the group was from the Trenton , Michigan , area on a week - long fall trip along the East Coast by bus and rail , organized by Trenton 's parks and recreation department and arranged through a Canadian company .
Police said they had never seen a disaster of this magnitude on the lake .
The captain survived and cooperated with police .
The National Transportation Safety Board investigation of the incident revealed that , although the boat was rated to carry 50 people when it was manufactured in 1966 , subsequent alterations to the boat 's design had greatly reduced its stability .
At the time of the accident , the boat should have been rated to carry no more than 14 passengers .
On February 5 , 2007 , the captain , Richard Paris , and the company that owned the boat , Shoreline Cruises , were indicted for having only one crew member aboard the boat .
More serious charges were not filed because neither the captain nor the owners were aware they were violating safety standards .
CHARACTER TOURIST DESTINATION Section::::Character .
Section::::Tourist destination .
Situated on the rail line halfway between New York City and Montreal , Lake George attracted the era 's rich and famous by the late 19th and early 20th century .
Members of the Roosevelt , van Rensselaer , Vanderbilt , Rockefeller and Whitney families visited its shores .
The Fort William Henry Hotel , in what is now Lake George Village , and The Sagamore in Bolton Landing opened at this time to serve tourists .
The wealthiest visitors were more likely to stay with their peers at their private country estates .
The Silver Bay YMCA on Lake George was constructed in 1900 .
It has since evolved into a summer family camp , serving several hundred organizations and tourists every summer .
Since 1913 , on the East Shore of Lake George , YMCA Camp Chingachgook has hosted thousands of guests every summer .
Lake George is accessible by car via Interstate 87 and by air from Albany International Airport , which is about away .
Today , Lake George remains a tourist destination , resort center , and summer colony .
A popular activity in the Lake George area is hot air ballooning .
One of the nation 's oldest gathering of hot air balloons occurs every September in nearby Glens Falls .
MILLIONAIRE 'S
ROW Section::::Millionaire 's Row .
Millionaire 's Row is the nickname of a stretch of Bolton Road ( now Lake Shore Drive ) on the west side of the lake where millionaires built mansions for use during the summer months .
Such notables as Spencer Trask and Robert Pitcairn built palatial summer homes here .
Although sometimes called " cottages " by their owners , these grand houses typically had dozens of bedrooms and more than of floor space .
Millionaire 's Row differed markedly from the more rustic summer " camps " built by other wealthy Adirondack summer residents such as William West Durant and John D. Rockefeller .
Unlike the log and timber structures at the camps , the houses of Millionaire 's Row were built of stone and masonry in the Tudor Revival , Georgian Revival and Italianate styles .
Unlike their contemporaries in Newport and the Hamptons , which were built on tiny pieces of land , the cottages of Millionaire 's row were mansions in the true sense of the word .
They were often built on hundreds of acres of pristine lakeside wilderness .
With the changing economic climate and the introduction of income tax , the mansions of Millionaire 's Row became less sustainable by the 1930s .
By the 1950s , with the advent of affordable auto and air travel , Lake George became more attractive to the growing middle class and less so to the " jet set " .
Most of the mansions of Millionaire 's Row were torn down or turned into hotels and restaurants .
Among the surviving " cottages " are Melody Manor , Sun Castle ( Erlowest ) , and Green Harbor Mansion .
GALLERY
PHOTOGRAPHS
PAINTINGS
VIDEOS
SEE ALSO
* Huletts Landing * Sagamore Hotel REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Lake George Travel Information and Blog Site
* Lake George Tourism Department * Lake George Chamber of Commerce tourism information * Official Lake George Historical Association Website
* Lake George Association * Lake George Music Festival