WE WERE SOLDIERS
We Were Soldiers is a 2002 American war film that dramatizes the Battle of Ia Drang on November 14 , 1965 .
The film was directed by Randall Wallace and stars Mel Gibson .
It is based on the book We Were Soldiers Once …
And Young ( 1992 ) by Lieutenant General ( Ret . )
Hal Moore and reporter Joseph L. Galloway , both of whom were at the battle .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A French unit on patrol in Vietnam in 1954 , during the final year of the First Indochina War , is ambushed by Viet Minh forces , probably the Battle of Mang Yang Pass .
Viet Minh commander Nguyen Huu An orders his soldiers to " kill all they send , and they will stop coming " .
Eleven years later , the United States is fighting the Vietnam War .
U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Hal Moore ( Mel Gibson ) is chosen to train and lead a battalion .
After arriving in Vietnam , he learns that an American base has been attacked , and is ordered to take his 400 men after the enemy and eliminate the North Vietnamese attackers , despite the fact that intelligence has no idea of the number of enemy troops .
Moore leads a newly created air cavalry unit into the Ia Drang Valley .
After landing in the " Valley of Death " , the soldiers capture a North Vietnamese soldier and learn from him that the location they were sent to is actually the base camp for a veteran North Vietnamese army division of 4,000 men .
Upon arrival in the area with a platoon of soldiers , 2nd Lt .
Henry Herrick spots an enemy scout , runs after him , and orders reluctant soldiers to follow .
The North Vietnamese scout lures them into an ambush , resulting in several men being killed , including Herrick and his subordinates .
The surviving platoon members are surrounded with no chance of retreat and are cut off from the rest of the battalion .
Sgt .
Savage assumes command , calls in artillery , and uses the cover of night to keep the Vietnamese from overrunning their small defensive position .
Meanwhile , with helicopters constantly dropping off units , Moore manages to secure weak points before the North Vietnamese can take advantage of them .
On the second day , despite being trapped and desperately outnumbered , the main U.S. force manages to hold off the North Vietnamese with artillery , mortars , and helicopter airlifts of supplies and reinforcements .
Eventually , Nguyen Huu An , the commander of the North Vietnamese division , orders a large - scale attack on the American position .
At the point of being overrun by the enemy and with no options left , Moore orders 1st
Lt .
Charlie Hastings , his Forward Air Controller , to call in " Broken Arrow " ( a call for all available combat aircraft to assist and attack enemy positions , even those close to the U.S. troops ' position , because a position is being overrun and can no longer be defended ) .
The aircraft attack with bombs , napalm , and machine guns , killing many PAVN and Viet Cong troops ; but a friendly fire incident also results in American deaths .
The second North Vietnamese attack is repelled , and the surviving soldiers of Herrick 's cut off platoon , including Savage , are rescued .
Meanwhile , back in the United States , Julia Moore ( Madeleine Stowe ) has become the leader of the American wives living on the base .
When the Army begins to use yellow cab drivers to deliver telegrams notifying the next of kin of soldiers ' deaths in combat , Julia personally assumes that emotional responsibility instead .
Moore 's troops regroup , secure the area , and stop at the base of a hill .
Nguyen Huu An plans a final assault on the Americans and sends most of his troops to carry out the attack .
The North Vietnamese have set up strong emplacements near the hidden entrance of the underground passage to the command post .
Hal and his men charge at them , but before the North Vietnamese can fire , Major Bruce " Snake " Crandall and others in helicopter gunships attack the North Vietnamese , destroying the bulk of the enemy force .
Nguyen
Huu
An is alerted that the Americans have broken through their lines and that there are no soldiers between the Americans and their command post .
Since he had deployed his reserve forces to the final offensive , and the base camp has no troops to call upon for defense , Huu An quickly orders the headquarters evacuated .
Moore , having achieved his objective , returns to the helicopter landing zone to be picked up .
Only after everyone ( including the dead and wounded ) is removed from the battlefield does he fly out of the valley .
Some time later , Nguyen Huu An and his men arrive on the battlefield to collect their dead .
He claims that the Americans will " think this was their victory .
So this will become an American war . "
At the end of the film , it is revealed that the landing zone immediately reverted to North Vietnamese hands after the American troops were airlifted out .
Hal Moore continued the battle in a different landing zone , and after nearly a year he returns home safely to Julia and his family .
His superiors congratulate him for killing over 1,800 North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong soldiers .
An older Moore visits the Vietnam War memorial and sees the names of soldiers who fell at Ia Drang .
CAST
* Mel Gibson as Lieutenant Colonel / Colonel Hal Moore
* Madeleine Stowe as Julia Moore * Greg Kinnear as Major Bruce P. Crandall * Sam Elliott as Sergeant Major Basil L. Plumley * Chris Klein as 2nd Lieutenant Jack Geoghegan * Luke Benward as David Moore * Taylor Momsen as Julie Moore
* Devon Werkheiser as Steve Moore
* Keri Russell as Barbara Geoghegan * Barry Pepper as Joe Galloway * Mark McCracken as Captain Ed
" Too Tall " Freeman * Đơn Dương as NVA Lieutenant Colonel Nguyễn Hữu
An * Ryan Hurst as Sergeant Ernie Savage * Marc Blucas as 2nd Lieutenant Henry Herrick
* Jsu Garcia as Captain Tony Nadal
* Jon Hamm as Captain Matt Dillon * Clark Gregg as Captain Tom Metsker
* Blake Heron as Sp4 .
Galen Bungum * Desmond Harrington as Sp4 .
Bill Beck * Brian Tee as Pfc .
Jimmy Nakayama
* Robert Bagnell as 1st Lieutenant Charlie Hastings , USAF * Bellamy Young as Catherine LaPlante Metsker ADAPTATION FROM SOURCE MATERIAL Section::::Adaptation from source material .
In the source book We Were Soldiers Once … And Young , Hal Moore complains that " Every damn Hollywood movie got it wrong " ; director Randall Wallace has said he was inspired by this comment and became " determined to get it right this time " .
The film 's final version , though getting many of the facts of the book presented onto film , is not entirely a historically accurate portrayal of the battle , nor is it entirely faithful to the book .
For instance , the film depicts a heroic charge under the command of Lt . Col . Hal Moore at the end of the battle that destroys the Vietnamese reserve , ending the battle in an American victory ( a fact that director Randall Wallace noted in the DVD commentary ) ; in fact , there was no heroic final charge in the book , nor were the North Vietnamese forces destroyed , though the American commander Moore reported 834 enemy bodies and 1215 estimated KIA ( one - third of the enemy force ) while the US forces were reduced by 72 out of 395 , with 18 % fatal casualties .
Lt .
Col .
Nguyen
Huu An , the Vietnamese commander , did not see the conclusion at LZ X - Ray as the end of combat , and the Battle of Ia Drang continued the next day with combat action at LZ Albany where the 2/7th , with A Company 1/5th , found themselves in a fight for their lives against Lt . Col .
Nguyen Huu An 's reserve .
Finally , as the movie notes in a voice over by Joe Galloway ( Barry Pepper ) , that Hal Moore continued to lead in Vietnam for over 235 more days .
There are many additional historical differences between the book and the movie , presumably made to shorten the length of the movie .
Some differences not shown would have demonstrated how desperate the American situation at Ia Drang was .
For example , the seriousness of the overrun of C Company under the command of Capt .
Robert Edwards and the repulse of the final major North Vietnamese push at LZ X - Ray on the former C Company line , which was then held by B Company 2/7th under the command of Capt .
Myron Diduryk , the Ukrainian captain who Col . Moore ( Mel Gibson ) seems to claim is attached to the 1/7th .
Also incorrect is the act of Capt .
Ramon Nadal pushing forward and rescuing the stranded platoon of Lt . Henry Herrick , which according to the book was actually done not by one company of the 1/7th , but rather by two companies of the 2/5th as well as B Company 1/7th .
Despite the aforementioned differences from the book and departures from historical accuracy , Gen. Moore states in a documentary included in the video versions that this film is the first one " to get it right " .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
We Were Soldiers is noteworthy for the use of the haunting lament Sgt .
MacKenzie by Joseph Kilna MacKenzie . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received mostly positive reviews .
Roger Ebert , writing for the Chicago Sun - Times , gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 4 , and praised the movie 's truthful and realistic battle scenes and how the movie follows the characters .
" Black Hawk Down " was criticized because the characters seemed hard to tell apart .
" We Were Soldiers " does n't have that problem ; in the Hollywood tradition it identifies a few key players , casts them with stars , and follows their stories .
Lisa Schwarzbaum , from Entertainment Weekly , gave the movie a B and noted the film 's fair treatment of both sides .
The writer - director bestows honor – generously , apolitically – not only on the dead and still living American veterans who fought in Ia Drang , but also on their families , on their Vietnamese adversaries , and on the families of their adversaries too .
Rarely has a foe been portrayed with such measured respect for a separate reality , which should come as a relief to critics ( I 'm one ) of the enemy 's facelessness in Black Hawk Down ; vignettes of gallantry among Vietnamese soldiers and such humanizing visual details as a Vietnamese sweetheart 's photograph left behind , in no way interfere with the primary , rousing saga of a fine American leader who kept his promise to his men to " leave no one behind dead or alive .
David Sterritt , from the Christian Science Monitor , criticized the movie for giving a more positive image of the Vietnam War that , in his opinion , did not concur with reality .
The films about Vietnam that most Americans remember are positively soaked in physical and emotional torment – from " Platoon , " with its grunt's - eye view of combat , to " Apocalypse Now , " with its exploration of war 's dehumanizing insanity .
Today , the pendulum has swung back again .
If filmmakers with politically twisted knives once sliced away guts - and - glory clichés , their current equivalents hack away all meaningful concern with moral and political questions .
" We Were Soldiers " is shameless in this regard , filling the screen with square - jawed officers who weep at carnage and fresh - faced GIs who use their last breaths to intone things like , " I 'm glad I died for my country . " Todd McCarthy , from Variety , said the film " presents the fighting realistically , violently and relatively coherently given the chaotic circumstances ...
" McCarthy further said , " Mel Gibson has the closest thing to a John Wayne part that anyone 's played since the Duke himself rode into the sunset , and he plays it damn well . "
He summarized with , " Gibson 's performance anchors the film with commanding star power to burn .
This officer truly loves his men , and the credibility with which the actor is able to express Moore 's leadership qualities as well as his sensitive side is genuinely impressive . "
Hal Moore , who had long been critical of many Vietnam War films for their negative portrayals of American servicemen , publicly expressed approval of the film and is featured in segments of the DVD .
Some soldiers were less pleased : Retired Col Rick Rescorla , who played an important role in the book and was pictured on the cover ( and later died in the September 11 attacks ) , was disappointed , after reading the script , to learn that he and his unit had been written out of the movie .
In one key incident , the finding of a vintage French bugle on a dying Vietnamese soldier , the English - born Rescorla is replaced by a nameless Welsh platoon leader .
SEE ALSO
* 1st Cavalry Division * Ed Freeman
* Sgt .
MacKenzie * Basil L. Plumley
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS