STAKEHOLDER ( CORPORATE )
In a corporation , as defined in its first usage in a 1963 internal memorandum at the Stanford Research Institute , a stakeholder is a member of the " groups without whose support the organization would cease to exist " .
The theory was later developed and championed by R. Edward Freeman in the 1980s .
Since then it has gained wide acceptance in business practice and in theorizing relating to strategic management , corporate governance , business purpose and corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) .
A corporate stakeholder can affect or be affected by the actions of a business as a whole .
Whereas shareholders are often the party with the most direct and obvious interest at stake in business decisions , they are one of various subsets of stakeholders , as customers and employees also have stakes in the outcome .
In the most developed sense of stakeholders in terms of real corporate responsibility , the bearers of externalities are included in stakeholdership .
APPLICATIONS OF THE TERM EXAMPLES OF A COMPANY 'S STAKEHOLDERS Section::::Applications of the term .
Section::::Examples of a company 's stakeholders . !
Stakeholders : !
Stakeholder 's concerns : TYPES OF STAKEHOLDERS Section::::Types of stakeholders .
Any action taken by any organization or any group might affect those people who are linked with them in the private sector .
For examples these are parents , children , customers , owners , employees , associates , partners , contractors , and suppliers , people that are related or located nearby .
Primary Stakeholders – usually internal stakeholders , are those that engage in economic transactions with the business ( for example stockholders , customers , suppliers , creditors , and employees ) .
Secondary Stakeholders – usually external stakeholders , are those who – although they do not engage in direct economic exchange with the business – are affected by or can affect its actions ( for example the general public , communities , activist groups , business support groups , and the media ) .
Excluded Stakeholders –
those such as children or the disinterested public , originally as they had no economic impact on business .
Now as the concept takes an anthropocentric perspective , while some groups like the general public may be recognized as stakeholders others remain excluded .
Such a perspective does not give plants , animals or even geology a voice as stakeholders , but only an instrumental value in relation to human groups or individuals .
The definition of corporate responsibilities through a classification of stakeholders to consider has been criticised as creating a false dichotomy between the " shareholder model " and the " stakeholders model " or a false analogy of the obligations towards shareholders and other interested parties .
COMPANY STAKEHOLDER MAPPING Section::::Company stakeholder mapping .
A narrow mapping of a company 's stakeholders might identify the following stakeholders : * Employees * Communities * Shareholders * Creditors * Investors * Government * Customers * Owners * Financiers * Managers A broader mapping of a company 's stakeholders may also include : *
Suppliers * Distributors * Labor unions
* Government regulatory agencies
* Government legislative bodies
* Government tax - collecting agencies * Industry trade groups * Professional associations * NGOs and other advocacy groups
* Prospective employees
* Prospective customers
* Local communities * National communities * Public at Large ( Global Community )
* Competitors * Schools
* Future generations *
Analysts and Media * Research centers IN MANAGEMENT Section::::In management .
In the last decades of the 20th century , the word " stakeholder " became more commonly used to mean a person or organization that has a legitimate interest in a project or entity .
In discussing the decision - making process for institutions — including large business corporations , government agencies , and non - profit organizations — the concept has been broadened to include everyone with an interest ( or " stake " ) in what the entity does .
This includes not only vendors , employees , and customers , but even members of a community where its offices or factory may affect the local economy or environment .
In this context , a " stakeholder " includes not only the directors or trustees on its governing board ( who are stakeholders in the traditional sense of the word ) but also all persons who paid into the figurative stake and the persons to whom it may be " paid out " ( in the sense of a " payoff " in game theory , meaning the outcome of the transaction ) .
Therefore , in order to effectively engage with a community of stakeholders , the organisation 's management needs to be aware of the stakeholders , understand their wants and expectations , understand their attitude ( supportive , neutral or opposed ) , and be able to prioritize the members of the overall community to focus the organisation 's scarce resources on the most significant stakeholders .
Example
* For example , in the case of a professional landlord undertaking the refurbishment of some rented housing that is occupied while the work is being carried out , key stakeholders would be the residents , neighbors ( for whom the work is a nuisance ) , and the tenancy - management team and housing - maintenance team employed by the landlord .
Other stakeholders would be funders and the design - and - construction team .
The holders of each separate kind of interest in the entity 's affairs are called a constituency , so there may be a constituency of stockholders , a constituency of adjoining property owners , a constituency of banks the entity owes money to , and so on .
In that usage , " constituent " is a synonym for " stakeholder " .
IN CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Section::::In corporate responsibility .
In the field of corporate governance and corporate responsibility , a debate is ongoing about whether the firm or company should be managed for stakeholders , stockholders ( shareholders ) , or customers .
Proponents in favour of stakeholders may base their arguments on the following four key assertions : 1 )
Value can best be created by trying to maximize joint outcomes .
For example , according to this thinking , programs that satisfy both employees ' needs and stockholders ' wants are doubly valuable because they address two legitimate sets of stakeholders at the same time .
There is evidence that the combined effects of such a policy are not only additive but even multiplicative .
For instance , by simultaneously addressing customer wishes in addition to employee and stockholder interests , both of the latter two groups also benefit from increased sales .
2 )
Supporters also take issue with the preeminent role given to stockholders by many business thinkers , especially in the past .
The argument is that debt holders , employees , and suppliers also make contributions and thus also take risks in creating a successful firm .
3 )
These normative arguments would matter little if stockholders ( shareholders ) had complete control in guiding the firm .
However , many believe that due to certain kinds of board of directors structures , top managers like CEOs are mostly in control of the firm .
4 )
The greatest value of a company is its image and brand .
By attempting to fulfill the needs and wants of many different people ranging from the local population and customers to their own employees and owners , companies can prevent damage to their image and brand , prevent losing large amounts of sales and disgruntled customers , and prevent costly legal expenses .
While the stakeholder view has an increased cost , many firms have decided that the concept improves their image , increases sales , reduces the risks of liability for corporate negligence , and makes them less likely to be targeted by pressure groups , campaigning groups and NGOs .
STAKEHOLDER THEORY Section::::Stakeholder theory .
Post , Preston , Sachs ( 2002 ) , use the following definition of the term " stakeholder " : " A person , group or organization that has interest or concern in an organization .
Stakeholders can affect or be affected by the organization 's actions , objectives and policies .
Some examples of key stakeholders are creditors , directors , employees , government ( and its agencies ) , owners ( shareholders ) , suppliers , unions , and the community from which the business draws its resources .
Not all stakeholders are equal .
A company 's customers are entitled to fair trading practices but they are not entitled to the same consideration as the company 's employees .
The stakeholders in a corporation are the individuals and constituencies that contribute , either voluntarily or involuntarily , to its wealth - creating capacity and activities , and that are therefore its potential beneficiaries and/or risk bearers .
" This definition differs from the older definition of the term stakeholder in Stakeholder theory ( Freeman , 1983 ) that also includes competitors as stakeholders of a corporation .
Robert Allen Phillips provides a moral foundation for stakeholder theory in Stakeholder Theory and Organizational Ethics .
There he defends a " principle of stakeholder fairness " based on the work of John Rawls , as well as a distinction between normatively and derivatively legitimate stakeholders .
Real stakeholders , labelled stakeowners : genuine stakeholders with a legitimate stake , the loyal partners who strive for mutual benefits .
Stakeowners own and deserve a stake in the firm .
Stakeholder reciprocity could be an innovative criterion in the corporate governance debate as to who should be accorded representation on the board .
Corporate social responsibility should imply a corporate stakeholder responsibility .
SEE ALSO
*
Stakeholder engagement * Stakeholder ( law )
* UK company law
* Strategy Markup Language , whose core elements include CITATIONS REFERENCES
* Freeman , R.E. and Reed , D.L. , 1983 .
Stockholders and stakeholders : A new perspective on corporate governance .
California management review , 25(3 ) , pp.88 - 106 .
* Redefining the Corporation : An International Colloquy * Figge , F. ; Schaltegger , S. :
What is Stakeholder Value ?
Developing a Catchphrase into a Benchmarking Tool .
Lüneburg / Geneva / Paris : University of Lüneburg / Pictet/ in association with United Nations Environment Program ( UNEP ) ,
2000 CSM Lüneburg ( 799 kBytes )