CHESAPEAKE BAY BRIDGE
The Chesapeake Bay Bridge ( known locally as the " Bay Bridge " ) is a major dual - span bridge in the U.S. state of Maryland .
Spanning the Chesapeake Bay , it connects the state 's rural Eastern Shore region with the urban Western Shore .
The original span , opened in 1952 and with a length of , was the world 's longest continuous over - water steel structure ; the parallel span was added in 1973 .
The bridge is officially named the " Gov. William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge " after William Preston Lane Jr. who , as the 52nd Governor of Maryland , initiated its construction in the late 1940s finally after decades of political indecision and public controversy .
The bridge is part of U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) and US 301 , and serves as a vital link in both routes .
As part of cross - country US 50 , it connects the Baltimore - Washington Metropolitan Area with Ocean City , Maryland , Rehoboth Beach , Delaware , and other coastal tourist resort destinations .
As part of US 301 , it serves as part of an alternative route for Interstate 95 travelers , between northern Delaware and the Washington , D.C. , area .
Because of this linkage , the bridge is busy and has become known as a point of traffic congestion , particularly during peak hours and summer months .
HISTORY PROPOSALS AND FERRIES Section::::History . Section::::Proposals and ferries .
Studies exploring the possibility of building a bridge across the Chesapeake Bay may have been conducted as early as the 1880s .
The first known proposal came about in 1907 and called for a crossing between Baltimore and Tolchester Beach ; other proposals , occurring in the years 1918 , 1919 , 1926 , and 1935 , also called for a bridge in this location .
In 1927 , local businesspeople were authorized to finance the construction of a Baltimore to Tolchester Beach crossing .
Plans for the new bridge were made , but construction was canceled following the Stock Market Crash of 1929 with the collapse of the American economy and resulting Great Depression of the 1930s .
Ferries were used as the main mode of transportation across the bay from the colonial period until the completion of the 1952 bridge .
The first service ran from Annapolis to Broad Creek on Kent Island , roughly where the bridge is today .
In 1919 , the Claiborne – Annapolis Ferry Company began running ferries between Annapolis and Claiborne , a community near St. Michaels .
In July 1930 , the Claiborne – Annapolis Company added a new ferry route , one running from Annapolis to Matapeake , a significantly shorter distance .
The auto and passenger ferries were taken over by the State Roads Commission in 1941 ( reorganized into today 's State Highway Administration of the Maryland Department of Transportation in 1973 ) .
Two years later the commission moved the western terminus of the old Annapolis –
Matapeake ferry to Sandy Point ( later adjacent to Sandy Point State Park ) , shortening the cross - bay trip .
CONSTRUCTION OF 1952 SPAN Section::::Construction of 1952 span .
A 1938 proposal by the Maryland General Assembly was the first to call for a bridge at the Sandy Point – Kent Island location .
Although the legislation authorizing the new bridge passed , the involvement of the United States in World War II delayed the bridge 's construction .
In 1947 , with the war over , the Assembly , under the leadership of Maryland Governor William Preston Lane Jr. , ( 1892–1967 ) , passed legislation directing the old State Roads Commission to begin construction .
Ground was broken in January 1949 , and after a -year construction project , the bridge opened to traffic on July 30 , 1952 , as both the longest continuous over - water steel structure , and the third longest bridge in the world .
Before the opening , a parade of vehicles made the first official crossing , led by then current Governor Theodore Roosevelt McKeldin , ( 1900–1974 ) , and other state officials in a distinctive white Cadillac convertible flying huge American and Maryland flags .
On November 9 , 1967 , the bridge was dedicated to Governor Lane , who had died earlier that year , and officially renamed the " William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge " .
1973
EXPANSION Section::::1973 expansion .
In 1967 , due to increasing traffic volumes , the Maryland General Assembly authorized three possible new crossings , all suggested during the 1964 Chesapeake Bay crossing study .
These included one further north near Baltimore , one in southern Maryland , and an additional span to be added to the existing bridge from Kent Island to Sandy Point ; ultimately , the third option was chosen .
Construction of the new parallel span began in 1969 to the north of the original bridge , and it was completed on June 28 , 1973 .
NOTABLE INCIDENTS Section::::Notable incidents .
Because of its height , the narrowness of the spans ( there are no hard shoulders ) , the low guardrails , and the frequency of high winds , it is known as one of the scariest bridges in the world , especially in higher tractor - trailer trucks .
Several incidents related to the bridge have occurred .
In some cases , these have caused significant closures and traffic congestion on either side approaching the bridge .
The bridge has been closed four times due to extreme weather .
The first time was September 18 , 2003 , during Hurricane Isabel and its high winds .
On August 27 , 2011 , the bridge was closed to all traffic due to the impact of Hurricane Irene .
Then - Governor Martin O'Malley ordered the bridge closed when sustained winds exceeded .
On October 29 , 2012 , the bridge was closed due to the effects of Hurricane Sandy .
On March 6 , 2013 , during the March 2013 nor'easter , high winds again caused the bridge to be closed .
On August 10 , 2008 , a tractor trailer involved in a head - on collision near the west end fell from the bridge ; the driver died in the crash .
The incident has highlighted concern that the bridge may not be structurally safe , but the Maryland Transportation Authority ( MDTA ) has discounted any structural or engineering problems with it .
Inspections of the wall in the weeks following the accident revealed that there was deterioration in the form of corrosion of the steel reinforcements inside barriers ; this prompted immediate repairs to the wall .
SPECIFICATIONS AND OPERATIONS Section::::Specifications and operations .
With shore - to - shore lengths of , the two spans of the bridge form the longest fixed water crossing in Maryland and are also among the world 's longest over - water structures .
The bridge 's western terminus is in Sandy Point State Park , located northeast of Annapolis in Anne Arundel County , and its eastern terminus is in Stevensville on Kent Island in Queen Anne 's County .
STRUCTURAL DETAILS Section::::Structural details .
With the exception of the number of lanes on each ( two on the original span and three on the newer span ) and differences owing to the design standards for the periods in which they were built , the spans are structurally similar .
Both were designed by J. E. Greiner Company , which later became a part of AECOM through the company 's acquisition of URS Corporation .
Each span features : * Two main spans over the bay 's two shipping channels : * A suspension span over the western channel with a maximum clearance of — high enough to accommodate ocean - going vessels and tall ships * A through - truss cantilever span over the eastern channel with a maximum clearance of * Deck truss and steel girder spans flanking the main spans * Concrete beam spans on the portions closest to the shores
* A curve near the western terminus , which is required so that the main spans cross the bay 's shipping channels at 90 degrees per United States Army Corps of Engineers requirements TRAFFIC CONTROL Section::::Traffic control .
Traffic patterns on the bridge 's five lanes can be adjusted via its lane control system , which consists of overhead lane control signals on both spans and approaches .
Typically , the two lanes on the south - most span are configured for vehicles traveling east on eastbound US 50 / US 301 , while the three lanes on the north - most span are configured for vehicles traveling west on westbound US
50 / US 301 ; the spans are therefore referred to as the " eastbound span " and " westbound span " , respectively .
However , this pattern is adjusted during incidents or peak travel times : for instance , on the outset of weekends when there is a high volume of beach - bound traffic , one lane on the westbound span is configured for eastbound traffic .
In 2006 , pink markers were placed along the eastbound span to mark out the suggested following distance , similar to systems used in Minnesota and Pennsylvania .
The markers are a part of the MDTA 's " Pace Your Space " campaign to prevent vehicle collisions and traffic congestion due to tailgating on the bridge .
In April 2013 , changes were made to increase safety on the westbound span during two - way operations : signs , pavement markings , and rumble strips were modified , and a buffer zone between the left and center lanes was created .
As a result , motorists can no longer switch between the left and center lanes , whether or not two - way operations are in effect .
TOLLS AND FEES Section::::Tolls and fees .
Operated by the MDTA , the bridge has a one - way toll ( eastbound ) of $ 4.00 for two - axle vehicles ; vehicles with a Maryland E - ZPass pay $ 2.50 .
Previously the bridge had a one - way ( eastbound ) toll of $ 6.00 for two - axle vehicles ( raised from $ 4 on July 1 , 2013 ) ; vehicles with E - ZPass that were enrolled in the Bay Bridge Commuter Plan paid $ 2.10 ( raised from $ 1 on July 1 , 2013 ) .
Tolls were collected in both directions until April 1989 , when tolls were doubled and only collected in the Eastbound direction .
The MDTA contracts with private companies to provide transportation across the bridge for nervous drivers ( gephyrophobiacs ) and cyclists ; fees are $ 25 and $ 30 for drivers and cyclists , respectively .
BAY BRIDGE WALK AND RUN Section::::Bay Bridge Walk and Run .
While there are no pedestrian facilities on the bridge , the Bay Bridge Walk and Governor 's Bay Bridge Run used to afford an opportunity to cross the bridge on foot , usually on the first Sunday in May.
The events took place on the eastbound span , which was closed to vehicles while two - way traffic shared the westbound span .
Participants started on the east end of the bridge ( on Kent Island ) and proceeded west to the finish near the toll plaza .
WMATA and MTA transit buses transported participants between outlying parking areas and the start and finish points .
The run , a 10 K race across the bridge , is held early in the morning before the walk .
It is conducted by the Annapolis Striders , a local running organization , and controlled by the MDTA and Maryland Department of Natural Resources .
Proceeds went to the Chesapeake Bay Trust in support of the bay .
The walk was first held in 1975 , after a Boy Scout leader in Towson asked then - Governor Marvin Mandel if his troop could walk across the bridge while it was closed for maintenance .
The annual walk was canceled for the first time in 1980 due to poor weather conditions , and later saw frequent cancellations throughout the 2000s .
During this period the walk was canceled in : * 2002 and 2007 due to poor weather conditions .
* 2003 and 2005 due to security concerns .
* 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 due to construction activity in the area on the west side of the bridge where participants would otherwise be staged .
Fiscal concerns were also cited as a contributing factor to the 2010 cancellation .
* 2011 due to fiscal concerns .
* 2012 for undisclosed reasons .
Following its cancellation in 2005 , the MDTA considered decreasing the annual frequency of the event , citing traffic , fiscal , manpower , and security concerns .
The most recent event ( held in 2006 ) cost over $ 350,000 , and the cost estimate for 2012 was almost $ 400,000 .
In late 2011 , a non - profit group , the Greater Washington Sports Alliance ( GWSA ) , approached the MDTA Capital Committee to propose sponsoring the event , along with a concert at Sandy Point State Park , at no cost to the MDTA .
While the Capital Committee unanimously recommended that the MDTA Board approve the proposal contingent upon an agreement between the GWSA and the MDTA , the 2012 event was ultimately cancelled .
After increasingly consistent cancellations of the walking event , the MDTA , along with Queen Anne 's County , contracted with an outside company to have a professional 10 K race across the bridge , which has been labeled the " Across the Bay 10 K " .
The inaugural event occurred November 9 , 2014 .
The Race Director is Dave McGillivray , who has served in that capacity for the BAA Boston Marathon since 1988 .
The Across the Bay 10 K will have several charity beneficiaries , including bay research and restoration as well as breast cancer research and several others .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
Since its construction , the bridge has made significant impacts on both sides of the bay ; among them has been the growth of Eastern Shore communities .
When the bridge opened in 1952 , and again when the second span was added in 1973 , the Eastern Shore was given easier access to Baltimore and Washington , causing areas in southern Queen Anne 's County to develop as bedroom communities .
This extension of the Baltimore – Washington suburbs has led Queen Anne 's County to be listed as part of the Baltimore – Washington Metropolitan Area .
The bridge has also given easier access to Ocean City from the Western Shore , which has caused Ocean City to grow from a small town to one that is said to become the second largest city in Maryland during the summer .
In 1948 , the impending completion of the bridge gave rise to an extension of US 50 to Ocean City .
The route was extended along the corridor of Maryland Route 404 ( MD 404 ) and a large portion of US 213 , cutting both of those routes back .
During the 1950s , US 50 on the Western Shore was rerouted onto the long - proposed Annapolis – Washington Expressway ( now known as the John Hanson Highway ) , which was built at the time in order to provide better access to the bridge .
As the Eastern Shore , particularly Ocean City , grew , further upgrades and realignments of US 50 took place .
This work included the aforementioned 1973 completion of the second Bay Bridge span , the extension of the US 50 freeway eastward to the US
50 / US 301 split in Queenstown , and the construction of a freeway bypass around the north side of Salisbury in 2002 .
Additionally , the road has been upgraded and realigned over the years from its original two - lane configuration to a four - lane divided highway , with the last such section being in Vienna , bypassed in 1991 .
As of 2008 , there are plans for further upgrades to US 50 , including extending its freeway portion in Queen Anne 's County to MD 404 outside of Wye Mills and replacing the aging Harry W. Kelly Memorial Bridge into Ocean City .
FUTURE EXPANSION Section::::Future expansion .
In December 2004 , a study concluded that traffic across the bridge was expected to increase by 40 % by 2025 .
The following year , a task force formed by Governor Bob Ehrlich met to again explore the possibility of establishing a new Chesapeake Bay crossing .
The task force concluded that a bridge would be the best option for an additional crossing , and four geographic locations for such a bridge were explored : Baltimore County to Kent County , Anne Arundel County to Queen Anne 's County ( the existing location ) , Anne Arundel or Calvert County to Talbot County , and Calvert County to Dorchester County .
In late 2006 , the task force released a report on the study but did not make a final recommendation ; members of the task force requested additional time to continue the study .
SEE ALSO
* Kent Narrows Bridge * List of bridges by length * Severn River Bridge
* St. Margaret 's , Maryland * Cape St. Claire , Maryland NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Chesapeake Bay Bridge official website * Bay Bridge Page at MdTA website
* Roads to the Future website
* Page at dcroads.net *
Live Video Rt 50 Kent Island
*
Live Video Rt 50 Sandy Point
* A 1950 comprehensive study of the economic effects of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge ( pdf )