CYTOLYSIS Cytolysis , or osmotic lysis , occurs when a cell bursts due to an osmotic imbalance that has caused excess water to diffuse into the cell .
Water can enter the cell by diffusion through the cell membrane or through selective membrane channels called aquaporins , which greatly facilitate the flow of water .
It occurs in a hypotonic environment , where water moves into the cell by osmosis and causes its volume to increase to the point where the volume exceeds the membrane 's capacity and the cell bursts .
The presence of a cell wall prevents the membrane from bursting , so cytolysis only occurs in animal and protozoa cells which do not have cell walls .
The reverse process is plasmolysis .
IN MAMMALS Section::::In mammals .
Osmotic lysis is often one result of a stroke , because of improper nutrient perfusion and waste removal alter cell metabolism .
Such malfunction results in an inflow of extracellular fluid into the cells .
IN
BACTERIA
Section::::In bacteria .
Osmotic lysis would be expected to occur when bacterial cells are treated with a hypotonic solution with added lysozyme , which destroys the bacteria 's cell walls .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Different cells and organisms have adapted different ways of preventing cytolysis from occurring .
For example , the paramecium uses a contractile vacuole , which rapidly pumps out excessive water to prevent the build - up of water and the otherwise subsequent lysis .
Additionally , these protists have cell membranes which are less permeable to water than some other species .
Other organisms pump solutes out of their cytosol , which brings the solute concentration closer to that of their environment .
This slows down the process of water 's diffusion into the cell , preventing cytolysis .
If the cell can pump out enough solutes so that an isotonic environment can be achieved , there will be no net movement of water .
SEE ALSO
* Cell disruption
* Crenation * Lysis
* Osmotic pressure * Plasmolysis
* Water intoxication REFERENCES