VISUAL MARKERS OF MARITAL STATUS Visual markers of marital status , as well as social status , may include clothing , hairstyle , accessories , jewelry , tattoos , and other bodily adornments .
Visual markers of marital status are particularly important because they indicate that a person should not be approached for flirtation , courtship , or sex .
In some cultures , married people enjoy special privileges or are addressed differently by members of the community .
Marital status markers are usually gender - specific .
HUSBAND Section::::Husband .
Male marital status markers are usually less elaborate than female marital status markers .
In many cultures , they may not exist .
JEWELERY Section::::Jewelery .
In many Western nations , some husbands wear a wedding ring on the third or fourth finger of the left hand .
In parts of Europe , especially in German - speaking regions , as well as in Bulgaria , Cyprus , Denmark , Greece , Latvia , Lithuania , Macedonia , Norway , Poland , Russia , Serbia , Spain , Turkey , and Ukraine , the wedding ring is worn on the ring finger of the right hand .
In the Netherlands , Catholics wear their wedding rings on the left hand , while most other people wear them on the right .
Some spouses choose to wear their wedding ring on the left hand in Turkey .
In China , Western influence has resulted in some husbands donning wedding rings .
Traditionally , Chinese men did not wear rings , and were expected to have several concubines .
A ring symbolizing marriage to only one spouse was not considered necessary .
Modernly the material of wedding rings is not strictly prescribed ; they may be forged of gold , rose gold , white gold , argentium silver , palladium , platinum , titanium , or tungsten carbide .
Manual labourers sometimes wear rings of inexpensive or more durable materials like tungsten while working or bear an ink tattoo to avoid damaging a ring of precious metal or personal injury .
BEARD Section::::Beard .
Among the Amish , Castellani , and Hutterite communities of Canada and the United States , only married men are permitted to wear a beard .
Unmarried men are required to shave .
TALLIT Section::::Tallit .
In some Ashkenazi Jewish communities , men wear a prayer shawl , denominated a " tallit " or " tallis " , only upon marriage .
It is customary for the father of the bride to present the groom with a tallit as a wedding present .
In other Jewish communities , both Ashkenazic and Sephardic , all males wear the tallis , but only husbands wear it over their heads .
WIFE JEWELLERY
* Engagement ring :
In many Western cultures , a proposal of marriage is traditionally accompanied by the gift of a ring .
The man proposes and offers the ring ; if the woman accepts this proposal of marriage , she will wear the ring , showing she is no longer available for courtship .
In British - American tradition , diamond rings are the most popular type of engagement ring .
The engagement ring is usually worn on the left ring finger ( sometimes this ring is switched from the right to the left hand as part of the wedding ceremony ) .
* Wedding ring : Many Western wedding ceremonies include the exchange of a wedding ring or rings .
A common custom is for the groom to place a ring on the bride 's finger and say , " With this ring I thee we d .
" Sometimes both bride and groom present each other with rings and repeat either these or similar words .
After the ceremony , the rings are worn throughout the marriage .
In the event of divorce , the couple usually removes their rings ; but some widows continue to wear their wedding ring , sometimes switching it to the left hand , while others do not .
In Jewish tradition , the wedding ring must be a plain band , without gemstones .
China has acquired the custom of wedding rings as late as the era of post - Cultural Revolution economic reforms , when rings were affordable and Western influence was allowed in .
As an adopted habit , there are variations on how rings are used , if at all , and when .
Some women wear the wedding ring on the left hand , men on the right ( representing yin and yang ) .
Some men wear the ring on the right hand .
Many Chinese put the ring away to protect it , except for important holidays , such as anniversaries .
In Chinese tradition , higher status for men was signified by having several young female partners or concubines .
A ring denies that status .
For this reason , many modern Chinese men do not wear a wedding ring .
Diamonds and two - partner wedding rings are advertised in modern China .
The Japanese , despite American occupation in the 1950s , only acquired a culture for wedding and engagement rings in the 1960s .
In 1959 , the importing of diamonds was allowed .
In 1967 a U.S. advertising agency created a marketing campaign on behalf of the De Beers diamonds .
The campaign equated rings with other symbols of Western culture .
The campaign resulted in a sharp increase in demand : From 5 % in 1967 , to 27 % in 1972 , to 50 % in 1978 , to 60 % in 1980 .
* Mangalsutra : In many Hindu wedding ceremonies , the groom gives the bride a gold pendant or necklace incorporating black beads or black string .
This is called a " mangal - sutra " .
It not only proclaims a woman 's marriage , but it is believed by many to exercise a protective influence over the husband .
That is , a wife 's love and concern , as shown by her donning of the mangal - sutra , is magically helpful to the husband .
This resembles the karwa - chauth celebration , in which a wife fasts and prays for her husband 's welfare .
* Bangles : Hindu wives also wear bangles of either white ( " sankha " ) and/or red colour ( " pala " ) on both hands , and do not remove them until they are single .
Often made of glass , they are broken when the marriage ends .
Bollywood uses this to great dramatic effect in Hindi films , with a woman being informed of the demise of her husband by the messenger , often her son , smashing her glass bangles and wiping the sindoor off her forehead .
Bangles made of gold , silver , or other materials are also worn by middle class wives .
Section::::Wife .
Section::::Jewellery .
The concept of mourning jewelry , which is colored black , is becoming an accepted , visible custom for widows and widowers .
Usually a black wedding band is worn on the third finger of the left hand .
Usually the ring is a black wedding band , but black eternity bands and black solitaires are also worn .
Such jewelry is denominated a " widow 's ring " and the mourning ring is added to the marriage ring(s ) and worn for the duration of the mourning period .
HEADWEAR Section::::Headwear .
In Orthodox Judaism , married women cover their hair at all times outside of their home .
The kind of hair covering may be determined by local custom or personal preference .
Headscarves , snoods , hats , berets , or - sometimes - wigs are used .
Turkmen wives wear a special hat similar to a circlet that is denominated a " Alyndaňy " .
HAIRSTYLE
* Hairstyle indicating marital status * Zuni hair styles COSMETICS * Sindoor , a red powder ( vermilion ) , is put on Hindu wives ' foreheads to indicate their marital status .
CLOTHES
* Hindu widows wear white .
( See White clothing ( religious ) )
* Tibetan wives wear aprons .
*
In western and northern Europe , it was previously common for widows to wear black , at least until the first anniversary of the death of their husbands , and some still practice this custom .
REFERENCES