THE VENETIAN LAS VEGAS
The Venetian Resort Hotel Casino is a luxury hotel and casino resort located on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise , Nevada , United States , on the site of the old Sands Hotel .
Designed by KlingStubbins , the hotel tower contains 36 stories and rises .
The Venetian is owned and operated by Las Vegas Sands .
The Venetian also serves as the seat of the corporate headquarters for its parent company .
The Venetian resort complex is ( together with the adjacent Sands Expo Convention Center , The Palazzo Hotel and Casino Resort and future MSG Sphere Las Vegas )
the world 's second - largest hotel , with 4,049 rooms , 3,068 suites ranging in price from $ 169 to $ 10,000 per night and a casino .
Since its opening , The Venetian Macao is now the largest casino in the world , beating The Venetian , Las Vegas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In April 1996 , Sheldon Adelson announced plans to create on the property the largest resort on the Strip .
This project would be situated on the former Sands property .
On November 26 , 1996 , eight years after it was purchased by the owners of The Interface Group — Adelson , Richard Katzeff , Ted Cutler , Irwin Chafetz and Jordan Shapiro , the Sands Hotel was imploded to make way for The Venetian Resort Hotel Casino .
Groundbreaking for the hotel began on April 14 , 1997 .
The resort opened on May 3 , 1999 , with flutter of white doves , sounding trumpets and singing gondoliers , with actress Sophia Loren joining The Venetian Chairman and Owner , Sheldon G. Adelson , in dedicating the first motorized gondola .
Built at a cost of $ 1.5 billion , it was one of the most expensive resorts of its kind when it opened .
On June 27 , 2003 , the 1,013-room Venezia Tower opened .
It was built on top of the garage parking lot .
in 2010 , it was announced that it will be affiliated with InterContinental Hotels Group .
In October 2011 , the Cantor Race & Sportsbook opened , which was the only Las Vegas sportsbook that was open 24 hours a day .
On June 11 , 2012 , the Venetian opened Carnevale , a summer - long festival that is anchored by a nightly 3-D projection show on the clock tower .
In September 2012 , The Blue Man Group show closed and relocated to the Monte Carlo , after being at the Venetian for six years .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The hotel uses Venice , Italy , as its design inspiration and features architectural replicas of various Venetian landmarks , including the Palazzo Ducale , Piazza San Marco , Piazzetta di San Marco , the Lion of Venice Column and the Column of Saint Theodore , St Mark 's Campanile , and the Rialto Bridge .
The design architects for this project were The Stubbins Associates and WAT&G. Interior design was provided by Wilson Associates and Dougall Associates for the casino .
ATTRACTIONS Section::::Attractions .
In October 2001 , the Guggenheim Hermitage Museum opened within the resort , featuring its first collection .
On June 27 , 2003 , the Venezia tower opened , adding 1,013 suites and a new wedding chapel .
In October 2005 , Blue Man Group officially opened at the Blue Man Theatre .
On June 24 , 2006 , the show , , opened at a new Paris Opera House styled theatre at The Venetian .
The show concluded on September 2 , 2012 .
Tim McGraw and Faith Hill headlined their Soul2Soul concert series which began in December 2012 and ended in April 2014 .
The Venetian is home to 4 theaters : the Opaline Theatre , The Palaazo Theatre , The Sands Showroom , and The Venetian Theatre .
The adjacent MSG Sphere Las Vegas which is being built in partnership with The Madison Square Garden Company will open in 2021 .
CLUBS Section::::Clubs .
In 2015 , TAO Nightclub generated over $ 50 million in revenue , according to Nightclub & Bar Top 100 .
With an Asian - inspired theme , TAO features a 20 foot tall Buddha statue , an infinity edge pool stocked with koi , eight private " sky boxes " with mini - bars , a 40-foot - long terrace with views of the strip , and two dance rooms .
TAO Beach , located on top of TAO Nightclub , is the Venetian 's day club and pool party .
It offers seven cabanas , each with television , DVD player , Xbox 360 , a stocked mini - fridge and a safe for valuables .
LEGAL PROBLEMS
Section::::Legal problems .
In 2004 , the Venetian agreed to pay a $ 1 million penalty to settle a 12-count Gaming Control Board complaint .
One of the 12 complaints alleged the hotel had held a drawing for a Mercedes - Benz that was rigged to be won by a high roller who had lost a large amount in the casino .
The executives involved were fired .
In 2013 , the Venetian agreed to pay the U.S. Department of Justice $ 47.4 million to settle charges over " alleged money laundering activities . "
GALLERY IN POPULAR CULTURE
Films
* A suite from the Venetian is featured as a location in the movie ( 2005 ) .
* Various Venetian locations were settings for the introductory scenes of the movie , Rat Race ( 2001 ) .
* The exterior of the Venetian is portrayed in the movie , ( 2007 ) .
There is a dramatic zombie attack scene which takes place on the Venetian 's replica of the Rialto Bridge .
Television
* " Building the Venetian " was the subject of an episode of the show MegaStructures .
* The U.S. TV series What Not to Wear shot its series finale at The Venetian ( and The Palazzo ) , inviting more than 100 past contributors from the show 's successful 10-year run to participate .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS