SUPERNUMERARY NIPPLE
A supernumerary nipple ( also known as a third nipple , triple nipple , accessory nipple , polythelia or the related condition : polymastia ) is an additional nipple occurring in mammals , including humans .
Often mistaken for moles , supernumerary nipples are diagnosed in humans at a rate of approximately 1 in 18 people .
The nipples appear along the two vertical " milk lines , " which start in the armpit on each side , run down through the typical nipples and end at the groin .
They are classified into eight levels of completeness from a simple patch of hair to a milk - bearing breast in miniature .
TYPES
Section::::Types . type
glandular tissue nipple areola fat tissue hair patch Polythelia refers to the presence of an additional nipple alone while polymastia denotes the much rarer presence of additional mammary glands .
Although usually presenting on the milk line , pseudomamma can appear as far away as the foot .
A possible relationship with mitral valve prolapse has been proposed .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE TELEVISION Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Television .
The Triple Nipple Club is a documentary shown on Channel 4 which explored the biological mystery of the supernumerary nipple .
First broadcast on 2 January 2008 , it was directed and produced by Dan Louw and commissioned as part of Channel 4 's First Cut series .
The film focuses on Louw 's attempts to understand why he was born with extra nipples , a condition he shares with the likes of Mark Wahlberg , Lily Allen and Tilda Swinton , as well as well known TV and film characters such as Scaramanga and Chandler Bing .
Fascinated and confused by this seemingly pointless mutation , Louw sets off on a personal journey of discovery to try and unwrap " the riddle of the triple nipple " .
He starts out by consulting the man in the street and even a renowned teratologist , an expert in physical mutations .
After testing the notion that extra nipples could be a sign of fertility , he discovers that they are actually an atavism , or evolutionary ' holdover ' – a sign of how humans evolved .
SEE ALSO
* Rudimentary supernumerary digit
* Accessory breast REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS