DOCTOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
The Doctor of Business Administration ( commonly abbreviated as DBA , DrBA , or BusD and most recently ) is a research doctorate awarded on the basis of advanced study and research in the field of business administration .
The D.B.A. is a terminal degree in business administration .
Along with the Ph.D. , it represents the highest academic qualification in business administration .
Successful completion of a D.B.A. or Ph.D. in business administration is required to gain employment as a full - time , tenure - track university professor or postdoctoral researcher in the field .
As with other earned research doctorates , individuals with the degree are awarded the academic title doctor , which is often represented via the English honorific " Dr. " or the post - nominal letters " DBA",or " Ph.D. " .
D.B.A. candidates submit a significant project , typically referred to as a thesis or dissertation , consisting of a body of original academic research that is in principle worthy of publication in a peer - reviewed journal .
Candidates must defend this work before a panel of expert examiners called a thesis , dissertation , or doctoral committee .
STRUCTURE AND FORMAT Section::::Structure and format .
Doctor of Business Administration programs have a dual purpose : contribute to business theory and further develop the professional practice ( e.g. contribute to professional knowledge in business ) .
Universities generally require candidates to have significant experience in business , particularly in roles with leadership or other strategic responsibilities .
D.B.A. candidates specialize in areas such as management science , information technology management , organizational behaviour , economics , finance and the like .
As with other doctorate programs , curricula may be offered on a full - time or part - time basis .
According to the European higher education standards set by the Bologna Process , the normal duration of doctorate programs like the D.B.A. and Ph . D is 4 years of full - time study .
The responsibility for the structure of doctoral programs resides within the graduate research committees or their equivalent within the university .
As such , D.B.A programs have a specific set of university regulations and are subject to quality approval processes .
Regulations include references to protocols for treating ethical issues in research .
These regulations are widely used in Australian Universities .
For instance , a D.B.A student can not embark on the research phase before passing all his or her coursework .
Furthermore , upon passing the proposal stage , he or she must clear ethics - related issues with an Ethics Committee .
The D.B.A candidate must go through numerous internal moderations of the dissertation before submitting to external examinations ( usually at least two ) .
Successful candidates usually revise their dissertations numerous times before final approval is granted from the doctoral committee .
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
D.B.A. AND PH.D Section::::Relationship between D.B.A. and Ph.D.
The Doctor of Business Administration and the Ph .
D in Business Administration are equivalent degrees .
Both doctorates are research doctorates representing the highest academic qualification in business in the United States .
As such , both D.B.A. and Ph .
D programs require students to develop original research leading to a dissertation defense .
Furthermore , both doctorates enable holders to become faculty members at academic institutions .
The D.B.A. and Ph .
D in Business Administration are terminal degrees , allowing the recipient to obtain a tenure - track position .
In some cases , as in that of Harvard University , the distinction is solely administrative ( Harvard Business School is not authorized to issue Ph . Ds ; only the Faculty of Arts and Sciences may do so ) .
In other cases , the distinction is one of orientation and intended outcomes .
The Ph . D is highly focused on developing theoretical knowledge , while the D.B.A. emphasizes applied research .
Upon completion , graduates of Ph .
D programs generally migrate to full - time faculty positions in academia , while those of D.B.A. programs re - emerge in industry as applied researchers or executives .
If working full - time in industry , graduates of D.B.A. and Ph .
D programs often become adjunct professors in top undergraduate and graduate degree programs .
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION
Section::::Geographic distribution .
D.B.A. programs are offered worldwide .
The majority , however , are offered in Europe ( 42 percent ) , followed by North America ( 28 percent ) and the Asia - Pacific region ( 22 percent ) .
6 percent of the programs are offered in Africa and 2 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean .
NOTABLE PERSONS WITH A D.B.A. DEGREE
* Hugh T. Broomall – Major General , USAF , Special Assistant to the Director , Air National Guard * Robert F. Bruner – Dean Charles C. Abbott Professor of Business Administration and Distinguished Professor of Business Administration at the Darden Graduate School of Business Administration , University of Virginia
* Clayton M. Christensen – Robert and Jane Cizik Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School
* Scott Cowen – president of Tulane University of Louisiana * Manfred F.R. Kets de Vries – Raoul de Vitry d'Avaucourt Professor of Leadership Development at INSEAD and director of the INSEAD Global Leadership Centre
* Tony Newton - President and Board Chair , British Dental Health Foundation and International Dental Health Foundation Durham University Business School
* CK Prahalad – Paul and Ruth McCracken Distinguished University Professor of Corporate Strategy at University of Michigan , Ross School of Business *
Michael E. Raynor – Canadian management expert and consultant with Deloitte Consulting LLP , the Distinguished Fellow with Deloitte Research
*
Lenos Trigeorgis – Real options pioneer ; Professor of finance , University of Cyprus * John Quelch – Dean , Vice President and Distinguished Professor of International Management at CEIBS , previously Senior Associate Dean and the Lincoln Filene Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School
* Birger Wernerfelt – J. C. Penney Professor of Management and Chair of PhD Committee , MIT Sloan School of Management * Robert B. Wilson – Adams Distinguished Professor of Management , Emeritus , Graduate School of Business , and Professor of Economics ( by courtesy ) , School of Humanities and Sciences , Stanford University * Dave Yeske – Co - Founder , Managing Director , Yeske Buie ; National President ( 2003 ) , Financial Planning Association ( FPA ) ; Distinguished Adjunct Professor , Ageno School of Business , Golden Gate University SEE ALSO * Business Education
* Doctor of Management *
Executive DBA Council
* List of fields of doctoral studies : Business Management / Administrative Services * PhD in Management
* Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) REFERENCES