CADBURY CREME EGG
A Cadbury Creme Egg is a chocolate bar product produced in the shape of an egg .
The product consists of a thick chocolate shell , housing a white and yellow fondant filling which mimics the albumen and yolk of a chicken egg .
The Creme Eggs are the best selling confectionery item between New Year 's Day and Easter in the UK , with annual sales in excess of 200 million and a brand value of approximately £ 55 million .
However , in 2016 sales plummeted after the controversial decision to change the recipe from the original Dairy Milk chocolate to a cheaper substitute , with reports of a loss of more than £ 6 m in sales .
Creme Eggs are produced by Cadbury UK in Scotland , by The Hershey Company in the United States and by Cadbury Adams in Canada .
They are sold by Mondelēz International in all markets except the US , where the Hershey Company has the local marketing rights .
At the Bournville factory in Birmingham , in the UK , they are manufactured at a rate of 1.5 million per day .
The Creme Egg was also previously manufactured in New Zealand but , since 2009 , they are imported from the UK .
While filled eggs were first manufactured by the Cadbury Brothers in 1923 , the Creme Egg in its current form was introduced in 1963 .
Initially sold as Fry 's Creme Eggs ( incorporating the Fry 's brand ) , they were renamed " Cadbury 's Creme Eggs " in 1971 .
PRODUCT SPECIFICATION PACKAGING
Section::::Product specification .
Section::::Packaging .
Creme eggs are usually sold individually but are also available in boxes containing a varying quantity of eggs depending on the country the packaging is intended for .
The foil wrapping of the eggs was traditionally green , red , yellow and blue in colour in the United Kingdom and Ireland , though green was removed and purple replaced blue early in the 21st century .
In the United States , some green is incorporated into the design , which previously featured the product 's mascot — the Creme Egg Chick .
As of 2015 , the packaging in Canada has turned into a 34 g , purple , red and yellow soft plastic shell .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
Creme eggs are available annually between 1 January and Easter Day .
In the UK in the 1980s , Cadbury made Creme Eggs available year - round but sales dropped and they returned to seasonal availability .
In 2018 white chocolate versions of the Creme Eggs were made available .
These eggs were not given a wrapper that clearly marked them as white chocolate eggs and were mixed in with the normal Creme Eggs in the United Kingdom .
Individuals who discovered an egg would win money via a code printed on the inside of the wrapper .
MANUFACTURE IN NEW ZEALAND
Section::::Manufacture in New Zealand .
Creme Eggs were manufactured in New Zealand at the Cadbury factory in Dunedin from 1983 to 2009 .
Cadbury in New Zealand and Australia went through a restructuring process which most Cadbury products previously produced in New Zealand being manufactured instead at Cadbury factories in Australia .
The Dunedin plant later received a $ 69 million upgrade to specialise in boxed products such as Cadbury Roses , and Creme Eggs were no longer produced there .
The result of the changes meant that Creme Eggs were instead imported from the United Kingdom .
The change has also seen the range of Creme Eggs available for sale decreased .
The size also dropped from 40 g to 39 g in this time .
The response from New Zealanders has not been positive .
Complaints have included the filling not being as runny as the New Zealand version .
MANUFACTURING PROCESS Section::::Manufacturing process .
Cadbury Creme Eggs are manufactured as two half - egg chocolate shells , each of which is filled with a white fondant , then topped with a smaller amount of yellow fondant , with the egg being filled in such a way that the fondant colours mimic egg yolk and egg white .
Both halves are then quickly joined together and cooled , the chocolate bonding together in the process .
The solid eggs are removed from the moulds and wrapped in foil .
The filling , to be more precise , is inverted sugar syrup , produced by processing the fondant with invertase .
There were
claims of changes to Cadbury 's actual milk chocolate had been changed in 2015 , and was actually released by Kraft who by then owned Cadbury .
The traditional dairy milk shell of the eggs was to be replaced with a cocoa based shell instead , and had to soon revert to the original recipe because of the complaints received from the fans of these eggs .
One other manufacturing difference that was made and that was the fact that there was no longer going to be the production of gold coin chocolates at Christmas time .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Cadbury has introduced many variants to the original Creme Egg , including : * Border Creme Eggs .
The first variant , wrapped in various colours of tartan foil and containing chocolate fondant .
Introduced as " Fry 's Border Creme Eggs " in 1970 , rebranded as " Cadbury Border Creme Eggs " in 1974 and discontinued in 1981 .
* Mini Creme Eggs ( bite - sized Creme Eggs )
* Caramel Eggs ( chocolate egg with a caramel filling ) , launched in 1994
* Caramilk Egg ( Canadian market only )
* Mini Caramel Eggs ( bite - sized Caramel Eggs )
* Chocolate Creme Eggs ( chocolate fondant filling ) , introduced in 1999
* Orange Creme Eggs ( Creme Eggs with a hint of orange flavour )
* ' Berry ' Creme Eggs ( magenta wrapper and pink fondant , sold circa 1987 in Australia )
* Mint Creme Eggs ( green " yolk " and mint flavour chocolate ) * Dairy Milk with Creme Egg bars
* Creme Egg Fondant in a Narrow Cardboard Tube ( limited edition )
* Creme Egg ice cream with a fondant sauce in milk chocolate * Dream Eggs ( New Zealand ) .
White chocolate with white chocolate fondant filling .
Discontinued in 2010 .
* Cadbury McFlurry ( British , Irish , Canadian and Australian McDonald 's only )
McFlurry soft serve mix with Creme Egg & chocolate filling .
* Creme Egg Twisted ( Britain , Ireland , Australia and Canada ) Available all year round .
It was introduced to Australia in 2010 but was quickly discontinued .
* Holiday Ornament Creme Egg
* Mad About Chocolate Egg ( Australia and New Zealand ) .
Purple wrapper , milk chocolate with chocolate fudge filling .
Discontinued in 2010 .
*
Peppermint Egg ( New Zealand ) .
Discontinued in 2010 .
* Giant Creme Eggs , a thick chocolate shell with white and caramel fondant filling .
Manufactured in North America .
Discontinued in 2006 .
* Creme Egg Splats - fried egg shaped pieces of milk chocolate filled with fondant .
* Screme Egg - traditional milk chocolate shell with a white and green fondant center - available for Halloween * Screme Egg Minis - Mini version of the Screme Egg - available for Halloween
* Fudgee - O Egg ( Canada ) .
Introduced at the start of 2015 .
Filled with a fudge creme centre .
* Oreo Cream Egg ( Canada ) .
Introduced in 2016 .
Filled with a white cream centre containing Oreo cookie crumbs .
*
Ghost Egg - Same as normal Creme Egg , but without the " yolk " .
* White Chocolate Creme Egg - Creme Egg , but with white chocolate replacing the milk chocolate .
Released in 2018 as part of a UK promotion Other products * Jaffa Egg ( New Zealand )
Dark chocolate with orange filling * Marble Egg ( New Zealand )
Dairy Milk and Dream Chocolate swirled together * Caramilk Egg – Manufactured in New Zealand , a mixture of caramel and white chocolate with a creamy centre of the same flavour .
* Chips Ahoy !
Egg ( Canada ) .
Introduced in 2017 .
Filled with a chocolate chip cookie dough centre .
CHANGES TO PRODUCT Section::::Changes to product .
During an interview a 2007 episode of Late Night with Conan O'Brien , actor B. J. Novak drew attention to the fact that American market Cadbury Creme Eggs had decreased in size , despite the official Cadbury website stating otherwise .
American Creme Eggs at the time weighed 34 g and contained 150 calories .
Before 2006 , the eggs marketed by Hershey were identical to the UK version , weighing 39 g and containing 170 calories .
In 2015 , the British Cadbury company under the American Mondelēz International conglomerate announced that it had changed the formula of the Cadbury Creme Egg by replacing its Cadbury Dairy Milk chocolate with " standard cocoa mix chocolate " .
It had also reduced the packaging from 6 eggs to 5 with a less than proportionate decrease in price .
This resulted in a large number of complaints from consumers .
Analysts IRI found that Cadbury lost more than $ 12 million in Creme Egg sales in the UK .
ADVERTISING
Section::::Advertising .
The Creme Egg has been marketed in the UK and Ireland with the question " How do you eat yours ?
"
and in New Zealand with the slogan " Do n't get caught with egg on your face " .
Australia and New Zealand have also used a variation of the UK question , using the slogan " How do you do it ? "
Over the years , there have been several major Cadbury 's Creme Egg campaigns .
* c 1970s : " Shopkeeper " campaign in which a boy asks for 6000 Cadbury Creme Eggs .
* " Irresistibly " campaign showing characters prepared to do something unusual for a Creme Egg , similar to the " What would you do for a Klondike bar ? " campaign .
*
Early 80 's : " Ca n't Resist Them . "
* 1985 :
The " How Do You Eat Yours ? "
campaign begins .
* Mid 80's - Present : " Nobunny Knows Easter Better than Cadbury " * 1985–1996 : " Do n't get caught with egg on your face " advertisement in
* 1990–1993 : The first television campaign to use the " How Do You Eat Yours ?
" theme , featuring the zodiac signs .
* 1994–1996 : Spitting Image characters continued " How Do You Eat Yours ? "
* 1997–1999 : Matt Lucas , with the catchphrase " I 've seen the future , and it 's egg shaped ! "
* 2000–2003 : The " Pointing Finger " * 2004 : The " Roadshow " finger * 2005 :
" Licky , Sticky , Happy " * 2006–2007 : " Eat It Your Way " * 2008–2009 : " Here Today , Goo Tomorrow " * 2008–2009 : " Unleash the Goo " * 2009 : " Release the Goo " * 2010 : "
You 'll Miss Me When I 'm Gone " * 2011 : " Goo Dares Wins " * 2011 : "
Get Your Goo On ! "
* 2012 : " Gooing For Gold " * 2012 : " It 's Goo Time " * 2013–2016 : " Have a fling with a Creme Egg "
* 2017–Present : "
It 's Hunting Season "
In North America , Creme Eggs are advertised on television with a small white rabbit called the Cadbury Bunny ( alluding to the Easter Bunny ) which clucks like a chicken .
Ads for caramel eggs use a larger gold - coloured rabbit which also clucks , and chocolate eggs use a large brown rabbit which clucks in a deep voice .
The advertisements use the slogan " Nobunny knows Easter better than him " , spoken by TV personality Mason Adams .
The adverts have continued to air nearly unchanged into the high definition era , though currently the ad image is slightly zoomed to fill the screen .
The majority of rabbits used in the Cadbury commercials are Flemish Giants .
In the UK , around the year 2000 , selected stores were provided standalone paperboard cutouts of something resembling a " love tester " .
The shopper would press a button in the centre and a " spinner " ( a series of LED lights ) would select at random a way of eating the Creme Egg , e.g. " with chips " .
These were withdrawn within a year .
There are also the " Creme Egg Cars " which are , as the name suggest , ovular vehicles painted to look like Creme Eggs .
They are driven to various places to advertise the eggs but are based mainly at the Cadbury factory in Bournville .
Five " Creme Egg Cars " were built from Bedford Rascal chassis .
The headlights are taken from a Citroën 2CV .
For the 2009 season , advertising in the UK , Ireland , Australia , New Zealand and Canada consisted of stopmotion adverts in the " Release the Goo " campaign which comprised a Creme Egg stripping itself of its wrapper and then breaking its own shell , usually with household appliances and equipment , while making various ' goo ' sounds , and a ' relieved ' noise when finally able to break its shell .
The Cadbury 's Creme Egg website featured games where the player had to prevent the egg from finding a way to release its goo .
A similar advertising campaign in 2010 featured animated Creme Eggs destroying themselves in large numbers , such as gathering together at a cinema before bombarding into each other to release all of the eggs ' goo , and another which featured eggs being destroyed by mouse traps .
OLYMPIC GAMES Section::::Olympic Games .
In 2012 , Cadbury parodied the Olympic Games by using Creme Eggs instead of athletes .
The first advert was 31 seconds long and consists of an Opening Ceremony , performed by stripped and packed Creme Eggs .
Each other advert contained a Creme Egg trying to ' release the goo ' whilst in an Olympic event .
An online game was created by Cadbury , so the public could play the ' Goo Games ' .
Six events were available to play and each of them was shown as a cartoon sketch .
It took place between 1 January to 4 April 2012 .
CREME EGG CAFÉ Section::::Creme Egg Café .
In 2016 , Cadbury opened a pop - up café titled " Crème de la Creme Egg Café " in London .
Tickets for the café sold out within an hour of being published online .
The café on Greek Street , Soho , was open every Friday , Saturday , Sunday from 22 January , to 6 March 2016 .
CREME EGG CAMP Section::::Creme Egg Camp .
In 2018 , Cadbury opened a pop - up camp .
The camp in Last Days of Shoreditch , Old Street was open every Thursday to Sunday from 19 January , to 18 February 2018 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Cadbury UK * Cadbury Chocolates from Hershey 's website