UKRAINIAN ALPHABET
The Ukrainian alphabet is the set of letters used to write Ukrainian , the official language of Ukraine .
It is one of the national variations of the Cyrillic script .
In Ukrainian , it is called ( IPA : ; Ukrayins'ka abetka ) , from the initial letters а ( a ) and б ( b ) ; ( alfavit ) ; or , archaically , ( azbuka ) , from the acrophonic early Cyrillic letter names ( az ) and ( buki ) .
Ukrainian text is sometimes romanised : written in the Latin alphabet , for non - Cyrillic readers or transcription systems .
See romanisation of Ukrainian for details of specific romanisation systems .
There have also been several historical proposals for a native Latin alphabet for Ukrainian , but none have caught on .
ALPHABET Section::::Alphabet . А а Б
б В
в Г
г Ґ
ґ
Д д Е е Є є Ж ж З
з И и
The alphabet comprises thirty - three letters , representing thirty - eight phonemes ( meaningful units of sound ) and an additional sign : the apostrophe .
Ukrainian orthography ( the rules of writing ) is based on the phonemic principle , with one letter generally corresponding to one phoneme .
The orthography also has cases in which semantic , historical , and morphological principles are applied .
In the Ukrainian alphabet the " Ь " could also be the last letter in the alphabet .
Twenty letters represent consonants ( , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ) , ten vowels ( , , , , , , , , , ) , and two semivowels ( й / yot , and ) .
The soft sign has no meaning when written by itself , but when written after a consonant , it indicates that the consonant is soft ( palatalized ) .
Also , certain consonants are palatalized when followed by certain vowels : , , , , , , , and are softened when they are followed by a " soft " vowel : , , , .
See iotation .
The apostrophe negates palatalization in places that it would be applied by normal orthographic rules .
It also appears after labial consonants in some words , such as " name " .
And it is retained in transliterations from the Latin alphabet : ( Côte d'Ivoire ) and ( O'Toole ) .
There are other exceptions to the phonemic principle in the alphabet .
Some letters represent two phonemes : , or , and , , when they do not palatalize a preceding consonant .
The digraphs and are normally used to represent single affricates and .
Palatalization of consonants before , , is indicated by writing the corresponding letter , , instead ( but palatalization before is usually not indicated ) .
Compared to other Cyrillic alphabets , the modern Ukrainian alphabet is the most similar to those of the other East Slavic languages : Belarusian , Russian , and Rusyn .
It has retained the two early Cyrillic letters і ( i ) and izhe ( ) to represent related sounds and as well as the two historical forms e ( ) and ye ( ) .
Unique letters are these : * ge ( ) , used for the less - common velar plosive sound : in Ukrainian ( similar to Dutch g ) , whereas the common Cyrillic represents a glottal fricative .
* yi ( ) or .
The apostrophe is similarly used in Belarusian orthography , while the same function is served in Russian by the hard sign ( ): Ukrainian and Belarusian vs. Russian ( " object " ) .
HISTORY EARLY CYRILLIC ALPHABET Section::::History .
Section::::Early Cyrillic alphabet .
The Cyrillic script was a writing system developed in the First Bulgarian Empire in the tenth century , to write the Old Church Slavonic liturgical language .
It was named after Saint Cyril , who with his brother Methodius had created the earlier Glagolitic Slavonic script .
Cyrillic was based on Greek uncial script , and adopted Glagolitic letters for some sounds which were absent in Greek — it also had some letters which were only used almost exclusively for Greek words or for their numeric value : Ѳ , Ѡ , Ѱ , Ѯ , Ѵ.
The early Cyrillic alphabet was brought to Kievan Rus ' at the end of the first millennium , along with Christianity and the Old Church Slavonic language .
The alphabet was adapted to the local spoken Old East Slavic language , leading to the development of indigenous East Slavic literary language alongside the liturgical use of Church Slavonic .
The alphabet changed to keep pace with changes in language , as regional dialects developed into the modern Ukrainian , Belarusian and Russian languages .
Spoken Ukrainian has an unbroken history , but the literary language has suffered from two major historical fractures .
Various reforms of the alphabet by scholars of Church Slavonic , Ruthenian , and Russian languages caused the written and spoken word to diverge by varying amounts .
Etymological rules from Greek and South Slavic languages made the orthography imprecise and difficult to master .
Meletiy Smotrytsky 's Slavonic Grammar of 1619 was very influential on the use of Church Slavonic , and codified the use of the letters Я ( ja ) , Е ( e ) , and Ґ ( g ) .
Various Russian alphabet reforms were influential as well , especially Peter the Great 's Civil Script of 1708 ( the Grazhdanka ) .
It created a new alphabet specifically for non - religious use , and adopted Latin - influenced letterforms for type .
The Civil Script eliminated some archaic letters ( Ѯ , Ѱ , Ѡ , Ѧ ) , but reinforced an etymological basis for the alphabet , influencing Mykhaylo Maksymovych 's nineteenth - century Galician Maksymovychivka script for Ukrainian , and its descendent , the Pankevychivka , which is still in use , in a slightly modified form , for the Rusyn language in Carpathian Ruthenia .
NINETEENTH - CENTURY REFORMS Section::::Nineteenth - century reforms .
In reaction to the hard - to - learn etymological alphabets , several reforms attempted to introduce a phonemic Ukrainian orthography during the nineteenth century , based on the example of Vuk Karadžić 's Serbian Cyrillic .
These included Oleksiy Pavlovskiy 's Grammar , Panteleimon Kulish 's Kulishivka , the Drahomanivka promoted by Mykhailo Drahomanov , and Yevhen Zhelekhivsky 's Zhelekhivka , which standardized the letters ї ( ji ) and ґ ( g ) .
A Ukrainian cultural revival of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries stimulated literary and academic activity in both Dnieper Ukraine and western Ukraine ( Austrian - controlled Galicia ) .
In Galicia , the Polish - dominated local government tried to introduce a Latin alphabet for Ukrainian , which backfired by prompting a heated " War of the Alphabets " , bringing the issue of orthography into the public eye .
The Cyrillic script was favoured , but conservative Ukrainian cultural factions ( the Old Ruthenians and Russophiles ) opposed publications which promoted a pure Ukrainian orthography .
In Dnieper Ukraine , proposed reforms suffered from periodic bans of publication and performance in the Ukrainian language .
One such decree was the notorious 1876 Ems Ukaz , which banned the Kulishivka and imposed a Russian orthography until 1905 ( called the Yaryzhka , after the Russian letter yery ы ) .
The Kulishivka was adopted by Ukrainian publications , only to be banned again from 1914 until after the February Revolution of 1917 .
The Zhelekhivka became official in Galicia in 1893 , and was adopted by many eastern Ukrainian publications after the Revolution .
The Ukrainian National Republic adopted official Ukrainian orthographies in 1918 and 1919 , and Ukrainian publication increased , and then flourished under Skoropadsky 's Hetmanate .
Under the Bolshevik government of Ukraine , Ukrainian orthographies were confirmed in 1920 and 1921 .
UNIFIED ORTHOGRAPHY
Section::::Unified orthography .
In 1925 , the Ukrainian SSR created a Commission for the Regulation of Orthography .
During the period of Ukrainization in Soviet Ukraine , the 1927 International Orthographic Conference was convened in Kharkiv , from May 26 to June 6 .
At the conference a standardized Ukrainian orthography and method for transliterating foreign words were established , a compromise between Galician and Soviet proposals , called the Kharkiv Orthography , or Skrypnykivka , after Ukrainian Commissar of Education Mykola Skrypnyk .
It was officially recognized by the Council of People 's Commissars in 1928 , and by the Lviv Shevchenko Scientific Society in 1929 , and adopted by the Ukrainian diaspora .
The Skrypnykivka was the first universally adopted native Ukrainian orthography .
However , by 1930 Stalin 's government started to reverse the Ukrainization policy as part of an effort to centralize power in Moscow .
In 1933 , the orthographic reforms were abolished , decrees were passed to bring the orthography steadily closer to Russian .
His reforms discredited and labelled " nationalist deviation " , Skrypnyk committed suicide rather than face a show trial and execution or deportation .
The Ukrainian letter ge ґ , and the phonetic combinations ль , льо , ля were eliminated , and Russian etymological forms were reintroduced ( for example , the use of -іа- in place of -ія- ) .
An official orthography was published in Kyiv in 1936 , with revisions in 1945 and 1960 .
This orthography is sometimes called Postyshivka , after Pavel Postyshev , Stalin 's official who oversaw the dismantling of Ukrainization .
In the meantime , the Skrypnykivka continued to be used by Ukrainians in Galicia and the worldwide diaspora .
During the period of Perestroika in the USSR , a new Ukrainian Orthographic Commission was created in 1987 .
A revised orthography was published in 1990 , reintroducing the letter
ge ґ .
It also revised the alphabetical order , moving the soft sign ь from the end of the alphabet , to a position before the letter ю , which helps sort Ukrainian text together with Belarusian ( following a proposal by L. M. Ivanenko of the Glushkov Institute of Cybernetics ) .
LETTER NAMES AND PRONUNCIATION Section::::Letter names and pronunciation .
+ Letters and symbols of the Ukrainian alphabet !
Upright ! !
Italic ! !
Transliteration ! !
BGN / PCGN ! !
Name ! ! ! !
Notes Transliteration is according to the scholarly transliteration system used in linguistics .
For other systems , see romanisation of Ukrainian .
Notes : LETTERFORMS AND TYPOGRAPHY Section::::Letterforms and typography .
As in other Cyrillic alphabets , hand - written or cursive letters vary somewhat in form from their block - letter , or typeset upright , counterparts , particularly the letters г , д , и , й , and т .
Typographically , the small ( lower - case ) letters are very similar to small - caps versions of the capitals , although sophisticated faces may have a small - caps font which is different from the lower - case .
A Cyrillic type face ( шрифт , shryft ) does n't technically have " roman " or " italic " fonts , since these terms stem from West European history .
It has upright ( прямий , prjamyj ) and cursive ( курсивний , kursyvnyj , later also called письмівка , pys'mivka ) .
Quoted text is surrounded by un - spaced guillemets ( angle - quotes ) , or lower and upper quotation markBringhurst , Robert ( 2002 ) .
The Elements of Typographic Style ( version 2.5 ) , pp .
262–264 .
Vancouver , Hartley & Marks . .
ENCODING UKRAINIAN
Section::::Encoding Ukrainian .
There are various character encodings for representing Ukrainian with computers .
ISO 8859 - 5 Section::::ISO 8859 - 5 .
ISO 8859 - 5 encoding is missing the letter ґ .
KOI8-U
Section::::KOI8-U. KOI8-U stands for Код обміну інформації 8 бітний — український , " Code for information interchange 8 bit — Ukrainian " , analogous to " ASCII " .
KOI8-U is a Ukrainianized version of KOI8-R.
WINDOWS-1251 Section::::Windows-1251 .
Windows-1251 works for Ukrainian alphabet , as well as for other Cyrillic alphabets .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
Ukrainian falls within the Cyrillic ( U+0400 to U+04FF ) and Cyrillic Supplementary ( U+0500 to U+052F ) blocks of Unicode .
The characters in the range U+0400–U+045F are basically the characters from ISO 8859 - 5 WEB PAGES AND XML Section::::Web pages and XML .
Elements in HTML and XML would normally have the Ukrainian language indicated using the IETF language tag codice_36 ( codice_37 in HTML and codice_38 in XML ) .
Although indicating the writing system is normally not necessary , this can be accomplished by adding a script subtag , for example to distinguish Cyrillic Ukrainian text ( codice_39 ) from romanized Ukrainian ( codice_40 ) .
SEE ALSO * Euro - Ukrainian alphabet
REFERENCES
* Peter T. Daniels and William Bright , eds .
( 1996 ) .
The World 's Writing Systems , pp 700 , 702 .
Oxford University Press . .
* Volodymyr Kubijovyč ed .
( 1963 ) .
"
Ukrainian Writing and Orthography " in Ukraine : A Concise Encyclopædia ,
vol 1 , pp 511–520 .
Toronto , University of Toronto Press . .
FURTHER READING
* Meletiy Smotrytsky ( 1619 ) .
Slavonic Grammar .
( Reprint edition , with Ukrainian interface . )
* Ivan Ohienko ( 1918 ) .
Nayholovnishi pravyla ukrayins'koho pravopysu .
Kyiv , UNR Ministry of Education .
* Ivan Ohienko ( 1919 ) .
Holovnishi pravyla ukrayins'koho pravopysu .
Kyiv , UNR Ministry of Education .
* All - Ukrainian Academy of Sciences ( VUAN , 1920 ) .
* People 's Commissariat of Education ( 1921 ) .
* ( 1928 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kharkiv , Academy of Science of the Ukrainian SSR .
* ( 1936 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Academy of Science of the Ukrainian SSR .
* L. Bulakhovs'ky , ed .
( 1946 ) .
Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , May 8 , 1945 : Academy of Science of the Ukrainian SSR .
* ( 1960 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Academy of Science of the Ukrainian SSR .
* ( 1990 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Academy of Science of the Ukrainian SSR .
* ( 2007 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Naukova Dumka .
Online version .
* ( 2012 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Naukova Dumka .
Online version .
* ( 2015 ) Ukrayins'kyy pravopys .
Kyiv , Naukova Dumka .
Online version .
* Ukrainian Primer by Elias Shklanka , M.A. , published by KNYHO - SPILKA in New York
* Мій найкращий Словнии , 2nd , edition , Ukrainian Editor Orest Dubas EXTERNAL LINKS *
The Cyrillic Charset Soup — Roman Czyborra 's site contains an exhaustive history of Cyrillic character set encoding schemes .
* Проєкт нового " Українського правопису " — Proposal for a new Ukrainian orthography ( in Ukrainian ) .
*
At the Encyclopedia of Ukraine : Cyrillic script , Orthography , Hrazhdanka , Maksymovychivka , Kulishivka , Zhelekhivka , Pankevychivka .
* Ukrajinśka Latynka is the online project that promotes Latin alphabet for the Ukrainian language .