SUNNYD Sunny Delight , marketed as SunnyD in some regions , is an orange flavored drink developed by Doric Foods of Mount Dora , Florida in 1963 .
It grew so popular that additional plants were built in California and Ohio in 1974 and 1978 , respectively .
In April 1983 , Sundor Brands bought out Doric Foods ; Sundor Brands was then purchased by Procter & Gamble in March 1989 .
In 2005 , Sunny Delight was spun off into the independent Sunny Delight Beverages Company ( SDBC ) .
The drink produced an estimated $ 450 million in revenue for Procter & Gamble in 2004 .
In 2005 , Sunny Delight was spun off into the independent Sunny Delight Beverages Company ( SDBC ) .
The beverage is also distributed by
Dr Pepper / Seven Up ( DPSU ) .
In Canada , the drink is manufactured and distributed by Saputo .
The beverage was launched in the United Kingdom in April 1998 with a £ 10 million promotional campaign , and by August 1999 , it became the third biggest selling drink in the United Kingdom , behind Coca - Cola and Pepsi .
It was sold in refrigerated cabinets , and marketed as a healthier alternative to soft drinks .
PROMOTIONAL CAMPAIGNS
REACH FOR THE SUN BOTTLE HUNT
Section::::Promotional campaigns .
Section::::Reach for the Sun Bottle Hunt .
In the middle of the 1990s , Sunny Delight sponsored an early internet contest promoting their beverage .
For the game , the Reach for the Sun Bottle Hunt , simple graphics depicting Sunny Delight " bottles " were incorporated into independent American web sites .
The site locations were various personal home pages or more well known internet resources .
At the main contest site , riddles were provided weekly to help people discover each of the sites displaying a hidden bottle .
Participants were encouraged to use the newest search engines in combination with the riddles .
Initially appearing in 1996 and gaining widespread attention , the contest was repeated three times over the course of a year and a half , and over 4,000 prizes were awarded during each iteration , ranging from T shirts to college scholarships .
As a pioneering internet advertising meme , it set the stage for years of later web marketing promotions .
PEEL '
N TASTE FLAVOR STRIPS Section::::Peel ' n Taste Flavor Strips .
In July 2009 , to promote the company 's Sunny Delight Smoothies , the company partnered with Food Lion supermarkets to place SunnyD Smoothies Peel ' n Taste flavor samplers in the aisles where Sunny Delight products were located .
REFORMULATION Section::::Reformulation .
In recent years , the artificial sweetener sucralose has been added in combination with high fructose corn syrup , in order to cut the calorie count .
As of 2013 , North American Sunny Delight contained less than 2 % concentrated fruit juice .
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
In the United Kingdom , there were many negative press reports about the product , following an investigation by The Food Commission , an independent consumer organisation in the United Kingdom .
In December 1999 , according to a report by BBC News , the negative publicity escalated when a Sunny Delight television advert showing a snowman turning orange was released , at about the same time as reports of a girl who experienced her skin turning orange – due to the product 's use of beta - Carotene for colour – after drinking an estimated 1.5 liters of Sunny Delight a day .
Sales had halved by 2001 , and the drink was redesigned and re invented in March 2003 as " SunnyD " .
In the United Kingdom , SunnyD was again relaunched in March 2009 , with a new formulation containing 70 % fruit juice and no artificial ingredients or added sugar .
However , amid declining sales , the product was further reformulated in April 2010 , as a lower priced beverage containing only 15 % fruit juice .
SEE ALSO
* Orange juice * Orange drink * Soft drinks
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * Official UK site * A profile at BBC News * Official Spanish site