JIF ( LEMON JUICE )
Jif is a brand of natural strength lemon juice prepared using lemon juice concentrate and water , whereby the concentrate is reconstituted using water .
After reconstitution , it is packaged and marketed .
It is sold in the United Kingdom and Ireland by Unilever .
Jif is used as a flavourant and ingredient in dishes , and as a condiment .
Two tablespoons is around the equivalent of the juice of one lemon .
The product has a shelf life of six months .
Jif is packaged in a squeezable container shaped like a lemon , and in bottles .
Development of the plastic container began in the 1950s , and was one of the original blow moulded containers used for food applications .
Jif brand lemon juice was established in 1956 .
In the 1950s , Edward Hack had the idea of lemon juice being packaged inside lemon - shaped and coloured containers .
Bill Pugh , an English plastics designer , created a prototype based upon Hack 's concept .
His company then produced and marketed Hax brand lemon juice in the plastic containers , using juice from Sicily .
Stanley Wagner of Coldcrops , Ltd. also independently designed a very similar package , which was used for Realemon brand lemon juice , later renamed to ReaLem .
An agreement between Hax and Coldcrops led to Hax leaving the lemon juice business , and Coldcrops acquiring the branding rights for ReaLem .
Coldcrops was acquired by Reckitt and Colman in 1956 , which rebranded the product as Jif .
The " Jif Lemon case " occurred in the 1980s , when the US company Borden introduced lemon juice packaged in a similar container to the UK .
Reckitt & Coleman sued Borden for passing off .
The case was settled in 1990 for Reckitt & Coleman .
Jif is sometimes used on pancakes , and was marketed in the past to be used on pancakes for Shrove Tuesday , with the slogan " Do n't forget the pancakes on Jif Lemon Day " .
FORMULATION Section::::Formulation .
Jif is prepared from reconstituted lemon concentrate and water as primary ingredients , and is formulated to be the same strength as natural lemons .
The concentrate is reconstituted using water .
The product contains the food preservative E223 ( sodium metabisulphite ) .
Jif has a shelf life of six months .
Two tablespoons is the equivalent of the juice of one lemon .
NUTRITION INFORMATION Section::::Nutrition information .
A 5 ml serving size of Jif provides 1 kcal ( kilocalorie ) of energy and 0.1 grams of carbohydrate .
USES Section::::Uses .
Jif is used as an ingredient and flavourant in dishes and foods , and as a condiment , such as on pancakes .
It may be used to add flavour to salads , sauces , fish and seafood , among other foods .
It can be used in recipes that require or recommend the use of lemon juice .
PACKAGING
Section::::Packaging .
Aside from its plastic , lemon - shaped containers containing 55 ml of juice , usually known as " jiffy lemons " or " jif lemons " , Jif lemon juice is also sold in bottles .
The plastic container is a squeeze pack container , whereupon squeezing the container releases juice from its nozzle .
Jif containers were embossed with the brand name " Jif " in 1956 , the same year the company came into existence .
Contemporary Jif containers have the phrase " Jif real lemon juice " embossed on the side of the squeeze pack .
The Jif plastic containers were originally made from polythene , and were one of the original and first blow moulded containers used for food applications .
The plastic containers served to replace glass bottles used to package lemon juice .
The plastic container was the brainchild of Edward Hack , and the container 's design was undertaken by Bill Pugh , the chief plastics designer at Cascelloid .
In its development , Pugh carved a core made of wood , covered it with fresh lemon peel to give it a realistic texture , and then cast a plaster mould .
This led to the realistic - looking container that significantly resembles a lemon .
Some sources have stated that similar plastic lemon packaging existed in Italy at the time of the end of World War II , prior to the time of the packaging design in the United Kingdom .
HISTORY HAX , REALEMON AND REALEM BRANDS Section::::History .
Section::::Hax , Realemon and ReaLem brands .
Edward Hack developed the original idea and model of lemon juice being contained inside lemon - shaped and coloured packaging in the 1950s .
The product was then designed and produced by
Cascelloid Ltd. Hack presented Cascelloid with a fresh lemon he acquired at Covent Garden , upon which to base the plastic container .
Hack had performed significant searches at several markets to find an optimal model .
Cascelloid stated that Hack reviewed and evaluated the entire inventory of lemons at Fortnum and Mason 's , Selfridges , Harrods and Covent Garden , the latter of which involved examining three cases of lemons that contained around 300 lemons in each case .
Bill Pugh , the chief plastics designer at Cascelloid , based in Leicester , and former Royal Air Force pilot , created a prototype of the blown lemon - shaped plastic shaped container based upon Hack 's idea sometime in the 1950s , as well as other types of blown containers .
Pugh 's experimented with the initial design until he was satisfied with its appearance .
This plastic lemon product was then used for Hax lemon juice .
Edward Hack , Ltd. produced and marketed Hax brand squeezable plastic lemon containers filled with two ounces of Sicilian lemon juice .
Per Edward Hack , Ltd. , the juice was unfiltered , had no water added to it , and contained a preservative to prevent spoilage .
Retailers could purchase the product in packs of six bags that contained 12 squeeze packs each , totalling 72 units .
Upon introduction to the marketplace , Hax juice and the plastic lemon design received some press coverage .
The Hax logo used on Hax lemon juice dates back to at least 1935 , at which time it was used in advertisements for Hax brand iodine pencils and Hax brand aspirin .
The plastic lemon container and the idea of marketing lemon juice in this manner was also undertaken independently by Stanley Wagner , a businessperson in the frozen food industry , and also a former Royal Air Force fighter pilot .
Wagner 's plastic lemon was produced by Shipton , a plastics company .
Wagner was with the company Coldcrops , Ltd. , which produced Realemon .
The Realemon trademark was developed and used for a lemon juice product based upon reconstitution in the 1940s .
Realemon was later renamed to ReaLem by Coldcrops .
Hax lemon juice was the first to be packaged and marketed in said lemon - shaped container , with Coldcrops following shortly thereafter with their own design .
It is of intrigue to some that both Pugh and Wagner were both former Royal Air Force pilots .
Over the course of a ten - month period from mid-1955 to early 1956 more than six million of the plastic juice lemons were sold by Coldcrops .
This initially began under the brand name " Realemon " , and then after an objection by the then Board of Trade , the name was changed to " ReaLem " and marketed with the slogan " juice in a jiffy " .
The Board of Trade objected because it was perceived that Coldcrops was possibly passing off their product as the Realemon brand from the United States .
During this same time period , Hax was marketing tomato ketchup and brown sauce in custom - shaped plastic containers , for use on restaurant tables .
After a long argument about plastic containers , the two companies agreed that they would not compete with one - another , and Coldcrops took the marketing rights for plastic lemons under the ReaLem brand .
Coldcrops would market ReaLem lemon juice and agreed to not enter other plastic container markets .
JIF BRAND Section::::Jif brand .
Reckitt and Colman approached Stanley Wagner to buy Coldcrops , and after a very long negotiation a deal was concluded .
A letter from Barclays Bank dated 21 June 1956 reads "
Dear Mr Wagner , I have pleasure in enclosing two copies of the Draft for £ ... credited to your account , which the Bank will be pleased if you will accept as a souvenir of this most successful transaction " .
The deal transferred ownership of the packaging and concept from Coldcrops to Reckitt & Coleman , and the new Jif - brand lemon juice was launched in 1956 .
All parties were delighted , Stanley Wagner with a substantial sum of money , for those days and a large profit from the six million lemons that had been sold , Reckitt 's even more so because the negotiating team had permission to pay far more for the business than they were able to achieve .
Lemon farmers in Sicily were also pleased , because the demand had increased for Sicilian lemon juice , which was largely a by - product of Sicilian lemon oil production .
For many years , whilst producing lemon oil , Sicilians had found little use for the juice .
Now there was a rapidly growing market for their near - waste product .
In 1970 , Jif continued to be prepared with lemon juice from Sicily .
Later on , Unilever acquired the Jif brand in 1995 for the price of £ 250 m , when it purchased Colman 's of Norwich .
At the time of Jif 's product launch in 1956 , it was marketed with the tagline ' Real lemon juice in a Jif ' .
In 1956 , Jif was the sole brand of lemon juice packaged in a squeeze pack container in the United Kingdom .
The new Jif brand used the packaging developed by Edward Hack .
COMPETITORS Section::::Competitors .
The U.S. company Borden acquired the rights to the ReaLemon brand of lemon juice in the United States in 1962 when it purchased the ReaLemon - Puritan Company for around $ 12.4 million .
ReaLemon had begun production in the U.S. in the 1930s .
Sales of ReaLemon realized successful profits in Europe in 1975 , at which time Borden expanded into the United Kingdom market , purveying a 250 ml bottle of lemon juice .
By 1980 , ReaLemon comprised around 25 % of the U.K. lemon juice market .
In response to this competition , Reckitt & Coleman began producing Jif in 150 ml- and 250 ml - sized bottles .
Borden then began making plans to market ReaLemon in a lemon - shaped package that was similar to Jif 's packaging .
This resulted in a lawsuit initiated by Reckitt & Coleman against Borden , based upon the notion that ReaLemon was attempting to copy Jif 's packaging in attempts to mislead consumers , by passing off their product as Jif .
The case became known as " The Jif Lemon case " , and was settled in 1990 in the Court of Appeal .
It was ruled that a sufficient public recognition of Jif 's packaging was existent , which created an established reputation for the brand .
The ruling stated that consumers would be " likely to believe that the ReaLemon was a Jif Lemon when they saw it on a supermarket shelf . "
The ruling in Reckitt & Colman 's favour occurred even though Reckitt & Colman did not register the plastic lemon packaging .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Jif is sometimes used on pancakes .
An advertising campaign introduced the catch - phrase
" Do n't forget the pancakes on Jif lemon day , " in reference to Shrove Tuesday , which is also referred to as Pancake Day .
The campaign and slogan was devised by Reckitt and Colman .
The Jif lemon - shaped packaging aligned Jif with the consumption of pancakes on Shrove Tuesday in consumers ' minds , creating a strong link between the product and Shrove Tuesday .
Jif and pancakes is a popular combination on Shrove Tuesday .
In 2000 , over 80,000 Jif lemons were being produced per day to meet consumer demand for Pancake Day , beginning five weeks prior to Pancake Day .
This occurred despite fresh lemons having greater availability during this time compared to other time periods .
SEE ALSO
* ReaLemon REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* " Frozen Foods " .
Journal of the Frozen Food Industry .
February 1963 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Jif Lemon homepage * HAX Packs .
Box vox .