.44
MAGNUM
The .44 Remington Magnum , or simply .44 Magnum ( 10.9×33mmR ) , and frequently .44
Mag , is a rimmed , large - bore cartridge originally designed for revolvers .
After its introduction , it was quickly adopted for carbines and rifles .
Despite the " .44 " designation , guns chambered for the .44 Magnum round , and its parent , the .44 Special , use diameter bullets .
The .44 Magnum is based on a lengthened .44 Special case , loaded to higher pressures for greater velocity ( and thus , energy ) .
The .44 Magnum has since been eclipsed in power by the .454 Casull , and most recently by the .460 S&W Magnum and .500 S&W Magnum , among others ; nevertheless , it has remained one of the most popular commercial large - bore magnum cartridges .
When loaded to its maximum and with heavy , deeply penetrating bullets , the .44 Magnum cartridge is suitable for short - range hunting of all North American game — though at the cost of heavy recoil and muzzle flash when fired in handguns , less so in carbines and rifles .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The .44 Magnum cartridge was the end result of years of tuned handloading of the .44 Special .
The .44 Special , and other large - bore handgun cartridges , were being loaded with heavy bullets , pushed at higher than normal velocities for better hunting performance .
One of these handloaders was Elmer Keith , a writer and outdoorsman of the 20th century .
Keith settled on the .44 Special cartridge as the basis for his experimentation , rather than the larger .45 Colt .
At the time , the selection of .44 caliber projectiles for handloaders was more varied , and the .44 Special 's brass was thicker and stronger than the dated .45 Colt case .
Also , the .44 Special case was smaller in diameter than the .45 Colt case .
In revolvers of the same cylinder size , this meant that the .44 caliber revolvers had thicker , and thus stronger , cylinder walls than the .45 .
This allowed higher pressures to be used with less risk of a burst cylinder .
Keith encouraged Smith & Wesson and Remington to produce a commercial version of this new high - pressure loading , and revolvers chambered for it .
Smith & Wesson 's first .44 Magnum revolver , the Model 29 , was built on December 15 , 1955 , and the gun was announced to the public on January 19 , 1956 for a price of USD$140 .
Julian Hatcher ( technical editor of American Rifleman ) and Keith received two of the first production models .
Hatcher 's review of the new Smith & Wesson revolver and the .44 Magnum cartridge appeared in the March , 1956 issue of the magazine .
Smith & Wesson produced 3,100 of these revolvers in 1956 .
By the summer of 1956 , Sturm , Ruger became aware of this project and began work on a single action Blackhawk revolver for the new .44 Magnum cartridge .
A popular rumor says a Ruger employee found a cartridge case marked " .44 Remington Magnum " and took it to Bill Ruger , while another says a Remington employee provided Ruger with early samples of the ammunition .
Ruger began shipping their new revolver in late November , 1956 .
The .44 Magnum case is slightly longer than the .44 Special case , not to make more room for propellant , but to prevent the far higher pressure cartridge from being chambered in older , weaker .44 Special firearms , thus preventing injuries and possible deaths .
The .44 Magnum was an immediate success , and the direct descendants of the S&W Model 29 and the .44 Magnum Ruger Blackhawks are still in production , and have been joined by numerous other makes and models of .44 Magnum revolvers and even a handful of semi - automatic models , the first being produced in the 1960s .
The film Dirty Harry , prominently featuring the S&W M29 , contributed to that model 's popularity ( as well as the cartridge itself ) .
Ruger introduced its first long gun , a semi - automatic carbine called the Ruger Model 44 chambered for .44 Magnum , in 1959 .
Marlin followed soon after with the lever action Model 1894 in .44 Magnum .
Having a carbine and a handgun chambered in the same caliber is an old tradition ; the .44 - 40 Winchester was introduced by Winchester in a lever action in 1873 , and Colt followed in 1878 with a revolver in the same caliber .
The .38 - 40 Winchester and .32 - 20 Winchester were also available in both carbines and revolvers , allowing the shooter to use one type of ammunition for both firearms .
Although improved modern alloys and manufacturing techniques have allowed even stronger cylinders to be made , leading to larger and more powerful cartridges such as the .454 Casull and .480 Ruger in revolvers the same size as a .44 Magnum , the .44 Magnum is still considered an exceptional weapon .
In 2006 , to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the .44 Magnum , Ruger introduced a special 50th anniversary Blackhawk revolver , in the " Flattop " style .
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
Section::::Technical specifications .
The .44 Magnum delivers a large , heavy bullet with high velocity for a handgun .
In its full - powered form , it produces so much recoil and muzzle blast that it is generally considered to be unsuitable for use as a police weapon .
Rapid fire is difficult and strenuous on the user 's hands , especially for shooters of smaller build or with small hands .
Although marketed as a .44 caliber , the .44 Magnum and its parent .44
Special are actually .429-.430 caliber .
The .44 designation is a carryover from the early measurements of " heeled " bullets , used in the later 19th century .
In those times , bullets were measured on the outside of the cartridge , not the inside of the cartridge .
After the .44 S&W Russian was developed , the forefather of the .44 Special and thus the .44 Magnum , the measurement of bullet caliber was taken from inside of the cartridge , resulting in .429 caliber .
Instead of confusing buyers who were used to .44 caliber revolvers , the original .44 designation was kept for market recognition .
Some gun styles are more comfortable to use when shooting this caliber .
Many shooters find the rounded grip shape of the single action better for handling heavy recoil than the grip shape of double - action revolvers , which have a shoulder on top of the grip .
Many shooters consider the ideal type of grip for heavy recoiling guns to be the longer " Bisley " style single action grip , and it can be found on single actions from Ruger ( models marked " Bisley " ) and Freedom Arms , as well as many custom makers .
DUAL - PURPOSE USE Section::::Dual - purpose use .
The concept of a dual - purpose handgun / rifle cartridge has been popular since the Old West , with cartridges like the .44 - 40 Winchester , whose " high - speed " rifle loadings were precursors to magnum loads .
Other dual - use rounds were the .32 - 20 Winchester and the .38 - 40 Winchester .
Some past dual - purpose cartridges , like the .44 - 40 Winchester , gave their manufacturers trouble when people loaded the " high - speed " versions designed for rifles into handguns .
Since the .44 Magnum was designed from the start as a revolver cartridge , there are no such issues , and SAAMI - compliant ammunition fires from any handguns or rifles chambered for the .44 Magnum .
As a rifle or carbine cartridge the .44 Magnum is sufficiently powerful for medium - sized game , yet fits easily into a compact , lightweight package .
In 1961 , Ruger introduced their .44 carbine , the first .44 Magnum carbine .
The lever - action Marlin Model 1894 , and many other firearms are currently available in this caliber .
With significantly longer barrels than revolvers and no cylinder gap ( except in revolving rifles ) , carbines will generate a significantly higher velocity than a revolver loaded with the same ammunition .
Tests with various ammunition in the Ruger Deerfield yielded a velocity of over with a bullet , comparable to the muzzle velocity out of a revolver .
Loads using slow burning powders maximize performance in both short and long barrels , with one published load generating from a revolver , and from a carbine with a bullet .
SUITABLE GAME Section::::Suitable game .
The .44 Magnum is well suited for game up to elk size .
With precise shot placement and deep - penetrating cartridges , it has even been used to take the largest of game , including Cape Buffalo .
Publisher Robert E. Petersen took a record - setting polar bear with a Smith & Wesson Model 29 .44 Magnum .
It has even been used against elephants with success .
In addition to beating the ballistics of the old .44 - 40 rifle loads , long considered a top deer cartridge , the heavy , flat - point bullets typically used in the .44 Magnum have an additional advantage .
Tests performed where bullets are shot through light cover , intended to represent twigs and brush , have shown that the high - velocity , lightweight , thin - jacketed , pointed bullets used by most hunting cartridges today are easily deflected by contact with the brush .
The ideal bullets for penetrating brush with minimal deflection are heavy , flat - point bullets at moderate velocities .
RANGE Section::::Range .
The accuracy of the .44 Magnum is very good , with models from Colt , Smith & Wesson , and Ruger producing bullet groups of at , with most ammunition .
The limiting factor of the .44 Magnum cartridge is not terminal ballistics .
When fired from a revolver , a typically loaded .44 Magnum bullet will have more impact energy at than
a .44 Special has at the muzzle , when fired from the same weapon .
When loaded with a heavy , non - expanding bullet , the .44 Magnum will easily shoot through large game such as elk and even bison .
The limiting factor is the bullet 's trajectory : the best hunting bullets are heavy , so they are relatively slow .
This means the projectile 's trajectory will drop significantly at ranges beyond ; there will be virtually zero significant drop at , so the gun 's aimed " line of sight " can meet the " bullet 's trajectory " at the same point .
When drop - out at is about
, the drop - out at is more than ; with a zero drop - out , the drop - out at will still measure more than .
Experts limit hunting ranges to when shooting .44 Magnum cartridges , less if practical accuracy requires it .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The .44 Magnum remained mildly popular among shooters for many years after its introduction , but did not come to the attention of the general public until 1971 , when it was prominently featured in the American feature film Dirty Harry starring Clint Eastwood .
In one of the classic lines in cinema , titular character Harry Callahan describes his Smith & Wesson Model 29 as " the most powerful handgun in the world " .
Although not strictly true ( the more powerful wildcat .454
Casull was announced in 1959 ) , the .44 Magnum was the most powerful then in production .
Demand for the Model 29 increased so much that they were selling for up to three times suggested retail price .
When the Model 29 could not be obtained , customers sought other handguns chambered in this caliber , such as the Ruger Redhawk .
SEE ALSO
* .357 Magnum , the first " magnum " cartridge and the immediate predecessor of the .44
Magnum * .44
AutoMag
* .445 SuperMag * Table of handgun and rifle cartridges
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ballistics By The Inch
.44magnum
results