GIRDLE
The term girdle , meaning " belt " , commonly refers to the liturgical attire that normally closes a cassock in many Christian denominations , including the Anglican Communion , Methodist Church and Lutheran Church .
The girdle , in the 8th or 9th century , was said to resemble an ancient Levitical Jewish vestment , and in that era , was not visible .
In 800 AD , the girdle began to be worn by Christian deacons in the Eastern Church .
The girdle , for men , symbolizes preparation and readiness to serve , and for women , represents chastity and protection ; it was also worn by laypersons in the Middle Ages , as attested in literature .
For example , the hagiographical account of Saint George and the Dragon mentions the evildoer being tamed with the sign of the cross and a girdle handed to Saint George by a virgin .
Since the 20th century , the word " girdle " also has been used to define an undergarment made of elasticized fabric that was worn by women .
It is a form - fitting foundation garment that encircles the lower torso , perhaps extending below the hips , and worn often to shape or for support .
It may be worn for aesthetic or medical reasons .
In sports or medical treatment , a girdle may be worn as a compression garment .
This form of women 's foundation wear replaced the corset in popularity , and was in turn to a large extent surpassed by the pantyhose in the 1960s .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The men among the Greeks and Romans wore the girdle upon the loins , and it served them to confine the tunic , and hold the purse , instead of pockets , which were unknown ; girls and women wore it under the bosom .
The Strophium , Taenia , or Mitra occurs in many figures .
In the small bronze Pallas of the Villa Albani , and in figures on the Hamilton Vases , are three cordons with a knot , detached from two ends of the girdle , which is fixed under the bosom .
This girdle forms under the breast a knot of ribbon , sometimes in the form of a rose , as occur on the two handsomest daughters of Niobe .
Upon the youngest the ends of the girdle pass over the shoulders , and upon the back , as they do upon four Caryatides found at Monte Portio .
This part of the dress the ancients called , at least in the time of Isidore , Succinctorium or Bracile .
The girdle was omitted by both sexes in mourning .
Often when the tunic was very long , and would otherwise be entangled by the feet , it was drawn over the girdle in such a way as to conceal the latter entirely underneath its folds .
It is not uncommon to see two girdles of different widths worn together , one very high up , the other very low down , so as to form between the two in the tunic , a puckered interval ; but this fashion was mostly applied to short tunics .
The tunic of the Greek males was almost always confined by a girdle .
Girdles of iron , to prevent obesity , were worn by some of the Britons .
From the Druidical eras the cure of diseases , especially those of difficult parturition , were ascribed to wearing certain girdles .
Among the Anglo - Saxons , it was used by both sexes ; by the men to confine their tunic , and support the sword .
We find it richly embroidered , and of white leather .
The leather strap was chiefly worn by monks .
VESTMENT AND ICONOGRAPHY JUDÆO - CHRISTIAN USAGE Section::::Vestment and iconography .
Section::::Judæo - Christian usage .
As a Christian liturgical vestment , the girdle is a long , rope - like cord tied around the waist over the alb or cassock .
The Parson 's Handbook describes the girdle as being made " generally of white linen rope , and may have a tassel at each end .
About 12 ft . 6 in .
long is a very convenient size if it is used double , one end being then turned into a noose and the tasselled ends slipped through .
The girdle , however , may be coloured .
" Christian monastics would often hang religious texts , such as the Bible or Breviary , from their girdles and these became known as girdle books .
In addition , they would often knot the ends of the girdle thrice , in order to represent the " vows of poverty , chastity , and obedience . "
As such , within the Christian Church , the girdle , in some contexts , represents chastity and within the Hebrew Bible , " Proverbs 31 provides biblical reference to the ancient practice of girdle making by virtuous chaste women " .
In the New Testament , " Christ referred to the girdle as a symbol of preparation and readiness for service ( ) " : Saint Paul , in also references the term , stating " Stand therefore , first fastening round you the girdle of truth and putting on the breastplate of uprightness " , further buttressing the concept of the girdle as a symbol of readiness .
Many Christian clergy , such as Anglican priests and Methodist ministers , use the following prayer when wearing the girdle : By the 8th century AD , the girdle became established as a liturgical vestment " in the strict sense of the word . "
Although the general word " cincture " is sometimes used as a synonym for the girdle , liturgical manuals distinguish between the two , as the " girdle is a long cord or rope while the cincture is a wide sash .
Generally an alb is closed with a girdle , an Anglican - style double - breasted cassock is closed with a cincture , and a Roman cassock is closed with either one . "
DHARMIC RELIGIONS Section::::Dharmic religions .
In the Vajrayana iconography of the Hevajra Tantra , the ' girdle ' ( Tib . : ske rags ) , one of the ' Five Bone Ornaments ' ( aṣṭhiamudrā ) symbolizes Amoghasiddhi and the ' accomplishing pristine awareness '
( Kṛty - anuṣṭhāna - jñāna )
, one of the ' Five Wisdoms ' ( pañca - jñāna ) .
The iconography of the girdle ( or bone apron and belt ) in Vajrayana iconography developed from one of the items of vestment adorning the Mahasiddha of the charnel grounds .
Beer ( 1999 : p. 318 ) describes the bone girdle as the ' netted bone apron and belt ' as vesture of the Dakinis and Heruka of the Cham Dance and Gar Dance of Tibetan Buddhism sacred ritual dance performances :
The bone ornaments worn in these ritual dances are exquisitely carved - especially the netted bone apron and belt , which are commonly adorned with intricately carved images of dakinis .
GIRDLE IN LITERATURE Section::::Girdle in literature .
In literature , girdles are often portrayed as magical , giving power and strength if worn by men , and protection if worn by women .
Several scriptures in the Bible make use of the girdle as a symbol for readiness and preparation .
Ishtar , a Babylonian goddess , wore a fertility girdle , which , when it was removed , rendered the universe barren .
Hercules wrestled with the Amazon queen for her girdle in his Greek myth .
Aphrodite , or Venus in Roman mythology , also wore girdles associated with lechery in later poetry .
For men a girdle was often used to hold weapons .
It also gave them freedom to move in a fight , unlike other types of clothing .
Both of these are thought to carry the connection of power to the man 's girdle in literature .
For example , Odysseus wears a girdle which allows him to swim for three days straight , and a girdle worn by Thor doubles his strength .
Later , for women , the girdle became a sign of virginity , and was often considered to have magical properties .
Monsters and all types of evil are recorded as being subdued by girdles in literature , a famous one being the dragon slain by Saint George .
Marriage ceremonies continued this tradition of girdles symbolizing virginity by having the husband take the wife 's girdle , and prostitutes were forbidden to wear them by law in historic France .
Often in literature , women are portrayed as safe from sexual or other attack when wearing a girdle , but suddenly vulnerable if it is missing or stolen .
Non - clothing uses in literature include Tolkien 's " Girdle of Melian " , a magical , protective " wall " surrounding an elven kingdom .
The 20th century women 's girdle attracts various references in literature , often in a disparaging way .
For example , Marilyn French in her classic book , The Women 's Room , is very critical not only of the girdle itself , but also of the virtual compulsion to wear one , a compulsion which existed until the late 1960s .
In John Masters 's Bhowani Junction , once the mixed - race Victoria Jones decides to opt for an Indian rather than British persona , she rejects her girdle as a " western garment " .
UNDERGARMENT Section::::Undergarment .
Historically and in anthropology , the girdle can be a scanty belt - shaped textile for men or women , worn on its own , often not holding a larger garment in place , and less revealing than the loincloth , as was used by Minoan pugilists .
Constructed of elasticized fabric and sometimes fastened with hook and eye closures , the modern girdle is designed to enhance a woman 's figure .
Most open - bottom girdles extend from the waist to the upper thighs .
In the 1960s , these models fell from favor and were to a great extent replaced by panty girdles , which resemble a tight pair of athletic shorts .
Both models of girdles may include suspender clips to hold up stockings .
Girdles were considered essential garments by many women from about 1920 to the late 1960s .
They created a rigid , controlled figure that was seen as eminently respectable and modest .
They were also crucial to the couturier Christian Dior 's 1947 New Look , which featured a voluminous skirt and a narrow , nipped - in waistline , also known as a wasp waist .
Later in the 1960s , the girdle was generally supplanted by the pantyhose .
Pantyhose replaced girdles for many women who had used the girdle essentially as a means of holding up stockings .
Those who wanted more control purchased " control top " pantyhose .
In 1968 at the feminist Miss America protest , protestors symbolically threw a number of feminine products into a " Freedom Trash Can . "
These included girdles , which were among items the protestors called " instruments of female torture " and accouterments of what they perceived to be enforced femininity .
Girdles and " body shapers " are still worn by women to shape their figure with a garment .
Some of these garments may incorporate a brassiere , becoming functionally equivalent to a corset .
However , they do not incorporate boning and hence do not produce the constricted waistline characteristic of Victorian - era corsets .
SPORTS
Section::::Sports .
In American football , a girdle is worn under the football player 's pants to keep the hip , thigh , and tailbone pads in place , making the process of putting on the tight football pants easier .
Older girdles resembled chaps , in that they covered only the front of the leg with pads , that snapped on .
Modern girdles are essentially a tight pair of compression shorts with pockets for the pads .
The girdle was also used in the Mesoamerican ballgame and is used in hockey ( National Hockey League ) .
SEE ALSO
* Confraternities of the Cord
* Girdle of Thomas
* Girdle book REFERENCES