BUTTERFINGER Butterfinger is a candy bar created in 1923 in Chicago , Illinois by Otto Schnering , which currently is manufactured by Nestlé .
The bar consists of a crispy peanut butter core coated in milk chocolate .
Butterfinger has become known for its marketing and a roster of spokespersons , including Bart Simpson , Top Cat , Seth Green , Erik Estrada , Rob Lowe , and Jaime Pressly .
Other memorable ad campaigns include counting down the end of the world or BARmageddon , with evidence such as the first ever , QR shaped crop circle in Kansas , a Butterfinger comedy - horror movie called " Butterfinger the 13th , " the first interactive digital graphic novel by a candy brand starring the Butterfinger Defense League , and several attention grabbing April Fool 's Day pranks , including the renaming of the candy bar to " The Finger . "
With 2010 sales of $ 598 million , Butterfinger has become increasingly popular and has typically ranked as the eleventh most popular candy bar sold in the $ 17.68 billion United States chocolate confectionery market between 2007 and 2010 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Curtiss Candy Company was founded near Chicago , Illinois , in 1922 by Otto Schnering , using his mother 's maiden name .
He invented the Butterfinger candy bar in 1923 .
The company held a public contest to choose the name of this candy .
In an early marketing campaign , the company dropped Butterfinger and Baby Ruth candy bars from airplanes in cities across the United States as a publicity stunt that helped increase its popularity .
The candy bar also was promoted in Baby
Take a Bow , a film from 1934 featuring Shirley Temple .
In 1964 , Standard Brands Inc. purchased the Curtiss Candy Company .
It then merged with Nabisco in 1981 .
RJR Nabisco was formed in 1985 by the merger of Nabisco Brands and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company .
In 1988 , RJR Nabisco was purchased by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. in what was at the time , the largest leveraged buyout in history .
In 1990 , Nestlé , a Swiss multinational food and beverage company , bought Baby Ruth and Butterfinger from RJR Nabisco .
When measured by revenues , Nestlé is considered the largest food company in the world .
In January 2018 , Nestlé announced plans to sell over 20 of its U.S. confectionery brands ( including Butterfinger ) to Italian chocolatier Ferrero SpA for $ 2.8 Billion dollars .
This deal was finalized in March 2018 .
NESTLÉ ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS
Section::::Nestlé advertising campaigns .
Two of the slogans currently used to advertise the candy bar are " Follow the Finger " and " Break out of the ordinary ! "
Prior to these , Bart Simpson , Homer Simpson , and other characters from Fox 's The Simpsons , appeared in numerous advertisements for the product from 1988 to 2001 , featuring the slogans
" Nobody better lay a finger on my Butterfinger ! " , " Bite my Butterfinger ! " , and " Nothin' like a Butterfinger ! "
Butterfinger , for unknown reasons , terminated a long standing advertising contract with The Simpsons in the end of 2001 .
Reacting to this , the January 2002 Simpsons episode " Sweets and Sour Marge " included a scene depicting Butterfinger bars as nonflammable ; the character Chief Wiggum says , " Even the fire does n't want them . "
In February 2003 , in the episode " Barting Over " , Bart claims he does not recall being in any commercials in the past , and then eats a Butterfinger just as he did in the commercials .
In the November 2014 episode Simpsorama , a crossover with Futurama , Butterfingers are used to lure the Bart creatures into Madison Cube Garden .
On April 1 , 2008 , Nestlé launched an April Fool 's Day prank in which they claimed that they had changed the name of the candy bar to " The Finger " , citing consumer research that indicated that the original brand was " clumsy " and " awkward " .
The prank included a fake Web site promoting the change that featured a video press release .
When the joke was revealed , the website redirected visitors to the fictitious " Butterfinger Comedy Network " .
In 2009 , a new advertisement for Butterfinger was produced that appeared to be a homage to the earlier The Simpsons commercials .
In 2010 , Butterfinger revived its " Nobody better lay a finger ...
" slogan as " Nobody 's gon na lay a finger on my Butterfinger . "
In 2011 , a comedy horror film entitled Butterfinger The 13th , was made to promote the product .
In April 2013 , an official announcement via the Twitter account of The Simpsons stated that the " Nobody better lay a finger " advertising campaign featuring Bart Simpson would be returning .
In the 2017 Treehouse of Horror XXVIII opening sequence , the family appeared as candy in a bowl .
Bart , a Butterfinger bar , tells his mother he is scared , and she comforts him by stating he 's always the last taken .
VARIATIONS
* Bites : A product with small , bite sized pieces of Butterfinger is called Butterfinger Bites .
* Snackerz : Butterfinger Snackerz is another bite sized , smooth centered version of the candy bar .
* BB 's : Starting in 1992 , another form of Butterfinger bars was available called BB 's .
Similar to Whoppers and Maltesers , they were roughly the size of marbles and sold in bags .
They also were advertised by the Simpsons .
They were discontinued in 2006 .
In 2009 , the product was brought back as Butterfinger Mini Bites .
* Buzz : During the height of the energy drink craze in 2009 , a two piece ' king size ' version of the candy bar containing 80 milligrams of caffeine was released with limited distribution .
The wrapper bears this warning : " Contains 80 mg per package ( 40 mg per piece ) , as much as in the leading energy drink .
Not recommended for pregnant women , children or persons sensitive to caffeine . "
* Ice Cream Bar : A product with an ice cream filling , the Butterfinger Ice Cream Bar , was introduced and continues to be sold in individual bags to this day .
Another product similar to that of Butterfinger Ice Cream Bars , but shaped in a nugget form , also was developed and is now discontinued .
*
Crisp : Nestlé also produces Butterfinger Crisp bars , which are a form of chocolate covered wafer cookie , with a Butterfinger flavored cream .
This is part of a line of Nestlé products under a " crisp " name , including Nestlé Crunch Crisp and Baby Ruth Crisp .
* Cocoa mix : Nestlé released a hot cocoa mix with the flavor of the Butterfinger bar .
The packaging advertises the cocoa as having a chocolate and peanut butter taste .
* Cups : In 2014 , a product similar to Reese 's Peanut Butter Cups was introduced by Nestlé , the Butterfinger Peanut Butter Cup , which unlike Reese 's Cups , has both crunchy and creamy peanut butter and covers the mix with milk chocolate .
It was the first new Butterfinger product introduced in more than five years .
Nestlé spent two years developing the product .
* Naked : The Naked Butterfinger is a version of the standard size candy bar that will only have a coating of chocolate on the bottom to hold it together .
* Dark : Made with Dark Chocolate USE BY OTHER MANUFACTURERS Section::::Variations .
Section::::Use by other manufacturers .
A part of Edy 's Fun Flavors line ( Dreyer 's west of the Rocky Mountains and outside the United States ) .
The product is vanilla ice cream with a peanut butter swirl and bits of the Butterfinger candy bar in it .
Grocery store Kroger has a flavor in their " Jammed " line called Peanut Butter Candy Crunch that is a peanut flavored frozen dairy dessert with Butterfinger chunks and a peanut butter swirl whose taste resembles that of the Butterfinger candy bar .
GERMAN GMO CONTROVERSY Section::::German GMO controversy .
Butterfinger was withdrawn from the German market in 1999 due to consumer rejection when it was one of the first products to be identified as containing genetically modified ingredients ( GMOs ) from corn .
Butterfinger sales ended after a successful campaign by Greenpeace pushed Nestlé to remove the product from German supermarkets .
SIMILAR PRODUCTS , OTHER MANUFACTURERS * Clark Bar ( from Boyer ) * 5th Avenue ( from The Hershey Company )
* Reese 's Crispy Crunchy Bar : a product that includes peanuts and peanut butter ( owned by The Hershey Company )
* Zagnut : a similar product using toasted coconut instead of chocolate ( from The Hershey Company )
* Chick - O - Stick : a rolled product using toasted coconut instead of chocolate ( from the Atkinson Candy Company )
* Crispy Crunch ( from Cadbury )
SEE ALSO
* List of chocolate bar brands REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Butterfinger website * Butterfinger Information