ANDREY KIVILEV
Andrei Kivilev ( 20 September 1973 – 12 March 2003 ) was a professional road bicycle racer from Taldykorgan , Kazakhstan .
In March 2003 , he crashed during the Paris – Nice race and subsequently died of his injuries .
His death was the trigger for the UCI to implement the compulsory wearing of helmets in all endorsed races .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Born in Taldykorgan , Almaty Province , Kivilev began his amateur racing career in Spain , before moving to France , where he wore the EC Saint - Etienne jersey .
In 1993 , he had a successful Regio - Tour as part of a successful tour for the Kazakh team : Kivilev won the points competition ; team mate Alexander Vinokourov won the combined competition ; and the team won the team competition .
He secured a professional contract with Festina in 1998 and rode with them until the end of 1999 .
Kivilev had a modest time at Festina , where his best results were fifth at the Championship of Zurich and seventh at the Critérium International .
Despite his lack of professional victories , Kivilev attracted admirers for his riding style , and despite interest from US Postal Service , signed with Ag2r Prévoyance in 2000 , before moving to Cofidis in 2001 .
It was at Cofidis that his career started to take off : in his first season , not only did he win the Route du Sud and stage five of the Dauphiné Libéré race , between Romans - sur - Isère and Grenoble , but also had a sensational performance in the Tour de France .
Having lost over eighteen minutes on a windswept and attritional stage 4 between Huy and Verdun , Kivilev was allowed to form part of a fourteen - man breakaway on stage 8 between Colmar and Pontarlier and gained 33 minutes on the race favourites .
Kivilev was an able climber , and limited his losses on the big hills .
His time trialling let him down when he lost a podium place to Joseba Beloki on the final time trial .
Nevertheless , Kivilev finished the tour in 4th position .
In fact , with later doping scandals eliminating those ahead of him on the podium , the French newspaper Le Monde retroactively ( and unofficially ) named Kivilev winner of the 2001 Tour de France .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
On 11 March 2003 , Kivilev was racing in the second stage of Paris –
Nice , between La Clayette and Saint - Étienne .
Approximately forty kilometres from the stage finish , as the peloton passed through Saint - Chamond , Kivilev collided with Polish teammate Marek Rutkiewicz and German Volker Ordowski of Team Gerolsteiner .
Rutkiewicz and Ordowski were not seriously hurt and finished the stage , but the helmetless Kivilev hit the ground and did not rise .
Kivilev immediately fell into a coma , initially being taken to the Saint - Chamond hospital before being transferred via air to the intensive care unit at Saint - Étienne hospital , where he was diagnosed with a serious skull fracture and two broken ribs .
His condition worsened overnight , and Kivilev died of his injuries at 10 a.m. on 12 March 2003 .
He was survived by his wife Natalia and six - month - old son Leonardo .
A few days later , his friend Alexander Vinokourov won the race .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
After Kivilev 's death , the UCI made the wearing of helmets compulsory .
They had previously tried to introduce this requirement in 1991 , but some riders protested this at the Paris –
Nice race , so the rule was not introduced .
The nature of Kivilev 's death , in that he was a lead rider , in one of the top French cycling teams , racing in a top stage race , coupled with advances in helmet technology , brought the debate back to the fore and conclusively so for the UCI .
Whilst many riders were initially still against compulsory helmet use , the UCI ensured the rules requiring helmets to be worn at all times would be in place for the 2003 Giro d'Italia , which started just eight weeks after Kivilev 's death .
Dissension to the rule was initially high , but the new rules were affirmed in October 2003 .
Whilst at first the rule was loose and not tightly enforced , especially on mountain - top finishes , it has since been enforced more strictly and helmet - wearing is now ubiquitous in the peloton .
MAJOR RESULTS 1995 1998
2001 2002 2003 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS