LEGAL DRINKING AGE
The legal drinking age is the age at which a person can legally consume alcoholic beverages .
These laws cover a wide range of issues and behaviors , addressing when and where alcohol can be consumed .
The minimum age alcohol can be legally consumed can be different from the age when it can be purchased in some countries .
These laws vary between different countries and many laws have exemptions or special circumstances .
Most laws apply only to drinking alcohol in public places with alcohol consumption in the home being mostly unregulated ( an exception being the UK , which has a minimum legal age of five for supervised consumption in private places ) .
Some countries also have different age limits for different types of alcoholic drinks .
Kazakhstan , Oman , Pakistan , Qatar , Sri Lanka , Tajikistan , Thailand , United Arab Emirates , Federated States of Micronesia , Palau , Paraguay , Solomon Islands , India ( certain states ) , the United States ( except U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico ) , Yemen ( Aden and Sana'a ) , Japan , Iceland , Canada ( certain Provinces and Territories ) , and South Korea have the highest set drinking ages ; however , some of these countries do not have off - premises drinking limits .
Austria , Antigua and Barbuda , Belgium , Bermuda , British Virgin Islands , Cuba , Ethiopia , Gibraltar , Luxembourg and Nicaragua have the lowest set drinking ages .
The most commonly known reason for the law behind the legal drinking age is the effect on the brain in adolescents .
Since the brain is still maturing , alcohol can have a negative effect on the memory and long - term thinking .
Alongside that , it can cause liver failure , and create a hormone imbalance in teens due to the constant changes and maturing of hormones during puberty .
AFRICA
De jureLuanda Province
It is illegal to sell alcoholic beverages to anyone under the age of 18 .
It is also illegal for minors to buy and consume alcohol .
It is illegal for any person to sell or supply alcoholic beverages to minors under the age of 15 years when sold or supplied off - premises ( e.g. , liquor stores , wine stores , and supermarkets ) .
It is illegal for any person to sell or supply alcoholic beverages to minors under the age of 21 years when sold or supplied on - premises ( e.g. , restaurants , bars , and cafes ) .
It is illegal for any person to sell or supply alcoholic beverages to minors under the age of 18 years .
It is illegal for any person to sell or supply alcoholic beverages to minors under the age of 18 years when sold or supplied on - premises ( e.g. , restaurants , bars , and cafes ) .
AMERICAS Section::::Americas .
The minimum age to purchase and consume varies , but the most common age is 18 years .
However , in North America the age limits varies between 18 and 21 years of age .
Throughout the United States the minimum legal age to purchase any alcoholic beverage from a shop , supermarket , liquor store , bar , club or any other licensed premises is 21 years of age .
In Canada each province can decide which minimum age limit is to be set to buy or consume alcohol .
Most provinces have a minimum age of 19 years , while Alberta , Manitoba and Quebec have set a minimum age of 18 years .
In South America all countries have set a minimum purchase age of 18 years , except for Guyana where minors aged 16 or 17 may consume a glass of beer , wine or cider in a restaurant provided they buy a meal , and ParaguayDe jureIdaho , Texas , and Maryland , is considered legal for those under the age of 21 .
By a judge 's ruling , South Carolina appears to allow the possession and consumption of alcohol by adults 18 to 20 years of age , but a circuit court judge has said otherwise .
The states of Washington and Wisconsin allows the consumption of alcohol in the presence of parents .
Some U.S. states have legislation that make providing to and possession of alcohol by persons under twenty - one a gross misdemeanor with a potential penalty of a $ 5,000 fine or up to a year in jail .
ASIA De jurestates of Bihar , Gujarat and Nagaland
*
It is illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to consume alcohol .
* Parents , guardians , and others taking care of people under 18 shall prohibit underage drinking , or risk administrative fines of 10000 to 50000 new Taiwan dollars when the situations are serious .
* One shall not supply alcohol to anyone under the age of 18 .
A violator shall be administratively fined 3000 to 15000 New Taiwan Dollars .
colspan=2
The legal age for drinking alcohol is 18 in Abu Dhabi ( although a Ministry of Tourism by - law allows hotels to serve alcohol only to those over 21 ) , and 21 in Dubai and the Northern Emirates ( except Sharjah , where drinking alcohol is illegal ) .
It is a punishable offence to drink , or to be under the influence of alcohol , in public .
Exception is in Aden Region where it 's legal for 21 and up EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Most countries within Europe have set 18 as the minimum age to purchase alcohol .
Although Austria , Belgium , Cyprus , Denmark , Germany , Gibraltar , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Malta , Serbia and Switzerland ( except Ticino ) maintain a minimum purchase age below 18 years permitting minors either full or limited access to alcohol .
In 2005 , 2007 and recently in 2015 the European Union has failed to enact a law forcing member states to raise their purchase age to 18 years .
But in the past years several European countries have raised their drinking / purchase age or enacted laws restricting the access to alcohol for minors :
*
In 2002 the autonomous communities Madrid , Valencia and Catalonia raised their minimum purchase age to 18 years .
Previous to 2002 Valencia and Madrid had a minimum purchase age of 16 years , and in Catalonia minors aged 16 or 17 could purchase alcohol up to 23 % ABV on and off premises .
*
In 2004 Denmark raised its off premises purchase age from 15 to 16 years .
*
In November 2005 Switzerland passed its " Food and Commodities Regulation " ( German : Lebensmittel- und Gebrauchsgegenständeverordnung ) , introducing a ban on alcohol sales to anyone under the age of 16 , even though " Alcohol Law " ( German : Alkoholgesetz ) passed in 1980 already required a minimum age of 18 years for the retail sale of distilled spirits .
Therefore , it is illegal to sell fermented alcohol ( e.g. beer , wine , sparkling wine or cider ) to anyone under the age of 16 , and any distilled alcoholic beverages to anyone under the age of 18 years .
Further the canton of Ticino introduced a cantonal law in 1989 banning all alcohol sales to anyone under the age of 18 years .
*
In 2006 the autonomous community Castile and León raised its minimum purchase age from 16 to 18 years .
*
In late 2006 , Gibraltar lawmakers passed the " Children and Young Persons ( Alcohol , Tobacco and Gaming ) Act 2006 " , which raised the minimum purchase age from 16 to 18 years .
But the new law made an exception : minors aged 16 or 17 can purchase and consume on premises beer , wine or cider under 15 % ABV or pre - packed containers of an alcoholic strength not exceeding 5.5 % ABV ( e.g. alcopops ) .
*
In 2009 France raised its minimum purchase age to 18 years , and fines were increased for selling or serving alcohol to a minor ( up to 7,500 € ) .
Previous to 2009 the minimum age to purchase any alcohol from off licensed premises was 16 years .
In order to purchase alcohol on premises the minimum age was 16 years for low alcoholic beverages such as wine , beer , cider , perry , mead , crème de cassis and juices from fermented fruits or vegetables that contain 1.2 to 3 ° alcohol , natural sweet wines from controlled cultivation – to purchase or be served stronger alcoholic drinks one had to be 18 years of age .
*
In October 2009 , the government of Malta passed a new law raising its drinking and purchase age from 16 to 17 years .
*
In 2010 the autonomous community of Galicia raised its minimum purchase age from 16 to 18 years .
*
In 2011 Denmark passed a new law , raising the minimum age for off - premises sale of alcohol
> 16.5 %
ABV to 18 years of age .
The age to purchase alcohol < 16.5 % ABV remaines at 16 .
* Italy raised its minimum purchase age from 16 to 18 in 2012 .
Previously Italy did not have a purchase age for off - premises sales , and the minimum age of 16 years for on premises sales was barely enforced .
*
In 2013 the government of Portugal restricted alcohol sales to young people : distilled spirits can not be sold to anyone under the age of 18 , and other alcohol ( e.g. beer , wine or cider ) ca n't be sold to anyone under the age of 16 .
Previously the minimum age for all kinds of alcoholic beverages was 16 years .
* As of 1 January 2014 , the minimum legal purchase and consumption age was raised from 16 to 18 in the Netherlands .
Previously young people over the age of 16 could purchase and consume alcohol < 15 % ABV , and adults aged 18 and over could purchase alcohol over 15 % ABV .
* As of March 2015 , the autonomous community of Asturias raised its drinking age from 16 to 18 years .
Asturias was Spain 's last community with a drinking age of 16 years .
The new law brings the drinking age into line with the rest of Spain .
* As of 1 January 2018 , Lithuania raised its minimum drinking age from 18 to 20 years .
De jure
*
In order to buy alcohol above 1.2 % and below 16.5 % ABV in stores , one must be 16 years of age .
*
In order to buy alcohol above 16.5 % ABV in stores , one must be 18 years of age .
By tradition , youths are privately allowed to drink alcohol after their confirmation .
If a shop or bar fails to ask for an ID card and is identified having sold alcohol to an underage , it is subject to fine .
A national ID card , obtained in the local town hall , can serve as age verification .
This card is rarely used though since a passport or drivers license is more commonly used .
Both the legal drinking and purchasing age in the Faroe Islands is 18 .
Police may search minors in public places and confiscate or destroy any alcoholic beverages in their possession .
Incidents are reported to the legal guardian and social authorities , who may intervene with child welfare procedures .
In addition , those aged 15 or above are subject to a fine .
In private , offering alcohol to a minor is considered a criminal offence if it results in drunkenness and the act can be deemed reprehensible as a whole , considering the minor 's age , degree of maturity and other circumstances .
It is illegal to sell , serve or supply fermented alcoholic beverages ( beer , wine , cider and sparkling wine ) to anyone under 16 years of age .
However this age limit drops down to 14 if a minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian .
It is generally illegal to serve , sell or supply any beverage containing spirits and aliments containing spirits above negligible amounts , to anyone under the age of 18 years .
Violation of the " Protection of Young Persons Act " can be fined up to € 50.000 .
*
The alcoholic beverage is beer , wine or cider below 15 % ABV , or *
The alcoholic beverage is served in a bottle , or a pre - packaged container below 5.5 % ABV .
colspan=2 Alcohol with more than 60 % ABVAsturias was the last autonomous community in Spain where the drinking age was increased to 18 ( previously 16 ) on 1 May 2015 .
None
None 18 18 20 , It is legal for anyone at any age to drink , but it is illegal to supply anyone under the age of 20 , any beverage containing more than 3.5%ABV , and supply anyone under the age of 18 beer containing more than 2.25%ABV , except in a venue licensed to sell alcohol , who are allowed to sell alcohol to anyone over 18 .
It is also legal to serve an underage person alcohol in a private place , provided it 's a limited amount and done in moderation .
The reason for lower limit in bars than in Systembolaget shops is that bartenders have a legal responsibility for how drunk a guest gets .
*
It is illegal to sell , serve , offer or consume alcoholic beverages on licensed premises under the age of 18 , other than the following two exceptions :
* Minors aged 16 or 17 may consume wine , beer or cider on licensed premises when ordered with a meal , and accompanied by an adult .
*
It is legal to sell liqueur confectionery to someone of any age .
*
It is illegal to permit minors under the age of 5 to consume alcoholic beverages unless under medical supervision or in an emergency .
* Persons over 17 are entitled to their own duty free allowance , which includes alcohol .
*
It is illegal to sell , serve , offer or consume alcoholic beverages in public under the age of 18 .
*
It is illegal to sell liqueur confectionery to anyone under 18 , however , consumption is permitted .
* Persons 18 and over are entitled to their own duty free allowance , which includes alcohol .
It is illegal to sell , serve , offer or consume alcoholic beverages in public under the age of 18 .
Under the BBPA 's Challenge 21 and Challenge 25 schemes , customers attempting to buy alcoholic beverages are asked to prove their age if in the retailer 's opinion they look under 21 ( or optionally 25 ) even though the law states they must be a minimum of 18 .
Many supermarket and off - licence chains display Challenge 21 ( or Challenge 25 ) notices stating that they will not serve persons who look under 21 ( or 25 ) without ID .
OCEANIA
De jure
SEE ALSO * Amethyst Initiative
* Alcohol consumption by youth in the United States * National Minimum Drinking Age Act * Alcoholism * National Youth Rights Association
* Shoulder tap ( alcohol )
* The Century Council
* Choose Responsibility
* Mature minor doctrine
* Youth * Youth suffrage
* Youth rights
* Age of candidacy * Legal drinking age controversy
*
Smoking age
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * IARD International Alliance for Responsible Drinking