TIME IN NEW ZEALAND !
Time zoneStandard
TimeDaylight Time New Zealand Chatham Islands colspan="3"The
current time in New Zealand ( main islands ) is : colspan="3"The
current time in the Chatham Islands is : colspan="3 " Time in New Zealand , by law , is divided into two standard time zones .
The main islands use New Zealand Standard Time ( NZST ) , 12 hours in advance of Coordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) / military M ( Mike ) , while the outlying Chatham Islands use Chatham Standard Time ( CHAST ) , 12 hours 45 minutes in advance of UTC / military M^ ( Mike - Three ) .
During summer months — from the last Sunday in September until the first Sunday in April — daylight saving time is observed and clocks are advanced one hour .
New Zealand Daylight Time ( NZDT ) is 13 hours ahead of UTC , and Chatham Daylight Time ( CHADT ) 13 hours 45 minutes ahead .
New Zealand dependencies , the Cook Islands , Niue and Tokelau , use several different times zones at their own discretion .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On 2 November 1868 , New Zealand officially adopted a standard time to be observed nationally , and was the first country to do so , around fifteen years before any other .
It was based on longitude 172 ° 30′ East of Greenwich , hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time ( GMT ) .
This standard was known as New Zealand Mean Time ( NZMT ) .
In 1941 , during the Second World War , clocks were advanced half an hour , making New Zealand 12 hours ahead of GMT .
This change was made permanent from 1946 by the Standard Time Act 1945 , at which the time at the 180 ° E meridian was made the basis for New Zealand Time .
NZST remained half an hour ahead of NZMT , and the Chatham Islands 45 minutes ahead of NZST .
In the late 1940s the atomic clock was developed and several laboratories began atomic time scales .
A new time scale known as Coordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) was adopted internationally in 1972 .
This was based on the readings of atomic clocks , updated periodically in accordance with time variations in the Earth 's rotation by the addition or deletion of seconds ( called leap seconds ) .
The Time Act 1974 defines New Zealand Standard Time as 12 hours in advance of UTC .
In 2011 , the New Zealand dependency of Tokelau moved its time zone forward by 24 hours , by skipping 30 December .
DAYLIGHT SAVING TIME ( DST )
Section::::Daylight saving time ( DST ) .
Starting in 1909 , the Honourable Sir Thomas Kay Sidey annually put forward a bill to advance the clocks an hour from September to the following March and The Summer Time Act 1927
succeeded : first Sunday in November to the first Sunday in March .
This proved unpopular so The Summer Time Act 1928 revised this to a half - hour shift from 14 October 1928 ( second Sunday ) to 17 March 1929 ( third Sunday ) , then The Summer Time Act 1929 fixed this half - hour shift to run from the second Sunday in October to the third Sunday in March .
In 1933 , the period was extended from the first Sunday in September to the last Sunday in April .
This continued until the Second World War , when emergency regulations in 1941 extended daylight saving to cover the whole year with annual re - applications until the Standard Time Act of 1945 made the abandonment of NZMT permanent in 1946 , so that 180 ° becomes the base longitude and what was called NZ Summer Time ( NZST ) became NZ Standard Time .
The Time Act 1974 empowered the Governor - General to declare by Order in Council a period when daylight saving time is to be observed .
This was a one - hour shift ( on top of the earlier half hour shift ) from the first Sunday in November to the last Sunday in February , promptly changed the next year by The New Zealand Time Order 1975 which fixed the period of observance from the last Sunday in October to the first Sunday in March .
In 1985 a comprehensive survey was undertaken by the Department of Internal Affairs .
Public attitudes towards NZDT ( New Zealand Daylight Time ) and its effects on work , recreation and particular groups of people in society were surveyed .
The survey indicated that 76.2 % of the population wanted NZDT either continued or extended .
The survey also concluded that opinion on the topic differed little between sexes , and that support for NZDT was generally higher in urban centres .
Daylight saving was famously opposed in the small Northland dairy farming community of Ararua , which refused to adjust its clocks for some years .
Support for shortening or abolishing NZDT was always in the minority in the areas surveyed .
As a consequence of the survey and further feedback from the public , in 1988 the Minister of Internal Affairs arranged for a trial period of extended NZDT to be held from the second Sunday in October 1989 to the third Sunday in March 1990 .
The Minister invited the public to write to him with their views on the five - week extension .
The Daylight Time Order 1990 declared that NZDT would run from 2 am NZST on the first Sunday in October to 3 am NZDT on the third Sunday in March .
On 30 April 2007
the government announced that it had extended the daylight saving period from 24 to 27 weeks .
From September 2007 , daylight saving is now observed from the last Sunday in September until the first Sunday in April .
From 30 April 2007 , DST begins at 02:00 NZST on the last Sunday in September each year , and ends at 03:00 NZDT ( or 02:00 NZST as defined in the Time Act 1974 ) on the first Sunday in April .
New Zealand time , including DST , is used by several Antarctic bases that are supplied from New Zealand .
This results in the oddity that the Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station sets its clocks an hour further ahead during the southern summer , when the sun is constantly above the horizon , than in the southern winter , when the sun is constantly below the horizon .
The extreme geographic position of the base means that no possible adjustment of the daily activity cycle can have any effect on the amount of sunlight received during those activities .
However , the arrangement presumably makes real time communications with New Zealand more practical , particularly in dealing with offices .
The New Zealand dependencies of Cook Islands , Tokelau and Niue do not maintain DST .
Two of them are the other side of the International Date Line and have 22–24 hours time difference to New Zealand .
STANDARDS Section::::Standards .
New Zealand standard time is maintained by the Measurement Standards Laboratory ( MSL ) , part of New Zealand Government .
New Zealand standard time is based on Co - ordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) .
UTC ( MSL ) is kept within 200 nanoseconds of the international atomic time scale maintained by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in Paris .
It is disseminated by various means , including time pips broadcast on Radio New Zealand , speaking clock and Network Time Protocol .
DEPENDENCIES AND ASSOCIATED STATES Section::::Dependencies and associated states . !
Time zoneStandard
TimeDaylight Time
Tokelaucolspan=2 Cook Islandscolspan=2 Niuecolspan=2
Ross Dependency
There are dependencies of New Zealand in the Pacific Ocean , in three different time zones , two of them on the other side of the International Date Line :
* The Cook Islands are in the UTC−10:00 time zone /Military
W ( Whiskey ) and do not observe daylight saving time .
Clocks in the Cook Islands are 22 or 23 hours behind New Zealand :
at noon on Thursday in New Zealand , it is 1 pm or 2 pm on Wednesday in the Cook Islands .
*
Niue is in the UTC−11:00 time zone /Military
X ( X - ray ) and does not observe daylight saving time .
Clocks in Niue are 23 or 24 hours behind New Zealand :
at noon on Thursday in New Zealand , it is noon or 1 pm on Wednesday in Niue .
* Tokelau is in the UTC+13:00 time zone /Military
M′ ( Mike Prime ) and does not observe daylight saving time .
Clocks in Tokelau are set to the same time as or 1 hour ahead of New Zealand : at noon on Thursday in New Zealand , it is noon or 1 pm on Thursday in Tokelau .
The Ross Dependency , McMurdo Station and the Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica maintain NZST / NZDT .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Measurement Standards Laboratory * Daylight Saving page from The Department of Internal Affairs .
* Timekeeping in Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand