MUTUAL OF OMAHA Mutual of Omaha is a privately held Fortune 500 mutual insurance and financial services company based in Omaha , Nebraska .
Founded in 1909 as Mutual Benefit Health & Accident Association , Mutual of Omaha is a multi - line organization providing insurance , banking , and financial products for individuals , businesses and groups throughout the United States .
The company provides a variety of health insurance options and product services , including Medicare Supplement , life insurance , long - term care coverage and annuities , as well as group coverage including life , disability and 401(k ) .
SUBSIDIARIES
Section::::Subsidiaries .
Mutual of Omaha has multiple subsidiaries including :
UNITED OF OMAHA LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY Section::::United of Omaha Life Insurance Company .
Founded in 1926 , this company provides life insurance , pension and annuity products for groups and individuals .
UNITED WORLD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY Section::::United World Life Insurance Company .
Through direct marketing and independent agent networks , this company has offered health and accident coverage and specialty life plans since 1983 .
MUTUAL OF OMAHA INVESTOR SERVICES , INC .
Section::::Mutual of Omaha Investor Services ,
Inc ..
Mutual funds are offered to individuals through the company 's agents and Retirement Plans brokers .
OMAHA FINANCIAL HOLDINGS , INC . Section::::Omaha Financial Holdings , Inc .. Omaha Financial Holdings ,
Inc. ( OFHI ) is a holding company for Mutual of Omaha 's banking operation .
EAST CAMPUS REALTY , LLC Section::::East Campus Realty , LLC .
East Campus Realty , LLC was established to develop Midtown Crossing at Turner Park , which is directly to the east of Mutual of Omaha 's headquarters .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Mutual of Omaha was founded in 1909 by a medical student at Omaha 's Creighton University and his wife , Dr. C.C. and Mabel Criss .
It has grown into a Fortune 500 company offering insurance and financial solutions for individuals , businesses and groups throughout the United States .
In 1927 , V.J. Skutt joined their team and was named president in 1949 .
With a license to sell insurance in all 48 states , an abbreviated name and distinctive Native American symbol , the company gained nationwide prominence in the 1950s .
In 1963 , the company began sponsoring Mutual of Omaha 's Wild Kingdom , a wildlife program hosted by Marlin Perkins and Jim Fowler that remained on television for more than 20 years .
The company was one of the first companies to provide disability insurance to non - professional workers , and in 1966 was among the first companies to provide supplementary coverage for people enrolled in Medicare .
* March 5 , 1909 – Mutual Benefit Health and Accident Association filed articles of incorporation with the Nebraska Insurance Department .
* 1920 – Premium income exceeded $ 1 million for the year .
* 1924 – Mutual of Omaha ranked 8th in comparison to other insurance companies * 1926 – The subsidiary , United Benefit Life Insurance Company , was founded * 1941 –
The company founded its Group Insurance department * 1950 – Mutual Benefit Health & Accident Association changed its name to Mutual of Omaha Insurance Company * January 6 , 1963 – Mutual of Omaha 's Wild Kingdom premiered on network television .
The original show was hosted by hosts Marlin Perkins , Jim Fowler , and Peter Gros , and ran until 1988 .
* 1981 – United Benefit Life Insurance Company became United of Omaha * 2001
– The company revitalized its brand and began sponsoring USA Swimming * 2002 – A new Wild Kingdom series premiered on Animal Planet * 2005 – Daniel P. Neary is named Chairman and Chief Executive Officer * 2007 –
Omaha Financial Holdings , Inc. was created as the parent company of Mutual of Omaha 's banking initiatives * 2009 – Mutual of Omaha celebrates their 100-year anniversary .
* 2015 – James T. Blackledge is named Chief Executive Officer and elected to the board .
* 2016 – The Company reaches $ 3 billion in policyholder surplus * 2018 - James T. Blackledge replaces Dan Neary as Chairman of the Board .
As of 2017 , Mutual of Omaha holds the 367th rank on Fortune 500 's top companies .
The current CEO is James T. Blackledge .
The company and its affiliates have more than 5,000 employees plus a network of sales advisors .
The Home Office remains in Omaha , NE , with satellite or sales offices in most states .
The Company holds an A+ rating from A.M. Best and AA- rating from Standard & Poor 's .
COMPANY GOVERNANCE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER Section::::Company Governance .
Section::::Chief Executive Officer . 1964–1983 V.J. Skutt CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD Section::::Chairman of the Board . 1949–1953
Dr. C.C. Criss RECOGNITION * 2016 - Mutual of Omaha received an A+ rating from A.M. Best Company , Inc. for overall financial strength and ability to meet policy holder - related obligations .
* 2017 - Mutual of Omaha was ranked 5th of 18 large life insurance companies by NerdWallet .
EXTERNAL SPONSORSHIPS Section::::External Sponsorships .
Wild Kingdom -
In 1963 , Mutual of Omaha introduced the wildlife television program , Mutual of Omaha 's Wild Kingdom .
The original show ran from 1963 to 1988 , and was revitalized in 2002 with a new series on Animal Planet .
The program currently is shown via webisodes starring with the program 's first female host , wildlife expert Stephanie Arne .
Golf - Mutual of Omaha sponsors 7 PGA Tour golfers and 2 LPGA Tour golfers , including Russell Knox , Henrik Stenson , Padraig Harrington , Paula Creamer , Jessica Korda , Bud Cauley , Brandon Hagy , Robby Shelton and David Leadbetter .
SEE ALSO * Midtown Omaha * Economy of Omaha , Nebraska
*
Mutual of Omaha Building
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official Mutual of Omaha company website *
Mutual of Omaha Bank website
* Mutual of Omaha 's Wild Kingdom website