FIST OF FURY Fist of Fury ( also known as The Chinese Connection ) is a 1972 Hong Kong martial arts film directed by Lo Wei , starring Bruce Lee in his second major role after The Big Boss ( 1971 ) .
Lee plays Chen Zhen , a student of Huo Yuanjia , who fights to defend the honor of the Chinese in the face of foreign aggression , and to bring to justice those responsible for his master 's death .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In early 20th century Shanghai , Chen Zhen returns to Jingwu School to marry his fiancée .
However , tragic news awaits him : his master Huo Yuanjia has died , apparently from illness .
Chen is deeply saddened and traumatised by the sudden demise of his teacher .
During the funeral , people from a Japanese dojo in Hongkou District arrive to taunt the Jingwu students .
Wu En , translator and advisor for the Japanese dojo 's grandmaster Hiroshi Suzuki - the villain of the film , taunts Chen by slapping him on the cheek several times , and dares him to fight one of Suzuki 's protégés .
They present a sign to Jingwu School , bearing the words " Sick Man of East Asia " , seemingly to insult Huo Yuanjia , describing the Chinese as " weaklings " in comparison to the Japanese .
The protégé taunts the Jingwu students to fight him and promises , " I 'll eat those words if any Chinese here dare to fight and defeat me " .
Shortly afterwards , Chen Zhen goes to the Hongkou dojo alone to return the " gift " ( the sign ) .
He faces hostility from the Japanese students and they engage in a fight .
Chen Zhen defeats all of them , including their sensei , single - handedly and effortlessly , using a nunchaku as a weapon during the fight .
He smashes the glass on the sign and makes the students who taunted him earlier chew up the paper bearing the derogatory words , so as to make them literally " eat their words " .
Later , Chen takes a stroll to a park .
A Sikh guard refuses him entry , due to a posted sign that forbids dogs and Chinese in the park .
After the guard allows a foreigner to bring her pet dog into the park , a Japanese man approaches Chen and tells him that if he behaves like a dog , he will be allowed to go in .
Chen beats up the man and his friends in anger .
After the fight , Chen breaks the sign .
The guard blows his whistle to alert the police , but the citizens who watched the whole fight help Chen to escape the park .
The Japanese students and their master retaliate by attacking Jingwu School on Suzuki 's orders .
After causing severe damage , the Japanese students leave .
Wu , accompanying the Japanese students , warns Jingwu School to hand over Chen .
Chen returns and realises that he has caused big trouble .
His fellow students are reluctant to hand him over to the Japanese , so they make plans to help him escape from Shanghai .
That night , Chen discovers that Master Huo had all along been poisoned by Tian , the cook .
Chen then sees Tian and Feng Guishi , the caretaker , talking .
Chen kills Tian , followed by Feng while trying to determine why they killed Master Huo .
Chen hangs Tian and Feng 's bodies from a lamp post .
Chen 's fiancée , Yuan Li'er , finds him hiding near Huo 's grave , and they share a passionate moment together .
Meanwhile , Suzuki forces the local police inspector , Inspector Lo , to arrest Chen , but he eludes them .
Then , while Suzuki is entertaining his visiting friend Petrov , Chen kills Wu and hangs his body from the lamp post as well .
The angry Suzuki heads to the Japanese Consulate and reports Chen , then sends his men to Jingwu School to kill everyone inside .
That same night , Chen barges into the dojo to take his revenge , killing the students ' master , Yoshida , Petrov , and that villain .
Chen returns to Jingwu School and finds most from Jingwu School and the Hongkou dojo dead .
However , a few Jingwu students - among them Yuan , Fan Junxia ( the eldest student at Jingwu ) , and Xu - remain , as they had also been searching for Chen at the grave site , acting on a tip from Yuan .
Inspector Lo arrives at Jingwu to arrest Chen , who agrees to surrender himself to Lo to protect his master 's legacy .
Lo tells Chen that he can always trust him since he is Chinese .
As they exit the school , Chen faces a line of armed Japanese soldiers and officials at the outer gate , all pointing their weapons at him .
Furious , Chen charges the line and makes a flying kick as gunshots sound .
CAST
* Bruce Lee as Chen Zhen * Nora Miao as Yuan Li'er
( Yuan Le - erh ) , Chen Zhen 's fiancée .
The character 's name is never mentioned in the film .
* Riki Hashimoto as Hiroshi Suzuki , the master of the Hongkou dojo
* Robert Baker as Petrov , a Russian gang boss and Suzuki 's friend
* Tien Feng as Fan Junxia
( Fan Chun - hsia ) , the eldest student in Jing Wu School
* Paul Wei as Wu En , Suzuki 's translator * Fung Ngai as Yoshida , the head instructor in the Hongkou dojo
* Lo Wei as Inspector Lo , the police inspector
* Wong Chung - shun as Tian , the cook in Jing Wu School
* Han Ying - chieh as Feng Guishi
( Feng Kwai - sher ) , the caretaker in Jing Wu School
* James Tien as Fan Jiaqi ( Fan Chia - chi ) ,
a Jing Wu student
* Maria Yi as Yen , a female Jing Wu student * Lee Kwan as Xu , a Jing Wu student * Jackie Chan as a Jing Wu Student ( Special Appearance ) Section::::Cast .
Robert Baker was a student and friend of Bruce Lee 's and was recommended for the role by Lee .
His voice was dubbed in the Cantonese and Mandarin versions by Lee as well .
TITLE Section::::Title .
Fist of Fury was accidentally released in the U.S. under the title The Chinese Connection .
That title was a means of tapping the popularity of another film , The French Connection ( starring Gene Hackman ) , released in the U.S. in 1971 .
That title was intended to be used for the U.S. release of another Bruce Lee film , The Big Boss , which also involved drug smuggling .
However , the U.S. titles for Fist of Fury and The Big Boss were accidentally switched , resulting in Fist of Fury being released in the U.S. under the title The Chinese Connection until 2005 , while The Big Boss was released as Fists of Fury .
Recent television screenings and the current official DVD release ( by 20th Century Fox , originally available in The Bruce Lee Ultimate Collection box set ) in the U.S. have restored the original titles of all the films starring Bruce Lee .
Fist of Fury is now officially known as Fist of Fury in the U.S ..
The current DVD version also has a subtitle that says " A.K.A.
The Chinese Connection " when the Fist of Fury title appears on screen , as the source material is the Fortune Star digital remasters . !
Original Title ! !
Year ! !
Mistaken Release Title ( A.K.A. ) ! !
Intended Release
Title BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Fist of Fury grossed HK$4,431,423 in its Hong Kong release , beating the previous box office record set by Lee 's The Big Boss in the previous year .
Its Hong Kong gross was equivalent to .
In the United States and Canada , the film earned in box office rentals .
Despite the film having Japanese antagonists , the film was a success when it released in Japan on 20 July 1974 , becoming the year 's seventh highest - grossing film with ( ) in distribution income .
In France , it became the 12th highest - grossing film of 1974 ( below two other Lee films in the top ten , Enter the Dragon and Way of the Dragon ) , with 3,013,676 box office admissions .
At an average ticket price of 2200/180 round 2F , it grossed approximately millionF ( ) in France .
Combined , the film grossed a total worldwide box office revenue of approximately , equivalent to about adjusted for inflation in 2017 .
DUBBING
Section::::Dubbing .
Sync sound was not widely used in Hong Kong cinema for a long time
so the voices ( even on the original Cantonese track ) for the film were dubbed .
The voice of the Russian fighter Petrov on the original Mandarin track was dubbed by Bruce Lee , with added reverb .
This film marks one of the few times that a DVD has an alternative new commentary .
Media Asia UK distributor Hong Kong Legends has released this film as a " Special Collector 's Edition " and a " Platinum Edition " .
Bey Logan recorded two alternative commentaries for both releases .
The usual process with re - releases on DVD is that the commentary is passed on to the next release .
Logan decided to re - record his second commentary as he wanted to give it a new light , being an avid fan of this film .
The re - dubbed theme song was played by Mike Remedios .
Bey Logan had previously done a commentary track for the Media Asia Megastar DVD release , which is almost word for word the same as the commentary he did for Hong Kong Legends ' years later .
Donnie Yen did the Cantonese language commentary on the same ' Megastar ' DVD . SEQUELS AND REMAKES Section::::Sequels and remakes .
The film spawned three sequels : New Fist of Fury ( 1976 ) , starring Jackie Chan , followed by Fist of Fury II ( 1977 ) and Fist of Fury III ( 1979 ) .
The film also spawned a remake , Fist of Legend ( 1994 ) , starring Jet Li .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released in 1972 in Hong Kong by Golden Harvest , and first released in the United States on 7 November 1972 in New York before Lee 's first major film , The Big Boss , was released there .
The film was originally distributed in the U.S. by National General Pictures beginning in 1973 , shortly before the release of Enter the Dragon .
Columbia Pictures acquired the U.S. distribution rights to the film , after the demise of National General Pictures , in 1980 and re - released it , along with The Big Boss , as a studio - sanctioned double feature with the tagline " What 's better than a Bruce Lee movie ?
Two Bruce Lee Movies ! "
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Fist of Fury at the Hong Kong Movie DataBase