NEWYORK – PRESBYTERIAN HOSPITAL
The NewYork – Presbyterian Hospital is a nonprofit university hospital in New York City affiliated with two Ivy League medical schools : Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons and Weill Cornell Medical College .
It is composed of two distinct medical centers , Columbia University Medical Center and Weill Cornell Medical Center .
, the hospital is ranked as the 8th best hospital in the United States and 1st in the New York City metropolitan area by U.S. News & World Report .
The hospital has 2,478 beds in total , and is one of the largest hospitals in the United States .
New York – Presbyterian Hospital is among the largest hospitals and largest private employers in New York City , and one of the world 's busiest .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The New York Hospital was founded in 1771 by Edinburgh graduate Samuel Bard .
It received a Royal Charter granted by King George III of Great Britain and became associated with Weill Cornell Medical College upon the latter institution 's founding in 1898 .
It is the third oldest hospital in the United States , after NYC Health + Hospitals / Bellevue in New York
( 1736 ) and Pennsylvania Hospital ( 1751 ) .
A 1927 endowment of more than $ 20 million by Payne Whitney expanded the hospital significantly and the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic is named in his honor .
Other prominent donors have included Edward S. Harkness and Anna Harkness , Howard Hughes , William Randolph Hearst , Harry and Leona Helmsley , Maurice R. Greenberg , and the Baker , Whitney , Lasdon , and Payson families .
The Presbyterian Hospital was founded in 1868 by James Lenox , a New York philanthropist and was associated with Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons .
In 1925 the Sloane Hospital for Women , a leader in obstetrics and gynecology that had been founded in 1886 , was incorporated .
New York Hospital was the subject of a lawsuit from the family of Libby Zion , a young woman admitted in 1984 who died while under the care of overworked hospital residents .
An investigation by the New York state Health Commissioner , the Bell Commission , led to restrictions on the number of hours residents could work and required oversight of their care by accredited physicians ( this regulation is also known as the Libby Zion law ) .
These reforms have since been adopted nationwide .
On January 1 , 1998 , The New York Hospital announced its merger with The Presbyterian Hospital to create New York – Presbyterian Hospital .
New York – Presbyterian Hospital , chartered as The New York and Presbyterian Hospital by the State of New York in 1996 , was formed in 1998 with the merger of two large , previously independent hospitals , the New York Hospital and Presbyterian Hospital .
In the 2010s , the hospital began to supplement its physical presence with remote and online services .
A tele - psychiatry service allows patients to receive follow - up care remotely , a CAT - equipped ambulance allows stroke care to take place outside the hospital , and a remote second opinion program uses Grand Rounds technology .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The NYP system includes a variety of outlying hospitals that had previously been affiliates of NYH or Presbyterian ; these hospitals stretch throughout the five boroughs , Westchester County , Long Island and New Jersey .
The hospital , along with Weill Cornell Medical College and Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons , runs the NewYork - Presbyterian Healthcare System , a network of independent , cooperating , acute - care and community hospitals , continuum - of - care facilities , home - health agencies , ambulatory sites , and specialty institutes in the New York metropolitan area .
The two medical schools remain essentially autonomous , though there is increasing cooperation and coordination of clinical , research , and residency training programs .
The hospitals have merged administrations , with Herb Pardes , MD , leading the combined hospitals from 2001 to 2011 .
Steven Corwin , MD is now the Hospital system CEO .
The institution 's facilities are : * NewYork - Presbyterian / Columbia University Irving Medical Center * NewYork - Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center * NewYork - Presbyterian / Allen Hospital *
NewYork - Presbyterian / Morgan Stanley Children 's Hospital
* NewYork - Presbyterian / Westchester Division , formerly the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic , and before that Bloomingdale Insane Asylum
* NewYork - Presbyterian /
Lower Manhattan Hospital
* NewYork - Presbyterian / Lawrence Hospital
* NewYork - Presbyterian / Hudson Valley Hospital
* NewYork - Presbyterian / New York Hospital Queens * NewYork - Presbyterian / New York Methodist Hospital AWARDS AND RECOGNITION Section::::Awards and recognition .
As of 2018 , the U.S. News and World Report rankings place NYPH overall as the sixth - best hospital in the United States .
Every specialty was ranked in the top 50 by US News , and the following were ranked in the top 10 of hospitals around the country :
neurology and neurosurgery ( 3 ) ; gastroenterology and gastrointestinal surgery ( 14 ) ; cardiology and heart surgery ( 3 ) ; diabetes and endocrinology ( 5 ) ; nephrology ( 4 ) ; geriatrics ( 7 ) ; pulmonology ( 8) ; rheumatology ( 2 ) ; urology ( 6 ) ; and psychiatry ( 3 ) . NEW YORK – PRESBYTERIAN EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES Section::::New York – Presbyterian Emergency Medical Services . New York – Presbyterian Emergency Medical Services ( NYP - EMS ) is a hospital - based ambulance service that has operated since 1981 .
NYP - EMS also operates critical care transport ambulances throughout the New York City Metropolitan Area .
The service is licensed to operate in the 5 counties of New York City , Westchester , Putnam , and Dutchess counties in New York , and in the state of New Jersey for Basic Life Support and Specialty Care Transport .
In addition to providing emergency and non - emergency ambulance services , either through the New York City 911 system or through the NYP - EMS Communications Center at Weill Cornell Medical Center , NYP - EMS provides stand - by EMS services for events throughout the New York City area , including the Avon Walk for Breast Cancer and the NYC Triathlon .
NYP - EMS is also a New York State Department of Health - approved training center for EMT and Paramedic programs , several of which are approved for college - level credit by the New York State Department of Education .
NYP - EMS operates one of the largest American Heart Association Emergency Cardiac Care training centers in New York .
NYP - EMS also maintains a Special Operations team trained in hazardous materials decontamination and technical rescue .
This team , accompanied by several Weill Cornell Physicians , provided rescue and relief support on the Gulf Coast of Mississippi in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 .
Most recently , the team decontaminated 28 patients after the 2007 New York City steam explosion in Midtown Manhattan on July 18 , 2007 .
FACILITIES ALLEN HOSPITAL Section::::Facilities .
Section::::Allen Hospital .
The Allen Hospital is located at 5141 Broadway and West 220th Street in northernmost part of Inwood , Manhattan .
The General Surgery Group of The Allen Hospital specialize in the treatment of hernias and gallbladder diseases .
The Hospitalist group and Internal Medicine and Family Medicine residents care for the adult medical patients .
There is an active Labor and Delivery Department .
It also has the Mila Conanan Memorial Chapel , named after Mila P. Conanan , who had been on the medical center staff for 20 years and the operating rooms director at the Allen Pavilion for three years before her death in 1990 .
MORGAN STANLEY
CHILDREN 'S HOSPITAL
Section::::Morgan Stanley Children 's Hospital .
Located on 3959 Broadway ( 165th Street and Broadway ) , New York City , New York - Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children 's Hospital is a pediatric hospital in New York – Presbyterian Hospital .
They are especially known for their expertise in pediatric heart surgery .
It was listed on the 2009 U.S.News & World Report " America 's Best Children 's Hospitals " " Honor Roll " and one of only 10 children 's hospitals in the nation to be ranked in all 10 clinical specialties .
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
IRVING MEDICAL CENTER Section::::Columbia University Irving Medical Center .
The New York – Presbyterian Hospital / Columbia University Irving Medical Center is located on West 168th Street in the Washington Heights neighborhood of New York City .
It contains an Emergency Room , an eye institute , a chapel , a garden , and more .
It is situated on a campus in the Washington Heights community of Manhattan and comprising roughly half of Columbia University 's nearly $ 3 billion annual budget , it provides leadership in scientific research , medical education , and more .
New York Presbyterian Hospital and Columbia University Medical Center are well known for their strong affiliation with the Neurological Institute of New York , which houses the departments of Neurology and Neurological Surgery as well as numerous research laboratories .
WEILL CORNELL MEDICAL CENTER Section::::Weill Cornell Medical Center .
Cornell Medical College was founded in 1898 , and has been affiliated with what is now New York – Presbyterian Hospital since 1927 .
The Medical College is divided into 20 academic departments .
It is among the top - ranked clinical and medical research centers in the United States of America , although the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services ' Medicare program adjudged its rate of admission for heart failure patients to be worse than the national rate .
Also housed here is the New York - Presbyterian Phyllis and David Komansky Center for Children 's Health .
Located at 525 East 68th Street on the Upper East Side in Manhattan ( E.68th and York Avenue ) , New York City , the Komansky Center for Children 's Health is a full - service pediatric " hospital within a hospital .
"
The Komansky Center was listed on the 2009 U.S.News & World Report " America 's Best Children 's Hospitals " " Honor Roll " and one of only 10 children 's hospitals in the nation to be ranked in all 10 clinical specialties .
In August 2011 , Becker 's Hospital Review listed the New York - Presbyterian Hospital/ Weill Cornell Medical Center as number 4 of the 100 Top Grossing Hospitals in America with $ 7.52 billion in gross revenue .
LOWER MANHATTAN HOSPITAL Section::::Lower Manhattan Hospital .
On July 1 , 2013 , NYP announced its merger with the former New York Downtown Hospital to form the Lower Manhattan Hospital ( LMH ) campus of the New York – Presbyterian Hospital .
LMH is one of the few hospitals in Lower Manhattan south of Greenwich Village .
The campus operates 170 beds and offers a full range of inpatient and outpatient services .
LMH serves the diverse neighborhoods of Wall Street , Battery Park City , Chinatown , SoHo , TriBeCa , Little Italy , and the Lower East Side , and is the closest acute care facility to both the Financial District and to the seat of New York City 's government .
QUEENS Section::::Queens .
On July 10 , 2015 , NYP announced its merger with the former New York Hospital Queens ( formerly known as Booth Memorial Medical Center ) to form the Queens campus of the New York – Presbyterian Hospital .
Located in Flushing , Queens , NewYork - Presbyterian / Queens is a teaching hospital affiliated with Weill Cornell Medical College that serves Queens and metro New York residents .
The 535-bed tertiary care facility provides services in 14 clinical departments and numerous subspecialties , including 15,000 surgeries and 4,000 infant deliveries each year .
With its network of affiliated primary and multispecialty care physician practices and community - based health centers , the hospital provides approximately 162,000 ambulatory care visits and 124,000 emergency service visits annually .
HUDSON VALLEY HOSPITAL Section::::Hudson Valley Hospital .
Founded in 1889 by the Helping Hand Association , NewYork - Presbyterian / Hudson Valley Hospital , located in Cortlandt Manor , New York , serves residents of the Hudson Valley and Westchester County .
The 128-bed facility provides a wide range of ambulatory care and inpatient services , with 350 physicians on staff in 43 specialties .
The hospital is home to the region 's only state - of - the - art , 24-hour " no wait " emergency department , which sees more than 39,000 visits per year .
In 2011 , the Cheryl R. Lindenbaum Cancer Center opened , offering the first comprehensive cancer center in the area , combining infusion , radiation therapy and support services all under one roof .
BROOKLYN METHODIST HOSPITAL
LAWRENCE HOSPITAL
RONALD O. PERELMAN HEART INSTITUTE Section::::Ronald O. Perelman Heart Institute .
Ronald O. Perelman Heart Institute is a " medical town square " dedicated to the treatment of heart disease patients in New York City .
Ronald O. Perelman , chairman of MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings Inc. , made a $ 50 million gift to the NewYork - Presbyterian Hospital / Weill Cornell Medical Center on February 28 , 2009 , to establish the institute .
The Heart Institute has a welcome center , a clinical trials enrollment center , and an interactive education resource center that includes medical information on heart disease — with an added focus on cardiac disease in women .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
ABC documentary series NY Med , produced by ABC News , features NewYork – Presbyterian Hospital / Weill Cornell Medical Center and NewYork - Presbyterian Hospital / Columbia University Medical Center .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* New York – Presbyterian Hospital
* New York - Presbyterian Emergency Medicine * New York - Presbyterian Children 's Health * Medical Center Archives of New York - Presbyterian / Weill Cornell