CRAFTSMAN ( TOOLS )
Craftsman is a line of tools , lawn and garden equipment , and work wear .
Originally owned by Sears , the brand is now controlled by Stanley Black & Decker .
Craftsman tools were first sold in 1927 .
They were not manufactured by Sears , but by various other companies under contract .
The tools were sold in Sears , sister retailer Kmart , and several other retailers .
In March 2017 , Stanley Black & Decker acquired the Craftsman brand from Sears Holdings .
Sears maintains the right to manufacture and sell tools using existing supply channels under the Craftsman name for 15 years after the deal closed .
In April 2018 , Lowe 's began selling Craftsman tools .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Craftsman trademark was registered by Sears on May 20 , 1927 .
Arthur Barrows , head of the company 's hardware department , liked the name Craftsman and reportedly bought the rights to use it from the Marion - Craftsman Tool Company for $ 500 .
The brand 's early customers were mostly farmers .
Barrows ' successor , Tom Dunlap , upgraded the quality of the tools and added chrome plating to them as America moved into the automobile age .
Sears ' tool line , like many of its other product lines , uses a " good , better , best " pricing structure , with the " Craftsman " brand as the middle tier and " Craftsman Professional " or " Craftsman Industrial " as the highest tier .
Craftsman Professional and Craftsman Industrial are marketed as being comparable to brands like Cornwell Quality Tools , SK , Snap on , Proto , Mac , and Matco .
The standard Craftsman line is marketed as being comparable in quality to other mid - price brands including UltraPro ( NAPA ) , Westward , Gray , Husky , and Kobalt .
Sears also marketed a " Sears Best " line of hand tools for a time .
The lowest tier was originally branded " Sears " .
The company also used the " Dunlap " name for its lesser quality tools from the late 1930s until the late 1950s .
The Sears tool line was discontinued in the late 1980s and replaced by the " Companion " tool line .
The Companion tool line was itself discontinued and replaced by the " Evolv " tool line in 2008 , with a focus on homeowners and DIYers .
Evolv tools also have a lifetime warranty but require that the customer have the original dated receipt to make a claim .
Since 1991 , Sears has run the Craftsman Club customer loyalty program , one of the oldest such programs by a retailer .
Craftsman tools are sold in Sears and sister store Kmart , as well as US military Army and Air Force Exchange Service stores , Navy Exchange stores , Summit Racing Equipment , Blain 's Farm & Fleet , Menards , W. W. Grainger , Ace Hardware , Montgomery Ward , Lowes , and Orchard Supply Hardware .
On January 5 , 2017 , Stanley Black & Decker announced its intent to acquire the Craftsman brand in a deal with a total value of $ 900 million ( with an up - front payment of $ 525 million , and a payment of $ 250 million after three years ) .
Sears will hold a royalty - free license to the Craftsman brand for a 15-year period after the completion of the sale , and will receive a royalty on all new Craftsman sales over this period .
Afterwards , Sears will pay Stanley Black & Decker a 3 % licensing fee .
The deal was closed on March 9 , 2017 .
Sears maintains the right to manufacture and sell tools using existing supply channels under the Craftsman name for 15 years .
SOURCING Section::::Sourcing .
Sears has never manufactured Craftsman products itself , instead relying on other manufacturers to make the products for them following Sears designs and specifications , and then applying the Craftsman brand name .
Sometimes , the Craftsman branded items include exclusive features or functions that separate them from the manufacturer 's own brand or other brands that the manufacturer produces .
At other times , Craftsman products are identical to models of other brands with a different name on them .
The hardline mechanic 's tools ( wrenches , ratchets , and sockets ) that make up the core of the brand have been made by a variety of manufacturers over the years , including New Britain , Moore Drop Forging , Stanley , Easco Hand Tools , Danaher Corporation , and most recently Apex Tool Group .
Screwdrivers have been manufactured by Pratt - Read and Western Forge , but are now supplied mostly exclusively by Western Forge , who also supply pliers and adjustable wrenches .
Beginning in 2010 , hand tools manufactured for Craftsman by Apex Tool Group ( formerly known as Danaher ) such as ratchets , sockets , and wrenches began to be sourced overseas ( mainly in China , although some are produced in Taiwan ) , while tools produced for Craftsman by Western Forge such as adjustable wrenches , screwdrivers , pliers and larger mechanic tool sets remain made in the United States , although as of 2018 , most if not all of the production for these products have moved over to Asia .
Sears still has an Industrial line which is sold through various authorized distributors .
These tools are US made , appearing identical to their previous non - industrial US made counterparts , save for the " Industrial " name stamped on them .
They are manufactured by Apex on the US production lines that previously produced the USA made standard Craftsman product before production switched overseas to Asia .
Many Craftsman portable power tools have been manufactured by Techtronic Industries .
Previously , these products were produced by the Diehl Motor Company ( a one time division of Singer ) and Ryobi .
Both Singer and Ryobi have been condensed under the Techtronic company umbrella .
These tools had a " 315 " or " 973 " prefix .
Most of the " 315 " product was made in the United States .
Sears hand power tools have also been produced by DeWalt .
These tools will typically have a " 900 " model prefix .
Some , such as the corded and cordless drills , were indistinguishable , other than the color and decal labels .
Many Craftsman bench and stationary power tools have been manufactured by Emerson Electric Company under the " 113 " model prefix ( previously under the " 103 " model prefix which was King - Seeley , but Emerson bought them out in the 1960 's ) and DeWalt .
Air compressors were manufactured by DeVilbiss Air Power ( part of Dewalt ) , and formerly by Campbell Hausfeld .
( DeVilbiss sourced units have a " 919 " model prefix and Campbell Hausfield had a " 106 " model prefix ) .
Tool storage has typically been manufactured by Waterloo Industries,("706 " model prefix )
while Craftsman - branded garage door openers are manufactured by The Chamberlain Group ( " 139 " model prefix ) .
Hammers have been produced by Vaughan - Bushnell for Sears .
( Coded " M " on the tool ) .
Many of the automotive specialty tools such as feeler gauges and gap gauges have been made by A&E Tool Company of Racine , WI ( these tools will have an " S " logo in a circle ) .
Ullman Devices of Ridgefield , CT makes many of the magnetic pick up tools , picks and inspection mirrors for Sears .
Some tools have codes on them that correspond to the manufacturer that produced the product for Sears ( see Alloy Artifacts website reference below ) .
For example , on hand tools , codes on them will indicate who made them for Sears .
For example , Western Forge sourced tools will have a " WF " stamped on the tool .
Tools produced by Moore Drop Forge will have a " V " on them , tools from Pratt - Reed will have " PR " on them , Easco will have an " E " or " EE " , and later Danaher made tools ( USA made ) will have a " VV " or a " VɅ " ( inverted second " V " ) .
Pliers have been sourced by a few vendors including the aforementioned Western Forge " WF " tools and Wilde Industries which have a " P " on the tool .
Many major Sears Craftsman items also have a vendor prefix , which is typically the first three digits before the period or dash in the model number .
These first three digits correspond to the vendor code , or the actual manufacturer contracted to make the product for Sears .
QUALITY AND REPUTATION Section::::Quality and reputation .
In 2007 , a Harris Interactive poll gave Craftsman the highest score for both " Brand Expectations " and " Trust " .
In 2009 , the readers of Popular Mechanics named Craftsman their favorite brand of hand tools in their Reader 's Choice Awards .
Craftsman is the official tool brand of NASCAR and the DIY Network .
WARRANTY Section::::Warranty .
Most Craftsman hand tools are advertised as having an unlimited lifetime warranty .
This lifetime warranty program was instituted by Sears when they began selling the Craftsman line in 1927 .
This warranty program requires no receipt or dated proof of purchase .
If the owner takes the item into a local retail store , it may be replaced or repaired free of charge .
In some cases , such as ratchets , the customer may be offered a repair kit with which to repair the item or an already refurbished item .
As of 2017 , many Sears stores do not offer the kits to consumers ; instead , they will either rebuild the customer 's ratchet or provide one that they have already rebuilt .
Ratchet kits for the US made ratchets are different than those for the Asian made ratchets , although some repair kits for the US made ratchets are now made in China ( but again , will not interchange with the kits for the Asian ratchets ) .
As of 2018 , some stores will supply the customer the rebuild kits for them to rebuild on their own , while others will require the customer to have the store employees rebuild the ratchet for them .
The full text of the warranty is as follows : Sears has reduced the warranty in effect on many Craftsman non - powered lawn and garden products including rakes , shovels , clippers , brooms , trowels , pruners , hoses , sprinklers , hose nozzles , and other small gardening hand tools .
Previously it was a lifetime warranty which on August 2 , 2012 , was reduced to 25 years with receipt required .
The lifetime warranty does not include precision hand tools , such as calipers and torque wrenches .
Many consumers have also been reporting problems when attempting to obtain warranty repair or replacement on tools that are covered by the full lifetime warranty .
Sears ' official position is that the warranty should be honored , and much of the problem may lie with individual sales associates .
In some cases Sears no longer sells particular Craftsman tools ( tape measures , and wood clamps are two examples ) , making it impossible to replace a tool sold with a lifetime warranty with a similar Craftsman tool that will continue the warranty .
Sears stores limit the number of hand tools that can be exchanged per day , in an effort to reduce the abuse of the lifetime warranty .
Stanley Black & Decker has stated that all previous warranties on Craftsman products will be honored after the purchase of Craftsman in 2017 .
Power tools have a one - year warranty .
LEGAL DISPUTES
Section::::Legal disputes .
Craftsman tools came under fire in 2004 in a lawsuit accusing Sears of false advertising and consumer fraud for questionable use of the slogan " Made in the USA " .
SPONSORSHIPS Section::::Sponsorships .
From 1995 to 2008 , Craftsman sponsored the NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series , a deal which began with the inception of the Truck Series .
After the 2008 season , Craftsman withdrew from sponsoring the series and was replaced by Camping World .
In 2016 , Craftsman returned to motorsports sponsorship , serving as the title name for the World of Outlaws , renaming the Sprint Car Series and Late Model Series to the World of Outlaws Craftsman Sprint Car Series and World of Outlaws Craftsman Late Model Series , respectively .
In 2018 , Craftsman returned to NASCAR to sponsor Erik Jones and Ryan Preece in a few races , in 2019 , Craftsman will return to sponsor Erik Jones .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Craftsman website
*
Alloy Artifacts : " Early Craftsman Tools and Their Makers " * Alloy Artifacts : " Craftsman Tools :
Maker ' V ' and the Modern Era " * Old Work - Working Machines : " Craftsman OEM List " *
Rose Antique Tools : Craftsman tool catalogues