SAINT ANDREW 'S
DAY
Saint Andrew 's Day is the feast day of Saint Andrew .
It is celebrated on 30 November .
Saint Andrew 's Day ( , ) is Scotland 's official national day .
It is a national holiday in Romania ( since 2015 ) .
Saint Andrew is represented in the New Testament to be the disciple who introduced his brother , the Apostle Peter , to Jesus as the Messiah .
He is the patron saint of Cyprus , Scotland , Greece , Romania , Russia , Ukraine , the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , San Andres Island ( Colombia ) , Saint Andrew ( Barbados ) and Tenerife .
In Germany , the feast day is celebrated as Andreasnacht ( "
( St . )
Andrew 's Night " ) , in Austria with the custom of Andreasgebet ( " ( St . )
Andrew 's Prayer " ) , and in Poland as Andrzejki ( " Andrew 's ( festivities ) " ) , in Russia as Андреева ночь ( " Andrew 's night " ) .
TRADITIONS AND CELEBRATIONS Section::::Traditions and celebrations .
Saint Andrew 's Day marks the beginning of the traditional Advent devotion of the Saint Andrew Christmas Novena .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
The celebration of Saint Andrew as a national festival is thought to originate from the reign of Malcolm III ( 1034–1093 ) .
It was thought that ritual slaughter of animals associated with Samhain was moved to this date , so as to assure enough animals were kept alive for winter .
But it is only in more recent times that 30 November has been given national holiday status .
BANK HOLIDAY Section::::Bank Holiday .
In 2006 , the Scottish Parliament passed the St. Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007 , which designated the Day as an official bank holiday .
If 30 November falls on a weekend , the next Monday is a bank holiday instead .
Although it is a bank holiday , banks are not required to close and employers are not required to give their employees the day off as a holiday .
The University of St Andrews traditionally gives the day for all the students as a free holiday , but this is not a binding rule .
THE SALTIRE Section::::The Saltire .
Saint Andrew 's Day is an official flag day in Scotland .
The Scottish Government 's flag - flying regulations state that the Flag of Scotland
( the Saltire or Saint Andrew 's Cross ) shall fly on all its buildings with a flagpole .
Prior to 2002 , the Scottish Government followed the UK Government 's flag days and would only fly the Union Flag on Saint Andrew 's Day .
The regulations were updated to state that the Union Flag would be removed and replaced by the Saltire on buildings with only one flagpole .
The flying of the Union Flag from Edinburgh Castle on all days , including Saint Andrew 's Day causes anger among some Scottish National Party politicians who have argued that the Saltire should fly on 30 November instead .
However , the Union Flag is flown by the British Army at the Castle as it is an official British Army flag flying station .
CELEBRATIONS Section::::Celebrations .
In Scotland , and many countries with Scottish connections , Saint Andrew 's Day is marked with a celebration of Scottish culture with traditional Scottish food , music and dance .
In Scotland the day is also seen as the start of a season of Scottish winter festivals encompassing Saint Andrew 's Day , Hogmanay and Burns Night .
There are week - long celebrations in the town of St Andrews and in some other Scottish cities .
BARBADOS Section::::Barbados .
Saint Andrew 's Day is celebrated as the national day of Independence in Barbados .
As the patron saint , Saint Andrew is celebrated in a number of Barbadian symbols including the cross formation of the Barbadian Coat of Arms , and the country 's national honours system which styles persons as Knights or Dames of St. Andrew .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
There are a few pre - Christian Romanian traditions connected to Saint Andrew 's Day , some of them having their origin in the Roman celebrations of Saturn .
The Dacian New Year took place from 14 November until 7 December ; this was considered the interval when time began its course .
One of the elements that came from the Roman and Thracian celebrations concerned wolves .
During this night , wolves are allowed to eat all the animals they want .
It is said that they can speak , too , but anyone that hears them will soon die .
Early on Saint Andrew 's day , the mothers go into the garden and gather tree branches , especially from apple , pear and cherry trees , and also rosebush branches .
They make a bunch of branches for each family member .
The one whose bunch blooms by New Year 's Day will be lucky and healthy the next year .
The best known tradition connected to this night concerns matrimony and premonitory dreams .
Single girls must put under their pillow a branch of sweet basil .
If someone takes the plants in their dreams , that means the girl will marry soon .
They can also plant wheat in a dish and water it until New Year 's Day .
The nicer the wheat looks that day , the better the year to come .
SAINT ANDREW 'S EVE Section::::Saint Andrew 's Eve .
In parts of Ukraine , Germany , Austria , Slovakia , Poland , Russia and Romania , a superstitious belief exists that the night before Saint Andrew 's Day is especially suitable for magic that reveals a young woman 's future husband or that binds a future husband to her .
The day was believed to be the start of the most popular time for vampire activity , which would last until Saint George 's Eve ( 22 April ) .
In Poland , the holiday Andrzejki is celebrated on the night of the 29th through 30 November .
Traditionally , the holiday was only observed by young single girls , though today both young men and women join the party to see their futures .
The main ceremony involved pouring hot wax from a candle through the hole in a key into cold water .
In Romania , it is customary for young women to put 41 grains of wheat beneath their pillow before they go to sleep , and if they dream that someone is coming to steal their grains that means that they are going to get married next year .
Also in some other parts of the country the young women light a candle from the Easter and bring it , at midnight , to a fountain .
They ask Saint Andrew to let them glimpse their future husband .
Saint Andrew is invoked to ward off wolves , who are thought to be able to eat any animal they want on this night , and to speak to humans .
A human hearing a wolf speak to him will die .
Saint Andrew is also the patron saint of Romania and the Romanian Orthodox Church .
In Póvoa de Varzim , an ancient fishing town in Portugal there 's Cape Santo André ( Portuguese for Saint Andrew ) , a place that shows evidence of Romanization and of probable earlier importance , with hints of stone age paintings .
Near the cape there are small pits in a rock , a mystery stone , that the people believe these are footprints of Saint Andrew .
Saint Andrew Chapel is of probable medieval origin , referenced in 1546 and in earlier documents .
It is the burial site of drowned fishermen found at the cape .
Fishermen also asked intervention from the saint for better fisheries .
Single girls wanting to get married threw a little stone to the roof of the chapel .
Because of pagan syncretism , it is also associated with white magic up to the present day .
It was common to see groups of fishermen , holding lights in their hands , making a pilgrimage to the Cape 's chapel throw the beach in Saint Andrew 's Eve .
They believed Saint Andrew fished , from the depths , the souls of the drowned .
Those who did not visit Santo André in life would have to make the pilgrimage as a corpse .
SEE ALSO
* Calendar of saints *
General Roman Calendar
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Descriptions of celebrations in Scotland and around the world
* Saint Andrew 's Day marked by Alex Salmond and David Cameron
* Smith , Cecily Fox , " St. Andrew 's Eve " ( poem ) * Saint Andrew on Electric Scotland