RED VELVET CAKE Red velvet cake is traditionally a red , red - brown , mahogany , maroon , crimson or scarlet colored chocolate layer cake , layered with white cream cheese or ermine icing .
The cake is commonly served on Valentine 's Day .
Common modern red velvet cake is made with red dye ; the red color was originally due to non - Dutched , anthocyanin - rich cocoa .
Common ingredients include buttermilk , butter , cocoa , vinegar , and flour .
Beetroot or red food coloring may be used for the color .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Velvet cake is thought to originate in the Victorian era .
During that Era they served velvet cakes as a fancy dessert .
The term " velvet " was a description used to let consumers know the dessert was a soft and velvety crumb cake .
During that same time devil 's food cake was introduced , which is how some believe that red velvet cake came about .
The difference between the two cakes is that devil 's food cake uses chocolate and red velvet cake uses cocoa .
When foods were rationed during World War II , bakers used boiled beet juices to enhance the color of their cakes .
Beets are found in some red velvet cake recipes .
Beets were and are in some recipes used as a filler or to retain moisture .
Adams Extract , a Texas company , is credited with bringing the red velvet cake to kitchens across America during the Great Depression era , by being one of the first to sell red food coloring and other flavor extracts with the use of point - of - sale posters and tear - off recipe cards .
The cake and its original recipe are well known in the United States from New York City 's famous Waldorf - Astoria Hotel , which has dubbed the confection Waldorf - Astoria cake .
However , it is widely considered a Southern recipe .
Traditionally , red velvet cake is iced with a French - style butter roux icing ( also called ermine icing ) , which is very light and fluffy , but time - consuming to prepare .
Cream cheese frosting and buttercream frosting are variations which have increased in popularity .
In Canada , the cake was a well - known dessert in the restaurants and bakeries of the Eaton 's department store chain in the 1940s and 1950s .
Promoted as an exclusive Eaton 's recipe , with employees who knew the recipe sworn to silence , many mistakenly believed the cake was the invention of the department store matriarch , Lady Eaton .
In recent years , red velvet cake and red velvet cupcakes have become increasingly popular in the US and many European countries .
A resurgence in the popularity of this cake is attributed by some to the film Steel Magnolias ( 1989 ) , which included a red velvet groom 's cake made in the shape of an armadillo .
Magnolia Bakery in Manhattan has served it since its opening in 1996 , as did restaurants known for their Southern cooking like Amy Ruth 's in Harlem , which opened in 1998 .
In 2000 , Cake Man Raven opened one of the first bakeries devoted to the cake in Brooklyn .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Ingredient changes vary based on the era and area of the world .
James Beard 's reference , American Cookery ( 1972 ) , describes three red velvet cakes varying in the amounts of shortening , butter , and vegetable oil .
All used red food coloring .
The reaction of acidic vinegar and buttermilk tends to better reveal the red anthocyanin in cocoa and keeps the cake moist , light , and fluffy .
This natural tinting may have been the source for the name " red velvet " , as well as " Devil 's food " and similar names for chocolate cakes .
Contemporarily , chocolate has often undergone Dutch processing , which prevents the color change of the anthocyanins .
A reconstruction of the original red velvet cake involves reducing or eliminating the vinegar and colorants , and using a non - Dutched cocoa to provide the needed acidity and color .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
In addition to the many variations of red velvet cake , there are endless red velvet - flavored products , including protein powder , tea , lattes , Pop - Tarts , waffles , and alcoholic beverages .
The scent is used for candles and air fresheners as well .
For dietary restrictions , such as those due to allergies and ingredient sensitivity , vegan , gluten free , and dairy free variations are available .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS