FRIDAY NIGHT LIGHTS ( FILM )
Friday Night Lights is a 2004 American sports drama film , directed by Peter Berg .
The film follows the coach and players of a high school football team in the Texas city of Odessa , which supported and was obsessed with them .
The book on which it was based , ( 1990 ) by H. G. Bissinger , followed the story of the 1988 Permian High School Panthers football team as they made a run towards the state championship .
A television series of the same name premiered on October 3 , 2006 on NBC .
The film won the Best Sports Movie ESPY Award and was ranked number 37 on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the Best High School Movies .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
As preseason practice begins for the Permian High School football team in August 1988 , the town of Odessa , Texas has high expectations for the players and their coach Gary Gaines to win a state championship with their star running back James " Boobie " Miles .
The quarterback , Mike Winchell , runs under the expectation of handing off the ball to Miles on most plays .
Fullback Don Billingsley struggles with his ball handling and is abused by his alcoholic father Charles , who won a state championship with Permian .
The players frequently party as they deal with the pressures of Odessa 's expectations .
In the season opener against the Marshall Bulldogs , the Permian Panthers make the game a blowout .
Gaines intends to bench Miles in the waning minutes , but keeps him in after third - stringer Chris Comer is unprepared to go in .
Miles tears his ACL after being tackled at the knee , and afterwards Gaines is widely criticized by the town for keeping Miles in .
In the next game during the start of district play , Permian gets blown out as Winchell struggles with consistency in his increased role and the second - string running back gets hurt .
Comer goes in , but avoids contact , and discussion arises about Gaines losing his job .
However , the Panthers start winning again as Winchell and Comer improve , and safety Brian Chavez and linebacker Ivory Christian emerge as defensive standouts .
Miles holds out hope that he can return to playing soon , and although his MRI scan shows otherwise , he rejects it and lies to Gaines so he can suit up again , with his uncle and guardian L.V. backing him up .
Permian plays its final district game against Midland Lee , with first place and a playoff spot on the line .
The Panthers fall behind , and Gaines puts Miles in out of desperation , but Miles is soon injured again .
Winchell leads a comeback drive , but Permian loses as his final pass flies over the receiver 's hands .
After the game , Billingsley fights with his drunk father , who throws his state championship ring onto the side of the freeway .
The next morning , Don reveals to his father that he recovered the championship ring and gives it back to him .
Charles partially apologizes and makes the point that his state championship was the best thing that happened to him , and he now has nothing happy except those memories .
The loss puts Permian in a three - way tie for first place with Lee and Abilene Cooper , and a coin toss is held to determine which two teams make the playoffs .
Permian and Lee win the toss , and as the Panthers prepare for the playoffs , Miles clears his locker .
While in his uncle 's car , he cries about his future in football becoming bleak .
Permian is successful in the playoffs , but all eyes are on the state powerhouse Dallas Carter High School .
Permian and Carter make it to the state championship game , which is held at the Astrodome due to the schools ' different demographics .
Miles rejoins the team and watches from the sidelines as the Panthers head into the game .
They are initially overwhelmed by Carter 's superior size and fall behind , but mount a comeback in the second half to pull within one score .
The defense improves its tackling , and the offense pushes through despite injuries .
After a defensive stop , Winchell , Comer , and Billingsley mount a final drive , but Comer and Billingsley are injured .
Billingsley goes back in , and holds onto the ball for a big run , but it is called back for a holding penalty .
On fourth down , Winchell is stopped just short of the goal line as the clock runs out , and Carter wins the championship .
Afterwards , Gaines removes the outgoing seniors from his depth chart , and it is revealed that Winchell , Billingsley , Miles , and Chavez went on to have successful lives after their football careers ended , with only Christian receiving a Division I scholarship .
The movie ends with the statement that Gaines and Comer led Permian to an undefeated state championship season the following year .
CAST * Billy Bob Thornton as Coach Gary Gaines * Lucas Black as Mike Winchell
* Garrett Hedlund as Don Billingsley * Derek Luke as James " Boobie " Miles
* Jay Hernandez as Brian Chavez * Lee Thompson Young as Chris Comer
* Tim McGraw as Charles Billingsley * Connie Britton as Sharon Gaines * Julius Tennon as Coach Freddie James * Connie Cooper as Ms. Winchell * Amber Heard as Maria * Stephen Bishop as Loie Harris
* Christian Kane as Brian * Brad Leland as John Aubrey CAMEOS
* Former NFL wide receiver Roy Williams ( a Permian alumnus ) had a cameo in the movie as an assistant coach for Midland Lee , Permian 's arch - rival .
*
Some sequences during the state playoffs showed highlights from high school football games in Texas .
In one of those highlights , NFL Pro Bowl cornerback Aqib Talib can be seen .
*
Ty Law played a wide receiver for Dallas Carter , the team Permian played in the movie 's state championship game .
He wore jersey # 2 , his last name was Graf , and he caught a one - handed touchdown pass .
*
The real James " Boobie " Miles played a Permian assistant coach in the film .
Although he has no lines , he was seen several times .
In the locker room scene at halftime of the state championship game , he was seen standing next to the fictional " Boobie " Miles as Coach Gaines gives his speech .
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE MOVIE AND EVENTS
PLAYERS
*
In the movie , Boobie Miles was depicted as one of the team 's three captains , but that honor was held by Ivory Christian , Mike Winchell and Brian Chavez in real life .
*
In the movie , some of the players ' numbers and positions were changed : Boobie Miles was # 45 and played tailback in the movie , but in the book he was playing fullback ( while Don Billingsley was the tailback ) and # 35 .
In the movie , Brian Chavez was the # 4 strong safety , while he was the # 85 tight end in the book , and Ivory Christian was a defensive end and wore # 90 , while he was the # 62 middle ( " Mike " ) linebacker in the book .
At the beginning of the film , as the camera panned over Coach Gaines ' depth chart , ' Miles ' name was listed under the FB tag .
Chris Comer was also the backup fullback in the book , not a third - string tailback .
One of the athletic directors in the stadium booth said , " I think he 's a sophomore " , when Comer was a junior at the time .
Comer also wore # 45 in the real season , but in the movie he wore # 42 .
Alan Wyles was depicted as a wide receiver when he was the placekicker .
* Don Billingsley 's father Charlie was depicted in the movie as having won a state championship .
In reality , as a junior , the 1968 Permian team lost in the finals .
THE REGULAR SEASON Section::::Differences between the movie and events .
Section::::The regular season .
In the movie , the team was depicted as practicing in full pads and with full contact on the first day of practice .
Under rules of the University Interscholastic League ( UIL ) , the governing body for Texas public school sports , teams can not use pads or hit until the 4th day of practice ( however , in the deleted scenes included in the DVD , a non - pad practice was shown ) .
* A Permian booster was heard toasting Coach Gaines ' second season as Permian 's head coach .
It was his third .
* Boobie Miles , in the book , injured his leg by getting his foot caught on the AstroTurf during a pre - season scrimmage against Amarillo Palo Duro at Jones Stadium in Lubbock .
In the movie , he was tackled by two players at the knee during a blowout non - district game at Ratliff Stadium .
*
In the movie , the top - ranked Permian Panthers defeated the hapless Marshall Bulldogs in a non - district game .
In real life , the third - ranked Marshall Mavericks ( whose colors are red and white , not purple and gold ) defeated fourth - ranked Permian 13 - 12 .
In the movie , the game was the season opener and played on a Friday night in Odessa .
In real life , it was Permian 's second game of the season , and played at Maverick Stadium in Marshall on a Saturday afternoon .
Permian 's football team chartered a jet for the 500 + mile trip from Odessa to Marshall , spawning controversy on the cost of the trip .
Played before a crowd of more than 12,000 fans at Maverick Stadium , the game was on a searing September afternoon where the temperature topped 100 degrees Fahrenheit ( 38 ° C ) .
The footage shown in the movie was from a game against the Midland High Bulldogs , who were n't mentioned in the movie .
Permian defeated the Dawgs 42 - 0 in district play , but the two teams ended up in a three - way tie along with Midland Lee for the district title .
*
In the movie , district play began in week 2 .
In the real regular season , district play began in week 4 .
*
In the movie , Permian defeated " North Shore Galena " in a mid - season ( presumably district ) game .
In reality , North Shore High School was within the Galena Park Independent School District located in the Houston suburbs over 500 miles ( 800 km ) southeast of Odessa .
Although North Shore and Permian have both been 5A football powerhouses , they have never played .
Furthermore , North Shore did not start seeing football success until the mid 1990s .
*
In reality , the three teams tied for best district record were Permian , Midland Lee , and Midland High , all with 5 - 1 district records .
In the movie , Permian and Lee were joined not by Midland but by Abilene Cooper , and each team had two district losses .
The tie breaking coin flip was held at a truck stop outside of Midland , and Midland High lost ( Cooper in the movie ) , so Permian and Lee went on .
Midland High 's missing the playoffs was poignant as it had not been to the playoffs since 1951 and did not get back to post - season play until 2002 .
* A Permian player was shown with coach Gaines at the coin toss .
In reality , no players from any of the three schools were allowed at the coin toss .
All of Permian 's players were on the team bus returning from the game that evening at San Angelo Central .
Permian assistant coach Mike Belew drove with Gaines from San Angelo to the site of the coin toss .
*
In a few scenes , players were shown wearing Under Armour apparel and facemask shields , although in 1988 , Under Armour and visors had n't been invented yet .
( Under Armour founder Kevin Plank was in high school in 1988 . )
The book says they wore green visors , which are now outlawed for high school and college teams .
*
In the movie , the annual duel against Permian 's archrival Midland Lee was portrayed as Lee having a handy lead throughout the game with Permian never having a shot at the victory .
In real life , Lee had to come from behind with a late - game touchdown to win the game 22 - 21 .
THE PLAYOFFS
* Permian 's first opponent in the playoffs was Amarillo Tascosa and not Dallas Jesuit as in the movie .
In 1988 , Texas Public Schools ( such as Permian , Carter , and Tascosa ) and private schools ( such as Jesuit ) competed in separate leagues with separate playoffs .
Jesuit was not allowed to join the previously all - public school UIL until 2003 , starting football competition in 2004 .
Dallas Jesuit and Strake Jesuit of Houston were the only private schools who currently play in the UIL , the rest competing in leagues such as TAPPS and the SPC .
Also , with the district setup at that time , it would have been impossible for Permian to play a team from the Dallas / Fort Worth Metroplex until the third round for the playoffs .
Nowadays , Permian could play Fort Worth - area teams in the first round of the playoffs , but still could not play Jesuit until round 3 .
Permian played Dallas Jesuit in Odessa during the regular season in 1988 , winning 48 - 2 .
Jesuit 's only points came on a missed - PAT return , which was a rule instituted that year ( the defensive conversion was not allowed in high school football under National Federation of State High School Associations rules , but Texas played by NCAA rules ) .
Jesuit 's helmet was shown as white and orange with a sort of wildcat 's head logo on it , but in real life they are solid gold without a logo .
*
In the movie , it was said that Carter was the state 's top - ranked team , when Carter was never ranked higher than No . 3 in the Associated Press poll .
* Carter played " Hays " High School in the playoffs , which was depicted as wearing green and white and nicknamed the Rams .
The real Jack C. Hays High School , located 15 minutes south of Austin in Buda , used red , white , and blue as its colors , and their nickname was the Rebels .
Hays was a Class 4A school in 1988 and did not become 5A until 2000 .
Hays was in the movie because the makers filmed crowd shots at Hays High during a Rebels home game against the Austin Westlake Chaparrals , another team depicted as a Permian playoff victim .
*
Permian was depicted as playing " San Angelo " in the quarterfinal round .
There were two high schools in the San Angelo Independent School District ; until 1998 , San Angelo Central High School , the district 's only 5A school had been in the same district as Permian ( having since been transferred , for football only , to the district with Lubbock and Amarillo schools ) , and could only have played Permian in the quarterfinal round ( owing to the structure of UIL playoffs ) if they had qualified .
However , Central finished 5th in the district that year , and as only two teams from each district qualified in 1988 , Permian and Central did not play in the 1988 playoffs .
Instead , Permian played Arlington Lamar in the quarterfinals .
*
On the playoff brackets it shows just the word " Baytown " .
There were two high schools in Baytown in 1988 ( there are now three ) , the team in the playoffs was Baytown Lee .
PERMIAN VS .
CARTER
*
Since 1982 , the UIL Class 5A ( now 6A ) football playoffs have had six rounds ( though a second , parallel playoff bracket of five rounds was added in 1990 , later also expanded to six rounds in 2006 ) , so while Permian played Dallas Carter in the fifth round , it was a semi - final and not a final .
In the Texas playoffs , a team from North or Western Texas always plays a team from the Houston area or Southern Texas in the final , so the Carter vs Permian final was not possible .
The real - life final featured Carter versus Converse Judson ( which defeated Permian in the 1995 state championship ) .
The Carter - Permian game was played in front of 10,000 people in a heavy downpour at The University of Texas at Austin 's Memorial Stadium , not in front of 55,000 in the Astrodome in Houston .
While the game in the movie was a high - scoring affair ( 34 - 28 ) , the real score was 14 - 9 in favor of Carter .
In real life , Permian held a 9 - 7 lead for most of the game and Carter made the dramatic fourth quarter comeback to win .
On the last play of the game , Winchell threw the ball incomplete , rather than running it himself close to the goal line .
*
The meeting between officials from Permian and Carter at the Midland airport occurred the Sunday prior to the game .
Not shown in the movie was the Carter officials changing their minds about a home site from Texas Stadium in Irving to the Cotton Bowl within the Dallas city limits .
Under UIL rules , if the schools can not agree to a neutral site , each side picks a " home " site and a " neutral " site , and two coin tosses are conducted .
The first was to determine whether a " home " or " neutral " site will be used , and the second to determine which team 's site will be used .
After a tense battle between the sides , they agreed to play the game at Austin .
*
In the movie , Gaines suggested at first suggests San Antonio as a potential neutral site , which would have meant playing the game at Alamo Stadium , since the Alamodome did not open until 1993 .
The other neutral site suggestion in the movie was College Station , presumably meaning Kyle Field at Texas A&M.
* The revocation of Carter 's state championship following their use of an academically ineligible player was never mentioned , nor was the prolonged legal battle that Carter went through to enable them to play in the playoffs .
Officially , the 1988 state champions were Converse Judson , which lost 31 - 14 in the final to Carter .
Furthermore , Carter was portrayed in the movie as a stereotypical " inner city thug " team ( likely due to the shocking series of armed robberies committed by several players after the season ended ) ; Carter at the time was located in a middle - class African - American neighborhood and was not known for dirty play .
THE SCHOOL AND THE CITY
* Permian was portrayed in the movie as a single large high school in a small , one - horse town in West Texas .
In reality , Odessa was a city of nearly 100,000 people at the time of the events portrayed in the movie , and part of a metropolitan area of nearly 250,000 combining the populations of Midland and Ector counties .
( The quaint downtown shown in the trailer for the movie was Manhattan , Kansas . )
Also , Permian was ( and still is ) only one of two large Class 5A high schools in Odessa .
The other and first high school in the city , Odessa High School ( mascot : the Bronchos ) , was never mentioned in the movie , despite the fact that they have played Permian every year , as the two schools have been in the same UIL district since Permian opened in 1959 and shared Ratliff Stadium with Permian .
An entire chapter in the book was devoted to the " Civil War " between the schools .
*
In the movie , Odessa was portrayed as being a mostly Anglo town with a sizable African - American population and virtually no Hispanics .
In 1988 , out of the almost 100,000 people that lived in Odessa , one - third were Hispanic while African - Americans made up only 5 % of the population .
* Ratliff Stadium was depicted as the location for Permian football practices .
In reality , the team practiced mostly on campus , and the stadium , used by both Permian and Odessa , was on the outskirts of town in a fairly unpopulated area about three miles ( five km )
away from the Permian High campus .
It was also unlikely that children would be playing touch football near the stadium , as depicted in the movie , as few houses were nearby at that time .
The area around the stadium has grown dramatically since then ( which caused an anachronism in the movie — the houses seen near the stadium did not yet exist in 1988 ) .
*
While Ratliff Stadium has had artificial turf since its opening , in 1988 it had the original AstroTurf , not the modern FieldTurf surface seen on the stadium in the film .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack for the film predominantly featured post - rock band Explosions in the Sky .
Music by Daniel Lanois and rock band Bad Company were also included .
Other songs in the film were " Just Got Paid " by ZZ Top during the montage of the Panthers ' road to the finals ; the pump up song featured as the team ran through the tunnel in the game against Dallas Carter was " New Noise " by the seminal Swedish punk band Refused .
During the start of the third quarter during the Championship game , the song " I Wanna Be Your Dog " by The Stooges was used .
Three songs from Public Enemy 's album
It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back were also used prominently .
The film 's score was composed and conducted by Cliff Eidelman .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Reviews of the film were highly positive .
The film received an 81 % " Certified Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 170 reviews , and the consensus stated : " An acute survey of the football - obsessed heartland that succeeds as both a stirring drama and a rousing sports movie . "
The film also has a score of 70/100 on Metacritic , based on 35 reviews .
While the residents of Odessa held a negative reception of , they eagerly anticipated the release of the film .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2004 : AFI 'S Top 10 Film of the Year * 2008 :
AFI 's 10 Top 10 : * Nominated Sports Film REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Behind the scenes of Friday Night Lights .
* UIL State Champion Archives