CLOBETASOL PROPIONATE Clobetasol propionate is a corticosteroid of the glucocorticoid class used to treat various skin disorders including eczema and psoriasis .
It is also highly effective for contact dermatitis caused by exposure to poison ivy / oak .
Clobetasol belongs to
US Class I ( Europe : class IV ) of the corticosteroids , making it one of the most potent available .
It comes in shampoo , mousse , ointment and emollient cream presentations .
It has very high potency and typically should not be used with occlusive dressings , or for extended continuous use ( beyond two weeks ) .
It is also used to treat several autoimmune diseases including alopecia areata , lichen sclerosus , and lichen planus .
USES Section::::Uses .
Clobetasol propionate is used for the treatment of various skin disorders including eczema , herpes labialis , psoriasis , and lichen sclerosus .
It is also used to treat several auto - immune diseases including alopecia areata , lichen planus ( auto immune skin nodules ) , and mycosis fungoides ( T - cell skin lymphoma ) .
It is used as first - line treatment for both acute and chronic GVHD of the skin .
Clobetasol propionate is used cosmetically by dark - skinned women for skin whitening , although this use is controversial .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved it for that purpose , and sales without a prescription are illegal in the U.S.
Nonetheless , skin - whitening creams containing this ingredient can sometimes be found in ethnic beauty supply stores in New York City and on the internet .
It is also sold internationally , and does not require a prescription in some countries .
Whitening creams with clobetasol proprionate , such as Hyprogel , can make skin thin and easily bruised , with visible capillaries , and acne .
It can also lead to hypertension , elevated blood sugar , suppression of the body 's natural steroids , and stretch marks , which may be permanent .
Clobetasol propionate is , along with mercury and hydroquinone , " amongst the most toxic and most used agents in lightening products . "
Many products sold illegally have higher concentrations of clobetasol propionate than is permitted for prescription drugs .
CONTRAINDICATIONS Section::::Contraindications .
According to the California Environmental Protection Agency , clobetasol propionate should not be used by pregnant women , or women expecting to become pregnant soon , as studies with rats shows a risk of birth defects :
" Studies in the rat following oral administration at dosage levels up to 50 mcg / kg per day revealed that the females exhibited an increase in the number of resorbed embryos and a decrease in the number of living fetuses at the highest dose .
Pregnancy : Teratogenic Effects ( i.e. , possibility of causing abnormalities in fetuses ) :
Pregnancy Category C :
Clobetasol propionate has not been tested for teratogenicity when applied topically ; however , it is absorbed percutaneously , and when administered subcutaneously it was a significant teratogen in both the rabbit and mouse .
Clobetasol propionate has greater teratogenic potential than steroids that are less potent .
There are no adequate and well - controlled studies of the teratogenic effects of clobetasol propionate in pregnant women .
Temovate Cream and Ointment should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus . "
FORMS Section::::Forms .
Clobetasol propionate is marketed and sold worldwide under numerous names including Clobex , Clob - x ( Colombia ) , Clovate , Clobet
( Biolab Thailand ) Clonovate ( T.O. Chemicals , Thailand ) , Cormax ( Watson , US ) , Haloderm ( Switzerland , by ELKO Org ) , Pentasol ( Colombia ) , Cosvate , Clop ( Cadila Healthcare , India ) , Propysalic ( India ) ,
Temovate ( US ) , Dermovate ( GlaxoSmithKline , Canada , Pakistan , Portugal , Israel ) , Olux , ClobaDerm , Tenovate , Dermatovate , Butavate , Movate , Novate , Salac ( Argentina ) , and Powercort . SEE ALSO
* Desoximetasone REFERENCES