ARMALITE AR-10
The ArmaLite AR-10 is a 7.62×51 mm NATO battle rifle developed by Eugene Stoner in the late 1950s and manufactured by ArmaLite , then a division of the Fairchild Aircraft Corporation .
When first introduced in 1956 , the AR-10 used an innovative straight - line barrel / stock design with phenolic composite and forged alloy parts resulting in a small arm significantly easier to control in automatic fire and over lighter than other infantry rifles of the day .
Over its production life , the original AR-10 was built in relatively small numbers , with fewer than 9,900 rifles assembled .
However , the ArmaLite AR-10 would become the progenitor for a wide range of firearms .
In 1957 , the basic AR-10 design was rescaled and substantially modified by ArmaLite to accommodate the .223 Remington cartridge , and given the designation ArmaLite AR-15 .
ArmaLite licensed the AR-10 and AR-15 designs to Colt Firearms .
The AR-15 eventually became the M16 rifle .
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::History and development .
ArmaLite began as a small engineering concern founded by George Sullivan , the patent counsel for Lockheed Corporation , and funded by Fairchild Engine and Airplane Corporation .
On October 1 , 1954 , the company was incorporated as the ArmaLite Corporation , becoming a subdivision of Fairchild .
With its limited capital and tiny machine shop , ArmaLite was never intended to be an arms manufacturer .
The company focused on producing small arms concepts and designs to be sold or licensed to other manufacturers .
Sullivan leased a small machine shop in Hollywood , California , hired several employees , and began work on a prototype for a lightweight survival rifle for use by downed aircrew .
While testing the prototype of the Armalite AR-5 survival rifle design at a local shooting range , Sullivan met Eugene Stoner , a small arms inventor , whom Sullivan hired to be ArmaLite 's chief design engineer .
At the time , ArmaLite Inc. was a very small organization ( as late as 1956 it had only nine employees , including Stoner ) .
With Stoner as chief design engineer , ArmaLite quickly released a number of unique rifle concepts .
The first prototypes of the 7.62 mm AR-10 emerged during 1955 and early 1956 .
At the time , the United States Army was in the midst of testing several rifles to replace the obsolete M1 Garand .
Springfield Armory 's T44E4 and heavier T44E5 were essentially updated versions of the Garand chambered for the new 7.62 mm round , while Fabrique Nationale submitted their FN FAL as the T48 .
ArmaLite 's AR-10 entered the competition late , hurriedly submitting two hand - built ' production ' AR-10 rifles based on the fourth prototype in the fall of 1956 to the United States Army 's Springfield Armory for testing .
The AR-10 prototypes ( four in all ) featured a straight - line stock design , rugged elevated sights , an oversized aluminum flash suppressor and recoil compensator , and an adjustable gas system .
In the fourth and final prototype , the upper and lower receiver were hinged with the now - familiar hinge and takedown pins , and the charging handle did not reciprocate and was not attached to the bolt carrier .
For a 7.62 mm NATO rifle , the AR-10 prototype was incredibly lightweight at only 6.85 lbs .
empty .
Initial comments by Springfield Armory test staff were favorable , and some testers commented that the AR-10 was the best lightweight automatic rifle ever tested by the Armory .
Unfortunately for ArmaLite , the rifle 's aluminum / steel composite barrel ( an untried prototype design specified for the tests by ArmaLite 's president , George Sullivan , over Stoner 's vehement objections ) burst in a torture test conducted by Springfield Armory in early 1957 .
ArmaLite quickly replaced it with a conventional steel barrel , but the damage had been done .
The final Springfield Armory report advised against adoption of the rifle , stating that it would take " five years or more to take it through tests to adoption " .
While ArmaLite objected , it was clear that the AR-10 , a brand - new rifle still in the prototype stage , was at a disadvantage compared to competing designs with longer development cycles , and by 1957 , U.S. Army infantry forces urgently required a modern , magazine - fed infantry rifle to replace the M1 .
In the end , the Army chose the conventional T44 , which entered production as the M14 rifle in 1957 .
That same year , ArmaLite completed about 50 production AR-10 rifles at its workshop for use as demonstrator models for its sales agents , including Samuel Cummings , a famous international arms dealer .
Attempts to rush completion of these fifty rifles resulted in a few units that were assembled with improperly machined barrel extensions , a defect that went unnoticed at the time .
These production rifles built at ArmaLite 's workshop in Hollywood would later become known as the Hollywood model .
On July 4 , 1957 , Fairchild ArmaLite sold a five - year manufacturing license for the AR-10 to the Dutch arms manufacturer , Artillerie Inrichtingen ( A.I. ) .
With its large factory and production facilities , A.I. could produce the ArmaLite rifle in the large quantities for which Fairchild expected orders would be forthcoming .
In 1957 Cummings secured an order of 7,500 AR-10 rifles from Nicaragua , with an initial delivery of 1,000 rifles to be delivered before January 1958 .
The order was contingent on a successful completion of a 7,500-round endurance test .
With the AR-10 in short supply , Cummings left his personal demonstrator rifle with Nicaragua 's chief military commander , General Anastasio Somoza , who personally conducted the endurance test trial .
While General Somoza was firing this rifle for the trial , the bolt lug over the ejector sheared off and flew past Somoza 's head .
The general angrily returned Cummings ' AR-10 and canceled the entire Nicaraguan order .
The remaining Hollywood rifles were inspected and refitted as necessary with new parts to prevent reoccurrence of the bolt lug failure , but the Nicaraguan order was lost for good .
A.I. officials meanwhile discovered a number of manufacturing and production issues in the Hollywood version of the AR-10 , all of which had to be resolved before large - scale production could commence .
In addition to designing and building tooling for the rifle , the design had to be converted to metric dimensions and subcontractors had to be found to supply materials or manufacture component parts .
ArmaLite also continued to send A.I. product improvement requests , including an adjustable regulator , a repositioned gas tube , and a new three - prong flash suppressor .
Accessories such as flash hiders , bayonet mounts , sling swivels , and sight graduations had to be designed .
Firearms historians have separated AR-10 production under the A.I. license into at least three basic identifiable versions , along with various sporting , carbine , and other experimental designs and calibers .
The three main variants have been termed the Sudanese model , the Transitional , and the Portuguese model AR-10 .
A.I. built all of these rifles , beginning with the Sudanese model AR-10 .
The Sudanese version derives its name from the sale of approximately 2,500 AR-10 rifles of to the government of Sudan in 1958 .
The Sudanese model was equipped with a very lightweight , fluted steel barrel fitted with a trim , prong - style flash suppressor , a bayonet lug , lightweight fiberglass furniture , and sight graduations in Arabic .
The Sudanese model weighed only with an empty magazine .
The price , including cleaning kit and four magazines , was US $ 225 per rifle .
All AR-10s , whether produced by ArmaLite or by A.I. , used the same Stoner - designed 20-round lightweight aluminum ' waffle ' magazine with pressed - in , corrugated sides , intended to be discarded in combat once emptied .
AR-10 production was limited , though Guatemala , Burma , Italy , Cuba , Sudan and Portugal all purchased AR-10 rifles for limited issue to their military forces .
Sudanese AR-10s were employed in frequent clashes with guerrilla forces and conflicts with neighboring countries , and a few captured rifles eventually turned up in unofficial service with various African and colonial armies , police , and guerrilla forces .
The AR-10 remained in service with Sudanese Special Forces until 1985 .
In 1958 , a special 7.62×39 mm caliber variant of the Sudanese AR-10 was produced in very small numbers for evaluation by Finland and Germany .
That same year , an AR-10 with a 16 " barrel was developed in response to a request by KLM Airlines for a carbine that could be issued to their crew for transpolar flights as part of an Arctic survival kit , and approximately 30 carbines were eventually produced .
A number of Transitional AR-10s were also fitted with a folding bipod designed to lie flat under the forearm .
The Italian Navy acquired the AR-10 for its COMSUBIN underwater commando teams .
Germany , Austria , the Netherlands , Finland , and South Africa also purchased small numbers of the AR-10 for test purposes , and Cuba 's Batista government ordered 100 " Transitional " model rifles in 1958 .
The Cuban order was delivered to Havana , but in December 1958 Fidel Castro 's forces took control of the country , including the warehouse containing the AR-10 shipment .
In 1959 , in response to a letter from ArmaLite 's sales agent Sam Cummings , Castro invited Cummings to Havana to discuss payment for the AR-10 rifles .
Fidel , his brother Raúl , and Che Guevara
test - fired the AR-10 outside Havana .
Impressed by the weapon 's firepower , Castro paid Cummings for all 100 rifles .
However , rapidly worsening relations with the United States eliminated any chance of future AR-10 sales to Cuba , and Castro transferred the ex - Batista AR-10s to a group of Communist revolutionaries from the Dominican Republic .
In June 1959 , the rebels , led by Cuban officers , invaded the Dominican Republic .
The invaders were defeated by the Dominican Army , and AR-10 rifles from the Batista shipment were found on the bodies of guerrillas .
The final Artillerie Inrichtingen design is known as the Portuguese model AR-10 .
This final version incorporated all that had been learned to date about the AR-10 , including infantry service rifle and field test reports .
In addition to a heavier barrel with chrome - lined chamber , optional bipod , and the removable plastic / metal handguards of the Transitional model , the Portuguese variant had wider bolt lugs , a stronger extractor , a new simplified three - position gas regulator , and a cocking handle featuring a forward bolt assist .
It is believed that approximately 4,000 - 5,000 Portuguese variants were produced ; nearly all of them were sold to the Portuguese National Defense Ministry by the Brussels - based arms dealer SIDEM International in 1960 .
The AR-10 was officially adopted by the Portuguese paratrooper battalions ( Caçadores páraquedistas ) , and the rifle saw considerable combat service in Portugal 's counter - insurgency campaigns in Angola and Mozambique .
In U.S. Army tests at Aberdeen Proving Ground in November 1960 , and later in Portuguese service , the AR-10 gained a reputation for accuracy ( some rifles would group into 25 mm ( 1 inch ) at 100 meters with service ammunition ) .
Portuguese paratroopers found the AR-10 to be not only accurate but reliable in combat , despite rugged service conditions in African jungle and savannah .
A few Portuguese and Sudanese model AR-10s found their way by various means to nearby African countries ; in Chad , the AR-10 was much appreciated by members of the French Foreign Legion .
As one police instructor in the Congo stated , " It was a good combat weapon that never failed me ; a bit too long ( but not as bad as the FAL or M14 ) for house - to - house work or really heavy brush , but great for 400 - 800 meters , in the flats - and really nice on the body , after wandering around 12 - 14 hours looking for bad guys . "
Some Portuguese - model AR-10s were fitted with A.I.-modified upper receivers in order to mount 3× or 3.6× telescopic sights .
These rifles were used by marksmen accompanying small patrols to eliminate individual enemies at extended ranges in open country .
Other AR-10s were used by the paratroopers in a secondary role to launch rifle grenades .
The AR-10 's built - in gas cutoff design enabled it to fire Energa rifle grenades without adjustment of the gas system , and the self - loading action would even eject the spent blank shells and load the next one , allowing several grenades to be quickly fired .
The added recoil took its toll on rifle stocks , and some Portuguese rifles were retrofitted with all - metal buttstocks to better withstand the strain caused by firing the heavy grenades .
Additional sales of the AR-10 rifle were stymied after the Netherlands embargoed further shipments of the rifle to Portugal .
Paratroopers deploying to Africa in later years were subsequently issued a collapsible stock version of the German Heckler & Koch G3 rifle .
Nevertheless , the AR-10 continued in service with a few Portuguese airborne units , and was in use as late as 1975 in the Portuguese Timor ( East Timor ) decolonization emergency .
Fairchild - ArmaLite was dissatisfied with the delays in setting up the tooling and production at A.I. for the AR-10 , and made it clear that they would not be renewing A.I. 's license to produce the rifle .
By 1960 , hampered by Dutch export restrictions and discouraged by the lack of arms sales to major national purchasers , Artillerie Inrichtingen decided to exit the small arms production business altogether , and ceased all production of the AR-10 under its license from Fairchild - ArmaLite .
By that time , fewer than 10,000 AR-10s had been produced , mostly military select - fire rifles , with a few semi - automatic only rifles produced for civilian use .
All A.I. AR-10 parts inventories , tooling , and prototypes were either sold or scrapped ; the barrel tooling was sold to Israel sometime in the early 1960s .
All AR-10 production records , design drawings , manuals , literature , and other publications then in inventory were discarded .
In later years , some ex - military Sudanese and Portuguese model AR-10s were sold to civilian markets in the U.S. , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand .
Nearly all of the rifles imported to the latter three countries had their full - automatic fire selector disabled .
Subsequently , as many as 2,500 Australian AR-10 rifles may have been confiscated and destroyed as a result of more restrictive firearms legislation passed in 1997 .
Most of the AR-10 ex - military rifles shipped to the United States were in the form of parts kits , having been previously dismantled , though a few were legally imported as National Firearms Act ( NFA ) weapons .
Large numbers of AR-10 7.62 mm magazines were imported as well .
Many of these kit rifles were combined with various semi - auto receivers made by civilian manufacturers in order to permit legal ownership .
During the early 1980s , Paragon Sales and Services in Joliet , Illinois manufactured new semi - automatic lower receivers while using imported upper AR-10 receivers originally manufactured by Artillerie - Inrichtingen in the Netherlands .
In 1957 , in an effort to increase profits from the ArmaLite venture , Fairchild decided to compete in the U.S. Army 's CONARC requirement for a new six - pound , high - velocity , .22-caliber selective - fire rifle accurate to 500 yards .
In response , ArmaLite engineers Gene Stoner , Jim Sullivan , and Bob Fremont used the basic AR-10 design to produce the ArmaLite AR-15 in .223 Remington , which was completed as a firing prototype in 1958 .
Fairchild - Armalite continued its efforts to sell both the AR-10 and AR-15 to various military forces around the world .
However , the AR-10 rifle marketed by ArmaLite after 1958 was not the product - improved AR-10 developed by Artillerie Inrichtingen , but rather a design scaled - up from AR-15 plans and specifications , the AR-10a .
None of the improvements incorporated by Artillerie Inrichtingen over three years of production were used in the new AR-10A. Although the AR-10a did not benefit from the modifications undertaken by the Dutch licensee , it had some differences from the AR-15 ( besides caliber and part dimensions ) , including a different bolt , trigger , and cocking handle design , along with a magazine canted forward at a five - degree angle .
While interest in the AR-15 was considerable , the AR-10a failed to attract any orders from domestic or foreign military customers .
In 1959 , ArmaLite sold its rights to the AR-10 / AR-15 to Colt Firearms , who successfully marketed the AR-15 to the U.S. military .
Eugene Stoner left the company in 1961 .
Disappointed with ArmaLite 's marketing efforts , Fairchild sold its share of ArmaLite in 1962 ; George Sullivan bought it with the financial backing of Capital Southwest Corporation of Dallas , Texas .
DESIGN DETAILS Section::::Design details .
The AR-10 is a lightweight , air - cooled , magazine - fed , gas - operated rifle that uses a piston within the bolt carrier with a rotary bolt locking mechanism .
The rifle has a conventional layout ; it features an in - line stock , an aluminum alloy receiver and a fiberglass reinforced pistol grip , handguard , and buttstock .
While mostly an original design , the AR-10 built upon previously proven concepts .
From the FAL it took the hinged receiver system allowing the rifle to be opened for cleaning much like a break - action shotgun .
The ejection port cover is similar to that found on the German World War II - era StG44 .
The bolt locking mechanism is similar to the M1941 Johnson rifle ( itself an adaptation of the Browning - designed Remington Model 8 bolt ) .
From the German MG 13 light machine gun , FG 42 and M1941 Johnson machine gun came the idea of the straight - line stock layout .
A " straight - line " recoil configuration increases controllability during burst or automatic fire by reducing muzzle climb .
The AR-10 's method of rotary bolt locking , straight - line recoil , and gas operation enhanced its inherent accuracy .
The gas system , bolt carrier , and bolt - locking design were novel for the time .
Most gas - operated rifles divert combustion gases from a port in the barrel to a piston and cylinder arrangement adjacent to the port .
In Stoner 's design , the gas travels from a port near the middle of the barrel through a steel tube back into the receiver .
The gas enters a chamber formed between the rear of the bolt and the inside of the bolt carrier .
Once the bolt carrier moves to the rear a small distance , excess gas is vented through holes in its side .
This use of the bolt and bolt carrier for the separate actions of a piston and gas cylinder simplified construction and saved weight .
Movement of the bolt carrier was in - line with the bore , greatly improving inherent accuracy , as well as keeping the rifle on target as the gun fired .
Since the straight - line stock placed the shooter 's eye well above the barrel the rifle 's sights were mounted high , with the rear sight contained in a carrying handle that also protected the cocking / charging lever .
The receiver is made from forged and machined aluminum to reduce weight .
The bolt locks into an extension on the barrel instead of the receiver allowing for a lightweight receiver while not compromising the strength of the bolt locking mechanism .
On a few prototype guns , an all - aluminum ( " Sullaloy " ) barrel was fitted at the insistence of George Sullivan – ArmaLite 's president – though after the 1957 Springfield Armory tests , all production AR-10s were fitted with standard steel barrels .
The stock is made from a fiberglass - reinforced phenolic compositewith a core of rigid plastic foam .
The handguards and pistol grip are also fiberglass reinforced plastic .
Fairchild was an aircraft manufacturer , and the use of plastics , titanium , and aluminum were common in the aircraft industry at the time , though not generally used in firearms .
Several experimental prototypes of a belt - fed variant of the AR-10 were developed by ArmaLite and A.I. engineers , informally designated the AR-10 LMG .
In one version , the belt was fed by a feed - chute connected to a 250-round ammo box carried on the user 's back .
All of the belt - fed prototypes experienced numerous issues with feed malfunctions and parts breakages , and these problems were never wholly solved during the weapon 's development stage , which ended with the termination of A.I. 's production contract .
As a result , no AR-10 LMG variants were ever sold .
SEMI - AUTOMATIC -
ONLY
AR-10 PRODUCTION ARMALITE AR-10B RIFLE SERIES Section::::Semi - automatic - only AR-10 production .
Section::::ArmaLite AR-10B rifle series .
In 1995 , former Army Ordnance officer Mark Westrom , owner of Eagle Arms , purchased the ArmaLite brand and the company became
ArmaLite Inc. Shortly thereafter , ArmaLite Inc. introduced the completely new semi - automatic - only AR-10B rifle series .
Notably , the AR-10B was not designed using the original AR-10 drawings from either ArmaLite or Artillerie Inrichtingen , but instead was based on the AR-15A2 , with parts scaled up or redesigned as needed to fire the 7.62×51 mm NATO ( .308 Winchester ) cartridge .
The AR-10B prototype was composed of individual sub - components tested on a special lower receiver made of two slabs of aluminum fitted to a Knights Armament Company SR-25 upper receiver assembly , and prototyped using computer analysis .
The full prototype AR-10B was the first rifle off the production line .
Since 1995 , the new ArmaLite company has also incorporated various other design and engineering improvements to the AR-10 , including a newly designed steel magazine derived from the model used on the U.S. M14 rifle .
The current ArmaLite AR-10 is offered in several versions including an A2 and A4 rifle or carbine with collapsible stock , a target model ( AR-10 T ) , a ' retro ' AR-10B with Sudanese AR-10-style handguard and cocking lever ( limited production ) and one version chambered in 300 Remington SAUM .
Current users include the Ontario Provincial Police Tactics and Rescue Unit .
While ArmaLite Inc. holds a US trademark on the name " AR-10 " , other rifle manufacturers currently produce 7.62×51 mm NATO auto - loading rifles that are based generally on the AR-10 design : the DPMS LR-308 , Knights Armament Corporation SR-25 , Rock River Arms LAR-8 ,
JP Enterprises LRP-07 , American Spirit Arms ASA .308 , Fulton Armory Titan , LWRC 's R.E.P.R. , LaRue Tactical 's OBR , RND Manufacturing 's " The Edge " , the German Oberland Arms OA-10 , the Lewis Machine and Tool LM308MWS , Bushmaster MOE 16
.308 , Palmetto State Armory PA-10 , Seekins SP-10 , Smith & Wesson M&P10 , and Windham Weaponry
SRC-308 .
These rifles differ from both the current and original Armalite AR10 in a few minor dimensions that make the Armalite AR10B not as modular as the rest of the AR based firearms .
ALTERNATE CALIBERS Section::::Alternate Calibers .
In addition to other manufacturers producing 7.62×51 mm NATO
AR-10 variants , numerous other chamberings are now being offered .
Common examples of these alternate calibers include .243
Winchester , .260
Remington , 6.5 mm Creedmoor , 7mm-08 Remington , and .338 Federal .
Manufacturers of these barrels include Ballistic Advantage , Wilson Combat , and DPMS Panther Arms .
AR-10
PURCHASERS
BY COUNTRY Section::::AR-10 purchasers by country .
This list denotes purchasers of ArmaLite Rifles produced by ArmaLite and its licensees from 1956 - 1960 , not necessarily later variants or designs .
* - Ontario Provincial Police
* - Purchased 2500 rifles from the A.I. factory , delivery October 1958
* - Purchased 135 rifles from the A.I. factory , delivery August 1958
SEE ALSO
* List of ArmaLite rifles * List of battle rifles
* ArmaLite * ArmaLite AR-15
* M16 rifle
* Colt AR-15
* Comparison of
the AK-47 and M16
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Pikula , Sam ( Major ) , The ArmaLite AR-10 , Regnum Fund Press ( 1998 ) , * Afonso , Aniceto and Gomes , Carlos de Matos , Guerra Colonial , 2000 , EXTERNAL LINKS * Moriarti Armaments home page
* Armalite home page
* AR10 promotional video