SPLIT - PHASE
ELECTRIC POWER
A split - phase or single - phase three - wire system is a type of single - phase electric power distribution .
It is the AC equivalent of the original Edison three - wire direct - current system .
Its primary advantage is that it saves conductor material over a single - ended single - phase system , while only requiring a single phase on the supply side of the distribution transformer .
The two 120 V AC lines are supplied to the premises from a transformer with a 240 V AC secondary winding which has a center tap connected to ground .
The system neutral conductor is connected to ground at the transformer center tap .
This results in two 120 V AC line voltages which are out of phase by 180 degrees with each other .
When required , 240 V AC can be obtained by connecting the load between the two 120 V AC lines .
CONNECTIONS Section::::Connections .
A transformer supplying a three - wire distribution system has a single - phase input ( primary ) winding .
The output ( secondary ) winding is center - tapped and the center tap connected to a grounded neutral .
As shown in Fig . 1 .
either end to center has half the voltage of end - to - end .
Fig .
2 illustrates the phasor diagram of the output voltages for a split - phase transformer .
Since the two phasors do not define a unique direction of rotation for a revolving magnetic field , a split single - phase is not a two - phase system .
In the United States and Canada , the practice originated with the DC distribution system developed by Thomas Edison .
By connecting pairs of lamps or groups of lamps on the same circuit in series , and doubling the supply voltage , the size of conductors was reduced substantially .
The line to neutral voltage is half the line - to - line voltage .
Lighting and small appliances requiring less than 1800 watts may be connected between a line wire and the neutral .
Higher wattage appliances , such as cooking equipment , space heating , water pumps , clothes dryers , and air conditioners are connected across the two line conductors .
This means that ( for the supply of the same amount of power ) the current is halved .
Hence , smaller conductors may be used than would be needed if the appliances were designed to be supplied by the lower voltage .
If the load were guaranteed to be balanced , then the neutral conductor would not carry any current and the system would be equivalent to a single - ended system of twice the voltage with the line wires taking half the current .
This would not need a neutral conductor at all , but would be wildly impractical for varying loads ; just connecting the groups in series would result in excessive voltage and brightness variation as lamps are switched on and off .
By connecting the two lamp groups to a neutral , intermediate in potential between the two live legs , any imbalance of the load will be supplied by a current in the neutral , giving substantially constant voltage across both groups .
The total current carried in all three wires ( including the neutral ) will always be twice the supply current of the most heavily loaded half .
For short wiring runs limited by conductor ampacity , this allows three half - sized conductors to be substituted for two full - sized ones , using 75 % of the copper of an equivalent single - phase system .
Longer wiring runs are more limited by voltage drop in the conductors .
Because the supply voltage is doubled , a balanced load can tolerate double the voltage drop , allowing quarter - sized conductors to be used ; this uses 3/8 the copper of an equivalent single - phase system .
In practice , some intermediate value is chosen .
For example , if the imbalance is limited to 25 % of the total load ( half of one half ) rather than the absolute worst - case 50 % , then conductors 3/8 of the single - phase size will guarantee the same maximum voltage drop , totalling 9/8 of one single - phase conductor , 56 % of the copper of the two single - phase conductors .
BALANCED POWER
Section::::Balanced power .
In a so - called balanced power system , an isolation transformer with a center tap is used to create a separate supply with conductors at a balanced Vnom/2 with respect to ground .
The purpose of a balanced power system is to minimize the noise coupled into sensitive equipment from the power supply .
Unlike a three - wire distribution system , the grounded neutral is not distributed to the loads ; only line - to - line connections at 120 V are used .
A balanced power system is only used for specialized distribution in audio and video production studios , sound and television broadcasting , and installations of sensitive scientific instruments .
The U.S. National Electrical Code provides rules for technical power installations .
The systems are not to be used for general - purpose lighting or other equipment , and may use special sockets to ensure only approved equipment is connected to the system .
Additionally , technical power systems pay special attention to the way the distribution system is grounded .
A risk of using a balanced power system , in an installation that also uses " conventional " power in the same rooms , is that a user may inadvertently interconnect the power systems together via an intermediate system of audio or video equipment , elements of which might be connected to different power systems .
APPLICATIONS
EUROPE
Section::::Applications .
Section::::Europe .
In Europe , three - phase 230/400 V is most commonly used .
However , 230/460 V , three - wire , single - phase systems are used to run farms and small groups of houses when only two of the three - phase high - voltage conductors are used .
A split - phase final step - down transformer is then used , with the centre - tap earthed and the two halves usually supplying different buildings with a single phase supply , although in the UK a large farm may be given a 230 - 0 - 230 supply .
In the UK , electric tools and portable lighting at larger construction and demolition sites are governed by BS7375 , and where possible are recommended to be fed from a centre - tapped system with only 55 V between live conductors and the earth ( so called CTE or Centre Tap Earth , or 55 - 0 - 55 ) .
This reduced low voltage system is used with 110 V equipment .
No neutral conductor is distributed .
In high hazard locations , additional double pole RCD protection may be used .
The intention is to reduce the electrocution hazard that may exist when using electrical equipment at a wet or outdoor construction site , and eliminate the requirement for rapid automatic disconnection for prevention of shocks during faults .
Portable transformers that transform single - phase 240 V to this 110 V split - phase system are a common piece of construction equipment .
Generator sets used for construction sites are equipped to supply it directly .
An incidental benefit is that the filaments of 110 V incandescent lamps used on such systems are thicker and therefore mechanically more rugged than those of 240 V lamps .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
This three - wire single phase system is common in North America for residential and light commercial applications .
Circuit breaker panels typically have two hot wires , and a neutral , connected at one point to the grounded center tap of a local transformer ) .
Single pole circuit breakers feed 120 volt circuits from one of the 120 volt busses within the panel , or two - pole circuit breakers feed 240 volt circuits from both busses .
120 V circuits are the most common , and used to power NEMA 1 and NEMA 5 outlets , and most residential and light commercial direct - wired lighting circuits .
240 V circuits are used for high - demand applications , such as air conditioners , space heaters , electric stoves , electric clothes dryers , air conditioners , water heaters , and electric vehicle charge points .
These use NEMA 10 or NEMA 14 outlets that are deliberately incompatible with the 120 V outlets .
Wiring regulations govern the application of split - phase circuits .
Since the neutral ( return ) conductor is not protected by a fuse or circuit breaker , a neutral wire can be shared only by two circuits fed from opposite lines of the supply system .
Two circuits from opposing lines may share a neutral if both breakers are connected by a bar so that both trip simultaneously ( NEC 210.4 ) , this prevents 120 V from feeding across 240 V circuits .
RAILWAYS Section::::Railways .
In Sweden split - phase electric power is also used on some railways .
The center tap is grounded , one pole is fed with an overhead wire section , while the other wire is used for another section .
Amtrak 's 60 Hz traction power system in the Northeast Corridor between New York and Boston also uses split - phase power distribution .
Two separate wires are run along the track , the contact wire for the locomotive and an electrically separate feeder wire .
Each wire is fed with 25 kV with respect to ground , with 50 kV between them .
Autotransformers along the track balance the loads between the contact and feeder wires , reducing resistive losses .
In the UK Network Rail are using autotransformers on all new 50 Hz electrification , and ( as of 2014 ) are converting many old booster transformer installations to autotransformers , to reduce energy losses and exported electromagnetic interference , both of which increase when longer , heavier , or faster trains are introduced , drawing higher peak current from the supply .
Note that booster transformers only " boost " the return of traction current through its intended path , the " return conductor " , rather than randomly through the earth , and do not boost , but rather reduce , the available voltage at the train , and introduce additional losses .
The autotransformer system enforces the traction return current taking its intended path , while reducing the transmission losses , and therefore achieves both required objectives , of controlling return current leakage to earth and ensuring low energy loss , simultaneously .
There is an initial cost penalty , because the previous return conductor , insulated to a fairly modest voltage , must be replaced by an anti - phase feeder , insulated to 25 kV , and the autotransformers themselves are larger and more expensive than the previous booster transformers .
SEE ALSO
* Shared neutral REFERENCES