UNANIMITY Unanimity is agreement by all people in a given situation .
Groups may consider unanimous decisions as a sign of agreement , solidarity , and unity .
Unanimity may be assumed explicitly after a unanimous vote or implicitly by a lack of objections .
It does not necessarily mean uniformity and can sometimes be the opposite of majority in terms of outcomes .
VOTING
Section::::Voting .
Practice varies as to whether a vote can be considered unanimous if some voter abstains .
In Robert 's Rules of Order , a " unanimous vote " is not specifically defined , although an abstention is not counted as a vote regardless of the voting threshold .
Also in this book , action could be taken by " unanimous consent " , or " general consent " , if there are no objections raised .
However , unanimous consent may not necessarily be the same as a unanimous vote ( see Not the same as unanimous vote ) .
In either case , it does not take into account the members who were not present .
In contrast , a United Nations Security Council resolution is not considered " unanimous " if a member abstains .
In the European Union , the Treaty of Amsterdam introduced the concept of " constructive abstention " , where a member can abstain in a vote where unanimity is required without thereby blocking the success of the vote .
This is intended to allow states to symbolically withhold support while not paralysing decision - making .
DEMOCRACIES Section::::Democracies .
The occurrence of unanimity in a representative democracy can be elusive with the diversity and variety of opinions in a participatory democracy .
Unanimity is often a political endeavor .
Although governments and international organizations may occasionally achieve unanimous decisions , popular consent is most often a more achievable aspiration for elected officials .
DICTATORSHIPS Section::::Dictatorships .
The legitimacy supposedly established by unanimity has been used by dictatorial regimes in an attempt to gain support for their position .
Participants in a legislature may be coerced or intimidated into supporting the position of a dictator , with the legislature becoming little more than a rubber stamp for a more powerful authority .
One - party states can restrict nominees to one per seat in elections and use compulsory voting or electoral fraud to create an impression of popular unanimity .
The North Korean parliamentary elections , 1962 reported a 100 % turnout and a 100 % vote for the Workers ' Party of Korea .
100 % votes have also been claimed by Ahmed Sékou Touré in Guinea in 1975 and 1982 , Félix Houphouët - Boigny in Côte d'Ivoire in 1985 , and Saddam Hussein in Iraq in 2002 .
JURIES Section::::Juries .
In criminal law jury trials , many jurisdictions require a guilty verdict by a jury to be unanimous .
This is not so in civil law jury trials .
The United States Supreme Court ruled in Apodaca v. Oregon that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment does not require jury unanimity in state courts , with a concurring opinion that the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution mandates unanimity for a guilty verdict in a federal court jury trial .
Notwithstanding this , many U.S. states do require jury unanimity for a finding of guilty ; for example , article 21 of the Maryland Constitution 's Declaration of Rights states : In England and Wales , since the Juries Act 1974 , a guilty verdict may be returned where not more than 2 jurors dissent .
SEE ALSO
* Consensus decision - making * Liberum veto * Unanimous consent REFERENCES