MEDIAN STRIP
The median strip or central reservation is the reserved area that separates opposing lanes of traffic on divided roadways , such as divided highways , dual carriageways , freeways , and motorways .
The term also applies to divided roadways other than highways , such as some major streets in urban or suburban areas .
The reserved area may simply be paved , but commonly it is adapted to other functions ; for example , it may accommodate decorative landscaping , trees , a median barrier or railway , rapid transit , light rail or streetcar lines .
REGIONAL TERMINOLOGY Section::::Regional terminology .
There is no international English standard for the term .
Median , median strip , and median divider island are common in North American and Antipodean English .
Variants in North American English include regional terms such as neutral ground in New Orleans usage .
In British English central reservation is the preferred usage ; it also occurs widely in formal documents in some non - British regions such as South Africa , where there are other informal regional words , for example middelmannetjie , which originally referred to the hump between wheel ruts on a dust road .
Among other coinages , central nature strip occurs in Australian English .
Additionally , different terminology is used to identify traffic lanes in a multi - lane roadway .
North American usage calls the lanes located closest to the roadway centerline the " inner " lanes , while British usage calls these lanes the " outer " lanes .
Thus , it is less confusing to call these central lanes the " passing " , " fast " , or " overtaking " lanes in international contexts , instead of using the ambiguous inner / outer distinction .
Regional differences between right - hand traffic and left - hand traffic can cause further confusion .
PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES Section::::Physical attributes .
Some medians function secondarily as green areas and green belts to beautify roadways .
Jurisdictions can : plant lawn grasses with regular mowing ; hydroseed or scatter wildflower seeds to germinate , bloom , and re - seed themselves annually ; or create extensive landscape plantings of trees , shrubs , herbaceous perennials and ornamental grasses .
Where space is at a premium , dense hedges of shrubs filter the headlights of oncoming traffic and provide a resilient barrier .
In other areas , the median may be occupied by a right - of - way for a public transportation system , such as a light rail or rapid transit line ; for example , the Red and Blue Lines of the Chicago ' L ' partially run in the medians of the Dan Ryan , Eisenhower , and Kennedy Expressways .
In contrast to the median of a major road , those in urban areas often take the form of central traffic islands that rise above the roadway .
These are frequently found on urban arterial roads .
In their simplest form , these are just raised concrete curbs , but can also be landscaped with grass or trees or decorated with bricks or stones .
Such medians are also sometimes found on more minor or residential streets , where they serve primarily as a traffic - calming or landscaping element rather than a safety enhancement to restrict turns and separate opposite directions of high - volume traffic flow .
In some areas , such as California , highway medians are sometimes no more than a demarcated section of the paved roadway , indicated by a space between two sets of double yellow lines .
Such a double - double yellow line or painted median is legally similar to an island median : vehicles are not permitted to cross it , unlike a single set of double yellow lines which may in some cases permit turns across the line .
This arrangement has been used to reduce costs , including narrower medians than are feasible with a planted strip , but research indicates that such narrow medians may have minimal safety benefit compared to no median at all .
The medians of United States Interstate Highways break only for emergency service lanes , with no such restrictions on lower classification roads .
On British motorways , the median is never broken ( except on the tidal flow of Aston Expressway ) , but there are no such restrictions on other dual carriageways .
WIDTH
Section::::Width .
The median strip in the United Kingdom ( where it is known as a central reservation ) and other densely populated European countries ( where it is known by their local names ) is usually no wider than a single lane of traffic .
In some cases , however , it is extended .
For instance , if the road is running through hilly terrain , the carriageways may have to be built on different levels of the slope .
An example of this is on the M5 motorway as it climbs up the side of the Gordano Valley south of Bristol .
Two examples on the UK road network where the carriageways are several hundred yards / meters apart , are on a section of the M6 between Shap and Tebay , which allows a local road to run between them , and on the M62 where the highest section through the Pennines famously splits wide enough to contain a farm .
The other major exception is the A38(M )
Aston Expressway , which is a single carriageway of seven lanes , where the median lane moves to account for traffic flow ( a system known as tidal flow or reversible lane ) .
With effect from January 2005 and based primarily on safety grounds , the UK 's Highways Agency 's policy is that all new motorway schemes are to use high containment concrete step barriers in the median ( central reservation ) .
All existing motorways will introduce concrete barriers as part of ongoing upgrades and through replacement as and when the current systems have reached the end of their useful life .
This change of policy applies only to barriers in the median of high speed roads and not to verge side barriers .
Other routes will continue to use steel barriers .
In North America , and some other countries with large sparsely populated areas , opposing lanes of traffic may be separated by several hundred meters of fields or forests outside of heavily populated areas ( an extreme example being the Trans - Canada Highway near Ernfold , Saskatchewan , Canada , where eastbound and westbound lanes go as far as apart from each other ) , but converge to a lane 's width of separation in suburban areas and cities .
In urban areas , concrete barriers ( such as Jersey barriers ) and guard rails ( or guide rails ) are used .
In Dedham , Massachusetts , the Norfolk County Correctional Center ( a state prison ) is located entirely within a wide median of Massachusetts Route 128 .
This 502-bed facility was opened in 1993 as infill construction in the previously - unused real estate which had been isolated by the divided highway in the early 1950s .
INVERTED MEDIAN Section::::Inverted median .
Some freeways in North America include " inverted " medians , which separate roadways running in the opposite direction from the standard for the country they are located in .
*
The north - south Golden State Freeway ( I-5 ) in the Tehachapi Mountains of California between Los Angeles and the San Joaquin Valley .
For several miles , the direction of traffic on both sides of the median is reversed — northbound traffic is on the western roadway and southbound traffic on the eastern roadway .
*
In western Montreal , on the Autoroute 20 , between the Route 138 and the Turcot Interchange , where the two directions , on opposite sides of a railway , are reversed ( and one enters or exits via the left side ) .
* I-85 in central North Carolina between Lexington and Thomasville features an inverted median , constructed so that an in - median , right - exit rest area can feature a historic bridge .
* I-77 in Charlotte , North Carolina , has a reverse median at its intersection over I-85 for on- and off - ramps without taking too much land from neighboring properties and without building many more bridges .
* I-84 used to have an inverted median through Waterbury , Connecticut , east of the 2-level " mixmaster " interchange with Route 8 .
This section of freeway was reconstructed in the 1970s , which eliminated the inverted median .
SAFETY IMPACT Section::::Safety impact .
An August 1993 study by the US Federal Highway Administration quantified the correlation between median width and the reduction of both head - on accidents and severe injuries .
The study found that medians without barriers should be constructed more than wide in order to have any effect on safety , and that safety benefits of wider medians continue to increase to a width of .
A consequence of this finding is that decreasing the size of a median to from to add lanes to a highway may result in a less safe highway .
Statistics regarding medians with barriers were not calculated in this study .
BUS RAPID TRANSIT Section::::Bus rapid transit .
Central reservations may also be used for reserved bus lanes , as in Istanbul 's Metrobus , Los Angeles 's Silver Line and Bogotá 's TransMilenio .
RAILWAY USE Section::::Railway use .
In some cases , the median strip of the highway may contain a train line , usually around major urban centers .
This is often done to share a right - of - way , because of the expense and difficulty of clearing a route through dense urban neighborhoods .
A reserved right - of - way is contrasted with street running , in which rail cars and automobiles occupy the same lanes of traffic .
Train lines that run in the median of highways include : EUROPE * Line 25N from Zaventem Airport junction to Mechelen along the E19 *
The line from Schiphol Airport along the A4 and A10 motorways to Amsterdam
*
The Essen Stadtbahn along the Ruhrschnellweg
* The Oresund Line along the E20 south of Malmö NORTH AMERICA
*
The Line 1 Yonge – University along Allen Road in northwest Toronto , Ontario , Canada UNITED STATES * The H Line ( RTD ) built in the median of Interstate 225 from Interstate 25 to north of Parker Road in the Denver , Colorado metro area
*
The New Mexico Rail Runner on the median of Interstate 25 from CP Hondo into the state capital of Santa Fe , New Mexico
* The WMATA Orange Line and the WMATA Silver Line west of Washington , D.C. following Interstate 66 and Virginia State Route 267 between Fairfax , Loudoun County , and Arlington , Virginia * The Baltimore Metro Subway along a portion of I-795 in Baltimore County
* The CTA Red Line and CTA Blue Line in the median of the Dan Ryan Expressway , the Kennedy Expressway , and I-290 to the west and south of Chicago
*
The TriMet MAX Blue Line light rail runs in the median between the two lanes of E. Burnside Street from 96th Avenue in Portland to 197th Avenue in Gresham , Oregon .
* Union Pacific 's main line through Austin , Texas , runs on the median of the MoPac Expressway .
The highway is named for the now defunct Missouri Pacific Railroad or " MoPac " .
*
The Hardy Toll Road in Houston , Texas , has a rail line running down the median for a significant portion of its length .
California
* Parts of Bay Area Rapid Transit ( BART ) outside San Francisco : * Antioch – SFO / Millbrae line ( including eBART ) along California State Route 24 and California State Route 4 * Dublin / Pleasanton –
Daly City line along Interstate 238 and Interstate 580 *
MacArthur station , a cross - platform interchange station where three lines meet in the median of State Route 24 *
The Los Angeles Metro
* The Green Line runs in the median of the Century Freeway .
*
The Gold Line runs in the median of the Foothill Freeway .
* San Bernardino Line runs in the median of the San Bernardino Freeway .
*
The Alum Rock – Santa Teresa line , part of the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority light rail system , runs for much of its length in the medians of California State Route 87 and California State Route 85 .
* Sacramento RT Light Rail Blue Line runs in the median of Interstate 80 ( California ) and includes park and ride facilities at most of the stations in this section .
OCEANIA
* The Joondalup and Mandurah railway lines in both Perth and Mandurah in Australia are set up like this .
The former is mainly located in the median of the Mitchell Freeway .
The latter line has its northern section in the median of the Kwinana Freeway while its southern section is located in Mandjoogoordap Drive .
Section::::Oceania .
City planners also commonly use media strips to accommodate urban tram tracks along a central segregated track , and examples of this layout are found across Europe .
Some of the earliest practices of incorporating central tramways into road designs were pioneered in Liverpool by John Alexander Brodie , and later emulated in Manchester , such as along Princess Parkway or Kingsway .
SEE ALSO * Lane * Motorway service area * Rest area * Road surface marking
* Shoulder ( road ) * Traffic lane REFERENCES