LAWRENCE KOHLBERG 'S STAGES OF MORAL DEVELOPMENT Lawrence Kohlberg 's stages of moral development constitute an adaptation of a psychological theory originally conceived by the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget .
Kohlberg began work on this topic while a psychology graduate student at the University of Chicago in 1958 and expanded upon the theory throughout his life .
The theory holds that moral reasoning , the basis for ethical behavior , has six identifiable developmental stages , each more adequate at responding to moral dilemmas than its predecessor .
Kohlberg followed the development of moral judgment far beyond the ages studied earlier by Piaget , who also claimed that logic and morality develop through constructive stages .
Expanding on Piaget 's work , Kohlberg determined that the process of moral development was principally concerned with justice , and that it continued throughout the individual 's lifetime , a notion that spawned dialogue on the philosophical implications of such research .
The six stages of moral development are grouped into three levels of morality : pre - conventional , conventional , and post - conventional morality .
For his studies , Kohlberg relied on stories such as the Heinz dilemma , and was interested in how individuals would justify their actions if placed in similar moral dilemmas .
He then analyzed the form of moral reasoning displayed , rather than its conclusion , and classified it as belonging to one of six distinct stages .
There have been critiques of the theory from several perspectives .
Arguments include that it emphasizes justice to the exclusion of other moral values , such as caring ; that there is such an overlap between stages that they should more properly be regarded as separate domains ; or that evaluations of the reasons for moral choices are mostly post hoc rationalizations ( by both decision makers and psychologists ) of essentially intuitive decisions .
Nevertheless , an entirely new field within psychology was created as a direct result of Kohlberg 's theory , and according to Haggbloom et al . 's study of the most eminent psychologists of the 20th century , Kohlberg was the 16th most frequently cited in introductory psychology textbooks throughout the century , as well as the 30th most eminent overall .
Kohlberg 's scale is about how people justify behaviors and his stages are not a method of ranking how moral someone 's behavior is .
There should , however , be a correlation between how someone scores on the scale and how they behave , and the general hypothesis is that moral behaviour is more responsible , consistent and predictable from people at higher levels .
STAGES
Section::::Stages .
Kohlberg 's six stages can be more generally grouped into three levels of two stages each : pre - conventional , conventional and post - conventional .
Following Piaget 's constructivist requirements for a stage model , as described in his theory of cognitive development , it is extremely rare to regress in stages — to lose the use of higher stage abilities .
Stages can not be skipped ; each provides a new and necessary perspective , more comprehensive and differentiated than its predecessors but integrated with them .
The understanding gained in each stage is retained in later stages , but may be regarded by those in later stages as simplistic , lacking in sufficient attention to detail .
PRE - CONVENTIONAL Section::::Pre - conventional .
The pre - conventional level of moral reasoning is especially common in children , although adults can also exhibit this level of reasoning .
Reasoners at this level judge the morality of an action by its direct consequences .
The pre - conventional level consists of the first and second stages of moral development and is solely concerned with the self in an egocentric manner .
A child with pre - conventional morality has not yet adopted or internalized society 's conventions regarding what is right or wrong but instead focuses largely on external consequences that certain actions may bring .
In Stage one ( obedience and punishment driven ) , individuals focus on the direct consequences of their actions on themselves .
For example , an action is perceived as morally wrong because the perpetrator is punished .
" The last time I did that I got spanked , so I will not do it again .
" The worse the punishment for the act is , the more " bad " the act is perceived to be .
This can give rise to an inference that even innocent victims are guilty in proportion to their suffering .
It is " egocentric " , lacking recognition that others ' points of view are different from one 's own .
There is " deference to superior power or prestige " .
An example of obedience and punishment driven morality would be a child refusing to do something because it is wrong and that the consequences could result in punishment .
For example , a child 's classmate tries to dare the child to skip school .
The child would apply obedience and punishment driven morality by refusing to skip school because he would get punished .
Stage two ( self - interest driven ) expresses the " what 's in it for me " position , in which right behavior is defined by whatever the individual believes to be in their best interest but understood in a narrow way which does not consider one 's reputation or relationships to groups of people .
Stage two reasoning shows a limited interest in the needs of others , but only to a point where it might further the individual 's own interests .
As a result , concern for others is not based on loyalty or intrinsic respect , but rather a " You scratch my back , and I 'll scratch yours " mentality .
The lack of a societal perspective in the pre - conventional level is quite different from the social contract ( stage five ) , as all actions at this stage have the purpose of serving the individual 's own needs or interests .
For the stage two theorist , the world 's perspective is often seen as morally relative .
An example of self - interest driven is when a child is asked by his parents to do a chore .
The child asks , " what 's in it for me ? "
The parents offer the child an incentive by giving a child an allowance to pay them for their chores .
The child is motivated by self - interest to do chores .
CONVENTIONAL
Section::::Conventional .
The conventional level of moral reasoning is typical of adolescents and adults .
To reason in a conventional way is to judge the morality of actions by comparing them to society 's views and expectations .
The conventional level consists of the third and fourth stages of moral development .
Conventional morality is characterized by an acceptance of society 's conventions concerning right and wrong .
At this level an individual obeys rules and follows society 's norms even when there are no consequences for obedience or disobedience .
Adherence to rules and conventions is somewhat rigid , however , and a rule 's appropriateness or fairness is seldom questioned .
In Stage three ( good intentions as determined by social consensus ) , the self enters society by conforming to social standards .
Individuals are receptive to approval or disapproval from others as it reflects society 's views .
They try to be a " good boy " or " good girl " to live up to these expectations , having learned that being regarded as good benefits the self .
Stage three reasoning may judge the morality of an action by evaluating its consequences in terms of a person 's relationships , which now begin to include things like respect , gratitude , and the " golden rule " .
" I want to be liked and thought well of ; apparently , not being naughty makes people like me . "
Conforming to the rules for one 's social role is not yet fully understood .
The intentions of actors play a more significant role in reasoning at this stage ; one may feel more forgiving if one thinks that " they mean well " .
In Stage four ( authority and social order obedience driven ) , it is important to obey laws , dictums , and social conventions because of their importance in maintaining a functioning society .
Moral reasoning in stage four is thus beyond the need for individual approval exhibited in stage three .
A central ideal or ideals often prescribe what is right and wrong .
If one person violates a law , perhaps everyone would — thus there is an obligation and a duty to uphold laws and rules .
When someone does violate a law , it is morally wrong ; culpability is thus a significant factor in this stage as it separates the bad domains from the good ones .
Most active members of society remain at stage four , where morality is still predominantly dictated by an outside force .
POST - CONVENTIONAL Section::::Post - conventional .
The post - conventional level , also known as the principled level , is marked by a growing realization that individuals are separate entities from society , and that the individual 's own perspective may take precedence over society 's view ; individuals may disobey rules inconsistent with their own principles .
Post - conventional moralists live by their own ethical principles — principles that typically include such basic human rights as life , liberty , and justice .
People who exhibit post - conventional morality view rules as useful but changeable mechanisms — ideally rules can maintain the general social order and protect human rights .
Rules are not absolute dictates that must be obeyed without question .
Because post - conventional individuals elevate their own moral evaluation of a situation over social conventions , their behavior , especially at stage six , can be confused with that of those at the pre - conventional level .
Some theorists have speculated that many people may never reach this level of abstract moral reasoning .
In Stage five ( social contract driven ) , the world is viewed as holding different opinions , rights , and values .
Such perspectives should be mutually respected as unique to each person or community .
Laws are regarded as social contracts rather than rigid edicts .
Those that do not promote the general welfare should be changed when necessary to meet " the greatest good for the greatest number of people " .
This is achieved through majority decision and inevitable compromise .
Democratic government is ostensibly based on stage five reasoning .
In Stage six ( universal ethical principles driven ) , moral reasoning is based on abstract reasoning using universal ethical principles .
Laws are valid only insofar as they are grounded in justice , and a commitment to justice carries with it an obligation to disobey unjust laws .
Legal rights are unnecessary , as social contracts are not essential for deontic moral action .
Decisions are not reached hypothetically in a conditional way but rather categorically in an absolute way , as in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant .
This involves an individual imagining what they would do in another 's shoes , if they believed what that other person imagines to be true .
The resulting consensus is the action taken .
In this way action is never a means but always an end in itself ; the individual acts because it is right , and not because it avoids punishment , is in their best interest , expected , legal , or previously agreed upon .
Although Kohlberg insisted that stage six exists , he found it difficult to identify individuals who consistently operated at that level .
Touro College Researcher Arthur P. Sullivan helped support the accuracy of Kohlberg 's first five stages through data analysis , but could not provide statistical evidence for the existence of Kohlberg 's sixth stage .
Therefore , it is difficult to define / recognize as a concrete stage in moral development .
FURTHER STAGES
Section::::Further stages .
In his empirical studies of individuals throughout their life , Kohlberg observed that some had apparently undergone moral stage regression .
This could be resolved either by allowing for moral regression or by extending the theory .
Kohlberg chose the latter , postulating the existence of sub - stages in which the emerging stage has not yet been fully integrated into the personality .
In particular Kohlberg noted a stage 4½ or 4 + , a transition from stage four to five , that shared characteristics of both .
In this stage the individual is disaffected with the arbitrary nature of law and order reasoning ; culpability is frequently turned from being defined by society to viewing society itself as culpable .
This stage is often mistaken for the moral relativism of stage two , as the individual views those interests of society that conflict with their own as being relatively and morally wrong .
Kohlberg noted that this was often observed in students entering college .
Kohlberg suggested that there may be a seventh stage — Transcendental Morality , or Morality of Cosmic Orientation — which linked religion with moral reasoning .
Kohlberg 's difficulties in obtaining empirical evidence for even a sixth stage , however , led him to emphasize the speculative nature of his seventh stage .
THEORETICAL ASSUMPTIONS ( PHILOSOPHY )
Section::::Theoretical assumptions ( philosophy ) .
Kohlberg 's stages of moral development are based on the assumption that humans are inherently communicative , capable of reason , and possess a desire to understand others and the world around them .
The stages of this model relate to the qualitative moral reasonings adopted by individuals , and so do not translate directly into praise or blame of any individual 's actions or character .
Arguing that his theory measures moral reasoning and not particular moral conclusions , Kohlberg insists that the form and structure of moral arguments is independent of the content of those arguments , a position he calls " formalism " .
Kohlberg 's theory centers on the notion that justice is the essential characteristic of moral reasoning .
Justice itself relies heavily upon the notion of sound reasoning based on principles .
Despite being a justice - centered theory of morality , Kohlberg considered it to be compatible with plausible formulations of deontology and eudaimonia .
Kohlberg 's theory understands values as a critical component of the right .
Whatever the right is , for Kohlberg , it must be universally valid across societies ( a position known as " moral universalism " ) : there can be no relativism .
Moreover , morals are not natural features of the world ; they are prescriptive .
Nevertheless , moral judgments can be evaluated in logical terms of truth and falsity .
According to Kohlberg , someone progressing to a higher stage of moral reasoning can not skip stages .
For example , an individual can not jump from being concerned mostly with peer judgments ( stage three ) to being a proponent of social contracts ( stage five ) .
On encountering a moral dilemma and finding their current level of moral reasoning unsatisfactory , however , an individual will look to the next level .
Realizing the limitations of the current stage of thinking is the driving force behind moral development , as each progressive stage is more adequate than the last .
The process is therefore considered to be constructive , as it is initiated by the conscious construction of the individual , and is not in any meaningful sense a component of the individual 's innate dispositions , or a result of past inductions .
FORMAL ELEMENTS
Section::::Formal elements .
Progress through Kohlberg 's stages happens as a result of the individual 's increasing competence , both psychologically and in balancing conflicting social - value claims .
The process of resolving conflicting claims to reach an equilibrium is called " justice operation " .
Kohlberg identifies two of these justice operations : " equality " , which involves an impartial regard for persons , and " reciprocity " , which means a regard for the role of personal merit .
For Kohlberg , the most adequate result of both operations is " reversibility " , in which a moral or dutiful act within a particular situation is evaluated in terms of whether or not the act would be satisfactory even if particular persons were to switch roles within that situation ( also known colloquially as " moral musical chairs " ) .
Knowledge and learning contribute to moral development .
Specifically important are the individual 's " view of persons " and their " social perspective level " , each of which becomes more complex and mature with each advancing stage .
The " view of persons " can be understood as the individual 's grasp of the psychology of other persons ; it may be pictured as a spectrum , with stage one having no view of other persons at all , and stage six being entirely socio - centric .
Similarly , the social perspective level involves the understanding of the social universe , differing from the view of persons in that it involves an appreciation of social norms .
EXAMPLES OF APPLIED
MORAL DILEMMAS Section::::Examples of applied moral dilemmas .
Kohlberg established the Moral Judgement Interview in his original 1958 dissertation .
During the roughly 45-minute tape recorded semi - structured interview , the interviewer uses moral dilemmas to determine which stage of moral reasoning a person uses .
The dilemmas are fictional short stories that describe situations in which a person has to make a moral decision .
The participant is asked a systemic series of open - ended questions , like what they think the right course of action is , as well as justifications as to why certain actions are right or wrong .
The form and structure of these replies are scored and not the content ; over a set of multiple moral dilemmas an overall score is derived .
A dilemma that Kohlberg used in his original research was the druggist 's dilemma : Heinz Steals the Drug In Europe .
CRITICISMS Section::::Criticisms .
One criticism of Kohlberg 's theory is that it emphasizes justice to the exclusion of other values , and so may not adequately address the arguments of those who value other moral aspects of actions .
Carol Gilligan has argued that Kohlberg 's theory is overly androcentric .
Kohlberg 's theory was initially developed based on empirical research using only male participants ; Gilligan argued that it did not adequately describe the concerns of women .
Kohlberg stated that women tend to get stuck at level 3 , focusing on details of how to maintain relationships and promote the welfare of family and friends .
Men are likely to move on to the abstract principles , and thus have less concern with the particulars of who is involved .
Consistent with this observation , Gilligan 's theory of moral development does not focus on the value of justice .
She developed an alternative theory of moral reasoning based on the ethics of caring .
Critics such as Christina Hoff Sommers , however , argued that Gilligan 's research is ill - founded , and that no evidence exists to support her conclusion .
Kohlberg 's stages are not culturally neutral , as demonstrated by its application to a number of different cultures .
Although they progress through the stages in the same order , individuals in different cultures seem to do so at different rates .
Kohlberg has responded by saying that although different cultures do indeed inculcate different beliefs , his stages correspond to underlying modes of reasoning , rather than to those beliefs .
Another criticism of Kohlberg 's theory is that people frequently demonstrate significant inconsistency in their moral judgements .
This often occurs in moral dilemmas involving drinking and driving and business situations where participants have been shown to reason at a subpar stage , typically using more self - interest driven reasoning ( i.e. stage two ) than authority and social order
obedience driven reasoning ( i.e. stage four ) .
Kohlberg 's theory is generally considered to be incompatible with inconsistencies in moral reasoning .
Carpendale has argued that Kohlberg 's theory should be modified to focus on the view that the process of moral reasoning involves integrating varying perspectives of a moral dilemma rather than simply fixating on applying rules .
This view would allow for inconsistency in moral reasoning since individuals may be hampered by their inability to consider different perspectives .
Krebs and Denton have also attempted to modify Kohlberg 's theory to account for a multitude of conflicting findings , but eventually concluded that the theory is not equipped to take into consideration how most individuals make moral decisions in their everyday lives .
Other psychologists have questioned the assumption that moral action is primarily a result of formal reasoning .
Social intuitionists such as Jonathan Haidt , for example , argue that individuals often make moral judgments without weighing concerns such as fairness , law , human rights , or abstract ethical values .
Thus the arguments analyzed by Kohlberg and other rationalist psychologists could be considered post hoc rationalizations of intuitive decisions ; moral reasoning may be less relevant to moral action than Kohlberg 's theory suggests .
CONTINUED RELEVANCE
Section::::Continued relevance .
Kohlberg 's body of work on the stages of moral development has been utilized by others working in the field .
One example is the Defining Issues Test ( DIT ) created in 1979 by James Rest , originally as a pencil - and - paper alternative to the Moral Judgement Interview .
Heavily influenced by the six - stage model , it made efforts to improve the validity criteria by using a quantitative test , the Likert scale , to rate moral dilemmas similar to Kohlberg 's .
It also used a large body of Kohlbergian theory such as the idea of " post - conventional thinking " .
In 1999 the DIT was revised as the DIT-2 ; the test continues to be used in many areas where moral testing is required , such as divinity , politics , and medicine .
SEE
ALSO REFERENCES
FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS * Moral Development and Moral Education : An Overview * Kohlberg 's Moral Stages *
Do the Right Thing : Cognitive science 's search for a common morality ( Boston Review ) * A Summary Of Lawrence Kohlberg 's Stages Of Moral Development