RAMPAGE ( VIDEO GAME )
Rampage is a 1986 arcade game by Bally Midway .
Players take control of gigantic monsters trying to survive against onslaughts of military forces .
Each round is completed when a particular city is completely reduced to rubble .
Warner Bros. currently owns all rights to the property via their purchase of Midway Games .
Rampage was inspired by the monster film King Kong , the kaiju film Godzilla , and the platform game Donkey Kong .
In turn , Rampage inspired a 2018 film adaptation of the same name .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Up to three simultaneous players control gigantic monsters who were formerly human .
The game 's protagonists are George , a King Kong - like gigantic gorilla transformed by an experimental vitamin , Lizzie , a Godzilla - like dinosaur / lizard transformed by a radioactive lake , and Ralph , a giant wolf , transformed by a food additive .
As monsters , they need to raze all buildings in a high - rise city to advance to the next level , eating people and destroying helicopters , tanks , taxis , police cars , boats , and trolleys along the way .
The monsters can climb any of the buildings , punching them to pieces on the way down which will eventually reduce them to rubble .
The various people can also be punched or grabbed and food items can be eaten .
The player 's monster receives damage from enemy bullets , sticks of dynamite , shells , punches from other monsters , and falls .
Damage is recovered by eating the various food items such as fruit , roast chicken , or even the soldiers .
If a monster takes too much damage , it reverts into a naked human and starts walking off the screen sideways , covering its modesty with its hands ( and in this state , can be eaten by another monster ) .
If the player continues , the human mutates back into the monster or ( if the human walked off the screen ) flies in on a blimp ( but has lost their score ) , with a full life bar .
Smashing open windows generally reveals an item or person of interest , which may be helpful or harmful .
Helpful items include food or money , while dangerous ones include bombs , electrical appliances , and cigarettes .
Some items can be both ; for example , a toaster is dangerous until the toast pops up , and a photographer must be eaten quickly before he dazzles the player 's monster with his flash , causing it to fall .
When a civilian is present waving their hands at a window signaling for help , a player 's points rapidly increase when the person is grabbed .
Each monster can hold only one type of person :
George can hold women , Lizzie can hold middle - aged men , and Ralph can hold businessmen .
Rampage is set over the course of 128 days in cities across North America .
The game starts in Peoria , Illinois and ends in Plano , Illinois .
In Plano , players receive a " mega vitamin bonus " which heals all the monsters and provides a large point bonus .
After this , the cycle of cities repeats five times .
After 768 days , the game resets back to Day 1 .
Some of the home port versions of the game start in San Jose , California and end in Los Angeles , California after going all around North America .
The rampage travels through two Canadian provinces and forty - three United States states .
Only Connecticut , Delaware , Mississippi , New Hampshire , Rhode Island , South Carolina , and Vermont are spared .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The game 's lead designers were artist Brian Colin and programmer Jeff Nauman .
Neither of them being fans of arcade games at the time , Colin conceived Rampage as a game in which there was " no wrong way to play .
" To this end , he wanted to eschew the common video game concepts of having a set objective , competing for a high score and dying .
Artist Sharon Perry , game tester Jim Belt and composer Michael Bartlow assisted with developing the game .
The game 's aim of destroying skyscrapers was created because the developers could only move rectangular shapes in the background .
The developers had to work within the technical limitations of the time - cities are largely identical in appearance , Ralph and George are the same character palette and head swapped and the dust effect from crumbling buildings conceals glitchy animation .
The game 's development and release languished as management was unconvinced of the game 's unusual concept of casting players as city - destroying monsters , but picked up after new management was installed at the company .
Post - release , additional levels were added to the game to make it more difficult .
In the opening cutscene reporting on three humans who had mutated into the monsters , Colin put pictures of himself as George , his wife Rae as Lizzy , and Nauman as Ralph .
RELEASE AND PORTS Section::::Release and ports .
The game was released for the arcades in 1986 .
Colin promoted the game via a press release sent to local media outlets in each of the towns mentioned in - game ; the press release took the form of an unofficial memo from Bally / Midway that stated that their town was " slated for destruction . "
Rampage was ported to the Apple II , Atari 2600 , Atari 7800 , Atari Lynx , Atari 8-bit , Atari ST , Amiga , Commodore 64 , MS - DOS / IBM PC , ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC , NES , Sega Master System and Tandy Color Computer 3 .
The Atari Lynx version adds a special fourth character named Larry , a giant rat .
The NES version excludes Ralph , reducing the number of monsters to two .
In 1997 Tiger Electronics released a handheld LCD version of the game .
In 2017 , Basic Fun released a mini arcade port of the NES version of the game with Ralph added .
This was # 10 of their Arcade Classics line .
The original arcade version of Rampage was included in various compilations .
In 1999 it was included in Arcade Party Pak for the PlayStation .
In 2003 it was included in Midway Arcade Treasures , a compilation of arcade games for the Nintendo GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox .
In 2005 it was included in for the PlayStation Portable .
In 2006 it was a bonus feature in .
In 2012 , it was included in the compilation Midway Arcade Origins .
The game was also an unlockable in the 2015 game Lego Dimensions .
In that game , a human sized version of George the ape appears in one of the sidequests .
In the Midway Arcade World level of the game , the player aids him in wrecking the area and protecting him from civilians to get a higher score than Ralph and Lizzie .
In July 2000 , Midway licensed Rampage , along with other Williams Electronics games , to Shockwave for use in an online applet to demonstrate the power of the shockwave web content platform , entitled Shockwave Arcade Collection .
The conversion was created by Digital Eclipse .
Rampage was also ported to iOS as part of the Midway arcade app .
In 2018 , Arcade 1up released a mini 4 foot version of the original arcade cabinet .
Unlike the original arcade game , most of the home ports ( such as the NES , Sega , and Atari Lynx versions ) actually end , rather than repeating levels endlessly .
The Amstrad CPC port ( published by Activision ) has in - game music ripped from the basement level of the arcade game Trojan , despite Trojan not having been ported to the Amstrad .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The game was a financial success in arcades , a rare high point for Bally / Midway in the aftermath of the video game crash of 1983 .
Computer Gaming World approved of the MS - DOS adaptation of Rampage , especially for those with computers faster than the original IBM PC and an EGA video card .
It stated that " Rampage is proof that IBM games can compete with other machines in running entertainment software " .
Your Sinclair said it was " All great fun for a while but being a monster can become a drag .
So unless you intend to play it three - handed , when the fun factor increases a little , or you 're a monster fan of the original , you might just give this a miss for something with more lasting value . "
ATARI LYNX Section::::Atari Lynx .
CVG Magazine reviewed the Atari Lynx version of the game in their March 1991 issue , giving it a score of 60 out of 100 .
Robert A. Jung reviewed the game which was posted to IGN Entertainment in July 1999 .
In his final verdict he wrote that " A lighthearted , silly game that 's lots of fun for lots of players ( the more the merrier ) .
" Giving a final score of 9 out of 10 .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
In 2012 , Walt Disney Animation Studios named their film character Wreck - It Ralph after Ralph
the wolf , since as the bad guy in his game " Fix - It Felix Jr. " , his job was to smash an apartment building
so the hero
Felix could repair the damage .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
About a decade later , a second arcade game was released entitled Rampage World Tour , developed for Midway by the original designers , Brian Colin and Jeff Nauman .
The success of Rampage World Tour as a home console title was followed by console - exclusive games including , Rampage Through Time , and Rampage Puzzle Attack .
The last game in the series made by Midway was .
The latest version was made by Raw Thrills , a redemption game with designs based on the 2018 Rampage film that was at first exclusive to Dave & Buster 's .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
On November 18 , 2011 it was announced that a theatrical film adaptation based on the game was in tentative development by New Line Cinema with John Rickard set to direct .
On June 22 , 2015 it was announced that actor Dwayne Johnson and producer Beau Flynn were attached to the project .
On July 22 , 2015 it was announced that San Andreas director Brad Peyton would direct the film .
On July 20 , 2016 , it was reported that production on the film would begin in March 2017 .
Filming officially began on April 17 , 2017 .
Rampage was released on April 13 , 2018 in 3D and IMAX .
SEE ALSO
* King of the Monsters REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS