MEDIAN ( GEOMETRY )
In geometry , a median of a triangle is a line segment joining a vertex to the midpoint of the opposing side , bisecting it .
Every triangle has exactly three medians , one from each vertex , and they all intersect each other at the triangle 's centroid .
In the case of isosceles and equilateral triangles , a median bisects any angle at a vertex whose two adjacent sides are equal in length .
The concept of a median extends to tetrahedra .
RELATION TO CENTER OF MASS Section::::Relation to center of mass .
Each median of a triangle passes through the triangle 's centroid , which is the center of mass of an infinitely thin object of uniform density coinciding with the triangle .
Thus the object would balance on the intersection point of the medians .
The centroid is twice as close along any median to the side that the median intersects as it is to the vertex it emanates from .
EQUAL - AREA DIVISION Section::::Equal - area division .
Each median divides the area of the triangle in half ; hence the name , and hence a triangular object of uniform density would balance on any median .
( Any other lines which divide the area of the triangle into two equal parts do not pass through the centroid . )
The three medians divide the triangle into six smaller triangles of equal area .
PROOF OF EQUAL - AREA PROPERTY Section::::Proof of equal - area property .
Consider a triangle ABC .
Let D be the midpoint of formula_1
, E be the midpoint of formula_2
, F be the midpoint of formula_3 , and O be the centroid ( most commonly denoted G ) .
By definition ,
formula_4 .
Thus formula_5 and formula_6 , where formula_7 represents the area of triangle formula_8
; these hold because in each case the two triangles have bases of equal length and share a common altitude from the ( extended ) base , and a triangle 's area equals one - half its base times its height .
We have :
Thus , formula_11 and formula_12 Since formula_13 , therefore , formula_14 .
Using the same method , one can show that formula_15 .
THREE CONGRUENT
TRIANGLES Section::::Three congruent triangles .
In 2014 Lee Sallows discovered the following theorem : FORMULAS
INVOLVING THE MEDIANS '
LENGTHS Section::::Formulas involving the medians ' lengths .
The lengths of the medians can be obtained from Apollonius ' theorem as : where a , b and c are the sides of the triangle with respective medians m , m , and m from their midpoints .
Thus we have the relationships : OTHER PROPERTIES
Section::::Other properties .
The centroid divides each median into parts in the ratio 2:1 , with the centroid being twice as close to the midpoint of a side as it is to the opposite vertex .
For any triangle with sides formula_22 and medians
formula_23 and
The medians from sides of lengths a and b are perpendicular if and only if formula_26 The medians of a right triangle with hypotenuse c satisfy formula_27
Any triangle 's area T can be expressed in terms of its medians formula_28 , and formula_29 as follows .
Denoting their semi - sum as σ , we have TETRAHEDRON Section::::Tetrahedron .
A tetrahedron is a three - dimensional object having four triangular faces .
A line segment joining a vertex of a tetrahedron with the centroid of the opposite face is called a median of the tetrahedron .
There are four medians , and they are all concurrent at the centroid of the tetrahedron .
As in the two - dimensional case , the centroid of the tetrahedron is the center of mass .
However contrary to the two - dimensional case the centroid divides the medians not in a 2:1 ratio but in a 3:1 ratio ( Commandino 's theorem ) .
SEE ALSO
* Angle bisector * Altitude ( triangle )
* Automedian triangle
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Medians at cut - the - knot * Area of Median Triangle at cut - the - knot * Medians of a triangle With interactive animation
* Constructing a median of a triangle with compass and straightedge animated demonstration