MARVEL STUDIOS
Marvel Studios , LLC ( originally known as Marvel Films from 1993 to 1996 ) is an American motion picture studio based at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , California and is a subsidiary of Walt Disney Studios , itself a wholly owned division of The Walt Disney Company , with film producer Kevin Feige serving as president .
Previously , the studio was a subsidiary of Marvel Entertainment until Disney reorganized the companies in August 2015 .
Dedicated to producing films based on Marvel Comics characters , the studio has been involved in three Marvel - character film franchises to have exceeded $ 1 billion in North American revenue : the X - Men , Spider - Man , and Marvel Cinematic Universe multi - film franchises .
The Spider - Man franchise is licensed to Sony Pictures .
Since 2012 , Marvel Studios ' films are distributed theatrically by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures , having previously been distributed by Paramount Pictures from 2008 to 2011 .
Universal Pictures distributed The Incredible Hulk ( 2008 ) and has the right of first refusal to distribute any future Hulk films produced by Marvel Studios , while Sony Pictures distributed ( 2017 ) and will distribute any future Spider - Man films produced in conjunction with Marvel Studios .
Marvel Studios has released 20 films since 2008 within the Marvel Cinematic Universe , from Iron Man ( 2008 ) to Ant - Man and the Wasp ( 2018 ) .
These films all share continuity with each other , along with the One - Shots produced by the studio and the television shows produced by Marvel Television .
The series has grossed over $ 17 billion at the global box office , making it the highest - grossing film franchise of all time .
BACKGROUND TIMELY ERA Section::::Background .
Section::::Timely era .
During what is known as Marvel 's Timely era , Captain America was licensed out to Republic Pictures for a serial just for the free advertising .
Timely failed to provide any drawing of Captain America with his shield or any further background , and Republic created a whole new background for the character , and portrayed the character using a gun .
MARVEL ENTERTAINMENT GROUP ERA Section::::Marvel Entertainment Group era .
In the late 1970s up to the early 1990s , Marvel Entertainment Group ( MEG ) sold options to studios to produce films based on Marvel Comics characters .
One of Marvel 's superheroes , Spider - Man , was optioned in the late 1970s , and rights reverted to Marvel without a film having been produced within the allotted timeframe .
From 1986 to 1996 , most of Marvel 's major characters had been optioned , including the Fantastic Four , X - Men , Daredevil , Hulk , Silver Surfer , and Iron Man .
A Howard the Duck film made it to the screen in 1986 , but was a box - office flop .
MEG was purchased by New World Entertainment in November 1986 and moved to produce films based on the Marvel characters .
It released The Punisher ( 1989 ) before MEG was sold to Ronald Perelman 's Andrews Group .
Two other films were produced : Captain America ( 1990 ) released in the United Kingdom on screens and direct to video in the United States , and The Fantastic Four ( 1994 ) , not intended for release .
Marvel 's rival DC Comics , on the other hand , had success licensing its properties Superman and Batman into successful film franchises .
HISTORY
MARVEL FILMS Section::::History .
Section::::Marvel Films .
Following Marvel Entertainment Group 's ( MEG ) ToyBiz deal in 1993 , Avi Arad of ToyBiz was named President and CEO of Marvel Films division and of New World Family Filmworks , Inc. , a New World Entertainment subsidiary .
New World was MEG 's former parent corporation and later a fellow subsidiary of the Andrews Group .
Marvel Productions became New World Animation by 1993 as Marvel would start up Marvel Films including Marvel Films Animation .
Marvel Films Animation shared Tom Tataranowicz with New World Animation as head of development and production .
New World Animation ( The Incredible Hulk ) , Saban ( X - Men ) and Marvel Films Animation ( Spider - Man ) each produced a Marvel series for television for the 1996–1997 season .
It was Marvel Films Animation 's only production .
By the end of 1993 , Arad and 20th Century Fox struck a deal to make a film based on the X - Men .
New World Animation and Marvel Films Animation were sold along with the rest of New World by Andrews Group to News
Corporation / Fox as announced in August 1996 .
As part of the deal , Marvel licensed the rights to Captain America , Daredevil and Silver Surfer to be on Fox Kids Network and produced by Saban .
New World Animation continued producing a second season of The Incredible Hulk for UPN .
MARVEL STUDIOS Section::::Marvel Studios .
In August 1996 , Marvel created Marvel Studios , an incorporation of Marvel Films , due to the sale of New World Communications Group , Inc. , Marvel 's fellow Andrews Group subsidiary in film and television stations , to News Corporation / Fox .
Filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to raise money to finance the new corporation , Marvel , Isaac Perlmutter 's Zib , Inc. and Avi Arad sold Toy Biz stocks , which Marvel had started and took public in February 1995 .
Toy Biz filed an offering of 7.5 million shares with a closing price of $ 20.125 at the time , making the offering worth approximately $ 150 million .
Toy Biz sought to sell 1 million shares , and Marvel sought to sell 2.5 million shares .
Jerry Calabrese , the president of Marvel Entertainment Group and Avi Arad , head of Marvel Films and a director of Toy Biz , were assigned tandem control of Marvel Studios .
Under Calabrese and Arad , Marvel sought to control pre - production by commissioning scripts , hiring directors , and casting characters , providing the package to a major studio partner for filming and distribution .
Arad said of the goal for control , " When you get into business with a big studio , they are developing a hundred or 500 projects ; you get totally lost .
That is n't working for us .
We 're just not going to do it anymore .
Period .
"
Marvel Studios arranged a seven - year development deal with 20th Century Fox to cover markets in the United States and internationally .
In the following December , Marvel Entertainment Group went through a reorganization plan , including Marvel Studios as part of its strategic investment .
By 1997 , Marvel Studios was actively pursuing various film productions based on Marvel characters , including the eventual films X - Men ( 2000 ) , Daredevil ( 2003 ) , Elektra ( 2005 ) and Fantastic Four ( 2005 ) .
Unproduced projects included Prince Namor , based on the character Namor and to be directed by Philip Kaufman , and Mort the Dead Teenager , based on the comic book of the same name and written by John Payson and Mort creator Larry Hama .
Marvel was developing a Captain America animated series with Saban Entertainment for Fox Kids Network to premiere in fall 1998 .
However , due to the bankruptcy the series was canceled after only character designs and a one - minute promotional reel were made .
LICENSING FILMS
Section::::Licensing films .
The first film packaged and licensed by Marvel Studios was Blade , based on the vampire hunter Blade .
The film was directed by Stephen Norrington and starred Wesley Snipes as Blade .
It was released on August 21 , 1998 , grossing $ 70,087,718 in the United States and Canada and $ 131,183,530 worldwide .
In 1999 , Marvel licensed Spider - Man to Sony .
Blade was followed by X - Men , which was directed by Bryan Singer and was released on July 14 , 2000 .
X - Men grossed $ 157,299,717 in the United States and Canada and $ 296,250,053 worldwide .
Blade and X - Men demonstrated that widely popular films could be made out of comic book characters not familiar to the general public .
Leading up to X - Mens release , Marvel Studios negotiated a deal with then - functional Artisan Entertainment , successful with the low - budget
The Blair Witch Project , for a co - production joint venture that included rights to 15 Marvel characters including Captain America , Thor , Black Panther , Iron Fist , and Deadpool .
Artisan would finance and distribute while Marvel would develop licensing and merchandising tie - ins .
The resulting production library , which would also include TV series , direct - to - video films and internet projects , would be co - owned .
With the deal at the time , 24 Marvel properties were then in various stages of development .
Brian Cunningham , editor of Wizard comic book magazine , believed that Avi Arad was successful in organizing strategic alliances and exercising fiscal responsibility in multimedia expansion .
Cunningham said of Arad 's leadership of the studio following its parent company 's near - bankruptcy , " The fact the X - Men is primed to be the biggest movie of the summer speaks volumes about the turnaround for Marvel .
From my observation , he 's focused on a lot more in diversifying Marvel , doing things that proliferate Marvel characters in the mainstream . "
Arad sought to protect Marvel 's image by serving as executive producer in all Marvel film productions and being responsible for crossover marketing between Marvel properties .
Arad had properties set up at different studios to create momentum so one studio would not cannibalize efforts with one property for the sake of another .
By 2001 , the success of Marvel Entertainment 's Ultimate Marvel comics created leverage in Hollywood for Marvel Studios , pushing more properties into development .
The next film licensed from Marvel Studios was Spider - Man by Columbia Pictures , directed by Sam Raimi and starring Tobey Maguire as Spider - Man .
The film was released on May 3 , 2002 , grossing $ 403,706,375 in the United States and Canada and $ 821,708,551 worldwide .
The early success of Spider - Man led the film 's studio to issue a seven - figure advance for a sequel .
Arad spoke of the deal , " Movies make sequels .
Therefore , it 's a big economic luxury to know that a movie 's going to get a second and third .
This is a business of precedence . "
According to a Lehman Brothers analysis , the Studios made only $ 62 million for the first 2 Spider - Man movies .
Marvel was making more from half the consumer product licensing fees while making relatively little from the movie , but was enough for Marvel to regain its financial footings .
In October 2002 , Marvel Studios announced deals for Sub - Mariner and Prime with Universal Studios .
In producing Marvel films in the 2000s , Avi Arad sought to capture the superheroes ' internal conflicts .
According to The New York Times , " Mr. Arad 's great accomplishment – and it is one , given the difficulties in transferring any kind of printed material to the big screen – is conveying what makes those heroes tick as characters ...
He works with the filmmakers to ensure that the heroes are conflicted , the villains motivated , the outcome shaded . "
In contrast to the original storylines of DC Comics ' Superman and Batman films , Marvel films were more directly inspired by their comics , copying from them set pieces , scenes , plots , and dialogue .
In 2003 , David Maisel approached Arad about earning Marvel more for their films .
Maisel , Arad and Perlmutter met leading to Maisel being hired in as President and COO .
The studio 's office , then on Santa Monica Boulevard , were small with a dozen or so staff members .
Kevin Feige was a junior executive generating script notes to the licensed studios .
In January 2003 , Marvel , The SCI FI Channel and Reveille Productions agreed to develop two pilot films based on Brother Voodoo and .
Partnering with Lionsgate in 2004 , Marvel Studios plan to enter the direct - to - DVD market with eight animated films with Lionsgate Home Entertainment handling distribution .
The line was a proof of concept for Maisel 's later plan .
Eric Rollman was hired by Marvel as Executive Vice President , Home Entertainment & TV Production for Marvel Studios to oversee the deal with Lionsgate .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2004 , David Maisel was hired as chief operating officer of Marvel Studios as he had a plan for the studio to self - finance movies .
Marvel entered into a non - recourse debt structure with Merrill Lynch that was collateralized by certain movie rights to a total of 10 characters from Marvel 's vast vault .
Marvel got $ 525 million to make a maximum of 10 movies based on the company 's properties over eight years , according to the parameters of the original deal .
Those characters were : Ant - Man , The Avengers , Black Panther , Captain America , Cloak & Dagger , Doctor Strange , Hawkeye , Nick Fury , Power Pack and Shang - Chi .
Ambac insured the movies would succeed or they would pay the interest payment on the debt and get the movie rights collateral .
Initially Marvel Studios was in talks with Universal Pictures as a possible distributor , as Universal owned the film rights to both Hulk and Namor during that time .
Negotiations dragged on , so the studio began talks with Paramount Pictures .
In the second quarter of 2005 , Merrill attempted to back out of full financing of each movie , demanding that Marvel finance 1/3 of the budget .
Marvel took back rights in five foreign territories from Paramount for pre - sell to meet that demand .
On September 6 , 2005 , Marvel announced the Merrill Lynch financing deal with Paramount was on as marketer and distributor .
Also , the parent company changed its name from Marvel Enterprises , Inc. to Marvel Entertainment , Inc. to reflect the change to self - production .
The studio moved to a new location over a Mercedes - Benz dealership in Beverly Hills .
Maisel was also named vice - chairman of the studio , but reported to Isaac Perlmutter .
In October 2005 , Michael Helfant joined the studio as president and chief operating officer .
In November 2005 , Marvel gained the film rights to Iron Man from New Line Cinema .
Marvel revealed that it had regained the film rights to Hulk from Universal in February 2006 , in exchange for letting Universal own the distribution rights to The Incredible Hulk and the right of first refusal to pick up the distribution rights to any future Marvel Studios - produced Hulk films .
In April 2006 , Thor was announced to be a Marvel Studios production .
Lions Gate Entertainment subsequently dropped the Black Widow motion picture project it had since 2004 giving the rights back to Marvel .
Maisel and Arad fought over the rate of movie releases and strength of characters in the movie line up .
Perlmutter supported Maisel and thus , in May 2006 , Arad quit as studio chair and CEO .
In March 2007 , David Maisel was named Chairman and Kevin Feige was named President of Production as Iron Man began filming .
In January 2008 , Marvel Animation was incorporated to direct Marvel 's efforts in animation and home entertainment markets including then animation efforts with Lionsgate and Nickelodeon .
The company in March agreed to a five picture basic cable distribution with FX for Iron Man and The Incredible Hulk movies with the additional movies to be named later .
In November , Marvel Studios signed a lease with Raleigh Studios to host its headquarters and production offices and film the next four movies on the studios ' slate , including Iron Man 2 and Thor , at their Manhattan Beach facilities .
By September 2008 , Paramount added to its domestic film distribution contract 5 additional Marvel movies ' foreign distribution .
In 2009 , Marvel attempted to hire a team of writers to help come up with creative ways to launch its lesser - known properties , such as Black Panther , Cable , Iron Fist , Nighthawk , and Vision .
In early 2009 , Sony returned all Spider - Man television rights ( including live action ) in exchange for an adjustment to the movie rights .
DISNEY CONGLOMERATE SUBSIDIARY ( 2009–PRESENT )
Section::::Disney conglomerate subsidiary ( 2009–present ) .
On December 31 , 2009 , The Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel Entertainment for $ 4 billion .
Both Marvel and Disney stated that the merger would not affect any preexisting deals with other film studios for the time being , although Disney said they would distribute future Marvel projects with their own studio once the deals expired .
In April 2010 , rumors circulated that Marvel was looking to create $ 20–40 million movies based on properties such as Doctor Strange , Ka - Zar , Luke Cage , Dazzler , and Power Pack .
Kevin Feige responded by saying , while budgets are generally never discussed early in development , Marvel was considering films for all characters mentioned in the rumor , except Dazzler , whose rights were at Fox .
In June 2010 , Marvel Entertainment set up a television division within Marvel Studios , headed up by Jeph Loeb as Executive Vice President , under which Marvel Animation would be operated .
On October 18 , Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures acquired the distribution rights for The Avengers and Iron Man 3 from Paramount Pictures with Paramount 's logo and credit remaining on the films .
On August 22 , 2011 , at Disney 's behest , the Studio dismissed most of its marketing department :
Dana Precious , EVP of Worldwide Marketing ; Jeffrey Stewart , VP of Worldwide Marketing and Jodi Miller , Manager of Worldwide Marketing .
Disney markets Marvel 's films .
In April 2012 , The Walt Disney Company China , Marvel Studios and DMG Entertainment announced an agreement to co - produce Iron Man 3 in China .
DMG partly financed , produced in China with Marvel , and handled co - production matters .
DMG also distributed the film in China in tandem with Disney .
Upon the release of The Amazing Spider - Man in 2012 , Disney and Sony negotiated a two - way agreement .
Disney would receive full merchandising ancillary rights to future Spider - Man films in exchange for Sony purchasing out Marvel 's film participation rights .
In April 2013 , Marvel Studios moved its production facilities from Manhattan Beach to The Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , California .
On July 2 , 2013 , Disney purchased the distribution rights to Iron Man , Iron Man 2 , Thor and from Paramount .
In September 2014 , TNT acquired the cable rights for , , and three other films , to air on the network two years after their theatrical releases .
The films had previously aired on FX since 2008 .
In February 2015 , it was announced that Disney and Sony Pictures will collaborate on the next Spider - Man films , the first of which , , was released on July 7 , 2017 .
Former Sony executive Amy Pascal will co - produce the films with Kevin Feige .
The film rights to Spider - Man will still remain with Sony .
Marvel Studios will also explore opportunities to integrate other characters of MCU into future Spider - Man films .
In August 2015 , Marvel Studios was placed into Walt Disney Studios , with Feige reporting directly to Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn instead of Marvel Entertainment CEO Isaac Perlmutter .
Marvel Television and subsidiary Marvel Animation were left under Marvel Entertainment and Perlmutter 's control .
Fast Company ranked Marvel Studios number eleven on its 2018 World 's Most Innovative Companies list .
In September 2018 , it was reported that Marvel Studios was developing several limited series for the streaming service Disney+ , to be centered on " second tier " characters from the MCU films who had not and were unlikely to star in their own films .
Characters being considered for series included Loki and Scarlet Witch , with the actors who portrayed the characters in the films expected to reprise their roles for the limited series .
Each series was expected to be six to eight episodes , with a " hefty [ budget ] rivaling those of a major studio productions " .
The series would be produced by Marvel Studios rather than Marvel Television , with Feige taking a " hands - on role " in each series ' development .
CHARACTER RIGHTS
Section::::Character rights .
Marvel had licensed out the film rights to many of their characters to other studios in the 1990s , starting with the X - Men to 20th Century Fox in 1993 .
One of the first characters to see the rights returned to Marvel was Black Panther , which were returned to Marvel in 2005 , having previously been at Columbia Pictures and Artisan Entertainment .
In November 2005 , Marvel gained the film rights to Iron Man from New Line Cinema .
In April 2006 , Thor 's rights reverted to Marvel from Sony , and in June , the Black Widow rights reverted to Marvel from Lions Gate Entertainment .
That same year , the film rights to Hulk reverted to Marvel Studios from Universal Studios , after the latter failed to enter production on a sequel to Ang Lee 's 2003 Hulk film .
Universal , however , retains the right of first refusal to distribute future Hulk films .
After being acquired by Disney , Marvel began to reclaim more of their character rights , starting with Blade from New Line Cinema .
In August 2012 , it was reported that 20th Century Fox was willing to allow the film rights to the superhero Daredevil and his related characters revert to Marvel and Disney , a contracted stipulation that required Fox to begin production on a new Daredevil film by late 2012 .
Fox had approached Marvel about extending the deadline and becoming a co - financier for the film , but was rebuffed .
On October 10 , 2012 , the Daredevil rights reverted to Marvel Studios , which was confirmed by studio president Kevin Feige on April 23 , 2013 .
On May 2 , 2013 , Feige confirmed in an interview that the Ghost Rider and Punisher rights had reverted to Marvel from Sony and Lionsgate respectively , as well as reaffirming the acquisition of the Blade rights .
It was later revealed in May 2013 that Marvel has also reacquired the rights to Luke Cage from Sony .
In an interview with Collider in early May 2013 , Kevin Feige stated he believed the Elektra rights were back at Marvel through the Daredevil deal .
In February 2015 , Marvel Studios and Sony Pictures Entertainment announced that Spider - Man would appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , with the character appearing in Captain America : Civil War and Sony releasing produced by Feige and Pascal on July 7 , 2017 .
Sony Pictures will continue to finance , distribute , own and have final creative control of the Spider - Man films .
Marvel Studios will also explore opportunities to integrate other characters of the Marvel Cinematic Universe into future Spider - Man films .
In June 2015 , Feige clarified that the initial Sony deal does not allow Spider - Man to appear in any of the MCU television series , as it was " very specific ... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed .
"
20th Century Fox was able to change the powers of Negasonic Teenage Warhead for Deadpool by giving Marvel Studios the rights to Ego the Living Planet , who appears in Guardians of the Galaxy Vol .
2 .
Marvel CCO Joe Quesada in 2012 believed Namor 's rights had reverted to Marvel , but Feige said in August 2013 this was not so .
However , Feige expanded in July 2014 saying that Marvel Studios , not Universal Pictures or Legendary Pictures , could make a Namor film , " but it 's slightly more complicated than that .
Let 's put it this way – there are entanglements that make it less easy .
There are older contracts that still involve other parties that mean we need to work things out before we move forward on it .
As opposed to an Iron Man or any of the Avengers or any of the other Marvel characters where we could just put them in . "
In June 2016 , Quesada again stated that , to his knowledge , the film rights to Namor had returned to Marvel .
In October 2018 , Feige noted the character could appear in the MCU , with the studio still deciding how it would use the character .
On December 14 , 2017 , Disney agreed to purchase 20th Century Fox 's parent company 21st Century Fox , after it spins off some of its businesses .
Disney plans to reincorporate the X - Men and Fantastic Four franchise of characters and Deadpool with their own Marvel properties in order to " create richer , more complex worlds of inter - related characters and stories that audiences have shown they love . "
In March 2018 , Feige revealed that the majority of the characters would be back with Marvel Studios , though there were still " some with a couple of other players involved that would have to be negotiated with . "
MARVEL KNIGHTS Section::::Marvel Knights .
Named after corporate sibling Marvel Comics ' imprint of the same name , Marvel Knights is also the name given to a production arm of Marvel Studios intended to be used to produce some of Marvel 's darker and lesser known titles .
The first film produced under the Marvel Knights banner was , the 2008 release that rebooted the Punisher franchise .
In 2012 , was the second and final title to be released under the Marvel Knights banner . !
Year(s ) !
Film(s ) !
Based on !
width="25 % " Production partner !
Distributor !
Budget(s ) !
Gross EXECUTIVES
* Stan Lee ( in July 1997 )
Marvel Studios Chairman *
Avi Arad * Marvel Films President and CEO , 1993 –
August 1996
* Marvel Studios Chairman and CEO , August 1998 – May 2006
* Jerry Calabrese * David Maisel * Chief Operating Officer , 2004 – September 2005 * Vice Chairman , September 2005 - September 27 , 2006
* Chairman and CEO , March 2007 – 2010
* Michael Helfant , President and Chief Operating Officer , October 2005 * Kevin Feige , President of Production , March 2007 – present * Tim Connors , Chief Operating Officer , December 12 , 2008 – 2012 UNITS * MVL Productions LLC : film slate subsidiary * Marvel Music ( 2005–present ) MARVEL MUSIC Section::::Units .
Section::::Marvel Music .
Marvel Music is a subsidiary of Marvel Studios involved in the publishing of music related to its productions .
Mighty Marvel Music Corporation and Marvel Music Group , Inc.
( both incorporated on July 29 , 1981 ) were music publishing subsidiaries of Marvel Entertainment Group that were retained by New World Entertainment when Marvel was sold to Andrews Group in 1989 , and were with New World when they were sold to Fox .
Marvel Music was incorporated on September 9 , 2005 to manage Marvel Studios ' and Marvel Animation 's filmed music .
At New York Comic Con in 2009 , Marvel officially announced the re - launch of Marvel Music , which would now serve as a label for releasing music related to Marvel 's film and television productions .
Disney Music Group began distributing Marvel Music 's albums in 2011 with the soundtrack releases of Thor and , which were released under Buena Vista Records .
Beginning in 2012 , with the release of Avengers Assemble ( Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture ) , Disney 's Hollywood Records label began distributing Marvel Music 's albums from then onward .
In 2014 , Guardians of the Galaxy : Awesome Mix Vol .
1 became the first Marvel Music album to be certified Gold — and subsequently certified Platinum — by the Recording Industry Association of America , as well as the first soundtrack album in history to top the Billboard 200 chart , while consisting entirely of previously released songs .
LOGO Section::::Logo .
Starting with the release of Spider - Man in 2002 , Marvel Studios introduced its " flipbook " logo , created by Imaginary Forces .
This logo was accompanied with music from the film 's score , sound effects or a song , to lead into the beginning of the film .
This was the logo seen in front of all films until 2013 , when the logo was updated with the release of , again created by Imaginary Forces .
Kevin Feige stated that since Marvel was now their own entity within The Walt Disney Company , it " felt like the time to update it and have something that is more substantial as a standalone logo in front of our features " instead of having it be accompanied by Marvel 's studio or distribution partners ' logos .
Feige added that " We did n't want to re - invent the wheel [ with the new logo ] , but we wanted it to feel bigger , to feel more substantial , which is why it starts with the flip , but suddenly it 's more dimensional as we go through the lettering and it reveals itself with the metallic sheen before settling into the white - on - red , well known Marvel logo , with the added flourish of the arrival and the announcement of the Studios at the bottom of the word Marvel . "
Imaginary Forces used the same animation technique on the updated logo , as they did when they created the first version in 2002 .
They were given a few hundred comic books to select images from , ultimately choosing 120 that were " universal and not specific to one character " and created a narrative " where each image spoke to the one before it and after . "
The new logo appeared on all subsequent studio productions set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe through Captain America : Civil War .
With the addition of the new logo , Marvel Studios also added a fanfare to accompany the logo , composed by Brian Tyler , who wrote the scores to Iron Man 3 , Thor : The Dark World , and Avengers : Age of Ultron .
It was featured on the films Thor : The Dark World , , and Guardians of the Galaxy .
In July 2016 , another new logo and opening were introduced , featuring an updated fanfare , composed this time by Doctor Strange and composer Michael Giacchino .
The new opening begins with comic book panels seen in the previous two openings , but transitions into footage and art of the characters from the Marvel Cinematic Universe films .
It was first seen in front of Doctor Strange .
The updated logo was created by Perception , who were first approached in January 2016 by Marvel to update their logo .
Feige specifically requested Perception " to combine the brand and the iconic characters into a single image , showcasing the heroes within the letterforms of the Marvel logo .
"
The Perception team settled on a concept they dubbed " How to Build a Universe " , which " was designed to pay tribute to [ the film making ] process by touching on " how a film 's origins is inspired by the comics , which then results in a script , followed by concept art , resulting in the final film .
Perception looked to the initial " flipbook " logo for inspiration , and paid tribute to it in the new opening , as it opens identically to the flipbook logo .
Next , the opening includes " various lines lifted directly from the script pages of various Marvel screenplays " , with Perception picking " both iconic fan - favorites , as well as lines that helped establish the breadth of the Marvel Universe . " To add in the concept art images , Perception looked " through a massive archive of concept art and " The Art Of … " books , to select the most iconic images for each beloved character .
Utilizing the original digital paintings themselves , the Perception team animated each image being painted from scratch .
The final touch was mapping this artwork onto 3D models to giving these once 2D paintings a sense of depth as the camera moves around them . "
Finally , over 70 pieces of footage from the 13 films that had released at that time were included , with Perception arranging them in a way they called the " vault " " where luminescent footage plays on the interior walls of the " Marvel " logotype . "
A new logo was introduced at the 2017 D23 Expo to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the MCU .
PRODUCTION LIBRARY
FILMS
TELEVISION LIVE ACTION Section::::Production library .
Section::::Television .
Section::::Live action . !
Series !
Year(s ) !
width="25 % " Production partner !
Writer !
Originalnetwork !
Notes ANIMATED Network !
colspan=5Marvel Films animation 1994–1998 Marvel Films Animation Fox Kids
Fantastic Four rowspan=21994–1996
rowspan=2 Genesis Entertainment ( US)New World Entertainment ( International ) rowspan=2The Marvel Action HourFirst - runsyndication Iron Man
The Incredible Hulk 1996–1997 New World Animation , New World Entertainment Saban Entertainment UPN !
colspan=5Marvel Studios animation Silver Surfer 1998 colspan=2 rowspan=3Saban
Entertainment rowspan=3Fox Kids
Spider - Man Unlimited 1999–2001 1999–2000 2000 - 2003 Film Roman
Warner Bros. Television Distribution Kids ' WB " 2003 - 2003 Mainframe Entertainment"Adelaide ProductionsSony Pictures Television
Sony Pictures Television
MTV 2006 - 2007
Moonscoop MoonScoop GroupCartoon Network
Cartoon Network
SEE ALSO
*
Marvel Cinematic Universe
* Outline of the Marvel Cinematic Universe
*
Marvel Entertainment * Marvel Productions
* List of films based on Marvel Comics * List of Marvel Cinematic Universe films REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS