PROSECCO Prosecco ( , ) is an Italian white wine .
Prosecco controlled designation of origin can be spumante ( " sparkling wine " ) , frizzante ( " semi - sparkling wine " ) , or tranquillo ( " still wine " ) .
It is made from Glera grapes , formerly known also as Prosecco , but other grape varieties may be included .
The following varieties are traditionally used with Glera up to a maximum of 15 % of the total : Verdiso , Bianchetta Trevigiana , Perera , Glera lunga , Chardonnay , Pinot Bianco , Pinot Grigio and Pinot Noir .
The name is derived from an Italian village of Prosecco near Trieste , where the grape and wine originated .
Prosecco DOC is produced in nine provinces spanning the Veneto and Friuli Venezia Giulia regions .
Prosecco Superiore DOCG comes in two varieties : Prosecco Conegliano Valdobbiadene Superiore DOCG , which can only be made in the Treviso province of Veneto on the hills between the towns of Conegliano and Valdobbiadene ( north of Treviso ) , and the smaller Asolo Prosecco Superiore DOCG , produced near the town of Asolo .
Prosecco is the main ingredient of the Bellini cocktail and can be a less expensive substitute of Champagne .
It is also a key ingredient of spritz , a popular cocktail in northern Italy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In Trieste at the beginning of the sixteenth century , the local wine " Ribolla " was promoted as the recreation of the Pucinian wine of antiquity , celebrated by Pliny the Elder in his Natural History and praised for its medicinal qualities by Livia , the wife of Emperor Augustus .
The need to distinguish the " Ribolla " of Trieste from other wines of the same name , produced in Gorizia and at lower cost in Istria , led , at the end of the century , to a change in name .
Following the supposed place of production in antiquity , the wine was referred to as " castellum nobile vinum Pucinum " , after the castle near the village of Prosecco .
The first known mention of the name " Prosecco " is attributed to the Englishman Fynes Moryson , although he used the word " Prosecho " .
Moryson , visiting the north of Italy in 1593 , notes : " Histria is devided into Forum Julii , and Histria properly so called ...
Here growes the wine Pucinum , now called Prosecho , much celebrated by Pliny " .
He places Prosecco among the famous wines of Italy : " These are the most famous Wines of Italy .
La lagrima di Christo and like wines neere Cinqueterre in Liguria :
La vernazza , and the white Muskadine , especially that of Montefiaschoni in Tuscany : Cecubum and Falernum in the Kingdom of Naples , and Prosecho in Histria " .
Up until the 1960s , Prosecco sparkling wine was generally rather sweet and barely distinguishable from the Asti wine produced in Piedmont .
Since then , production techniques have improved , leading to the high - quality dry wines produced today .
According to a 2008 New York Times report , Prosecco has risen sharply in popularity in markets outside Italy , with global sales growing by double - digit percentages since 1998 , aided also by its comparatively low price .
It was introduced into the mainstream U.S. market in 2000 by Mionetto , now the largest importer of Prosecco , who also reported an " incredible growth trend " in 2008 .
Consumption also ballooned in the UK , which became , in the mid-2010s , the biggest export market for Prosecco , consuming fully one quarter of all Italian production .
Until the 2008 vintage Prosecco was protected as a DOC within Italy , as Prosecco di Conegliano - Valdobbiadene , Prosecco di Conegliano and Prosecco di Valdobbiadene .
From 2009 , this has been promoted to DOCG status .
To further protect the name , an association of traditional Prosecco growers is advocating a protected designation of origin status for Northern Italian Prosecco under European law .
Since 1 January 2010 , Prosecco is , according to an order of the Italian Minister of Agriculture of 17 July 2009 , not the name of a grape variety any more ( now to be called Glera ) , but exclusively a geographical indication .
This was confirmed by EG - Regulation Nr .
1166/2009 of 30 November 2009 .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Unlike Champagne and Franciacorta DOCG , Prosecco usually is produced using the Charmat - Martinotti method , in which the secondary fermentation takes place in stainless steel tanks rather in each bottle , making the wine less expensive to produce .
Neverless , the rules for the DOCG Prosecco Valdobbiadene do allow the use of the traditional method of secondary fermentation in the bottle .
Approximately 150 million bottles of Prosecco are produced annually .
, 60 % of all Prosecco is made in the Conegliano and Valdobbiadene area .
Production there amounted to € 370 million in 2007 .
Since the 2000s , Glera ( formerly known as Prosecco ) grapes are also cultivated and wine from the grapes is produced in other countries including Brazil , Romania , Argentina , and Australia .
In the region of Conegliano and Valdobbiadene there are more than 150 producers , and they form together the Consortium for the Protection of Prosecco from Conegliano and Valdobbiadene ( Consorzio per la Tutela del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene ) .
PROSECCO DOC Section::::Prosecco DOC .
Prosecco DOC can be Spumante sparkling wine , Frizzante ( semi - sparkling ) and Tranquillo ( still ) .
Prosecco DOC Spumante is the most famous and popular variety and has a longer - lasting bubbles .
Prosecco DOC Frizzante has less lingering bubbles .
Prosecco DOC Tranquillo is a still wine , with no bubbles .
Depending on their sweetness , in accordance with the EU Sweetness of wine Regulations for Terms used to indicate sweetness of sparkling wine , Proseccos are labelled " Brut " ( up to 12 grams per litre of residual sugar ) , " Extra Dry " ( 12–17 g / l ) or " Dry " ( 17–32 g / l ) .
The still wine ( tranquillo ) amounts to only about five percent of production , and this wine is rarely exported .
Prosecco labeled with another , non - protected designation , such as " IGT - Veneto " , are generally cheaper and of a more varied quality .
PROSECCO SUPERIORE
DOCG
Section::::Prosecco Superiore DOCG .
Prosecco Conegliano Valdobbiadene Superiore DOCG can only be made in the Treviso province of Veneto on the hills between the towns of Conegliano and Valdobbiadene .
Producers from Valdobbiadene have recently tended to skip the mention of Conegliano on their front label , calling their wine Valdobbiadene Prosecco Superiore .
There is also the smaller Asolo Prosecco Superiore DOCG , produced near the town of Asolo .
While the bulk of Prosecco DOC is grown on low - lying plains in an extended area covering 20,000 hectares , Prosecco Conegliano Valdobbiadene Superiore DOCG is grown exclusively on hillside vineyards in a far smaller growing area totaling 6,586 hectares .
The steepness of the hills of Valdobbiadene means that everything , from pruning to picking , is principally done by hand .
The manual aspect , especially for the harvest , further increases quality .
SUPERIORE DI CARTIZZE
Section::::Superiore di Cartizze .
The hill of Cartizze is a high vineyard of of vines , owned by 140 growers .
The Prosecco from its grapes , of which comparatively little is produced , is widely considered to be of the highest quality , or even the " Grand Cru " of Prosecco .
Accordingly , a hectare of Cartizze grape land was estimated to be worth in excess of one million US dollars in 2008 , and its value was estimated to have increased to 1.5–2 million euros in 2015 , the most for a vineyard in Italy .
The sparkling wine produced from Cartizze has recently been named by producers as Superiore di Cartizze , without mentioning Prosecco on the front label to further emphasize its territory .
According to a local legend , Cartizze grapes traditionally were harvested last , as the vines were situated on steep slopes and hard to reach , which led to vintners discovering that this extended ripening period improved the flavour .
Nonetheless , in a blind tasting at the 2006 Vinitaly trade fair , Cartizze spumanti were ranked consistently behind " normal " Prosecco .
RIVE SUBZONES Section::::Rive subzones .
While Cartizze is at the top of the Prosecco Superiore DOCG quality pyramid , the Consorzio recently introduced their official Rive delimitations , i.e. subzones that are named after the area where the grapes originate , highlighting the different microclimates and distinct terroirs found throughout the growing zone .
COL FONDO Section::::Col Fondo .
Some winemakers are reviving the customary Prosecco Col Fondo , refermented in the bottle but not disgorged , as the wines are left on their lees .
This yeasty residue leaves a fine sediment on the bottom ( fondo in Italian ) that imparts more complexity and flavor .
These wines are currently labeled Conegliano Valdobbiadene DOCG , without the added term Superiore — which is reserved for wines that have at least 3.5 bars of pressure in the unopened bottle , while the Col Fondo generally have 2.5 bars .
CONSUMPTION Section::::Consumption .
In Italy , Prosecco is a ubiquitously used wine .
Outside Italy , it is most often drunk as an apéritif , much as Champagne is .
As with other sparkling wines , Prosecco is served chilled .
Unlike Champagne , Prosecco does not ferment in the bottle , and it grows stale with time .
It should be drunk as young as possible , preferably within three years of its vintage , although high - quality Prosecco may be aged for up to seven years .
The view that Prosecco can not be aged has been challenged by other experts .
A tasting in 2013 of wines produced between 1983 and 2013 demonstrated the longevity of the wines from one of their top producers .
Compared to other sparkling wines , Prosecco is low in alcohol , about 11 to 12 percent by volume .
The flavor of Prosecco has been described as intensely aromatic and crisp , bringing to mind yellow apple , pear , white peach , and apricot .
Unlike Champagne , appreciated for its rich taste and complex secondary aromas , most Prosecco variants have intense primary aromas and are meant to taste fresh , light and comparatively simple .
Most commonly Prosecco is served unmixed , but it also appears in several mixed drinks .
It was the original main ingredient in the Bellini cocktail and in the Spritz cocktail , and it can also replace Champagne in other cocktails such as the Mimosa .
With vodka and lemon sorbet , Prosecco is also an ingredient of the Italian mixed drink Sgroppino .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Consorzio di Tutela del Prosecco di Conegliano
Valdobbiadene DOCG
* Consorzio di Tutela del Prosecco DOC