HAM HOCK
A ham hock ( or hough ) or pork knuckle is the joint between the tibia / fibula and the metatarsals of the foot of a pig , where the foot was attached to the hog 's leg .
It is the portion of the leg that is neither part of the ham proper nor the ankle or foot ( trotter ) , but rather the extreme shank end of the leg bone .
USES Section::::Uses .
Since this piece generally consists of much skin , tendons and ligaments , it requires long cooking through stewing or braising to be made palatable .
The cut of meat can be cooked with greens and other vegetables or in flavorful sauces .
It is often added to soups , such as pea and ham soup , with the meat being added to the soup prior to serving .
The meat of particularly meaty hocks may be removed and served as is .
Ham hocks , like hog jowls ( pigs ' cheeks ) , add a distinctive flavor to various dishes .
This is particularly true for collard greens , mustard greens , cabbage , green beans and navy beans .
Ham hocks are essential ingredients for the distinct flavor in soul food and other forms of American Southern country cooking .
In the Mid - Atlantic States , in rural regions settled by the Pennsylvania Dutch , hocks are a commonly used ingredient for making a kind of meat loaf called scrapple .
Eisbein is the name of the joint in north German , and at the same time the name of a dish of roasted ham hock , called Schweinshaxe in Bavaria , Stelze in Austria and Wädli in Switzerland .
Golonka is a very popular Polish barbecued dish using this cut .
Ham hocks are also popular when boiled with escarole , more commonly called endives , in Italian - American cuisine .
Fläsklägg med rotmos is a Swedish dish consisting of cured ham hocks and a mash of rutabaga and potatoes , served with sweet mustard .
In Canada , and particularly Montreal , ham hocks are referred to as " pigs ' knuckles " and are served in bistros and taverns with baked beans .
In northern Italy ham hocks are referred to as stinco , and is often served roast whole with sauerkraut .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * List of ham dishes – also includes ham hock dishes * List of smoked foods REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS