RUDY RUETTIGER Daniel Eugene " Rudy " Ruettiger ( born August 23 , 1948 ) is a motivational speaker who played college football at the University of Notre Dame .
His early life and career at Notre Dame were the inspiration for the 1993 film Rudy .
EARLY LIFE AND COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::Early life and college career .
Daniel Ruettiger ( nicknamed " Rudy " ) had a hard time in school because he was dyslexic .
He was the third of fourteen children .
He attended Joliet Catholic High School , where he played for locally famous coach Gordie Gillespie .
Ruettiger joined the United States Navy after high school , serving as a yeoman on a communications command ship for two years ; then he worked in a power plant for two years .
He applied to Notre Dame , but owing to his marginal grades , he had to do his early college work at nearby Holy Cross College .
After two years at Holy Cross , Ruettiger was accepted as a student at Notre Dame on his fourth try , in the fall of 1974 .
It was during his time studying at Holy Cross that Ruettiger discovered he had dyslexia .
Ruettiger harbored a dream to play for the Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team , despite being undersized at merely 5'6 " and 165 pounds .
Head coach Ara Parseghian encouraged walk - on players from the student body .
For example , Notre Dame 's 1969 starting center , Mike Oriard , was a walk - on who was eventually nominated for a Rhodes Scholarship and an NFL contract with the Kansas City Chiefs .
After working as hard as possible and showing that he was willing to work as much as he needed to , Ruettiger earned a place on the Notre Dame scout team , a practice squad that helps the varsity team practice for games .
Merv Johnson was the coach who was instrumental in keeping Rudy on as a scout - team player .
After the 1974 season , Notre Dame coach Parseghian stepped down , and former Green Bay Packers coach Dan Devine was named head coach .
In Ruettiger 's last opportunity to play for Notre Dame at home , Devine put him into a game as defensive end against Georgia Tech on November 8 , 1975 .
In the movie Rudy , Devine is given a somewhat antagonistic role , not wanting Ruettiger to dress for his last game .
In the real life scenario , however , it was Devine who came up with the idea to dress Ruettiger .
In the final play of Ruettiger 's senior season with the Fighting Irish , he recorded a sack , which is all his Notre Dame stat line has ever shown .
Ruettiger actually played for three plays .
The first play was a kickoff , the second play was an incomplete pass , and on the third ( and final ) play he sacked Georgia Tech quarterback Rudy Allen .
Ruettiger was carried off the field by his teammates following the game .
Ruettiger was one of two players in Notre Dame history to ever be carried off the field by his teammates .
The other is Marc Edwards in 1995 .
LIFE POST
NOTRE DAME
Section::::Life post Notre Dame .
The inaugural 2007 College Football Rudy Award was held on January 8 , 2008 at the Opryland Hotel in Nashville , Tennessee .
The College Football Rudy Award was created by the Rudy Foundation and honors Division I football players who demonstrate what Ruettiger refers to as the " Four Cs " : character , courage , contribution , and commitment as a member of their team .
The 2007 award was presented to Terry Clayton of the University of Kentucky Wildcats and the 2008 award was presented to Drew Combs of the Texas Christian University Horned Frogs .
The 2009 award winner was LeVon Morefield of University of Akron Zips , and in 2010 it went to Mark Herzlich of the Boston College Eagles .
On October 14 , 2005 , Ruettiger was the master of ceremonies at a pep rally for Notre Dame Football .
The Fighting Irish were about to play rival and then # 1-ranked University of Southern California ( USC ) the following day and Head Coach
Charlie Weis asked some Notre Dame legends , including Tim Brown and Joe Montana , to come back and speak at the rally .
Ruettiger came out of the tunnel at Notre Dame Stadium to a loud ovation .
Notre Dame ultimately lost the game ( though that loss was later vacated due to misconduct by USC ) .
In July 2009 , Ruettiger was initiated into the Kappa Sigma Fraternity at the Grand Conclave in San Antonio , Texas .
In September 2009 , Trusted Sports and Ruettiger launched the High School Football " Rudy " Awards , which aim to uncover the " Rudy " on every high school football team in America .
The award is presented to the most inspirational high school football player who personifies what Ruettiger calls the " Four Cs " : courage , character , commitment , and contribution .
Inspired by the College Football Rudy Awards , three finalists were announced on February 3 , 2010 .
The winner , Calob Leindecker of Baton Rouge , Louisiana , received a college scholarship totaling $ 10,000 .
Two runners - up , Kyle Weafer of Kansas and Justin Ray Duke of Texas each received $ 5,000 scholarships .
Ruettiger 's story was told in the 1993 film Rudy , which starred actor Sean Astin in the title role .
The film was written by Angelo Pizzo and directed by David Anspaugh , both of whom were involved in Hoosiers .
Ruettiger appeared in a cameo as a fan behind his father , Ned Beatty , during the final scene .
SEC INVESTIGATION Section::::SEC investigation .
In 2011 , Ruettiger was charged with " lack of oversight " while serving as Chairman of Rudy Beverage , Inc which was publicly traded and a group of unscrupulous individuals carried out a pump - and - dump scheme .
Ruettiger was not criminally charged .
A settlement of the case required Ruettiger to pay $ 382,866 in fines .
PUBLICATIONS
* Rudy 's Insights for Winning in Life
* Rudy 's Lessons for Young Champions
* Rudy & Friends AWARDS
* Honorary Doctorate Degree from Our Lady of Holy Cross College
* The key to numerous cities across the nation along with special proclamations for his inspiration , commitment , and human spirit
* Honorary assist to the Attorney General of Louisiana
* Recognition from President George W. Bush
* Recognition at the White House * Recognition from the House of Representatives in the state of Texas * A Proclamation from the Governor of Nevada granting an Official Rudy Award Day MOVIE ACCURACY Section::::Movie accuracy .
Ruettiger has said that the movie is " 92 % true .
" The players did not lay down their jerseys ; rather , the team captain and one other player requested that he be allowed to play .
Dan Devine is given an antagonistic role in the film , but the coach was actually one of his biggest motivators to return to the team .
The groundskeeper and former player Fortune is a combination of three different people .
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Pagna , Tom , " Notre Dame 's Era of Ara " , Diamond Communications , Inc. , 1976 , , pp 182–183 , regarding Parseghian 's use of walk - ons .
Interview with Rudy for the DVD release can be found on the DVD Special Features , and on YouTube snippets of the film where he discusses the accuracy of the film to the real story .
* https://www.rudyinternational.com/true-story EXTERNAL LINKS