METATARSOPHALANGEAL JOINT SPRAIN
A metatarsophalangeal joint sprain is an injury to the connective tissue between the foot and one of the toes .
When the big toe is involved , it is known as " turf toe " .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Turf toe is named from the injury being associated with playing sports on rigid surfaces such as artificial turf and is a fairly common injury among professional American football players .
Often , the injury occurs when someone or something falls on the back of the calf while that leg 's knee and tips of the toes are touching the ground .
The toe is hyperextended and thus the joint is injured .
Additionally , athletic shoes with very flexible soles combined with cleats that " grab " the turf will cause overextension of the big toe .
This can occur on the lesser toes as well .
It has also been observed in sports beyond American football , including soccer , basketball , rugby , volleyball , and tae kwon do .
This is a primary reason why many athletes prefer natural grass to turf , because it is softer .
DIAGNOSIS TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The injury can be debilitating for athletes of many sports who need to accelerate , quickly change direction , or jump .
Use of the toes is not possible during the healing process .
Since the toes are necessary for proper push - off when accelerating , those sorts of athletic activities should be almost completely curtailed .
An extended healing period of one or more months is often required .
Because of the anatomy of the distal foot and the unique use of the foot , it is often impossible to properly tape or brace the joint .
Although difficult , it is not impossible to tape the toe to limit extension ( upward bend of toe ) .
Additionally , wearing a shoe with a rigid sole ( often a metal plate ) and cushioned innersole will help minimize extension of the joint .
Anti - inflammatory medication as well as physical therapy is recommended .
Turf toe is usually healed in about 2–3 weeks .
It can become more serious if left untreated , and may cause serious problems for the athlete .
Treating the injury includes icing of the area , elevating the foot , or possibly the use of custom orthotics .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS