NET INCOME
In business and accounting , net income ( total comprehensive income , net earnings , net profit , bottom line , gross profit , gross margin , sales profit , or credit sales ) is an entity 's income minus cost of goods sold , expenses and taxes for an accounting period .
It is computed as the residual of all revenues and gains over all expenses and losses for the period , and has also been defined as the net increase in shareholders ' equity that results from a company 's operations .
In the context of the presentation of financial statements , the IFRS Foundation defines net income as synonymous with profit and loss .
The difference between revenue and the cost of making a product or providing a service , before deducting overheads , payroll , taxation , and interest payments .
This is different from operating profit ( earnings before interest and taxes ) .
A common synonym for net profit when discussing financial statements ( which include a balance sheet and an income statement ) is the bottom line .
This term results from the traditional appearance of an income statement which shows all allocated revenues and expenses over a specified time period with the resulting summation on the bottom line of the report .
In simplistic terms , net profit is the money left over after paying all the expenses of an endeavor .
In practice this can get very complex in large organizations or endeavors .
The bookkeeper or accountant must itemise and allocate revenues and expenses properly to the specific working scope and context in which the term is applied .
Definitions of the term can , however , vary between the UK and US .
In the US , net profit is often associated with net income or profit after tax ( see table below ) .
The net profit margin percentage is a related ratio .
This figure is calculated by dividing net profit by revenue or turnover , and it represents profitability , as a percentage .
It is a measure of the profitability of a venture after accounting for all costs and taxes .
It is the actual profit , and includes the operating expenses that are excluded from gross profit .
Net income is usually calculated per annum , for each fiscal year .
It is the same as net profit but a distinct accounting concept from profit , i.e. the amount of money the company has made before its company - specific deductions are subtracted .
Net income can also be calculated by adding a company 's operating income to non - operating income and then subtracting off taxes .
" How does a company decide whether it is successful or not ?
Probably the most common way is to look at the net profits of the business .
Given that companies are collections of projects and markets , individual areas can be judged on how successful they are at adding to the corporate net profit . "
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Net income can be distributed among holders of common stock as a dividend or held by the firm as an addition to retained earnings .
As profit and earnings are used synonymously for income ( also depending on UK and US usage ) , net earnings and net profit are commonly found as synonyms for net income .
Often , the term income is substituted for net income , yet this is not preferred due to the possible ambiguity .
Net income is informally called the bottom line because it is typically found on the last line of a company 's income statement ( a related term is top line , meaning revenue , which forms the first line of the account statement ) .
The items deducted will typically include tax expense , financing expense ( interest expense ) , and minority interest .
Likewise , preferred stock dividends will be subtracted too , though they are not an expense .
For a merchandising company , subtracted costs may be the cost of goods sold , sales discounts , and sales returns and allowances .
For a product company advertising , manufacturing , and design and development costs are included .
Cost of goods sold is calculated differently for a merchandising business than for a manufacturer .
AN EQUATION FOR NET INCOME Section::::An equation for net income .
Net profit : To calculate net profit for a venture ( such as a company , division , or project ) , subtract all costs , including a fair share of total corporate overheads , from the gross revenues or turnover .
Net profit is a measure of the fundamental profitability of the venture .
" It is the revenues of the activity less the costs of the activity .
The main complication is . . .
when needs to be allocated " across ventures .
" Almost by definition , overheads are costs that can not be directly tied to any specific " project , product , or division .
" The classic example would be the cost of headquarters staff . "
" Although it is theoretically possible to calculate profits for any sub-(venture ) , such as a product or region , often the calculations are rendered suspect by the need to allocate overhead costs . "
Because overhead costs generally do n't come in neat packages , their allocation across ventures is not an exact science .
EXAMPLE Section::::Example .
Here is how you reach net profit on a P&L ( Profit & Loss ) account : * Sales revenue = price ( of product ) × quantity sold * * Gross profit = sales revenue − cost of sales and other direct costs *
* Operating profit = gross profit − overheads and other indirect costs *
* EBIT ( earnings before interest and taxes ) = operating profit + non - operating income *
* Pretax profit ( EBT , earnings before taxes ) = operating profit − one off items and redundancy payments , staff restructuring − interest payable
* * Net profit = Pre - tax profit − tax
* * Retained earnings = Profit after tax − dividends
*
Another equation to calculate net income :
Net sales ( revenue ) - Cost of goods sold =
Gross profit - SG&A expenses ( combined costs of operating the company ) -
Research and development ( R&D ) =
Earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation and amortization
( EBITDA )
- Depreciation and amortization =
Earnings before interest and taxes
( EBIT ) -
Interest expense ( cost of borrowing money ) =
Earnings before taxes ( EBT )
- Tax expense =
Net income ( EAT ) Another equation to calculate net income : OTHER TERMS SEE
ALSO
* Dividend * Economic value added * Gross income * Income statement
* Liquidating dividend
* Net income per employee
* Operating income * Operating Income Before Depreciation and Amortization
* Opportunity cost
* Profit ( accounting ) * Revenue * Cost of goods sold * Profit margin ( the ratio of net income to net sales ) * Gross margin ( the difference between the sales and the production costs ) REFERENCES