GUITAR CENTER Guitar Center is an American music retailer chain .
It is the largest company of its kind in the United States , with 269 locations .
Its headquarters is in Westlake Village , California .
Guitar Center oversees various subsidiaries including Music & Arts , GuitarCenter.com , LMI , Giardinelli , Musician.com , Private Reserve Guitars , Woodwind and Brasswind , Music 123 , and used to own Harmony Central until its April 2015 sale to Gibson .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Founded in Hollywood by Wayne Mitchell in 1959 as The Organ Center , a retailer of electronic organs for home and church use , it became a major seller of Vox electric guitars and guitar amplifiers , changing its name to The Vox Center in 1964 .
Toward the end of the 1960s , Vox — whose sales derived largely from its association with The Beatles , who made extensive use of its amplifiers — fell in popularity as Marshall amplifier users Eric Clapton and others captured musicians ' imaginations .
Accordingly , Mitchell once again changed the name , this time to Guitar Center .
The popularity of rock and roll in the 1970s allowed Mitchell to open stores in San Francisco and San Diego , as well as several suburbs of Los Angeles .
Ray Scherr , previously the general manager of the San Francisco store , purchased the company from Mitchell in the late 1970s .
Scherr owned and operated it until 1996 from its Westlake Village headquarters .
Although synthesizer - driven disco and new wave pop sapped rock 's audience in the late 1970s , the 1980s " guitar rock " revival led by Van Halen and a concurrent influx of Japanese - produced instruments brought guitar sales to unprecedented levels .
Guitar Center took full advantage of this sales bonanza , and by the end of the decade began an ambitious program of expansion across the entire United States .
Using its size as leverage over the musical instrument business , it developed into the largest musical instrument retailer in the country , and made an initial public offering of stock in 1997 .
In 2005 , Guitar Center , Inc. , started The Fender Music Foundation , a nonprofit organization that supports music education .
Activision partnered with Guitar Center in 2006 ; all purchases made during game play of Guitar Hero , beginning with the second installment , are made in a virtual Guitar Center store .
On June 27 , 2007 , Guitar Center agreed to a $ 1.9 billion buyout from Bain Capital , totaling $ 2.1 billion including debt .
The deal was led by Goldman Sachs and amounted to a per - share price of $ 63 , or a 26 % premium on the June 26 closing price .
The deal was approved by shareholders on September 18 , 2007 , and closed October 9 , 2007 .
In mid-2009 Guitar Center opened the first of its rehearsal and lessons studio facility in Woodland Hills , California .
The eight studios with full backline range in size from 350 - 550 square feet .
Guitar Center also hosts annual events such as the Drum Off , King of the Blues , contests , and artist appearances throughout the nation .
In 2011 , Guitar Center added equipment rentals to the store in San Diego , California .
Since , Guitar Center has opened rental departments in ten other existing locations and plans to offer rental services in various other stores across the country .
In May 2013 , Standard & Poor 's cut its debt rating on Bain Capital - owned Guitar Center Holdings Inc to " junk bond " status , citing struggles with " weak operating trends .
" The corporate credit rating on the company dropped from ' B- ' to ' CCC+ ' .
In April 2014 , Ares Management took a controlling stake in Guitar Center .
Bain Capital , Guitar Center 's former owner , retained partial ownership of the company , along with representation on the board .
According to Mike Pratt , the retailer 's previous chief executive , the deal will reduce Guitar Center 's total debt and provide it with the resources to expand its footprint and invest in its business .
In August 2014 , Guitar Center opened a new 28,000 square foot flagship location in the heart of Times Square in New York City .
The grand opening included a celebratory concert featuring the band The Roots .
The Guitar Center Times Square location is now the permanent home of Eric Clapton 's Blackie Fender Stratocaster , which Guitar Center purchased at a Christie 's Crossroads Centre auction in 2004 for $ 959,000 .
In April , 2017 , Moody 's Investors Services revised the outlook on Guitar Center 's B2 rating to negative , meaning it could downgrade the rating further into junk territory in the medium tern .
The concern is that Guitar Center may be overwhelmed by its $ 1 billion debt in the face of flat sales in the musical instrument industry as a whole .
GUITAR CENTER
SESSIONS Section::::Guitar Center Sessions .
First debuting in 2010 , each episode of Guitar Center Sessions showcases exclusive live performances by noteworthy artists captured in hi - definition at Guitar Center 's iconic Hollywood , CA location .
Some past guests have included Linkin Park , Saint Motel , Wiz Khalifa , Billy Idol , The 1975 , Sum 41 , Weezer , Smashing Pumpkins , Peter Gabriel , Alanis Morissette , 311 , Megadeth , Snoop Dogg , Soundgarden , Seether , The Cult , CAKE , Jakob Dylan , Blondie , Rodrigo y Gabriela , Bush , Ben Folds Five , Korn , Joan Jett , Cheap Trick , Skylar Grey , Peter Frampton , Frank Turner , Coheed and Cambria , and Jane 's Addiction .
Guitar Center Sessions is hosted by Nic Harcourt , and was created , developed and produced by Guitar Center exclusively on DirecTV .
Guitar Center Sessions has won several awards , including a Lumiere Award from the International 3D Society for the episodes featuring Jane 's Addiction and Peter Gabriel .
To celebrate their 50th anniversary , Guitar Center asked Linkin Park to play a show on October 24 , 2014 ; the performance first aired on DirecTV on December 5 , 2014 .
AT :
GUITAR CENTER WEB SERIES
Section::::At : Guitar Center web series .
The At : Guitar Center web series ( formerly At : Guitar Center podcast ) features interviews and intimate performances with some of the biggest names in music .
Some past guests have included Travis Barker , Sevendust , T - Pain , Joe Bonamassa , The Crystal Method , Buddy Guy , Daughtry , Jimmy Cliff , Meiko , Rza , Steve Vai , Joe Satriani , Brandi Carlile , and Minus the Bear , The podcasts are available on the iTunes , Zune and BlackBerry networks and on the Guitar Center website .
The show is hosted by Nic Harcourt .
CONNECTIONS MADE BY GUITAR CENTER
Section::::Connections Made by Guitar Center .
Connections Made by Guitar Center , a collaboration between 88.5 KCSN Los Angeles and Guitar Center , was a weekly one - hour radio program featuring fresh , new music from across the globe and musical spectrum .
Signed or unsigned , the show offered an electric mix of progressive and innovative artists .
The show was hosted by radio host and taste maker , Nic Harcourt .
GUITAR CENTER LEGENDS
COLLECTION
Section::::Guitar Center Legends Collection .
The " Guitar Center Legends Collection " consists of four classic guitars made famous by music legends Eric Clapton , Stevie Ray Vaughan , and U2 's The Edge .
Guitar Center purchased Clapton 's " Blackie " Fender Stratocaster , his vintage Gibson " ES-335 , " and Vaughan 's " Lenny " Stratocaster for over $ 2.4 million from the Clapton Crossroads Centre charity auction at Christie 's New York in 2004 .
They added The Edge 's cream white Gibson Les Paul Custom after purchasing it for $ 240,000 at the Music Rising Charity Auction in 2007 .
Over the years , the collection has been exhibited in one - of - a - kind , " Legends ' Collection " display cases , which provide high level protection and climate control as the instruments tour prestigious musical events and key Guitar Center locations , such as " Guitar Center Road to Crossroads " held at Madison Square Garden in conjunction with Clapton 's Crossroads Guitar Festival in April 2013 .
In August 2014 , Clapton 's Blackie and ES-335 were moved to their new permanent location at Guitar Center 's Times Square flagship location .
Clapton 's " Blackie " was purchased by Guitar Center for $ 959,500 .
Clapton 's Cherry Red Gibson " 335 , " purchased for $ 847,500 , was used to record Cream 's versions of " Badge " and " Crossroads ( from their final live performance in November 1968 ) , " as well as many other historical performances , during his 40 years of ownership .
Steve Ray Vaughan 's " Lenny , " which was purchased for $ 623,500 , was used to record his classic love songs including " Lenny " and " Riviera Paradise .
" All of the proceeds from these three guitars purchased by Guitar Center were for the benefit of Clapton 's Crossroads Centre charity .
The Edge 's cream colored 1975 Les Paul Custom ( faded from its original white ) found fame as a go - to guitar for stage and studio on many of U2 's most famous recordings and performances .
In 2005 , The Edge partnered with producer Bob Ezrin , Gibson and the Guitar Center Music Foundation ( now known as the Fender Music Foundation ) to establish Music Rising , a charity founded to benefit musicians whose lives were torn apart by Hurricane Katrina .
In 2007 , he donated this prized guitar to be auctioned for the cause .
The winning bid was $ 240,000 from Guitar Center ( $ 288,000 including Buyers Premium ) .
GUITAR CENTER 'S DRUM - OFF Section::::Guitar Center 's Drum - Off .
Since 1988 , Guitar Center has held an annual search for the next great undiscovered drummer .
Developed to spotlight the drumming community , Guitar Center 's Drum - Off is the music retailer 's longest running artist - discovery program , providing an outlet for drummers to be recognized for their skill and attain success in their field .
For over a quarter of a century , the program has unearthed some of the day 's top undiscovered drummers and provided a platform for established drummers to be acknowledged .
Guitar Center 's Drum - Off breaks down into three rounds of store preliminary competitions at 250 + Guitar Center locations nationwide .
Every contestant is allowed five minutes of set up time and three minutes to perform .
One winner from each store finals competition is chosen to move up to the quarterfinals , ( hosted at 30 Guitar Center locations nationwide ) , followed by semi - finals at five store locations at which point performance time is increased to allow five minutes to each contestant .
The winners from these five semifinal locations convene in Los Angeles , CA to compete in Guitar Center 's Drum Off finals in front of a live audience and a panel of celebrity judges .
Each contestant is required to perform on a 5-piece acoustic drum kit complete with hardware , cymbals , cowbell , throne and the option to incorporate the Roland SPD-30 Octapad into the competition kit .
As of 2016 however , the SPD-30 Octapad will no longer be part of the competition kit .
All contestants are evaluated by a panel of independent and credible judges on the following criteria : skills & technique , groove , originality , stage presence , and overall performance .
In years past , some of the world 's most renowned drummers have participated in and supported Guitar Center 's Drum - Off , including : Terry Bozzio , Aaron Spears ( Usher ) , Dennis Chambers ( Parliament / Funkadelic ) , Chad Smith ( Red Hot Chili Peppers ) , Steve Gadd , Questlove ( The Roots ) , Travis Barker ( Blink-182 ) , Tommy Lee ( Motley Crüe ) , Dave Lombardo ( Slayer ) , Carmine Appice , John Tempesta ( The Cult ) , Taylor Hawkins ( Foo Fighters ) , Steve Smith , Gavin Harrison , Jojo Mayer , Thomas Lang , Josh Freese
( Nine Inch Nails , A Perfect Circle ) , José Pasillas ( Incubus ) , Billy Cobham , Nicko McBrain ( Iron Maiden ) , Stephen Perkins ( Jane 's Addiction ) , Danny Carey ( Tool ) , Brann Dailor ( Mastodon ) , John Blackwell , and more .
According to their website , and as of 2017 , Guitar Center will no longer sponsor the annual drumoff .
Instead , Guitar Center announced it will create a community outreach program specifically geared toward drummers .
HOLLYWOOD 'S ROCKWALK Section::::Hollywood 's RockWalk .
The Sunset Boulevard location in Los Angeles hosts Hollywood 's RockWalk , a hall of fame honoring musical artists .
Artists are invited to place their handprints into cement blocks that are put on display at the Guitar Center .
Some past inductees have included B'z , Eric Clapton , AC / DC , Aerosmith , Alanis Morissette ,
B.B. King , Black Sabbath , Carlos Santana , Cheap Trick , Def Leppard , Dick Clark , Ernie Ball , Herbie Hancock , Iron Maiden , James Brown , Jerry Lee Lewis , Jimi Hendrix , Jimmy Page , Joe Satriani , Bonnie Raitt , Johnny Cash , KISS , Les Paul , Little Richard , Lynyrd Skynyrd , Melissa Etheridge , Nancy Wilson , Slash , The Doobie Brothers , The Wrecking Crew , Van Halen , Simon Kirke , as well as countless others .
ACQUISITIONS Section::::Acquisitions .
In 2000 , Guitar Center purchased mail order and Internet retail house
Musician 's Friend for $ 50 million , asserting that the merged company was the world 's largest seller of musical instruments .
Musician 's Friend became a wholly owned subsidiary that was headquartered in Medford , Oregon until 2011 , when Musician 's Friend 's headquarters operations were gradually consolidated into Guitar Center 's facilities in Westlake Village , California .
In 2005 , Guitar Center Inc. acquired Music & Arts , the largest school music dealer in the United States , and merged their subsidiary band and orchestral chain American Music Group into Music & Arts ( as the company was renamed ) .
Music & Arts was founded in 1952 in Bethesda , Maryland and sells band and orchestra instruments , guitars , keyboards , drum sets , printed sheet music , and related supplies .
In the summer of 2006 , Guitar Center purchased four stores in Texas from the popular South Texas and Central / South American company , Hermes .
In February 2007 , the direct response division of Guitar Center , Musician 's Friend , purchased assets of the Indiana - based company Dennis Bamber , Inc. , which included leading band and orchestra retailer , Woodwind and Brasswind , plus Music 123 and Lyons Music .
MEDIA Section::::Media .
There was a television series known as Guitar Center Sessions , which featured artists such as 311 , Bad Religion , and Smashing Pumpkins .
ALBUMS RECORDED
AT GUITAR CENTER
* No Stairway by Glassine
* Live at Guitar Center by Noah Wall SEE ALSO * Music & Arts Center REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Musician 's Friend * Marty Albertson Interview NAMM Oral History Library ( 2012 )
* Richie Pidanick Interview NAMM Oral History Library ( 2012 )
* Dave Weiderman Interview NAMM Oral History Library ( 2012 )
* Ray Scherr Interview NAMM Oral History Library ( 2016 )