RADIO FLYER ( FILM ) Radio Flyer is a 1992 American drama - fantasy film directed by Richard Donner and written by David Mickey Evans .
It stars Lorraine Bracco , John Heard , Elijah Wood , Joseph Mazzello , Adam Baldwin and Ben Johnson .
Evans was to make his directorial debut on the film but was replaced by Donner .
Michael Douglas and Evans were executive producers .
Filming locations included Novato , California , and Columbia Airport in Columbia , California .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Mike observes his two sons fighting , with one insisting that a promise does n't mean anything .
To make them understand that a promise does mean something , he tells them the story of his youth .
Mike , his little brother , Bobby , their mother , Mary , and their German Shepherd , Shane , all move to a new town after their father / husband leaves them .
There , Mary marries a new man , Jack , who likes the others to call him " The King " .
Unbeknownst to Mary , the King is an alcoholic who often gets drunk and beats Bobby .
The King also reppetively plays the song Jambalaya ( On the bayou ) over and over again while drunk .
Seeing that Mary has found happiness at last with the King , the two boys are reluctant to tell either her or the police about the abuse .
Instead , they try to avoid the King by exploring and having adventures amidst the turmoil and traumatic experiences .
After the King beats Bobby so badly that he ends up in the hospital , he is arrested .
However , following the death of his mother , the King is released and returns to their house promising never to drink again .
Unfortunately , while the boys are at school , the King breaks this promise and nearly kills their dog , Shane .
In the process , the two devise a plan for Bobby to escape the King once and for all .
Mary also starts to catch on to Jack 's true nature and , in the end , requests a divorce due to all the times he beat Bobby and for his heavy drinking .
Inspired by the urban legend of a boy named Fisher who attempted to fly away on his bicycle , the two convert their eponymous Radio Flyer toy wagon into an airplane .
With it , Bobby flies away , and the King is arrested .
Though Mike never sees Bobby again , he continues to receive postcards from him from places all over the world .
CAST * Lorraine Bracco as Mary
* John Heard as Jim Daugherty
* Elijah Wood as Mike
* Tom Hanks as Older Mike / Narrator ( uncredited )
* Joseph Mazzello as Bobby
* Adam Baldwin as Jack " The King " * Ben Johnson as Geronimo Bill * Garette Ratliff as Chad
* Thomas Ian Nicholas as Fergie PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
David Mickey Evans ' script for Radio Flyer was a hot property around Hollywood , and Warner Bros. and Columbia Pictures started a bidding war around it in November 1989 .
Warners had eyes on it as a vehicle for veteran director Richard Donner , while Columbia was buying it on behalf of Michael Douglas 's production outfit Stonebridge Entertainment , which had a major production deal with the latter studio .
Just before Thanksgiving , Columbia gave Evans a huge sum for a first - time Hollywood screenwriter : $ 1.25 million .
The deal also gave Evans the opportunity to direct , even though he had no experience in said field ; Douglas believed he had the vision to pull it off .
This was the first film Columbia put into production under the ownership of Sony , as well as one of the first films to be greenlit by the studio 's new management , led by Peter Guber and Jon Peters .
Filming started on June 18 , 1990 .
Under Evans ' direction , the film starred Rosanna Arquette as the mother , Tomas Arana as The King , and Luke Edwards and James Badge Dale as the children .
The budget was set at $ 17–18 million after Evans agreed to cut some elaborate effects sequences .
However , Stonebridge executives found the dailies disappointing , and after 10 days of filming , Douglas shut down production , at a loss of $ 5 million .
Douglas then recruited Richard Donner as the film 's new director .
With Evans ' blessing , Donner accepted with a $ 5 million paycheck , while his wife , producer Lauren Shuler Donner came on board .
Evans remained on the film as an executive producer .
With the major players recast , Radio Flyer resumed production that October .
Donner had Evans rewrite the script extensively to find a way to balance escapist fantasy and child abuse without alienating the audience .
The film 's original ending featured a present - day coda where a now - adult Mike , played by Tom Hanks , takes his children to the National Air and Space Museum , where the Radio Flyer / Plane hybrid is displayed next to the Wright Brothers ' flying machine .
Test audiences were confused by this ending and re - shoots led to the modern - day prologue and epilogue seen in the final film .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film opened to mostly mixed to negative reviews from critics and lackluster box office results .
It currently holds a 33 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 39 reviews .
Roger Ebert and Leonard Maltin both criticized the film for presenting fantasy as a way of escaping child abuse .
Said Ebert , " I was so appalled , watching this kid hurtling down the hill in his pathetic contraption , that I did n't know which ending would be worse .
If he fell to his death , that would be unthinkable , but if he soared up to the moon , it would be unforgivable — because you ca n't escape from child abuse in little red wagons , and even the people who made this picture should have been ashamed to suggest otherwise . " Because the film in fact ends with Bobby successfully evading his stepfather forever , viewers ( including Ebert himself ) have taken to speculating on the " true " ending , assuming that the one presented was a case of an unreliable narrator .
DEDICATION Section::::Dedication .
The film is dedicated to the memory of script supervisor Nancy Benta Hansen and uncredited production assistant Simone Fuentes , " whose professionalism and humor we miss . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS