CRIMINAL TRANSMISSION OF HIV Criminal transmission of HIV is the intentional or reckless infection of a person with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) .
This is often conflated , in laws and in discussion , with criminal exposure to HIV , which does not require the transmission of the virus and often , as in the cases of spitting and biting , does not include a realistic means of transmission .
Some countries or jurisdictions , including some areas of the U.S. , have enacted laws expressly to criminalize HIV transmission or exposure , charging those accused with criminal transmission of HIV .
Others , including the United Kingdom , charge the accused under existing laws with such crimes as murder , fraud ( Canada ) , manslaughter , attempted murder , or assault .
MODES OF TRANSMISSION Section::::Modes of transmission .
Medical research has identified the following situations in which HIV may be transmitted : * Sexual transmission where one person with an HIV infection engages in unprotected sexual intercourse with another , thus transferring the virus ; * Blood donation and transfusions or other medical procedures involving biological material such as blood , tissue , organs , or semen from an infected donor ; HIV has been transmitted through the organ transplantation of kidney , liver , heart , pancreas , bone , and skin , all of which are blood - containing organs or highly vascular tissues ( but not through transplantation of bone without marrow , corneas , etc . ) , but this mode of transmission , along with blood transfusions , has become rare since the development of accurate HIV - testing procedures ; *
The use of unsterilized needles / syringes for medical , recreational drug use ( including a range of drug paraphernalia ) , tattooing , body piercing , etc . ;
* Pregnancy and postnatal transmission ( e.g. , breast feeding ) .
BLOOD DONATION
Section::::Blood donation .
France began testing blood products for HIV antibodies in June 1985 , Canada in November 1985 , and Switzerland in May 1986 .
Germany inconsistently tested plasma products between 1987 and 1993 , as did Japan in 1985 and 1986 .
There were criminal investigations and prosecutions of those persons found to be responsible for these delays ( see Weinberg et al . ) .
At least 20 countries now have plans in place to compensate some classes of individuals , e.g. hemophiliacs , infected by the transfusion of HIV - contaminated blood and blood products .
LEGAL SITUATION
Section::::Legal situation .
In many English - speaking countries and in most of the states who have signed the European Convention of Human Rights , knowingly infecting others with HIV can lead to criminal prosecution .
One such case is that of Thomas Guerra , an American landscape architect , who became the first person in the state of California to be convicted for intentionally infecting another individual with HIV .
In court , prosecutors presented 11,000 text messages and 36 audio clips to support their case against Guerra .
Since then , Guerra has been accused of intentionally exposing dozens of other men to HIV .
In a 2004 survey of the latter group , the Global Network of People Living with HIV / AIDS found that at least one prosecution had occurred in about half of these countries , and that in Finland , Sweden and Slovakia , about 0.5 % to 1 % of all people reported to be living with HIV / AIDS had been prosecuted for alleged intentional or " negligent " transmission of HIV .
In many developing countries such as Thailand where the HIV / AIDS pandemic has been much more serious , laws regarding criminalisation of intentional transmission have been either weak or non - existent .
From a global perspective , the U.S. and Canada account for the vast majority of reported prosecutions .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australia the regulations concerned with the transmission of HIV are found in two sources , the Public Healths Acts and in the criminal law .
NEW SOUTH WALES
Section::::New South Wales .
The New South Wales ( NSW ) Public Health Act from 2010 regulates under section 79 that a person with HIV must disclose their status to all sexual partners .
Under section 79(3 ) it is a defence , if the court is satisfied , that the defendant took reasonable precautions to prevent the transmission .
In other Australian states , there is no specific legislative requirement to disclose .
Interventions may range from counseling through to restrictive orders , with detention as a last resort .
If talking about the problems of practising safe sex does not help , the doctor may obtain a Public Health Order to manage the behaviour of the HIV positive person .
Only a small number of sex workers and clients have received a Public Health Order or ' management ' intervention for potentially breaking the law .
Under the criminal law , a person with HIV is criminally liable for prosecution if they have intentionally transmitted the virus to their partner without informing them of their status .
In NSW the relevant offences are separated into those done intentionally ( Section 33 of the Crimes Act 1900 ) , and those done recklessly ( Section 35 ) .
The definition of grievous bodily harm ( GBH ) now explicitly includes ( in s4(1)(c))'any grievous bodily disease ' .
This means that the infliction of grievous bodily harm refers to causing a person to contract a grievous bodily disease .
Under section 33 a person who intends to inflect grievous bodily harm on another person can be imprisoned for up to 25 years while under section 35 a person who recklessly causes another person grievous bodily harm can be imprisoned for up to 10 years and 14 years if in company .
This can include causing someone to be infected with HIV .
A person is generally deemed as reckless when they are aware that there is a risk that another person may be caused GBH as a result of their actions , but they proceed to act anyway .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Though Canadian federal law does not contain any HIV - specific statutes , HIV transmission and exposure are otherwise prosecuted under general offense laws .
R. v. Mabior , ( 2012 )
SCC 47 reflects the Supreme Court of Canada 's most recent decision outlining criminal liability for serostatus nondisclosure .
After being diagnosed with HIV in 2004 , Clato Mabior underwent aggressive antiretroviral therapy and was adhering to treatment at the time of pursuing sexual relations with multiple partners between 2004 - 2006 .
Despite intermittent condom use , HIV was never transmitted to his partners .
Ultimately , the Court convicted Mabior with six counts of aggravated sexual assault .
The Mabior ruling comes fourteen years after R. v. Cuerrier ( 1998 ) 127 CCC ( 3d ) 1 ( SCC ) where the defendant was charged with aggravated assault for the sexual transmission of HIV under s268 Canadian Criminal Code .
The Supreme Court of Canada found that the trial judge had misdirected himself and ordered a new trial on two counts of aggravated assault but , in May 1999 , the Attorney - General for British Columbia announced that a new persons trial would not take place .
The Supreme Court ruling caused difficulty because even though it only concerned non - disclosure of HIV - positive status in sexual situations , it unanimously rejected of the English authority of R v Clarence , L'Heureux - Dubé stating that any fraud could vitiate consent to all types of assault because the autonomy and physical integrity of the person has been violated .
Thus , because the Canadian legislature has declined to criminalize the transmission of HIV , the judiciary must address the issues as and when they arise .
Subsequent legal precedent has established that failure to disclose HIV - positive status , combined with failure to utilize protective measures ( condom use ) , is sufficiently fraudulent behaviour to constitute turning " consensual " sex into aggravated sexual assault , since the other party has been denied the information necessary to give properly informed consent .
The Court 's vague justification for serostatus disclosure under circumstances that lead to " significant risk of bodily harm " remained a particularly contentious issue in the aftermath of Cuerrier .
Because Cuerrier did not expressly define " significant risk " , lower courts inconsistently criminalized HIV - positive defendants based on varied interpretations of the clause .
In large part , Mabior represents a response to Cuerrier and an attempt to sharpen the criteria .
In Mabior , the Court found that " significant risk of bodily harm is negated if ( i ) the accused 's viral load at the time of sexual relations was low , and ( ii )
condom protection was used . "
Many anti - criminalization groups maintain that even this clarification is equally ambiguous without explicitly defining a threshold for low viral load .
On 1 December 2005 , Jian Ghomeshi filed a report on this issue for the CBC .
He asked whether there is a legal obligation to disclose HIV status .
He held up the case of Johnson Aziga , who was diagnosed in 1996 but then allegedly had unprotected sex with at least 13 women .
Aziga was charged with two counts of murder and 11 counts of aggravated sexual assault ; the prosecution claims that he did not disclose his status .
On 4 April 2009 , Aziga was found guilty of the two counts of first degree murder as well as the lesser counts .
The current precedent in Canada stands as any person who has HIV , fails to disclose the fact to their sexual partner , and does not take some sort of protective measure ( such as condom use ) , is guilty of aggravated sexual assault as per R. v. Cuerrier and subsequent cases .
Aziga was convicted of first degree murder since under Canadian law , any death as a result of aggravated sexual assault ( two of the women died as a result of the HIV infection received from intercourse with Aziga ) is automatically first degree murder as per section 231 of the Criminal Code of Canada .
Hamish Stewart , a University of Toronto law professor , has stated Several Canadian courts had ruled that people who are not informed that a sexual partner is HIV - positive can not truly give consent to sex .
As a result , the death of Aziga 's partners was automatically considered to be murder instead of the lesser charge of manslaughter .
However , in Mabior the Supreme Court rejected the view that consent will always be vitiated by non - disclosure of HIV - positive status , substituting the rule that there will be no consent only if in addition to the non - disclosure there was a realistic possibility of transmission of HIV .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
The first case of criminal HIV infection in Finland was that of Steven Thomas , a US citizen from New York , who was convicted in 1997 in Helsinki for knowingly infecting Finnish women with HIV during 1993–1996 .
In January 1997 , Finnish police published Thomas ' picture in newspapers and stated that Thomas may have infected tens or even hundreds of Finnish women with HIV .
Seventeen women said they had been in unprotected sexual contact with Thomas .
Thomas was given a 14-year prison sentence at the Helsinki court on 10 July 1997 for 17 counts of attempted manslaughter .
Thomas was found to have infected five of the 17 women with HIV , and was ordered to pay damages of $ 63,000–$73,000 to each infected victim .
The sentence was widely criticised within the legal system , because under Finnish law the maximum sentence for multiple counts of attempted manslaughter is 12 years .
Lauri Lehtimaja , the Ombudsman of the Parliament , gave a warning to the court judge about his misuse of the law .
The Helsinki Court of Appeal lowered the sentence in December 1997 to be 11 years and 6 months of imprisonment .
The documents of the case were classified for 40 years .
In 2002 Steven Thomas was quietly released and deported from Finland to an unknown location .
A Finnish man convicted of spreading HIV knowingly through unprotected sex with many women was Aki Matti Hakkarainen .
He was first convicted in 2005 and sentenced to one year and nine months in prison for attempted aggravated assault .
In August 2007 , Hakkarainen was arrested by Rovaniemi police after a report from a young woman saying she had contracted HIV from Hakkarainen during unprotected sex .
On 5 October 2007 , police published the name and photo of Hakkarainen in newspapers in an effort to reach all women who had had sexual intercourse with him .
In court , Hakkarainen admitted to having unprotected sex with the women but denied trying to infect them with the virus .
On 22 April 2008 , Rovaniemi court concluded that Hakkarainen knowingly infected five women with HIV , and in August 2008 he was found guilty of five counts of aggravated assault and 14 counts of attempted aggravated assault .
He was sentenced to ten years in prison .
He was also ordered to pay 45,000–55,000 euros compensation to the five women that contracted the virus .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In the Federal Republic of Germany on 16 August 2010 , Nadja Benaissa of the German pop music group
No Angels admitted to sex with several men while knowing her HIV - positive status , and infecting one of those several , who subsequently brought the case against her .
She faced prison , but was instead given probation ( 2 years ) and community service .
Women groups were outraged at the possibility of a woman being charged for negligently spreading HIV .
She denied any intent to infect , apologising profusely and saying " When I was arrested I realised that the way that I had dealt with the illness had been wrong ...
I made a big mistake ...
No way did I want my partner to be[come ] infected . "
She stated that she concealed the infection to avoid hurting the success of her band .
Benaissa has claimed she had been told by doctors that the risk of passing on the virus was " practically zero " .
LIBYA Section::::Libya .
The HIV trial in Libya , also called ' the Bulgarian nurses affair ' , concerns the trials , appeals and eventual release of six foreign medical workers charged with conspiring to deliberately infect over 400 children with HIV in 1998 , causing an epidemic at El - Fatih Children 's Hospital in Benghazi , Libya .
The defendants , arrested in 1999 , were one Palestinian medical intern and five Bulgarian nurses ( often termed " medics " ) .
All of the medics were heavily tortured for months to extract confessions .
The torture process is described in details in the book Notes from Hell , co - written by Nikolay Yordanov and one of the nurses , Valya Chervianashka .
As a result , three of the medics signed confessions .
They were first sentenced to death , had their case remanded by Libya 's highest court , and were sentenced to death again , which was upheld by Libya 's highest court in early July 2007 .
A Libyan government panel later commuted their sentences to life in prison .
The six were released following a deal reached with European Union representatives on humanitarian issues .
The EU did not condone the guilty verdict in Libya against the six .
On 24 July 2007 , the five medics and the doctor were extradited to Bulgaria , where their sentences were commuted by the Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov and they were freed .
Libya has since complained about the releases , and the issue remains ongoing .
Furthermore , a controversy has arisen concerning the terms of release , which allegedly include an arms trade as well as a civilian nuclear cooperation agreement signed by French President Nicolas Sarkozy in July 2007 .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
New Zealand 's first case for criminal HIV transmission occurred in 1993 , when Peter Mwai , a Kenyan visiting New Zealand on a tourist visa , was sentenced to seven years in prison for infecting at least two women with HIV through unprotected sexual intercourse .
Mwai came to New Zealand police attention after a woman reported she had contracted HIV after sleeping with him .
Multiple women came forward saying they had unprotected sex with Mwai who had not told them he had HIV .
At least two of the women tested positive for HIV .
Peter Mwai was charged under existing laws , for causing ' grievous body harm ' and ' reckless endangerment ' .
On 6 October 2005
a New Zealand District Court ruled that HIV - positive people need not tell sexual partners about their status so long as safe sex is practiced .
In the case being ruled on , the man had used a condom during intercourse but not during oral sex .
His partner had not been infected .
The same man was convicted of criminal nuisance earlier for having unprotected sex with another partner without revealing his HIV status .
In May 2009 , a 40-year - old bisexual man from Auckland was thought to have infected at least five younger gay men between 2008 and 2009 .
One of the infected men had laid a formal complaint to the New Zealand police , sex venues shut their doors to what was called a ' HIV predator ' .
and police arrested the 40-year - old man in on 28 May 2009 .
On 16 June 2009 the court heard that two more people had come forward with complaints bringing the total to six .
The eight charges included that he " with reckless disregard for the safety of others caused – or attempted to cause – grievous bodily harm to five males aged 17 , 20 , 24 , 26 , and 31 , plus a female aged 19 . "
He faced charges of " willfully and without justification or excuse causing in a male aged 20 and a female aged 19 a disease , namely HIV .
" The trial set for 2010 did not proceed as Glenn Mills , accused of knowingly exposing fourteen young people to HIV , was found dead in his Mt Eden remand prison cell on 30 November 2009 after having made two unsuccessful applications to be released on bail in prior weeks .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Three HIV - positive men , Peter Mulder , Hans Jurgens and Wim Dekker , were jailed in 2008 on charges of attempting to inflict grievous bodily harm after drugging and raping 14 men , some of whom they injected with their own HIV - infected blood .
Twelve of the victims were HIV - positive or suffering from AIDS at the time of the trial .
POLAND Section::::Poland .
In Poland under Art .
161 of the Criminal Code , persons who knowingly risk infecting others with HIV are liable to be jailed up to 3 years .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
Infecting another individual with HIV is a criminal offense unless that individual knew about HIV infection beforehand and consented .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Transmission generally may fall under sections 18 , 20 , 23 , 24 or 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 .
As of 19 June 2006 , there had been seven convictions for the sexual transmission of HIV in England and Wales under s.20 of the 1861 Act which , inter alia , criminalizes the reckless inflicting of grievous bodily harm .
Of these , five were men accused of infecting female partners during sex , one was a man who pleaded guilty to infecting a male partner , and one ( in Wales ) was a woman .
In 2005 , the 20-year - old Welsh woman was convicted of infecting her boyfriend with HIV during sex , knowing she had the infection .
In 2006 , a 43-year - old woman pleaded guilty to recklessly inflicting grievous bodily harm on her 31-year - old lover .
Only two cases pleaded ' not guilty ' , and both have gone to appeal .
In Regina v Dica ( Mohammed ) [ 2004 ] the Court of Appeal held that a person was reckless if , knowing that they were HIV - positive , they transmitted HIV to a person who had not been told of the infection , and convicted him of a total sentence of 8 years ' imprisonment .
It was not necessary to prove that the transmission had involved an assault for the " inflicting " of the disease .
They acknowledged that there could be a higher standard of disclosure expected of someone in a relationship , compared with the " known risks " involved in casual sex .
Matthew Weait has critically discussed the case .
In Regina
v Konzani
the same court held that a person accused of recklessly transmitting HIV could only raise the defense of consent , in cases where that consent was a " willing " or " conscious " consent .
In other words , the court distinguished between " willingly running the risk of transmission " and " willingly consenting to the risk of transmission .
"
This suggests that consent will only operate as a defense — in all but the most exceptional of cases — where there has already been prior disclosure of known HIV - positive status . , two women have been convicted for passing on an HIV infection in the UK .
The first , from Cardiff , was jailed for 2 years ; the second , Sarah Jane Porter , was convicted of grievous bodily harm through the reckless transmission of HIV , and was sentenced to 32 months in prison in June 2006 .
The National AIDS Trust has published a table of cases of people in England and Wales charged with reckless sexual transmission of HIV .
In November 2017 , a man called Daryll Rowe was convicted of grievous bodily harm after intentionally infecting five men with the virus and attempting to infect five more .
The Rowe case has been reported as being the first case in the United Kingdom where the defendant was found guilty for intentionally rather than recklessly transmitting the virus .
In 2017 , another man , Antonio Reyes - Minana , was convicted of grievous bodily harm after withholding his HIV status from two male partners .
An important issue that arises where proof of transmission is required , is establishing the source of the complainant 's HIV infection .
Although it can not prove the route and timing of transmission , phylogenetic analysis has been used in many trials to demonstrate how closely related HIV strains in samples taken from the defendant and complainant are .
The issues and problems surrounding phylogenetic analysis in criminal investigation are discussed in a 2007 report by aidsmap .
Presentations from the Economic and Social Research Council funded 2011 seminar series " HIV / AIDS and Law :
Theory , Practice and Policy " at Keele University deal with the question of criminalization .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
In February 2001 Stephen Kelly , an ex - prisoner and former IV drug user , was convicted of the Scots common law offence of " recklessly injuring " his former partner by infecting her with HIV .
In HMA v Deveraux ( 2010 ) , the HIV positive defendant pleaded guilty to reckless injury on four counts , one of which led to the victim contracting HIV .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In July 2010 the White House announced a major change in its HIV / AIDS policy , a change informed by public health law research carried out by Scott Burris , professor of law at Temple University and the director of its Public Health Law Research program .
The Obama administration 's National HIV / AIDS Strategy for the United States concluded that " the continued existence and enforcement of these types of laws [ that criminalize HIV infection ] run counter to scientific evidence about routes of HIV transmission and may undermine the public health goals of promoting HIV screening and treatment . "
In the fall of 2010 , the Center for HIV Law and Policy launched the ' Positive Justice Project ' , a campaign to combat HIV - related stigma and discrimination against people with HIV by the U.S. criminal justice system .
It released a manual of HIV - specific laws and prosecutions in the 50 states , District of Columbia , U.S. Territories , Federal government , and military in 2010 .
On September 23 , 2011 , Rep. Barbara Lee ( D - CA ) introduced H.R. 3053 , The Repeal Existing Policies that Encourage and Allow Legal HIV Discrimination Act or the REPEAL HIV Discrimination Act .
The REPEAL HIV Discrimination Act calls for review of all federal and state laws , policies , and regulations regarding the criminal prosecution of individuals for HIV - related offenses .
The bill died in the Subcommittee on Health , and also in 2013/2014 when introduced as HR 1843 and referred to the Subcommittee on Military Personnel .
Courts have looked into the statistical probability of HIV transmission to overturn or reduce criminal sentences resulting from prosecutions .
For example , on February 23 , 2015 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces reversed the aggravated assault conviction of Technical Sergeant David Gutierrez upon determining , that the risk of HIV transmission through sexual intercourse was not " likely to produce death or grievous bodily harm " under the applicable statute .
As of 2017 , the Center for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC ) states that those who have undetectable levels of HIV in their blood can not transmit the virus .
CRITICISM OF CRIMINAL STATUTES Section::::Criticism of criminal statutes .
South Africa 's openly HIV - positive Supreme Court Justice Edwin Cameron argued against criminalisation at the XVII International AIDS Conference in Mexico City .
Additional criticisms of criminalization point to the lack of empirical evidence supporting its ability to stop or slow infections , ongoing reluctance of legal entities to narrowly tailor prosecutions to behaviors that transmit the disease , excessive punishments and disproportionate impact on disenfranchised communities .
SEE ALSO
* List of HIV - positive people : Criminal transmission of HIV REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Chalmers , James ' The criminalisation of HIV Transmission ' 28 Journal of Medical Ethics ( 2002 ) 160 ; Criminal Law Review ( 2004 ) 944 ; * Donegan E , Lee H , Operskalski EA , Shaw GM , Kleinman SH , Busch MP , Stevens CE , Schiff ER , Nowicki MJ , Hollingsworth CG .
Transfusion transmission of retroviruses : human T - lymphotropic virus types I and II compared with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 .
Transfusion .
1994 Jun;34(6):478 - 83 .
* LegalEase Collective , ' Episode 38 - The Status of Non - Disclosure of HIV Status : A Legal Analysis of Supreme Court of Canada Decisions R. v. Mabior and R. v. D.C. ' LegalEase on CKUT 90.3 FM ( October 2012 ) ; * OSI 10 Reasons to Oppose Criminalization of HIV Exposure or Transmission ; * Spencer , J.R. ' Liability for Reckless Infection : Part 1 ' New Law Journal ( 12 March 2004 )
384 ; * Spencer , J.R. ' Liability for Reckless infection : Part 2 ' New Law Journal ( 26 March 2004 ) 448 ; * Spencer , J.R. ' Reckless Infection in the Course of Appeal ' New Law Journal ( 21 May 2004 ) 762 ;
* Warburton , Damian ( 2004 ) '
A Critical Review of English Law in Respect of Criminalising Blameworthy Behaviour by HIV+ Individuals ' Journal of Criminal Law ( 2004 ) , 55 ;
* Weait , Matthew ( 2007 ) Intimacy and Responsibility : the Criminalisation of HIV Transmission ( Abingdon : Routledge - Cavendish ) ;
* Weait , Matthew ' Dica : Knowledge , Consent and the Transmission of HIV ' New Law Journal ( 28 May 2004 ) 826 ;
* Weait , Matthew ' Criminal Law and the Sexual Transmission of HIV : R v Dica ' 68(1 ) Modern Law Review ( 2005 ) 121 ;
* Weait , Matthew ' Taking the blame : criminal law , social responsibility and the sexual transmission of HIV ' 23(4 ) Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law ( 2001 ) 441–457 ; * Weait , Matthew & Azad , Yusef ' The criminalization of HIV transmission in England and Wales : Questions of Law and Policy ' HIV / AIDS Policy and Law Review ( August 2005 ) EXTERNAL LINKS * Criminal Transmission of HIV - list of notable cases * HIV and the criminal law ( International resource from NAM )
* Criminal HIV Transmission Research Project Tops 100
Online Profiles
* Information concerning a number of European countries
* Information concerning England and Wales *
More information concerning England and Wales * Canadian HIV / AIDS Legal Network
* HIV & AIDS Legal Clinic ( Ontario)Canada * The Center for HIV Law & Policy - Positive Justice Project
* NAM Aids Map - Transmission of HIV as a criminal offence
* WHO technical consultation - A report by the World Health Organization on Criminalizing HIV Transmission * Keele University Research Institute for Law , Politics and Justice - The legal , political and social problems associated with HIV were discussed at a seminar series at Keele University in 2005/6 .