UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON – DOWNTOWN
The University of Houston – Downtown ( UHD ) is a four - year state university and one of four distinct institutions in the University of Houston System .
Its campus spans in Downtown Houston , with a satellite location in northwestern Harris County .
Founded in 1974 , UHD is the second - largest university in the Houston area with more than 14,000 students .
The university serves students in four academic colleges .
UHD offers 52 degree programs : 45 bachelors and seven masters .
Awarding more than 2,400 degrees annually , the university 's alumni base exceeds 40,000 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Recognizing the need for a university presence in Downtown Houston , the Board of Regents of the University of Houston acquired the assets of South Texas Junior College on August 6 , 1974 and opened the University of College ( ) as a four - year institution under the organization and control of the University of Houston .
By August 1979 , it became a stand - alone university when the 66th Texas Legislature established as a separate and distinct institution in the University of Houston System .
The college 's first four - year degree was a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice and resident students attended for $ 4 per credit hour .
The school purchased its first and only dormitory in 1981 .
The dormitory , formerly the Harley Hotel located at 101 Main Street and known as the University Center , remained in the university 's possession until 1991 when it was demolished in favor of renovation .
On April 26 , 1983 , the word " College " was dropped from the institution 's name to become University of ( UHD ) .
During this decade when Houston was booming , UHD succeeded in having the Merchants and Manufacturers Building named to the National Register of Historic Places , degree programs continued to grow , and UHD 's first Red Rose Ball became a signature fundraiser .
Tuition increased in 1984 to $ 12 per credit hour .
By fall 1988 , more than 8,300 students were enrolled on campus .
In 1992 , Max Castillo came from San Antonio College to lead the university .
During the 1990s , UHD focused on becoming a metropolitan university — appealing to traditional students as well as working professionals .
During the early 1990s , UHD also began key partnerships with community colleges and it moved to meet greater Houston 's demand for qualified teachers when it added a teacher certification program in urban education .
During this time , the Weekend College Program began and a new Academic Building and the Jesse H. Jones Student Life Center opened .
As the 1990s ended , UHD moved ahead again , earning full approval from the Texas Legislature and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board to offer graduate programs ; the University 's first master 's degree in criminal justice was approved .
UHD also began offering degree programs at Lone Star College – University Center and eventually at the UH System teaching center in Cinco Ranch .
UHD 's expansion and growth continued as a new millennium arrived .
Master 's degree programs in criminal justice and teaching were added .
Physical growth also continued and the Willow Street Pump Station was renovated while a new , bricked - face Commerce Street Building opened at the corner of Commerce Street and Main Street — providing a new home for the College of Public Service .
As UHD grew so did the number of students participating in commencement .
In 2002 , UHD became the first university to award degrees in Minute Maid Park .
UHD won national recognition for its wireless campus and the Bachelor of Business Administration degree program in general business became the university 's first on - line degree .
In November 2007 , the Shea Street Building opened as the new home of the UHD 's College of Business .
After 38 years as an open admission institution , the Board of Regents of the UH System approved admission standards for UHD in February 2012 .
The new admission standards went into effect for applicants entering the university in fall 2013 and onward .
INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE
Section::::Institutional structure .
The University of Houston – Downtown ( UHD ) is one of four separate and distinct institutions in the University of Houston System .
The institution is separately accredited , offers its own academic programs and confers its own degrees , and has its own administration .
UHD is a stand - alone university ; it is not a branch campus of the University of Houston ( UH ) .
Although UHD and UH are both component institutions of the University of Houston System , they are separate universities .
The organization and control of the University of Houston –
Downtown is vested in the Board of Regents of the University of Houston System .
The Board has all the rights , powers , and duties that it has with respect to the organization and control of other institutions in the System ; however , UHD is maintained as a separate and distinct institution .
ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
The president is the chief executive officer of the University of Houston – Downtown , and the position reports to the chancellor of the University of Houston System .
The president is appointed by the chancellor and confirmed by the Board of Regents of the University of Houston System .
Since April 2017 , the president of the university is Dr. Juan Sánchez Muñoz .
The UHD administration is located on the ninth floor in the One Main Building .
* William I. Dykes ( interim ) , 1974–1975
* J. Don Boney , 1975–1979 * Alexander F. Schilt , 1980–1987 * Manuel T. Pacheco , 1987–1991
* George W. Magner ( interim ) , 1991–1992 * Max Castillo , 1992–2009 * William V. Flores , 2009–2016
* Michael A. Olivas ( interim ) , 2016–2017
* Juan Sánchez Muñoz , 2017–Present ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
The University of Houston –
Downtown is primarily an undergraduate institution .
It offers 44 undergraduate and eight graduate degree programs in the following academic colleges :
* Davies College of Business * College of Humanities and Social Sciences , * College of Public Service , * College of Sciences and Technology *
University College CAMPUS Section::::Campus .
The campus of UHD is located in five buildings at the north end of Downtown Houston and the south end of Northside , next to the crossing of Interstate 10 and Main Street .
The university is located near the site where Houston was founded , Allen 's Landing .
Two of the university 's buildings — One Main Building ( formerly the Merchants and Manufacturers Building ) and the Willow Street Pump Station — are listed in the National Register of Historic Places .
UHD 's student demographics consist of 47 % Hispanic , 25 % African American , 17 % white , 10 % Asian American , and 2 % foreign nationals ( regardless of race and/or ethnic origins ) .
The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities has designated UHD as a Hispanic - serving institution , in recognition of the large number of Hispanic students enrolled at UHD .
It is also a federally designated minority - serving and institution .
Although UHD does not have an intercollegiate varsity athletics program , it does offer its students a number of club sports and intramural sports in addition to numerous fitness programs .
The Department of Sports & Fitness coordinates these activities out of the Student Life Center located on the UHD campus .
UHD 's club sports teams are known as the Gators .
The UHD mascot is known as Ed - U - Gator .
The university and its community offer additional activities for students such as clubs , organizations , fraternities , and sororities .
The campus of UHD is served by METRORail 's UH – Downtown station on the Red Line .
NOTABLE PEOPLE AND ALUMNI
*
Lorenzo Thomas , poet and faculty member * Juan Díaz , boxer * Mario Gallegos , Jr. , Texas State Senator * Charles McClelland , Chief of the Houston Police Department *
Diana López , American taekwondo practitioner ( 2008 Olympic bronze medalist )
* Phil Montgomery , Wisconsin state assemblyman * Ghulam Bombaywala ( associate degree ) * , Harris County Sheriff * Judge Brent Gamble , 207th District Court Harris County
*
, EVP Goya Foods * , President James Coney Island
* Rick Hartley , Executive Director
The 100 Club * , Partner Andrews Kurth LLP * , Professional Boxer and former Lightweight World Champion * , CFO Calpine * , UHS Regent
* Troy Nehls , Fort Bend County
Sheriff
* Briscoe Cain , Texas House of Representatives District 128 * Al Espinoza , Pasadena Police Chief
*
Mary Ann Perez , Texas House of Representatives
District 144 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS