SEVEN SEAS
The " Seven Seas " ( as in the idiom " sail the Seven Seas " ) is an ancient phrase for all of the world 's oceans .
Since the 19th century , the term has been taken to include seven oceanic bodies of water : * the Arctic Ocean * the North Atlantic Ocean * the South Atlantic Ocean
* the Indian Ocean * the North Pacific Ocean * the South Pacific Ocean * the Southern ( or Antarctic )
Ocean
The World Ocean is also collectively known as just " the sea " .
The International Hydrographic Organization lists over 70 distinct bodies of water called seas .
MESOPOTAMIA Section::::Mesopotamia .
The term " Seven Seas " appears as early as 2300 BC in Hymn 8 of the Sumerian Enheduanna to the goddess Inanna .
The Mesopotamians were the first in the history of astronomy to keep records of the observed seven moving objects in the heavens – the seven Classical Planets / Seven Heavens – and they made this connection to their seven seas .
ROMANS
Section::::Romans .
Not all Roman uses of septem maria ( Latin ) would strike a responsive chord today .
The navigable network in the mouths of the Po river discharges into saltmarshes on the Adriatic shore and was colloquially called the " Seven Seas " in ancient Roman times .
Pliny the Elder , a Roman author and fleet commander , wrote about these lagoons , separated from the open sea by sandbanks : All those rivers and trenches were first made by the Etruscans , thus discharging the flow of the river across the marshes of the Atriani called the Seven Seas , with the famous harbor of the Etruscan town of Atria which formerly gave the name of Atriatic to the sea now called the Adriatic .
A history of Venice states :
The expression " to sail the seven seas " was a classical flourish signifying nautical skill .
It was applied to the Venetians long before they sailed the oceans .
ARABS Section::::Arabs .
The Arabs and their near neighbours considered the Seven Seas ( ) to be the seas that they encountered in their voyages to The East .
They were trading routes in ancient times and since the time of Muhammad , they are the places where Islam spread and is widely practised .
In the 9th century AD , author Ya'qubi wrote : Whoever wants to go to China must cross seven seas , each one with its own color and wind and fish and breeze , completely unlike the sea that lies beside it .
The first of them is the Sea of Fars , which men sail setting out from Siraf .
It ends at Ra 's al - Jumha ; it is a strait where pearls are fished .
The second sea begins at Ra 's al - Jumha and is called Larwi .
It is a big sea , and in it is the Island of Waqwaq and others that belong to the Zanj .
These islands have kings .
One can only sail this sea by the stars .
It contains huge fish , and in it are many wonders and things that pass description .
The third sea is called Harkand , and in it lies the Island of Sarandib , in which are precious stones and rubies .
Here are islands with kings , but there is one king over them .
In the islands of this sea grow bamboo and rattan .
The fourth sea is called Kalah and is shallow and filled with huge serpents .
Sometimes they ride the wind and smash ships .
Here are islands where the camphor tree grows .
The fifth sea is called Salahit and is very large and filled with wonders .
The sixth sea is called Kardanj ; it is very rainy .
The seventh sea is called the sea of Sanji , also known as Kanjli .
It is the sea of China ; one is driven by the south wind until one reaches a freshwater bay , along which are fortified places and cities , until one reaches Khanfu .
This passage demonstrates the Seven Seas as referenced in Medieval Arabian literature :
* The Persian Gulf ( " Sea of Fars " )
* The Arabian Sea ( " Sea of Larwi " ) * The Bay of Bengal ( " Sea of Harkand " )
* The Strait of Malacca ( " Sea of Kalah " )
* The Singapore Strait ( " Sea of Salahit " )
* The Gulf of Thailand ( " Sea of Kardanj " )
*
The South China Sea ( " Sea of Sanji " ) .
Arab seafarers may have also considered other important seas nearby which they navigated regularly , including the Black Sea , Caspian Sea , Red Sea , Mediterranean Sea , and Adriatic Sea .
MEDIEVAL EUROPE Section::::Medieval Europe .
The medieval concept of the Seven Seas has its origins in Greece and Rome .
In medieval European literature , the Seven Seas referred to the following seas : *
the Adriatic Sea
* the Mediterranean Sea , including its , notably the Aegean Sea , Ionian Sea and Tyrrhenian Sea .
*
the Black Sea
*
the Caspian Sea
* the Persian Gulf * the Arabian Sea ( which is part of the Indian Ocean ) * the Red Sea , including the closed Dead Sea and the Sea of Galilee
The Seven Seas in medieval times also included : * the Atlantic Ocean * the Aegean Sea * the Indian Ocean * the North Sea RENAISSANCE ERA Section::::Renaissance era .
During the Renaissance a moderately standardized iconography of the four continents ( and the corresponding four rivers ) of the world was created .
PERSIANS Section::::Persians .
The Persians used the term " the Seven Seas " to refer to the streams forming the Oxus River .
TALMUDISTS Section::::Talmudists .
The Babylonian Talmud mentions seven seas and four rivers that surround the land of Israel .
In Tractate Bava Batra , fol . 74b , it reads :
When R. Dimi came he said R. Yohanan said : " What is the meaning of the verse , ' For he hath founded it upon the seas and established it upon the floods . '
( Ps . 24:2 ) ?
This refers to the seven seas and four rivers that surround the land of Israel .
And what are the seven seas ?
The sea of Tiberias , the Sea of Sodom , the Sea of Helath , the Sea of Hiltha , the Sea of Sibkay , the Sea of Aspamia and the Great Sea .
And what are the four rivers ?
The Jordan , the Yarmuk , the Keramyhon and Pigah . "
According to this and other passages , the Talmudic Seven Seas include : * Sea of Tiberias ( Lake Tiberias or The Sea of Galilee ) * Sea of Sodom ( The Dead Sea ) * Sea of Helath ( The Red Sea )
* Sea of Hiltha ( Birkat Ram )
* Sea of Sibkay ( Lake Hula )
* Sea of Aspamia ( A lake said to be north of Apamia on the Asi River , possibly the formerly flooded Al - Ghab Plain )
*
The Great Sea ( The Mediterranean Sea )
Various transliterations for the sea names from Hebrew exist .
For Helath : Chelath and Shelyith .
For Hiltha : Chiltha and Chultha .
For Sibkay : Sibchi and Somcho .
And for Aspamia : Apamia .
The 17th century churchman and scholar John Lightfoot mentions this set of seas in his Commentary on the New Testament .
A chapter titled The Seven Seas according to the Talmudists , and the four Rivers compassing the Land includes the " Great Sea " ( now called the Mediterranean Sea ) , the " Sea of Tiberias " ( Sea of Galilee ) , the " Sea of Sodom " ( Dead Sea ) , the " Lake of Samocho " ( probably the ( mostly ) dried - up Hula Lake , called Semechonitis by Josephus and lake Sumchi in the Talmud ) , also called the " Sibbichaean " .
Lightfoot does not comment on the remaining three seas .
EAST INDIES Section::::East Indies .
In Colonial times the Clipper Ship Tea Route from China to England was the longest trade route in the world .
It took sailors through seven seas near the Dutch East Indies : the Banda Sea , the Celebes Sea , the Flores Sea , the Java Sea , the South China Sea , the Sulu Sea , and the Timor Sea .
The Seven Seas referred to those seas , and if someone had sailed the Seven Seas it meant he had sailed to , and returned from , the other side of the world .
MODERN Section::::Modern .
Before modern reckoning , the term " Seven Seas " has been used to refer to seven of the largest bodies of water in the world : * the Pacific Ocean * the Atlantic Ocean
* the Indian Ocean * the Arctic Ocean * the Mediterranean Sea * the Caribbean Sea * the Gulf of Mexico SEE
ALSO
* Clime * Four Seas * Four continents
* Karshvar * List of seas
* Roof of the World * Rudyard Kipling , who titled a volume of poems
The Seven Seas ( 1896 ) and dedicated it to the city of Bombay .
REFERENCES