FORDSON Fordson was a brand name of tractors and trucks .
It was used on a range of mass - produced general - purpose tractors manufactured by Henry Ford & Son Inc from 1917 to 1920 , by Ford Motor Company ( U.S. ) and Ford Motor Company Ltd ( U.K. ) from 1920 to 1928 , and by Ford Motor Company Ltd ( U.K. ) from 1929 to 1964 .
The latter ( Ford of Britain ) also later built trucks under the Fordson brand .
American engineer , inventor , and businessman Henry Ford built experimental tractors from automobile components during the early 20th century , and launched a prototype known as the Model B in August 1915 .
Further prototypes , with a dedicated tractor design , followed in 1916 .
With World War I raging in Europe , the first regular - production Henry Ford & Son tractors were exported to the U.K. in 1917 to expand British agriculture .
In 1918 , exports continued , the tractors began to be labeled as Fordsons , and U.S. domestic sales began .
Sales boomed in 1918 and 1919 .
Between 1917 and 1922 , the Fordson was for tractors somewhat like the Ford Model T was for automobiles — it captured the public 's imagination and widely popularized the machine , with a reliable design , a low price affordable for workers and farmers , a widespread dealership network , and a production capacity for large numbers .
Just as the Model T helped the public to appreciate how soon cars and trucks might replace most horses in transport , the Fordson helped people to appreciate how soon tractors might replace most horses in farming ( advancing the mechanisation of agriculture ) .
As with cars , Ford never had the market to itself , but it dominated the market for a time ( for cars , roughly 1910 - 1925 ; for tractors , roughly 1917 - 1925 ) .
Ford was the only automotive firm to sell cars , trucks and tractors simultaneously from 1917 to 1928 .
For a decade between 1928 and 1939 , Ford of the U.S. left the tractor business .
During that decade , Ford of Britain continued to build Fordsons and to develop new variants , which it exported widely .
In 1939 Ford of the U.S. reentered the tractor market with an all - new model , this time with the Ford brand .
Ford of Britain continued to use the Fordson brand until 1964 .
Fordson production occurred in the U.S. ( 1917–1928 ) ; Cork , Ireland ( 1919–1923 and 1928–1933 ) ; and at Dagenham , Essex , England ( 1933–1964 ) .
Tens of thousands of Fordsons , most from the U.S. and some from Ireland , were exported to the Soviet Union from 1920 to 1927 .
Soviet Fordson clones were also built at Leningrad from 1924 and at Stalingrad from 1930 .
TRACTORS FORD EXPERIMENTAL TRACTOR DEVELOPMENT , 1907 - 1916 Section::::Tractors .
Section::::Ford experimental tractor development , 1907 - 1916 .
Henry Ford grew up in an extended family of farmers in Wayne County a few miles from Detroit , Michigan in the late 19th century .
At the time , farm work was extremely arduous , because on the typical farm virtually nothing could get done without manual labour or animal labour as the motive power .
As his interest in automobiles grew , he also expressed a desire to " lift the burden of farming from flesh and blood and place it on steel and motors .
" In the early 20th century , he began to build experimental tractors from automobile components .
Four years after founding the Ford Motor Company in 1903 , Ford finished his first experimental tractor in 1907 on Woodward Avenue in Detroit , referring to it as the " Automobile Plow " .
Approximately 600 gasoline - powered tractors were in use on American farms in 1908 .
Fordson tractor design was headed by Eugene Farkas and József Galamb , both involved in the design of the successful Ford Model T automobile .
Traction engines had been around for a while , but they were large , heavy , expensive machines suited to prairie grain farming more than to small family farms in other regions .
In the early 1910s , North America and Europe were hungry for small , inexpensive tractors , and many people seized on the Model T as a platform with which to create them .
Clearly the idea of an auto - like tractor , made using auto - like parts and methods or by conversion from autos , was ripe .
Henry Ford experimented with both auto - plows and heavier tractors .
In August 1915 , at a plowing demonstration in Fremont , Nebraska , he introduced a newly designed tractor known as
the Model B.
It used a 16 horsepower , two - cylinder , horizontally opposed engine , a spur gear transmission and three wheels - two front drivers and one rear steerer .
The Model B was never produced , but did gain enough publicity to let the world know Ford was interested in developing a tractor .
Knowing there was demand for a Ford - built tractor , a group of entrepreneurs in Minneapolis organized The Ford Tractor Company , paying a company clerk surnamed Ford for the use of his name , with the intention of getting sales and attention from the confusion of this Ford with Ford Motor Company .
The company built and sold some tractors , but anticipated a settlement with Henry Ford for permission to use their already - trademarked name .
However , Ford thwarted them by using another name .
FORDSON ORIGINS , MODEL F , AND MODEL N
Section::::Fordson origins , Model F , and Model N.
The first prototypes of the new Henry Ford & Son tractor , which would later be called the Fordson , were completed in 1916 .
World War I was raging in Europe , and the United Kingdom , a net importer of food , was desperate for tractors in its attempt to expand its agriculture enough to feed Britain despite the great shipping disruption of the war .
In 1917 , the British Ministry of Munitions selected the Fordson for both importation from the U.S. and domestic U.K. production .
It was thought that domestic U.K. production was preferable because so much Atlantic shipping was being sunk that exporting tractors from the U.S. would be counterproductive , as many would be lost at sea .
This was soon modified to exclude the London area because of concerns about its vulnerability to German attacks .
Henry Ford decided to build the tractor at Cork , Ireland ( which at the time was still part of the U.K. ) , partly because he wanted to bring jobs to , and foster industriousness in , southern Ireland .
But the Cork plant did not begin production until 1919 , after the war had ended .
As events turned out , thousands of tractors were exported from the U.S. in 1917 and 1918 .
The tractor used a , inline four - cylinder engine .
The engine was similar to the Ford Model T engine in many respects .
Like many engines of its day , it was multifuel - capable ; it was usually tuned for gasoline or kerosene , but alcohol could also be burned .
( Tractor vaporising oil [ TVO ] existed in 1920 but was not yet widely used .
It entered broader use in the 1930s and 1940s . )
Like many other multifuel machines , the Fordson started on gasoline from a small auxiliary tank ( just a few quarts ) and then switched over to the main fuel tank once warmed up sufficiently ( no more than 5 minutes ) .
To handle the kerosene ( or , rarely , TVO ) , the intake system had a vaporizer downstream of the carburetor .
The mixture coming from the carburetor was intentionally rich , and the vaporizer heated it and mixed it with more air to lean it out to the final ratio before entering the intake manifold .
The intake system also had a water - bath air cleaner to filter the dust out of the air inhaled by the engine ( an invention that did not originate at Ford
but that was still rather novel in 1917 ) .
Air cleaning is critical to engine lifespan , even for road vehicles and most especially for farming and construction vehicles ( which work in environments where dirt is frequently stirred up into the air ) .
The Fordson carburetor and air cleaner were designed by Holley .
In later decades , the water bath would be replaced with an oil bath for better filtering performance .
The ignition system was similar to that of the Model T , with a flywheel - mounted low - tension magneto and trembler coils .
The ignition timing was manually advanced or retarded with the spark advance lever mounted near the steering column , which rotated the timer .
The cooling was by thermosiphon .
( In later decades , a high - tension magneto and a water pump would be added . )
The transmission was a three - speed spur gear ( the three forward speeds ranged from approximately 2 to 6 mph ) .
A worm drive reduction set and a differential made up the rear .
The design of the rear was patented for its ease of manufacture and service .
Brakes were not provided on early Fordsons , as high - ratio worm sets generally transmitted rotation in one direction only , from the worm element to the gear element , because of the high power loss through friction .
To stop the tractor , the driver depressed the clutch .
Ford engineer Eugene Farkas successfully made the engine block , oil pan , transmission , and rear axle stressed members constituting the frame .
By eliminating the need for a heavy separate frame , costs were reduced and manufacturing was simplified .
Ford held a patent on a unit - frame tractor .
The rear wheels were fabricated steel , spoked and cleated .
The earliest ones were 12-spoke ; a 14-spoke version followed .
Several models of front wheel were used , including and .
Industrial models also used other wheels designed for specific tasks , including aftermarket wheels .
In 1916 and 1917 , the name " Fordson " was not yet used as the tractor 's make or model name , nor was " Model F " .
During this period , terms such as " the [ real / genuine ] Ford tractor " or " the Henry Ford tractor " , as well as " the MOM tractor " ( because almost all output was going to the British Ministry of Munitions ) , were used .
In early 1918 , the name " Fordson " was trademarked , and within a few months it was being marked on the tractors .
Published sources vary somewhat on the origin of the name .
All agree that the name reflects the contemporary name of the tractor company , " Henry Ford & Son " , and its obvious eponyms : Henry and Edsel .
Some claim that the company had been using the cable address " Fordson " for several years , which would mean even before the company was officially incorporated in July 1917 .
Another implies that February 1918 marked the first use of " Fordson " in a cablegram .
Regardless , by April 1918 the name " Fordson " was established as the brand , and its eponyms were obvious .
In that month , U.S. sales began under County War Board distribution rules .
The Model F designation ( for essentially the same model , with improvements ) began in 1919 .
Sales boomed in 1918 and 1919 .
There was nothing about the Fordson 's design or farming capabilities that was a " first ever " among tractors ( Ford 's version of a unit frame was novel for tractors , but that did n't give it special farming advantages ) .
But it was the first tractor that combined all of the following factors :
it was small , lightweight , mass - produced , and affordable ; it had a large distribution network ( dealers nearby in many locales ) ; and it had a widely trusted brand ( via Ford ) .
Such factors made it possible for the average farmer to own a tractor for the first time .
Thus Henry Ford and colleagues had done again , for the tractor , what they had recently done for the automobile with the Ford Model T. Ford incorporated his private company , Henry Ford and Son Inc , to mass - produce the tractor on July 27 , 1917 .
The Fordson tractor went into mass production in 1917 and debuted for sale on October 8 , 1917 , for US$ 750 .
At a hurriedly built factory in Dearborn , Michigan , he used the same assembly line techniques he used to mass - produce the Ford Model
T.
It took thirty hours and forty minutes to convert the raw materials into the 4,000 parts used for the tractor assembly .
At this time , the Fordson sold for US$ 750 ; each cost $ 567.14 to manufacture ( including labor , materials and overhead ) , leaving a profit of $ 182.86 .
Soon Dearborn was sending knock - down kits to final assembly plants in various U.S. states , including New Jersey , Iowa , and Missouri .
The core of Fordson production later moved to the new Ford River Rouge Complex .
The Fordson succeeded in being cheaper to maintain than horses , as the Ford Model T had previously done .
A government test concluded that farmers spent $ .95 per acre plowing with a Fordson compared to feeding eight horses for a year and paying two drivers , which cost $ 1.46 per acre .
Despite several early design flaws and reliability issues such as engine failure and unbearable heat , the Fordson established a firm foothold on U.S. farms , with more than 70 % market share in earlier years .
By mid-1918 , more than 6,000 Fordson tractors were in use in Britain , Canada , and the United States .
In the U.S. , Ford established a policy in 1919 to loan Fordson tractors to educational institutions with vocational training programmes .
Agricultural colleges could use a Fordson for six months and then exchange it for a new one .
Under this arrangement , forty - two tractors were loaned to such universities as Cornell , Idaho , Michigan , Maryland and Prairie View State Normal in Texas .
Others went to the orphanage at Nacoochee Institute in Georgia , the Berry School at Rome , Georgia and Camp Dix at Hutchinson , Kansas .
Annual production reached 36,781 in 1921 and 99,101 in 1926 .
By 1925 , Ford had built its 500,000th Fordson tractor .
Ford was the only automotive firm to sell cars , trucks , and tractors simultaneously from 1917 to 1928 , during which time 552,799 Fordson tractors were built .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
Like the Model T car , a Fordson tractor that was relatively new and well maintained would start easily in warm weather .
Under such conditions , often a single crank pull would start it .
However , in cold weather , starting could be difficult , especially once the machines were 10 , 20 , or 30 years old and worn out .
In cold weather , the oil congealed on the cylinder walls and on the clutch plates .
The engine had to be hand cranked repeatedly with great effort .
Strong men took turns cranking between intervals when individual ignition coils were adjusted .
Sometimes farmers would build a fire under the tractor to warm up the crankcase and gear boxes to make it crank easier .
The tractor , when in use , was fueled by kerosene , but gasoline was required to start it .
The Fordson could pull discs and plows that would require at least four mules to pull , and it could work all day long , provided the radiator was continually filled , the fuel replenished , and the water in the air filter tank changed .
The carburetor air was filtered by bubbling it through a water tank .
On dry days , mud would build up in the water tank after a few of hours of operation .
The mud would then have to be flushed out and the tank refilled .
RELIABILITY Section::::Reliability .
The Fordson Model F was not without flaws it shared with other brands .
These problems included practical limits to traction , especially under muddy , snowy , or icy conditions , and the habit of rearing over backwards if the plow encountered an obstruction .
Many people complained that the traction would be better if the tractor were heavier , although Henry Ford always countered that merely adding weight was not a smart way to maximize traction .
Ford began shipping Fordson tractors to Ford Motor Company Limited in Britain in 1917 to meet an order from the British government for 5,000 .
Between the time the order was accepted and when production started , Ford overhauled the design to solve several problems .
The car - type radiator was enlarged to capacity to cure overheating problems .
The additional weight also helped hold the front down .
In early Fordsons , the worm drive was located at the top under the driver 's seat .
During heavy operation the heat became unbearable to the operator .
The worm drive was relocated to solve this problem and also allowed larger rear wheels which improved traction .
Several changes were also made to simplify manufacture .
The Fordson used the Model T coil magneto system ; and water and oil pumps were eliminated in favor of the simpler thermosiphon cooling and splash lubrication .
Despite design and assembly improvements , Fordsons still required a high level of maintenance .
A farmer near Atlanta in 1921 listed the cost of his Fordson repairs for the year as $ 1,246 .
He recorded problems in his diary , noting difficulty starting the engine , a broken wheel , engine failure and the rear end bursting throughout January , totaling costs of $ 1,301 for 620 hours of work .
A Colorado farmer telephoned his dealer three times a day to complain about his Fordson .
The most dangerous feature would occur when a towed implement became immoveable : the stoppage of the implement would cause a reaction through the transmission that would flip the tractor over backwards , sometimes killing the driver .
This condition was introduced when the worm drive was relocated below the main drive pinion , relieving the driver from the heat it generated but also causing a torque on the tractor that lightened the load on the front wheels .
One Indiana farmer believed the Fordson to be so dangerous that it should have been banned by law .
The Eastern Implement Dealer claimed that Fordsons killed 36 drivers in 1918 .
Pipp 's Weekly further claimed that Fordsons had killed 136 men up to August 1922 .
Ford spokesmen maintained the accidents resulted from inexperienced drivers , saying any tractor could be dangerous if improperly handled .
Satisfied customers praised the Fordson , saying it made farm work easier and performed ideally in orchards and truck farms .
Judging from the Fordson 's market share in the late teens and early 20s , the anecdotal horror stories , while extreme , must have been relative outliers ( that is , the notion that " all Fordsons flip over backwards and burst at the seams " was an exaggeration ) .
Nonetheless , it became imprinted in many minds and became a punch line .
The " Hoyt - Clagwell " tractor on the 1960s TV sitcom Green Acres was a Fordson Model F.
It was known to randomly ' explode ' followed by one or both of the rear wheels falling off .
IMPORTATION AND PRODUCTION IN IRELAND , ENGLAND , AND THE SOVIET UNION Section::::Importation and production in Ireland , England , and the Soviet Union .
As described earlier , because the Fordson was born in 1916 , its production site choices and export / import were shaped by the Allied war effort for World War I.
Almost all of the first tractors went to the U.K. during 1917 .
In 1918 and 1919 , sales spread to Canada and the U.S. , and U.K. production began in pre - independence Ireland .
Ford signed a contract for a large consignment of Fordson tractors to the Soviet Union in 1919 , which soon became the largest customer of the company .
From 1921 until 1927 , the Soviet Union imported over 25,000 Fordsons .
These inexpensive and robust tractors became the major enticement for Soviet peasants towards collectivisation and were often seen on Soviet posters and paintings during the era , such as in The First Tractor meme .
As also happened with Ford cars and trucks imported in the early 1920s , the Soviets immediately began their own domestic production of replacement parts and of clones .
In 1924 , the Leningrad plant " Red Putilovite " ( Красный Путиловец ) started the production of Fordson - Putilovets tractors ( Фордзон - путиловец ) .
During the 1920s , the Soviet versions had a reputation for insufficient quality .
Much of this was because the metallurgy and heat treatment were wrong .
For example , no matter how perfectly one machines a shaft or gear , it will fail early if the hardness is wrong .
As Soviet industrialization progressed in the 1930s , the worst of the quality problems were solved .
By mid-1918 , more than 6,000 Fordson tractors , all U.S.-built , were in use in Britain , Canada , and the United States .
After World War I ended , production began in Cork , Ireland , in parallel with U.S. production .
Fordson tractors quickly shaped the U.S. tractor market , and held over 70 % of the market in earlier years .
Henry Ford had a power struggle with Ford Motor Company 's shareholders ( including the Dodge Brothers , Horace and John Dodge ) that culminated in 1919 .
He resigned from Ford Motor Company with the threat ( fully realizable ) to treat Henry Ford & Son Inc as his new enterprise for all of his future cars , trucks , and tractors ( he would begin with all - new designs ) , which would turn Ford Motor Company into a mere badly led competitor , destroying its stock 's value .
This maneuver worked ; Henry Ford bought out all the minority shareholders of Ford Motor Company in 1919 , and then consolidated ownership in the Ford family : fifty - five percent in his name , forty - two percent in son Edsel 's name and the remaining three percent in wife Clara 's name .
He merged Henry Ford & Son into the Ford Motor Company in 1920 .
Annual production reached 36,781 in 1921 .
The Fordson had established a firm foothold on U.S. farms .
In February 1922 , after sales had suffered from the depression of 1920–21 and with stiffer competition from International Harvester , John Deere , J.I. Case , Allis - Chalmers , and others , Ford decided to reduce the price of the Model F from $ 625 to $ 395 .
This sparked a price war in the tractor industry known as the " tractor wars " .
To compensate for the lower price , Ford had to cut costs and strive for larger - volume production .
Meanwhile in Ireland , the Irish War of Independence occurred .
Production at Cork never flourished during this first period , although a few thousand tractors a year were built .
Ford ended production at Cork in 1922 and shipped the factory 's equipment back to the U.S. in 1923 .
( It would return some years later , as described below . )
By 1925 , Ford had built its 500,000th Fordson tractor .
Annual production reached 99,101 in 1926 .
By May 1927 , total production figures had reached 650,000 .
In February 1928 , Ford surprised his U.S. market by ending U.S. Fordson production .
Various reasons have been suggested .
One was that IHC 's Farmall and other competitors had taken away the mystique of the Fordson in the U.S. , and Henry Ford was not content to compete in the U.S. tractor market on a mere commodity basis ; he wanted decisive competitive edges .
Another is that he envisioned moving all production to Ireland and England because Europe , including Russia , were set to become the most important Fordson markets .
Henry Ford did not elaborate on his reasons .
Ford of England restarted Fordson manufacture at Cork , which involved a lot of work given that the factory had been disassembled in 1923 .
Ford Ltd bought much of the tooling from Ford of the U.S.
From 1930 , Fordson tractors were again sold in the United States , via imports from Cork ; the Dagenham plant opened in 1933 and took over production from the Cork plant , which was again closed .
George and Eber Sherman became the leading importers of English - built Fordsons .
After Cork became the sole production site in 1928 , exports to the US were limited to 1,500 a month .
This disrupted the business of countless firms , including Ford dealerships and aftermarket equipment makers ( which was a large industry both for the Model T and the Fordson ) .
Many of these firms formed a conglomerate called the United Tractor & Equipment Corporation , which arranged a deal with Allis - Chalmers to build a substitute tractor .
By 1933 , the deal fell apart , as the Great Depression damaged the economy and dealers and aftermarket builders could also import Cork - built Fordsons and , starting in 1933 , Dagenham - built Fordsons .
The United tractor became the Allis - Chalmers Model U.
Given Ford 's shutdown of U.S. Fordson production , the next big Soviet orders of American tractors via the Amtorg Trading Corporation went to IHC and others .
The Roaring Twenties had certainly been good for the Ford Motor Company .
Even though Henry Ford had to deal with the disappointment of learning that the public would not forever adore and demand his original models of car , truck , and tractor ( the Model T , Model TT , and Fordson ) , his new model of car and truck ( Model A ) was also very successful .
Fordson success continued at Ford Ltd even though it came to an end in the U.S. FORDSON MODEL N
STANDARD Section::::Fordson Model N Standard .
The Fordson Model N replaced the Fordson Model
F.
It was an improved variant of the F. Production of the Model N started in Cork in 1927 .
Production of the Fordson Model N was transferred from Cork to Dagenham in 1933 .
The Model N featured a 27 HP engine , standard rear fenders ( mudguards ) , a higher voltage ignition system , and optional pneumatic tires .
In 1935 power take - off ( PTO ) was available as an option on the Model N.
The Fordson Model N was probably the most important tractor in the United Kingdom during World War II .
The Dagenham plant produced over 136,000 Model N tractors during the war .
Ford of the U.S. also exported Model 9N tractors to the U.K. during the war .
LATER FORDSON TRACTORS ( MADE IN ENGLAND ) 1930S
EXPERIMENTATION
AT
DEARBORN Section::::Later Fordson tractors ( made in England ) .
Section::::1930s experimentation at Dearborn .
After U.S. Fordson production ceased in 1928 , Irish - built and later English - built Fordsons were imported to the U.S. ; Eber Sherman was a principal importer .
Development of new Fordson / Ford tractors in the U.S. remained mostly inactive for about 10 years after the end of U.S. production , although Ford did experiment with a number of designs during the 1930s .
Most of them never left the drawing board , which was intentional ; Henry Ford was interested in continuing R&D ( and continued paying Ford engineers to work on it ) , although he was n't going to put any models into production until all conditions ( design , market ) were right for commercial success .
A Fordson row - crop model , essentially a " Fordson version of the Farmall " with tricycle design and high clearance , was prototyped at Dearborn in 1930 - 1931 but waited until 1936 to be produced , when Ford Ltd of Britain produced it as the Fordson All - Around .
( It was not without precedent , for the aftermarket had presaged it , although not with the high clearance ; in 1939 , Ford filed a patent for raising and lowering the clearance on the fly . )
The idea of variable front track for row - crop tractors was also considered at Ford during this era .
Achieving it via pivoting cantilevered wheel mounts was one of the options , although Ford never put that method into production ( it later reached production in the form of the Avery Ro - Trak in 1938 ) .
The thought devoted to the topic paid off later , when the Ford 9N achieved it with another , simpler method .
Between 1928 and 1932 , Henry Ford 's attention became consumed mostly by the development and introduction of his company 's first V8 engine , which was introduced by Ford on March 31 , 1932 and was an immediate success in Ford cars and trucks .
Experimental V8-powered tractor prototypes were built , but no production occurred .
By the late 1930s , Henry Ford 's enthusiasm for reentering the tractor market was growing , but he still did not have a design or features that could ensure a runaway , market - changing success .
His idea for a tractor with one large drive wheel was extensively developed , but the prototypes did not perform well .
Various people who worked on it have wondered whether it was just a ruse to mislead Ford 's competitors about his real intentions for a coming model , but it seems that he was quite serious about it and was probably disappointed that it did not work out ; if it had worked , it would have been a powerful fulfillment of his penchant for simplicity and very low cost .
His 1938 meeting with Harry Ferguson was the turning point that led to the next Ford tractor , the 9N. The Ferguson system , whose hitch we now call the three - point hitch , gave Ford the kind of new and special feature that he was wishing to find — something to give a groundbreaking competitive advantage to any new Ford tractor entering the market .
After the 1939 introduction of this new line of " Ford " tractors made in the U.S. ( the Ford N - Series tractors ) , there was very little importation of English Fordson models to the U.S.
E27N Section::::E27N.
The Fordson E27N Major was an upgrade to the Fordson N , and made in England from March 1945 , having the same engine and transmission as the Model N , but in a new casting which allowed for a PTO and a hydraulic lift unit manufactured by either Smiths or Varley .
The differential however was of completely new design .
For the first time Fordson owners could purchase a tractor from the dealer fully equipped with 3PL , PTO , full electrics and an adjustable - width front axle , allowing the tractor to work row - crops .
Available in many different versions , one such as the crawler conversion made by County , and the half - tracked version by Roadless .
from 1948 onwards the Perkins P6(TA ) could be ordered fitted from the factory , giving the tractor a 45 hp power unit , and improving on the design that was let down by the under - powered petrol / TVO engine .
The E27N was a popular Machine with Australian farmers , setting the way for large sales of the New Major ( E1A ) .
E1A Section::::E1A. Post - war shortages delayed the development of an entirely new tractor .
In 1952 , the " New Major " entered production with an all new all Ford engine range .
The 4D engine was designed and manufactured in UK at Dagenham and was available as Diesel , Petrol or Petrol / Kerosene .
The tractor had a 6 speed modified version of the E27N transmission .
The driver sat significantly lower , which led to the E27N being nicknamed the ' High Major ' .
In 1958 , - the Power Major - was introduced with 51.8 hp and an improved transmission and ' live - drive ' hydraulics , and then in 1960 the final version , the Super Major came out with a weight transfer system and differential lock .
The Super Major was produced until 1964 .
These tractors were exported to the US - the first since 1939 - badged as Fords .
DEXTA Section::::Dexta .
Meanwhile , a smaller new three - cylinder version which was named the Dexta had been launched to compete with the success of the Massey Ferguson 35 , of which it shared the basic engine , gearbox and differential casings as well as many other parts .
Both tractors featured the Perkins A3 engine , with a few differences .
The engine was at 144 cubic inches in early Dextas , whereas later machines and all MF 35 's had the 152 cid version .
The two tractors also had different injector systems and many further differences despite their common platform .
The gasoline version of the Dexta basically had the same Standard engine as the Ferguson TEA and FE 35 , one difference being that the starter was relocated to the right side on the Dexta .
Unlike the Ferguson , the gasoline Dexta had the same gearbox castings as the diesel version .
After 1964 , the Fordson name was dropped and all Ford tractors were simply badged as Fords in both the UK and the US .
FORD TRACTORS AFTER 1964 Section::::Ford tractors after 1964 .
Starting around 1961 , the U.S. tractor operations and the Ford Ltd U.K. tractor operations , which had been substantially independent although always in close communication , were reorganized into closer integration .
After 1964 , all tractors made by the Ford companies worldwide carried the Ford brand .
In 1986 , Ford expanded its tractor business when it purchased the Sperry - New Holland skid - steer loader and hay baler , hay tools and implement company from Sperry Corporation and formed Ford - New Holland which bought out Versatile tractors in 1988 .
In 1991 Ford sold its tractor division to Fiat with the agreement that they must stop using the Ford name by 2000 .
In 1999 , Fiat removed all Ford identification from their blue tractors and renamed them " New Holland " tractors .
AFTERMARKET ACCESSORIES AND CONVERSIONS Section::::Aftermarket accessories and conversions .
Like Model T cars and trucks , the Fordson tractor provided the basis for a large and varied aftermarket in accessories and conversions .
A pair of articles in a 1922 issue of the Chilton Tractor Journal describes the business environment and gives photographs of many of the attachments and conversions available .
As with most other tractors , farmers and construction contractors could buy aftermarket governors , ignition parts , hitches and drawbars ; but with the Fordson especially , one could buy a crawler tractor , road grader , or self - propelled combine built by an aftermarket firm that used the Fordson essentially as a platform .
For example , the original Gleaner self - propelled combines were built by attaching the combine to a Fordson .
At least 3 companies offered crawler conversions , and others offered enlarged cleats , including the " overgrown tire chain " type that had led to crawler development not long before .
Several companies converted Fordsons to road graders ; the Wehr ( video ) is well remembered .
The first tricycle cultivator version of the Fordson was available as an aftermarket conversion by the Moline Implement Company as early as 1920 or 1921 , which was 3 to 4 years before the Farmall was introduced , a full decade before Dearborn prototyped the Fordson All - Around , and a full decade and a half before Ford Ltd produced that model .
It lacked those tractors ' high clearance but was otherwise prescient .
An economically significant concept is illustrated by kits such as the .
Its attachments let the person riding the towed implement control the tractor from the implement seat .
Such a setup was offered for the Fordson by at least 3 aftermarket suppliers .
It was reminiscent of earlier mechanized efforts such as the , , and Allis - Chalmers Model 6 - 12 in that it represented the most literal kind of horse replacement ( in some suppliers ' cases , even retaining the reins as the control method ) .
But besides providing mere comfort and familiarity for farmers accustomed to working with horses , it also neutralized an economic disadvantage of the tractors of the era .
With horses , one person could control both the motive power and the implement , but with a tractor , two were required , because the tractor required a driver and the implement , in many cases , required an operator .
Most implements of the era were legacy horse - drawn equipment ( a fact that Harry Ferguson had to battle in trying to sell his system of tractor - specific implements during the 1920s and 1930s ) .
Setups such as these cut back the man - hour requirement to match that of the horse — while the tractor 's multiple horsepower and lack of daily , year - round feeding ( " eats only when it works " ) continued to beat the horse economically otherwise .
The two - person requirement was often not a problem on farms that had large families ; a son or daughter was usually available for duty .
But the farm help problem was felt keenly on many other farms , especially during the world wars .
Technological advancement eventually made it standard for one person to control both the tractor and implement , via the growing suite of hydraulic and electrical controls , especially after World War II .
In 1926 a corporation called Snow - Motors Inc demonstrated a Fordson Model F converted into a snowmobile , which they dubbed the Snow - Motor .
The tractor used bullet - shaped screws instead of wheels or continuous track units to move across the snow .
They were used ( unsuccessfully ) by Richard Byrd 's first Antarctic Expedition .
RAIL CONVERSIONS Section::::Rail conversions .
In an effort to displace both horses and steam from remote logging railways ( bush trams ) , several enterprising inventors took the Fordson tractor and made modifications to allow them to run on rails .
Extra bogies ( wheel sets ) were added behind and in front of some versions and acted as log bogies , whilst increasing traction on the light rail lines , without increasing weight .
Dunedin company Trails Ltd used the Fordson F as a base , adding a reverser , so the tractor could operate either way at the same speeds , and a powered bogie to act as a powered log bogie .
Wellington company Nattrass advanced this design , and both companies sales spelled the end to horse - operated bush trams in New Zealand .
Nattrass also enjoyed sales in Australia .
The last locomotive built by A & G Price , noted steam and diesel locomotive builder was completed in 1970 , and used a Fordson Major E1 as a base .
TRACTOR MODELS
* Fordson Model
F
* Fordson Model
N
* Fordson All - Around ( also called Fordson Row Crop )
* Fordson Major
E27N
* Fordson New Major
* Fordson Dexta * Fordson Power Major
* Fordson Super Major ( called the Ford 5000 in U.S. )
* Fordson Super Dexta ( called the Ford 2000 Diesel in U.S. ) TRUCKS Section::::Trucks .
The Fordson E83W is an example of Fordson trucks .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* .
An article about Ford 's power farming activities that shows the zeitgeist of the early 1920s in American mechanized farming .
Partial toward Ford but informative .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of Fordson and Ford tractors * Fordson Tractors 1917 to 1950