ALLIGATOR SNAPPING TURTLE
The alligator snapping turtle ( Macrochelys temminckii ) is a species of turtle in the family Chelydridae .
The species is native to freshwater habitats in the United States .
M. temminckii is one of the heaviest freshwater turtles in the world .
It is often associated with , but not closely related to , the common snapping turtle , which is in the genus Chelydra .
The specific epithet temminckii is in honor of Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Although it was once believed that only one extant species exists in the genus Macrochelys , recent studies have shown that there are two species , the other being the Suwannee snapping turtle ( M. suwanniensis ) of the Suwannee River ( a third species , the Apalachicola snapping turtle M. apalachicolae , has been proposed , but is generally not recognized ) .
COMMON NAME
Section::::Common name .
The alligator snapping turtle is given its common name because of its immensely powerful jaws and long , spring - like neck , as well as distinct ridges on its shell that are similar in appearance to the rough , ridged skin of an alligator .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The alligator snapping turtle is found primarily in southeastern United States waters .
They are found from the Florida Panhandle west to East Texas , north to southeastern Kansas , Missouri , southeastern Iowa , western Illinois , southern Indiana , western Kentucky , and western Tennessee .
They are found on the Missouri River at least as far north as the Gavins Point Dam , the southernmost dam on the Missouri River at Yankton , South Dakota , and are featured in the Gavins Point Dam Aquarium .
Typically , only nesting females venture onto open land .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The alligator snapping turtle is characterized by a large , heavy head , and a long , thick shell with three dorsal ridges of large scales ( osteoderms ) , giving it a primitive appearance reminiscent of some of the plated dinosaurs , most notably the ankylosaurs .
They can be immediately distinguished from the common snapping turtle by the three distinct rows of spikes and raised plates on the carapace , whereas the common snapping turtle has a smoother carapace .
They are a solid gray , brown , black , or olive - green in color , and often covered with algae .
They have radiating yellow patterns around their eyes , serving to break up the outline of the eyes to keep the turtle camouflaged .
Their eyes are also surrounded by a star - shaped arrangement of fleshy , filamentous " eyelashes " .
Though not verified , a alligator snapping turtle was found in Kansas in 1937 , but the largest verifiable one is debatable .
One weighed at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago was a 16-year resident giant alligator snapper weighing , sent to the Tennessee Aquarium as part of a breeding loan in 1999 , where it subsequently died .
Another weighing was housed at the Brookfield Zoo in suburban Chicago .
Another large turtle reportedly weighed .
They generally do not grow quite that large .
Breeding maturity is attained around , when the length is around , but then they continue to grow throughout life .
Excluding exceptionally large specimens , adult alligator snapping turtles generally range in carapace length from and weigh from .
Males are typically larger than females .
88 adult alligator snapping turtles averaged , 92 averaged , and 249 averaged .
Usually very old males comprise the specimens that weigh in excess of per most population studies .
Among extant freshwater turtles , only the little - known giant softshell turtles of the genera Chitra , Rafetus , and Pelochelys , native to Asia , reach comparable sizes .
In " mature " specimens ( carapace length over ) , males and females can be differentiated by the position of the cloaca from the carapace and the thickness of the tail 's base .
A mature male 's cloaca extends beyond the carapace edge , a female 's is placed exactly on the edge if not nearer to the plastron .
The base of the tail of the male is also thicker as compared to females because of the hidden reproductive organs .
The inside of the turtle 's mouth is camouflaged , and it possesses a ( i.e. , " worm - shaped " ) appendage on the tip of its tongue used to lure fish , a form of Peckhamian mimicry .
The turtle hunts by lying motionless in the water with its mouth wide open .
The vermiform tongue imitates the movements of a worm , luring prey to the turtle 's mouth .
The mouth is then closed with tremendous speed and force , completing the ambush .
Contrary to claims that alligator snapping turtles possess one of the strongest bite forces of any animal , it has been recorded at , which is lower than several other species of turtles and at about the same level as humans , relative to the turtle 's body size .
Still , these turtles must be handled with extreme care and considered potentially dangerous .
This species can bite through the handle of a broom and rare cases have been reported where human fingers have been cleanly bitten off by the species .
No human deaths have been reported to have been caused by alligator snapping turtles .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Alligator snappers are opportunistic feeders that are almost entirely carnivorous .
They rely on both live food caught by themselves and dead organisms which they scavenge .
In general , they will eat almost anything they can catch .
Fishermen have glorified the species ' ability to catch fish and to deplete fish populations , whereas in fact they largely target any abundant and easily caught prey , and rarely have any extensive deleterious effect on fish populations .
Their natural diets consist primarily of fish and fish carcasses , molluscs , carrion , and amphibians , but they are also known to eat snakes , crayfish , worms , water birds , aquatic plants , and other turtles .
In one study conducted in Louisiana , 79.8 % of the stomach contents of adult alligator snapping turtles was found to be composed of other turtles , although the resistance of shell and reptile - bone fragments to digestion may have led these fragments to remain longer in the digestive tract than other items .
This species may also , on occasion , prey on aquatic rodents , including nutrias and muskrats or even snatch small to mid - sized other mammals , including squirrels , opossums , raccoons , and armadillos when they attempt to swim or come to the water 's edge .
Alligator snapping turtles seemingly most often hunt at night .
They may also hunt diurnally , however .
By day , they may try to attract fish and other prey by sitting quietly at the bottom of murky water and let their jaws hang open to reveal their tongues , which look like small , pink , worm - like lures in the back of their gray mouths , and lure the prey into striking distance .
Small fish , such as minnows , are often caught in this way by younger alligator snapping turtles , whereas adults must eat a greater quantity per day and must forage more actively .
Though not a regular food source for them , adult alligator snappers have even been known to kill and eat small American alligators .
In captivity , they may consume almost any kind of meat provided , including beef , chicken , and pork .
They will refuse to eat if exposed to extreme temperatures .
REPRODUCTION AND LIFESPAN Section::::Reproduction and lifespan .
Maturity is reached around 12 years of age .
Mating takes place yearly , in early spring in the southern part of their total range , and later spring in the north .
The female builds a nest and lays a clutch of 10–50 eggs about two months later .
The sex of the young depends on the temperature at which the eggs are incubated .
Nests are typically excavated at least 50 yards from the water 's edge to prevent them from being flooded and drowned .
Incubation takes from 100 to 140 days , and hatchlings emerge in the early fall .
Though their potential lifespans in the wild are unknown , alligator snapping turtles are believed to be capable of living to 200 years of age , but 80 to 120 is more likely .
In captivity , they typically live between 20 and 70 years .
UNDER HUMAN CARE Section::::Under human care .
Alligator snapping turtles are sometimes captive - bred as pets and are readily available in the exotic animal trade .
Due to their potential size and specific needs , they do not make particularly good pets for any but the most experienced aquatic turtle keepers .
They prefer to feed on live fish which they catch with their special technique , but will readily feed on other types of meat or leafy vegetables if offered .
Hand feeding is dangerous .
Extreme temperatures are known to affect the turtle 's appetite and would result in the turtle refusing to feed until it has been remedied .
Due to their sheer size , handling adult specimens can pose significant problems .
Small turtles can be held by the sides of the shell with relative safety , but large individuals must be held by grasping the turtle 's shell just behind the head and in front of the tail .
Despite their reputation , alligator snapping turtles are typically not prone to biting .
However , if provoked they are quite capable of delivering a powerful bite which can easily amputate fingers or cause other significant injuries .
Some U.S states where alligator snapping turtles do not naturally occur ( such as California ) prohibit them from being kept as pets by residents .
INVASIVE SPECIES Section::::Invasive species .
Some alligator snapping turtles were released or escaped into waters of the Czech Republic and Germany .
In Bavaria , one turtle caused injury to a child , but was not caught .
In Bohemia , four turtles of this species have been caught .
Both countries have strong laws against keeping alligator snapping turtles without permission .
Both are member states of the EU , which has laws against invasive species .
CONSERVATION STATUS Section::::Conservation status .
Because of collection for the exotic pet trade , overharvesting for their meat , and habitat destruction , some states have imposed bans on collecting alligator snapping turtles from the wild .
The IUCN lists it as a threatened species , and as of June 14 , 2006 , it was afforded some international protection by being listed as a CITES III species ( which will put limits on exportation from the United States and all international trade in this species ) .
The alligator snapping turtle is now endangered in several states , including Kentucky , Indiana , Illinois , and Missouri , where they are protected by state law .
They are designated as " in need of conservation " in Kansas .
In October 2013 , one was found in the Prineville Reservoir in Oregon .
It was captured and euthanized by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife , which considers alligator snapping turtles to be an invasive species .
This one was the first found in the state .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Alligator vs. common snapping turtle – Chelydra.org
* Alligator snapping turtle care sheet
* Crunch , the alligator snapping turtle * FURTHER READING
* Behler JL , King FW ( 1979 ) .
The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Reptiles and Amphibians .
New York : Alfred A. Knopf .
743 pp . .
( Macroclemys temmincki , pp .
436–437
+
Plates 325 , 326 , 327 ) .
* , Goin OB , ( 1978 ) .
Introduction to Herpetology , Third Edition .
San Francisco : W.H. Freeman .
xi + 378 pp . .
( Macroclemys temmincki , pp .
77 , 124 , 256 - 257 ) .
* Smith HM , Brodie ED Jr ( 1982 ) .
Reptiles of North America : A Guide to Field Identification .
New York :
Golden Press .
240 pp . .
( Macroclemys temmincki , pp .
38–39 ) .
* Troost G ( 1835 ) .
In : Harlan R ( 1835 ) .
Medical and Physical Researches : or Original Memoirs in Medicine , Surgery , Physiology , Geology , Zoology , and Comparative Anatomy .
Philadelphia : L.R. Bailey .
xxxix + 653 pp .
( Chelonura temminckii , new species , p. 158 ) .
* Zim HS , Smith HM ( 1956 ) .
Reptiles and Amphibians : A Guide to Familiar American Species .
Golden Nature Guides .
New York : Simon and Schuster .
160 pp .
( Macroclemys temmincki , pp .
25 , 155 ) .