TEN - DIGIT DIALING
In the United States and Canada , ten - digit dialing is the practice of including the area code of a telephone number when dialing to initiate a telephone call .
When necessary , a ten - digit number may be prefixed with the trunk code 1 , which is often referred to as 11-digit dialing or national format .
TRADITIONAL
DIALING PROCEDURES Section::::Traditional dialing procedures .
After the implementation of the North American Numbering Plan , placing a local call within the caller 's area code involved only seven - digit dialing .
Callers dialed only the central office code ( three digits ) and the four - digit station number of the telephone subscriber to reach .
For example , a person at a station with the telephone number 212 - 555 - 7890 called the number 212 - 555 - 3456 by dialing 555 - 3456 .
In seven - digit dialing the area code is dialed only when the area code of the called number is different from that of the calling number .
Some communities on an area code boundary , such as Ottawa - Hull ( 613/819 ) , Kansas City MO / KS ( 816/913 ) or Washington , D.C. ( 202 ) implemented central office code protection to ensure the same seven - digit local number was not assigned in two different area codes in the same city to retain seven - digit dialing in the entire community .
Code protection is not possible for calls across area code boundaries within split plan cities where area codes have been added due to a shortage of available local numbers ; these local calls became ten digits when the code was split .
The phone system often requires the caller to dial 1 first as a trunk prefix before the area code and number , to indicate to the phone system that the call requires a connection to another area .
" 1 " is also the country code for the North American Numbering Plan , and therefore must likewise be dialed before the area code for international calls made to NANP countries .
It used to be that a call to a different area code was a long - distance call , with rare exceptions where a city falls on an area code boundary , but the significant growth in the number of area codes , and the shrinking of the numbering plan areas since that time have invalidated this assumption .
In Canada and some regions of the United States , placing a landline call with " 1 " before an area code where the outgoing call is in the same service area results in an automated recording indicating that the call being made is local .
The toll prefix is not necessary , even if the area codes are different .
This is common in areas where overlays are being used .
Landline providers have warned that dialing " 1 " when it is unnecessary could result in long distance charges being made even when they otherwise would not have been charged .
Cellular telephones have always accepted ten - digit dialing , even where a call is seven - digit local .
OVERLAY PLANS Section::::Overlay plans .
The introduction of overlay plans as a means to reduce the need for phone numbers to change as a result of adding new area codes meant that one geographic area could be associated with more than one area code .
This is disadvantageous to new service providers as existing providers can issue numbers in the familiar area code .
In response to pressure from carriers , the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and the Canadian Radio - television and Telecommunications Commission ( CRTC ) have imposed 10-digit dialling for all local calls ( even within the same area code ) in the overlaid areas .
The requirement has no technical basis , but carriers expected it would reduce objections from new subscribers assigned the less - desirable overlay code by inconveniencing everyone equally .
Consumer groups and state regulators ( the Illinois Commerce Commission and Citizens Utility Board for northwest Chicago , the NYS Public Service Commission in NYC ) pushed back against the requirement with attempts at litigation , to no avail .
The requirement is unenforceable against PBX vendors and voice over IP operators as the dial plan is controlled by subscriber - owned equipment , which can be configured to send seven - digit calls to the original area code .
It has also failed to stop a pattern of some subscribers paying third - party resellers an artificially - high price for a number in a desirable original area code like Manhattan 's 212 or Toronto 's 416 .
A business which advertises a main number in a random overlay which did not exist at the turn of the millennium marks itself as a newcomer , or even as someone doing business from a mobile telephone , placing it at a disadvantage against long - established local competitors who first opened their doors in an era when there was just one telephone company and one area code .
The " 1 " before the area code is most often required only for actual long distance calls .
Some phone systems in early overlay plan areas still do not accept a " 1 " before the area code for non - long - distance calls ; all Canadian landlines follow this pattern .
However , in the three largest US markets ( New York City , Los Angeles and Chicago ) , the initial " 1 " is required even for local calls .
All cellphones in North America ignore this and only require the user to dial 10 digits .
The added dialing requirement , coupled with the need to remember which of the area 's coincident area codes applied to a seven - digit local number , damaged the popularity of overlay plans , which themselves were introduced as a means to reduce the inconveniences associated with the traditional split plans .
As overlay plans have spread to more areas , 10-digit dialing in the U.S. and Canada is becoming increasingly common .
However , most areas not within an overlay plan can still use 7-digit dialing for local calls , although long distance calls within the area code may have required ten or eleven digits .
Eleven digits for toll calls became standard in all of North America by the end of 1994 to allow introduction of " interchangeable NPA codes " – area codes that did not have a 0 or 1 as the middle digit and could therefore be confused with the central office code – after January 1 , 1995 .
A few areas that are not within an overlay plan nonetheless require 10-digit dialing if part of the local calling area is served by an overlay plan .
One example of such an area is the Fort Knox Army base in Kentucky .
The base itself is served by area code 502 , which is not yet subject to an overlay plan , but its local calling area includes cities that are now served by the 270/364 overlay complex .
As a result , Fort Knox imposed 10-digit dialing for all off - base numbers when the 270/364 overlay was established in 2014 .
SEE ALSO
* List of country calling codes
*
Telephone numbering plan REFERENCES