SPOON BENDING Spoon bending is the apparent deformation of objects , especially metal cutlery , either without physical force , or with less force than would normally seem necessary .
It is a common form of stage magic , and a variety of methods are used to produce the illusion .
Spoon bending attracted considerable media attention in the 1970s when some people claimed to have the ability to cause such events by paranormal psychic means .
The most notable was Uri Geller , who performed by bending metal spoons as well as metal keys and several other objects and materials .
Geller 's performances were attributed to stage magic by critics such as James Randi and Martin Gardner .
STAGE MAGIC Section::::Stage magic .
Causing spoons , keys , and other items to appear to bend without any physical force is a common stage magic trick that has many variants .
Simply holding a spoon by its neck and rapidly tilting it back and forth can create the illusion that the spoon is bending , due to the way that the human eye perceives the rocking motion .
When a spoon is physically bent or broken , it is usually at the point where the object would be easiest to bend by hand .
In many cases , the trick uses misdirection , a basic tool of the stage magician .
The performer draws the audience 's attention away from the spoon during the brief moment while the spoon is being physically bent .
The typical bend , where the bowl meets the handle , requires relatively little force .
The magician then gradually reveals the bend .
When a 1996 BBC television show staged a prank on Uri Geller , it took footage from angles he was not expecting , which showed Geller grasping a spoon firmly with both hands as he stood up to display a bend in it .
Other methods use a metal spoon that has been prepared so that a simple flick will cause it to bend or break .
This can be done , for instance , by repeatedly bending the spoon at the desired spot , until the metal cracks and weakens .
If the spoon breaks , the magician holds together the two halves of the spoon as if it were unbroken , then slowly relaxes the grip , making the spoon appear to bend before splitting in two .
If a magician has control over the viewing angle , the trick can be done by using a spoon that is already bent at the start of the trick .
The spoon is initially held with the bend along the viewing angle , making it invisible .
The magician then turns the spoon slowly to reveal the bend .
The magician Ben Harris author of the book Gellerism Revealed : The Psychology and Methodology Behind the Geller Effect ( 1985 ) revealed step - by - step photographs and text showing how to bend keys and cutlery by trick methods .
Some novelty or magic shops sell self - bending spoons ( utilizing the physical properties of a nickel titanium alloy ) which can be used by amateur and stage magicians to demonstrate " psychic " powers or as a practical joke .
Such " self - bending " spoons will bend themselves when used to stir tea , coffee , or any other warm liquid , or even when warmed by body heat .
PSYCHOLOGY Section::::Psychology .
In an experimental study ( Wiseman and Greening , 2005 ) two groups of participants were shown a videotape in which a fake psychic placed a bent key on a table .
Participants in the first group heard the fake psychic suggest that the key was continuing to bend when it had remained stationary , while those in the second group did not .
The results revealed that participants from the first group reported significantly more movement of the key than the second group .
The findings were replicated in another study .
The experiments had demonstrated that " testimony for PKMB after effects can be created by verbal suggestion , and therefore the testimony from individuals who have observed allegedly genuine demonstrations of such effects should not be seen as strong evidence in support of the paranormal " .
SPOON BENDING AND THE PARANORMAL
Section::::Spoon bending and the paranormal .
Due partly to the publicity surrounding Uri Geller in the 1970s , bent spoons have become a common visual symbol of the paranormal .
It is shown , for example , in The Matrix , when a young boy bends a spoon to demonstrate the unreality of a computer simulation .
While many individuals have claimed the paranormal or psychokinetic ability to bend spoons or manipulate other objects , spoon bending by mental powers alone has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the scientific community .
Magician and skeptic James Randi has offered a prize of one million dollars to any person who is able to demonstrate paranormal abilities such as spoon bending .
CLAIMS Section::::Claims .
Retired Boeing Engineer Jack Houck hosted " PK Parties " ( psychokinesis parties ) from 1981 to 1988 where 85 % of thousands of participants claimed to have accomplished spoon bending personally .
Author Michael Crichton described his successful experience with spoon bending at a psychokinesis party in his 1988 book Travels : Parapsychologist and author Dean Radin has reported that he was able to bend the bowl of a spoon over with unexplained ease of force with witnesses present at an informal psychokinesis experiment gathering in 2000 .
Maureen Caudill , a trainer associated with the Monroe Institute , claims this is significantly easier to achieve when performed in groups rather than alone .
TESTS
Section::::Tests .
Physicist John Hasted believed that children could paranormally bend paper clips inside a glass sphere , provided the sphere had a hole in it
and they were allowed to take the sphere into a room unobserved .
Martin Gardner wrote Hasted was incapable of devising simple controls such as videotaping the children secretly .
Stephen North , a British psychic , was tested by Hasted in the late 1970s .
Hasted claimed North had the psychokinetic ability to bend spoons and teleport objects in and out of sealed containers .
North was tested in Grenoble on 19 December 1977 in scientific conditions and the results were negative .
According to James Randi , during a test at Birkbeck College , North was observed to have bent a metal sample with his bare hands .
Randi wrote that " I find it unfortunate that [ Hasted ] never had an epiphany in which he was able to recognize
just how thoughtless , cruel , and predatory were the acts perpetrated on him by fakers who took advantage of his naivety and trust . "
Jean - Pierre Girard , a French psychic , has claimed he can bend metal bars by psychokinesis .
Girard was tested in the 1970s but failed to produce any paranormal effects in scientifically controlled conditions .
He was tested on January 19 , 1977 during a two - hour experiment in a Paris laboratory .
The experiment was directed by physicist Yves Farge with a magician also present .
All of the experiments were negative as Girard failed to make any of the objects move paranormally .
He failed two tests in Grenoble in June 1977 with James Randi .
He was also tested on September 24 , 1977 at a laboratory at the Nuclear Research Centre .
Girard failed to bend any bars or change the structure of the metals .
Other experiments into spoon bending were also negative and witnesses described his feats as fraudulent .
Girard later admitted that he would sometimes cheat to avoid disappointing the public but insisted he still had genuine psychic power .
Magicians and scientists have written that he produced all his alleged psychokinetic feats through fraudulent means .
Between 1979 and 1981 , the McDonnell Laboratory for Psychical Research at Washington University reported a series of experiments they named Project Alpha , in which two teenaged male subjects had demonstrated psychokinesis phenomena , including metal - bending and causing images to appear on film , under less than stringent laboratory conditions .
James Randi eventually revealed that the subjects were two of his associates , amateur conjurers Steve Shaw and Michael Edwards .
The pair had created the effects by standard trickery , but the researchers , being unfamiliar with magic techniques , interpreted them as proof of psychokinesis .
John Taylor had tested children in metal bending .
According to Martin Gardner , the controls were inadequate as the children would put paper clips in their pockets and later take one out twisted or be left with metal rods unobserved .
James Randi managed to bend an aluminum bar when Taylor was not looking and scratch on it
" Bent by Randi " .
In other experiments , two scientists from the University of Bath examined metal bending with children in a room which was secretly being videotaped through a one - way mirror .
The film revealed that the children bent the objects with their hands and feet .
Due to the evidence of trickery , Taylor concluded metal bending had no paranormal basis .
SEE ALSO
* Bent Spoon Award
* Psychokinesis REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Henry Gordon .
( 1988 ) .
Extrasensory Deception : ESP , Psychics , Shirley MacLaine , Ghosts , UFOs .
Macmillan of Canada .
* Ben Harris .
( 1985 ) .
Gellerism Revealed : The Psychology and Methodology Behind the Geller Effect .
Calgary : Micky Hades International .
* Terence Hines .
( 2003 ) .
Pseudoscience and the Paranormal .
Prometheus Books .
* David Marks .
( 2000 ) .
The Psychology of the Psychic ( 2nd Edition ) .
Prometheus Books .
* Joe Nickell .
( 2013 ) .
Mind Over Metal .
Skeptical Inquirer .
* James Randi .
( 1982 ) .
Flim - Flam !
Psychics , ESP , Unicorns , and Other Delusions .
Prometheus Books .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Spoon - bending for beginners
: Teaching anomalistic psychology to teenagers by Chris French .
* Uri Geller
Caught
Red - Handed by Massimo Polidoro .
* PK ( spoon - bending ) Party : format and materials by Jack Houck 1982