PREGNANCY OVER
AGE 50 Pregnancy over age 50 has , over recent years , become possible for more women , and more easily achieved for many , due to recent advances in assisted reproductive technology , in particular egg donation .
Typically , a woman 's fecundity ends with menopause , which by definition is 12 consecutive months without having had any menstrual flow at all .
During perimenopause , the menstrual cycle and the periods become irregular and eventually stop altogether , but even when periods are still regular , the egg quality of women in their forties is lower than in younger women , making the likelihood of conceiving a healthy baby also reduced , particularly after age 42 .
It is important to note , that the female biological clock can vary greatly from woman to woman .
A woman 's individual level of fertility can be tested through a variety of methods .
Men also experience a decline in fertility as they age though in a very gradual and later process in contrast to women 's fertility as men 's biological clock declines simply by each age ( loses 1 percent every age ) in comparison to women 's biological clock where it begins drop sharply and rapidly after 38 years of age ; for example , the average time to pregnancy if a man is under 25 is just over 4.5 months but nearly two years if a man is over 40 ( if the woman is under 25 ) .
The risk of genetic defects is greatly increased due to the paternal age effect .
Children with fathers aged 40 or older are more than five times as likely to have an autism spectrum disorder than children fathered by men aged under 30 .
Researchers estimate that compared to a male fathering a child in his early 20s , there is double the chance of the child getting schizophrenia when the father is age 40 , and triple the risk of schizophrenia when the father is age 50 ( though , for most people this means the risk goes from approximately 1 in 121 when a man is 29 , to 1 in 47 when a man is age 50 to 54 ) .
Men 's fertility declines throughout the lifespan , with the volume and fecundity of a man 's semen quality and sperm motility (
the ability of sperm to move towards an egg ) decrease continually between the ages of 20 and 80 .
The incidence of dwarfism and miscarriage also increases as men age In the United States , between 1997 and 1999 , 539 births were reported among mothers over age 50 ( four per 100,000 births ) , with 194 being over 55 .
The oldest mother to date to conceive , was 71 years , and the youngest mother , 5 years old .
According to statistics from the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority , in the UK more than 20 babies are born to women over age 50 per year through in - vitro fertilization with the use of donor oocytes ( eggs ) .
Maria del Carmen Bousada de Lara is the oldest verified mother ; she was aged 67 years 3 days when she gave birth to twins ; she was 130 days older than Adriana Iliescu , who gave birth in 2005 to a baby girl .
In both cases the children were conceived through IVF with donor eggs .
The oldest verified mother to conceive naturally ( listed currently in the Guinness Records ) is Dawn Brooke ( UK ) ; she conceived a son at the age of 59 years in 1997 .
MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS Section::::Medical considerations .
The risk of pregnancy complications increases as the mother 's age increases .
Risks associated with childbearing over the age of 50 include an increased incidence of gestational diabetes , hypertension , delivery by caesarean section , miscarriage , preeclampsia , and placenta previa .
In comparison to mothers between 20 and 29 years of age , mothers over 50 are at almost three times the risk of low birth weight , premature birth , and extremely premature birth ; their risk of extremely low birth weight , small size for gestational age , and fetal mortality was almost double .
CASES OF PREGNANCY OVER AGE 50 Section::::Cases of pregnancy over age 50 .
Facts about the conception of pregnancies in this age group can be difficult to determine , but they are nearly always due to the use of IVF with donor eggs . !
Age of mother !
Date !
Mother !
Father !
Nature of conception !
Country !
Notes Unidentified Donor IVF Australia
A woman in Australia successfully gave birth at 63 in Melbourne , Victoria , according to newspapers and current affairs .
The woman and the father formally requested to remain unidentifiable .
She received an embryo implantation overseas .
She is Australia 's oldest first mother .
Father is an unidentified 78-year old .
The child was born prematurely , at 34 weeks gestation , both mother and child are healthy .
She is a Tasmanian .
65 years December 2018
Mrs. Hakim Din Hakim Din , Her 80
yr old husband Natural Conception India
The woman , from Sailan , Surankote in Poonch district of Jammu & Kashmir , gave birth to a healthy baby girl at a local hospital .
In the late afternoon , she gave birth to her second child while her first delivery ( a boy ) was around 8 to 10 years ago .
The condition of the mother as well as the baby was stable and healthy .
Maria died on July 11 , 2009 from stomach cancer , which she developed soon after giving birth to her twins ; her sons were only 2 ½ years old then .
DEBATE Section::::Debate .
Pregnancies among older women have been a subject of controversy and debate .
Some argue against motherhood late in life on the basis of the health risks involved , or out of concern that an older mother might not be able to give proper care for a child as she ages , while others contend that having a child is a fundamental right and that it is commitment to a child 's wellbeing , not the parents ' ages , that matters .
A survey of attitudes towards pregnancy over age 50 among Australians found that 54.6 % believed it was acceptable for a postmenopausal woman to have her own eggs transferred and that 37.9 % believed it was acceptable for a postmenopausal women to receive donated ova or embryos .
Governments have sometimes taken actions to regulate or restrict later - in - life childbearing .
In the 1990s , France approved a bill which prohibited postmenopausal pregnancy , which the French Minister of Health at the time , Philippe Douste - Blazy , said was " ... immoral as well as dangerous to the health of mother and child " .
In Italy , the Association of Medical Practitioners and Dentists prevented its members from providing women aged 50 and over with fertility treatment .
Britain 's then - Secretary of State for Health , Virginia Bottomley , stated , " Women do not have the right to have a child ; the child has a right to a suitable home " .
However , in 2005 , age restrictions on IVF in the United Kingdom were officially withdrawn .
Legal restrictions are only one of the barriers confronting women seeking IVF , as many fertility clinics and hospitals set age limits of their own .
SEE ALSO
* Age of consent
* Child sexual abuse * Child sexuality
* List of child brides
* List of oldest birth fathers * List of oldest birth mothers * List of people with the most children
* List of multiple births * List of youngest birth fathers * List of youngest birth mothers
* Lolita ( term ) * Mother * Precocious puberty * Pregnancy * Sexuality in older age
* Teenage pregnancy REFERENCES