BASS PRO SHOPS BPS Direct , LLC ( doing business as Bass Pro Shops ) is an American privately held retailer of hunting , fishing , camping and related outdoor recreation merchandise .
Bass Pro Shops supports and sells merchandise for the National Audubon Society .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The majority owner , John Morris , began his career in sporting goods with a fishing section in the back of a Brown Derby liquor store owned by his father , located in Springfield MO on the road to Table Rock Lake and Branson , Missouri .
That small fishing department sold homemade bait and worms , proving popular enough that Bass Pro Shops was incorporated in 1971 .
These homemade baits were so popular that many people wanted the opportunity to buy these when they had returned home .
Thus began the Bass Pro Shops catalog , first mailed in 1974 .
Soon , it became the world 's largest mail order sporting goods store .
In 1975 , to meet the burgeoning demand for Bass Pro Shops exclusive products , American Rod and Gun was established .
Acting as a separate wholesaling entity ARG serves more than 7,000 independently owned retail stores worldwide .
In 1977 , Bass Pro Shops introduced the first fish - ready complete boat motor and trailer package with the Bass Tracker .
In 1984 , construction began on the Outdoor World Catalog Showroom in Springfield , Missouri .
Big Cedar Lodge opened in 1988 on Table Rock Lake .
In 1995 , Bass Pro Shops Sportsman 's Warehouse opened in Atlanta , Georgia , its first store outside the state of Missouri .
In November 2001 , taking advantage of Outdoor World 's popularity as a tourist destination , the Wonders of Wildlife museum was opened next door to the store in Springfield .
The Wonders of Wildlife Museum & Aquarium closed for renovation in 2007 .
As of October 2016 it is still closed with an expected reopening by the end of the year .
Bass Pro Shops has announced that the grand reopening of the Wonders of Wildlife museum will take place on September 21 , 2017 .
In 2015 , Bass Pro Shops opened a store inside the Memphis Pyramid , a former sports arena and concert venue in Memphis , Tennessee .
In addition to the retail store itself , the building houses two restaurants , a bowling alley , a 100-room hotel , an observation deck , and the tallest free - standing elevator in America .
At 535,000 sq ft , The Pyramid is Bass Pro 's largest store .
In October 2016 , Bass Pro Shops announced that they had reached a deal to acquire competitor Cabela 's for $ 5.5 billion .
The deal is being financed via preferred equity financing from Goldman Sachs and Pamplona .
Goldman Sachs will contribute $ 1.8 billion towards financing and Pamplona will contribute the remainder for a total commitment of $ 2.4 billion .
The new entity is expected to be formed and in operation in Q1 or Q2 of 2017 .
The new entity will keep Cabela 's base in Sidney and Lincoln , Nebraska .
Morris will continue as CEO of the new entity .
He will also be the majority shareholder of the new privately held entity .
Tommy Milner stressed that the company had reviewed a range of options that would maximize value , with the board choosing to go the route of Bass Pro Shops .
HOUSE BRANDS Section::::House brands .
Bass Pro Shops carries a number of house brands .
Among these are : TRACKER MARINE GROUP Section::::Tracker Marine Group .
For the article on the company , see Tracker Marine Group .
In 1978 , Bass Pro Shops introduced the Bass Tracker boat , produced by the Tracker Marine Group .
Its brands include Tracker Boats , Nitro , Sun Tracker , Tahoe , Fisher , ProCraft , Kenner , Mako Myacht and SeaCraft .
These boats are sold in showrooms attached to every Bass Pro Shops store , in stand alone Tracker dealerships , and to independent marine dealers throughout the United States .
All Tracker Marine Group boats are manufactured in multiple plants in southern Missouri .
Over 400,000 people have purchased Tracker boats since 1978 .
RETAIL STORES Section::::Retail stores .
Bass Pro Shops has 94 existing stores in the United States and Canada .
The store sizes range from up to .
The largest flagship stores are known as Outdoor World stores .
The decor of the stores includes taxidermy mounts native to the local area .
All stores have an indoor water feature that showcases fish species that are indigenous to the area .
The fish in their tanks are game fish of great size .
In some of these aquariums , professional anglers and store pro - staff hold demonstrations showing the use of an artificial bait .
They catch the fish in these tanks to show how well the bait works .
Bass Pro Shops is also known for its Outdoor Skills Workshops , teaching skills as varied as fly fishing , Dutch oven cooking , archery hunting with an archery range in the store , and GPS navigation .
They hold many skills workshops with the top names in the outdoor world .
The Rancho Cucamonga , California Outdoor World store is used for the exterior shots of the fictional " Outdoor Man " store in the ABC sitcom
Last Man Standing , starring Tim Allen , that premiered in 2011 .
Camera crews have also visited the store several times to film interior shots .
ISLAMORADA FISH COMPANY RESTAURANT Section::::Islamorada Fish Company Restaurant .
Many locations include an Islamorada Fish Company , a chain of restaurants owned by Bass Pro Shops .
UNCLE BUCK 'S FISHBOWL AND GRILL Section::::Uncle Buck 's Fishbowl and Grill .
The new San Jose , CA , Bridgeport , CT , Tsawwassen , BC , Altoona , IA , East Peoria , IL , Harlingen , TX , Round Rock , TX , Bristol , TN , Memphis , TN , and Tacoma , WA Outdoor World locations feature a first for Bass Pro Shops : a 12-lane bowling alley .
The project is in cooperation with Brunswick Bowling & Billiards .
In addition to bowling , the facility offers a full - service restaurant and bar as well as world - class billiards in the Black Widow billiard room .
The underwater themed facility is connected to the Bass Pro Shops , but features a separate entrance to accommodate late night diners and bowlers .
NRA NATIONAL SPORTING ARMS MUSEUM Section::::NRA National Sporting Arms Museum .
After nearly a decade of work by the NRA and Bass Pro Shops , the NRA National Sporting Arms Museum opened in the flagship store in Springfield , Missouri on August 2 , 2013 .
It showcases almost 1,000 sporting artifacts from the 1600s to today , including some historically significant firearms from the NRA Museum Collection .
The museum will host firearms and artwork from the Remington Arms Company factory collection , a multimillion - dollar collection of U.S. military sidearms , engraved Colt revolvers of the American frontier , the guns of Annie Oakley and firearms of U.S. Presidents like Teddy Roosevelt and Dwight Eisenhower .
AFFILIATION WITH NASCAR Section::::Affiliation with NASCAR .
Bass Pro Shops and its owner , John Morris , have had a longtime interest in NASCAR racing .
The company has sponsored such racers as Dale Earnhardt , Kerry Earnhardt , and Martin Truex Jr. Truex won the 2004 and 2005 Busch Series championships in the No . 8 Bass Pro Shops - sponsored Chevy , and drove the No . 1 Chevy for Earnhardt Ganassi Racing in the Sprint Cup series from 2005 to 2009 .
He got his first win at Dover International Speedway and finished 11th in the Chase for the Nextel Cup in 2007 .
While Truex , Jr. renewed with Bass Pro Shops as his main sponsor for three years in 2007 .
In 2009 , he announced he would be leaving Earnhardt Ganassi Racing for Michael Waltrip Racing in 2010 .
Jamie McMurray , former driver of the Roush Fenway Racing Crown Royal Ford Fusion and who is from Joplin , MO ( approx .
60 miles away from the national headquarters in Springfield ) , replaced Truex , Jr. for the 2010 season .
McMurray won the 2010 Daytona 500 in his first race driving in the Bass Pro Shops - sponsored Chevrolet .
He followed that up by winning the 2010 Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis , making him the 3rd driver to win both races in the same season .
He also won the 2010 Bank of America 500 at Lowe 's Motor Speedway .
In the Xfinity Series , Bass Pro Shops was the main sponsor for the No . 3 car driven by Ty Dillon .
Also in the Truck Series , Bass Pro Shops sponsors the No . 32 truck driven by Ryan Truex .
Beginning with the 2013 season , Bass Pro Shops signed a multi - year agreement to be the primary sponsor for the No . 14 Stewart - Haas Racing Chevrolet SS driven by three - time Sprint Cup Champion Tony Stewart .
Bass Pro Shops reunited with Martin Truex Jr. in 2016 to be the primary sponsor of the No . 78 Furniture Row Sprint Cup car at the Daytona 500 and eight more races during the 2016 season .
In 2017 , Truex won his first Cup championship , with Bass Pro Shops as his sponsor .
Also in 2016 , Bass Pro Shops became the primary sponsor of the August race at Bristol Motor Speedway , one of the most iconic events in NASCAR .
The event is now known as the Bass Pro Shops NRA Night Race .
In the 2005 Disney film , Bass Pro Shops is one of two main sponsors of Ray Peyton Jr. ( the other being Tracker Boats which Bass Pro Shops owns )
Herbie also later receives a Bass Pro Shops sticker on his left rear fender .
SEE ALSO
* Academy Sports +
Outdoors
* Cabela 's * Dick 's Sporting Goods *
Gander Mountain
* Legendary Whitetails
*
REI
* Scheels
All Sports * Sportsman 's Warehouse * Calibers and CalibersUSA.com REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Bass Pro Shops * Islamorada Fish Company Restaurant * Tracker Boats