TOYOTA TACOMA
The Toyota Tacoma is a pickup truck manufactured in the U.S. by the Japanese automobile manufacturer Toyota since 1995 .
The first generation Tacoma , model years 1995½ through 2004 , was classified as a compact pickup .
The second generation was classified as mid - size .
The Tacoma was Motor Trend Magazine 's Truck of the Year for 2005 .
As of 2015 , the Toyota Tacoma is sold in the U.S. , Canada , Mexico , Panama , Bolivia , Bermuda , Chile , and the French territory of New Caledonia .
FIRST GENERATION ( JANUARY 1995–AUGUST 2004 )
Section::::First generation ( January 1995–August 2004 ) .
The Tacoma was introduced in the US in February 1995 ( March 1995 market launch ) as a replacement for the Hilux , which prior to this was marketed in the US under the name Toyota Pickup .
Compared with the Hilux , the Tacoma is engineered with a greater priority on ride quality , handling , comfort , and safety over ruggedness and payload capacity .
The design is intended to better suit the needs of the US and Canadian pickup truck market , where pickup trucks , particularly compact and mid - sized models , are often used as personal vehicles , and less exclusively for commercial , agricultural , and off road use .
The name was derived from the Coast Salish peoples ' name for Mt. Rainier in Washington state .
Development began in 1989 , following launch of the fifth generation Toyota Pickup in late 1988 and concluded in 1994 .
Design work was done at Calty Design Research in California from 1990 to 1992 , when Kevin Hunter 's exterior design proposal was chosen in the autumn of 1991 and in final form , frozen for production in 1992 .
Patents for the production design were filed in Japan in April 1993 and October 28 , 1993 in the United States .
There were a total of three engines available for the Toyota Tacoma : * 2.4 L four - cylinder rated at and of torque * 2.7 L four - cylinder rated at and of torque * 3.4 L V6 rated at and of torque .
The 2.4 L gave ( highway cycle ) , the 2.7 L gave ( highway ) , and the 3.4 L delivered ( highway ) .
Two - wheel drive Tacomas ( non - PreRunner models ) had 5-stud wheel lug patterns and available with the 2.4L or 3.4L. Automatic and manual transmissions were available .
Four - wheel drive and PreRunner Tacomas had six - stud wheel lug patterns and were available with the 2.7L and 3.4L engines .
All PreRunner and all Double Cab models were only available with an automatic transmission for the first generation while the regular cab and Xtracab four - wheel drive was available with either a manual transmission or automatic transmission .
The truck 's frame is fully boxed until immediately after the rear leaf spring mount bracket where it transitions into a c - frame section .
The 3.4 V6 's manual transmission was an R150F while the automatic transmission was an A340F
( Aisin code is 30 - 40LE ) .
The aftermarket TRD supercharged 3.4L V6 produced and .
From 1997 on , the regular cabs was only available with a 2.4L or a 2.7L 4-cylinder .
The TRD Off - Road package was introduced in 1998 .
This package added a locking rear differential and was only available to PreRunner and four - wheel drive models that were equipped with a V6 .
In its first couple years of production the Tacoma sold very well , attracting many young buyers .
The first generation Tacoma underwent a minor headlight upgrade from recessed to flush headlights in October 1996 on 2WD models and a total of two cosmetic facelifts :
the first in July 1997 , and the second in October 2000 .
The facelifts mainly entailed grilles ( model year MY1998 and 2001 ) and tailgate badging and emblems ( MY1998 ) .
Mechanical changes included a switch to distributorless ignitions ( coil - on - plug ) in 1996 and in 1997 longer rear leaf springs .
A passenger - side air bag was added in July 1997 , and the driver 's side air bag ( standard from 1995 launch ) was " depowered " .
Most 4x4 models came with Toyota 's Automatic Differential Disconnect ( ADD ) system after the 2000 model year .
The PreRunner model was introduced for the 1998 model year .
The PreRunner is a two - wheel drive that shares the same taller suspension and lug pattern as the four - wheel drive .
Along with the four - wheel drive model , it was also available with the TRD Off - Road Package that included a locking rear differential , also introduced in 1998 .
Designed through 1998 ( by Yusuke Fukushima )
as part of the MY2001 facelift ( patented on September 22 , 1998 at Japan Patent Office under # 0890798 ) was a new crew cab ( four - door ) model added to the lineup in October 2000 .
The crew cab , officially dubbed as the Double Cab model , featured four doors and Tokico gas shocks , while the extended cabs still opened with two doors and used Bilstein shocks .
The extended cab featured a bed while the crew cab featured a bed .
Many customers were upset with small crew cab beds , but most competitors shared this shortcoming .
In October 2000 , along with the front facelift , Toyota had also unveiled an S - Runner trim package which included the 3.4-liter V6 engine .
It came with alloy wheels , and a 5-speed manual transmission with Tokico gas shocks .
There were only 800 produced each month from September 2000 to August 2004 .
By 2003 the Tacoma had gained 16.5 percent sales from its previous years .
The Tacoma 's popularity only increased in the next few years .
By 2004 it was ahead of the Nissan Frontier , and Dodge Dakota , but still 2.2 percent behind in sales to the Ford Ranger .
In 2008 , Toyota proactively announced a 15-year , unlimited mileage corrosion warranty for 1995 - 2000 model years due to inadequate rustproofing and frame corrosion issues affecting over 800,000 Tacomas .
Toyota will either repair the frame or buyback the truck for 1.5 times its KBB retail value .
This was later extended to include 2001 - 2004 model years , but in these cases when a frame was found to be rusty to the point of perforation , the frame is replaced with a new one instead of a buy back .
On November 21 , 2012 , Toyota recalled about 150,000 Tacoma mid - size pickup trucks from the model years 2001 to 2004 that were sold primarily in 20 cold - weather U.S. states .
The recall involves the spare tire and how it could fall off . !
Production Colors ! !
Model years
SECOND GENERATION ( AUGUST 2004–AUGUST 2015 )
Section::::Second generation ( August 2004–August 2015 ) .
In 2000 , Toyota began development of the second generation Tacoma under chief engineer Chikuo Kubota .
The majority of development work was handled by Hino in Japan .
Designers Shigeya Hattori and Hideo Karikomi of Hino , won the internal design competition in 2001 .
Final designs were frozen for production in 2002 and patents filed on July 3 , 2003 , with test mules being tested from early 2003 .
Prototypes were built later in 2003 , with development ending in the second quarter of 2004 .
On February 4 , 2004 at the Chicago Auto Show , Toyota unveiled a bigger and more powerful Tacoma .
This new Tacoma was available in eighteen different configurations , that included three cab configurations , four transmissions , two engines , and two bed lengths .
The three cab configurations consist of regular cab , access cab , and double cab .
The transmissions come in 4-speed automatic , 5-speed automatic , 5-speed manual , and 6-speed manual .
Beds are : long bed , and short bed .
The Tacoma 's 4.0-liter 1GR - FE V6 took the place of the original 3.4-liter 5VZ - FE V6 .
The new V6 had many enhancements , such as a tow rating of , and a payload capacity of .
It produces and of torque .
The smaller , but all - new 2.7-liter 2TR - FE 4-cylinder alternative in less expensive models is rated at and .
of torque .
Toyota also introduced an X - Runner trim , which replaces the slow selling S - Runner trim from the previous generation .
The X - Runner features the 1GR - FE paired to a six - speed manual transmission , alloy wheels , is lowered two inches from the factory and included an X - Brace suspension package .
Toyota also included a Down - Hill Assist Control ( DAC ) and Hill - Start Assist Control ( HAC ) , with models that were equipped with the optional Toyota Racing Development ( TRD )
Off - Road package .
DAC automatically applies braking during downhill descents while HAC prevents the vehicle from rolling backwards on hills .
A rear locking differential , or limited - slip differential were also some optional features .
Every Tacoma was manufactured with a composite inner bed that includes a deck rail system with four tie down cleats , hook - pins , storage boxes .
TRD package equipped Tacomas also feature an in - bed 115 V/400 W AC power outlet .
The tie down cleats are rated to hold up to .
The 2006 model Tacoma was a bit different from the 2005 model .
The 2006 model made some options standard .
Toyota also added 2 new interior colors for the 2007 model year .
2008 models are carry - ons from 2007 .
For 2009 safety features were added and the Tacoma no longer offers a mechanical limited slip differential rather an open differential which uses individual wheel braking to simulate a mechanical LSD or " Auto - LSD " .
TRD off - road models continue to come equipped with a locking rear differential .
The second generation Tacomas were assembled in Tijuana , Mexico and Fremont , California while the plastic / composite beds were all built in Mexico .
However , in August 2009 Toyota announced that it would relocate Tacoma production from Fremont to San Antonio , Texas .
A minor facelift came for 2009 , including a slightly revised grille on some models , new LED taillamps , and on the X - Runner , TRD Offroad and TRD Sport models includes smoked headlamp trim .
Auxiliary audio input now comes standard .
The Access / Double Cab trucks have two new ceiling mounted speakers and available backup monitor .
Four new exterior colors are also added to the Tacoma .
After the bankruptcy of GM , GM ended its joint venture with Toyota .
Toyota , needing additional production volume at its Texas and Mississippi plants , ended Corolla and Tacoma production at the Fremont plant .
In 2010 all Tacoma production was moved to Toyota 's Texas plant in San Antonio .
The Tacoma will be built alongside the Tundra .
This brought a total of approximately 1,000 new jobs to San Antonio
The 2012 model year refresh featured a restyled front bumper , headlights , grille , hood , new interior and a shark fin antenna for the SiriusXM satellite radio .
The 2013 model year comes with touch screen audio system and removes the shark fin antenna and SiriusXM radio capability unless the optional Entune package is installed .
2014 models came with a new SR trim and for 2015 models the regular cab model was discontinued .
In November 2016 , Toyota USA settled a class action suit over frame rust , agreeing to inspect and if necessary replace rusted frames on 2005–2010 model year Tacomas , 2007–2008 MY Tundras , and 2005–2008 MY Sequoias in the US and its territories .
SG Automotive manufactures a truck with a similar grille and headlights called the Huanghai Major in China .
SAFETY AND STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY Section::::Safety and structural integrity .
The Tacoma comes standard with anti - lock brakes , brake assist , and electronic brakeforce distribution .
For 2008 , a rollover sensor was added which would deploy the side curtain airbags in the event of rollover in Tacomas equipped with the optional side airbags .
Beginning with the 2009 model year , all Tacomas feature Toyota 's Star Safety System which added Vehicle Stability Control and traction control .
Front row side torso airbags and side curtain airbags for both rows also become standard as well as active head restraints .
Given the smaller size of pickup trucks in the Tacoma 's category , crash testing for these sized trucks lags with how well most full size trucks perform .
However , in an Insurance Institute for Highway Safety ( IIHS ) test of the Tacoma and other small trucks , only the side airbag equipped Tacoma received the highest overall rating of " Good " in the side impact test .
The Tacoma also is rated " Good " in the frontal offset crash test .
In 2009 with the active head restraints the Tacoma is given the IIHS 's Top Safety Pick award .
+ NHTSA crash test ratings ( 2006 ) : Frontal Driver Frontal Passenger Side Driver Side Rear Passenger Rollover TRD PACKAGES Section::::TRD Packages .
The Tacoma comes in two TRD packages : Sport and Off - Road .
The Sport is targeted more towards improved road performance , while the Off - Road is more geared towards the off - road enthusiast .
Both are available in 2WD or 4WD , with rear electronic locking differential available in the Off - Road model .
The TRD Sport package comes in two levels .
The first level has a color - matched grille , color - matched front / rear bumpers , color - matched door handles , color - matched mirrors , Bilstein shocks / struts , TRD interior , hood with scoop , A / C inverter in the bed , bed rails with cleats , stainless steel exhaust tip and 17 " wheels .
The second level includes the above and also adds a towing package ( oil and transmission coolers ) , and heavy - duty high output alternator .
The 2005 to 2008 model years came with a mechanical true limited slip locking differential .
The 2009 model year onwards has an open differential with a brake assisted " automatic limited slip " rear differential , similar to a VSC system .
The TRD Off - Road package includes a chrome rear bumper , 16 " wheels , skid plates , chrome grille , locking rear differential , aluminum skid plate , and no hood scoop .
Progressive rate springs are included , along with A - TRAC , Hill Descent assist(Automatic only ) and Hill Start assist ( six speed only ) .
The Off - Road package has a smaller diameter sway bar compared to the Sport package , which gives the Off - Road more wheel articulation and a smoother ride but allows for more body roll .
All - Terrain tires and a heavy duty front tow hook complete the package .
TRD EXTREME OR T /
X BAJA
Section::::TRD Extreme or T / X Baja .
From model years 2012 to 2014 the Tacoma was offered in 1 of 1500 of the T / X BAJA package .
Package includes upgraded lifted suspension with Eibach springs and TRD Bilstein coil - overs in the front and TRD Bilstein reservoir shocks in the rear with an additional leaf spring .
The bead - lock style wheels are also added wrapped in BF Goodrich All Terrains .
The BAJA model also include a stainless steel TRD exhaust .
The iconic BAJA shift knob is also available for the 6-speed manual transmission models .
TRD PRO Section::::TRD Pro .
The TRD Pro package was offered for 2015 models .
Based on the TRD Off Road , the Pro package added a 2 " front lift with Bilstein 2.5-inch front shocks and 2.0-inch rear shocks with remote reservoirs for extra wheel travel , BFGoodrich all - terrain tires on 16-inch black and silver bead - lock - style wheels , and TRD cat - back exhaust system .
Cosmetic upgrades included the scooped Sport hood , black badges , blackout lighting elements , a TRD Pro matte - black grille with TOYOTA lettering , and various TRD - badged interior parts .
About 1200 TRD Pro Tacomas were made .
IRONMAN EDITION Section::::Ironman edition .
In 2008 , an " Ironman " edition was released , named after Ivan " Ironman " Stewart .
The engine output was increased to and with the addition of the TRD Supercharger and Magnaflow exhaust .
X - RUNNER Section::::X - Runner .
The Toyota X - Runner was a limited production model .
The X - Runner is only available in three colors per year , and only five colors total .
For the 2005 to 2008 model years , the X - Runner was available in Speedway Blue , Radiant Red and Black Sand Pearl .
In 2008 for the 2009 model year facelift , Radiant Red was replaced with Barcelona Red Metallic .
For the 2012 model year , Speedway Blue was replaced with Nautical Blue Metallic .
The X - Runner was discontinued in the mainland US after the 2013 model year .
The X - Runner was last offered in Canada for the 2014 model year and in Hawaii ( USA ) for the 2014/2015 model years .
Key differences between the X - Runner and the other packages include tweaks to the suspension , hood scoop , ground effects kit , driving lights , sports wheel and tires , and a 3.15 final drive ratio ( 3.73 for V6 PreRunner and 4X4 ) .
Toyota added a rear - mounted X - Brace to stiffen up the rear end ( hence the name X - Runner ) .
The chassis was further stiffened by adding two more support braces to the frame .
An optional big brake kit by TRD is also available on the X - Runner ;
which consists of a 332 mm slotted rotor and 4 piston caliper .
The BBK ( big brake kit ) was designed by StopTech .
The X - runner comes with an Aisin RA60 6-speed manual transmission produced by Aisin Seiki Co. THIRD GENERATION ( SEPTEMBER 2015–PRESENT ) Section::::Third generation ( September 2015–present ) .
The new Tacoma was officially unveiled at the January 2015 Detroit Auto Show with United States sales following in September 2015 .
The truck has a new exterior profile taking styling cues from the 2014 model year 4Runner SUV and the 2014 model year Tundra pickup and features a much more aggressive and masculine look , with a larger grill and new projector beam headlamps .
The tailgate and bed were redesigned and featured a debossed Tacoma logo as well as an infused spoiler .
New character lines were also observed on the truck as well as an air dam in front of the vehicle – these new features will likely assist in added fuel economy .
Toyota offers a 2.7 liter I4 engine paired with a 5-speed manual or 6-speed automatic transmission , and a 3.5 liter V6 engine paired with a 6-speed manual or 6-speed automatic transmission .
The 3.5 V6 can run on a simulated Atkinson cycle using VVT - iW , and feature Toyota 's D-4S system which allows it to switch from port injection to direct injection based on driving conditions .
The 2.7 liter delivers of power at 5200 rpm and of torque at 3800 rpm , while the 3.5 liter delivers of power at 6000 rpm and of torque at 4600 rpm .
EPA - estimated city / highway / combined mpg for the 4x2 automatic is 19/24/21 and 18/22/20 for the 4x4 automatic .
Based on the SAE J2807 tow guidelines the Tacoma can tow up to with the added tow package .
In addition to this , Toyota updated the truck 's frame by adding more high strength steel in order to increase the truck 's rigidness and to drop weight .
The body is also constructed using ultra - high strength steel that will be integrated using a new hot stamping process that reduces weight .
Toyota also updated the suspensions , rear differentials and rear axle to improve the truck 's road manners while still keeping it off - road capable .
The truck is available in 6 distinct trims , these are the base SR , mid - level SR5 , TRD Off Road , TRD Sport , Limited , and range topping TRD Pro .
The truck is offered in Access Cab and Double Cab configurations with the long or short bed sizes .
The Regular Cab model was not carried over for the new generation pickup .
The interior of the pickup gets a complete overhaul as well .
Using a handle - bar theme , Toyota made the interior of the Tacoma more luxurious and added a larger touchscreen display as well as an all new instrument panel .
Soft - touch materials also replaced the previous generations hard plastics .
A leather option was added .
Toyota has also used an acoustic windshield , better insulated doors , as well as more weather stripping to reduce road and wind noise .
For the first time Toyota will offer dual climate control in the newly refined Tacoma .
Unlike the 2nd generation models , the steering wheel controls ( as of 2016 - 2017 ) have reduced functionality , and therefore impaired convenience when attempting to browse phone Contacts / Favorite Contacts .
The steering wheel D - pad controls are no longer linked to the Entune system for the purposes of browsing and selecting contacts .
Instead , the driver must rely on voice controls , or reaching over to make adjustments to the Entune system to browse and select the appropriate contact in order to place a phone call .
Furthermore , D - pad controls no longer offer the ability to scroll through lists of songs during USB or Bluetooth music playback .
The driver must use the touch screen to select new albums / artists / songs .
The TRD Off Road trim models features an all - new terrain select mode which allows the driver to choose between different types of terrain such as , loose rock , mud , and sand .
Toyota also announced a new CRAWL mode that will allow the driver to steer the truck in tough terrain while the truck manages braking and acceleration by itself .
In addition to this the truck also features a moon - roof , key - less entry , Qi Wireless phone charging capability , easy lower tailgate , blind spot monitoring system , backup camera ( standard ) and a mounted GoPro holder ( standard ) .
Toyota also introduced a TRD Pro version in late 2016 for the 2017 model year , which comes with FOX - patented Internal Bypass shocks , TRD Pro catback exhaust , TRD Pro skid plate , Rigid Industries LED fog lights , and heritage inspired ' TOYOTA ' grille .
The 2017 model year TRD Pro was only available in the double cab short bed configuration , with either a manual or automatic gear box in Barcelona Red Metallic , Super White , or Cement .
Black leather with red accents and stitching is the only available interior option .
For the 2018 model year TRD Pro , Midnight Black Metallic and Cavalry Blue are new available exterior colors , with Barcelona Red Metallic and Cement discontinued .
The Tacoma 's transition to its third generation took place while the segment is growing .
In 2014 , the San Antonio plant built 105,796 Tacomas and the Baja plant built 71,399 for a total of 177,195 .
In 2015 , the San Antonio plant built 110,911 and Baja built 82,328 for a total of 193,239 built .
In 2016 , 191,673 Tacomas were sold in the US and Canada ( along with 115,489 Tundras also built in San Antonio ) and , with the mid size segment up overall , the San Antonio plant was running costlier extra Saturday shifts to keep up with demand , running at 125 % of projected plant capacity .
The 2016 and 2017 model year double - cab short - bed Tacomas are currently made in Tijuana ( VINs starting in 3 ) and all other Tacoma configurations are made in San Antonio ( VINs starting in 5 ) .
Toyota USA announced it intended to increase production at the Tijuana plant in 2018 from about 100,000 to 160,000 Tacomas .
TOYOTA RACING DEVELOPMENT Section::::Toyota Racing Development .
In 1998 Toyota added a new Toyota Racing Development ( TRD ) off road package .
The package includes off road tires , 16-inch alloy wheels , TRD dampers , a locking rear differential , and the TRD graphics .
In 2003 Toyota introduced a TRD sport package on the Tundra full - size pickup .
This package was introduced in 2005 for the Tacoma at the same time as the release of the newly redesigned Tacoma .
TRD SUPERCHARGER Section::::TRD supercharger .
Toyota Racing Development offered a TRD supercharger for the FJ Cruiser and Tacoma equipped with 4.0-liter V6 engine , available through Toyota dealerships .
This supercharger was co - developed with Magnuson Superchargers to ensure the utmost reliability .
When installed by a professional dealer , it would not void any warranties on a vehicle .
The supercharger increases the Tacoma 's power output to from the original , and the torque output to and is now out of production .
This all - new TRD supercharger is compatible on all 2005 through 2015 model year Toyota Tacoma trucks , and 2007 through 2009 model year FJ Cruiser SUV .
This supercharger system features Eaton roots - type rotating components in a one - piece integral manifold , iridium spark plugs , and a five - rib serpentine drive belt system .
It produces about of boost pressure .
The supercharger , when installed by an authorized Scion or Toyota dealer , has the same warranty as powertrain , five years or , or the balance of the new car warranty , whichever is greater .
When not installed by an authorized dealer , the supercharger is covered by a 12-month , parts - only warranty .
The manufacturer 's suggested retail price of the TRD supercharger is $ 4,500 , not including installation .
The TRD supercharger program is being discontinued for all vehicles , including Tacoma , as of June 2015 .
BACK TO THE FUTURE TACOMA CONCEPT Section::::Back
To The Future Tacoma Concept .
On October 21 , 2015 , Toyota and Universal Pictures celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Back to the Future ( franchise ) with a Toyota Tacoma Concept that was inspired by the original Toyota pickup that Toyota created for Back to the Future .
The 2016 Tacoma 4WD was recreated using the same features and black color paint trim , KC HiLite driving lamps ( modified with LED lighting ) , modified headlights and taillights ( matching the 1985 version ) , the Toyota badging to the truck 's tailgate , as well as the same D-4S fuel injection , and the 1985-inspired mudflaps .
The only difference between the 1985 original and the 2016 concept is the tires : Goodyear was featured in the 1985 film , while BF Goodrich is used on the concept .
The concept also did not have a solid front axle like the original 1985 Pickup .
Toyota notes that this is a one - off concept as there are no plans to offer it as a package or level trim .
AMERICAN SPECIAL FORCES USE Section::::American special forces use .
During Operation Iraqi Freedom , and Operation Enduring Freedom , multiple Toyota Tacomas have been observed in use by special forces units of the U.S. Army .
Typically , they have been Double Cab models , with SR5 and TRD packages .
Despite the fact that the Hilux , from which the Tacoma is descended , is extremely common in the Middle East , the special forces found it to be easier to purchase Tacomas from American dealerships , modify them appropriately , and ship them to their areas .
The gasoline engine used is significantly quieter than the diesel engines used in the HMMWV and some Hilux models .
These were modified by eliminating the factory radio , along with almost all exterior lights and door buzzers .
The front headlights have been modified to work in IR , in order to work with night vision .
The engines are unmodified , but the vehicles have been fitted with brush guards , Warn winches , and a rollbar with a machine gun mount .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
Calendar Year !
US 152,932 REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Tacoma global site