DESIGNATED SURVIVOR
In the United States , a designated survivor ( or designated successor ) is an individual in the presidential line of succession , usually a member of the United States Cabinet , who is arranged to be at a physically distant , secure , and undisclosed location when the President , the Vice President , and the other officials in the line of succession are gathered at a single location , such as during State of the Union addresses and presidential inaugurations .
This is intended to guarantee continuity of government in the event of a catastrophic occurrence that kills the President and many officials in the presidential line of succession , such as a mass shooting , bombing , attack or catastrophic natural disaster .
If such an event occurred , killing both the President and Vice President , the surviving official highest in the line , possibly the designated survivor , would become the Acting President of the United States under the Presidential Succession Act .
Only Cabinet members who are eligible to succeed to the presidency ( i.e. , natural - born citizens over the age of 35 , who have resided in the United States for at least 14 years ) can be chosen as designated survivors .
The designated survivor is provided presidential - level security and transport for the duration of the event .
An aide carries a nuclear football with them .
However , they are not given a briefing on what to do in the event that the other successors to the presidency are killed .
HISTORY PRESIDENTIAL Section::::History .
Section::::Presidential .
The practice of naming a designated survivor originated during the Cold War with its risk of nuclear attack .
In 1947 , the Presidential Succession Act established the line of succession and led to the continuity of government plan .
In one special case the Housing and Urban Development Secretary Shaun Donovan was designated survivor for the 2010 State of the Union Address given by Barack Obama .
At the same time Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was also absent from the address .
However , Secret Service rules prevented Clinton from being named the designated survivor since it was public knowledge that she was at a conference in London during the event .
Had a calamity occurred only in Washington and Clinton
remained unharmed , she instead of Donovan would have become Acting President , as the Secretary of State is higher in the line of succession than the Housing and Urban Development Secretary .
LEGISLATIVE Section::::Legislative .
Since 2005 , members of Congress have also been chosen as legislative designated survivors .
In addition to serving as a rump legislature in the event that all of their colleagues were killed , a surviving Representative and Senator could ascend to the ( vacated ) offices of Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Senate , offices that immediately follow the Vice President in the presidential line of succession .
However , it is unclear whether a legislative designated survivor not already holding that house 's leadership position could assume such a position without previously having been elected to it by a quorum of their respective house .
If such a legislative designated survivor were simultaneously the sitting Speaker or President Pro Tempore – as was the case during the 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 State of the Union addresses , in which Presidents Pro Tempore Ted Stevens ( R - Alaska ) and Sen. Robert Byrd ( D - West Virginia ) were also legislative designated survivors – he or she would become the acting president in the event of the additional deaths of both the president and the vice - president , rather than the presidential designated survivor Cabinet member .
LIST OF SOME DESIGNATED SURVIVORS Section::::List of some designated survivors . !
data - sort - type="usLongDate " Date ! !
Occasion ! !
Designee ! !
Position ! ! class="unsortable
" Notes rowspan=2 January 12 , 2016
rowspan=2 State of the Union Orrin Hatch ( R - UT ) President Pro Tempore of the Senate January 30 , 2018 State of the Union
Sonny Perdue Secretary of Agriculture IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In the 1991 HBO original film By Dawn 's Early Light , the US Secretary of the Interior becomes President of the United States following a Soviet nuclear strike on Washington , D.C while on board a Boeing E-4 NEACP aircraft with the callsign " Condor " .
*
In the TV show The West Wing , the episode " He Shall , from Time to Time ...
" features President Josiah Bartlet talking to Secretary of Agriculture Roger Tribbey in the Oval Office prior to leaving for his State of the Union address .
The choosing of the designated survivors is shown at the start of the episode , generating some discussion about how it works .
* The 2016 TV series Designated Survivor stars Kiefer Sutherland as Tom Kirkman , the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development who becomes President after a terrorist attack during the State of the Union address kills the President , the Vice President , the Speaker of the House , and every individual ahead of him in the line of succession .
SEE ALSO
* Central Locator System * Decapitation strike * National Command Authority * Operation Looking Glass * United States presidential line of succession in fiction NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* U.S. Senate 's list of cabinet members who did not attend the State of the Union Address ( since 1984 )
* Cabinet Members Who Did Not Attend the State of the Union Address Reagan ( 1984 )
– Trump The American Presidency Project [ online ] .
Gerhard Peters ( database ) .
Santa Barbara , California : University of California ( hosted ) .