THEFT OF SERVICES Theft of services is the legal term for a crime which is committed when a person obtains valuable services — as opposed to goods — by deception , force , threat or other unlawful means , i.e. , without lawfully compensating the provider for these services .
It may also overlap with some types of fraud in which payment is made on credit , but under an assumed identity , and ultimately disavowed ( " identity theft " ) .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Crimes of this sort are typically prosecuted as larceny , and may be either a misdemeanor or a felony , based upon the value of the services illegally obtained .
This category encompasses a wide variety of criminal activity including tampering with ( or bypassing ) a utility meter so that the true level of consumption is understated , leaving a hotel or restaurant or similar establishment without paying for the service and " turnstile jumping " or other methods of evading the payment of a fare or fee when using a public transit vehicle or entering a private facility normally requiring payment ( e.g. , jumping over the fence at a fair or country concert ) .
Theft of services also occurs in the taxi industry , when a passenger in a taxi flees from the taxi to avoid paying the fee .
Theft of this sort should not be confused with reasonable rejection , where , for example , a customer does not pay because the services provided were not as advertised or because the services did not meet reasonable standards of quality .
For example , if a roofer installs a new roof , but the roof leaks , the customer might be able to withhold payment until the leak has been fixed .
Withholding of payment without reason would be considered larceny .
These statutes have also , on occasion , been applied in the realm of health care , when hospitals or other health care providers have pressed criminal charges against indigent , uninsured patients who were unable to pay for their treatment .
This scenario has prompted intense criticism , and is a key issue in the call for a major overhaul of the health care system in the United States .
REFERENCES SEE ALSO
* Uttering , including use of forged passes , tickets , coupons , etc .
* Fraud , specifically to obtain services .
* Blue box , red box : theft of telephone service , usually toll charges , using a tone generator .
* Cable theft , illegal access to cable television systems .