BICYCLE LAW IN CALIFORNIA Bicycle law in California is the parts of the California Vehicle Code that set out the law for persons cycling in California , and a subset of bicycle law in the United States .
GENERAL APPLICABILITY OF ROAD RULES
Section::::General applicability of road rules .
CVC 21200 states that the rules of the road , set out in Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code , that do not specifically apply only to motor vehicles are applicable to cyclists .
Police officers riding bicycles are exempt from the provisions when they are responding to an emergency call , engaged in rescue operations , or in immediate pursuit of a suspect .
LOCATIONS OF CYCLING ON - ROAD Section::::Locations of cycling . Section::::On - road .
CVC 21650 sets the on - road position for all vehicles , including bicycles .
21650(g ) clarifies that bicycles are not prohibited from riding on sidewalks or crosswalks but does allow for local ordinance to prohibit such operation .
It is not illegal for bicycles to ride on the sidewalk in a direction opposing the flow of traffic .
However , doing so is quite dangerous .
CVC 21650.1 clarifies that cyclists , unlike drivers of vehicles , are generally not prohibited from riding on the shoulder of the road .
Cyclists are allowed but never required to ride on the shoulder .
CVC 530 defines the " roadway " as " that portion of a highway improved , designed , or ordinarily used for vehicular travel " .
The on - road position of cyclists is narrowed by CVC 21202 , which requires riding " as close as practicable to the right - hand curb or edge of the roadway " except in certain circumstances .
The wording shall ride as close as practicable to the right is sometimes misunderstood by police officers as well as cyclists .
CVC Section 21960 authorizes local authorities to prohibit or restrict the use of bicycles on freeways .
Where bike lanes exist on roadways , CVC 21208 requires cyclists to use them , except under certain conditions .
There is no requirement to ride in a bike lane or path that is not on the roadway .
There is no requirement in the California but side - by - side riding may be regulated by local ordinance .
OFF - ROAD Section::::Off - road .
CVC 21100 sets out that " Local authorities may adopt rules and regulations ... regarding the ... Operation of bicycles , and , as specified in Section 21114.5 , electric carts by physically disabled persons , or persons 50 years of age or older , on the public sidewalks .
" Under this provision , many California cities have banned sidewalk cycling in business districts .
MOVEMENT Section::::Movement .
CVC 22107 requires cyclists to yield and signal before moving left or right .
CVC 21656 specifies that slow - moving vehicles causing a queue of five or more vehicles behind them must turn off the roadway in order to allow the vehicles behind to pass them .
Section 21202 explicitly states that cyclists are " subject to the provisions of Section 21656 " .
CVC 21760 requires motor vehicles to leave a 3-foot margin while passing a cyclist if possible .
CYCLIST 'S DUTIES TO OTHER CYCLISTS , PEDESTRIANS , RUNNERS , AND SELF
Section::::Cyclist 's Duties to Other Cyclists , Pedestrians , Runners , and Self .
It is arguably legal for cyclists to race each other on open public roads in California if that is safe at the time under the circumstances .
In traffic , or where visibility is limited ( rain , fog , wooded areas , curvy roads ) , racing would be arguably negligent and unlawful .
CVC 21200(a ) , provides : " Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway ... is subject to all the provisions applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this division ... except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application .
" Under the common law in California , all vehicle operators ( including bike operators ) have a general duty to use reasonable care to avoid collisions with other cyclists , cars , runners and pedestrians , since it is not the case that runners and pedestrians ( for example ) are always prohibited by the CVC from sharing a bike lane .
MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS Section::::Miscellaneous .
Section::::Equipment requirements .
A bicycle ridden on public roads must have a brake on at least one wheel which can make the wheel skid on dry pavement .
CVC 21201 ( d )
A bicycle operated during darkness upon a highway , a sidewalk where bicycle operation is not prohibited by the local jurisdiction , or a bikeway … shall be equipped with all of the following *
A white front lamp ( either attached to the bike or to the rider ) which can be seen from away .
* A red rear safety reflector visible from away when illuminated by automobile headlights .
* White or yellow reflectors visible from on the bike 's pedals or the cyclist 's feet or ankles .
* A white or yellow reflector on each side of the bike 's front half .
* A white or red reflector on each side of the bike 's back half .
BICYCLE HELMETS FOR MINORS Section::::Bicycle helmets for minors .
CVC 21212 requires cyclists under the age of 18 to wear helmets .
Under CVC 21100(a ) local authorities may adopt ordinances for the purpose of " Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on the highways . "
RIDING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
Section::::Riding under the influence .
CVC 21200.5 prohibits riding a bicycle while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs .
POSSIBILITY OF LICENSING Section::::Possibility of licensing .
CVC 39002 allows local authorities to implement mandatory licensing for bicycles and prohibit riding of unlicensed bicycles .
SEE ALSO
* Law of California * Outline of cycling NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * California Vehicle Code