PRINCE CHARMING Prince Charming is a fairy tale character who comes to the rescue of a damsel in distress and must engage in a quest to liberate her from an evil spell .
This classification suits most heroes of a number of traditional folk tales , including " Snow White " , " Sleeping Beauty " , and " Cinderella " , even if in the original story they were given another name , or no name at all .
Often handsome and romantic , these characters are essentially interchangeable , serving as a foil to the heroine ; in many variants , they can be viewed as a metaphor for a reward the heroine achieves for the decisions she makes .
The prominence of the character type makes him an obvious target for revisionist fairy tales . "
Prince Charming " is also used as a term to refer to the idealized man some people dream of as a future spouse .
HISTORY OF TERM Section::::History of term .
Charles Perrault 's version of Sleeping Beauty , published in 1697 , includes the following text at the point where the princess wakes up : " ' Est - ce vous , mon prince ? '
lui dit - elle , ' vous vous êtes bien fait attendre ' .
Le Prince charmé de ces paroles ...
ne savait comment lui témoigner sa joie " .
( " ' Are you my prince ? '
she said . '
You 've kept me waiting a long time ' .
The prince charmed by her words ... did not know how to express his joy . " )
It has sometimes been suggested that this passage later inspired the term , " Prince Charming " , even though it is the prince who is charmed ( charmé ) here , not who is being charming ( charmant ) .
In the 17th century , Madame d'Aulnoy wrote two fairy tales , The Story of Pretty Goldilocks , where the hero was named Avenant ( " Fine " , " Beautiful " , in French ) , and The Blue Bird , where the hero was Le roi Charmant ( " The Charming King " ) .
When Andrew Lang retold the first ( in 1889 ) for The Blue Fairy Book , he rendered the hero 's name as " Charming " ; the second , for The Green Fairy Book , as " King Charming " .
Although neither one was a prince and the first was not royal , this may have been the original use of " Charming " .
Then , Oscar Wilde 's 1890 novel The Picture of Dorian Gray refers ironically to " Prince Charming " , perhaps the earliest use of the exact term .
The main character , Dorian , is supposed to be a young actress 's " Prince Charming " , but he abandons her and in despair she commits suicide .
In the early Disney animated feature , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , when Snow White tells the dwarfs about her prince , she says , " Anyone could see that the prince was charming , the only one for me . "
However , he is never referred to specifically as " Prince Charming " .
Andreas Deja initially struggled with the concept of animating a handsome villain in Beauty and the Beast .
Deja ultimately based Gaston 's appearance on those of handsome soap opera actors in order to create a grotesque version of the Prince Charming stock character .
In other languages , like Spanish and Italian , he is called the " Blue Prince " .
In Portuguese , a translation mistake occurred and he is called " Charmed Prince " ( Príncipe Encantado ; the correct term for " Charming " should be Encantador or Charmoso ) , coincidentally closer to the sense in Perrault 's story mentioned atop this section .
MODERN USAGE
* The Broadway musical Into the Woods ( first produced in 1986 ) explores the character as polygamous , and where there are not one , but two Prince Charmings .
Here , they are shown as brothers pursuing Cinderella and Rapunzel , then later , Sleeping Beauty and Snow White , after they have married their first loves .
Cinderella 's Prince has an affair with the baker 's wife as well , and when confronted about his womanizing , states " I was raised to be charming , not sincere . "
In the 2014 Disney film adaptation of Into the Woods , Prince Charming is portrayed by Chris Pine .
* As implied by the title , the 1991 fantasy novel Bring Me the Head of Prince Charming by Roger Zelazny and Robert Sheckley includes sharp satire of the traditional fairy tale theme .
*
Prince Charming is a prominent character in the Fables comic book ( 2002–2015 ) .
Polygamy is explored again :
in that version , he successively married Snow White , Sleeping Beauty and Cinderella with each marriage ending in divorce due to his compulsive womanizing .
He himself comments : " I always truly love a woman when I first pursue her ...
I'm just no good at the happily - ever - after part . "
He parlays his charm into election as the mayor of Fabletown , the underground " Fable " community , and finds the job more difficult than he had anticipated .
He died in the Battle for the Homelands by activating a bomb to End the War .
* The character of Prince Charming is deconstructed in the 2004 movie Shrek 2 and its 2007 follow - up Shrek the Third , wherein he is the son of the Fairy Godmother and has an unpleasant and ruthless personality unfitting for a fairy - tale prince .
*
In the fantasy novel series
The Sisters Grimm ( 2005–2012 ) , Prince Charming is the mayor of Ferryport Landing , a town inhabited by fairy - tale characters- or everafters .
He is shown to be rude , arrogant and boastful , but turns out to be a valuable ally to the protagonists of the series .
He is shown to have married and slept with many of the girls in this town , among them
Cinderella , Snow White and Sleeping Beauty .
But he clarifies that he truly loves Snow White and proposes to her .
He then separates himself from her for her protection .
*
The concept of the Prince Charming is parodied in the 2007 film Enchanted when Edward is looking for Princess Giselle in the New York City .
While knocking the doors he finds a pregnant housewife holding three kids , who tells him , in a scoffing voice , " You 're too late . "
*
In the television series Once Upon a Time ( 2011–2017 ) , Prince Charming is David ( portrayed by Josh Dallas ) , the husband of Snow White , though neither of them remembers this in Storybrooke , where the character 's name is David Nolan ( " Charming " is the nickname given to him by Snow White ) .
In his previous life , David is actually the brother of the real prince James ( also portrayed by Josh Dallas ) who died and was replaced with his twin .
Both brothers were born to a poor farm couple who made a deal with Rumpelstiltskin to save their farm ; they gave up one son to King George , whose wife could not conceive .
After James 's death his brother found out the truth and took his place , becoming engaged to Abigail , daughter of King Midas ( reluctantly , after his family is threatened by the real prince 's adoptive father ) in a deal that unites two kingdoms with Midas giving the King George gold in exchange for the prince defeating a dragon .
Later , the prince meets and marries Snow White with whom he has a daughter named Emma and finds out he has a grandson named Henry .
In Storybrooke , David is a John Doe with amnesia who meets and falls for Mary Margaret , who is really Snow White , before recovering his memory and working at the Storybrooke Sheriff Department .
He later has another child with Snow White named Neal .
* A Charming Affair ( c. 2011–2013 ) by Robert Scott ( 1984 ) is an 8-minute sketch published by Lazy Bee Scripts portraying Prince Charming as a bigamist .
When Snow White , Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty learn the truth , they plan to assassinate him with a poisoned apple .
The sketch was performed in 2014 in Short and Sweet Theatre Festival by the American Theatre of Dubai , and the script became the Judges Award Winner .
*
In the book series The Land of Stories ( 2012 ) by Chris Colfer , there are four Prince Charmings , who are brothers .
Three of them are married with Snow White , Cinderella , and Sleeping Beauty , the other is lost .
TITLES
* " Prince Charming " , a 1981 album and song by Adam and the Ants
* Prince Charming , a 1997 song by Metallica
* Prince Charming , a 1999 movie starring Andy Lau and Michelle Reis * Meet Prince Charming , a 1999 movie starring Tia Carrere and David Charvet
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Merriam - Webster.com :
Prince Charming