A LITTLE PRINCESS
A Little Princess is a children 's novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett , first published as a book in 1905 .
It is an expanded version of the short story
" Sara Crewe : or ,
What Happened at Miss Minchin 's " , which was serialized in St. Nicholas Magazine from December 1887 , and published in book form in 1888 .
According to Burnett , after she composed the 1902 play A Little Un - fairy Princess based on that story , her publisher asked that she expand the story as a novel with " the things and people that had been left out before " .
The novel was published by Charles Scribner 's Sons ( also publisher of St. Nicholas ) with illustrations by Ethel Franklin Betts and the full title
A Little Princess : Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Being Told for the First Time .
Based on a 2007 online poll , the U.S. National Education Association named the book one of its " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " .
In 2012 it was ranked number 56 among all - time children 's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal , a monthly with primarily U.S. audience .
It was the second of two Burnett novels among the Top 100 , with The Secret Garden number 15 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Captain Crewe , a wealthy English widower , has been raising his only child , Sara , in India where he is stationed with the British Army .
Because the Indian climate is considered too harsh for children , British families living there traditionally send their children to boarding school back home in England .
The captain enrolls his young daughter at Miss Minchin 's boarding school for girls in London , and dotes on his daughter so much that he orders and pays the headmistress for special treatment and exceptional luxuries for Sara , such as a private room for her with a personal maid and a separate sitting room ( see Parlour boarder ) , along with Sara 's own private carriage and a pony .
Miss Minchin openly fawns over Sara for her money , but secretly and jealously despises her for her wealth .
Despite her privilege , Sara is neither arrogant nor snobbish , but rather kind , generous and clever .
She extends her friendship to Ermengarde , the school dunce ; to Lottie , a four - year - old student given to tantrums ; and to Becky , the lowly , stunted fourteen - year - old scullery maid .
When Sara acquires the epithet of a princess , she embraces its favorable elements in her natural goodheartedness .
After some time , Sara 's birthday is celebrated at Miss Minchin 's with a lavish party , attended by all her friends and classmates .
Just as it ends , Miss Minchin learns of Captain Crewe 's unfortunate demise .
Furthermore , prior to his death , the previously wealthy captain had lost his entire fortune ; a friend had persuaded him to cash in his investments and deposit the proceeds to develop a network of diamond mines .
The scheme fails , and Sara is left an orphan and a pauper , with no other family and nowhere to go .
Miss Minchin is left with a sizable unpaid bill for Sara 's school fees and luxuries , including her birthday party .
Infuriated and pitiless , she takes away all of Sara 's possessions ( except for some old frocks and one doll ) , makes her live in a cold and poorly furnished attic , and forces her to earn her keep by working as an errand girl .
For the next several years , Sara is abused by Miss Minchin and the other servants , except for Becky .
Miss Minchin 's kind - hearted sister , Amelia , deplores how Sara is treated , but is too weak - willed to speak up about it .
Sara is starved , worked for long hours , sent out in all weathers , poorly dressed in outgrown and worn - out clothes , and deprived of warmth or a comfortable bed in the attic .
Despite her hardships , Sara is consoled by her friends and uses her imagination to cope , pretending she is a prisoner in the Bastille or a princess disguised as a servant .
Sara also continues to be kind and polite to everyone , including those who treat her badly .
One day , she finds a coin in the street and uses it to buy buns at a bakery , but despite being very hungry , she gives most of the buns away to a beggar girl dressed in rags who is hungrier than herself .
The bakery shop owner sees this and wants to reward Sara , but she has disappeared , so the shop owner instead gives the beggar girl bread and warm shelter for Sara 's sake .
Meanwhile , Mr. Carrisford and his Indian assistant Ram Dass have moved into the house next door to Miss Minchin 's school .
Carrisford had been Captain Crewe 's friend and partner in the diamond mines .
After the diamond mine venture failed , both Crewe and Carrisford became very ill , and Carrisford in his delirium abandoned his friend Crewe , who died of his " brain fever . "
As it turned out , the diamond mines did not fail , but instead were a great success , making Carrisford extremely rich .
Although Carrisford survived , he suffers from several ailments and is guilt - ridden over abandoning his friend .
He is determined to find Crewe 's daughter and heir , although he does not know where she is and thinks she is attending school in France .
Ram Dass befriends Sara when his pet monkey escapes into Sara 's adjoining attic .
After climbing over the roof to Sara 's room to get the monkey , Ram Dass tells Carrisford about Sara 's poor living conditions .
As a pleasant distraction , Carrisford and Ram Dass buy warm blankets , comfortable furniture , food , and other gifts , and secretly leave them in Sara 's room when she is asleep or out .
Sara 's spirits and health improve due to the gifts she receives from her mysterious benefactor , whose identity she does not know ; nor are Ram Dass and Carrisford aware that Sara is Crewe 's lost daughter .
When Carrisford anonymously sends Sara a package of new , well - made , and expensive clothing in her proper size , Miss Minchin becomes alarmed , thinking Sara might have a wealthy relative secretly looking out for her , and begins to treat Sara better and allows her to attend classes rather than doing menial work .
One night , the monkey again runs away to Sara 's room , and Sara visits Carrisford 's house the next morning to return him .
When Sara casually mentions that she was born in India , Carrisford and his solicitor question her and discover that she is Captain Crewe 's daughter , for whom they have been searching for years .
Sara also learns that Carrisford was her father 's friend and her own anonymous benefactor , and that the diamond mines have produced great riches , of which she will now own her late father 's share .
When Miss Minchin angrily appears to collect Sara , she is informed that Sara will be living with Carrisford and her entire fortune has been restored and greatly increased .
Upon finding this out , Miss Minchin unsuccessfully tries to persuade Sara into returning to her school as a star pupil , and then threatens to keep her from ever seeing her school friends again , but Carrisford and his solicitor tell Miss Minchin that Sara will see anyone she wishes to see and that her friends ' parents are not likely to refuse invitations from an heiress to diamond mines .
Miss Minchin goes home , where she is surprised when Amelia finally stands up to her .
Amelia has a nervous breakdown afterwards , but she is on the road to gaining more respect .
Sara invites Becky to live with her and be her personal maid , in much better living conditions than at Miss Minchin 's .
Carrisford becomes a second father to Sara and quickly regains his health .
Finally , Sara — accompanied by Becky — pays a visit to the bakery where she bought the buns , making a deal with the owner to cover the bills for bread for any hungry child .
They find that the beggar girl who was saved from starvation by Sara 's selfless act is now the bakery owner 's assistant , with good food , clothing , shelter , and steady employment .
SOURCE MATERIAL Section::::Source material .
The novella appears to have been inspired in part by Charlotte Bronte 's unfinished novel , Emma , the first two chapters of which were published in Cornhill Magazine in 1860 , featuring a rich heiress with a mysterious past who is apparently abandoned at a boarding school .
The thread of A Little Princess is evident in Burnett 's original novella , in which Sara Crewe is left at Miss Minchin 's , loses her father , is worked as a drudge , and is surprised with the kindness of an Indian gentleman who turns out to be Captain Crewe 's friend .
However , at just over one - third the length of the later book , the novella is much less detailed .
Generally , the novel expanded on things in the novella ; Captain Crewe 's " investments " are only referred to briefly and generally , and much of the information revealed in conversations in the novel is simply summarised .
However , there are details in the novella which were dropped for the novel .
While a drudge , Sara is said to have frequented a library , in which she read books about women in rough circumstances being rescued by princes and other powerful men .
In addition , Mr. Carrisford 's illness is specified as liver trouble .
PLAY Section::::Play .
After writing Sara Crewe , Burnett returned to the material in 1902 , penning the three - act stage play A Little Un - fairy Princess , which ran in London over the autumn of that year .
Around the time it transferred to New York City at the start of 1903 with title was shortened to A Little Princess .
( It was A Little Princess in London , but The Little Princess in New York . )
Burnett said that after the production of the play on Broadway , her publisher , Charles Scribner 's Sons , asked her to expand the story into a full - length novel and " put into it all the things and people that had been left out before .
" The book was illustrated by Ethel Franklin Betts and published in 1905 under the full title
A Little Princess : Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Being Told for the First Time .
ADAPTATIONS FILM * 1917 version :
Mary Pickford as Sara and Katherine Griffith as Miss Minchin .
* 1939 version : Shirley Temple as Sara and Mary Nash as Miss Minchin , this adaptation notably differs from the original , in that Sara 's father is wounded and missing in action in wartime , and later is reunited with his daughter .
Miss Minchin 's younger sister Miss Amelia is replaced with " Mr Bertie " , Miss Minchin 's brother , a former music hall performer ; and a substantial portion of the story is given over to Sara 's abetting of an illicit romance between an under - teacher and the school 's riding master .
* 1995 Filipino version : entitled Sarah ...
Ang Munting Prinsesa ( lit . "
Sarah , the Little Princess " ) which starred Camille Prats as Sarah and Jean Garcia as Miss Minchin .
It was inspired by the entry of the anime version Princess Sarah .
* 1995 version : Liesel Matthews as Sara and Eleanor Bron as Miss Minchin , this adaptation notably differs from the original and more closely resembles the 1939 version , in that Sara 's father is wounded and missing in action in wartime , and later is reunited with his daughter .
Another difference is that it takes place in New York City during World War
I instead of London during the Boer War , and the character of Becky , canonically Cockney , is recast as African - American .
Directed by Alfonso Cuarón .
* 1996 version :
An animated film produced by Blye Migicovsky and directed by Laura Shephard .
As in the 1995 film , Sara 's father is later found alive , and Becky is black .
The voice cast includes Melissa Bathory , Lawrence Bayne , Desmond Ellis , Nonnie Griffin , Marieve Herington , Sarena Paton , Katherine Shekter , and Colette Stevenson .
* 1997 Russian film Malenkaya printsessa ( ): Anastasiya Meskova as Sara and Alla Demidova as Miss Minchin .
TELEVISION * 1973 version : Deborah Makepeace as Sara and Ruth Dunning as Miss Minchin .
This was very faithful to the novel .
* 1986 version : Amelia Shankley as Sara and Maureen Lipman as Miss Minchin .
This was also a faithful adaptation .
*
Princess Sara : a 1985 Japanese anime series , which was featured as part of Nippon Animation 's World Masterpiece Theater collection .
The series spanned 46 episodes , including a few new characters and adventures along the way .
It is considered by many fans to be the best adaptation of the source material , and was a huge hit in Japan and across Europe , the Middle East and the Philippines .
Veteran Japanese voice actress
Sumi Shimamoto voiced Sarah Crewe .
* Sōkō no Strain , a 2006 anime that completely reworks the story into a mecha series about " Sara Werec " , who finds herself robbed of the ability to pilot the titular Strain when her brother , Ralph , betrays and disgraces her family .
* Princess Sarah , a Filipino 2007 remake .
* Shōkōjo Seira a 2009 remake with the main character Japanese and named Seira , aged 16 when her father dies , and as an Indian Princess .
Becky is changed to a male and a romantic lead .
( The 1985 TV series by Nippon Animation has a similar title in Japanese , although the two adaptations are not related . )
* " The Penniless Princess " ( 2012 ) , a Veggietales episode MUSICALS Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Musicals .
Due in part to the novel 's public domain status , several musical versions of A Little Princess have emerged in recent years , including : * A Little Princess , Music and Lyrics by Eric Rockwell and Margaret Rose , Book by William J. Brooke .
World premiere at the Sacramento Theater Company , April 2013 .
* A Little Princess , Princess Musicals - Book and Lyrics by Michael Hjort , Music by Camille Curtis .
*
Sara Crewe , premiered May 2007 at Needham ( Boston , MA )
Community Theater , first full production November 2007 at the Blackwell Playhouse , Marietta , Georgia ; music , lyrics , and book by Miriam Raiken - Kolb and Elizabeth Ellor *
Sara Crewe : A Little Princess , Wheelock Family Theatre , Boston , 2006 ; music and libretto by Susan Kosoff and Jane Staab * A Little Princess , TheatreWorks , Palo Alto , California , premiered 2004 ; music by Andrew Lippa ; book by Brian Crawley ; directed by Susan H. Schulman * A Little Princess , Wings Theatre , ( Off - Broadway , New York , 2003 )
Book and Direction by Robert Sickinger ; music and lyrics by Mel Atkey , musical director / arranger / pianist
Mary Ann Ivan * A Little Princess , Children 's Musical Theater San Jose , May 2002 .
Book and lyrics by Tegan McLane , music by Richard Link * A Little Princess , Bodens Youth Theatre , London , premiering February 2012 ; music and lyrics by Marc Folan , book by Adam Boden
* Off - Broadway U.S. Premiere , The Hudson Guild Theater , NYC , May 2014
Some of these productions have made significant changes to the book , story and characters , most notably the Sickinger / Atkey version , which moves the action to Civil War - era America .
In addition , Princesses , a 2004 musical currently in development for Broadway , features students at a boarding school presenting a production of A Little Princess .
Music and book by Cheri Steinkellner and Bill Steinkellner ; lyrics and direction by David Zippel .
OTHER THEATRE * A theatre adaptation by Belt Up Theatre was performed at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival 2012 as ' Belt Up Theatre 's A Little Princess ' .
* An adaptation of the book , entitled Sara Crewe :
The Little Princess was written by Steve Hays and was featured at CityStage in Springfield MA , performing six shows and starred Carlie Daggett in The title role .
* A theatre adaptation was written by Lauren Nichols and performed by all for One productions , inc . , with original music composed by a young girl , Torilinn Cwanek , at the Allen County Public Library Auditorium in Fort Wayne , Indiana , in February 2013 , performing six shows .
*
The London Children 's Ballet performed ballet adaptions in 1995 ( Choreographer : Harold King ) , 2004
( Choreographer : Vanessa Fenton ) and 2012
( Choreographer : Samantha Raine ) .
VIDEO GAMES
* A Little Lily Princess , a 2016 visual novel game by Hanabira .
AUDIOBOOKS
* A Little Princess unabridged audiobook narrated by Magda Allani ( Slow Burn Publications , 2016 ) .
This edition is read in the authentic English accent that would have been British - born Frances Hodgson Burnett 's own .
RELATED BOOKS Section::::Related books .
In 1995 , Apple published a series of three books written by Gabrielle Charbonnet . "
The Princess Trilogy " was an updated version of the classic , with the title character named Molly , rather than Sara .
Molly Stewart 's father was a famous film director who left his daughter in a posh upscale boarding school .
There were three books in the series , which ended in a similar way as the original : Molly 's Heart , The Room on the Attic , and Home at Last .
A sequel by Hilary McKay was published by Hodder Children 's Books in September 2009 :
Wishing For Tomorrow : The Sequel to A Little Princess .
It tells the story of what happened to the rest of the boarding school girls after Sara and Becky left ( " life must go on at Miss Minchin 's " ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS