THREE
BILLY GOATS GRUFF
" Three Billy Goats Gruff " ( ) is a Norwegian fairy tale .
The fairy tale was collected by Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe in their Norske Folkeeventyr , first published between 1841 and 1844 .
It has an " eat - me - when - I'm - fatter " plot ( Aarne - Thompson type 122E ) .
The first version of the story in English appeared in George Webbe Dasent 's translation of some of the Norske Folkeeventyr , published as Popular Tales from the Norse in 1859 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story introduces three male goats , sometimes identified as a youngster , father and grandfather , but more often described as brothers .
In other adaptations , there is a baby or child goat , mama goat and papa goat .
" Gruff " was used as their family name in the earliest English translation , by Dasent ; the original Norwegian version used the name " Bruse " .
In the story , there is almost no grass left for them to eat near where they live , so they must cross a river to get to " sæter " ( a meadow ) or hillside on the other side of a stream in order to eat and fatten themselves up .
To do so , however , they must first cross a bridge , under which lives a fearsome and hideous troll , who is so territorial that he eats anyone who tries to cross the bridge .
The smallest billy goat is the first to cross and is stopped abruptly by the troll who threatens to " gobble him up ! "
However , the little goat convinces the troll to wait for his big brother to come across , because he is larger and would make for a more gratifying feast .
The greedy troll agrees and lets the smallest goat cross .
The medium - sized goat passes next .
He is more cautious than his brother , but is also stopped by the troll and given the same threat .
The second billy goat is allowed to cross as well after he tells the troll to wait for the biggest billy goat because he is the largest of the three .
The third billy goat gets on the bridge , but is also stopped by the hungry troll who threatens to devour him as well .
However , the third billy goat challenges the troll and knocks him off the bridge with his horns .
The troll falls into the stream and is carried away by the current .
From then on the bridge is safe , and all three goats are able to go to the rich fields around the summer farm in the hills , and they all live happily ever after .
ADAPTATIONS AND CULTURAL REFERENCES AUDIOBOOKS * Scholastic Corporation produced an audio recording in 1963 , with music composed and directed by Arthur Rubinstein , narrated by Bob Thomas , and cover illustration by Susan Blair and Ellen Appleby .
It was first made available as a phonograph record , and then on Compact Cassette .
* TaleThings offers a storybook program ( " app " ) for iOS and Android mobile devices that is a humorous retelling of the classic tale .
It features animated visuals and narration in any of six languages .
COMICS
* Bill Willingham 's 2002 comic book Fables contains mention of the goats , and the troll is an ongoing character .
FILMS
*
In the Norwegian film Trollhunter ( 2010 ) , the titular character attempts to bait a troll by placing three goats on a bridge .
* Mike Flanagan 's Kickstarter - funded film Absentia ( 2011 ) is a modern - day retelling centered around a tunnel , a series of abductions , and a troll - like creature .
* " Team Juan " at the Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design at the University of Dundee produced a version with a Spanish twist on the story : The 3 Billy Piñatas ( 2015 ) .
*
In My Neighbour Totoro ( 1988 )
the eponymous creature Totoro is named after misspelling ' Totoru ' , what means troll on japanese .
In the end scene is a book of the story " Three Billy Goats Gruff " with Totoro on it visible , indicating that Totoro is named after this story .
GAMES
* The tale also comes into play during the first King 's Quest ( 1983 ) game .
A troll is guarding a bridge Graham needs to cross .
The optimum solution to the puzzle is to lure a goat over to the bridge .
Upon seeing the troll , the goat is angered , and butts it into the river below .
*
The tale also comes into play during Magicland Dizzy ( 1990 ) .
A troll is guarding a bridge Dizzy needs to cross .
He says the only way to cross is to give him 30 diamonds before kicking Dizzy in the air away from him , but this is a red herring , as there are 30 in the whole game with one behind him and many in the Ice Palace afterwards .
The only solution to the puzzle , is to cut the rope holding the goat using the dagger , before hitting him with the stick to make him charge towards the troll .
Along his way , the goat butts the troll into the air .
*
The tale is also included in the video game Simon the Sorcerer ( 1993 ) .
*
In the video game ( 2011 ) , near a place called Purewater Run , there is a stone bridge near a waterfall .
If it is the player 's first time there , they will see three goats ; upon looking under the bridge , they will find a dead troll .
* In 2016 Saturn Animation Studio has produced an interactive adaptation of Three Billy Goats Gruff for mobile devices .
* A game adaptation for tablets and mobile phones is developed by the Norwegian game studio Agens .
The game was made with support from the Norwegian Film Institute in 2011 .
LITERATURE
* An abbreviated version of this tale is used in " 3-Part Puzzle " by Gordon R. Dickson , translated into an ET language as " The THREE ( Name ) ( Domestic Animals ) ( Name ) " ( and the ( horrendous , carnivorous , mythical creature ) .
The ET Envoy is puzzled over the glee that children show over this " simple and boring " " lesson in tactics " .
* Stephen King 's It ( 1986 ) alludes to this story .
* Golden Books did a version of the story that was similar to the book .
The only difference is that when the troll is washed away by the stream , he is later mentioned to have moved into a cave .
* Terry Pratchett 's Discworld novel Lords and Ladies ( 1992 ) refers to this story , as does a joke made in the first chapter of Monstrous Regiment ( 2003 ) .
* Neil Gaiman adapted the story for Snow White , Blood Red ( 1993 ) , an anthology of children 's fairy tales retold for adults .
In Gaiman 's version ( entitled " Troll Bridge " ) , the troll approaches a young boy who has crossed his bridge and demands to " eat his life .
"
The boy eventually persuades the troll to wait until he has lived a little more , after which he will return to the bridge .
The goats in this adaptation are represented by the protagonist as a child , a teenager and finally a middle - aged man .
The story was nominated for a 1994 World Fantasy Award .
*
The Billy Goats Gruff make an appearance in Jim Butcher , book Small Favor ( 2008 ) , the tenth novel of the Dresden Files series .
*
Andri Snær Magnason 's retells the story in the children 's book Tímakistan ( 2013 ) .
This variant features a kid , its mother , and her husband .
When the mother goat tells the troll to eat her husband instead of her , " the troll lost his appetite . '
What 's the world coming to ? ' , he cried . '
The kid tells me to eat its mother , and she tells me to eat her husband !
Crazy family ! ' .
" The troll goes home leaving the goats uneaten .
*
The tale is the inspiration of Kevin P. Futers 's novel The Adventures of the Billy Goats Gruff , which is set in seventh - century Northumbria and includes goats are named Edgar , Bert , and Frith .
MUSIC
* The tale appears to be cryptically referenced in the song " John Brown " ( 1988 ) by indie - rock band Masters of Reality .
The lyrics are usually understood to be " John Brown , bring him down ; pull his body to the ground .
Left him up , for long enough ; let me be the Baby Gruff . "
* James Scott Balentine composed Kinderkonzerts , a chamber music setting for string quintet and narrator , with the text adapted by Stephanie Sant'Ambrogio , for the Cactus Pear Music Festival .
*
The song " Much Chubbier " by Nerdcore rapper MC Frontalot on his album Question Bedtime ( 2014 ) is a retelling of the story .
RADIO PRODUCTIONS
* A version of the story written and performed by Frank Luther was often played on the BBC Radio programme Children 's Favourites , in the 1950s and early 1960s .
STAGE PRODUCTIONS
* Gwen Edwards adapted the story into a popular children 's musical called Billy , Goat , Gruff : The Musical ( summer 2007 ) , at Barter Theatre in Abingdon , Virginia .
* Lazy Bee Scripts published Billy Goat Gruff ( 2009 ) , a simple play for young children .
* A musical adaptation by British composing team George Stiles and Anthony Drewe was commissioned by the Singapore Repertory Theatre .
It premiered there in 2015 and is making its North American debut in 2017 at the Aurora Theatre in Lawrenceville , Georgia .
TELEVISION
*
In 1996 , the TV show Aaahh ! ! !
Real Monsters told its version of the Three Billy Goats Gruff in the episode " Oblina and the Three Humans " .
In this telling , the goats are represented by humans and the monster under the bridge is the main character of the story .
*
In 2008 , the BBC created a modern adaptation for its Fairy Tales TV series .
In this , the story was given a twist in that the troll was presented as a tragic , cruelly maligned victim :
*
In a segment about " patent trolls " on Last Week Tonight with John Oliver , it is referenced with " trolls actually do something , they control bridge - access for goats and ask people fun riddles " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Norwegian version , ePub and audio books in Speex format available .
* SurLaLune website :
annotated Three Billy Goats Gruff in the version from Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe , Popular Tales from the Norse George Webbe Dasent , translator .
Edinburgh : David Douglass , 1888 .
*
Three Billy Goats Gruff with other regional variations and 122E stories .