LACTEAL
A lacteal is a lymphatic capillary that absorbs dietary fats in the villi of the small intestine .
Triglycerides are emulsified by bile and hydrolyzed by the enzyme lipase , resulting in a mixture of fatty acids , di- and monoglycerides .
These then pass from the intestinal lumen into the enterocyte , where they are re - esterified to form triglyceride .
The triglyceride is then combined with phospholipids , cholesterol ester , and apolipoprotein B48 to form chylomicrons .
These chylomicrons then pass into the lacteals , forming a milky substance known as chyle .
The lacteals merge to form larger lymphatic vessels that transport the chyle to the thoracic duct where it is emptied into the bloodstream at the subclavian vein .
At this point , the fats are in the bloodstream in the form of chylomicrons .
Once in the blood , chylomicrons are subject to delipidation by lipoprotein lipase .
Eventually , enough lipid has been lost and additional apolipoproteins gained , that the resulting particle ( now referred to as a chylomicron remnant ) can be taken up by the liver .
From the liver , the fat released from chylomicron remnants can be re - exported to the blood as the triglyceride component of very low - density lipoproteins .
Very low - density lipoproteins are also subject to delipidation by vascular lipoprotein lipase , and deliver fats to tissues throughout the body .
In particular , the released fatty acids can be stored in adipose cells as triglycerides .
As triglycerides are lost from very low - density lipoproteins , the lipoprotein particles become smaller and denser ( since protein is denser than lipid ) and ultimately become low - density lipoproteins .
A great deal has been written about low - density lipoproteins because they are thought to be atherogenic .
Note that in contrast to any other route of absorption from the small intestine , the lymphatic system avoids first pass metabolism .
NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " 117 .
Digestive System :
Alimentary Canal jejunum , central lacteals "