EZ TAG EZ TAG is an electronic toll collection system in Houston , Texas , United States , that allows motorists to pay tolls without stopping at toll booths .
Motorists with the tags are allowed to use lanes reserved exclusively for them on all Harris County Toll Road Authority ( HCTRA ) roads .
As of late 2003 the EZ TAG can also be used on all lanes of tolled roadways in Texas that accommodate electronic toll collection .
HOW IT WORKS Section::::How
it works .
To participate , a driver signs up through the EZ TAG website , via telephone , or at one of the store locations .
Next , the customer receives a small , white radio frequency transponder which must be affixed to the inside of their windshield behind their rear view mirror .
Finally , when passing through a toll plaza , the driver chooses lanes specially equipped with sensors that can read EZ TAG transmitters and deduct the appropriate amount from their accounts .
Houston Transtar uses EZ TAG sensors , which are placed at numerous points across Greater Houston , for their Automatic Vehicle Identification ( AVI ) traffic monitoring system .
By tracking the movement of individual transponder tags ( EZ TAG user vehicles ) over the city , the system can generate real time traffic information for use by the general public .
The personal information about the EZ TAG customer is not compromised in this process because the EZ TAG database and the AVI system are not interconnected .
NEW TRANSPONDER Section::::New transponder .
In May 2006 , HCTRA introduced a new version of the transponder tag .
Instead of battery - powered radio transmitters , the new tags are adhesive stickers with a button - sized microchip in the middle of , and a reflective antenna system throughout the tag .
These new tags are sold , rather than rented , so they help save money over the life of the tag by eliminating the monthly $ 1 rental fee .
The battery tag 's $ 15 security deposit can be applied to the purchase of the sticker tag .
Removing the sticker after placement has a high probability of either separating the chip from the antenna , de - tuning the antenna from its designated frequency , or both , therefore invalidating the tag for future use .
The tag also relies on the windshield for an amplification effect , and its effective range is greatly reduced if it is not mounted on a glass substrate .
This range reduction is so much that not having a tag properly mounted will result in it not reading at all in toll lanes .
These characteristics are much different compared to the old battery tags , which would read fine if not mounted properly .
As such , some toll patrons attempt to hold up their sticker tags when driving through the toll lanes , and appear mystified when they do not work as their old tags did .
The new tag uses three different protocols , or communications methods , with the tag readers — ATA , eGo and SeGo .
The protocol used in Houston is ATA for automatic equipment identification ; however , a driver in Houston can conceivably use the tag in another state where the other protocols are used .
In addition , the tags support ANSI INCITS 256 - 2001 and ISO 10374 .
The tag is read by scanners as far as at 915 MHz , and the tag features a 2048-bit read / write passive memory .
To duplicate a 915 MHz EZ TAG , a copy of the ROM 2048-bit chip must be dumped and loaded into another ROM chip and a matched inductance of the RFID EZ TAG surface needs to be constructed .
Blank 915 MHz RFID pads can be bought online .
NEW VARIATIONS Section::::New variations .
As of January 2008 , three different sets of EZ Tags have been released .
The differences are purely cosmetic .
Despite the similarity in the names , EZ Tags are not compatible with the E - ZPass system in the northeast U.S.
EZ TAG BY BANCPASS
Section::::EZ
Tag by BancPass .
In November 2015 , HCTRA announced a new Cash Reloadable EZ Tag .
The EZ Tag by BancPass can be reloaded with cash at major retailers , or the user can reload online using a debit or credit card .
The EZ Tag by BancPass also differs from the standard EZ Tag by not reloading automatically .
The user is notified when the account balance gets low , and the user can choose when and how much to put on the user 's account .
The EZ Tag by BancPass is available online , at H - E - B grocery stores and at Corner Store by Valero .
Accounts can be reloaded online or at any H - E - B , CVS or Corner Store by Valero .
INTEROPERABILITY * 2003 , Texas Department of Transportation ( TxTag ) and NTTA ( TollTag )
* 2017 , Kansas Turnpike Authority ( K - TAG ) * Speculated around the 3rd quarter of 2017 , although as of Nov 2018 it is not yet interoperable , Oklahoma Turnpike Authority ( PikePass )
*
In early to mid-2018 , EZ TAG will become interoperable with the toll - roads in Florida ( SunPass ) , Georgia ( Peach Pass ) , North Carolina ( NC Quick Pass ) and South Carolina ( Palmetto Pass ) SEE ALSO * North Texas Tollway Authority * TollTag
* TxTag REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official EZ TAG website *
Houston TranStar
* EZ TAG Design Background
* EZ Tag by BancPass