WATER INTOXICATION Water intoxication , also known as water poisoning , hyperhydration , overhydration , or water toxemia is a potentially fatal disturbance in brain functions that results when the normal balance of electrolytes in the body is pushed outside safe limits by excessive water intake .
Under normal circumstances , accidentally consuming too much water is exceptionally rare .
Nearly all deaths related to water intoxication in normal individuals have resulted either from water - drinking contests , in which individuals attempt to consume large amounts of water , or from long bouts of exercise during which excessive amounts of fluid were consumed .
In addition , water cure , a method of torture in which the victim is forced to consume excessive amounts of water , can cause water intoxication .
Water , just like any other substance , can be considered a poison when over - consumed in a specific period of time .
Water intoxication mostly occurs when water is being consumed in a high quantity without adequate electrolyte intake .
Excess of body water may also be a result of a medical condition or improper treatment ; see " hyponatremia " for some examples .
Water is considered one of the least toxic chemical compounds , with an LD of over 90 ml / kg in rats .
RISK FACTORS LOW BODY MASS ( INFANTS ) Section::::Risk factors .
Section::::Low body mass ( infants ) .
It can be very easy for children under one year old to absorb too much water , especially if the child is under nine months old .
Because of their small body mass , it is easy for them to take in a large amount of water relative to body mass and total body sodium stores .
ENDURANCE SPORTS Section::::Endurance sports .
Marathon runners are susceptible to water intoxication if they drink too much while running .
This is caused when sodium levels drop below 135 μmol / L when athletes consume large amounts of fluid .
This has been noted to be the result of the encouragement of excessive fluid replacement by various guidelines .
This has largely been identified in marathon runners as a dilutional hyponatremia .
A study conducted on participants of the 2002 Boston Marathon found that thirteen percent finished the race with hyponatremia .
The study concluded that the strongest predictor of hyponatremia was weight gain while racing ( over - hydration ) , and hyponatremia was just as likely to occur in runners who chose sports drinks as those who chose water .
Medical personnel at marathon events are trained to suspect water intoxication immediately when runners collapse or show signs of confusion .
OVEREXERTION AND HEAT STRESS Section::::Overexertion and heat stress .
Any activity or situation that promotes heavy sweating can lead to water intoxication when water is consumed to replace lost fluids .
Persons working in extreme heat and/or humidity for long periods must take care to drink and eat in ways that help to maintain electrolyte balance .
People using drugs such as MDMA ( often referred to colloquially as " Ecstasy " ) may overexert themselves , perspire heavily , feel increased thirst , and then drink large amounts of water to rehydrate , leading to electrolyte imbalance and water intoxication – this is compounded by MDMA use increasing the levels of antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) , decreasing the amount of water lost through urination .
Even people who are resting quietly in extreme heat or humidity may run the risk of water intoxication if they drink large amounts of water over short periods for rehydration .
PSYCHIATRIC CONDITIONS
Section::::Psychiatric conditions .
Psychogenic polydipsia is the psychiatric condition in which patients feel compelled to drink large quantities of water , thus putting them at risk of water intoxication .
This condition can be especially dangerous if the patient also exhibits other psychiatric indications ( as is often the case ) , as the care - takers might misinterpret the hyponatremic symptoms .
IATROGENIC Section::::Iatrogenic .
When an unconscious person is being fed intravenously ( for example , total parenteral nutrition ) or via a nasogastric tube , the fluids given must be carefully balanced in composition to match fluids and electrolytes lost .
These fluids are typically hypertonic , and so water is often co - administered .
If the electrolytes are not monitored ( even in an ambulatory patient ) , either hypernatremia or hyponatremia may result .
Some neurological / psychiatric medications ( Oxcarbazepine , among others ) have been found to cause hyponatremia in some patients .
Patients with diabetes insipidus are particularly vulnerable due to rapid fluid processing .
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Pathophysiology .
At the onset of this condition , fluid outside the cells has an excessively low amount of solutes , such as sodium and other electrolytes , in comparison to fluid inside the cells , causing the fluid to move into the cells to balance its concentration .
This causes the cells to swell .
In the brain , this swelling increases intracranial pressure ( ICP ) , which leads to the first observable symptoms of water intoxication : headache , personality changes , changes in behavior , confusion , irritability , and drowsiness .
These are sometimes followed by difficulty breathing during exertion , muscle weakness & pain , twitching , or cramping , nausea , vomiting , thirst , and a dulled ability to perceive and interpret sensory information .
As the condition persists , papillary and vital signs may result including bradycardia and widened pulse pressure .
The cells in the brain may swell to the point where blood flow is interrupted resulting in cerebral edema .
Swollen brain cells may also apply pressure to the brain stem causing central nervous system dysfunction .
Both cerebral edema and interference with the central nervous system are dangerous and could result in seizures , brain damage , coma or death .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Water intoxication can be prevented if a person 's intake of water does not grossly exceed their losses .
Healthy kidneys are able to excrete approximately 800 millilitres to 1 litre of fluid water ( 0.84 - 1.04 quarts ) per hour .
However , stress ( from prolonged physical exertion ) , as well as disease states , can greatly reduce this amount .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Mild intoxication may remain asymptomatic and require only fluid restriction .
In more severe cases , treatment consists of : * Diuretics to increase urination , which are most effective for excess blood volume .
*
Vasopressin receptor antagonists NOTABLE CASES
* 1991 , Andy Warhol : Five years after his death , Warhol 's family publicly accused the hospital where he had his gallbladder removed of causing his death by water intoxication administered post - operatively .
A claimed autopsy weight of 150 lbs , with his weight being 128 lbs when admitted , was cited as evidence that too much fluid had been given .
* October 24 , 1995 :
Anna Wood , a 15-year - old Australian schoolgirl , died from the effects of water intoxication secondary to use of MDMA ( commonly known as Ecstasy ) .
* November 16 , 1995 :
Leah Betts , an English schoolgirl , died as the result of drinking too much water , though in the media her death was mistakenly attributed to taking an ecstasy tablet at her 18th birthday party .
* 2003 : British actor Anthony Andrews survived a case of water intoxication .
He was performing as Henry Higgins in a revival of the musical My Fair Lady at the time , and consumed up to eight litres of water a day .
He was unconscious and in intensive care for three days .
* January 12 , 2007 : Jennifer Strange died after drinking what is believed to be 2 gallons ( 7.5 liters ) of water in an attempt to win a Nintendo Wii .
The KDND radio station 's morning show , the Morning Rave , held an on - air contest entitled " Hold Your Wee for a Wii , " in which contestants were asked to drink as much water as they could without urinating .
KDND was subsequently ordered to pay US$ 16,577,118 in damages to Jennifer 's family .
SEE ALSO
* Electrolytes * Dehydration *
Drowning
* Hyperkalemia / Hypokalemia * Hypermagnesemia / Hypomagnesemia * Hypernatremia / Hyponatremia
* Gastroenteritis * Oral rehydration therapy
* Polydipsia
* Water urticaria
*
Dihydrogen monoxide hoax
* Electrolyte imbalance
* List of unusual deaths * Potomania
*
The dose makes the poison REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS