GESTATIONAL SAC
The gestational sac is the large cavity of fluid surrounding the embryo .
During early embryogenesis it consists of the extraembryonic coelom , also called the chorionic cavity .
The gestational sac is normally contained within the uterus .
It is the only available structure that can be used to determine if an intrauterine pregnancy exists until the embryo is identified .
On obstetric ultrasound , the gestational sac is a dark ( " anechoic " ) space surrounded by a white ( " hyperechoic " ) rim .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The gestational sac is spherical in shape , and usually located in the upper part of the fundus of the uterus .
By approximately 9 weeks of gestational age , the amniotic sac has expanded to occupy the majority of the volume of the gestational sac , eventually expanding to reduce the extraembryonic coelom to a thin layer between the amnion membrane and the mesoderm .
By then , the gestational sac is usually simply called the " amniotic sac " .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
During embryogenesis , the extraembryonic coelom ( or chorionic cavity ) that constitutes the gestational sac is a portion of the conceptus consisting of a cavity between Heuser 's membrane and the Trophoblast .
During formation of the primitive yolk sac , some of the migrating hypoblast cells differentiate into mesenchymal cells that fill the space between Heuser 's membrane and the Trophoblast , forming the extraembryonic mesoderm .
As development progresses , small lacunae begin to form within the extraembryonic mesoderm which enlarge to become the extraembryonic coelom .
The extraembryonic coelom divides the extraembryonic mesoderm into two layers : extraembryonic splanchnopleuric mesoderm , which lies adjacent to Heuser 's membrane around the outside of the primitive yolk sac , and extraembryonic somatopleuric mesoderm , which lies adjacent to the cytotrophoblast layer of the embryo .
The chorionic cavity is enclosed by the chorionic plate , which is composed of an inner layer of somatopleuric mesoderm and an outer layer of trophoblast cells .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE ULTRASOUND Section::::Clinical significance .
Section::::Ultrasound .
The mean sac diameter ( MSD ) can effectively estimate gestational age between 5 and 6 weeks , with an accuracy of about + /-
5 days .
The yolk sac and embryo should be readily identifiable when the gestational sac reaches a certain size — a yolk sac should be seen when the gestational sac is 20 mm and
a fetal pole should be seen when the gestational sac reaches 25 mm .
Gestational sacs can be identified via ultrasound and are generally identified by the following 4 characteristics :
* The sac has a round or elliptical shape in longitudinal and transverse views
*
* it is surrounded by a white echogenic rim ( " choriodecidual reaction " )
*
* The sac is located in the uterine fundus *
* The sac is not implanted on the midline , but eccentrically ( to one side of the uterine cavity line ) .
* REFERENCES