THE BLUE LAGOON ( 1980 FILM )
The Blue Lagoon is a 1980 American romantic survival drama film directed by Randal Kleiser from a screenplay written by Douglas Day Stewart based on the 1908 novel of the same name by Henry De Vere Stacpoole .
The film stars Brooke Shields and Christopher Atkins .
The music score was composed by Basil Poledouris and the cinematography was by Néstor Almendros .
It tells the story of two young children marooned on a tropical island paradise in the South Pacific .
With neither the guidance nor the restrictions of society , emotional feelings and physical changes arise as they reach puberty and fall in love .
The film contained a substantial amount of sexual content , and both main characters were depicted in the nude .
This was controversial , as Shields was 14 years old at the time of the filming .
A body double was used for all of her nude scenes and her breasts remained covered in frontal shots .
The Blue Lagoon was theatrically released on June 20 , 1980 by Columbia Pictures .
The film was panned by the critics , who disparaged its screenplay and execution and Shields 's performance , although Almendros 's cinematography received praise .
In spite of criticism , the film was a commercial success , grossing over $ 58 million on a $ 4.5 million budget , becoming the ninth highest grossing film of 1980 .
The film received a significant amount of awards attention .
It was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , Almendros received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography , Atkins was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actor , and Shields won the inaugural Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the early Victorian period , two young cousins , Richard ( Glenn Kohan ) and Emmaline LeStrange ( Elva Josephson ) , and a galley cook , Paddy Button ( Leo McKern ) , survive a shipwreck in the South Pacific and reach a lush tropical island .
Paddy cares for the children and forbids them by " Law " from going to the other side of the island , as he had found remains from bloody human sacrifices on an altar .
He also warns them against eating a deadly scarlet berry .
Several years later , Paddy dies after a drunken binge .
Now alone , the children go to another part of the island and rebuild their home .
Years pass and they grow into tall , strong teenagers .
They live in their hut , spending their days fishing , swimming and diving for pearls .
Richard and Emmaline ( now portrayed by Christopher Atkins and Brooke Shields ) begin to fall in love .
This is stressful for them , because of their lack of education on human sexuality .
Emmaline is frightened by her first menstrual period ; she refuses to allow Richard to inspect her for what he imagines is a wound .
Richard becomes physically attracted to Emmaline , but she does not reciprocate his feelings , inciting Richard to go off alone and masturbate .
A ship appears for the first time in years , but Emmaline does not light the signal fire .
As a result , the ship passes by without noticing them .
When Richard angrily confronts Emmaline about this , she tells him that the island is their home now and they should stay , to Richard 's disbelief .
Emmaline secretly ventures to the forbidden side of the island and sees the altar .
She associates the blood on the altar with the blood of Christ 's crucifixion .
She comes to the conclusion that the altar is God , and tries to persuade Richard to go to the other side of the island to pray with her .
Richard is shocked at the idea of breaking the Law .
They insult each other and Emmaline reveals she knows about his masturbating and threatens to tell her Uncle Arthur about it .
They throw coconuts at each other and she hits him on the head .
Following the fight , Richard kicks Emmaline out of their hut .
Emmaline accidentally steps on a stonefish .
Sick and weak , she pleads with Richard to " take her to God . "
Richard carries her to the other side of the island and places her on the altar , offering a prayer to God .
Emmaline recovers and Richard admits his fear of losing her .
After Emmaline regains her ability to walk , they go skinny dipping in the lagoon and then swim to shore .
Still naked , Richard and Emmaline discover sexual intercourse and passionate love .
They regularly make love from then on .
Emmaline becomes pregnant .
Richard and Emmaline are stunned when they feel the baby move inside her and assume that it is her stomach causing the movements .
Emmaline gives birth to a baby boy , whom they name Paddy .
Emmaline holds him and learns how to feed him as the baby instinctively starts suckling .
The young parents teach Paddy how to swim , fish and build things .
A ship led by Richard 's father Arthur ( William Daniels ) approaches the island and sees the family playing on the shore .
When they notice the ship , they walk away instead of signaling for help , content with their lives .
As they are covered in mud , their appearance is difficult to determine and Arthur assumes that they are natives .
One day , the family takes the lifeboat to visit their original homesite .
Richard goes off and finds bananas for them , leaving Emmaline and Paddy with the boat .
Emmaline does not notice when Paddy brings a branch of the scarlet berries into the boat .
Emmaline and Paddy slowly drift away and Paddy tosses one of the oars out .
Unable to reach the oar , Emmaline shouts to Richard and he swims to her , followed closely by a shark .
Emmaline throws the other oar at the shark , striking it and giving Richard time to get into the boat .
They are unable to retrieve the oars without risking a shark attack .
They paddle with their hands to no avail ; the boat is caught in the current and drifts out to sea .
After drifting for days , Richard and Emmaline awake to find Paddy eating the berries he had picked .
Hopeless , Richard and Emmaline eat the berries as well , lying down to await death .
A few hours later , Arthur 's ship finds them .
Arthur asks , " Are they dead ? "
The captain ( Gus Mercurio ) answers , " No , sir .
They 're asleep . "
CAST * Brooke Shields as Emmaline LeStrange
* Elva Josephson as Young Emmaline * Christopher Atkins as Richard LeStrange
* Glenn Kohan as Young Richard * Bradley Pryce as Little Paddy LeStrange
* Chad Timmermans as Infant Paddy * Leo McKern as Paddy Button * William Daniels as Arthur LeStrange
* Alan Hopgood as Captain * Gus Mercurio as Officer PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The movie was a passion project of Randal Kleiser , who had long admired the original novel .
He hired Douglas Day Stewart , who had written The Boy in the Plastic Bubble , to write the script and met up with Richard Franklin , the Australian director , who was looking for work in Hollywood .
This gave him the idea to use an Australian crew , which Franklin helped supervise .
The film was shot in Jamaica and Nanuya Levu , a privately owned island in Fiji .
The flora and fauna featured in the film includes an array of animals from multiple continents .
As it turned out , the iguanas filmed on Fiji were a species
hitherto unknown to biologists ; this was noted by the herpetologist John Gibbons when he watched the film and after traveling to the island where the iguanas were filmed , he described the Fiji crested iguana ( Brachylophus vitiensis ) in 1981 .
The lagoon scenes were shot in Comino Island , Malta and Champagne Bay , Vanuatu .
All of Brooke Shields ' nude scenes were performed by the film 's 32-year - old stunt coordinator , Kathy Troutt .
Shields did many of her topless scenes with her hair glued to her breasts .
Atkins appeared nude ( including frontal nudity ) in the film .
Underwater moving picture photography was performed by Ron and Valerie Taylor .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The Blue Lagoon was panned by critics .
It holds a score of 9 % on Rotten Tomatoes out of 22 reviews .
Among the more common criticisms were the ludicrously idyllic portrayal of how children would develop outside of civilized society , the unfulfilled buildup of the island 's natives as a climactic threat and the way the film , while teasing a prurient appeal , conspicuously obscures all sexual activities .
Roger Ebert gave the film 1½ stars out of 4 , claiming that it " could conceivably have been made interesting , if any serious attempt had been made to explore what might really happen if two 7-year - old kids were shipwrecked on an island .
But this is n't a realistic movie .
It 's a wildly idealized romance , in which the kids live in a hut that looks like a Club Med honeymoon cottage , while restless natives commit human sacrifice on the other side of the island . "
He also deemed the ending a blatant cop - out .
He and Gene Siskel selected the film as one of their " dogs of the year " in a 1980 episode of Sneak Previews .
Time Out commented that the film " was hyped as being about ' natural love ' ; but apart from ' doing it in the open air ' , there is nothing natural about two kids ( unfettered by the bonds of society from their early years ) subscribing to marriage and traditional role - playing . "
Gary Arnold of The Washington Post similarly called the film " a picturesque rhapsody to Learning Skills , Playing House , Going Swimming , Enjoying the Scenery and Starting to Feel Sexy in tropical seclusion .
" He particularly ridiculed the lead characters ' persistent inability to make obvious inferences .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was the ninth biggest box office hit of 1980 in North America according to Box Office Mojo , grossing US$ 58,853,106 in the United States and Canada on a $ 4.5 million budget .
AWARDS AND HONORS
* Main awards
* Nominee : Academy Award for Best Cinematography – Néstor Almendros
* Nominee : Saturn Award – Best Fantasy Film * Nominee :
Golden Globe Award , New Star of the Year – Christopher Atkins
* 1st Golden Raspberry Award
* Won : Worst Actress ( Brooke Shields )
* Young Artist Awards
* Nominee : Best Major Motion Picture –
Family Entertainment
* Nominee : Best Young Motion Picture Actor – Christopher Atkins
* Nominee : Best Young Motion Picture Actress – Brooke Shields OTHER HONORS
Section::::Awards and honors .
Section::::Other honors .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists : * 2002 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Passions – Nominated VERSIONS AND ADAPTATIONS Section::::Versions and adaptations .
The Blue Lagoon was based on Henry De Vere Stacpoole 's novel of the same name , which first appeared in 1908 .
The first film adaptation of the book was the British silent 1923 film of that name .
There was another British adaptation in 1949 .
The 1980 version includes much more nudity and sex scenes than the 1949 version , though far less than the book .
The sequel Return to the Blue Lagoon ( 1991 ) loosely picks up where The Blue Lagoon left off , except that Richard and Emmaline are found dead in the boat .
Their son is rescued .
As Paddy 's name is unknown to his rescuers , he is renamed Richard , after his father .
The movie was briefly parodied in a flashback scene of the movie Top Secret !
( 1984 ) .
The Quantum Leap episode " Leaping of the Shrew " guest - starred Brooke Shields and was about a young man and woman marooned on a deserted island .
It was also parodied in the movie Going Berserk ( 1983 ) when John Candy reveals his recurring nightmare inspired by the movie .
The end of the dream spoofs Christopher Atkins ' masturbation scene when Candy is spotted masturbating by the jeering passengers of a ship that happens to pass by .
On December 9 , 2011 , the cable TV network Lifetime greenlit the television film .
It premiered on the channel on June 16 , 2012 .
Atkins appears in the 2012 film as one of the teachers on the shipborne field trip where Emma and Dean are lost at sea and end up on an island .
DVD AND BLU - RAY
Section::::DVD and Blu - ray .
The Special Edition DVD , with both widescreen and fullscreen versions , was released on October 5 , 1999 .
Its special features include the theatrical trailer , the original featurette , a personal photo album by Brooke Shields , audio commentary by Randal Kleiser and Christopher Atkins , and another commentary by Randal Kleiser , Douglas Day Stewart and Brooke Shields .
The film was re - released in 2005 as part of a two - pack with its sequel , Return to the Blue Lagoon .
A limited edition Blu - ray Disc of the film was released on December 11 , 2012 by Twilight Time .
Special features on the Blu - ray include an isolated score track , original trailer , three original teasers , a behind the scenes featurette called An Adventure in Filmmaking : The Making of The Blue Lagoon , as well as audio commentary by Randal Kleiser , Douglas Day Stewart and Brooke Shields and a second commentary by Randal Kleiser and Christopher Atkins .
STREAMING
Section::::Streaming .
The 1980 movie was made available for streaming through services such as Amazon Video and Vudu .
SEE ALSO
* The Blue Lagoon ( 1923 version ) * The Blue Lagoon ( 1949 version )
* Return to the Blue Lagoon * , a Lifetime television movie
* Paradise * State of nature * Martin Popplewell , an English journalist who was inspired by The Blue Lagoon to intentionally strand himself and his lover on a desert island at age 15 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS