TOPANGA , CALIFORNIA Topanga is a census - designated place ( CDP ) in western Los Angeles County , California , United States .
Located in the Santa Monica Mountains , the community lies in Topanga Canyon .
The narrow southern portion of Topanga at the coast is in between the city of Malibu and the city of Los Angeles neighborhood of Pacific Palisades .
Topanga had a population of 8,289 as of 2010 .
The ZIP code is 90290 and the area code is primarily 310 , with 818 only at the north end of the canyon .
It is in the 3rd County Supervisorial district .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Topanga is the name given to the area by the Native American indigenous Tongva tribe , and may mean " a place above " .
It was the western border of their territory , abutting the Chumash tribe that occupied the coast from Malibu northwards .
Bedrock mortars can be found carved into rock outcroppings in many locations .
Topanga was first settled by Europeans in 1839 .
In the 1920s , Topanga Canyon became a weekend getaway for Hollywood stars with several cottages built for that purpose .
The rolling hills and ample vegetation served to provide both privacy and attractive surroundings for the rich and famous .
During the 1960s , Topanga Canyon became a magnet to many new artists .
In 1965 Wallace Berman settled in the area .
For a time , Neil Young lived in Topanga , first living with producer David Briggs then later buying his own house .
He recorded most of his After the Gold Rush album in his basement studio in 1970 .
Charles Manson had previously been living in Topanga , where he had briefly befriended both Neil Young and Dennis Wilson of The Beach Boys .
Members of the Manson Family began their campaign of murder on July 31 , 1969 with the murder of Topanga resident Gary Hinman , a music teacher who had opened his home to anyone needing shelter .
The Topanga Corral was a nightclub that featured an eclectic mix of performers , including then Topanga locals Canned Heat , Spirit , Little Feat , Spanky and Our Gang , Taj Mahal , Emmylou Harris , Bob Denver , Neil Diamond and Russ Tamblyn .
Etta James , Windance , Neil Young , and Crazy Horse , Geronimo Black , and many others .
It is rumored that Jim Morrison was inspired to write " Roadhouse Blues " about the drive up Topanga Canyon Boulevard to The Corral .
Later in the 1970s , after being destroyed by fire and rebuilt , the club featured many up and coming bands from the L.A. punk scene .
In 1986 , the Corral again burned to the ground and was not rebuilt .
Today , many musicians , artists and actors continue to make Topanga their home .
Linda Ronstadt had been seen hitchhiking through the Canyon barefoot with her guitar .
GEOGRAPHY TOPANGA CANYON Section::::Geography .
Section::::Topanga Canyon .
Topanga Creek drains Topanga Canyon and is the third largest watershed entering the Santa Monica Bay .
The creek is one of the few remaining undammed waterways in the area , and is a spawning ground for steelhead trout .
The area typically receives about 22 " of rain annually .
Topanga Beach lies on the coast at the outlet of Topanga Creek .
Topanga Canyon Boulevard , State Route 27 , is the principal thoroughfare , connecting the Ventura Freeway ( US 101 ) with Pacific Coast Highway ( SR 1 ) .
The southern portion of the boulevard largely follows Topanga Creek .
North of the Old Topanga Canyon Road intersection , the boulevard traverses the Santa Monica Mountains .
Topanga Canyon contains lands of Topanga State Park , which is the largest park in the Santa Monica Mountains and one of the largest open space preserves surrounded by a city in the world , as well as the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy .
It is part of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area .
It primarily represents a California coastal sage and chaparral ecoregion , with large areas of the California oak woodland plant community , and a wide variety of native plants .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
This region experiences warm ( but not hot ) and dry summers , with no average monthly temperatures above .
According to the Köppen Climate Classification system , Topanga has a warm - summer Mediterranean climate , abbreviated " Csb " on climate maps .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
The 2010 United States Census reported that Topanga had a population of 8,289 .
The population density was 433.2 people per square mile ( 167.2 / km² ) .
The racial makeup of Topanga was 7,313 ( 88.2 % )
White ( 84.5 % Non - Hispanic White ) , 117 ( 1.4 % )
African American , 35 ( 0.4 % )
Native American , 353 ( 4.3 % )
Asian , 3 ( 0.0 % ) Pacific Islander , 125 ( 1.5 % ) from other races , and 343 ( 4.1 % ) from two or more races .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 534 persons ( 6.4 % ) .
The Census reported that 8,289 people ( 100 % of the population ) lived in households , 0 ( 0 % ) lived in non - institutionalized group quarters , and 0 ( 0 % ) were institutionalized .
There were 3,442 households , out of which 996 ( 28.9 % ) had children under the age of 18 living in them , 1,772 ( 51.5 % )
were opposite - sex married couples living together , 262 ( 7.6 % ) had a female householder with no husband present , 140 ( 4.1 % ) had a male householder with no wife present .
There were 239 ( 6.9 % ) unmarried opposite - sex partnerships , and 49 ( 1.4 % ) same - sex married couples or partnerships .
903 households ( 26.2 % ) were made up of individuals and 256 ( 7.4 % ) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.41 .
There were 2,174 families ( 63.2 % of all households ) ; the average family size was 2.87 .
The population was spread out with 1,682 people ( 20.3 % ) under the age of 18
, 333 people ( 4.0 % ) aged 18 to 24 , 1,917 people ( 23.1 % ) aged 25 to 44 , 3,188 people ( 38.5 % ) aged 45 to 64 , and 1,169 people ( 14.1 % ) who were 65 years of age or older .
The median age was 46.1 years .
For every 100 females , there were 97.9 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96.2 males .
There were 3,750 housing units at an average density of 196.0 per square mile ( 75.7 / km² ) , of which 2,589 ( 75.2 % ) were owner - occupied , and 853 ( 24.8 % ) were occupied by renters .
The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.2 % ; the rental vacancy rate was 3.8 % .
6,597 people ( 79.6 % of the population ) lived in owner - occupied housing units and 1,692 people ( 20.4 % ) lived in rental housing units .
LOWER TOPANGA CANYON Section::::Lower Topanga Canyon .
The bottom of Topanga Canyon , where it meets Pacific Coast Highway and the ocean , was owned for many years by the Los Angeles Athletic Club , a wealthy private club in downtown Los Angeles .
The 1,659 acre ( 6.7 km ) parcel was rented out to a variety of businesses and residents for decades at remarkably low rents , considering that it borders the city of Malibu .
Thus Lower Topanga became unique as one of the last outposts of the classic Topanga Canyon bohemian hippie lifestyle .
The Chumash considered Lower Topanga a sacred , economic , and cultural meeting place for tribes all along the coast .
One of the main neighborhoods , the " Rodeo Grounds , " takes its name from an actual rodeo arena that existed there on a Mexican Ranch in the 1800s .
( Another neighborhood , " The Snake Pit , " was named both for its abundance of rattlesnakes and for the shifty characters who passed through like Charles Manson . )
In the early 1900s , Lower Topanga was a Japanese fishing village .
William Randolph Hearst owned the property for a time and turned it into a weekend getaway spot with beach shacks for his and Marion Davies ' guests .
Famous residents of Lower Topanga have included : Humphrey Bogart , Bertolt Brecht , Carole Lombard , Peter Lorre , Ida Lupino , Shirley Temple , and Johnny Weissmuller .
In the ' 60s , a lively community of artists and surfers sprang up in Lower Topanga .
They maintained their houses without assistance , sometimes digging them out of the mud after floods or setting backfires to prevent a spreading wildfire from burning down their neighborhood .
The roads remained unpaved .
In 2001 , Lower Topanga was sold to California State Parks .
Even though the Lower Topanga community occupied less than 2 % of the total purchased land , State Parks had an aggressive policy to relocate everyone and bulldoze all of the houses .
( State Parks had already evicted residents who lived directly on Topanga Beach in the late ' 70s . )
Arundo , a type of giant reed resembling bamboo that characterizes the Lower Topanga landscape , became a totemic plant for the residents because it was first on a long list of non - native plants that State Parks also condemned to be uprooted in an attempt to restore the land to its natural state .
A group of 10 Lower Topanga poets calling themselves the " Idlers of the Bamboo Grove " published a book of the same name in 2002 , celebrating their community and lamenting the prospect of having to leave .
Their publisher , Brass Tacks Press , continued publishing works about Lower Topanga , including The Snake Pit by Baretta ( 2006 ) , Tool 's Snake Pit by Tool ( 2007 ) , Rohloff 's Snake Pit by Chris Rohloff ( 2009 ) , and Topanga Beach Experience : 1960s–70s by Paul Lovas and Pablo Capra ( 2011 ) – as well as maintaining an online Lower Topanga Photo Archive .
In addition , Austrian filmmakers Natalie Lettner and Werner Hanak shot a documentary film about the neighborhood called Malibu Song ( 2006 ) , and Topangan Anastasia Fite shot a shorter documentary called Last Bastion ( 2009 ) .
Even though Lower Topanga residents were given money to leave , some fought bitterly against their relocation in court .
However , the last holdouts were forced off the land in March 2006 .
Currently there are active efforts by TreePeople and Mountains Restoration Trust to restore the area to its pristine condition as it was prior to development .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
Topanga is known as a bohemian enclave attracting artists , musicians , filmmakers , and others .
Numerous music festivals have been organized in the canyon , including the Topanga Days Festival and Topanga Earth Day .
The Topanga Film Institute hosts the annual Topanga Film Festival .
In the 1950s , blacklisted actor Will Geer had to sell his large Santa Monica home and move his family to a small plot in the canyon where they could grow their own produce .
Geer 's friend Woody Guthrie had a small shack on the property .
They unintentionally founded what became an artists ' colony .
Since its founding in 1973 , the Geer family has continued to operate the Will Geer Theatricum Botanicum .
It has grown into an Equity theater , and occupies a natural outdoor amphitheater .
It features Shakespearean plays , modern classics , and original productions , as well as musical concerts .
Performers have included Pete Seeger , Arlo Guthrie , Della Reese , and Burl Ives .
A famous venue in the canyon was the Elysium Institute , also known as Elysium Fields , a nudist club started by Ed Lange in 1967 .
After surviving extended battles with county officials the property was sold in 2002 by its founder 's heirs .
Every Memorial Day weekend on the grounds of the Topanga Community House , Topanga has an annual fair and parade , called Topanga Days .
Topanga Days Country Fair features music , belly dancing , over 80 unique craft vendors and a variety of food from Cajun to Mexican to vegan .
A parade is held on Memorial Day .
The parade is said to have inspired the more famous Doo - Dah Parade in Pasadena .
Topanga canyon also sees and annual reggae festival
" Reggae on the Mountain " that has grown to be one of the largest events in the area .
The event serves as a fundraiser for the Topanga Community Club in a similar fashion as Topanga Days .
The Topanga Film Institute presents the annual Topanga Film Festival each July .
The festival endeavors to bridge cultures , create and expand community , provide cultural exchange and networking opportunities .
Two outdoor shopping centers featuring local businesses form the hub of local commerce .
There are no hotels , motels or gas stations in Topanga , nor are there any chain or big box stores .
The location of Topanga in the Santa Monica Mountains also makes the natural surroundings an important part of the culture .
Streams , waterfalls , cliffs of exposed bedrock , landmark rock outcroppings , and overlooks with panoramic views of the mountains , Pacific Ocean and Los Angeles are common attractions .
There are many trails for short walks , hiking , mountain biking , horseback riding , birdwatching , and rock climbing , all of which are important parts of the local community .
GOVERNMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE Section::::Government and infrastructure .
The County of Los Angeles Public Library operates the Topanga Library located on 122 N Topanga Canyon Blvd .
The Los Angeles County Fire Department operates Fire Station # 69 in Topanga as a part of Battalion 5 .
The Los Angeles County Sheriff 's Department ( LASD ) operates the Malibu / Lost Hills Station in Calabasas , serving Topanga .
The United States Postal Service Topanga Post Office is located at 101 South Topanga Canyon Boulevard .
The Topanga Coalition for Emergency Preparedness ( T - CEP ) operates an Emergency Operations Center ( EOC ) near the Topanga Town Center .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Most Topanga residents are zoned to schools in the Los Angeles Unified School District .
* Topanga Elementary School *
A teacher stated in a 1998 Los Angeles Magazine article that the fact that the parents are creative professionals contributes to the school 's high test scores .
As of 1998 many parents conduct music and art lessons at this school , as Topanga itself is an artists ' colony .
* Manzanita School at big rock Ranch * A choice between Revere Charter Middle School or Woodland Hills Academy ( formerly known as Parkman Middle School ) * A choice between Palisades Charter High School and Taft High School
The area is within Board District 4 .
As of 2010 Steve Zimmer represents the district .
Some portions are in the Santa Monica - Malibu Unified School District ( SMMUSD ) .
Those portions are zoned to Webster Elementary School and Malibu High School .
The County of Los Angeles Public Library operates the Topanga Library .
NATURAL DISASTERS * November 6 , 1961
, The Santa Ynez Fire began , the same day as the Bel - Air – Brentwood Fire further east .
It burned nine structures and 9,720 acres ( 39 km ) of watershed .
* Topanga Creek causes occasional flooding and extensive road erosion , requiring the closure of Topanga Canyon Boulevard .
In 1980 , severe flooding washed out large sections of the road at the bottom of the " S " curves .
Traffic was severely restricted during the six months of repairs .
* November 2 , 1993 , The Old Topanga Fire .
Within an hour , had burned 1,000 acres ( 4 km ) .
It resulted in the largest mobilization of emergency resources in a 24-hour period in California history .
By the time it was extinguished 10 days later , 16,516 acres ( 67 km ) of watershed and at least 388 structures were burned in Topanga and adjoining areas .
*
In 1997–8 Topanga Canyon received over 58 " of rainfall resulting in extensive flood damage .
*
In 2005 , a fire referred to as the " Topanga Fire " burned in Chatsworth and points south and west of Chatsworth .
This fire did not burn any areas in Topanga Canyon , but was named due to its origin near the intersection of Topanga Canyon Boulevard ( SR 27 ) and the Ronald Reagan Freeway ( SR 118 ) in Chatsworth .
NOTABLE PEOPLE SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Topanga Chamber of Commerce .
* Topanga Elementary School * Topanga Journal local magazine covering Topanga and the surrounding area .
* www.parks.ca .
Official Topanga State Park website .
* Topanga Messenger , the local newspaper .
Closed doors December 1 , 2016 .
* " Messenger Mountain News local newspaper covering Topanga and the Santa Monica Mountains , since January 2017 .
* Topanga Community Club , home of Topanga Days .
* TopangaBands.com — Links to over 70 bands from Topanga .
*
Topanga Banjo Fiddle Contest
*
Official report Old Topanga Fire
* Project to save historic Los Angeles County Engine 69 which served Topanga area around 1955
* Topanga Days Country Fair * Census 2000
Demographic Profile
* The Fire Next Time — A story on Topanga Coalition for Emergency Preparedness ( T - CEP )
* Topanga Creek watershed map *
The Lower Topanga Photo Archive , hosted by Brass Tacks Press