PERIORBITAL DARK CIRCLES Periorbital dark circles ( also known as dark circles , infraorbital venous stasis or periorbital hyperpigmentation ) are dark blemishes around the eyes .
There are many causes of this symptom , including heredity and bruising .
CAUSES ALLERGIES , ASTHMA , AND ECZEMA Section::::Causes .
Section::::Allergies , asthma , and eczema .
Any condition that causes the eyes to itch can contribute to darker circles due to rubbing or scratching the skin around them .
Hay fever sufferers in particular will notice under - eye " smudges " during the height of the allergy season .
MEDICATIONS Section::::Medications .
Any medications that cause blood vessels to dilate can cause circles under the eyes to darken .
Because the skin under the eyes is very delicate , any increased blood flow shows through the skin .
ANEMIA Section::::Anemia .
The lack of nutrients in the diet , or the lack of a balanced diet , can contribute to the discoloration of the area under the eyes .
It is believed that iron deficiency can cause dark circles as well .
Iron deficiency is the most common type of anemia and this condition is a sign that not enough oxygen is getting to the body tissues .
The skin can also become more pale during pregnancy and menstruation ( due to lack of iron ) , allowing the underlying veins under the eyes to become more visible .
FATIGUE Section::::Fatigue .
A lack of sleep and mental fatigue can cause paleness of the skin , allowing the blood underneath the skin to become more visible and appear more blue or darker .
AGE Section::::Age .
Dark circles are likely to become more noticeable and permanent with age .
This is because as people get older , their skin loses collagen , becoming thinner and more translucent .
Circles may also gradually begin to appear darker in one eye than the other as a result of some habitual facial expressions , such as an uneven smile .
PERIORBITAL HYPERPIGMENTATION
Section::::Periorbital hyperpigmentation .
Periorbital hyperpigmentation is the official name for when there is more melanin produced around the eyes than is usual , giving them a darker color .
DIAGNOSIS TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
At one time , Hydroquinone solution was often mixed in an oil - free moisturizer that acted like a skin bleach .
However the use of hydroquinone for skin whitening has been banned in European countries due to health concerns .
In 2006 , the United States Food and Drug Administration revoked its approval of hydroquinone for over the counter preparations warning that it may cause cancer or have many other detrimental effects .
The use of hydroquinone skin - whitening products can be toxic , harmful or lethal for humans .
Modern treatments include topical creams that are marketed for the condition ( e.g. L'Oreal , Olay , Skin Doctors etc . ) .
Various ingredients have been researched , developed and included in these creams .
For example , recently , chemical compounds called alpha hydroxy acids ( AHAs ) have been added as a beneficial ingredient to creams for dark circles .
Specialist treatments including laser and intense pulsed light skin surgery can also be used .
SEE ALSO * Periorbital puffiness REFERENCES