CORSAGE
A corsage is a small bouquet of flowers worn on a woman 's dress or around her wrist for a formal occasion .
Traditionally , they are given to her by her date .
Today , corsages are most commonly seen at homecomings , proms , and similar formal events .
* The corsage is worn on a young woman 's clothing or wrist for a homecoming celebration or other formal occasions such as prom in some schools around the world .
*
In some countries , corsages are worn by the mothers and grandmothers of the bride and groom at a wedding ceremony .
*
In some cases , young girls may wear a corsage to a father - daughter dance , and the father may also wear a boutonnière .
Sometimes incorrectly called corsages , flowers worn by men are called buttonholes or boutonnières .
At school events such as homecoming or prom , the couple traditionally coordinates the corsage and boutonnière with one other , signifying that the couple is paired together and separating themselves from other guests or groups .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although today the term corsage refers to any small bouquet of flowers that a woman wears , the tradition of wearing them pinned to clothing dates as far back as Ancient Greece , when small bunches of fragrant flowers and herbs were worn at weddings to ward off evil spirits .
During the 16th and 17th centuries , corsages and boutonnieres may have been a part of daily life to prevent disease and to ward off evil spirits , but over time , they became special - occasion pieces .
The word corsage comes from the French term bouquet de corsage , meaning " a bouquet of the bodice " which was traditionally worn by women to weddings and funerals .
Eventually , the term shortened to corsage .
In the early 19th century , corsages were regarded as a courting gift and were often given at formal dances .
Traditionally , the gentleman would bring a gift of flowers for his date 's parents and would select one of the flowers to give to his date , which would then be carried or attached to her clothing , usually on the shoulder .
During the 1950s , some corsages were made with fruit and would be seen on hats for decoration .
As dress styles changed , pinning the corsage to the dress became impractical , and wrist corsages became the norm .
Today 's corsages are still very similar to those made in previous decades , although they are much smaller now .
It is still customary for a male to give his female date a corsage when attending a formal dance , but they are also sometimes given to a daughter attending a formal event by her parents or worn by the mothers and grandmothers of the bride and groom at a wedding .
Flowers used should be complementary in color to the attire , and corsages and boutonnières should be coordinated to indicate that a couple is attending the event together .
Corsages are often dried and pressed to be preserved as mementos .
HOMECOMING AND PROM Section::::Homecoming and prom .
When attending a school formal or prom , providing a corsage for a prom date signifies consideration and generosity , as the corsage is meant to symbolize and honor the person wearing it .
Corsages are usually worn around a prom date 's wrist ; alternatively , they may be pinned on her dress or
a modified nosegay can be carried in her hand .
The colors of the flowers are usually chosen to complement the dress or to add color to the couple , creating a unifying look .
Prom couples may wish to go together to choose the flowers for a custom - made corsage or boutonnière .
Traditionally , the male presents a corsage or nosegay to the female as a gift , while the female would provide the boutonnière and pin it on the male 's shirt or jacket .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Corsages can be made from a single flower or a small bunch of flowers , and a variety of flowers can be used .
The following table shows some of the main flowers and accents used to create a custom - made corsage and that can be included in a nosegay and boutonnière . !
Main flowers !
Fillers and accents !
Extras Spray roses ( sweetheart roses ) Gypsophilia ( baby 's breath )
Artificial leaves Standard roses Solidago Gems
Orchids
Wax flower Beads
Carnations
Seeded eucalyptus Ribbon Mini calla lilies Asters Pearl wristband Succulents
Hypericum
Bracelet Freesia
Chamomile
Glitter
Daisies
Mums TOOLS Section::::Tools .
The style and design of a corsage may vary depending on the event .
Younger generations tend to use wrist corsages , which may vary in style and size depending on the wearer .
The more traditional option is a corsage pinned on the shoulder of a woman 's dress .
This style often gets confused with a boutonnière .
The main difference is the size and the number of flowers used .
If a wrist corsage is chosen for an event , it can be made using wire and floral tape or floral glue .
The wire method is recommended for pin - on corsages because the wire will support the stems or flower bulbs .
Glue can be added to hold the flowers together if the wire and tape are not sufficient . !
Wrist corsage !
Pin - on corsage Flowers
Flowers Floral glue Floral wire
Floral tape Floral tape
Floral wire
SEE ALSO
* Boutonnière * Floristry * Nosegay REFERENCES