STATE OF EMERGENCY IN INDIA
A state of emergency in India refers to a period of governance under an altered constitutional setup that can be proclaimed by the President of India , when he / she perceives grave threats to the nation from internal and external sources or from financial situations of crisis .
Under the advice of the cabinet of ministers and using the powers vested in him / her largely by Part XVIII of the Constitution of India , the President can overrule many provisions of the constitution , which guarantee fundamental rights to the citizens of India and acts governing devolution of powers to the states which form the federation .
In the history of independent India , there were three periods during which a state of emergency was need to have existed .
* Between 26 October 1962 to 10 January 1968 during the India - China war — " the security of India " having been declared " threatened by external aggression " .
*
* Between 3 December 1971 to 21 March 1977 originally proclaimed during the Indo Pakistan war , and later extended along with the third proclamation — " the security of India " having been declared " threatened by external aggression " .
*
* Between 25 June 1975 to 21 March 1977 under controversial circumstances of political instability under Indira Gandhi 's prime ministership — " the security of India " having been declared " threatened by internal disturbances " .
*
The phrase Emergency period used loosely , when referring to the political history of India , often refers to the third and the most controversial of the three occasions .
The President can declare three types of emergencies : * National emergency * State emergency * Financial emergency
NATIONAL EMERGENCY UNDER ARTICLE 352 Section::::National emergency under article 352 .
National emergency can be declared on the basis of external aggression or armed rebellion in the whole of India or a part of its territory .
Such an emergency was declared in India in 1962 ( China war ) , 1971 ( Pakistan war ) , and 1975 ( declared by Indira Gandhi ) .
The President can declare such an emergency only on the basis of a written request by the Cabinet headed by the Prime Minister .
Such a proclamation must be laid before both houses of Parliament , and the state of emergency expires after one month unless approved within that time by both houses sitting and voting separately .
However , if the Lok Sabha ( the lower house ) has been dissolved or dissolution takes place in the state of emergency , and the Rajya Sabha approves of the state of emergency , the deadline for the Lok Sabha is extended until thirty days after that house reconstituted .
According to Article 352(6 ) , approval by either house requires a special majority : those in favour of the motion must be two thirds of those present and voting , and amount to a majority of the entire membership of that house .
A Parliamentary resolution extends the state of emergency for up to six months , and it can be extended indefinitely by further resolutions in six - monthly increments .
During a national emergency , many Fundamental Rights of Indian citizens can be suspended .
The six freedoms under Right to Freedom are automatically suspended .
By contrast , the Right to Life and Personal Liberty can not be suspended according to the original Constitution .
In January 1977 , during the emergency declared controversially by Indira Gandhi , the government decided to suspend even the Right to Life and Personal Liberty by dispensing with Habeas corpus .
Justice Hans Raj Khanna defended the Right to Life and asked : " Life is also mentioned in Article 21 and would Government argument extend to it also ? " .
The Attorney General observed : " Even if life was taken away illegally , courts are helpless " .
A national emergency modifies the federal system of government to a unitary one by granting Parliament the power to make laws on the 66 subjects of the State List ( which contains subjects on which the state governments can make laws ) .
Also , all state money bills are referred to the Parliament for its approval .
During an emergency , the term of the Lok Sabha can be successively extended by intervals of up to one year , but not beyond six months after the state of emergency has been revoked .
STATE
EMERGENCY UNDER ARTICLE 356 Section::::State Emergency under Article 356 .
A state of emergency can be declared in any state of India ( except Jammu and Kashmir ) under article 356 on the recommendation of the governor of the state .
Every state in India except two states , Chhattisgarh and Telangana has been under a state of emergency at some point of time or the other .
The state of emergency is commonly known as ' President 's Rule ' .
If the President is satisfied , based on the report of the Governor of the concerned state or from other sources , that the governance in a state can not be carried out according to the provisions in the Constitution , he may declare an emergency in the state .
Such an emergency must be approved by the Parliament within a period of two months .
It is imposed for an initial period of six months and can last for a maximum period of three years with repeated parliamentary approval every six months .
The 42nd amendment act of 1976 extended the initial time duration of state emergency from 6 months to 1 year .
Subsequently , 44th CAA 1978 restored the 1-year period back to 6 months .
Originally , the maximum period of operation of state emergency was 3 years .
This 3-year period was divided into 1 year of ordinary period and 2 years of extra ordinary period for which certain conditions are to be fulfilled .
Therefore , from now on after every 1 year Parliament needs to approve the same .
If the emergency has to be extended for more than three years , it can only be done by a constitutional amendment , as has happened in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir .
During such an emergency , the President can take over the entire work of the executive , and the Governor administers the state in the name of the President .
The Legislative Assembly can be dissolved or may remain in suspended animation .
The Parliament makes laws on the 66 subjects of the state list ( see National emergency for explanation ) .
All money bills have to be referred to the Parliament for approval .
In this occasion ministers of state legislature do not perform actions in state .
FINANCIAL EMERGENCY
UNDER ARTICLE 360 Section::::Financial Emergency Under Article 360 .
If the President is satisfied that there is an economic situation in which the financial stability or credit of India is threatened , he or she can declare financial emergency .
Such an emergency must be approved by the Parliament within two months .
It has never been declared .
Such a situation had arisen but was avoided by putting the gold assets of India as collateral for foreign credit .
In case of a financial emergency , the President can reduce the salaries of all government officials , including judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts .
All money bills passed by the State legislatures are submitted to the President for his approval .
He can direct the state to observe certain principles ( economy measures ) relating to financial matters ; but fundamental rights can not be suspended .
REFERENCES
* State of Emergency law