PETE THE PUP Pete the Pup ( original , 1924 – June 1930 ; second Pete , September 9 , 1929 – January 28 , 1946 ) was a character in Hal Roach 's Our Gang comedies ( later known as The Little Rascals ) during the 1930s .
Otherwise known as " Pete , the dog with the ring around his eye " , or simply " Petey " .
He was well known for having a circled eye which was added by Hollywood make - up artist Max Factor and credited as an oddity in Ripley 's Believe It or Not .
The original Pete ( sired by " Tudor 's Black Jack " ) was a UKC registered American Pit Bull Terrier named " Pal , the Wonder Dog " , and had a natural ring almost completely around his right eye ; dye was used to finish it off .
HISTORY Section::::History .
When he was about six months old , Pal the Wonder Dog made a cameo appearance in the Harold Lloyd film The Freshman , in 1925 .
Pal first started out as " Tige " in the Buster Brown series in the 1920s .
It was during this time that he acquired the circled eye , and when he was recruited to appear in the Our Gang comedies later that year , Hal Roach simply left it on , creating one of the most recognized dogs in film history .
Trainer and owner Lt .
Harry Lucenay used one of Pal 's offspring as Pete in the series after Pal was poisoned and died in 1930 .
The dog , named Lucenay 's Peter , was bred by A. A. Keller .
The second Pete looked very similar to the first Pete but was a mirror image ; the circle around first Pete 's right eye was around the left eye of his son , the second Pete .
The second Pete appeared as a puppy on Pups Is Pups and was nearly full - grown on his second appearance ,
School 's Out .
The second Pete 's last Our Gang appearance was The Pooch in 1933 .
The plot had a dog catcher who attempts to catch Pete and euthanise him , but is unsuccessful .
After Lucenay was fired from the Our Gang series in 1932 , he retired Peter to Atlantic City , where he was photographed with children at the Steel Pier .
Beginning with Hook and Ladder ( filmed the same year ) , an unrelated dog played Pete , after which , various unrelated dogs would play the role through 1938 .
In the 1982 cartoon series produced by Hanna - Barbera , he was voiced by Peter Cullen .
In the 1994 feature film remake of The Little Rascals , Pete is an American Bulldog , and in the 2014 movie The Little Rascals Save the Day , Pete is a mutt .
A parody of Pete appeared briefly in the Bob Hope short Watch the Birdie , produced by competitor ,
Warner Bros. DEATH Section::::Death .
Roach used a number of unrelated dogs to portray Pete in Our Gang until 1938 .
Lucenay 's Peter continued on and died of old age on January 28 , 1946 , in Los Angeles , California , at age 16 years/4 months , two years after the Our Gang series ended .
Pete is buried at Los Angeles Pet Memorial Park at Calabasas , Los Angeles County , California , United States .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pal The Wonder Dog
And Pete
* Pal the wonder dog - online pedigree REFERENCES