MOTOR CORTEX
The motor cortex is the region of the cerebral cortex involved in the planning , control , and execution of voluntary movements .
Classically the motor cortex is an area of the frontal lobe located in the posterior precentral gyrus immediately anterior to the central sulcus .
COMPONENTS OF THE MOTOR CORTEX Section::::Components of the motor cortex .
The motor cortex can be divided into three areas : 1 .
The primary motor cortex is the main contributor to generating neural impulses that pass down to the spinal cord and control the execution of movement .
However , some of the other motor areas in the brain also play a role in this function .
It is located on the anterior paracentral lobule on the medial surface .
2 .
The premotor cortex is responsible for some aspects of motor control , possibly including the preparation for movement , the sensory guidance of movement , the spatial guidance of reaching , or the direct control of some movements with an emphasis on control of proximal and trunk muscles of the body .
Located anterior to the primary motor cortex .
3 .
The supplementary motor area ( or SMA ) , has many proposed functions including the internally generated planning of movement , the planning of sequences of movement , and the coordination of the two sides of the body such as in bi - manual coordination .
Located on the midline surface of the hemisphere anterior to the primary motor cortex .
*
The posterior parietal cortex is sometimes also considered to be part of the group of motor cortical areas ; however it is best to regard it as an association cortex rather than motor .
It is thought to be responsible for transforming multisensory information into motor commands , and to be responsible for some aspects of motor planning , in addition to many other functions that may not be motor related .
*
The primary somatosensory cortex , especially the part called area 3a , which lies directly against the motor cortex , is sometimes considered to be functionally part of the motor control circuitry .
Other brain regions outside the cerebral cortex are also of great importance to motor function , most notably the cerebellum , the basal ganglia , pedunculopontine nucleus and the red nucleus , as well as other subcortical motor nuclei .
THE PREMOTOR CORTEX Section::::The premotor cortex .
In the earliest work on the motor cortex , researchers recognized only one cortical field involved in motor control .
Alfred Walter Campbell was the first to suggest that there might be two fields , a " primary " motor cortex and an " intermediate precentral " motor cortex .
His reasons were largely based on cytoarchitectonics , or the study of the appearance of the cortex under a microscope .
The primary motor cortex contains cells with giant cell bodies known as " Betz cells " .
These cells were mistakenly thought to be the main outputs from the cortex , sending fibers to the spinal cord .
It has since been found that Betz cells account for about 2 - 3 % of the projections from the cortex to the spinal cord , or about 10 % of the projections from the primary motor cortex to the spinal cord .
The specific function of the Betz cells that distinguishes them from other output cells of the motor cortex remains unknown , but they continue to be used as a marker for the primary motor cortex .
Other researchers , such as Vogt and Vogt and Otfrid Foerster also suggested that motor cortex was divided into a primary motor cortex ( area 4 , according to Brodmann 's naming scheme ) and a higher - order motor cortex ( area 6 according to Korbinian Brodmann ) .
Wilder Penfield notably disagreed and suggested that there was no functional distinction between area 4 and area 6 .
In his view both were part of the same map , though area 6 tended to emphasize the muscles of the back and neck .
Woolsey who studied the motor map in monkeys also believed there was no distinction between primary motor and premotor .
M1 was the name for the proposed single map that encompassed both the primary motor cortex and the premotor cortex .
Although sometimes " M1 " and " primary motor cortex " are used interchangeably , strictly speaking , they derive from different conceptions of motor cortex organization .
Despite the views of Penfield and Woolsey , a consensus emerged that area 4 and area 6 had sufficiently different functions that they could be considered different cortical fields .
Fulton helped to solidify this distinction between a primary motor cortex in area 4 and a premotor cortex in area 6 .
As Fulton pointed out , and as all subsequent research has confirmed , both primary motor and premotor cortex project directly to the spinal cord and are capable of some direct control of movement .
Fulton showed that when the primary motor cortex is damaged in an experimental animal , movement soon recovers ; when the premotor cortex is damaged , movement soon recovers ; when both are damaged , movement is lost and the animal can not recover .
The premotor cortex is now generally divided into four sections .
First it is divided into an upper ( or dorsal ) premotor cortex and a lower ( or ventral ) premotor cortex .
Each of these is further divided into a region more toward the front of the brain ( rostral premotor cortex ) and a region more toward the back ( caudal premotor cortex ) .
A set of acronyms are commonly used : PMDr ( premotor dorsal , rostral ) , PMDc , PMVr , PMVc .
Some researchers use a different terminology .
Field 7 or F7 denotes PMDr ; F2 = PMDc ; F5 = PMVr ; F4 = PMVc .
PMDc is often studied with respect to its role in guiding reaching .
Neurons in PMDc are active during reaching .
When monkeys are trained to reach from a central location to a set of target locations , neurons in PMDc are active during the preparation for the reach and also during the reach itself .
They are broadly tuned , responding best to one direction of reach and less well to different directions .
Electrical stimulation of the PMDc on a behavioral time scale was reported to evoke a complex movement of the shoulder , arm , and hand that resembles reaching with the hand opened in preparation to grasp .
PMDr may participate in learning to associate arbitrary sensory stimuli with specific movements or learning arbitrary response rules .
In this sense it may resemble the prefrontal cortex more than other motor cortex fields .
It may also have some relation to eye movement .
Electrical stimulation in the PMDr can evoke eye movements and neuronal activity in the PMDr can be modulated by eye movement .
PMVc or F4 is often studied with respect to its role in the sensory guidance of movement .
Neurons here are responsive to tactile stimuli , visual stimuli , and auditory stimuli .
These neurons are especially sensitive to objects in the space immediately surrounding the body , in so - called peripersonal space .
Electrical stimulation of these neurons causes an apparent defensive movement as if protecting the body surface .
This premotor region may be part of a larger circuit for maintaining a margin of safety around the body and guiding movement with respect to nearby objects .
PMVr or F5 is often studied with respect to its role in shaping the hand during grasping and in interactions between the hand and the mouth .
Electrical stimulation of at least some parts of F5 , when the stimulation is applied on a behavioral time scale , evokes a complex movement in which the hand moves to the mouth , closes in a grip , orients such that the grip faces the mouth , the neck turns to align the mouth to the hand , and the mouth opens .
Mirror neurons were first discovered in area F5 in the monkey brain by Rizzolatti and colleagues .
These neurons are active when the monkey grasps an object .
Yet the same neurons become active when the monkey watches an experimenter grasp an object in the same way .
The neurons are therefore both sensory and motor .
Mirror neurons are proposed to be a basis for understanding the actions of others by internally imitating the actions using one 's own motor control circuits .
THE SUPPLEMENTARY MOTOR CORTEX Section::::The supplementary motor cortex .
Penfield described a cortical motor area , the supplementary motor area ( SMA ) , on the top or dorsal part of the cortex .
Each neuron in the SMA may influence many muscles , many body parts , and both sides of the body .
The map of the body in SMA is therefore extensively overlapping .
SMA projects directly to the spinal cord and may play some direct role in the control of movement .
Based on early work using brain imaging techniques in the human brain , Roland suggested that the SMA was especially active during the internally generated plan to make a sequence of movements .
In the monkey brain , neurons in the SMA are active in association with specific learned sequences of movement .
Others have suggested that , because the SMA appears to control movement bilaterally , it may play a role in inter - manual coordination .
Yet others have suggested that , because of the direct projection of SMA to the spinal cord and because of its activity during simple movements , it may play a direct role in motor control rather than solely a high level role in planning sequences .
On the basis of the movements evoked during electrical stimulation , it has been suggested that the SMA may have evolved in primates as a specialist in the part of the motor repertoire involving climbing and other complex locomotion .
Based on the pattern of projections to the spinal cord , it has been suggested that another set of motor areas may lie next to the supplementary motor area , on the medial ( or midline ) wall of the hemisphere .
These medial areas are termed the cingulate motor areas .
Their functions are not yet understood .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1870 Eduard Hitzig and Gustav Fritsch demonstrated that electrical stimulation of certain parts of the dog brain resulted in muscular contraction on the opposite side of the body .
A little later , in 1874 , David Ferrier , working in the laboratory of the West Riding Lunatic Asylum at Wakefield ( at the invitation of its director , James Crichton - Browne ) , mapped the motor cortex in the monkey brain using electrical stimulation .
He found that the motor cortex contained a rough map of the body with the feet at the top ( or dorsal part ) of the brain and the face at the bottom ( or ventral part ) of the brain .
He also found that when electrical stimulation was maintained for a longer time , such as for a second , instead of being discharged over a fraction of a second , then some coordinated , seemingly meaningful movements could be caused , instead of only muscle twitches .
After Ferrier 's discovery , many neuroscientists used electrical stimulation to study the map of the motor cortex in many animals including monkeys , apes , and humans .
One of the first detailed maps of the human motor cortex was described in 1905 by Campbell .
He did autopsies on the brains of amputees .
A person who had lost an arm would over time apparently lose some of the neuronal mass in the part of the motor cortex that normally controls the arm .
Likewise , a person who had lost a leg would show degeneration in the leg part of motor cortex .
In this way the motor map could be established .
In the period between 1919 and 1936 others mapped the motor cortex in detail using electrical stimulation , including the husband and wife team Vogt and Vogt , and the neurosurgeon Foerster .
Perhaps the best - known experiments on the human motor map were published by Penfield in 1937 .
Using a procedure that was common in the 1930s , he examined epileptic patients who were undergoing brain surgery .
These patients were given a local anesthetic , their skulls were opened , and their brains exposed .
Then , electrical stimulation was applied to the surface of the brain to map out the speech areas .
In this way , the surgeon would be able to avoid any damage to speech circuitry .
The brain focus of the epilepsy could then be surgically removed .
During this procedure , Penfield mapped the effect of electrical stimulation in all parts of the cerebral cortex , including motor cortex .
Penfield is sometimes mistakenly considered to be the discoverer of the map in motor cortex .
It was discovered approximately 70 years before his work .
However , Penfield drew a picture of a human - like figure stretched over the cortical surface and used the term " homunculus " ( diminutive of " homo " , Latin for " man " ) to refer to it .
It is perhaps for this reason that his work has become so popular in neuroscience .
THE MOTOR CORTEX MAP Section::::The motor cortex map .
A simple view , that is almost certainly too limited and that dates back to the earliest work on the motor cortex , is that neurons in motor cortex control movement by a feed - forward direct pathway .
In that view , a neuron in motor cortex sends an axon or projection to the spinal cord and forms a synapse on a motor neuron .
The motor neuron sends an axon to a muscle .
When the neuron in cortex becomes active , it causes a muscle contraction .
The greater the activity in motor cortex , the stronger the muscle force .
Each point in motor cortex controls a muscle or a small group of related muscles .
This description is only partly correct .
Most neurons in the motor cortex that project to the spinal cord synapse on interneuron circuitry in the spinal cord , not directly onto motor neurons .
One suggestion is that the direct , cortico - motoneuronal projections are a specialization that allows for the fine control of the fingers .
The view that each point in motor cortex controls a muscle or a limited set of related muscles was debated over the entire history of research on the motor cortex , and was suggested in its strongest and most extreme form by Asanuma on the basis of experiments in cats and monkeys using electrical stimulation .
However , almost every other experiment to examine the map , including the classic work of Ferrier and of Penfield showed that each point in motor cortex influences a range of muscles and joints .
The map is greatly overlapping .
The overlap in the map is generally greater in the premotor cortex and supplementary motor cortex , but even the map in the primary motor cortex controls muscles in an extensively overlapped manner .
Many studies have demonstrated the overlapping representation of muscles in the motor cortex .
It is believed that as an animal learns a complex movement repertoire , the motor cortex gradually comes to coordinate among muscles .
The clearest example of the coordination of muscles into complex movement in the motor cortex comes from the work of Graziano and colleagues on the monkey brain .
They used electrical stimulation on a behavioral time scale , such as for half a second instead of the more typical hundredth of a second .
They found that this type of stimulation of the monkey motor cortex often evoked complex , meaningful actions .
For example , stimulation of one site in cortex would cause the hand to close , move to the mouth , and the mouth to open .
Stimulation of another site would cause the hand to open , rotate until the grip faced outward , and the arm to project out as if the animal were reaching .
Different complex movements were evoked from different sites and these movements were mapped in the same orderly manner in all monkeys tested .
Computational models showed that the normal movement repertoire of a monkey , if arranged on a sheet such that similar movements are placed near each other , will result in a map that matches the actual map found in the monkey motor cortex .
This work suggests that the motor cortex does not truly contain a homunculus - type map of the body .
Instead , the deeper principle may be a rendering of the movement repertoire onto the cortical surface .
To the extent that the movement repertoire breaks down partly into the actions of separate body parts , the map contains a rough and overlapping body arrangement noted by researchers over the past century .
A similar organization by typical movement repertoire has been reported in the posterior parietal cortex of monkeys and galagos and in the motor cortex of rats and mice .
EVOLUTION OF THE MOTOR CORTEX Section::::Evolution of the motor cortex .
Mammals evolved from mammal - like reptiles over 200 million years ago .
These early mammals developed several novel brain functions most likely due to the novel sensory processes that were necessary for the nocturnal niche that these mammals occupied .
These animals most likely had a somatomotor cortex , where somatosensory information and motor information were processed in the same cortical region .
This allowed for the acquisition of only simple motor skills , such as quadrupedal locomotion and striking of predators or prey .
Placental mammals evolved a discrete motor cortex about 100 mya .
According to the principle of proper mass , " the mass of neural tissue controlling a particular function is appropriate to the amount of information processing involved in performing the function .
"
This suggests that the development of a discrete motor cortex was advantageous for placental mammals , and the motor skills that these organisms acquired were more complex than their early - mammalian ancestors .
Further , this motor cortex was necessary for the arboreal lifestyles of our primate ancestors .
Enhancements to the motor cortex ( and the presence of opposable thumbs and stereoscopic vision ) were evolutionarily selected to prevent primates from making mistakes in the dangerous motor skill of leaping between tree branches ( Cartmill , 1974 ; Silcox , 2007 ) .
As a result of this pressure , the motor system of arboreal primates has a disproportionate degree of somatotopic representation of the hands and feet , which is essential for grasping ( Nambu , 2011 ; Pons et al . , 1985 ; Gentilucci et al . , 1988 ) .
SEE ALSO
* Motor skill
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Canavero S. Textbook of therapeutic cortical stimulation .
New York :
Nova Science , 2009
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Motor Cortex