CLIP ( FIREARMS )
A clip is a device that is used to store multiple rounds of ammunition together as a unit , ready for insertion into the magazine or cylinder of a firearm .
This speeds up the process of loading and reloading the firearm as several rounds can be loaded at once , rather than one round being loaded at a time .
Several different types of clips exist , most of which are made of inexpensive stamped sheet metal and are intended to be disposable , though they are often re - used .
Charging clips has no moving parts and is usually made of stamped sheet metal .
Detachable magazines are often incorrectly referred to as clips .
TYPES STRIPPER Section::::Types .
Section::::Stripper .
A stripper clip or charger is a speedloader that holds several cartridges together in a single unit for easier loading of a firearm 's magazine .
A stripper clip is used only for loading the magazine and is not necessary for the firearm to function .
It is called a ' stripper ' clip because , after the bolt is opened and the stripper clip is placed in position ( generally by placing it in a slot on either the receiver or bolt ) , the cartridges are pressed down , thereby ' stripping ' them off the stripper clip and into the magazine .
The clip is then either removed and tossed away , or the bolt is thrown forward , expending the clip without the need of prior removal .
A few examples of designs that allow for stripper clip use include the Mauser C96 , Lee - Enfield , Mosin - Nagant , SKS and the Vz . 58 .
Detachable magazines may also be loaded with stripper clips , provided they have a special guide attached , such as an M14 or an M16 .
EN BLOC Section::::En bloc .
Several rifle designs utilize an en bloc clip to load the firearm .
With this design , both the cartridges and the clip are inserted as a unit into a fixed magazine within the rifle , and the clip is usually ejected or falls from the rifle upon firing or chambering of the last round .
The en bloc clip was invented by Ferdinand Mannlicher for use in his Model 1885 and Model 1888 rifle Other rifles utilizing en - bloc clips include the German Gewehr 88 ( since 1905 replaced by stripper clips ) , the Mexican Mondragón , the French Berthier Mle 1890 and RSC Mle 1917 , the Italian M1870/87 Vetterli - Vitali and M1891 Carcano , the various ( Romanian , Dutch , Portuguese ) turnbolt Mannlichers , the Austro - Hungarian straight - pull Steyr - Mannlicher M1895 , the Hungarian FÉG 35 M , and the US M1895 Lee Navy , M1 Garand and Pedersen T1E3 .
Original Austrian Mannlicher clips were often uni - directional , but already the Gewehr 88 and subsequently the M1891 Carcano used symmetrical clips .
John Pedersen at first developed an irreversible clip for his rifle , later he redesigned the clip to be reversible .
This design was also utilized for the competing designs by John Garand .
MOON AND HALF - MOON Section::::Moon and half - moon .
A moon clip is a ring - shaped or stellate piece of metal designed to hold a full cylinder of ammunition for a revolver ( generally six rounds ) together as a unit .
Therefore , instead of loading or extracting one round at a time , a full cylinder of ammunition or spent cases can be loaded or extracted at once , speeding the loading process .
A similar device known as the half - moon clip is semi - circular and designed to hold a half cylinder of ammunition ( generally three rounds)—in which case two clips are necessary to fully load the cylinder .
Such devices have most often been used to chamber rimless semi - automatic pistol cartridges in a revolver , although they can be used for rimmed cartridges to allow for faster reloading .
SEE ALSO * Speedloader REFERENCES