SKUNKS AS
PETS
Although capable of living indoors with humans similarly to cats or dogs , pet skunks are relatively rare , partly due to restrictive laws and the complexity of their care .
Pet skunks are mainly kept in the United States , Canada , Germany , the Netherlands , Poland , and Italy .
In the United States , pet skunks can be purchased from licensed animal shelters , non - profit skunk educational organizations such as the American Domestic Skunk Association , Inc. , or breeders with a permit from the U.S. Department of Agriculture 's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service .
Baby skunk availability peaks during springtime , immediately following the skunk mating season .
Some large fur farms sell surplus skunks to pet stores .
Skunks are probably best known for their ability to spray foul - smelling fluid as a defense against predators .
Most wild skunks spray only when injured or attacked , as a defense mechanism .
The mercaptan - emitting scent glands are usually removed in pet skunks at about four weeks of age .
Since 2006 , this removal practice has been illegal in the UK .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Skunks are native to the Americas and are first noted in historical accounts of Christopher Columbus .
Skunks were reportedly kept as pets by some Native American nations .
Farmers valued domesticated skunks for their ability to kill rodents and other pests .
Skunk pelts were also used for coats and frequently passed off as marten fur .
Before the 1950s , they were sold under ambiguous names such as " American sable " and " Alaskan sable " .
The courts finally ruled that the customer must be informed of any purchase that contained skunk parts .
The skunk fur market subsequently collapsed .
Since then , skunks have been mainly bred as pets .
In the 20th century , most U.S. states outlawed the keeping of wild animals as part of their efforts to stem the spread of rabies .
Only about one - third of states continued to allow domestic skunks .
In the 1990s , skunk enthusiasts began establishing mailing lists and organized for skunk law reform .
In the 2000s , similar initiatives took place in Canada .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
Skunks are sensitive , intelligent animals , and like all intelligent animals , temperament varies with each individual .
Skunks tend to be highly curious and will open cupboards that are left unlocked .
Some owners have noticed skunks smelling something that was spilled on the carpet long ago , and attempting to dig to find out what is buried there .
Like ferrets , their curiosity can lead them into danger , especially if they crawl inside reclining chairs or other machinery .
SKUNK CARE
HANDLING
SKUNKS Section::::Skunk care .
Section::::Handling skunks .
To play with a baby pet skunk , it is possible to get on one 's hands and knees , and playfully tap the floor with the fingers of one hand , while moving the hand toward the skunk .
They quickly get the idea , and will respond with a sort of cat - like rearing up and coming down on their front feet .
However , as they make their move , they will be looking you straight in the eyes , while aiming , with tail raised high , their potent " weapon " directly at your eyes simultaneously .
( They do the same in the wild when threatened ; baby skunks are trained in this manner by their mothers . )
It is better to avoid playing rough with baby skunks , or they may become aggressive and uncooperative as they get older .
Bare hands can be used for loving and cuddling the skunk , but a stuffed toy or hand puppet should be used when playing with them due to their sharp teeth and extremely long fangs .
As with all animals , spanking or hitting a skunk is not recommended , since it will cause them to become vengeful or hand - shy .
A squirt of water from a spray bottle may be helpful .
HOUSEBREAKING
Section::::Housebreaking .
Most skunks can be housebroken by corner training .
After they choose a corner , a litter pan with unscented litter can be placed there .
If the skunk misses the litter pan , after cleanup , the area should be saturated with plain white vinegar to remove the scent , so that they will not return to that spot .
After the skunk 's toilet has been established , it can be moved about four inches a day to a different location .
The skunk may or may not follow .
If it does not follow , it may be necessary to give in , let the skunk have that corner , and block the view with a chair or bookcase placed in the corner or some other decorative idea .
For covered cat litter boxes , it will probably be necessary to cut a larger opening for the skunk .
With any litter pan , bear in mind that regular cleaning is necessary since skunks will avoid a dirty litter box .
Letting skunks outside by themselves is risky since , like ferrets , they lack a homing instinct and can easily get lost .
De - scented skunks lack their most powerful defense against predators such as coyotes and foxes .
Their nearsightedness also makes them susceptible to becoming roadkill .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Skunks need a wider variety of food than most pets .
They tend to have a voracious appetite , making obesity a common problem .
It is important not to overfeed them .
Some types of food , such as chocolate , are known to be harmful to almost all animals .
The topic of what to feed skunks is very controversial , according to Owners of Pet Skunks .
Mary Kaye Ashley 's book , A Comprehensive Guide to Raising a Pet Skunk , recommends a ratio of 50 percent vegetables , 40 percent Skunkie Delight , and 10 percent other whole foods .
Skunkie Delight is a homemade blend of a cooked grain ( millet , oats , barley , or brown rice ) , raw ground turkey , eggs , vegetable oil , and a variety of vitamin and mineral powders .
Jane Bone 's Skunk Stuff describes a diet of vegetables , fruits , dairy , yogurt , vitamins and minerals , fiber , carbohydrates , and eggs .
Skunk Haven disagrees with this diet , and recommends their own sample diet .
Skunk expert Mary Kaye Ashley , as well as the American Domestic Skunk Association , Inc. also disagree with this diet .
Eugie and Matthew Foster have tried a lacto - ovum vegetarian diet with good results , with rice and beans with yogurt , cottage cheese , the occasional boiled egg , and unsalted peanuts for protein needs , and including nutritional yeast , cold - pressed safflower oil , and various vitamin supplements ( including taurine and D ) in addition to vegetables and fruit .
Lynnda Butler , president of Florida Skunks as Pets , believes a small amount of sugar can be beneficial for skunks and recommends an eighth of a graham cracker or vanilla wafer a day .
Others ( e.g. Skunk Haven ) eschew feeding skunks processed sugar altogether , citing the risk of diabetes .
Skunk expert Mary Kaye Ashley , as well as the American Domestic Skunk Association , also strongly disagree with the feeding of any form of processed sugar products .
Per Ms. Ashley , natural sugars ( such as a small amount of fruit ) can be included in the diet several times a week provided that the skunk does not suffer from hypoglycemia or diabetes .
Skunks generally do not drink a great deal of water , but clean water should always be available .
VETERINARY CARE
Section::::Veterinary care .
Baby skunks from the pet store generally have not had any medical treatment other than scent gland removal , and will require spaying or neutering , shots , and worming .
They will need to be tested for coccidia and other protozoa as well as parasites .
Skunks also need to have regular yearly checkups .
Dr. Frank Krupka and Skunk Haven have developed a blood panel to show if supplements or changes in diet are needed , and recommend a blood panel as part of a yearly check up .
Veterinary understanding of skunks is rather limited , since scientists have not conducted as much research on skunks as they have on more common pets .
Skunks do not always respond to medicines the same way as cats or dogs .
As a result , there is considerable disagreement about how best to treat them .
Some veterinarians say they are related to hamsters and treat them as such .
However , hamsters are from the Rodent order while Skunks are in the family Mephitidae of the order Carnivora .
This is the same order as cats , dogs , and ferrets .
There are several different pet skunk organizations giving out conflicting advice on skunk care .
Particularly in the medical realm , it is wise to consult multiple sources rather than rely on any one source of information from the Internet .
Spaying / neutering Males should be neutered between 3 and 4 months of age .
Females should be spayed between 4 and 6 months of age .
Vaccinations
Most skunk organizations recommend Purevax Distemper and Rabies vaccinations .
Only distemper has been shown to cause disease or illness in skunks .
Other vaccinations created for dogs and cats are modified live vaccinations and may cause actual illness in skunks .
Declawing Skunks should not be declawed , since they use their claws to handle food .
Instead , their claws should be trimmed occasionally .
Skunks have " digging " claws like dogs , as opposed to gripping claws like cats .
Roundworms
Many skunks have died from roundworms .
Baylisascaris columnaris is the species that infests skunks most commonly .
Baylisascaris eggs can remain viable in the environment for many years , despite hot or freezing weather or certain harsh chemicals .
Skunks can be infested with roundworms for several weeks before eggs begin to be shed in feces .
It is common for new skunks to have roundworms , which may be too early in development to be detected by fecal tests .
Skunk experts agree that all new skunks need to be treated for roundworms , and that more than one treatment is needed .
Diagnostic Parasitologist Matt Bolek recommends that " A deworming program should probably start at 7 - 8 weeks of age and deworm biweekly for 3 - 4 treatments " .
The frequency with which adults need to be treated for roundworms is controversial :
* Skunk Haven as well as skunk expert Mary Kaye Ashley and ADSA ,
Inc. recommend : " After the first series of wormings , you should worm every 4 - 6 months " .
* Owners of Pet Skunks recommends " over the counter worm medication given every couple of months and a yearly stool sample check at the vet " .
* Skunk expert Jane Bone recommends that all skunks be wormed once a month .
However this information is dated and is no longer believe to be the best method of controlling parasites in skunks .
Deworming should be done as needed and not on a routine basis due to certain parasites and worms becoming resistant to the dewormers .
The consensus is that Evict or Nemex 2 are good over - the - counter wormers for skunks .
A veterinarian may have more powerful wormers .
Safe , natural alternatives include seeds from cantaloupe , fig juice or cloves , according to Jane Bone .
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Section::::General considerations .
Overall , caring for skunks is more complicated and challenging than raising other pets due to their rarity .
The difficulty in finding a veterinarian with experience treating skunks , the conflicting advice offered by different pet skunk organizations , and the scarcity of scientific knowledge about skunk physiology make it necessary for many skunk owners to fend for themselves .
In addition , some skunks - especially those that were mistreated - may bite , refuse to use a litter box , or exhibit other negative behaviors , according to Jane Bone and Skunk Haven .
According to James Furniss , a good skunk owner needs to be a do - it - yourself - er and willing to put in a lot of effort .
There are , however , relocation options if a pet skunk does not work out , including skunk shelters .
RABIES Section::::Rabies .
Skunks and other mammals can contract rabies by being bitten by an infected animal or eating the carcass of an infected animal .
Although it is quite rare for domesticated skunks to get rabies , there have been many unfortunate cases in which an uninfected pet skunk bit a person , and then was euthanized by animal control personnel so that its brain cells could be tested for rabies .
In the United States , there is no government - approved rabies vaccine or quarantine period for skunks .
In Canada , Imrab 3 was used in a study for off - label use as a skunk rabies vaccine and to date it is not approved for skunk use .
If a skunk nips or bites , and the owner can produce proof of vaccination , a 2-week quarantine is required , according to Vivianne Chernoff of Skunks as Pets Canada .
Many countries , such as Japan , require all newly imported skunks to be quarantined .
In 2003 , The Guardian reported that the UK lacks quarantine kennels licensed to hold skunks .
LEGALITY UNITED KINGDOM Section::::Legality .
Section::::United Kingdom .
It is currently legal to keep skunks as pets in Britain without a license .
With the exception of keepers who intend to house skunks in property owned by their local authority and therefore may be required to seek permission , there is no restriction on a persons ability to keep a skunk as a domestic pet in the UK .
In the United Kingdom , the practice of removing healthy scent glands is considered unethical by the regulatory body responsible for veterinary education and clinical standards .
Since the introduction of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 ( England and Wales ) and Animal Health and Welfare Act 2006 ( Scotland ) , it is an offence to perform any procedure which involves the removal of skunks ' scent glands unless for the purpose of its medical treatment .
This has not prevented skunks from becoming more popular as pets in the UK , according to reports in a number of national newspapers .
In April 2007 the Daily Mail reported that skunks were becoming an increasingly popular pet , with breeders estimating that around 2000 skunks were being housed as domestic pets .
+ Legality of skunk ownership in the United Kingdom !
Country !
Legality !
Legislature !
United Kingdom CANADA Section::::Canada .
Import permits will not be issued for foxes , raccoons and skunks purchased for import to Canada as a personal pet .
POLAND
Section::::Poland .
Polish law considers skunks as normal pets , like cats and dogs .
There are no specific regulations and there is no requirement to register skunks .
There are a few breeders from whom skunks are available .
Prices are vary from around € 150 to € 400 , ( 600 - 1600 Polish zloty ) .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
American laws on skunk ownership vary significantly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .
Most states prohibit keeping skunks as pets .
American skunk dealers earning more than $ 500 a year on the skunk trade are regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( USDA / APHIS ) , which has established three classes of licensed skunk dealers .
A class A license allows one to breed skunks ; a class B license allows one to sell skunks ; and a class C license allows one to display them to the public .
Skunk regulations can change from time to time , so prospective skunk owners may want to check with the Fish and Game Commission or Department of Conservation and Natural Resources in their state .
+ Legality of skunk ownership in the United States !
State !
Legality !
Statute !
Alabama !
Alaska !
Arkansas !
Arizona !
California !
Colorado !
Connecticut !
Delaware !
Florida !
Georgia !
Hawaii !
Idaho !
Illinois !
Indiana !
Iowa !
Kansas !
Kentucky !
Louisiana !
Maine !
Maryland !
Massachusetts !
Michigan !
Minnesota !
Mississippi !
Missouri !
Montana !
Nebraska !
Nevada !
New Hampshire !
New Jersey !
New Mexico !
New York !
North Carolina !
North Dakota !
Ohio !
Oklahoma !
Oregon !
Pennsylvania !
Rhode Island !
South Carolina !
South Dakota !
Tennessee !
Texas !
Utah !
Vermont !
Virginia !
Washington !
West Virginia !
Wisconsin !
Wyoming !
Washington , D.C. POLITICS Section::::Politics .
Several activists are seeking legalization of pet skunks in the jurisdictions where they are currently banned .
Their activities have included supporting bills and testifying before legislative panels .
In 2001 , Del. George W. Owings III introduced a bill in the Maryland legislature to legalize pet skunks in that state .
Several officials spoke in opposition to the measure before the Environmental Matters committee .
Mike Slattery , testifying on behalf of the Maryland Department of Natural Resources , criticized the idea , saying it would encourage " Bambi syndrome " , the tendency to domesticate wild animals .
State health officials pointed out that the bill , HB 91 , required rabies vaccinations when there is no federally approved rabies vaccine for skunks .
Rabies has , in fact , been a key issue in skunk - related legislative debates .
Since wild skunks account for the second - largest number of rabies cases in wildlife in the US , many legislators have been reluctant to allow domestic skunks without an appropriate vaccine on the market .
In addition to the problems at the state level , federal organizations set the policy for dealing with accidental skunk bites , which currently requires euthanizing the animal so rabies tests can be performed .
In February 1990 , a rabies vaccine called Imrab 3 was approved for ferrets .
Many skunk advocates believe the vaccine would also be effective for skunks , and are pushing to have it tested for this use .
They also favor clinical tests to determine the appropriate quarantine / observation period in case of a skunk bite .
This would provide a way to test skunks without the need for euthanasia .
According to Aspen Skunk Rabies Research , part of the reason that this research has not been done yet is the high cost of these clinical trials , which would be difficult for drug companies to recoup .
In the early 2000s , People for Domestic Skunks gathered more than 4,000 signatures for its Nationwide Domestic Skunk Petition .
According to Aspen Skunk Rabies Research , Inc. , the effectiveness of petitions is limited by the fact that many important decisions are made by national organizations .
The National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians ' annual Rabies Compendium sets the procedures for what to do if a skunk bites someone .
In Canada , Mike Freeman of Freeman 's Exotic Skunks was ordered in 1999 by the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources to destroy his entire stock of 100 adult and 700 baby skunks .
Although the agency had approved his farm in 1997 , the 1998 Fish and Wildlife Act outlawed breeding .
Natural Resources Minister John Snobelen ultimately gave him six months to sell or give away the animals in the U.S. , saying , " No one wants to see these animals euthanized and that wo n't have to happen " .
Skunks as Pets Canada leader Vivianne Chernoff and other activists subsequently persuaded the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to legalize importation of pen - bred skunks .
Although NRC does not recognize the CFIA laws , the CFIA assured Chernoff that NRC can not confiscate a micro - chipped skunk whose legality is documented with import papers and a health certificate .
In 2004 , Canadian activists were working on having a tear duct rabies test legalized for skunks .
In the United Kingdom , the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons recommended in 1987 that elective skunk scent gland removal be classified as an unacceptable procedure : The discharge of anal sac contents as a result of fear or other stress is normal , and the removal of normally functioning sacs is not an acceptable procedure .
Infection or other pathological conditions can result in recurring or chronic discharge or in fistula and sinus formation .
Removal in such circumstances is an acceptable therapeutic measure .
Anal sacs are sometimes removed from animals such as the skunk and fox in order to make them more acceptable as domestic animals .
The Working Party does not accept that this is an ethical procedure and considers that anal sacs should not be removed for other than therapeutic reasons .
ORGANIZATIONS Section::::Organizations .
Pet skunk organizations can be a source of useful advice for skunk owners .
Some organizations also hold annual skunk shows .
Prizes are awarded in categories such as Prettiest Tail , Friendliest , Most Talented , etc .
The American Domestic Skunk Association provides the following services to all skunk owners , prospective owners , and interested parties : * Education for Skunk Owners & the General Public * 24-Hour Phone & Web Support
* Skunk Kitten Adoptions
* Rescue , Rehabilitation & Adoption * Skunk Shows & Events * Newsletters & Skunk Care Guide * Research Program Owners of Pet Skunks is a non - profit organization whose mission is to better the lives of captive - bred skunks .
OOPS has an annual picnic and publishes a quarterly newsletter containing informative articles about skunks , human interest stories , puzzles , information on skunk related laws , and regional and national events .
Skunk Haven Skunk Rescue , Shelter , and Education , Inc. is based in Ohio and provides the following services :
* For emergencies , staff are on call 24/7 by phone and/or via the Internet .
* An international network of people helping with rescues .
Teaching new owners about diet , health , and behaviors of their pet skunk .
Also assisting prospective owners to determine if a skunk is a viable pet to fit their lifestyle phone or email , and also through our Yahoo skunk list , SkunkInfo .
*
The shelter has Federal USDA / APHIS and State permits to accept surrendered pet skunks into the shelter and to perform adoptions nationally .
Also , these permits allow SkunkHaven to perform exhibition and education programs .
*
Skunk Haven will provide free Skunk Care brochures to any public or private source upon request .
* Skunk Haven has set blood normals for skunks and has current ongoing collective data being performed by a licensed veterinarian .
*
Skunk Haven also maintains a regularly updated list of legal states .
* The homebase of Skunk Haven , in North Ridgeville , OH , is the home of SkunkFest .
SkunkFest is held each year on the second Saturday in September .
The organization has a newsletter called SkunkNews and a Yahoo discussion list .
*
The homebase is also licensed for rehab / release of wild skunks .
Skunks as Pets has chapters in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Minnesota , North Dakota , Mississippi , New Jersey , Ohio , Oregon , Texas , Canada , and Germany .
REFERENCES