LANUGO Lanugo (; from Latin lana " wool " ) is very thin , soft , usually unpigmented , downy hair that is sometimes found on the body of a fetal or new - born human .
It is the first hair to be produced by the fetal hair follicles , and it usually appears around sixteen weeks of gestation and is abundant by week twenty .
It is normally shed before birth , around seven or eight months of gestation , but is sometimes present at birth .
It disappears on its own within a few weeks .
It is replaced by hair covering the same surfaces , which is called vellus hair .
This hair is thinner and more difficult to see .
The more visible hair that persists into adulthood is called terminal hair .
It forms in specific areas and is hormone - dependent .
OCCURRENCE
IN HUMANS FETAL DEVELOPMENT Section::::Occurrence .
Section::::In humans .
Section::::Fetal development .
During human development , the lanugo grows on fetuses as a normal part of gestation , but it is usually shed and replaced by vellus hair at about thirty - three to thirty - six weeks of gestational age .
As the lanugo is shed from the skin , it is normal for the hair to be consumed by the developing fetus , since it drinks from the amniotic fluid and urinates into its environment .
As a result , lanugo contributes to the new - born baby 's meconium .
The presence of lanugo on new - borns is not necessarily a sign of premature birth .
It is seen on infants born at thirty - nine weeks of gestation , that is , full term .
Lanugo functions as an anchor to hold the vernix caseosa on the skin .
Together they protect the delicate foetal skin from being damaged by the amniotic fluid .
The vernix caseosa also helps to prepare the foetus for life outside the womb .
It provides lubrication for birth and contributes to thermoregulation , prevention of water loss , and innate immunity .
Without the lanugo to anchor the vernix caseosa , these functions would be compromised .
MALNUTRITION Section::::Malnutrition .
Lanugo can be observed in malnourished patients , including those with eating disorders .
When found along with other physical symptoms , for example , lanugo can help a physician make a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa .
TERATOMA Section::::Teratoma .
It is often found in teratomas ( congenital tumours ) .
IN OTHER ANIMALS Section::::In other animals .
Lanugo is also common on other animals .
For example , seals and elephants are often born with a covering of lanugo .
Fetal whales also have lanugo , and is the only time such species show an example of external hair .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photo of lanugo in a human infant , The Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh