SONG STRUCTURE
Song structure or the musical forms of songs in traditional music and music are typically sectional , repeating forms used in songs , such as strophic form and is a part of the songwriting process .
Other common forms include bar form , thirty - two - bar form , verse - chorus form , ternary form , strophic form , and the twelve - bar blues .
Popular music songs traditionally use the same music for each verse or stanza of lyrics ( as opposed to songs that are " through - composed"—an approach used in classical music art songs ) .
Pop and traditional forms can be used even with songs that have structural differences in melodies .
The most common format in modern popular music is introduction ( intro ) , verse , pre - chorus , chorus ( or refrain ) , verse , pre - chorus , chorus , bridge ( " middle eight " ) , verse , chorus and outro .
In rock music styles , notably heavy metal music , there is usually a guitar solo in the song .
In pop music , there may be a guitar solo , or the solo may be performed by a synthesizer player or sax player .
The foundation of popular music is the " verse " and " chorus " structure . "
Pop and rock songs nearly always have both a verse and a chorus .
The primary difference between the two is that when the music of the verse returns , it is almost always given a new set of lyrics , whereas the chorus usually retains the same set of lyrics every time its music appears .
" Both are essential elements , with the verse usually played first .
Exceptions abound , with " She Loves You " by The Beatles being an early example in the rock music genre .
Each verse usually employs the same melody ( possibly with some slight modifications ) , while the lyrics usually change for each verse .
The chorus ( or " refrain " ) usually consists of a melodic and lyrical phrase that repeats .
Pop songs may have an introduction and coda ( " tag " ) , but these elements are not essential to the identity of most songs .
Pop songs often connect the verse and chorus via a bridge , which as its name suggests , is a section that connects the verse and chorus at one or more points in the song .
The verse and chorus are usually repeated throughout a song though the bridge , intro , and coda ( also called an " outro " ) are usually only used once .
Some pop songs may have a solo section , particularly in rock- or blues - influenced pop .
During the solo section , one or more instruments play a melodic line which may be the melody used by the singer , or , in blues or jazz an improvised line .
ELEMENTS INTRODUCTION Section::::Elements .
Section::::Introduction .
The introduction is a unique section that comes at the beginning of the piece .
Generally speaking , an introduction contains just music and no words .
It usually builds up suspense for the listener so when the downbeat drops in , it creates a pleasing sense of release .
The intro also creates the atmosphere of the song .
As such , the rhythm section typically plays in the " feel " of the song that follows .
For example , for a blues shuffle , a band starts playing a shuffle rhythm .
In some songs , the intro is one or more bars of the tonic chord ( the " home " key of the song ) .
With songs , another role of the intro is to give the singer the key of the song .
For this reason , even if an intro includes chords other than the tonic , it generally ends with a cadence , either on the tonic or dominant chord .
The introduction may also be based around the chords used in the verse , chorus , or bridge , or a stock " turnaround " progression may be played , such as the I – vi – ii – V progression ( particularly in jazz influenced pop songs ) .
More rarely , the introduction may begin by suggesting or implying another key .
For example , a song in C Major might begin with an introduction in G Major , which makes the listener think that the song will eventually be in G Major .
A cliche used to indicate to the listener that this G Major section is in fact the dominant chord of another key area is to add the dominant seventh , which in this case would shift the harmony to a G7 chord .
In some cases , an introduction contains only drums or percussion parts that set the rhythm and " groove " for the song .
Alternately the introduction may consist of a solo section sung by the lead singer ( or a group of backup singers ) , or a riff played by an instrumentalist .
The most straightforward , and least risky way to write an introduction is to use a section from the song .
This contains melodic themes from the song , chords from one of the song 's sections , and the beat and style of the song .
However , not all songs have an intro of this type .
Some songs have an intro that does not use any of the material from the song that is to follow .
With this type of intro , the goal is to create interest in the listener and make them unsure of what will happen .
This type of intro could consist of a series of loud , accented chords , punctuated by cymbal , with a bassline beginning near the end , to act as a pitch reference point for the singer .
VERSE Section::::Verse .
In popular music , a verse roughly corresponds to a poetic stanza because it consists of rhyming lyrics most often with an AABB or ABAB rhyme scheme .
When two or more sections of the song have almost identical music but different lyrics , each section is considered one verse .
It is not to be confused with a pre - verse , which is an interlude between the song 's introduction and its opening verse .
Although it is less - common now , the pre - verse technique was popular with the surf music of the 1960s .
Musically , " the verse is to be understood as a unit that prolongs the tonic ...
The musical structure of the verse nearly always recurs at least once with a different set of lyrics .
" The tonic or " home key " chord of a song can be prolonged in a number of ways .
Pop and rock songs often use chords closely related to the tonic , such as iii or vi , to prolong the tonic .
In the key of C Major , the iii chord would be E Minor and the vi chord would be A Minor .
These chords are considered closely related to the tonic because they share chord tones .
For example , the chord e minor includes the notes E and G , both of which are part of the C Major triad .
Similarly , the chord a minor includes the notes C and E , both part of the C Major triad .
Lyrically , " the verse contains the details of the song : the story , the events , images and emotions that the writer wishes to express ...
Each verse will have different lyrics from the others . "
" A verse exists primarily to support the chorus or refrain ... both musically and lyrically . "
A verse of a song , is a repeated sung melody where the words change from use to use ( though not necessarily a great deal ) .
PRE - CHORUS Section::::Pre - chorus .
An optional section that may occur after the verse is the " pre - chorus " .
Also known as a " build " , " channel " , or " transitional bridge " , the pre - chorus functions to connect the verse to the chorus with intermediary material , typically using subdominant ( usually built on the IV chord or ii chord , which in the key of C Major would be an F Major or D minor chord ) or similar transitional harmonies . "
Often , a two - phrase verse containing basic chords is followed by a passage , often harmonically probing , that leads to the full chorus . "
Often , when verse and chorus use the same harmonic structure , the pre - chorus introduces a new harmonic pattern or harmony that prepares the verse chords to transition into the chorus .
For example , if a song is set in C Major , and the songwriter aims to get to a chorus that focuses on the dominant chord ( G Major ) being tonicized ( treated like a " home key " for a short period ) , a chord progression could be used for the pre - chorus that gets the listener ready to hear the chorus ' chord ( G Major ) as an arrival key .
One widely used way to accomplish this is to precede the G Major chord with its own ii - V7 chords .
In the key given , ii of G Major would be an A minor chord .
V7 of G Major would be D7 .
As such , with the example song , this could be done by having a pre - chorus that consists of one bar of A minor and one bar of D7 .
This would allow the listener to expect a resolution from ii - V to I , which in this case is the temporary tonic of G Major .
The chord A minor would not be unusual to the listener , as it is a shared chord that exists in both G Major and C Major .
A minor is the ii chord in G Major , and it is the vi chord in C Major .
The chord that would alert the listener that a change was taking place is the D7 chord .
There is no D7 chord in C Major .
A listener experienced with popular and traditional music would hear this as a secondary dominant .
Harmonic theorists and arrangers would call it V7 / V or five of five , as the D7 chord is the dominant ( or fifth ) chord of G Major .
CHORUS OR REFRAIN Section::::Chorus or refrain .
" The difference between refrain and chorus is not always cut - and - dried ; both refer to passages of unchanging music and text providing a periodic sense of return . "
" At times , the term ' refrain ' has been used interchangeably with ' chorus . '
Technically , the refrain may be considered anything that 's not the verse ...
a song part that contains the hook or title and appears more than once in a song is usually called ' a chorus . ' "
" The chorus contains the main idea , or big picture , of what is being expressed lyrically and musically .
It is repeated throughout the song , and the melody and lyric rarely vary .
" A refrain is , " a repeated line or musical phrase that ties a song together ...
A refrain is only a phrase , or a word , while a chorus contains many more words .
" A refrain is a repetitive phrase or phrases that serve the function of a chorus lyrically , but are not in a separate section or long enough to be a chorus .
For example , refrains are found in The Beatles ' "
She Loves You " ( "
yeah ,
yeah ,
yeah " )
AC / DC 's
" You Shook Me All Night Long " , Paul Simon 's " The Sound of Silence " , and " Deck the Halls " ( " fa la la la la " ) .
The chorus or refrain is the element of the song that repeats at least once both musically and lyrically .
It is almost always of greater musical and emotional intensity than the verse . "
The chorus , which gets its name from a usual thickening of texture from the addition of backing vocals , is always a discrete section that nearly always prolongs the tonic and carries an unvaried poetic text .
"
In terms of narrative , the chorus conveys the main message or theme of the song .
Normally the most memorable element of the song for listeners , the chorus usually contains the hook .
BRIDGE Section::::Bridge .
A bridge may be a transition , but in popular music , it more often is " ...
a section that contrasts with the verse ...
[ , ] usually ends on the dominant ...
[ , ] [ and ] often culminates in a strong re - transitional . "
" The bridge is a device that is used to break up the repetitive pattern of the song and keep the listener 's attention ...
In a bridge , the pattern of the words and music change .
"
For example , John Denver 's " Country Roads " is a song with a bridge while Stevie Wonder 's " You Are the Sunshine of My Life " is a song without one .
In music theory , " middle eight " ( a common type of bridge ) refers to a section of a song with a significantly different melody and lyrics , which helps the song develop itself in a natural way by creating a contrast to the previously played , usually placed after the second chorus in a song .
( Typically , a song consists of first verse , pre - chorus , chorus , second verse , pre - chorus , chorus , middle eight , chorus ) .
Such sections often consist of new chords , but also frequently just alternate between two chords .
It is called a middle eight because it happens in the middle of the song and the length is generally eight bars .
Jazz players also call this " the release " .
A song employing a middle eight might look like : Middle eights are often quieter than the remainder of the song , in contrast with the solo , which is generally more energetic .
In slower songs , however , a middle eight can be used to generate energy .
By adding a powerful upbeat middle eight , musicians can then end the song with a hook in the end chorus and finale .
CONCLUSION OR OUTRO Section::::Conclusion or outro .
The conclusion or outro of a song is a way of ending or completing the song .
It signals to the listeners that the song is nearing its close .
The reason for having an outro is that if a song just ended at the last bar of a section , such as on the last verse or the last chorus , this might feel too abrupt for listeners .
By using an outro , the songwriter signals that the song is , in fact , nearing its end .
This gives the listeners a good sense of closure .
For DJs , the outro is a signal that they need to be ready to mix in their next song .
In general , songwriters and arrangers do not introduce any new melodies or riffs in the outro .
However , a melody or riff used throughout the song may be re - used as part of an outro .
Generally , the outro is a section where the energy of the song , broadly defined , dissipates .
For example , many songs end with a fade - out , in which the song gets quieter and quieter .
In many songs , the band does a ritardando during the outro , a process of gradually slowing down the tempo .
Both the fade - out and the ritardando are ways of decreasing the intensity of a song and signalling that it is nearing its conclusion .
For an outro that fades out , the arranger or songwriter typically repeats a short section of the music over and over .
This can be the chorus , for example .
An audio engineer then uses the fader on the mixing board to gradually decrease the volume of the recording .
When a tribute band plays a cover song that , in the recorded version ends with a fade - out , the live band may imitate that by playing progressively quieter .
Another way many pop and rock songs end is with a tag .
There are two types of tags : the instrumental tag and the instrumental / vocal tag .
With an instrumental tag , the vocalist no longer sings , and the band 's rhythm section takes over the music to finish off the song .
A tag is often a vamp of a few chords that the band repeats .
In a jazz song , this could be a standard turnaround , such as I - vi - ii - V7 or a stock progression , such as ii - V7 .
If the tag includes the tonic chord , such as a vamp on I - IV , the bandleader typically cues the last time that the penultimate chord ( a IV chord in this case ) is played , leading to an ending on the I chord .
If the tag does not include the tonic chord , such as with a ii - V7 tag , the bandleader cues the band to do a cadence that resolves onto the tonic ( I ) chord .
With an instrumental and vocal tag , the band and vocalist typically repeat a section of the song , such as the chorus , to give emphasis to its message .
In some cases , the vocalist may use only a few words from the chorus or even one word .
Some bands have the guitar player do a guitar solo during the outro , but it is not the focus of the section ; instead , it is more to add interesting improvisation .
A guitar solo during an outro is typically mixed lower than a mid - song guitar solo .
ELISION Section::::Elision .
An elision is a section of music where different sections overlap one another , usually for a short period .
It is mostly used in fast - paced music , and it is designed to create tension and drama .
Songwriters use elision to keep the song from losing its energy during cadences , the points at which the music comes to rest on , typically on a tonic or dominant chord .
If a song has a section that ends with a cadence on the tonic , if the songwriter gives this cadence a full bar , with the chord held as a whole note , this makes the listener feel like the music is stopping .
However , if songwriters use an elided cadence , they can bring the section to a cadence on the tonic , and then , immediately after this cadence , begin a new section of music which overlaps with the cadence .
Another form of elision would , in a chorus later in the song , to interject musical elements from the bridge .
INSTRUMENTAL SOLO Section::::Instrumental solo .
A solo is a section designed to showcase an instrumentalist ( e.g. a guitarist or a harmonica player ) or less commonly , more than one instrumentalist ( e.g. , a trumpeter and a sax player ) .
Guitar solos are common in rock music , particularly heavy metal and in the blues .
The solo section may take place over the chords from the verse , chorus , or bridge , or over a standard solo backing progression , such as the 12-bar blues progression .
In some pop songs , the solo performer plays the same melodies that were performed by the lead singer , often with flourishes and embellishments , such as riffs , scale runs , and arpeggios .
In blues- or jazz - influenced pop songs , the solo performers may improvise a solo .
AD LIB Section::::Ad lib .
In Latin , ad libitum means " at will " ; this is often shortened to ad lib .
An ad lib section of a song ( usually in the coda or outro ) occurs
when the main lead vocal or a second lead vocal breaks away from the already established lyric and/or melody to add melodic interest and intensity to the end of the song .
Often , the ad lib repeats the previously sung line using variations on phrasing , melodic shape , and/or lyric , but the vocalist may also use entirely new lyrics or a lyric from an earlier section of the song .
During an ad lib section , the rhythm may become freer ( with the rhythm section following the vocalist ) , or the rhythm section may stop entirely , giving the vocalist the freedom to use whichever tempo sounds right .
During live performances , singers sometimes include ad libs not originally in the song , such as making a reference to the town of the audience or customizing the lyrics to the current events of the era .
There is a distinction between ad lib as a song section and ad lib as a general term .
Ad lib as a general term can be applied to any free interpretation of the musical material .
AABA FORM Section::::AABA form .
Thirty - two - bar form uses four sections , most often eight measures long each ( 4×8=32 ) , two verses or A sections , a contrasting B section ( the bridge or " middle - eight " ) and a return of the verse in one last A section ( AABA ) .
The B section is often intended as a contrast to the A sections that precede and follow it .
The B section may be made to contrast by putting it in a new harmony .
For example , with the jazz standard " I 've Got Rhythm " , the A sections are all tonic prolongations based around the I - vi - ii - V chord progression ( Bb in the standard key ) ; however , the B section changes key and moves to V / vi , or D7 in the standard key , which then does a circle of fifths movement to G7 , C7 and finally F7 , setting the listener up for a return to the tonic
Bb in the final A section .
The " I 've Got Rhythm " example also provides contrast because the harmonic rhythm changes in the B section .
Whereas the A sections contain a vibrant , exciting feel of two chord changes per bar ( e.g. , the first two bars are often Bb g minor / c minor F7 ) , the B section consists of two bars of D7 , two bars of G7 , two bars of C7 and two bars of F7 .
In some songs , the " feel " also changes in the B section .
For example , the A sections may be in swing feel , and the B section may be in Latin or Afro - Cuban feel .
While the form is often described as AABA , this does not mean that the A sections are all exactly the same .
The first A section ends by going back to the next A section , and the second A section ends and transitions into the B section .
As such , at the minimum , the composer or arranger often modifies the harmony of the end of the different A sections to guide the listener through the key changes .
As well , the composer or arranger may re - harmonize the melody on one or more of the A sections , to provide variety .
Note that with a reharmonization , the melody does not usually change ; only the chords played by the accompaniment musicians change .
Examples include " Deck the Halls " : VARIATION ON THE BASIC STRUCTURE Section::::Variation on the basic structure .
Verse - chorus form or ABA form may be combined with AABA form , in compound AABA forms .
Variations such as a1 and a2 can also be used .
AAA format may be found in Bob Dylan 's " The Times
They Are a - Changin ' " , and songs like " The House of the Rising Sun " , and " Clementine " .
Also " Old MacDonald " , " Amazing Grace " , "
The Thrill Is Gone " , and Gordon Lightfoot 's " The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald " .
AABA may be found in Crystal Gayle 's " Do n't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue " , Billy Joel 's " Just the Way You Are " , and The Beatles ' " Yesterday " .
ABA ( verse / chorus or chorus / verse ) format may be found in Pete Seeger 's " Turn !
Turn !
Turn ! "
( chorus first ) and The Rolling Stones 's " Honky Tonk Woman " ( verse first ) .
ABAB may be found in AC / DC 's " Back in Black " ,
Jimmy Buffett 's " Margaritaville " , The Archies 's " Sugar , Sugar " , and The Eagles 's " Hotel California " .
ABABCB format may be found in John Cougar Mellencamp 's " Hurts So Good " ,
Tina Turner 's " What 's Love Got to Do with It ? " , and ZZ Top 's " Sharp Dressed Man " .
Variations include Smokey Robinson 's " My Guy " , The Beatles 's " Ticket to Ride " , The Pretenders ' " Back on the Chain Gang " ( ABABCAB ) , Poison 's " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " ( ABABCBAB ) , and Billy Joel 's "
It 's Still Rock and Roll to Me "
( ABABCABCAB ) .
SEE ALSO
* Earworm * Lick
* Ostinato * Subject * Vamp REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING *
Appen , Ralf von / Frei - Hauenschild , Markus " AABA , Refrain , Chorus , Bridge , Prechorus — Song Forms and their Historical Development " .
In : Samples .
Online Publikationen der Gesellschaft für Popularmusikforschung / German Society for Popular Music Studies
e .
V. Ed .
by Ralf von Appen , André Doehring and Thomas Phleps .
Vol .
13 ( 2015 ) .
* Covach , John .
"
Form in Rock Music : A Primer " , in Stein , Deborah ( 2005 ) .
Engaging Music :
Essays in Music Analysis .
New York :
Oxford University Press . .
* Covach , John and Boone , Graham , eds .
Understanding Rock : Essays in Musical Analysis .
Cited in Covach ( 2005 ) .
* Everett , Walter , ed .
Rock Music :
Critical Essays on Composition , Performance , Analysis , and Reception .
Cited in Covach ( 2005 ) .
* Forte , Allan
The American Popular Ballad of the Golden Era , 1924 - 1950 : A Study in Musical Design , Princeton University Press , 1995 . .
* Kaiser , Ulrich " Babylonian confusion .
Zur Terminologie der Formanalyse von Pop- und Rockmusik " .
In : Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Musiktheorie 8/1 ( 2011 ) – ISSN 1862 - 6742 .
* Richard Middleton .
" Form " , in Horner , Bruce and Swiss , Thomas , eds .
( 1999 )
Key Terms in Popular Music and Culture .
Malden , Massachusetts . .