THUNDERSNOW Thundersnow , also known as a winter thunderstorm or a thundersnowstorm , is an unusual kind of thunderstorm with snow falling as the primary precipitation instead of rain .
It typically falls in regions of strong upward motion within the cold sector of an extratropical cyclone .
Thermodynamically , it is not different from any other type of thunderstorm , but the top of the cumulonimbus cloud is usually quite low .
In addition to snow , graupel or hail may fall .
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
Thundersnow , while relatively rare anywhere , is more common with lake - effect snow in the Great Lakes area of the United States and Canada , the midwestern United States , and the Great Salt Lake .
Thundersnow also occurs in Halifax , Nova Scotia , sometimes several times per winter season .
Bozeman , Montana also sees thundersnow more often than average with these storms typically occurring in April or
May. In the United States , March is the peak month of formation ; on average , only 6.4 events are reported per year .
The British Isles and other parts of northwestern Europe occasionally report thunder and lightning during sleet or ( usually wet ) snow showers during winter and spring .
It is also common around Kanazawa and the Sea of Japan , and even around Mount Everest .
Low pressure events in the eastern Mediterranean that originate from polar origin cause copious thundersnow occurrences during winter storms , especially over the elevated provinces of Israel , Palestine and Jordan , including Amman and Jerusalem .
When such storms happen at areas intended for skiing , the mountains are often evacuated for safety .
ACOUSTIC EFFECTS Section::::Acoustic effects .
One unique aspect of thundersnow is that the suspended and deposited snowfall act as an acoustic suppressor of the sound of thunder .
The thunder from a typical thunderstorm can be heard many miles away , while the thunder from thundersnow can usually only be heard within a radius from the lightning .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
There are usually three causes of thundersnow :
* A normal thunderstorm on the leading edge of a cold front or warm front that can either form in a winter environment , or that runs into cool air , and where the precipitation takes the form of snow * A heavy synoptic snowstorm that sustains strong vertical mixing which allows for favorable conditions for lightning and thunder to occur * A lake effect or ocean effect thunderstorm which is produced by cold air passing over relatively warm water ; this effect commonly produces snow squalls over the Great Lakes LAKE EFFECT PRECIPITATION
Section::::Lake effect precipitation .
Lake effect thundersnow occurs after a cold front or shortwave aloft passes over a body of water .
This steepens the thermal lapse rates between the lake temperature and the temperatures aloft .
A difference in temperature of or more between the lake temperature and the temperature at about ( the 850 hPa level ) usually marks the onset of thundersnow , if surface temperatures are expected to be below freezing .
However several factors , including other geographical elements , affect the development of thundersnow .
The primary factor is convective depth .
This is the vertical depth in the troposphere that a parcel of air will rise from the ground before it reaches the equilibrium ( EQL ) level and stops rising .
A minimum depth of is necessary , and an average depth of or more is generally accepted as sufficient .
Wind shear is also a significant factor .
Linear snow squall bands produce more thunder snow than clustered bands ; thus a directional wind shear with a change of less than between the ground and in height must be in place .
However , any change in direction greater than through that layer will tear the snow squall apart .
A bare minimum fetch of is required so that the air passing over the lake or ocean water will become sufficiently saturated with moisture and will acquire thermal energy from the water .
The last component is the echo top or storm top temperature .
This must be at least .
It is generally accepted that at this temperature there is no longer any super cooled water vapor present in a cloud , but just ice crystals suspended in the air .
This allows for the interaction of the ice cloud and graupel pellets within the storm to generate a charge , resulting in lightning and thunder .
SYNOPTIC FORCING Section::::Synoptic forcing .
Synoptic snow storms tend to be large and complex , with many possible factors affecting the development of thundersnow .
The best location in a storm to find thundersnow is typically in its NorthWest quadrant ( in the Northern Hemisphere , based on observations in the Midwestern United States ) , within what is known as the " comma head " of a mature extratropical cyclone .
Thundersnow can also be located underneath the TROWAL , a trough of warm air aloft which shows up in a surface weather analysis as an inverted trough extending backward into the cold sector from the main cyclone .
In extreme cases , thunderstorms along the cold front are transported towards the center of the low pressure system and will have their precipitation change to snow or ice , once the cold front becomes a portion of the occluded front .
The 1991 Halloween blizzard , Superstorm of 1993 , and White Juan are examples of such blizzards featuring thundersnow .
UPSLOPE FLOW Section::::Upslope flow .
Similar to the lake effect regime , thundersnow is usually witnessed in terrain in the cold sector of an extratropical cyclone when a shortwave
aloft moves into the region .
The shortwave will steepen the local lapse rates , allowing for a greater possibility of both heavy snow at elevations where it is near or below freezing , and occasionally thundersnow .
HAZARDS Section::::Hazards .
Thundersnow produces heavy snowfall rates in the range of per hour .
Snowfall of this intensity may limit visibilities severely , even during light wind conditions .
However , thundersnow is often a part of a severe winter storm or blizzard .
Winds of above tropical storm force are frequent with thundersnow .
As a result , visibilities in thundersnow are frequently under .
Additionally , such wind creates extreme wind chills and may result in frostbite .
Finally , there is a greater likelihood that thundersnow lightning will have a positive polarity , which is associated with a greater destructive potential than the more common negatively - charged lightning .
SEE ALSO
* Blizzard Warning * Severe thunderstorm warning
* Severe weather terminology ( United States )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* What causes thundersnow ?
* Straight Dope staff report : Why do n't snowstorms produce lightning ?
* Research on Convective Snow from University of Missouri
* Thundersnow caught on live BBC TV
broadcast - 1st Feb 2009 - Kent , United Kingdom