SINGLE TRANSVERSE PALMAR CREASE
In humans , a single transverse palmar crease is a single crease that extends across the palm of the hand , formed by the fusion of the two palmar creases ( known in palmistry as the " heart line " and the " head line " ) and is found in people with Down syndrome .
However , it is not an indication that a person with single transverse palmar crease has to have Down syndrome .
It is also found in 1.5 % of the general population in at least one hand .
Because it resembles the usual condition of non - human simians , it is also known as a simian crease or simian line , although these terms have widely fallen out of favor due to their pejorative connotation .
MEDICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Medical significance .
Males are twice as likely as females to have this characteristic , and it tends to run in families .
In its non - symptomatic form , it is more common among Asians and Native Americans than among other populations , and in some families there is a tendency to inherit the condition unilaterally ; that is , on one hand only .
The presence of a single transverse palmar crease can be , but is not always , a symptom associated with abnormal medical conditions , such as fetal alcohol syndrome , or with genetic chromosomal abnormalities , including Down syndrome ( chromosome 21 ) , cri du chat syndrome ( chromosome 5 ) , Klinefelter syndrome , Wolf - Hirschhorn Syndrome , Noonan syndrome ( chromosome 12 ) , Patau syndrome ( chromosome 13 ) , IDIC 15 / Dup15q ( chromosome 15 ) , Edward 's syndrome ( chromosome 18 ) , and Aarskog - Scott syndrome ( X - linked recessive ) , or autosomal recessive disorder , such as Leaukocyte adhesion deficiency-2 ( LAD2 ) .
A unilateral single palmar crease was also reported in a case of chromosome 9 mutation causing Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome and Robinow syndrome .
It is also sometimes found on the hand of the affected side of patients with Poland syndrome , and craniosynostosis .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO * Dermatoglyphics REFERENCES