BRAN STARK Brandon Stark , typically called Bran , is a fictional character in the A Song of Ice and Fire series of epic fantasy novels by American author George R. R. Martin , and its television adaptation Game of Thrones .
Introduced in 1996 's A Game of Thrones , Bran is the second son and fourth child of Eddard Stark , the honorable lord of Winterfell , an ancient fortress in the North of the fictional kingdom of Westeros .
He subsequently appeared in Martin 's A Clash of Kings ( 1998 ) and A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) .
Bran was one of a few prominent characters that were not included in 2005 's A Feast for Crows , but returned in the next novel A Dance with Dragons ( 2011 ) .
Martin told Rolling Stone in 2014 that Bran 's chapter with Jaime and Cersei Lannister is what " hooked " many readers early in the first novel .
Bran is portrayed by English actor Isaac Hempstead Wright in the HBO television adaptation .
CHARACTER DESCRIPTION
Section::::Character description .
Bran is seven years old at the beginning of A Game of Thrones ( 1996 ) .
He is the fourth child and second son of
Eddard " Ned " Stark and his wife Lady Catelyn , and has four siblings : an older brother Robb , two older sisters Sansa and Arya , a younger brother Rickon , and an illegitimate older half - brother Jon Snow .
Bran is constantly accompanied by his direwolf Summer , the simpleton stableboy Hodor ( who carries him around after his crippling ) , and the Reed siblings Meera and Jojen .
Martin describes Bran as favoring his mother in appearance , having the thick auburn hair and deep blue eyes of the Tullys .
According to Martin , Bran is a strong willed , but sweet and thoughtful boy , well - loved by everyone at Winterfell .
He enjoys climbing and exploring the walls and ramparts of the castle ; he is also dutiful and tough - minded .
With his dreams of being a knight dashed by the crippling attempt on his life in A Game of Thrones , duty forces Bran to overcome his new limitations and embrace his new abilities .
His gradual acceptance of his seemingly - prophetic visions ( called the " greensight " ) and his ability to psychically inhabit his direwolf Summer ( which marks him as a type of skinchanger known as a warg ) show his growing maturity and his worth beyond the loss of his legs .
He also manages to enter the mind of the stableboy Hodor , and later skinchanges into crows and even weirwood trees under the mentorship of the Three - Eyed Raven .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The very first — and youngest — point of view character in the novels
, Bran was set up by Martin as a young hero of the series .
Mikal Gilmore of Rolling Stone noted in 2014 that the moment in A Game of Thrones in which Jaime Lannister pushes Bran to his likely death " grabs you by the throat " .
Martin commented in the interview :
In 2000 , Martin called Bran the hardest character to write : Booklist cited Bran as a notable character in 1999 , and the Publishers Weekly review of A Game of Thrones noted , " It is fascinating to watch Martin 's characters mature and grow , particularly Stark 's children , who stand at the center of the book . "
Noting Bran 's absence in 2005 's A Feast for Crows , James Poniewozik of Time wrote in his review of A Dance with Dragons ( 2011 ) : STORYLINES
A GAME OF THRONES
Section::::Storylines .
Section::::A Game of Thrones .
In A Game of Thrones ( 1996 ) , Bran accidentally sees Queen Cersei Lannister and her brother Ser Jaime having sex ; whereupon he is pushed from the window by Jaime to keep the incest a secret , but he survives in a coma .
While Bran remains unconscious , an attempt is made on his life , and Catelyn delays the assassin long enough for Bran 's direwolf , Summer , to kill him .
Senseless , Bran dreams of his falling from the tower and of a three - eyed crow that offers to teach him to fly .
With the crow 's guidance , Bran wakes ; but having been crippled by the fall , he is unable to walk .
Thereafter he relies on the giant simpleton Hodor , and a harness designed by Tyrion Lannister , to move .
When Robb rides south to relieve Ned 's arrest in King 's Landing , Bran becomes the acting Lord of Winterfell .
A CLASH OF KINGS Section::::A Clash of Kings .
1998 's A Clash of Kings finds Robb named King in the North , and Bran , as Robb 's heir , rules the castle in his brother 's absence .
When Theon Greyjoy betrays the Starks and captures Winterfell , Bran and Rickon escape , aided by the wildling Osha .
To hide his failure , Theon has two other children murdered and proclaims them to be Bran and Rickon .
Theon himself is betrayed by Ramsay Snow , the bastard son of Roose Bolton .
Having been hiding in the crypts of Winterfell , Bran and his companions emerge to find the castle in ruins .
They come upon a mortally wounded Maester Luwin , who advises their traveling party to split .
Osha takes Rickon in the direction of White Harbor , while Bran , Hodor , Meera , and Jojen Reed set off north to seek the three - eyed crow .
Meanwhile , Bran has slowly accepted the veracity of his dreams , and his ability to psychically inhabit Summer , which makes him a type of skin - changer known as a warg .
A STORM OF SWORDS
Section::::A Storm of Swords .
Bran , Hodor , Meera and Jojen travel north to the Wall in search of the three - eyed crow in A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) .
A DANCE WITH DRAGONS Section::::A Dance with Dragons .
In A Dance with Dragons ( 2011 ) , Bran , Hodor , Meera and Jojen are joined by the mysterious Coldhands , and a Child of the Forest named Leaf takes them to the three - eyed raven ( actually a human telepath ) , who in turn offers to train Bran in clairvoyance .
FAMILY TREE OF HOUSE STARK TV ADAPTATION Section::::TV adaptation .
Bran Stark is played by Isaac Hempstead Wright in the television adaption of the series of books .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Brandon " Bran " Stark is the second son and fourth child of Eddard and Catelyn Stark .
He was named after his deceased uncle , Brandon .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
Bran receives one of a litter of recovered direwolves given to the Stark children and names him Summer .
During the King 's visit to Winterfell , Bran accidentally interrupts the Queen , Cersei , having sex with her brother , Jaime , who shoves him from the window .
While he is unconscious and recovering from his injuries , Summer kills an assassin sent to murder Bran .
When he awakens Bran can not recall the events before his fall and finds that he is crippled from the waist down , forced to be carried everywhere by the stableboy Hodor .
Slowly , he realizes that he has gained the ability to assume Summer 's consciousness , making him a warg or a skinchanger .
After his older brother , Robb , is crowned King in the North , Bran becomes Robb 's heir and the Lord of Winterfell .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
After Theon Greyjoy captures Winterfell , Osha helps Bran and his younger brother Rickon go into hiding .
To cement his claim on Winterfell , Theon kills two orphan boys and passes their bodies off as Bran and Rickon .
After Theon 's men betray him and Winterfell is sacked , Bran , Rickon , Hodor , Osha and their direwolves head north to find his older brother Jon Snow for safety .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Bran and his group encounter Jojen and Meera Reed , two siblings who aid them in their quest .
Jojen shares Bran 's " greensight " , and tutors him in his prophetic visions .
After coming close to the wall , Osha departs with Rickon for Last Hearth while Bran insists on following his visions beyond the Wall .
He also encounters Sam and Gilly , who tries to persuade him not to , but Bran claims it is his destiny and leaves through the gate with Hodor and the Reeds . SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
During their travels beyond the Wall , Bran and his group stumble across Craster 's Keep , where they are captured and held hostage by the Night 's Watch mutineers led by Karl Tanner .
Night 's Watch rangers led by Jon eventually attack Craster 's Keep to kill the mutineers , but Locke , a new recruit but secretly a spy for Roose Bolton , attempts to take Bran away and kill him elsewhere .
Bran wargs into Hodor and kills Locke by snapping his neck , but Bran and his group are forced to continue on their journey without alerting Jon , whom Jojen claims would stop them .
Bran 's group eventually reaches the heart tree , but are set upon by wights outside the entrance .
Jojen is killed in the attack , but the Children of the Forest destroy the wights and lead Bran and his company into the cave to meet the Three - Eyed Raven .
The Three - Eyed Raven declares that he will not walk again , but will fly instead .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
As part of his training , Bran is shown several visions of the past , including Ned Stark and Howland Reed confronting Ser Arthur Dayne and Ser Gerold Hightower at the Tower of Joy , and learns of how the Children of the Forest injected one of the First Men with dragonglass in a ritual to create the Night King , the first White Walker , as a defense against the other First Men .
However , the Three - Eyed Raven is always quick to withdraw Bran from the visions , warning that he may become trapped in them if he stays too long .
Growing bored with his slow progress , Bran enters a vision on his own and witnesses the Night King in the present day , who sees Bran and marks him , making the Three - Eyed Raven 's cave vulnerable to the White Walkers ' magic .
The Three - Eyed Raven enters Bran into another vision of Winterfell 's past to impart all his knowledge , but before the transfer is completed the White Walkers attack the cave , killing the Three - Eyed Raven , Summer , and the Children of the Forest .
Bran , still caught in the vision , wargs into Hodor through his younger self ( named Wylis ) , and he and Meera flee as he carries his unconscious body out of the cave .
Meera carries Bran into the forest and Hodor gives his life to hold back the cave door against the army of wights until they overwhelm him .
Bran witnesses how his warging accidentally linked Hodor 's past and present mind , inducing a seizure in young Wylis and causing him to repeat Meera 's command to " hold the door " until he can only slur the word " Hodor " .
After the wight army catches up to them again , Bran and Meera are rescued by Bran 's uncle Benjen Stark , who had been killed by the White Walkers several years prior but was revived by the Children .
Benjen whisks the duo to safety , telling Bran that he is now the Three - Eyed Raven and must learn to control his powers before the Night King attacks the Seven Kingdoms .
Benjen leaves Bran and Meera at the weirwood in the Haunted Forest , as the Wall 's magic prevents the dead from passing .
Bran touches the weirwood and witnesses the rest of the vision of Ned Stark at the Tower of Joy .
He discovers that Lyanna Stark died giving birth to Rhaegar Targaryen 's son Aegon , who Ned found and raised as Jon Snow at Lyanna 's dying request .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
Bran returns to Winterfell , which has been rebuilt and reoccupied by the remaining Starks .
Although Jon has traveled to Dragonstone to meet with Daenerys Targaryen , he is reunited with Sansa and Arya , both of whom are concerned by Bran 's knowledge about their tribulations following Ned 's execution .
Meera leaves Winterfell to return to Greywater Watch ; when Bran is indifferent to her departure , she realises that Bran " died " in the Three - Eyed Raven 's cave .
Bran remains aloof to his siblings , but uses his greenseeing abilities to discover Littlefinger 's betrayal of Ned .
When Sansa confronts Littlefinger about his treason towards House Stark , Bran corroborates the accusations leveled against him , and Littlefinger is executed by Arya .
Samwell Tarly arrives in Winterfell and comes to visit Bran .
Bran tells him that he has discovered that Jon is the bastard son of Rhaegar and Lyanna , but Sam mentions a former High Septon 's record of annulling Rhaegar 's marriage to Elia Martell so that he could marry Lyanna .
Bran uses greenseeing to confirm that the marriage took place , and then revisits the vision of the Tower of Joy , discovering that 's Jon 's real name is Aegon Targaryen .
Bran declares that Jon is therefore the heir to the Iron Throne .
REFERENCES