SHANTARAM ( NOVEL )
Shantaram is a 2003 novel by Gregory David Roberts , in which a convicted Australian bank robber and heroin addict who escaped from Pentridge Prison flees to India .
The novel is commended by many for its vivid portrayal of tumultuous life in Bombay .
The novel is reportedly influenced by real events in the life of the author , though some claims made by Roberts are contested by others involved in the story .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
In 1978 , Roberts was sentenced to a 19-year imprisonment in Australia after being convicted of a series of armed robberies of building society branches , credit unions , and shops .
In July 1980 , he escaped from Victoria 's Pentridge Prison in broad daylight , thereby becoming one of Australia 's most wanted men for the next ten years .
The protagonist Lindsay ( according to the book , Roberts ' fake name ) arrives in Bombay carrying a false passport in the name of Lindsay Ford .
Mumbai was supposed to be only a stopover on a journey that was to take him from New Zealand to Germany , but he decides to stay in the city .
Lindsay soon meets a local man named Prabaker whom he hires as a guide .
Prabaker soon becomes his friend and names him Lin ( Linbaba ) .
Both men visit Prabaker 's native village , Sunder , where Prabaker 's mother decided to give Lin a new Maharashtrian name , like her own .
Because she judged his nature to be blessed with peaceful happiness , she decided to call him Shantaram , meaning Man of God 's Peace .
On their way back to Mumbai , Lin and Prabaker are robbed .
With all his possessions gone , Lin is forced to live in the slums , which shelters him from the authorities .
After a massive fire on the day of his arrival in the slum , he sets up a free health clinic as a way to contribute to the community .
He learns about the local culture and customs in this crammed environment , gets to know and love the people he encounters , and even becomes fluent in Marathi , the local language .
He also witnesses and battles outbreaks of cholera and firestorms , becomes involved in trading with the lepers , and experiences how ethnic and marital conflicts are resolved in this densely crowded and diverse community .
The novel describes a number of foreigners of various origins , as well as local Indians , highlighting the rich diversity of life in Mumbai .
Lin falls in love with Karla , a Swiss - American woman , befriends local artists and actors , landing him roles as an extra in several Bollywood movies , and is recruited by the Mumbai underworld for various criminal operations , including drug and weapons trade .
Lin eventually lands in Mumbai 's Arthur Road Prison .
There , along with hundreds of other inmates , he endures brutal physical and mental abuse from the guards , while existing under extremely squalid conditions .
However , thanks to the protection of the Afghan mafia don " Abdel Khader Khan " , Lin is eventually released , and begins to work in a black market currency exchange and passport forgery .
Having traveled as far as Africa on trips commissioned by the mafia , Lin later goes to Afghanistan to smuggle weapons for mujahideen freedom fighters .
When his mentor Khan is killed , Lin realizes he has become everything he grew to loathe and falls into depression after he returns to India .
He decides that he must fight for what he believes is right , and build an honest life .
The story ends with him planning to go to Sri Lanka , which lays the premise for the sequel to this book .
FACT - BASED ELEMENTS Section::::Fact - based elements .
While parts of the novel , based on Roberts ' known biography , read as reportedly factual , numerous significant claims by Roberts are impossible to verify and are disputed by the family of one of the main Indian characters in the book .
A few parts of the story , such as Roberts ' criminal history and escape from prison in Australia , are a matter of public record , while others remain harder ( or impossible ) to verify .
There is a great deal of debate as to where the boundaries lie between fact and fiction in the book .
Roberts has stated the characters in the story are largely invented , and that he merged different elements taken from true events and people into such events and characters like Prabaker ' of the big smile ' .
Prabhakar Kisan Khare was a real - life individual , as are the members of Khare family from the book ( Kisan , Rukhma , Kishor and Parvati Khare ) whose names appear on government issued identity cards .
The family resides in the Navy Nagar slum where the lead character Shantaram also lived .
The Khare family disputes many of Roberts ' claims , although they acknowledge close association with Gregory Roberts in the 1980s .
Prabhakar died in an accident in 1988 in circumstances matching the event in the book .
In March 2006 , the Mumbai Mirror reported they may have discovered the inspiration for the big smile of the character Prabhakar as belonging to a still living cab driver called Kishore , who took Roberts to his home village .
Kishore Khare , brother of Prabhakar , who drives tourists around Mumbai , has told his story .
ROBERTS ' POSITION , BASED ON HIS INTERVIEWS Section::::Roberts ' position , based on his interviews .
" With respect , Shantaram is not an autobiography , it 's a novel .
If the book reads like an autobiography , I take that as a very high compliment , because I structured the created narrative to read like fiction but feel like fact .
I wanted the novel to have the page - turning drive of a work of fiction but to be informed by such a powerful stream of real experience that it had the authentic feel of fact .
"
" As with the novel Shantaram , the experiences in The Mountain Shadow are derived from my own real experiences , and the characters , dialogue , and narrative structure are all created . "
Roberts repeatedly stated this , as on the book 's official website : " All of the characters in the novel , Shantaram , are created .
None of the characters bears even a remote resemblance to any real person I 've ever known .
Proceeding from the theme of exile , all of the characters represent one or another aspect of the exile experience .
None of the characters – with the exception of Johnny Cigar , who is born to a vanished ( exiled ) father from somewhere beyond the city – is born in Bombay . "
CHARACTERS PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
Originally , Shantaram was published by Scribe Publications as a hardcover and later as a paperback .
Following the mediated resolution in 2004 of a dispute that arose in 2003 between Scribe and the book 's author , Gregory David Roberts , rights to all forms of the local publication of Shantaram reverted to the author after Scribe sold its remaining stock of hardbacks .
Pan Macmillan then took over publication under the Picador label .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
Gregory Roberts has said that Shantaram is the second book in a planned quartet .
A sequel entitled The Mountain Shadow was released on 13 October 2015 by Little Brown .
In this long - awaited sequel , Lin strives to survive in the new Bombay run by the new mafia .
POTENTIAL ADAPTATIONS Section::::Potential adaptations .
When the novel Shantaram was published in 2003 , several parties , including actor Russell Crowe , expressed interest in a film adaptation .
Although Crowe was temporarily attached to a bid , Warner Bros. went forward with a $ 2 million bid primarily due to actor Johnny Depp 's expression of love for the book to studio executive Brad Grey .
With the rights won , Depp was attached to star in the film , which was to be based on a script written by the book 's author Gregory David Roberts .
Roberts commended the casting choice , and the author said of his intended script , " The screenplay I am writing will be as complex and will have the same sense of layering and texturing .
Thematically , it will reflect everything that is in the heart of the book and that is the exile experience , and the power of love to transform and change the heart of a person .
But the book is a book and the film is a film — they are different art forms so the film will have an independent life . "
In October 2005 , Warner Bros. hired screenwriter Eric Roth to rewrite the initial draft created by Roberts .
The following November , director Peter Weir was hired by the studio to helm Shantaram and develop the script with Roth .
The studio originally planned to schedule production for late 2006 .
By June 2006 , Weir departed from the project with a studio spokesperson citing different interpretations between the director and the studio and producers .
In January 2007 , director Mira Nair replaced Weir at the helm .
The studio anticipated production would begin by autumn 2007 for a 2008 release .
Roth began rewriting the script to lower project costs , and actor Amitabh Bachchan joined to star opposite Depp .
By November 2007 , the anticipated February production start was cancelled by Warner Bros , who cited the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike 's interference with the script 's readiness , the impending monsoon season in India , and Depp 's schedule difficulties in filming between India and New Mexico in the United States .
The studio anticipated that production would finally begin in September 2008 , but by November 2009 , with production not starting , The Independent reported the project had been cancelled .
In May 2013 , the Mumbai Mirror reported that Warner Bros. had negotiated to retain the film rights until 2015 , fuelling speculation that a film adaptation of Shantaram was still in the works .
In the following October , it was announced that Joel Edgerton would be starring in the leading role , with Eric Roth penning the adaptation and Johnny Depp now involved as a producer .
Warner Bros. is in early talks with Garth Davis , co - director of the Emmy - nominated Top of the Lake , to make his feature film directing debut on the movie .
On June 7 , 2018 , it was announced that Apple Inc. was developing a television adaptation of the novel to be written by Eric Warren Singer who will also executive produce alongside David Manson , Nicole Clemens , Steve Golin , and Andrea Barron .
Production companies set to be involved with the potential series include Anonymous Content and Paramount Television .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Shantaram Forum
* Shantaram Tour website
* " Shantaram " Facebook Page