SEVEN SEAS LAGOON
The Seven Seas Lagoon is a man - made lake at the Walt Disney World Resort in Bay Lake , Florida , near Orlando .
Located south of the Magic Kingdom theme park , the Seven Seas Lagoon serves as a natural buffer between the Magic Kingdom and its parking lot and connects with the adjacent Bay Lake .
The lake reaches a depth of 14 feet .
The lagoon is used mainly for recreational boating , as well as by the resort 's three Disney Transport ferryboats that transport guests between the Magic Kingdom and the Transportation and Ticket Center .
USES Section::::Uses .
The Seven Seas Lagoon is used for boating activities at the resort .
Fishing was not allowed in the Lagoon until the mid-1990s , some 25 years after Walt Disney World 's opening .
However , the plan had existed from the start and fish were set free in the lagoon in 1973 .
Swimming was originally allowed , but has since been prohibited for safety reasons due to the operation of the rental boats .
The lagoon is also the site of the Electrical Water Pageant .
The lagoon , despite being man - made , is home to native Florida species such as alligators , crocodiles , lizards , snakes , and turtles .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Seven Seas Lagoon was originally configured for artificial waves , tall enough to allow surfing .
The machine began operation with the opening of the resort in 1971 .
However , it was soon disabled after causing severe beach erosion to the Polynesian Village Resort , for which the machine was installed .
2016
ALLIGATOR ATTACK Section::::2016 alligator attack .
At around 9:15 p.m. on June 14 , 2016 , a two - year - old boy wading in the Seven Seas Lagoon , where it was posted not to go into the water , at the Grand Floridian Resort & Spa was grabbed and mauled to death by an alligator .
His parents tried to intervene , but they were unsuccessful .
The boy 's intact body was discovered at the bottom of the lagoon at approximately 1:45 p.m. the following afternoon ; he was found near where he went missing 12 to 15 yards ( 11 to 14 m ) from the shore in about 6 feet ( 1.8 m ) of water .
The medical examiner ruled that the child died of " drowning and traumatic injuries .
" Reuters reported that the resort would put up signs warning guests about alligators and five of them were earlier killed in the search , to examine their stomachs .
Since the incident , Disney has removed several references to alligators and crocodiles from various attractions throughout Disney World .
BORDERING RESORTS
Section::::Bordering resorts .
Three resorts border the Seven Seas Lagoon , all of which have beaches .
These hotels are the only hotels on Walt Disney World property that are directly serviced by the Walt Disney World Monorail System , allowing full monorail access from these hotels to the Magic Kingdom , Epcot , and the Transportation and Ticket Center .
* Disney 's Contemporary Resort * Bay Lake Tower ( Disney Vacation Club )
* Disney 's Grand Floridian Resort & Spa *
Disney 's Polynesian Resort REFERENCES