DARDEN
RESTAURANTS
Darden Restaurants , Inc. is an American multi - brand restaurant operator headquartered in Orlando .
As of April 2017 , the firm owns two fine dining restaurant chains :
Eddie V 's Prime Seafood and The Capital Grille ; and six casual dining restaurant chains : Olive Garden , LongHorn Steakhouse , Bahama Breeze , Seasons 52 , Yard House and Cheddar 's Scratch Kitchen
( the latter having been acquired on April 24 , 2017 ) .
Until July 28 , 2014 , Darden also owned Red Lobster .
Darden has more than 1,500 restaurant locations and more than 150,000 employees , making it the world 's largest full - service restaurant company .
As of 2018 , Darden is the only Fortune 500 company with its corporate headquarters in Greater Orlando .
HISTORY Section::::History .
William ( Bill )
Darden opened his first restaurant , The Green Frog , in his hometown of Waycross , Georgia in 1938 at age 19 .
The restaurant , which grew quickly , formed the basis of the organization that later became known as Darden Restaurants .
He later founded the Red Lobster Inns of America and opened the first Red Lobster restaurant in Lakeland , Florida in 1968 .
Darden chose Lakeland because he wished to see how a seafood restaurant would fare in a non - coastal region , and Lakeland was the innermost city in Florida .
The initial Red Lobster franchise was applauded by diners and critics alike .
The store became successful and by 1970 had expanded to three locations in the state with two more under construction .
While the locations were profitable , the company lacked the resources to expand further , so Darden sold the company to food giant General Mills that year .
GENERAL MILLS OWNERSHIP
Section::::General Mills ownership .
General Mills upgraded the chain to a more casual dining / family fare oriented format , opened a new company headquarters in Orlando and retained Darden as company manager .
In 1975 , when Darden was promoted to Vice President of General Mills , Joseph
( Joe ) R. Lee , the company 's first restaurant manager , was promoted as President of Red Lobster .
Under General Mills ownership , Red Lobster expanded into a chain of almost 400 locations by 1985 .
The company underwent several restructurings and transformed itself from an inexpensive fast - food seller into a chain of casual dining seafood restaurants by 1988 .
One of the company 's first ventures into the diversification of its portfolio was the York Steak House chain of English - themed steak and chop restaurants in the 1970s .
The franchised steak and potatoes restaurant was a cafeteria - style restaurant with salad bar and hot station .
By the end of the 1980s , the chain had been mostly closed down , though some independent locations still exist .
These places were very similar to Ruby Tuesday now .
In 1982 , Darden opened the first Olive Garden concept store in Orlando .
The chain took off , and by 1989 General Mills had opened over 145 stores , making the chain the fastest - growing unit in the company 's restaurant holdings .
While Olive Garden did not meet critical success , it was popular , and its per - store sales soon grew to match those of Red Lobster .
The company eventually became the largest chain of Italian - themed full - service restaurants in the United States .
In 1990 , China Coast was launched as an attempt to create a ( U.S. ) national casual dining restaurant that featured American Chinese cuisine .
While the chain eventually expanded to some 50 restaurants , its sales were lackluster and lost an estimated US$ 20 million .
By the end of 1995 , the company was shuttered , and the remaining locations were either converted to Red Lobsters or Olive Gardens or closed altogether .
DARDEN
Section::::Darden .
In 1995 , General Mills decided to spin off its restaurant chains to focus on consumer food products .
The new company was named Darden Restaurants , after Red Lobster 's founder .
General Mills stockholders received one share of Darden for every common share of General Mills held .
General Mills restaurants had $ 108 million net income in that year .
At the end of 1995 , Darden operated 1,250 restaurants in 49 states with 73 locations in Canada .
Darden Restaurants was spun off from General Mills beginning on May 9 , 1995 , when it began trading on when - issue basis at $ 9.75 a share .
The company became a fully separate entity on May 31 , 1995 , when its shares went on sale on the NYSE .
The shares opened at $ 10.75 , 17 % below expectations , but climbed to $ 11.125 by the close of trading .
Darden executives planned to have two additional chains in place by 1998 .
In March 1996 , Darden launched a test of Bahama Breeze Caribbean Grille concept featuring food and drinks found in the islands of the Caribbean Sea and a Caribbean theme , was created in 1996 .
Markets were over saturated with restaurants in 1997 forcing Darden to close 48 poor performing locations and lose $ 91 million due to the restructuring .
Red Lobster and Olive Garden were given make overs in 1998 .
Darden also made a profit of $ 102 million that year .
1999 saw Darden opening additional location after recovering from the 1996–1997 losses .
The company then began testing a new concept entitled Smokey Bones BBQ Sports Bar that opened in late 1999 in Orlando .
The restaurant is a sports bar concept featuring barbecue and related foodstuffs in an Appalachian mountain - lodge setting .
In 2003 , Seasons 52 was under development with the idea of " provide guests the opportunity to indulge while still eating well " .
Season 52 were only being opened in the Florida or Atlanta markets during its initial phase .
Darden announced in January 2007 that the company was willing to expand by purchasing an existing 100 location chains even considering franchisors .
By May , Darden indicated that its Smokey Bones division would be sold and or shut down including the two Rocky River Grillhouse , the proposed replacement concept for Smokey Bones .
In August , Darden acquired rival Atlanta - based restaurant holder Rare Hospitality for US$ 1.4 billion , gaining Rare 's two chains , The Capital Grille and LongHorn Steakhouse .
As part of the Rare acquisition , Darden set up its Specialty Restaurant Group to include Capital Grille , Bahama Breeze and Seasons 52 .
In December , Darden announced that it would sell its Smokey Bones chain to Barbeque Integrated , Inc. , an affiliate of Sun Capital Partners , Inc. , for approximately $ 80 million .
The sale was completed in January 2008 .
EXPANSION AND OWNERSHIP CHANGES Section::::Expansion and ownership changes .
In 2010 , Seasons 52 started a new expansion phase opening up in 11 more states over the next three years .
In January 2011 , Darden announced co - locating their Olive Garden and Red Lobster brands in smaller markets to share kitchen but continue separate menus and eating areas .
As part of the February Darden analyst conference , an analyst indicated that the corporation may be targeting another restaurant chain for acquisition possibly one of BJ 's , California Pizza Kitchen or Yard House .
In October 2011 , Darden acquired 2 chains , Eddie V 's Prime Seafood and Wildfish Seafood Grille , for $ 59 million cash transaction and were placed within its Specialty Restaurant Group , Also in October , Darden signed an area - development agreement with Americana Group of Kuwait to develop and operate at least 60 locations using the Red Lobster , Olive Garden and LongHorn Steakhouse concepts .
In July 2012 , Darden acquired the Yard House 39 location beer - centric chain for $ 585 million from TSG Consumer Partners .
Yard House will be alongside the other upscale restaurants in Darden 's Specialty Restaurant Group .
On December 23 , 2013 , Darden 's stock rose 3 percent after activist investor Starboard Value , a hedge fund , took a stake in the company .
RED LOBSTER
SALE Section::::Red Lobster sale .
On December 19 , 2013 , Darden announced plans to sell or spin - off the Red Lobster brand , citing pressure from stock investors .
This was in direct response to the company spending US$ 100 million on a new digital platform .
At the time , the project was already at least one year behind schedule and above budget .
A large number of layoffs occurred in its marketing department , and the company 's second in command also left .
On May 12 , 2014 , Darden announced that as part of the spinoff of Red Lobster , it was converting the co - located Red Lobster and Olive Garden locations into standalone Olive Garden locations .
On May 16 , 2014 , Darden announced it would be selling the Red Lobster seafood restaurant chain to Golden Gate Capital for US$ 2.1 billion .
Darden announced the completion of the sale of Red Lobster on July 28 , 2014 .
ACQUISITIONS Section::::Acquisitions .
Differences between Starboard and Darden management soon emerged over the hedge fund 's proposal to split the company in two and spin off a third to handle their real estate portfolio , a move Starboard said would greatly boost shareholder value .
Matters came to head when management announced a plan to spin off the underperforming Red Lobster early in 2014 .
Starboard led a large group of investors in asking management to delay the move and see if better options , such as its plans to revitalize the chain , were available .
When management instead decided to sell the chain to private equity firm Golden Gate Capital in May , Starboard and other investors sharply criticized the $ 2.1 billion " fire sale " price as a serious undervaluing of Red Lobster and its assets such as the underlying real estate .
It also claimed management had refused shareholders ' requests for a special meeting to discuss the deal .
Chief Executive Officer Clarence Otis , Jr. announced he would be resigning at the end of the year , the same day the Red Lobster sale was complete .
Management said afterwards that it would work on a needed turnaround plan for Olive Garden , also struggling .
However , after CNBC reported on a leaked document , supposedly offered to potential lenders and buyers earlier in the year , that described Red Lobster 's financial position far more optimistically than management had in its contemporary public statements , one of the investors , a union pension fund , filed suit alleging material misrepresentation .
Management claimed the document had been prepared by Golden Gate in consultation with Red Lobster 's executives , who could have been expected to have that view of the chain 's future .
Eugene Lee was named permanent CEO on February 23 , 2015 , after serving as interim CEO in October 2014 .
Starboard assembled its own slate of directors to challenge all the sitting board members in the company 's upcoming shareholder elections .
In support of their candidacy it released a 294-slide presentation in early September about how the company had gone wrong and how its directors would restore it to health .
While it received considerable media attention for its detailed focus on Olive Garden , in particular the chain 's " wasteful " practice of serving too many of its free unlimited breadsticks at once ( to prevent food waste due to staleness : instead of one per customer plus an additional one per table ; additional breadsticks are served fresh on demand ) and not salting the water it boiled pasta in so as to secure a longer warranty on the pots , it also attacked management for spending lavishly on the chain 's corporate headquarters while paying the general managers of individual restaurants less than its competitors did .
Management responded two days later that it was already implementing many of the suggested changes , and said the free breadsticks merely represented " Italian generosity " .
Nevertheless , in October , shareholders replaced the entire board with Starboard 's slate , in what an observer called an " epic fail " for management , since that rarely happens .
On March 27 , 2017 , Darden announced its intent to acquire Cheddar 's Scratch Kitchen for $ 780 million from shareholders such as L Catterton and Oak Investment Partners .
On March 28 , 2017 , when Darden announced it that had acquired Cheddar 's Scratch Kitchen and " lifted its full - year earnings outlook , " the company became the biggest gainer that day on the S&P 500 , with shares growing nearly 9 percent .
The acquisition was completed on April 24 , 2017 .
UNITS * LongHorn Steakhouse
* Olive Garden
* Cheddar 's Scratch Kitchen
* Darden 's Specialty Restaurant Group
* Eddie V 's Prime Seafood
*
The Capital Grille *
Bahama Breeze * Seasons 52 , fresh grill and wine bar featuring a seasonal menu with dishes containing 475 or fewer calories .
* Yard House USA , Inc. – 62 locations * Darden Corporation * GMRI ,
Inc. * RARE Hospitality International , Inc. * RARE Hospitality Management ,
Inc. SEE ALSO
* List of restaurant chains * List of food companies
* List of casual dining restaurant chains
* List of S&P 500 companies * Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange ( D )
* List of Florida companies
* List of Orlando companies
* List of Michigan companies REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website