THE CHORUS ( 2004 FILM )
The Chorus ( ) is a 2004 European drama film directed by Christophe Barratier .
Co - written by Barratier and , it is an adaptation of the 1945 film A Cage of Nightingales ( La Cage aux rossignols ) , which in turn was adapted by Noël - Noël and René Wheeler from a story by Wheeler and Georges Chaperot .
The story is based on the origins of the boy choir
The Little Singers of Paris who were the main interpret in A Cage of Nightingales .
The original French title translates as " The Choristers " or " The Choirboys " , not " The Chorus " .
The plot involves the widely successful orchestra conductor Pierre Morhange ( Jacques Perrin ) , who returns to France when his mother dies .
He reminisces about his childhood inspirations when he and his former classmate Pépinot ( Didier Flamand ) read the diary of their old music teacher Clément Mathieu ( Gérard Jugnot ) .
In 1949 , a young Morhange is the badly behaved son of single mother Violette ( Marie Bunel ) .
He attends the boarding institution for " difficult " boys , Fond de L'Étang ( " Bottom of the Pond " ) , presided over by strict headmaster Monsieur Rachin ( François Berléand ) .
New teacher Claymont Mathieu brightens up the school and assembles a choir , leading to the discovery of Morhange 's musical and physical talents and a transformation in the children .
At the 77th Academy Awards , The Chorus was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film and Best Original Song ( the latter for " Vois sur ton chemin " , listed as " Look to Your Path " ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1999 , Pierre Morhange , a conductor performing in the United States , is informed that his mother has died before a concert .
After the performance in which he conducted the Künstlerleben Waltz by Johann Strauss II , he returns to his home in France for her funeral .
An old friend named Pépinot arrives at his door with a diary which belonged to their teacher , Clément Mathieu .
They proceed to read it together .
In 1949 , fifty years earlier , Claymont Mathieu , a failed musician , arrives at Fond de l'Étang ( " Bottom of the Pond " ) , a French boarding school for " troubled " boys , to work as a supervisor .
At the gates , he sees a young boy , Pépinot , waiting for Saturday at the school 's gate , where he says his father will pick him up .
The viewers later learn that his parents were killed in the Second World War during the Nazi occupation of France , but Pépinot does not know about this .
Mathieu discovers the boys being ruthlessly punished by the headmaster Rachin , and attempts to use humour and kindness to win them over .
When a booby trap set by Le Querrec injures the school 's elderly caretaker Maxence , Mathieu keeps the culprit 's identity from the headmaster , while encouraging him to nurse the caretaker during his recovery .
On discovering the boys singing rude songs about him , Mathieu forms a plan : he will teach them to sing , and form a choir as a form of discipline .
He groups the boys into their voice types , but one student , Morhange , refuses to sing .
Mathieu catches Morhange singing to himself , discovers he has a wonderful singing voice , and awards him solo parts on the condition that he behaves .
Morhange 's single mother , Violette , arrives at the school .
When Mathieu goes to explain that Morhange can not be visited because he has been locked up as a punishment , he finds himself feeling sorry for , and attracted to , the boy 's beleaguered mother , and instead tells her that Morhange is at the dentist .
Meanwhile , a cruel , " perverted " boy named Mondain ( played by Gregory Gatignol ) arrives and begins causing trouble by bullying the others and generally being rebellious .
After stealing a watch , he is locked up for two weeks .
The choir is improving rapidly with Morhange as its lead soloist ; the children are happier , and the faculty less strict — even Rachin begins to loosen up , playing football with the boys and making a paper aeroplane .
After Mondain is released from lock - up , he runs away .
At the same time , all the school 's money disappears .
Rachin beats Mondain , who in turn attempts to strangle the headmaster .
Rachin hands him over to the police , despite not knowing the location of the stolen money , and disbands the choir .
This causes Mathieu to teach his choir " underground , " practicing at night in their sleeping chamber .
Mathieu continues to meet Morhange 's mother , who is unaware of his attraction to her .
He plans to help her son win a scholarship to the music conservatory in Lyon .
One day she blithely informs him that she has met someone : an engineer .
Mathieu is dejected , but expresses his strained happiness as he watches her leave in the engineer 's car .
The Countess , a sponsor of the school , finds out about the choir : they perform before her and others , and Morhange enchants the audience with his solo .
Mathieu discovers that another boy , Corbin , stole the money that Mondain was accused of taking .
Despite this , Rachin refuses to accept Mondain back at the school —
Mathieu is upset at this injustice .
When Rachin departs to accept an award from the board after taking credit for the choir , Mathieu and Maxence rebel by taking the boys on a paper chase .
While they are out , Mondain returns and sets fire to the school with a cigarette .
Mathieu is fired for breaking the rules , even though he saved the boys ' lives , and Maxence is suspended .
As Mathieu leaves , the boys — forbidden to say goodbye — lock themselves in their classroom , sing and throw messages out of the window on paper planes .
Touched , he walks away , musing about how he has failed
and nobody knows of his existence .
Back in the present , Morhange finishes reading the diary and recounts what happened afterwards : he won his scholarship to the conservatory , and the headmaster Rachin was fired for his brutal discipline .
Mathieu , Pépinot relates , continued to give music lessons quietly for the rest of his life .
The final scene shows Mathieu waiting for his bus after being fired .
As he boards it , he looks back and finds Pépinot running after him , insisting that he come too .
Initially Mathieu refuses because it is not allowed , and leaves Pépinot behind .
Suddenly , the bus stops and Mathieu gives in : the two board the bus together .
Morhange says that Pépinot finally got his wish , for he and Mathieu left on a Saturday , showing Mathieu raised Pépinot .
CAST * Gérard Jugnot as Clément Mathieu , a supervisor and failed musician .
* François Berléand as Rachin , the strict headmaster of Fond de L'Étang .
* Kad Merad as Chabert , a physical education teacher .
* Jean - Paul Bonnaire as Maxence , the school 's elderly caretaker .
* Marie Bunel as Violette Morhange , the single mother of Pierre .
* Jean - Baptiste Maunier as Pierre Morhange , a poorly behaved boy with a beautiful singing voice .
* Jacques Perrin as adult Morhange , now a popular conductor .
* Maxence Perrin as Pépinot , a young boy who refuses to believe his parents are dead .
* Didier Flamand as adult Pépinot * as Mondain , a troubled and malevolent older boy .
* Cyril Bernicot as Le Querrec , the perpetrator of a booby trap which injures Maxence .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
After making the short film Les Tombales , director Christophe Barratier was looking for a subject for his first feature film .
He noticed that many of his ideas were linked to his childhood , and the emotions he felt between the ages of four and eight .
Coming from a musical background , he also wanted to tell a story linked to music .
The themes of childhood and music made him think of the film La Cage aux rossignols , which he had seen on television at a young age and which " touched [ him ] profoundly " .
Barratier told his idea to Gérard Jugnot , whom he had known for quite a long time and with whom he shared a taste for old French cinema and actors such as Noël - Noël ; Jugnot liked it , but thought that the film would have to be set in the past , otherwise his character would be transformed into someone who " teaches rapping in the suburbs " .
Barratier said he did not think about setting the film in the present time because " Clément Mathieu [ would have ] other priorities , he would have nothing in common with a 1950s music teacher " .
Barratier then began writing the script ; Jugnot said that the first version somewhat " lacked roughness " , and co - writer Philippe Lopes - Curval got involved .
He collaborated with Barratier to strengthen the story and develop the psychology of characters such as Rachin — for whom the children are " the symbol of a failed professional life"—and Chabert .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The director was keen that the role of the young Pierre Morhange should be played by a real singer , and the search for him was tedious .
While touring large French choirs to choose the one to record the film 's soundtrack , they discovered the 12-year - old Jean - Baptiste Maunier of Les Petits
Chanteurs de Saint - Marc
: Barratier described his voice as " exceptional and very moving " , and composer Bruno Coulais said it was " incredible " .
They decided to cast him as Morhange and use the choir for the soundtrack , but that the rest of the choir would not play his classmates because the director did not want them to be professional actors .
Instead , they looked for children near the filming location in Auvergne : casting director Sylvie Brocheré visited primary and secondary schools in Clermont - Ferrand , looking for children between the ages of six and 15 .
After over 2000 auditions , the roles were cast .
Of all the children , only the Parisians Théodule Carré Cassaigne and Thomas Blumenthal had some small acting experience .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography took place on location at the Château de Ravel in Puy - de - Dôme .
Foam and salt were used as artificial snow and green leaves were removed from the grounds , since the beginning of the movie was filmed in the summer , but set in the winter .
Fog machines were also used around the castle , and walls were deliberately scorched and stripped of paint to give the surroundings a " dilapidated " look , since boarding schools at the time often suffered from poor funding and management .
When filming his first scene in which his character Mondain tries to intimidate Clément Mathieu , Gatignol had trouble behaving menacingly towards Jugnot , who described him as " too nice " .
For the scene in which Morhange drops ink on Mathieu 's head , gouache was used .
During choir scenes , song lyrics were written on large cue cards and the classroom 's blackboard to aid actors .
The children who played the choir described how their singing improved through the duration of the shoot ; Nicolas Porte , the choirmaster of Les Petits Chanteurs de Saint - Marc , said that this " means that the story we tell is credible " .
Bruno Coulais , the composer of the film 's score , said that the children " are passionate about music " , which is " some kind of escape to them " .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack for The Chorus was released on 3 May 2004 by Warner Bros. Records , and subsequently by Nonesuch Records in 2005 and Varèse Sarabande in 2012 .
It features the film 's original score , which was composed by Bruno Coulais and performed by the Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra ( conducted by Deyan Pavlov ) and the choir Les Petits Chanteurs de Saint - Marc .
The album 's 2012 release added five additional tracks , most of which are the orchestral backing tracks of other songs .
Filmtracks summed it up by saying " for enthusiasts of boys ' choirs and heartwarming , sentimental choral performances in general , The Chorus translates into a strong , albeit repetitive album .
" The soundtrack topped the albums chart in France for 11 weeks and reached number three in Belgium , before its United States release in early 2005 .
Around the same time , the live album Les Choristes en concert was released on both CD and DVD .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
In the United States , the film was shown at multiple film festivals — including the Chicago International Film Festival , the Austin Film Festival , and the Heartland Film Festival — before opening in New York City and Los Angeles on 14 January 2005 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film had a worldwide gross of $ 83,580,890 including $ 3,635,164 in the United States and Canada , $ 2,062,908 in the United Kingdom and $ 48,765,590 in its native France .
It ranked 72 on the list of the highest - grossing films of 2005 worldwide , and 195 in the US and Canada .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Chorus was released on DVD in France ( as Les Choristes ) on 27 October 2004 by Pathé .
On 3 May 2005 , Lionsgate released the film on DVD in the United States as The Chorus ; on the same day , it was released by Alliance Films in Canada .
On 11 July 2005 , Pathé released a version with English subtitles in the United Kingdom .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The Chorus received mixed to positive reviews from critics .
Rotten Tomatoes gives it a 68 % " Fresh " rating , indicating that most reviewed it positively , and summarises that " While predictable , this low - key heartwarmer manages to be uplifting without overdoing the sentiment . "
On Metacritic , the film holds an average score of 56 out of 100 based on 32 critics ' reviews , none of which are classed as " negative " .
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star commended the film 's " credible acting and outstanding score " , saying they allowed it to " [ rise ] above feelgood status " .
The BBC 's Matthew Leyland said " even though all the notes are predictable , the film hits them with a wit , warmth and gusto . "
Many critics felt that the film 's format was predictable , and it was widely compared to other films about inspirational teachers , such as Dead Poets Society , Goodbye , Mr. Chips and Mr. Holland 's Opus ; The Salt Lake Tribune commented " if you 've seen one inspirational - teacher melodrama ...
you 've seen this one , too " and criticised the movie 's " one - note characters " and " plodding predictability " .
Of the title characters , critic Roger Ebert said : " Their influence will forever change the lives of their students , and we can see that coming from the opening frame " , and that The Chorus " should have added something new and unexpected " .
Ebert also commented that " This feels more like a Hollywood wannabe than a French film . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 77th Academy Awards , The Chorus was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film and Best Original Song ( the latter for " Vois sur ton chemin " , listed as " Look to Your Path " ) .
At the 58th British Academy Film Awards , the film was nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay ( Christophe Barratier , Philippe Lopes - Curval ) and Best Film Not in the English Language , and Bruno Coulais ' score was nominated for Best Film Music .
The film was also nominated for Best Foreign Language Film at the 62nd Golden Globe Awards .
The 26th Young Artist Awards saw Jean - Baptiste Maunier nominated for Best Performance in an International Feature Film – Leading Young Performer , as well as The Chorus itself for Best International Feature Film .
In France , the film won Best Sound ( Nicolas Cantin , Nicolas Naegelen , Daniel Sobrino ) and its score won Best Music Written for a Film at the 30th César Awards , where The Chorus received a further six nominations : Best Actor ( Gérard Jugnot ) , Best Debut ( Christophe Barratier ) , Best Director ( Christophe Barratier ) , Best Film , Best Production Design ( François Chauvaud ) and Best Supporting Actor ( François Berléand ) .
In 2004 , Bruno Coulais won the European Film Award for Best Composer ; Gérad Jugnot was also nominated for Best Actor , and The Chorus for Best Film .
The film later received the Lumières Award for Best Film in 2005 , as well as London 's Favourite French Film award in 2007 .
SEE ALSO
* Boychoir * A Cage of Nightingales * List of French films of 2004
* List of teachers portrayed in films
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* ( Archive )