LITTLE BRITAIN , NEW YORK Little Britain , New York is an area in the town of New Windsor , Orange County .
The name spread to the surrounding region , which at that time was part of Ulster County , New York .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The area of Little Britain was part of a patent issued to Andrew Johnston on July 19 , 1719 for 2,000 acres .
It was first settled around 1724 by John Humphrey who purchased a farm lot of 250 acres .
Peter Mullinder purchased a farm in 1729 , the following month Robert Burnet of Scotland by way of Raritan , New Jersey and John Reid also bought land .
Charles Clinton was a native of County Longford , Ireland , who espoused Jacobite sympathies .
Having persuaded a number of his friends and relatives to join him , he left Ireland and arrived at Little Britain in 1731 .
Among those who accompanied him were William Borland , Alexander Denniston , Thomas Dunlap , Robert Frazer , William Hamilton , and George Lille .
Clinton became a judge of the court of common pleas .
In 1770 Little Britain was designated a road district for the purpose of maintenance .
Little Britain Road was one of the first roads in the town .
In 1737 , there being but few children in the settlement , Little Britain had no schoolmaster , but around 1751 the Rev. John Moffat , pastor of Goodwill Church , having succeeded John McNeil , opened " Moffat 's Academy " , which was located in a house on a farm owned by Robert Shaw , on the road from Little Britain to Washingtonville .
By 1814 the Little Britain Meetinghouse school district was established .
The first post office in the town was established at Little Britain on May 29 , 1824 .
Hamilton Morrison was postmaster .
Little Britain was the birthplace of New York Governor DeWitt Clinton , his father General James Clinton and his uncle U.S. Vice President George Clinton .
Today it lends its name to Little Britain Elementary School , part of the Washingtonville school district .
The Little Britain Grange hall also still stands near the intersection of NY 207 and NY 747 .
REFERENCES
* http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/b/a/r/Thomas-Barker-TX/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-0104.html
* http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/b/a/r/Thomas-Barker-TX/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-1262.html