HEMISPHERECTOMY
Hemispherectomy is a very rare neurosurgical procedure in which a cerebral hemisphere ( half of the brain ) is removed , disconnected , or disabled .
This procedure is used to treat a variety of seizure disorders where the source of the epilepsy is localized to a broad area of a single hemisphere of the brain , notably Rasmussen 's encephalitis .
About one in three patients with epilepsy will continue to have persistent seizures despite epileptic drug therapy .
Hemispherectomy is reserved for the most extreme cases of this one - third in which the individual 's seizures are irresponsive to medications or other less invasive surgeries and significantly impair functioning or put the patient at risk of further complications .
The procedure successfully cures seizures in about 85%-90 % of patients .
Additionally , it is also known to often markedly improve the cognitive functioning and development of the individual .
Subtotal hemispherectomy sparing sensorimotor cortex can be performed with successful seizure control expected in 70 - 80 % of patients .
Even with the presence of widespread unilateral epileptogenicity or anatomic / functional imaging abnormalities , complete hemispherectomy can often be avoided , particularly when there is little hemiparesis .
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::History and development .
Hemispherectomy was first performed on a dog in 1888 by Friedrich Goltz .
The first such operation on humans was done by Walter Dandy in 1928 for glioblastoma multiforme .
Hemispherectomy was revitalized in children in the 1980s by John M. Freeman and Ben Carson at Johns Hopkins Hospital .
In the 1960s and early 1970s , hemispherectomy involved essentially removing an entire half of the brain .
This procedure is known as anatomical hemispherectomy .
Anatomical hemispherectomy decreases the likelihood that seizures will return , as there is no longer any part of the identified epileptic brain area left to cause seizures .
A second type of hemispherectomy , known as functional hemispherectomy , has become more prevalent in recent years .
In this procedure , only the epileptic portions of that side of the brain are removed , as opposed to the entire hemisphere .
If a functional hemispherectomy is chosen over an anatomical hemispherectomy , it is likely because it allows for less blood loss and greater chance of resilience for the patient .
Additionally , functional hemispherectomy is less likely to cause hydrocephalus , the " excessive accumulation of ( cerebrospinal ) fluid in the brain , " which leads to complications from harmful pressure on brain tissues .
Within the last fifteen years , a few types of functional hemispherectomies have emerged .
One such procedure is known as peri - insular hemispherectomy .
Peri - insular hemispherectomy has been developed to allow for seizure relief with minimal brain tissue removal .
In this procedure , the surgeon aims to disconnect ( rather than remove ) the hemisphere , in order to minimize long term complications .
Another procedure relatively new to epilepsy surgery is endoscopic surgery ( see endoscopy ) , surgery performed using small camera scopes and little incision sites .
Its appeal lies in its minimally invasive nature , which generally decreases chance of infection and increases speed of physical recovery .
PATIENT CRITERIA Section::::Patient criteria .
Because of the dramatic alteration of brain composition and the inherent risk that hemispherectomies pose , there are criteria that must be met in order for a person to qualify for the procedure .
Criteria include no successful control of seizures throughout a variety of drug trials , and a reasonable to high chance of procedural success .
One such predictor of success is often the age of the patient .
This procedure is almost exclusively performed in children because their brains generally display more neuroplasticity , allowing neurons from the remaining hemisphere to take over the tasks from the lost hemisphere .
This likely occurs by strengthening neural connections which already exist on the unaffected side but which would have otherwise remained small in a normally functioning , uninjured brain .
In one study of children under 5 who had this surgery to treat catastrophic epilepsy , 73.7 % were freed of all seizures .
Success of the procedure is not , however , limited to children .
A study in 2007 indicated the long - term efficacy of anatomic hemispherectomy in carefully selected adults , with seizure control sustainable over multiple decades .
A case study published in 2015 of 2 adults aged 48 and 38 demonstrated the success of functional hemispherectomy in treating status epilepticus ( SE ) , an epileptic condition in which seizures are prolonged or occur closely together .
In 2012 , a case study following 30 individuals having undergone some form of hemispherectomy in adulthood found that 81 % of individuals were seizure free post - procedure .
Furthermore , almost all participating patients reported improved quality of life .
The conclusion : " ( a)dult patients do not have to expect more problems with new deficits , appear to cope quite well , and mostly profit from surgery in several quality of life domains . "
Ultimately , the chances of benefit and improvement to the individual must outweigh the costs .
For example , a neurosurgeon would not recommend hemispherectomy in a patient who still possessed significant functionality , despite frequent seizures .
Such a patient would risk losing their remaining functionality .
Likewise , hemispherectomy likely would be recommended to a patient with debilitating seizures .
A patient with little or severely deteriorating functioning does not have as much to risk by having the procedure , thus the chance of benefit to them is greater .
Depending on the case , a recommendation for a hemispherectomy could be more risky for a child than for an adult .
Thus , age is not always the deciding success factor for hemispherectomies .
RESULTS Section::::Results .
Overall , hemispherectomy is a successful procedure .
A 1996 study of 52 individuals who underwent the surgery found that 96 % of patients experienced reduced or completely ceased occurrence of seizures post - surgery .
Studies have found no significant long - term effects on memory , personality , or humor , and minimal changes in cognitive function overall .
For example , one case followed a patient who had completed college , attended graduate school and scored above average on intelligence tests after undergoing this procedure at age 5 .
This patient eventually developed " superior language and intellectual abilities " despite the removal of the left hemisphere , which contains the classical language zones .
When resecting the left hemisphere , evidence indicates that some advanced language functions ( e.g. , higher order grammar ) can not be entirely assumed by the right side .
The extent of advanced language loss is often dependent on the patient 's age at the time of surgery .
One study following the cognitive development of two adolescent boys who had undergone hemispherectomy found that " brain plasticity and development arise , in part , from the brain 's adaption of behavioral needs to fit available strengths and biases … The boy adapts the task to fit his brain more than he adapts his brain to fit the task .
" Neuroplasticity after hemispherectomy does not imply complete regain of previous functioning , but rather the ability to adapt to the current abilities of the brain in such a way that the individual may still function , however differently the new way of functioning is .
Along with neuroplasticity , people who undergo hemispherectomies remarkably recover due to resilience .
Resilience is the ability , in this case , of the brain being able to recover from a tough situation and take back its shape .
Neuroplasticity resilience explains why the hemisphere that is still intact is able to recover many of the functions that were once the removed hemisphere 's job .
Resilience here is an action in patients with hemispherectomies in which they recover and navigate back to health .
TRAUMATIC
HEMISPHERECTOMY
Section::::Traumatic hemispherectomy .
There are cases where a person that received major trauma to one side of the brain , such as a gunshot wound , has required a hemispherectomy and survived .
The most notable case is that of Ahad Israfil , who lost the right side of his cerebrum in 1987 in a gun - related work accident .
He eventually regained most of his faculties , though he still required a wheelchair .
It was noted that reconstructive surgery was difficult due to the gunshot shattering his skull , and he is living with a large indentation on that side of his head .
SEE ALSO
* Corpus callosotomy * Hemispherectomy Foundation * Epilepsy REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Johns Hopkins Children 's Center research findings * Hopkins Medical News article on the topic
*
The Hemispherectomy Foundation * The Deepest Cut by Christine Kenneally , The New Yorker