RAISE YOUR VOICE
Raise Your Voice is a 2004 American teen musical drama film directed by Sean McNamara .
Canadian rock band
Three Days Grace appeared in this movie as special guests , performing the songs " Are You Ready " and " Home " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Terri Fletcher ( Hilary Duff ) is a teenager with a passion for singing and dreams of becoming a professional singer .
She wants to participate in a music program that could give her a $ 10,000 scholarship .
Her overprotective father Simon ( David Keith ) , a second - generation restaurateur , disapproves of Terri 's plans , stating that being a singer may not be a worthwhile life choice .
Simon believes that Terri will get hurt if she goes to Los Angeles and would prefer if she continues running the family business .
Terri is very close to her elder brother Paul ( Jason Ritter ) who fully supports her dream , despite what their dad says .
At Paul 's graduation - day barbecue , he has a fight with Simon , who , in the heat of it , grounds his son .
Terri sneaks Paul out of the house to attend a Three Days Grace concert .
On the way back , they are in a car accident .
Terri awakens in the hospital , where she learns that Paul was killed .
Terri loses interest in her singing , and also in the music program .
However , Terri 's mother Frances ( Rita Wilson ) feels differently ; knowing that Paul would have wanted Terri to attend the program , she convinces Terri to go .
Frances tells Simon that Terri plans to live with her aunt Nina ( Rebecca De Mornay ) in Palm Desert for the summer and allows her daughter to travel to Los Angeles .
Terri arrives in Los Angeles and weathers some difficult ordeals : her jacket is stolen , her cab driver is crabby , and when she arrives at the music school , the door is locked ;
fellow student Jay ( Oliver James ) lets her in and Terri arrives safely .
While at the program , Terri makes new friends and learns a great deal about music , but problems arise when she is plagued by memories of the car crash which took Paul 's life and finds it increasingly difficult to keep her participation in the program a secret from her father .
Throughout the film , Terri develops a mutual fondness for Jay , but she faces competition from Robin Childers ( Lauren C. Mayhew ) , who was involved with Jay the previous summer .
Although Robin still harbors feelings for Jay , he does not reciprocate these feelings .
Jay tries to get Robin to cease her efforts to keep him and Terri apart .
On one occasion , she kisses him just as Terri walks in .
Jay pushes Robin away , but Terri runs off in tears , ignoring Jay 's insistence that the kiss meant nothing .
Later , finding him drunk , Terri and her roommate Denise ( Dana Davis ) take Jay elsewhere to sober up .
When he does , Jay apologizes , and Terri agrees to finish the song they 've been working on for the scholarship contest .
At home , Simon learns of Terri 's ruse and becomes furious .
Simon then flies to Los Angeles to bring Terri home in an effort to keep her safe .
On the final day , Simon comes to the school and Terri finds him packing up her belongings ; he reams Terri for disobeying and deceiving him , and for turning his own sister and wife against him .
She begs him to let her finish what she started and not let the summer go to waste .
Ultimately , realizing how selfish he had been acting concedes and allows her to perform .
Terri and Jay then perform the song they wrote with Terri dedicating it to Paul .
The scholarship prize is won by Denise , yet Simon is proud of his daughter and her talents .
He is also glad that her last memory of Paul is one worth having ( the concert ) , as opposed to Simon 's own ( their argument , and Paul 's subsequent restriction to his bedroom ) .
Terri 's teachers hope to see her next year ; Simon replies that they just might .
Over the end credits , Terri performs for her parents and Nina , with Jay cheering her on .
CAST
* Hilary Duff as Teresa
" Terri " Fletcher * Oliver James as Jay * Lauren C. Mayhew as Robin Childers * Dana Davis as Denise * Johnny Lewis as Engelbert " Kiwi " Wilson * Rebecca De Mornay as Nina Fletcher * Jason Ritter as Paul Fletcher * David Keith as Simon Fletcher * Rita Wilson as Frances Fletcher
* Kat Dennings as Sloane
* John Corbett as Mr. Torvald * James Avery as Mr. Gantry * Robert Trebor as Mr. Wesson * Gibby Brand as Mr. Holcomb * Three Days Grace as themself RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mostly negative reviews , receiving 33 out of 100 by Metacritic and achieving a 15 % ( rotten ) rating on Rotten Tomatoes with 85 reviews and an average rating of 4.7 out of 10 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film opened on October 8 , 2004 and grossed $ 4,022,693 in its opening weekend at # 6 , behind Shark Tales second weekend , Friday Night Lights , Ladder 49s second weekend , Taxi , and The Forgottens third weekend .
The film was also a flop at the box office .
By the end of its run , Raise Your Voice grossed $ 10,411,980 domestically and $ 4,455,534 internationally , totaling $ 14,867,514 worldwide .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In contrast to the negative reviews , for her role , Duff won Favorite Movie Actress at the 2005 Kids Choice Awards .
Duff also received a Golden Raspberry Award nomination in 2005 for Worst Actress .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on VHS and DVD February 15 , 2005 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was planned to be debuting before the movie , but was never released because Duff released her eponymous second album with the songs featured on the film .
Three Days Grace also contributed the songs " Are You Ready " and " Home " to the movie , the latter from their self - titled debut album .
The upbeat " Lift Off " by Tina Sugandh .
Unreleased tracklist :
* " Play It Loud " – MxPx
*
*
" Someone 's Watching Over Me " – Hilary Duff * * " Jericho " – Hilary Duff * * " Fly " – Hilary Duff * * " Shine " – Hilary Duff
*
* " Walking on Sunshine " – Katrina and the Waves
* * " Home " – Three Days Grace * *
" Are You Ready ? " – Three Days Grace * *
" We Might as Well Be Strangers " –
Keane
* * " Lift Off " –
Tina Sugandh * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS