AERO ( CHOCOLATE )
Aero is an aerated chocolate product manufactured by Nestlé .
Originally produced by Rowntree 's , Aero bars were introduced in 1935 to the North of England as the " new chocolate " .
By the end of that year , it had proved sufficiently popular with consumers that sales were extended throughout the United Kingdom .
By 1936 , sales of the chocolate had spread to New York City , and later spread to many other countries including Canada , Mexico , Australia , South Africa and Japan .
Aero has been manufactured by Nestlé since 1988 , after a take over of Rowntree 's .
Known for its unique " bubbly " texture that collapses as the bar melts , it is available in many different flavours , and various forms including Aero Bubbles and Aero Biscuits .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The process of manufacture was patented in 1935 by Rowntree 's in York , England .
In 1935 , Rowntree 's launched Aero into the United Kingdom , followed by the Peppermint Aero in the 1960s .
The wrapping was brown ( green in the mint version ) and displayed the " Rowntree 's " script logo and the large word " AERO " , along with the slogan " Hold on tight
or I 'll fly away ! "
below the " AERO " name .
The words " Aerated Mint Chocolate " ( " Aerated Milk Chocolate " for the chocolate version ) were seen multiple times in the word " AERO . "
In the 1970s , an advertisement was aired in which had kids flying an Aero bar as if it was a kite .
FLAVOURS Section::::Flavours .
There are several flavours of Aero .
These include the Original Aero ( which consists of milk chocolate throughout ) , Mint Aero ( with a green , bubbly , mint flavoured centre , covered in milk chocolate ) , Caramel Aero ( with a caramel layer on top of the chocolate layer ) , Dark Chocolate Aero , White Chocolate Aero ,
Latte flavour Aero and Crispy Aeros ( similar to Nestlé Crunch bars ) .
Orange Aeros ( orange / chocolate layered ) were sold for a while as well , and larger 100 g sized bars are currently available in some stores .
In the 1970s , there were also Strawberry flavour bars .
In the United Kingdom , and recently Canada , Aero Bubbles are also available .
These are small , round chocolates with a bubbly centre , available in Milk Chocolate , Mint and Orange flavours and a mixture of both .
A chunky spared bar was launched .
In May 2012 , Aero Orange and Aero Bubbles Orange were both introduced in Canada and in the United Kingdom as a limited edition .
In January 2014 , customers in Canada reported on two new flavours of Aero Bubble Bars that arrived in shops ; a Strawberry flavour and a new variation of a Caramel Aero .
While bars were ( and still are ) produced with chocolate and a liquid caramel , the new Caramel Bubble Bar consists of a Caramel flavoured white chocolate centre with a milk chocolate coating .
Japan has produced a number of unique Aero flavours , among them Vanilla Milkshake , Hot Milk , Green Tea and others .
They usually consist of a flavoured , coloured chocolate centre and outer milk chocolate layer .
Aero Cocoa ( plain , Green Tea and Strawberry flavours ) is also sold in Japan .
Released in 2006 , the Aero Vanilla Yogourt flavour was released only in Canada .
As with all other Aero bars manufactured by Nestlé in Canada and Nicaragua , it is manufactured in a peanut free facility .
In Australia there is also an Aero Temptations bar , which has the bubbly chocolate , but with a caramel topping .
In Ireland , there was an Irish Cream flavour Aero .
In 2010 in the United Kingdom , and 2011 in Ireland , Nestlé modified the ingredients and colouring of the Mint Aero Bubbles product .
This resulted in the product retaining its mint flavour , but losing its green coloured bubble interior .
This has been explained by Nestlé as being a response to corporate policy to remove artificial food colourings from the product .
There has , however , been no indication that the Mint Aero chocolate bar is to be modified in the same way .
AERO BISCUITS Section::::Aero Biscuits .
On 4 May 2011 , Nestlé introduced the Aero Biscuit .
Aero Biscuit consists of the classic flavour Aero chocolate and round pieces of biscuit .
It is currently sold throughout the United Kingdom and Ireland , and is also available in Aero Orange and Aero Mint varieties .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
As well as the United Kingdom , its place of creation , the bar is also sold as Aero in Argentina , Australia , Bahrain , Bulgaria(as LZ , through Aero is sold in some shops in Bulgaria ) , Canada , Colombia , Croatia , the Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Hong Kong , Nicaragua , Ireland , Kuwait , Malta , Mauritius , Portugal , Poland , Serbia , Slovakia , Spain , New Zealand , Japan , South Africa , Ukraine , Saudi Arabia , South Korea and the United Arab Emirates .
In Brazil , the bar is known as Suflair , in Hungary as Boci Aero and in the Netherlands as Bros ( meaning " brittle " ) .
Aero enjoys a large market following in South Africa with Aero , Aero Mint , and recently White Aero and Cappuccino Aero .
The Aero bar was made available for a short time in the United States by Nestlé during the 1980s , though it seems not to have been a commercial success .
However , they are still available at certain speciality vendors or supermarkets such as Big Y , Wegmans and Publix that import the bars .
Previously , The Hershey Company sold Aero bars in the United States under licence from Rowntree Chocolate Company from 1937 until 1939 .
Hershey currently markets a similar bar called Hershey 's Air Delight .
In Germany , the brand Aero is owned by German chocolate brand Trumpf .
Unlike the Nestlé Aero bars , the Trumpf Aero bars are solid white or milk chocolate , foamed up with carbon dioxide , and have no filling ; the inside also has a different texture .
SLOGANS Section::::Slogans .
The slogan for Aero in Australia during the 1980s was " It 's the bubbles of nothing that make it really something . "
From the 1999 redesign and " singers " advertising campaign Aero 's tagline was " Have you felt the bubbles melt ? "
This slogan was invented by Nick Welch , an advertiser and the father of Florence Welch of the indie band Florence and the Machine .
The slogan in 2011 was " Irresistabubble " , a revival of a 1980s campaign which also featured the word " Adorabubble " , and was created by Salman Rushdie , during his time as an advertising copywriter .
VARIETIES AND FLAVOURS Section::::Varieties and flavours .
Normal
*
Milk Chocolate * Mint Chocolate * Orange Chocolate * Dark Chocolate ( 70 % )
* 2 in 1 Milk Chocolate Shell ,
White Chocolate Filling * Caramel
( Caramel flavored & colored white chocolate center )
Chunky * Milk Chocolate
* Mint Chocolate " Limited Edition " ( 2000 to 2010 )
Aero Bubbles
*
Milk Chocolate
* Mint Chocolate * Orange Chocolate
* Strawberry Milk Chocolate
*
Mousse Aero Biscuit *
Milk Chocolate * Orange Chocolate * Pink Lemonade Aero Bubble Biscuits
*
Milk Chocolate
SEE ALSO
*
Mirage ( chocolate ) *
Wispa
* List of chocolate bar brands REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * A Brief History Of Aero ( letter from Nestlé UK )
* Nestlé Aero Bubbles
* Aero " hunk " advert * Aero at Nestlé Global * Air Delights