DOWNREGULATION AND UPREGULATION
In the biological context of organisms ' production of gene products , downregulation is the process by which a cell decreases the quantity of a cellular component , such as RNA or protein , in response to an external stimulus .
The complementary process that involves increases of such components is called upregulation .
An example of downregulation is the cellular decrease in the number of receptors to a molecule , such as a hormone or neurotransmitter , which reduces the cell 's sensitivity to the molecule .
This is an example of a locally acting ( negative feedback ) mechanism .
An example of upregulation is the response of liver cells exposed to such xenobiotic molecules as dioxin .
In this situation , the cells increase their production of cytochrome P450 enzymes , which in turn increases their degradation of these molecules .
Downregulation or upregulation of an RNA or protein may also arise by an epigenetic alteration .
An epigenetic alteration can be permanent or semi - permanent in a somatic cell lineage .
Such an epigenetic alteration can cause expression of the RNA or protein to no longer respond to an external stimulus .
This occurs , for instance , during drug addiction or progression to cancer .
DOWNREGULATION AND UPREGULATION OF RECEPTORS Section::::Downregulation and upregulation of receptors .
All living cells have the ability to receive and process signals that originate outside of their membranes , which they do by means of proteins called receptors , usually found on a cell 's surface imbedded in the plasma membrane .
When such signals bind to a receptor , they effectively direct the cell to do something , such as dividing , dying , or allowing substances to be created , or to enter or exit the cell .
A cell 's ability to respond to a chemical message depends on the presence of receptors tuned to that message .
The more receptors a cell has that are tuned to the message , the more the cell will respond to it .
Receptors are created , or expressed , by the DNA of the cell , and they can be increased , or upregulated , when the signal is weak , or decreased , or downregulated , when it is strong .
Downregulation of receptors happens when receptors have been chronically exposed to an excessive amount of a ligand , either from endogenous mediators or from exogenous drugs .
This results in ligand - induced desensitization or internalization of that receptor .
It is usually exhibited by various hormone receptors .
Upregulation of receptors , on the other hand , results in super - sensitized cells especially after repeated exposure to an antagonistic drug or prolonged absence of the ligand .
Some receptor agonists may cause downregulation of their respective receptors , while most receptor antagonists temporarily upregulate their respective receptors .
The disequilibrium caused by these changes often causes withdrawal when the long - term use of a drug is discontinued .
However , the use of certain receptor antagonists may also damage receptors faster than they upregulate ( internalization of receptors due to antagonism ) .
Upregulation and downregulation can also happen as a response to toxins or hormones .
An example of upregulation in pregnancy is hormones that cause cells in the uterus to become more sensitive to oxytocin .
EXAMPLE :
INSULIN RECEPTOR DOWNREGULATION
Section::::Example : Insulin receptor downregulation .
Elevated levels of the hormone insulin in the blood trigger downregulation of the associated receptors .
When insulin binds to its receptors on the surface of a cell , the hormone receptor complex undergoes endocytosis and is subsequently attacked by intracellular lysosomal enzymes .
The internalization of the insulin molecules provides a pathway for degradation of the hormone as well as for regulation of the number of sites that are available for binding on the cell surface .
At high plasma concentrations , the number of surface receptors for insulin is gradually reduced by the accelerated rate of receptor internalization and degradation brought about by increased hormonal binding .
The rate of synthesis of new receptors within the endoplasmic reticulum and their insertion in the plasma membrane do not keep pace with their rate of destruction .
Over time , this self - induced loss of target cell receptors for insulin reduces the target cell 's sensitivity to the elevated hormone concentration .
This process is illustrated by the insulin receptor sites on target cells in a person with type 2 diabetes .
Due to the elevated levels of blood glucose in an overweight individual , the β - cells ( islets of Langerhans ) in the pancreas must release more insulin than normal to meet the demand and return the blood to homeostatic levels .
The near - constant increase in blood insulin levels results from an effort to match the increase in blood glucose , which will cause receptor sites on the liver cells to downregulate and decrease the number of receptors for insulin , increasing the subject 's resistance by decreasing sensitivity to this hormone .
There is also a hepatic decrease in sensitivity to insulin .
This can be seen in the continuing gluconeogenesis in the liver even when blood glucose levels are elevated .
This is the more common process of insulin resistance , which leads to adult - onset diabetes .
Another example can be seen in diabetes insipidus , in which the kidneys become insensitive to arginine vasopressin .
DOWNREGULATION AND UPREGULATION IN DRUG ADDICTION
Section::::Downregulation and upregulation in drug addiction .
Family - based , adoption , and twin studies have indicated that there is a strong ( 50 % ) heritable component to vulnerability to substance abuse addiction .
Especially among genetically vulnerable individuals , repeated exposure to a drug of abuse in adolescence or adulthood causes addiction by inducing stable downregulation or upregulation in expression of specific genes and microRNAs through epigenetic alterations .
Such downregulation or upregulation has been shown to occur in the brain 's reward regions , such as the nucleus accumbens .
( See , for example , Epigenetics of cocaine addiction . ) DOWNREGULATION AND UPREGULATION IN CANCER Section::::Downregulation and upregulation in cancer .
DNA damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer .
If accurate DNA repair is deficient , DNA damages tend to accumulate .
Unrepaired DNA damage can increase mutational errors during DNA replication due to error - prone translesion synthesis .
DNA damage can also increase epigenetic alterations due to errors during DNA repair .
Such mutations and epigenetic alterations can give rise to cancer ( see malignant neoplasms ) .
Thus , epigenetic downregulation or upregulation of DNA repair genes is likely central to progression to cancer .
As described in Regulation of transcription in cancer , epigenetic downregulation of the DNA repair gene MGMT occurs in 93 % of bladder cancers , 88 % of stomach cancers , 74 % of thyroid cancers , 40%-90 % of colorectal cancers and 50 % of brain cancers .
Similarly , epigenetic downregulation of LIG4 occurs in 82 % of colorectal cancers and epigenetic downregulation of NEIL1 occurs in 62 % of head and neck cancers and in 42 % of non - small - cell lung cancers .
Epigenetic upregulation of the DNA repair genes PARP1 and FEN1 occurs in numerous cancers ( see Regulation of transcription in cancer ) .
PARP1 and FEN1 are essential genes in the error - prone and mutagenic DNA repair pathway microhomology - mediated end joining .
If this pathway is upregulated , the excess mutations it causes can lead to cancer .
PARP1 is over - expressed in tyrosine kinase - activated leukemias , in neuroblastoma , in testicular and other germ cell tumors , and in Ewing 's sarcoma .
FEN1 is upregulated in the majority of cancers of the breast , prostate , stomach , neuroblastomas , pancreas , and lung .
SEE ALSO
* Regulation of gene expression * Desensitization ( medicine ) * Addiction * Cocaine REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Sherwood , L. ( 2004 ) .
Human Physiology From Cells to Systems ,
5th Ed ( p. 680 ) .
Belmont , CA : Brooks / Cole - Thomson Learning
*
Wilmore , J. , Costill , D. ( 2004 ) .
Physiology of Sport and Exercise , 3rd Ed ( p. 164 ) .
Champaign , IL : Human Kinetics EXTERNAL LINKS