THE LONGEST YARD ( 1974 FILM )
The Longest Yard is a 1974 American sports comedy film directed by Robert Aldrich , written by Tracy Keenan Wynn and based on a story by producer Albert S. Ruddy .
The film follows a former NFL player ( Burt Reynolds ) recruiting the group of prisoners and playing football against their guards .
The film was remade three times , including for the 2001 British film Mean Machine ( a shortened version of the title used for the original 's UK release ) , starring Vinnie Jones , the 2005 film remake , The Longest Yard featured Reynolds as coach Nate Scarborough , and as the 2015 Egyptian film .
In the two non - American remakes , the sport was changed from American football to association football .
Though the film was billed as being based on an original story , some reviewers found parallels between this film and the 1962 Hungarian film Two Half Times in Hell , which was based on a real - life association football game in 1942 between German soldiers and Ukrainian prisoners of war during World War II , known as the Death Match .
The Longest Yard featured many real - life football players , including Green Bay Packers legend Ray Nitschke .
The film was shot on location at Georgia State Prison in Reidsville , Georgia .
It had the cooperation of then - Governor Jimmy Carter .
Filming had to be delayed from time to time due to prison uprisings .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Paul " Wrecking " Crewe is a former star pro football quarterback , who walks out on his wealthy girlfriend Melissa in Palm Beach , Florida .
He takes her Maserati - engined Citroën SM without permission and leads police on a car chase .
Crewe is eventually caught and sentenced to 18 months in Citrus State Prison .
The convicts disrespect Crewe because he was dismissed from the NFL for point shaving .
A sadistic warden , Rudolph Hazen , is a football fanatic who manages a semi - pro team made up of prison guards .
He wants Crewe to help coach the team and clinch a championship .
Responding to pressure from the guards ' leader and coach , Wilhelm Knauer , Crewe initially refuses , but eventually agrees to play an exhibition game .
Crewe forms a team that includes Samson , a former professional weightlifter , and Connie Shokner , a serial killer and martial arts expert .
With the help of the clever Caretaker , former professional player Nate Scarborough and the first black inmate willing to play , " Granny " Granville , plus long - term prisoner Pop — and with an assist from the warden 's amorous secretary , Miss Toot — Crewe molds a team nicknamed the " Mean Machine " .
He agrees to play quarterback himself .
After witnessing " Granny " being harassed by some of the prison guards without breaking , the black inmates decide to volunteer their services and join the team .
Unger , one of the prison trustees , persistently asks Crewe if he can replace Caretaker as manager of the team , which Crewe refuses to do .
In retaliation , Unger attempts to kill Crewe by fashioning a home - made bomb from a light bulb filled with a combustible fluid , designed to detonate inside Crewe 's cell when he turns on the light .
However , Caretaker is killed instead , when he enters Crewe 's cell to retrieve some papers and Unger closes the cell door , locking him in and preventing rescue .
Crewe 's teammates are given a stern lecture from Hazen about the consequences of any attempted escape after the game .
Afterward , Crewe re - energizes the team with a surprise - presenting them with professional uniforms ( stolen from the guards by Caretaker before he was killed ) .
They charge onto the field , to the shock of the guards and Hazen , in their new uniforms .
The " Mean Machine " starts out surprisingly well , and at halftime the game is close , with the guards leading , 15 - 13 .
Hazen threatens Crewe as an accessory to Caretaker 's murder unless Crewe loses the game to the guards by at least 21 points .
Crewe reluctantly agrees , but only if Hazen promises not to hurt the other prisoners ; Hazen agrees , but in bad faith , and tells Knauer to have his team " inflict as much physical punishment on the prisoners as humanly possible " as soon as they are ahead by 21 points .
Crewe makes deliberate mistakes , putting the " Mean Machine " down by more than three touchdowns , 35 - 13 , then takes himself out of the game .
The guards gladly injure several of the prisoners , and Crewe 's teammates feel betrayed .
Depressed , Crewe goes back into the game , but the prisoners refuse to co - operate with him until he convinces them of his change of heart .
The " Mean Machine " gets back into the game , trailing 35 - 30 , one of their touchdowns scored by Nate despite his bad knee , and he is immediately cut down and crippled by guard Bogdanski .
As he is wheeled off the field , Nate tells Crewe to " screw Hazen " and win the game .
Crewe scores the winning touchdown with no time left and the " Mean Machine " wins , 36 - 35 .
As the prisoners celebrate and Crewe walks across the field , appearing to escape , Hazen furiously orders Knauer to shoot him with a rifle , but he refuses before Crewe picks up the football and hands it to Hazen .
CAST * Burt Reynolds as Paul " Wrecking " Crewe * Eddie Albert as Warden Rudolph Hazen
* Ed Lauter as Captain Wilhelm Knauer
* Michael Conrad as Nate Scarboro * James Hampton as James " Caretaker " Farrell * Harry Caesar as " Granny " Granville * John Steadman as Pop * Charles Tyner as Unger * Mike Henry as Rasmussen
* Jim Nicholson as Ice Man * Bernadette Peters as Miss Toot * Pepper Martin as Shop steward * Robert Tessier as Connie Shokner * Richard Kiel as Samson * Anitra Ford as Melissa
* Ray Nitschke as Bogdanski * George Jones as Big George
* Joe Kapp as Walking Boss
* Pervis Atkins as Mawabe
* Ernie Wheelwright as Spooner
* Sonny Shroyer as Tannen
* Ray Ogden as Schmidt
* Sonny Sixkiller as Indian * Michael Fox as announcer
A number of the actors had previously played professional football .
Henry played for the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Los Angeles Rams .
Kapp played quarterback for the Minnesota Vikings .
Nitschke was a middle linebacker for the Green Bay Packers who was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1978 , four years after release , and Atkins played for the Los Angeles Rams , the Washington Redskins and the Oakland Raiders .
Also appearing as prisoners are Wheelwright , who played with the New York Giants , Atlanta Falcons and the New Orleans Saints , and Ogden , who played with the St. Louis Cardinals , the New Orleans Saints , the Atlanta Falcons and the Chicago Bears .
Sixkiller was a collegiate star as a quarterback for the University of Washington Huskies from 1970 - 1972 , and briefly played pro in the defunct World Football League .
Reynolds himself had played college football for Florida State University before injuries curtailed his career .
There were a number of convicts used as players during filming .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film was based on a story by producer Albert S. Ruddy written in the late 1960s .
He got Tracy Keenan Wynn , who had written a TV movie about life in prison , The Glass House , to write a script .
Wynn signed in June 1972 .
Finance was raised through Paramount , who released Ruddy 's The Godfather .
Aldrich says he took the third act of the film from Body and Soul ( 1947 ) a film on which Aldrich had worked as assistant director .
He says this consisted of his character falling from grace and trying to redeem himself .
He later did this on All the Marbles .
According to Reynolds , Aldrich knew comedy was " not his strong suit " so they would do a take as written then
the director would ask for a " schtick take " where Reynolds could " clown around " .
Reynolds says " 65 % of the time " the schitck scenes were used .
Aldrich said Reynolds " on occasion he 's a much better actor than he 's given credit for .
Not always : sometimes he acts like a caricature of himself .
I thought he was very good in Longest Yard . "
RELEASE Section::::Release .
The Longest Yard opened in New York on August 21 , 1974 .
This was followed by a release in Los Angeles on September 25 , 1974 followed by a general release in October 1974 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film was popular and earned $ 22 million in North American theatrical rentals .
It had admissions in France of 200,738 .
The film received generally positive reviews , currently holding an 81 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
MAD satirized this movie as " The Longest Yardbird " in issue # 176 ( July ' 75 ) .
REMAKES Section::::Remakes .
The film has been remade three times :
* Mean Machine ( 2001 ) , starring Vinnie Jones , taking place in England and changing the sport from American Football to Association Football .
*
The Longest Yard ( 2005 ) , starring Adam Sandler as Crewe and featuring Burt Reynolds in a supporting role ( that of retired player Nate Scarborough ) .
* , which translates to Egypt 's Captain ( 2005 ) , starring Mohamed Imam , taking place in Egypt and again changing the sport to association football .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy in 1975 .
Reynolds was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy , Albert was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture and James Hampton was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actor .
The film was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Film Editing .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1974 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS