CHRISTOPHER JOHN BOYCE
Christopher John Boyce ( born February 16 , 1953 ) is a former American defense industry employee who was convicted for selling United States spy satellite secrets to the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
ESPIONAGE
Section::::Espionage .
Boyce is the son of Noreen Boyce ( née Hollenbeck ) and former McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corporation , Director of Security , Charles Eugene Boyce .
Along with his three brothers and five sisters , Boyce was raised in Southern California , in the affluent community of Rancho Palos Verdes , a suburb southwest of Los Angeles .
In 1974 , Boyce was hired at TRW , an aerospace firm in Redondo Beach , California .
Due to his father 's prestigious position at McDonnell Douglas , Boyce was able to obtain employment .
Within months , Boyce was promoted to a highly sensitive position in TRW 's " Black Vault " ( classified communications center ) with a top secret security clearance , where he worked with National Reconnaissance Office ( NRO ) transmissions .
Boyce claims that he began getting misrouted cables from the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) discussing the agency 's desire to depose the government of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam in Australia .
Boyce claimed the CIA wanted Whitlam removed from office because he wanted to close U.S. military bases in Australia , including the vital Pine Gap secure communications facility , and withdraw Australian troops from Vietnam .
For these reasons some claim that U.S. government pressure was a major factor in the dismissal of Whitlam as Prime Minister by the Governor General , Sir John Kerr , who according to Boyce , was referred to as " our man Kerr " by CIA officers .
Through the cable traffic Boyce saw that the CIA was involving itself in such a manner , not just with Australia but with other democratic , industrialized allies .
Boyce considered going to the press , but believed the media 's earlier disclosure of CIA involvement in the 1973 Chilean coup d'état had not changed anything for the better .
Instead , he gathered a quantity of classified documents concerning secure U.S. communications ciphers and spy satellite development and had his friend Andrew Daulton Lee , a cocaine and heroin dealer since his high school days
( hence his nickname , " The Snowman " ) deliver them to Soviet embassy officials in Mexico City , returning with large sums of cash for Boyce ( nicknamed " The Falcon " because of his longtime interest in falconry ) and himself .
According to a book that Boyce and his wife co - authored , the information was not valuable to the Soviet Union .
Boyce , then 23 , was finally exposed after Lee was arrested by Mexican police in front of the Soviet embassy on January 6 , 1977 .
His arrest was " almost by accident " : Lee was arrested for littering .
During his harsh interrogation , Lee , who had top secret microfilm in his possession when arrested , confessed to being a Soviet spy and implicated Boyce .
Boyce was arrested on January 16 , 1977 , when the FBI found him hiding out at the shack he was renting near Riverside , California .
He was convicted May 14 , 1977 , of espionage and sentenced to 40 years in prison , initially at Terminal Island
and then the Metropolitan Correctional Center in San Diego .
On July 10 , 1979 , he was transferred to the federal penitentiary in Lompoc , California .
ESCAPE Section::::Escape .
On January 21 , 1980 , Boyce escaped from Lompoc .
While a fugitive , Boyce carried out 17 bank robberies in Idaho and Washington , and adopted the alias of " Anthony Edward Lester " .
According to Boyce , he studied aviation , not to flee to the Soviet Union as some suspected , but to rescue Daulton Lee from Lompoc .
On August 21 , 1981 , Boyce was arrested while eating in his car outside " The Pit Stop , " a drive - in restaurant in Port Angeles , Washington .
Authorities had received a tip about Boyce 's whereabouts from his former bank robbery confederates .
RETURN TO PRISON
Section::::Return to prison .
Boyce was sentenced to three years for his escape and to 25 years for bank robbery , conspiracy , and breaking federal gun laws .
He was transferred to United States Penitentiary , Leavenworth .
In 1982 , Boyce gave a television interview to Ray Martin for Australia 's 60 Minutes about the dismissal of Whitlam .
After this he received a bashing from fellow inmates which he believed was orchestrated by prison guards .
After the attack , he was transferred to USP Marion , where he was held in isolation .
In April 1985 , Boyce gave testimony on how to prevent insider spy threats to the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations as part of its Government Personnel Security Program .
In 1988 , with support from senators , he was transferred , out of solitary confinement , to Minnesota Correctional Facility – Oak Park Heights .
In 1998 he was transferred to ADX Florence in Colorado ; in his opinion , this was punishment for a newspaper article that he had written .
In 2000 he was transferred to FCI Sheridan in Oregon .
RELEASE AND SUBSEQUENT LIFE Section::::Release and subsequent life .
Boyce was released from prison on parole on September 16 , 2002 after serving a little over 25 years , accounting for his time spent outside from the escape .
Shortly thereafter he married Kathleen Mills , whom he had met when she was working as a paralegal spearheading efforts to obtain parole for Lee .
After her success with Lee , she turned her attention to securing parole for Boyce as well , and the two developed a personal relationship .
The couple moved to Oregon , and Boyce 's own parole ended in 2007 .
In 2013 , Boyce published a book titled American Sons : The Untold Story of the Falcon and the Snowman , which mainly discusses his time in prison and relationship with Kathleen .
At that time , he was living a relatively quiet life with Kathleen in central Oregon , where he had resumed his participation in falconry as a frequent pastime .
When interviewed at the time his book was released , Boyce expressed support for the actions of Edward Snowden in exposing information about the United States government 's surveillance programs .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The story of their case was told in Robert Lindsey 's best - selling 1979 book The Falcon and the Snowman .
This book was turned into a film of the same title in 1985 by director John Schlesinger starring Timothy Hutton as Boyce and Sean Penn as Lee .
Lindsey 's initial book was followed by The Flight of the Falcon : The True Story of the Escape and Manhunt for America 's Most Wanted Spy ( 1983 ) , an account of Boyce 's escape from prison and subsequent bank robbing spree .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Statement by Peter Staples , Member for Jagajaga in Australia , November 20 , 1986
* Robert Lindsey , The Falcon and the Snowman : A True Story of Friendship and Espionage , Lyons Press , 1979 , * Robert Lindsey , The Flight of the Falcon :
The True Story of the Escape and Manhunt for America 's Most Wanted Spy , Simon & Schuster , 1983 ,
* Christopher Boyce , Cait Boyce , Vince Font , American Sons : The Untold Story of the Falcon and the Snowman , 2013 , EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Falcon and The Snowman : American Sons book and blog website
* https://twitter.com/CodenameFalcon * Chris Boyce and Daulton Lee in the TruTV Crime Library