CUMMINGTONITE Cummingtonite is a metamorphic amphibole with the chemical composition ( Mg , Fe)(Mg , Fe)SiO(OH ) , magnesium iron silicate hydroxide .
Monoclinic cummingtonite is compositionally similar and polymorphic with orthorhombic anthophyllite , which is a much more common form of magnesium - rich amphibole , the latter being metastable .
Cummingtonite shares few compositional similarities with alkali amphiboles such as arfvedsonite , glaucophane - riebeckite .
There is little solubility between these minerals due to different crystal habit and inability of substitution between alkali elements and ferro - magnesian elements within the amphibole structure .
NAME AND DISCOVERY Section::::Name and discovery .
Cummingtonite was named after the town of Cummington , Massachusetts , where it was discovered in 1824 .
It is also found in Sweden , South Africa , Scotland , and New Zealand .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Cummingtonite is a member of the cummingtonite - grunerite solid solution series which ranges from MgSiO(OH ) for magnesiocummingtonite to the iron rich grunerite endmember FeSiO(OH ) .
Cummingtonite is used to describe minerals of this formula with between 30 and 70 per cent FeSiO(OH ) .
Thus , cummingtonite is the series intermediate .
Manganese also substitutes for ( Fe , Mg ) within cummingtonite amphibole , replacing B site atoms .
These minerals are found in high - grade metamorphic banded iron formation and form a compositional series between MnMgSiO(OH )
( tirodite ) and MnFeSiO(OH ) ( dannemorite ) .
Calcium , sodium and potassium concentrations in cummingtonite are low .
Cummingtonite tends toward more calcium substitution than related anthophyllite .
Similarly , cummingtonite has lower ferric iron and aluminium than anthophyllite .
Amosite is a rare asbestiform variety of grunerite that was mined as asbestos only in the eastern part of the Transvaal Province of South Africa .
The origin of the name is Amosa , the acronym for the mining company " Asbestos Mines of South Africa " .
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
Cummingtonite is commonly found in metamorphosed magnesium - rich rocks and occurs in amphibolites .
Usually it coexists with hornblende or actinolite , magnesium clinochlore chlorite , talc , serpentine - antigorite minerals or metamorphic pyroxene .
Magnesium - rich cummingtonite can also coexist with anthophyllite .
Cummingtonite has also been found in some felsic volcanic rocks such as dacites .
Manganese rich species can be found in metamorphosed Mn - rich rock units .
The grunerite end member is characteristic of the metamorphosed iron formations of the Lake Superior region and the Labrador Trough .
With prograde metamorphism cummingtonite and grunerite morph to members of the olivine and pyroxene series .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING