KEG
A keg is a small barrel .
Traditionally , a wooden keg is made by a cooper and used to transport items such as nails , gunpowder , and a variety of liquids .
In recent times , a keg is often constructed of stainless steel .
It is commonly used to store , transport , and serve beer .
Other alcoholic or non - alcoholic drinks , carbonated or non - carbonated , may be housed in a keg as well .
Carbonated drinks are generally kept under pressure in order to maintain carbon dioxide in solution , preventing the beverage from becoming flat .
BEER KEG Section::::Beer keg .
Beer kegs are made of stainless steel , or less commonly , of aluminium .
A keg has a single opening on one end , called a " bung . "
A tube called a " spear " extends from the opening to the other end .
There is a self - closing valve that is opened by the coupling fitting which is attached when the keg is tapped .
There is also an opening at the top of the spear that allows gas ( usually carbon dioxide ) to drive the beer out of the keg .
The coupling fitting has one or two valves that control the flow of beer out of and gas into the keg .
The keg must be in the upright position , that is , with the opening on top , for the beer to be dispensed .
Kegs can be contrasted to casks , which have two or more openings and no spear .
Most major breweries now use internally speared kegs .
SIZE Section::::Size .
Historically a beer barrel was a standard size of , as opposed to a wine barrel at , or an oil barrel at .
Over the years barrel sizes have evolved and breweries throughout the world use different sized containers .
Even when the content capacity of two kegs are equal — e.g . metricized to 50 liters — the keg shape and keg tap system may differ greatly .
U.S. KEG SIZES Section::::U.S. keg sizes .
Most U.S. brewers sell beer in barrels of 15.5 gallons , barrels of 7.75 gallons , and barrels of 5.17 gallons .
Since keg sizes are not standardized , the keg can not be used as a standard unit of measure for liquid volumes .
This size standard varies from country to country and brewery to brewery with many countries using the metric system rather than U.S. gallons .
A keg , or half - barrel is a 15.5 U.S. gallon vessel .
A quarter - barrel has a volume of 7.75 U.S. gallons .
Generally a keg is a vessel smaller than a barrel ; thus , it is 30 gallons or smaller .
In the U.S.
the terms half - barrel and quarter - barrel are derived from the U.S. beer barrel , legally defined as being equal to 31 U.S. gallons ( this is not the same volume as some other units also known as barrels ) .
A 15.5 U.S. gallon keg is also equal to : * 12.7 Imperial gallons * 58.67 liters * 103.25 Imperial pints
* 124 U.S. pints
* 496 U.S. gills * 165 twelve fluid ounce ( U.S. measure ) drinks
* About 90 bombers ( 22 fl oz bottles ) * About 6.88 24-unit cases of 12 fl oz cans *
About 5.5 30-racks of 12 fl oz cans
* 1,984 fluid ounces ( U.S. )
However , beer kegs can come in many sizes : !
Size ( US gal ) Size ( liters )
No . of 12 fl oz drinks No . of 16
fl oz drinks No . of 20
fl oz drinks Weight of full keg ( lb ) Also known as DIN - KEG AND EURO - KEG Section::::DIN - keg and Euro - keg .
In European countries the most common keg size is 50 liters .
This includes the UK , which uses a non - metric standard keg of 11 imperial gallons , which is coincidentally equal to .
The German DIN 6647 - 1 and DIN 6647 - 2 have also defined kegs in the sizes of 30 and 20 liters .
A newer Euro regulation defines 50 , 30 , 25 and 20 liters where the keg shape is usually thicker but not as tall as the German keg specifications . !
Content !
DIN 6647 - 1/-2 !
DIN - Keg diameter !
Euro - Keg !
Euro - Keg diameter
In some areas it is common to refer to the size not in liters but in beers .
In areas such as Germany , where the standard beer size is 0.5 liters , that means a 50-liter keg contains 100 beers .
SPECIFICATIONS FOR A U.S. 1/2 BARREL KEG Section::::Specifications for a U.S. 1/2 barrel keg .
Accepted
specifications for a standard keg are : TAPPING
A KEG Section::::Tapping a keg .
There are two different types of tapping equipment that are available for kegs : party pumps and gas taps .
Party pumps utilize outside air , thus introducing oxygen and bacteria into the keg .
This causes the beer to oxidize , affecting the taste .
Kegs operating a party pump should be used within 18–24 hours so that the beer does not become unpalatable .
Gas pumps may use CO , although it is recommended to use a mixed gas ( usually nitrogen - CO ) so the beer does not get overcarbonated when being tapped for a long time ( Guinness requires 25 % CO and 75 % nitrogen ) .
Gas pumps can preserve a keg up to 120 days with proper refrigeration .
As with any pressurized container , a keg can cause injury , even at normal operating pressure , whether with compressed air or carbon dioxide : " The tapping system and pressure regulator both should be equipped with a pressure relief ( blow off ) device .
If you are not familiar with tapping equipment , consult your retailer ... " ( printed on an Anheuser - Busch 's keg cap )
In the US and Australia , kegs or beer coils are usually kept in a bucket of ice and/or water to keep the beer cool .
European consumers , when not using a party pump , mainly use inline beer chillers to pour a beer in an ideal temperature for serving .
Those chillers usually also have their own air compressor for keg pressurization .
OTHER TYPES OF KEGS CORNELIUS KEG
Section::::Other types of kegs .
Section::::Cornelius keg .
A Cornelius keg ( also known as a Corney or soda keg ) was originally used by the soft drink industry , now commonly used to store and dispense beer , especially homebrewed .
Cornelius kegs were originally made by Cornelius ,
Inc. Since the arrival of newer technology such as bag - in - box packages soft drink bottlers have mostly abandoned their Cornelius kegs , often making them available to hobbyists .
MINI KEG Section::::Mini keg .
The mini keg is a 5-liter keg produced for retail sales .
Some brands come with a spout and pour from the bottom via gravity , while others may use a low cost pressurized tap .
Mini kegs are typically not returned to the manufacturer for cleaning and refilling .
The disposable kegs , being made of aluminum , may be recycled .
In Canada , Molson brewery dubbed the mini keg " Bubba " .
This name has now been genericized to generally apply to all 5-liter mini kegs in Canada .
This might cause confusion , as a company called Bubba Keg is established in the U.S. , and appears to not be associated with Molson .
Today , mini kegs are widely available in liquor stores worldwide , with Heineken , Grolsch and Bitburger all adopting the design .
Recently in Austria , beer is available in mini kegs , either by a one - way type keg made of steel or out of a reinforced thermoplastic for about a 4 € deposit .
BEER BALL Section::::Beer ball .
Another type of mini keg is the " beer ball " or the " party ball " , a disposable plastic ball that usually holds around , roughly the equivalent of 55 twelve - ounce beers , though they can also be found in a smaller size .
Like kegs , it is necessary to tap the ball before the beer inside can be served .
ONE - WAY KEGS Section::::One - way kegs .
One - way kegs , also known as disposable kegs or PET kegs , were invented in 1996 .
They are usually made of plastic .
Some types have a cardboard outer packaging , which makes them easier to stack and transport , and also protects the plastic container .
Some may use either bag in ball or spear technology .
A stronger , more pressure resistant type of one way kegs make use of a double wall technology .
QUARTER BARREL ( PONY KEG )
Section::::Quarter barrel ( pony keg ) .
A quarter barrel , more commonly known as pony keg , is a beer vessel containing approximately 7.75 U.S. gallons ( 29.33 liters ) of fluid .
It is half the size of the standard beer keg and equivalent to a quarter of a barrel .
The term pony refers to its smaller size – compare pony glass ( quarter - pint ) and pony bottle .
It will serve roughly 82 twelve - ounce cups .
The shape of a pony keg resembles that of a full - sized keg , while being much easier to move manually .
However , it shares many inconveniences with the bigger kegs , such as : often requiring a deposit when purchased ; needing a tap to serve the contents ; and posing difficulties in determining the amount of beer remaining ( weighing the keg or observing its buoyancy are common techniques ) .
Despite this , a pony keg can be a cheap way to provide beer for a medium - sized party .
In some places such as Cincinnati , the term pony keg can mean a convenience store that sells beer .
SIXTH BARREL Section::::Sixth barrel .
A sixth barrel keg contains approximately 5.2 gallons , and is becoming the choice for many establishments and breweries that wish to use kegs smaller than a half barrel .
The sixth barrel kegs are nominally larger in size and volume compared to the Cornelius keg .
They are normally fitted with a standard US Type D Sanke coupler on a single downspout ; whereas , Corny kegs are normally fitted with a flip - hatch , and a dual connector pin - lock or ball - lock top .
Although the sixth barrel torpedo keg is approximately the same height as the standard half barrel , the smaller foot print of the sixth barrel allows retailers have a greater variety of beer in a small space .
This size keg is quickly replacing the quarter barrel size which has the same foot print as a half barrel keg , but is only half as tall .
Other than smaller circumference , sixth barrel kegs are very similar to their full - sized counterparts in construction .
A stainless Micromatic brand sixth barrel keg weighs approximately 14 - 15 pounds ( 6.3–6.8 kg ) when empty , and approximately 58 - 60 pounds ( 26.3 - 27.2 kg ) when full . EIGHTH BARREL Section::::Eighth barrel .
An eighth barrel has the same dimensions as a sixth barrel , but the seven bottom - most inches are hollow .
UK AND IRISH KEG SUPPLY
STRUCTURE Section::::UK and Irish keg supply structure .
The beer vessel supply structure in the UK and Ireland is quite different , whilst the couplers for kegs have been largely standardised to sankey , grundy and interbrew , a couple of others exist such as UEC and U - Type ; however these are much less common .
The kegs themselves are made from stainless steel or aluminium .
The standard keg size is 11 imperial gallons ( 50 litre/88 imperial pints approx ) and the vast majority of keg beers are supplied in this keg size .
There are also smaller 30 liters ( 52.76 imperial pints ) kegs usually reserved for more specialist and/or premium European beers .
A number of manufacturers also produce 18 imperial gallon ( approximately 82 liters/144 imperial pints ) and 22 imperial gallon ( approximately 100 liters/172 imperial pints ) kegs , however owing to their size
they are not so popular as manual handling is seen by some to be difficult , and as a result they tend to be used only for large - scale events and bars with high throughput .
For bars that sell an excessive volume of beer there is the 36 imperial gallon ( 150 liter/260 imperial pint ) keg , however due to its very large size few people can move them making it an impractical choice .
KEG LAWS Section::::Keg laws .
In the U.S. as of 2005 , there are 21 states and numerous localities that have keg registration laws .
The laws vary widely in terms of whom they target , what their intended purpose is , and how strongly they are enforced .
SEE ALSO
* Cask
ale * Draught beer * Firkin
* Growler ( jug )
* Keg stand
* Bag - in - box * BeerTender
* Keg in the Closet
REFERENCES
NOTES BOOKS
* Soroka , W , Fundamentals of Packaging Technology , IoPP , 2002 , * Yam , K. L. , Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology , John Wiley & Sons , 2009 , EXTERNAL LINKS
* How to Tap a Keg — A wikiHow article * How to remove and reassemble the valve in a sanke keg