DESSERT SPOON
A dessert spoon is a spoon designed specifically for eating dessert and sometimes used for soup or cereals .
Similar in size to a soup spoon ( intermediate between a teaspoon and a tablespoon ) but with an oval rather than round bowl , it typically has a capacity around twice that of a teaspoon .
The use of dessert spoons around the world varies greatly ; in some areas , they are very common while in other places the use of the dessert spoon is almost unheard of — with diners using forks or teaspoons for their desserts instead .
In most traditional table settings , the dessert spoon is placed above the plate or bowl , separated from the rest of the cutlery , or it may be brought in with the dessert .
As a unit of culinary measure , a level dessertspoon ( dstspn . ) equals two teaspoons , or 10 milliliters , whereas a tablespoon is three teaspoons ( 15 ml or half a fluid ounce ) in the United States , and two dessertspoons , i.e. four teaspoons ( 20 ml or two - thirds of a fluid ounce ) in Britain and Australia , which is the old British standard .
For dry ingredients , a rounded or heaped teaspoonful is often specified instead .
As a unit of Apothecary measure , the dessert - spoon was an unofficial but widely used unit of fluid measure equal to two fluid drams , or fluid ounce .
In the United States and pre-1824 England , the fluid ounce was of a Queen Anne wine gallon ( which was defined as exactly 231 cubic inches ) thus making the dessert - spoon approximately .
The post-1824 ( British ) imperial Apothecaries ' dessert - spoon was also fluid ounce , but the ounce in question was of an imperial gallon , which was originally defined as 277.274 cubic inches , but later adjusted to approximately 277.419433 cubic inches , in either case yielding a dessert - spoon of approximately .
In both the British and American variants of the Apothecaries ' system , two tea - spoons make a dessert - spoon , while two dessert - spoons make a table - spoon .
In pharmaceutical Latin , the Apothecaries ' dessert - spoon is known as , abbreviated as or less frequently , as opposed to the tea - spoon ( or ) and table - spoon ( or ) .
SOURCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Silver place settings , from Butler 's Guild