THE FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX
The Flight of the Phoenix is a 1964 novel by Elleston Trevor .
The plot involves the crash of a transport aircraft in the middle of a desert and the survivors ' desperate attempt to save themselves .
The book was the basis for the 1965 film The Flight of the Phoenix starring James Stewart and the 2004 remake entitled Flight of the Phoenix .
The Flight of the Phoenix came at the midpoint of Trevor 's career and led to a bidding war over its film rights .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Pilot Frank Towns and navigator Lew Moran are ferrying a mixed bag of passengers out of the Jebel oil town of the Libyan desert , among them oil workers , a couple of British soldiers , and a German who was visiting his brother .
An unexpected sandstorm forces the aircraft down , damaging it , killing two of the men , and severely injuring the German .
In the book , the action takes place in the Libyan part of the Sahara .
The survivors wait for rescue but begin to worry , as the storm has blown them far off course , away from where searchers would look for them .
After several days , Captain Harris marches toward a distant oasis together with another passenger .
His aide , Sergeant Watson feigns a sprained ankle and does not join Harris .
A third man follows after them .
Days later , Harris barely manages to return to the crash site .
The others are lost .
As the water begins to run out , Stringer , a precise , arrogant English aeronautical engineer , proposes a radical solution .
He claims they can rebuild a new aircraft from the wreckage of the old twin - boom aircraft , using the undamaged boom and adding skids to take off .
They set to work .
At one point , they spot a party of nomadic tribesmen .
Captain Harris decides to ask them for help , but Sergeant Watson refuses to accompany him .
Instead another survivor , a Texan named Loomis , goes with him .
The next day , Towns finds their looted bodies , throats cut , and the nomads gone .
Later , Towns finds out that Stringer 's job is designing model aircraft , not real , full - scale ones .
Afraid of the effect on morale , he and Moran keep their discovery secret , though they now believe Stringer 's plan is doomed .
However , they turn out to be wrong .
The aircraft is reborn , like the mythical Phoenix .
It flies the passengers , strapped to the outside of the fuselage , to an oasis and civilization .
FILM ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film adaptations .
The book was the basis of a 1965 film starring James Stewart , Richard Attenborough , and Hardy Krüger .
The 2004 remake featuring Dennis Quaid was also based on the novel , although it was re - located to the Gobi Desert in Asia .
SEE ALSO * Coffman engine starter
*
Lady Be Good ( aircraft )
* Tragedy at Kufra REFERENCES