CERVICAL FRACTURE
A cervical fracture , commonly called a broken neck , is a catastrophic fracture of any of the seven cervical vertebrae in the neck .
Examples of common causes in humans are traffic collisions and diving into shallow water .
Abnormal movement of neck bones or pieces of bone can cause a spinal cord injury resulting in loss of sensation , paralysis , or usually instant death .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Considerable force is needed to cause a cervical fracture .
Vehicle collisions and falls are common causes .
A severe , sudden twist to the neck or a severe blow to the head or neck area can cause a cervical fracture .
Sports that involve violent physical contact carry a risk of cervical fracture , including American football , association football ( especially the goalkeeper ) , ice hockey , rugby , and wrestling .
Spearing an opponent in football or rugby , for instance , can cause a broken neck .
Cervical fractures may also be seen in some non - contact sports , such as gymnastics , skiing , diving , surfing , powerlifting , equestrianism , mountain biking , and motor racing .
Certain penetrating neck injuries can also cause cervical fracture which can also cause internal bleeding among other complications .
Hanging also causes a cervical fracture which kills the victim .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Severe pain will usually be present at the point of injury .
Pressure on a nerve may also cause pain from the neck down the shoulders and/or arms .
Bruising and swelling may be present at the back of the neck .
A neurological exam will be performed to assess for spinal cord injury .
X - rays will be ordered to determine the severity and location of the fracture .
CT ( computed tomography ) scans may be ordered to assess for gross abnormalities not visible by regular X - ray .
MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) tests may be ordered to provide high resolution images of soft tissue and determine whether there has been damage to the spinal cord , although such damage is usually obvious in the conscious patient because of the immediate functional consequences of numbness and paralysis in much of the body .
It is also common for imaging ( either a plain film X - ray or CT scan ) to be completed when assessing a cervical injury .
This is the most common way to diagnose the location and severity of the fracture .
To decrease the use C - spine scans yielding negative findings for fracture , thus unnecessarily exposing people to radiation and increase time in the hospital and cost of the visit , multiple clinical decision support rules have been developed to help clinicians weigh the option to scan a patient with a neck injury .
Among these are the Canadian C - spine rule and the NEXUS criteria for C - Spine imaging , which both help make these decisions from easily obtained information .
Both rules are widely used in emergency departments and by paramedics .
SURGERY INDICATION
Section::::Surgery indication .
The indication to surgically stabilize a cervical fracture can be estimated from the Subaxial Injury Classification ( SLIC ) .
In this system , a score of 3 or less indicates that conservative managementDiscs and ligaments !
colspan=2 Neurology TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Complete immobilization of the head and neck should be done as early as possible and before moving the patient .
Immobilization should remain in place until movement of the head and neck is proven safe .
In the presence of severe head trauma , cervical fracture must be presumed until ruled out .
Immobilization is imperative to minimize or prevent further spinal cord injury .
The only exceptions are when there is imminent danger from an external cause , such as becoming trapped in a burning building .
Non - steroidal anti - inflammatory medications ( NSAIDs ) , such as aspirin or ibuprofen , are contraindicated because they interfere with bone healing .
Tylenol ( acetaminophen ) is a better option .
Patients with cervical fractures will likely be prescribed medication for pain control .
In the long term , physical therapy will be given to build strength in the muscles of the neck to increase stability and better protect the cervical spine .
Collars , traction and surgery can be used to immobilize and stabilize the neck after a cervical fracture .
CERVICAL COLLAR
Section::::Cervical collar .
Minor fractures can be immobilized with a cervical collar without need for traction or surgery .
A soft collar is fairly flexible and is the least limiting but can carry a high risk of further neck damage in patients with osteoporosis .
It can be used for minor injuries or after healing has allowed the neck to become more stable .
A range of manufactured rigid collars are also used , usually comprising a firm plastic bi - valved shell secured with Velcro straps and removable padded liners .
The most frequently prescribed are the Aspen , Malibu , Miami J , and Philadelphia collars .
All these can be used with additional chest and head extension pieces to increase stability .
RIGID BRACES Section::::Rigid braces .
Rigid braces that support the head and chest are also prescribed .
Examples include the Sterno - Occipital Mandibular Immobilization Device ( SOMI ) , Lerman Minerva and Yale types .
Special patients , such as very young children or non - cooperative adults , are sometimes still immobilized in medical plaster of paris casts , such as the Minerva cast .
TRACTION Section::::Traction .
Traction can be applied by free weights on a pulley or a Halo type brace .
The Halo brace is the most rigid cervical brace , used when limiting motion to the minimum that is essential , especially with unstable cervical fractures .
It can provide stability and support during the time ( typically 8–12 weeks ) needed for the cervical bones to heal .
SURGERY Section::::Surgery .
Surgery may be needed to stabilize the neck and relieve pressure on the spinal cord .
A variety of surgeries are available depending on the injury .
Surgery to remove a damaged intervertebral disc may be done to relieve pressure on the spinal cord .
The discs are cushions between the vertebrae .
After the disc is removed , the vertebrae may be fused together to provide stability .
Metal plates , screws , or wires may be needed to hold vertebrae or pieces in place .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Arab physician and surgeon Ibn al - Quff ( d. 1286 CE ) described a treatment of cervical fractures through the oral route in his book Kitab al-ʿUmda
fı Ṣinaʿa al - Jiraḥa
( Book of Basics in the Art of Surgery ) .
SEE ALSO
* Brown - Séquard syndrome * Cervical dislocation * Internal decapitation
* Spinal cord injury
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Brigham And Women 's Hospital Health Information - Neck Fracture .
9/12/2006 .
*
Cervical Fracture - DynoMed.com * Pamphlet containing information wearing a Halo Brace