LEMONY SNICKET 'S A SERIES OF UNFORTUNATE EVENTS
Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events ( also simply known as A Series of Unfortunate Events ) is a 2004 American gothic dark comedy film directed by Brad Silberling .
It is a film adaptation of A Series of Unfortunate Events by Lemony Snicket , covering the first three novels
The Bad Beginning , The Reptile Room , and The Wide Window .
The film stars Jim Carrey , Liam Aiken , Emily Browning , Timothy Spall , Catherine O'Hara , Billy Connolly , Cedric the Entertainer , Luis Guzmán , Jennifer Coolidge and Meryl Streep , as well as Jude Law as Lemony Snicket ( the pen name of American writer Daniel Handler ) .
Nickelodeon Movies purchased the film rights to Daniel Handler 's book series in 2000 and soon began development of a film with Barry Sonnenfeld attached to direct .
Handler adapted the screenplay and courted Jim Carrey for Count Olaf .
Sonnenfeld eventually left over budget concerns in January 2003 and Brad Silberling took over .
Robert Gordon rewrote Handler 's script , and principal photography started in November 2003 .
A Series of Unfortunate Events was entirely shot using sound stages and backlots at Paramount Pictures and Downey Studios .
The film received positive reviews , with many praising Carrey 's performance , while some criticized its comical tone .
The film also grossed $ 209 million worldwide , and won the Academy Award for Best Makeup .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the opening , the narrator , who identifies himself as Lemony Snicket , while typing on a type - writer , tells the audience the story of the Baudelaire children .
Fourteen - year - old inventor Violet Baudelaire , her twelve - year - old brother Klaus , and their baby sister Sunny are orphaned when a fire burns down their house and kills their parents .
Mr. Poe , the family 's banker , manages their fortune and leaves them in the care of their closest relative Count Olaf , who is only interested in obtaining their fortune despite Violet not being the legal age of eighteen to obtain it .
He also forces them to work through grueling house chores and belittles them .
The day Olaf obtains full custody , he pretends to go into a store claiming to buy soda , but Violet notices the car is parked directly on train tracks with a train heading towards them .
They manage to build a device to turn the switch controlling the tracks so that they are not hit .
Mr. Poe arrives and takes them away when he sees Sunny in the front seat , believing her to have been " driving .
"
Olaf initially says farewell , but threatens them that they will always be found .
The orphans are then taken to their uncle Dr. Montgomery , a kind , caring herpetologist who is planning to take the children with him to Peru .
However , Olaf arrives in disguise as an Italian scientist named Stephano .
The orphans attempt to warn Montgomery , and he believes to an extent .
Montgomery believes Stephano is after a large viper in his museum , which despite its looks , is actually very gentle .
He is discovered dead shortly after , and the orphans can not prove that Stephano is responsible for Montgomery 's death .
They are almost taken back to him when Sunny proves the viper 's innocence when it plays with her , disproving its hostile nature .
Stephano flees the scene , ridding himself of all evidence of his disguise as the police pursue him .
Mr. Poe leaves them with their Aunt Josephine , a kindly woman who is nonetheless obsessed with grammar and has irrational fears .
Olaf appears disguised as Captain Sham to interfere with their plans again .
One day , Josephine is not at the house , leaving what is apparently a suicide note ; Klaus takes advantage of mistakes in the letter 's grammar ( which Josephine would never have tolerated ) to decode her location : Curdled Cave .
A hurricane sweeps through the town - ultimately destroying the house - but the children manage to flee before the structure falls apart .
They sail to the cave and rescue her , but attract leeches due to Josephine having eaten a banana .
Olaf appears and takes the kids with him , throwing Josephine off the boat and to the Lachrymose Leeches after she annoys him by correcting his speech .
A play is soon planned , titled " The Marvelous Marriage " that involves Olaf and Violet as the leads : a groom and a bride .
Klaus 's suspicions reveal that Olaf is planning to take advantage of the play to marry Violet in reality in a desperate attempt to get the fortune .
Unless Violet follows her lines or finds a loophole , Sunny , who is being held hostage in a cage , will be dropped to her death .
Klaus manages to escape and finds a hidden tower in Olaf 's house , with a large lens which , if positioned correctly , can focus the rays of the sun .
He discovers this way that it was Olaf who set the fire to their old house .
He uses this window to burn the marriage certificate before the marriage is officially complete , leading to Olaf 's arrest .
However , a jury of his peers overturn his sentence and Olaf vanishes .
Violet , Klaus and Sunny are taken to visit their old home one last time .
As they observe the burned remains , a letter lost in the mail finally arrives , and inside is a spyglass announcing their family 's secret society .
Though their future is unclear , despite the children 's misfortune , they still have each other , thus making them " Very Fortunate Indeed " .
In the end , Snicket concludes the story , finishes typing the book , and prepares to publish it .
CAST
* Jim Carrey as Count Olaf , a villain stage actor who lusts after the Baudelaire family fortune .
Some of his disguises include Dr. Stephano , an Italian reptile scientist and Captain Sham , a swashbuckling seaman .
* Liam Aiken as Klaus Baudelaire , an intelligent bookworm who uses his knowledge of books to get himself and his siblings out of trouble .
He is the middle child of the Baudelaire orphans .
* Emily Browning as Violet Baudelaire , an intelligent inventor who makes inventions out of everyday items .
She is the eldest of the Baudelaire orphans .
* Kara and Shelby Hoffman as Sunny Baudelaire , a sassy infant with four very sharp teeth whose dialogue is almost entirely subtitled because she seems to be communicating in a series of shrieks .
She is the youngest of the Baudelaire orphans .
* Jude Law as Lemony Snicket , an introverted writer and the narrator of the story .
* Timothy Spall as Mr. Poe , a stuffy banker whose job is to take the Baudelaire children to their guardians , but is quite incompetent at keeping them safe .
*
Billy Connolly as Dr. Montgomery , an eccentric herpetologist and the Baudelaire 's uncle who temporarily becomes their guardian .
* Meryl Streep as Josephine Anwhistle , a paranoid , grammar - obsessed recluse and the Baudelaire 's aunt who temporarily becomes their guardian .
* Catherine O'Hara as Justice Strauss , Count Olaf 's kind neighbor and a judge .
* Cedric the Entertainer as the Constable , a skeptical detective .
* Luis Guzmán as the Bald - Headed Man , one of Count Olaf 's minions .
* Jamie Harris as the Hook - Handed Man , one of Count Olaf 's minions .
* Craig Ferguson as the Person of Indeterminate Gender , one of Count Olaf 's minions .
* Jennifer Coolidge and Jane Adams as the White - Faced Women , two of Count Olaf 's minions .
NOTES Section::::Cast .
Section::::Notes .
Daniel Handler ( the true name of the Lemony Snicket stories ' writer and creator ) cameos as a photographer .
The film featured uncredited appearances by Jane Lynch as a realtor , Helena Bonham Carter as Beatrice Baudelaire , Gilbert Gottfried as the voice of a duck , and Dustin Hoffman as a critic .
Author Daniel Handler initially viewed Count Olaf as being a James Mason - type .
Carrey was not familiar with the book series when he was cast , but he became a fan of the series . "
Handler 's books are just a bold and original way to tell a children 's story , " the actor explained .
Carrey was also attracted to the role despite self - parody concerns .
Director Brad Silberling was open to Carrey 's idea of improvisation for various scenes , especially the Stephano and Captain Sham alter egos .
To make his prosthetic makeup more comfortable and easier to apply , Carrey shaved his head bald for the part .
The actor 's inspiration for Olaf 's voice was combining the voices of Orson Welles and Bela Lugosi .
Emily Browning was cast as Violet Baudelaire when she auditioned at a casting call in Australia .
She was sent Handler 's original script when Barry Sonnenfeld was planning to direct , and she screen tested for the part using an English accent .
Browning became a fan of the books after reading Handler 's original script .
The actor was not cast until Silberling took over , then her character 's accent was changed to American .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Nickelodeon Movies purchased the film rights to the A Series of Unfortunate Events novel series in May 2000 .
Paramount Pictures , owner of Nickelodeon Movies , agreed to co - finance , along with Scott Rudin .
Various directors , including Terry Gilliam and Roman Polanski , were interested in making the film .
One of author Daniel Handler 's favorite candidates was Guy Maddin .
In June 2002 , Barry Sonnenfeld was hired to direct .
He was chosen because he previously collaborated with Rudin and because of his black comedy directing style from The Addams Family , Addams Family Values and Get Shorty .
Sonnenfeld referred to the Lemony Snicket novels as his favorite children 's stories .
The director hired Handler to write the script with the intention of making Lemony Snicket as a musical , and cast Jim Carrey as Count Olaf in September 2002 .
The film suffered setbacks in development in December 2002 .
Rudin left Unfortunate Events over budget concerns .
While Sonnenfeld and Carrey remained , Sonnenfeld admitted he was skeptical of Paramount 's $ 100 million budget .
The studio decided that changing the shoot from Hollywood to Wilmington , North Carolina would be less expensive .
The April 2003 start date was also pushed back .
Paramount eventually settled the situation in January 2003 by enlisting help from DreamWorks to co - finance the film , but Sonnenfeld vacated the director 's position .
Rudin and Sonnenfeld had no involvement with the film afterward , but were credited as executive producers .
Carrey remained with approval over the hiring of the next director .
Brad Silberling signed on to direct in February 2003 .
He was not familiar with the series when he was first approached .
He quickly read the first three novels and was excited that " Hollywood was taking a chance to put over $ 100 million to adapt these inventive children 's books onto screen " .
Handler , who wrote eight drafts of the script for Sonnenfeld , was replaced by Robert Gordon in May 2003 .
Handler approved of the changes that were made to his original screenplay .
" I was offered credit on the film for screenwriting by the Writers Guild of America , " Handler continued , "
but I did n't take it because I did n't write it .
I felt like it would be an insult to the guy who did . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming was set to begin in October 2003 , but it was pushed back .
Principal photography for Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events began on November 10 , 2003 , using the sound stages and backlot at Paramount Studios in Hollywood .
Director Brad Silberling avoided using too many digital or chroma key effects because he wanted the younger actors to feel as if they were working in a realistic environment .
Olaf 's mansion occupied two sound stages , while the graveyard and the ruins of the Baudelaire mansion were constructed on the Paramount back lot .
After 21 weeks of shooting at Paramount , production then moved to Downey Studios , a former NASA facility in Downey , California , for eight more weeks .
Downey housed the circular railroad crossing set complete with forced perspective scenery , as well as a newly constructed water tank complete with over one million gallons of water .
The water tank was instrumental in filming scenes set at Briny Beach , Lake Lachrymose , Damocles Dock and Curdled Cave .
Filming for A Series of Unfortunate Events ended on May 29 , 2004 .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Silberling , production designer Rick Heinrichs and costume
designer Colleen Atwood all aimed for the film 's setting to be ambiguous , giving it a " timeless " feel .
Heinrichs also added steampunk designs to the period .
To contribute to the setting , Silberling hired Emmanuel Lubezki as the cinematographer because he was impressed with the trio 's work on Sleepy Hollow .
Lubezki compared the cinematic similarities to Sleepy Hollow , notably the monochromatic look of both films .
He also chose a specific color palette backdrop for A Series of Unfortunate Events .
" The story is very episodic , so we picked a different color scheme for each section .
For example " , Lubezki continued , " Count Olaf 's house has a lot of greens , blacks and grays ; the house of Uncle Monty has a lot of greens and browns and a bit of yellow ; and the house of Aunt Josephine has blues and blacks .
" The railroad crossing set was constructed on a cyclorama , which was the most ambitious setpiece for the art department on using elements of " in house " special effects and matte paintings .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , supervised by Stefen Fangmeier , created the film 's 505 visual effects - shots .
The filmmakers used as few digital effects as possible , though the train and smoke for the railroad crossing scene was entirely created using computer animation .
ILM also used color grading techniques for the Lake Lachrymose scene , which required complete animation for the leeches .
The digital animators studied footage of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season to accurately depict Hurricane Herman , which was ILM 's most ambitious use of computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) for the film .
Nexus Productions designed the opening " Littlest Elf " animated sequence by modeling it after stop motion animation and completing it with computer animation .
The snakes at Uncle Monty 's house were a combination of real snakes and animatronics .
The animatronics , primarily the Incredibly Deadly Viper , were used as reference models that ILM later enhanced using CGI .
Because working with infants was sometimes risky in producing a film , four scenes involving Sunny Baudelaire required CGI with motion capture technology .
Among these are the shot of Sunny hanging on to a table by her teeth , catching a spindle with her mouth and the scene where she is entangled with the Incredibly Deadly Viper .
Animation supervisor Colin Brady used his baby daughter for motion capture recording .
A remote controlled animatronic of Sunny was also designed by Kevin Yagher .
Another show of visual effects used for the film was in the opening with the ' littlest elf ' :
stop motion filming was done for the film 's beginning until it is interrupted by Jude Law , who as Lemony Snicket lets the audience know that the film they will see is most unpleasant .
RELEASE MARKETING
Section::::Release .
Section::::Marketing .
In October 2002 , Nickelodeon Movies hired Activision ( who actually had a partnership with DreamWorks ) to create the film 's tie - in video game .
The agreement also included options for sequels .
Director Brad Silberling delivered his first cut of the film to the studio in August 2004 .
Fearing his original version was " too dark " , Paramount and DreamWorks conducted test screenings .
The film was then re - edited over family - friendliness concerns .
Given its December release , the film 's marketing campaign was criticized for being a deliberately anti - holiday comedy with taglines like , " Taking the cheer out of Christmas " and " Mishaps .
Misadventures .
Mayhem .
Oh Joy .
"
The premiere for Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events was held at the Cinerama Dome on December 13 , 2004 .
A tent display on Vine Street was decorated with pieces from the film 's sets .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Lemony Snicket 's a Series of Unfortunate Events was released on DVD and VHS on April 26 , 2005 .
A Portuguese - labeled All - Region Blu - ray was released in 2012 and then an American Region A Blu - ray was released on September 9 , 2014 .
The film was re - released on DVD on January 24 , 2017 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events grossed $ 118.6 million in the United States and Canada and $ 90.4 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 209.1 million , against a budget of $ 140 million .
The film was released in the United States and Canada on December 17 , 2004 on 4,400 screens at 3,620 theaters , earning $ 30.1 million in its opening weekend and finishing first at the box office .
In its second weekend the film fell to second behind Meet the Fockers , grossing $ 12.6 million .
It was the highest - grossing film under the Nickelodeon Movies banner until being surpassed by The Last Airbender .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received an approval rating of 71 % based on 160 reviews , with an average rating of 6.7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Although it softens the nasty edges of its source material , Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events is a gothic visual treat , and it features a hilariously manic turn from Jim Carrey as the evil Count Olaf . "
On Metacritic , gave the film a score of 62 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Robert K. Elder of the Chicago Tribune praised Rick Heinrichs 's production design and Jim Carrey for having a balanced performance as a scene stealer .
Elder called the film " exceptionally clever , hilariously gloomy and bitingly subversive . "
Desson Thomson from The Washington Post reasoned over a fellow film - goer 's characterization of Count Olaf , " Olaf is a humorless villain in the book .
He 's not amusing like Carrey at all .
To which I would counter : If you ca n't let Carrey be Carrey , put someone boring and less expensive in the role .
In his various disguises he 's rubbery , inventive and improvisationally inspired .
I particularly liked his passing imitation of a dinosaur . "
Ty Burr , writing in The Boston Globe , observed , " Director Brad Silberling has essentially made a Tim Burton movie without the weird shafts of adolescent pain .
At the same time , Silberling 's not a hack like Chris Columbus , and Snicket has more zip and inspired filmcraft than the first two Harry Potter films .
The film 's no masterpiece , but at least you 're in the hands of people who know what they 're doing .
The movie , like the books , flatters children 's innate sense that the world is not a perfect place and that anyone who insists otherwise is trying to sell you something .
How you deal with the cognitive dissonance of a $ 125 million Hollywood picture telling you this is up to you .
At least there are no Lemony Snicket Happy Meals .
Yet .
" Internet reviewer James Berardinelli felt that " the film is first and foremost a fantasy , but there are dark currents running just beneath the surface .
I give Silberling credit for not allowing them to swallow the film .
Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events manages to remain witty throughout .
"
Roger Ebert gave a mixed review : " Jim Carrey is over the top as Count Olaf , but I suppose a character named Count Olaf is over the top by definition .
I liked the film , but I 'll tell you what .
I think this one is a tune - up for the series , a trial run in which they figure out what works and what needs to be tweaked .
The original Spider - Man was a disappointment , but the same team came back and made Spider - Man 2 , the best superhero movie ever made . "
Scott Foundas of Variety gave a negative review , criticizing the filmmakers for sacrificing the storyline in favor of visual elements such as set design and cinematography .
He wrote , " A Series of Unfortunate Events suggests what Mary Poppins might have looked like had Tim Burton directed it .
Not surprisingly , Burton 's longtime production designer Rick Heinrichs was responsible for the sets , while ace Emmanuel Lubezki ( Burton 's Sleepy Hollow ) contributed the expressionistic lighting schemes . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col
" Recipient ! scope="col " Result rowspan="4
" Academy Awards rowspan="3"Saturn
Awards
CANCELLED FRANCHISE AND REBOOT CANCELLED FILM FRANCHISE
Section::::Cancelled franchise and reboot .
Section::::Cancelled film franchise .
Paramount Pictures , DreamWorks and Nickelodeon Movies hoped the film would become a franchise like the Harry Potter film series .
Jim Carrey thought his character would be good as the basis for a film franchise since it would allow him to dive into a new role .
" I do n't have a deal [ for a sequel ] , but it 's one that I would n't mind doing again because there are so many characters , " the actor explained in December 2004 .
" I mean , it 's just so much fun .
It 's so much fun being a bad actor playing a character ...
" In May 2005 , producer Laurie MacDonald said " Lemony Snicket is still something Paramount is interested in pursuing and we 're going to be talking with them more . "
In October 2008 , Daniel Handler said that " a sequel does seem to be in the works .
Paramount has had quite a few corporate shakeups , which has led to many a delay .
Of course , many , many plans in Hollywood come to naught , but I 'm assured that another film will be made .
Someday .
Perhaps . " In June 2009 , Silberling confirmed he still talked about the project with Handler , and suggested the sequel be a stop motion film , with each film being in a new medium , due to the young lead actors having grown too old to continue their roles .
" In an odd way , the best thing you could do is actually have Lemony Snicket say to the audience , ' Okay , we pawned the first film off as a mere dramatization with actors .
Now , I 'm afraid I 'm going to have to show you the real thing . ' " NETFLIX SERIES Section::::Netflix series .
In November 2014 , Netflix announced its plans of creating a television series to adapt the entire novel series .
The series stars Neil Patrick Harris , Malina Weissman , Louis Hynes and Presley Smith , with Patrick Warburton as narrator .
The series , also titled A Series of Unfortunate Events , premiered on January 13 , 2017 .
The first season consisted of eight episodes , and adapts the first four books of the series .
A Series of Unfortunate Events season two was released on March 30 , 2018 , which contains 10 episodes , adapting books five through nine of the novel series .
The third and final season is set to be released on January 1 , 2019 and will adapt the four remaining books in seven episodes .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video game based on the books and film ( more so the film , as the name and many plot elements seen in the movie but not the book are seen ) was released in 2004 by Adrenium Games and Activision for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and the PC as Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events .
The player plays as all three orphans at points in the game , and encounters characters such as Mr. Poe , Uncle Monty and Aunt Josephine , along with villains such as Count Olaf , the hook - handed man , the white - faced women , and the bald - headed man .
The game , like the movie , follows only the first three books in the series .
Although never mentioned in the game , there are some references to V.F.D. , such as in the first level where a package is delivered from the " Very Fast Delivery Service .
"
The note attached to the package also reads at the end , " P.S. The world is quiet here " , which is the motto of V.F.D. REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website for Daniel Handler