INDUCTION COOKING Induction cooking heats a cooking vessel electrically by magnetic induction , instead of by radiation or thermal conduction from an electrical heating element , or from a flame .
Because inductive heating directly heats the vessel , very rapid increases in temperature can be achieved , and changes in heat settings are instantaneous .
In an induction cooktop ( " induction hob " or " induction stove " ) , a coil of copper wire is placed under the cooking pot and an alternating electric current is passed through it .
The resulting oscillating magnetic field induces an electrical current in the pot .
This large eddy current flowing through the resistance of the pot results in resistive heating .
For nearly all models of induction cooktops , a cooking vessel must be made of , or contain , a ferrous metal such as cast iron or some stainless steels .
The iron in the pot concentrates the current to produce heat in the metal .
If the metal is too thin , or does not provide enough resistance to current flow , heating will not be effective .
Most induction tops will not heat copper or aluminum vessels because the magnetic field can not produce a concentrated current ; " all metal " induction tops use much higher frequencies to overcome that effect .
Any vessel can be used if placed on a suitable metal disk which functions as a conventional hotplate .
Induction cooking is quite efficient , which means it puts less waste heat into the kitchen , can be quickly turned off , and has safety advantages compared to gas stoves .
Cooktops are also usually easy to clean , because the cooktop itself does not get very hot .
COOKING PROPERTIES
Section::::Cooking properties .
Induction cooking provides faster heating , improved thermal efficiency , and more consistent heating than cooking by thermal conduction , with precise control similar to gas .
The induction elements commonly have heating performance comparable to a commercial gas burner , but are significantly more energy - efficient .
The surface of the cooker is heated only by the pot and so does not usually reach a hazardous temperature .
Because the temperature of the cooking surface matches that of the pot , this permits precise control of the cooking temperature .
The control system shuts down the element if a pot is not present or not large enough .
Induction cookers are easy to clean because the cooking surface is flat and smooth and does not get hot enough to make spilled food burn and stick .
The unit can detect whether cookware is present by monitoring power delivered .
This allows it to keep a pot just simmering , or automatically turn an element off when cookware is removed .
Because the cook top is shallow compared to a gas - fired or electrical coil cooking surface , wheelchair access can be improved ; the user 's legs can be below the counter height and the user 's arms can reach over the top .
RESILIENCE
Section::::Resilience .
Induction cookers have glass ceramic tops that can be damaged by sufficient impact although they are required to meet minimum specified product safety standards with regard to impact .
Aluminum foil can melt onto the top and cause permanent damage or cracking of the top .
Surfaces can be scratched by sliding pans across the cooking surface .
As with other electric ceramic cooking surfaces , a maximum pan size may be specified by the manufacturer .
NOISE
Section::::Noise .
A small amount of noise is generated by an internal cooling fan .
Audible electromagnetic noise ( a hum or buzz ) may be produced by cookware exposed to high magnetic fields , especially at high power if the cookware has loose parts ; cookware with welded - in cladding layers and solid riveting is less likely to produce this type of noise .
Some users may detect a whistling or whining sound from the cookware or from the powered electronic devices .
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Section::::Other considerations .
Some cooking techniques available when cooking over a flame are not applicable .
Persons with implanted cardiac pacemakers or other electronic medical implants are usually instructed to avoid sources of magnetic fields ; the medical literature seems to suggest that proximity to induction cooking surfaces is safe , but individuals with such implants should always check first with their cardiologists .
Radio receivers near the induction - cooking unit may pick up some electromagnetic interference .
EFFICIENCY Section::::Efficiency .
Cooking methods that use flames or hot heating elements have a significantly higher loss to the ambient ; induction heating directly heats the pot .
Because the induction effect does not directly heat the air around the vessel , induction cooking results in further energy efficiencies .
Cooling air is blown through the electronics beneath the surface but is only slightly warm .
The purpose of a cooktop is to prepare food ; for example , long periods of simmering may be required .
A rational measure of efficiency would be to compare the actual energy input to the cooktop to some theoretical value required to prepare the specified food .
Since experiments to make these measurements would be difficult to replicate , energy efficiency measurements that are published concentrate on the ability of a cooktop to transfer energy to a metal test block , which is much easier to measure in a repeatable fashion .
Energy transfer efficiency , as defined by U.S. Department of Energy ( DOE ) , is the percentage of the energy consumed by a cooker that , at the end of a simulated cooking cycle , appears to have been transferred as heat to a standardized aluminum test block .
The DOE test cycle starts with both the block and the cooktop at room temperature : 77 ° F ± 9 °
F ( 25 ° C ± 5 ° C ) .
The cooktop is then switched to maximum heating power .
When the test block temperature reaches + 144 ° F ( +80 ° C ) above the initial room temperature , the cooktop power is immediately reduced to 25 % ±
5 % of its maximum power .
After 15 minutes of operation at this lower power setting , the cooktop is turned off and the heat energy in the test block is measured .
Efficiency is given by the ratio between energy in the block and input ( electric ) energy .
Such a test , using a combination of two different power levels , was conceived to mimic real life use .
Wasted energy terms such as residual unused heat ( retained by solid hot - plates , ceramic or coil at the end of the test ) , and losses from convection and radiation by hot surfaces ( including the ones of the block itself ) are simply disregarded and do n't contribute to efficiency .
In typical cooking , the energy delivered by the cooker is only partly used to heat the food up to temperature ; once that has occurred , all the subsequent energy input is delivered to the air as loss through steam or convection and radiation from the pan sides .
Since there is no increase in the food temperature , the DOE test procedure would consider the efficiency substantially zero .
Cooking procedures such as reduction of a sauce , braising meat , simmering , and so on are significant uses of a cooker , but efficiency of these practices is not modelled by the DOE test procedure .
In 2013 and 2014 DOE developed and proposed new test procedures for cooking products to allow direct comparison of energy transfer efficiency measurements among induction , electric resistance , and gas cooking tops and ranges .
The procedures use a new hybrid test block made of aluminum and stainless steel , so it is suitable for tests on induction cookers .
The proposed rule lists results of real lab tests conducted with the hybrid block .
For comparable ( large ) cooking elements the following efficiencies were measured with ±0.5 % repeatability : 70.7 % - 73.6 % for induction , 71.9 % for electric coil , 43.9 % for gas .
Summarizing the results of several tests , DOE affirms that " induction units have an average efficiency of 72.2 % , not significantly higher than the 69.9 % efficiency of smooth — electric resistance units , or the 71.2 % of electric coil units " .
Moreover , DOE reminds that the 84 % induction efficiency , cited in previous Technical Support Documents , was not measured by DOE laboratories but just " referenced from an external test study " performed in 1992 .
In addition independent tests conducted by manufacturers , research laboratories and other subjects seem to demonstrate that actual induction cooking efficiencies stays usually between 74 % and 77 % and reach occasionally 81 % ( although these tests could follow procedures different from that of DOE ) .
These clues indicate that the 84 % induction average efficiency reference value should be taken with caution .
Just for comparison and in agreement with DOE findings , cooking with gas has an average energy efficiency of about 40 % .
It can be raised only by using special pots with fins whose first design and commercialization came years ago , but that have been recently rediscovered , redesigned in a different way and put again on the market .
So for environmental considerations dealing with induction versus gas , a 40 % gas efficiency will be used .
When comparing with gas , the relative cost of electrical and gas energy , and the efficiency of the process by which electricity is generated , affect both overall environmental efficiency ( as explained in more detail below ) and cost to the user .
VENTILATION Section::::Ventilation .
Energy lost from gas cooking heats the kitchen , whereas with induction cooking , the losses are much lower .
This results in less heating of the kitchen itself and can affect the amount of ventilation required .
Gas cooking efficiencies may be lower if waste heat generation is taken into account .
Especially in restaurants , gas cooking can significantly increase the ambient temperature in localized areas .
Not only may extra cooling be required , but zoned venting may be needed to adequately condition hot areas without overcooling other areas .
Costs must be considered on an individual situation due to numerous variables in temperature differences , facility layout or openness , and heat generation schedule .
Induction cooking using grid electricity may surpass gas efficiencies when waste heat and air comfort are quantified .
In a commercial setting , induction cookers do not require interlocks between the fuel source and the ventilation , as may be required with gas systems .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
An induction cooker transfers electrical energy by induction from a coil of wire into a metal vessel that must be ferromagnetic .
The coil is mounted under the cooking surface , and a high frequency ( e.g. 24 kHz ) alternating current is passed through it .
The current in the coil creates a dynamic magnetic field .
When an electrically conductive pot is brought close to the cooking surface , and the pan is thicker than the skin depth , the magnetic field induces large eddy currents in the pot .
The eddy currents flow through the electrical resistance of the pot to produce heat through Joule heating ; the pot then in turn heats its contents by heat conduction .
The cooking vessel typically needs to be made of a suitable stainless steel or iron .
The increased magnetic permeability of the material decreases the skin depth , concentrating the current near the surface of the metal , and so the electrical resistance will be further increased .
Some energy will be dissipated wastefully by the current flowing through the resistance of the coil .
To reduce the skin effect and consequent heat generation in the coil , it is made from litz wire , which is a bundle of many smaller insulated wires in parallel .
The coil has many turns , while the bottom of the pot effectively forms a single shorted turn .
This forms a transformer that steps down the voltage and steps up the current .
The resistance of the pot , as viewed from the primary coil , appears larger .
In turn , most of the energy becomes heat in the high - resistance steel , while the driving coil stays cool .
Often a thermostat is present to measure the temperature of the pan .
This helps prevent the pan from severely overheating if accidentally heated empty or boiled dry , but also can allow the induction cooker to maintain a target temperature .
APPLICATIONS
Section::::Applications .
Induction equipment may be a built - in surface , part of a range , or a standalone surface unit .
Built - in and rangetop units typically have multiple elements , the equivalent of separate burners on a gas - fueled range .
Stand - alone induction modules are usually single - element , or sometimes have dual elements .
All such elements share a basic design : an electromagnet sealed beneath a heat - resisting glass - ceramic sheet that is easily cleaned .
The pot is placed on the ceramic glass surface and begins to heat up , along with its contents .
In Japan , some models of rice cookers are powered by induction .
In Hong Kong , power companies list a number of models .
Asian manufacturers have taken the lead in producing inexpensive single - induction - zone surfaces ; efficient , low - waste - heat units are advantageous in densely populated cities with little living space per family , as many Asian cities are .
Induction cookers are less frequently used in other parts of the world .
Induction ranges may be applicable in commercial restaurant kitchens .
Electric cooking avoids the cost of natural gas piping and in some jurisdictions may allow simpler ventilation and fire suppression equipment to be installed .
Drawbacks for commercial use include possible breakages of the glass cook - top , higher initial cost and the requirement for magnetic cookware .
CONTROLS Section::::Controls .
The ferromagnetic properties of a steel vessel concentrate the induced current in a thin layer near its surface , which results in a strong heating effect .
In paramagnetic materials like aluminum , the magnetic field penetrates deeper , and the induced current encounters little resistance in the metal .
According to Lenz 's law the efficiency of the induction in the pot may be sensed , so that the induction may be attained accordingly with special electronics devices .
At least one high - frequency " all - metal " cooker is available , that works with lower efficiency on non - ferromagnetic metal cookware .
The cooking surface is made of a glass - ceramic material which is a poor heat conductor , so only a little heat is lost through the bottom of the pot .
In normal operation the cooking surface stays significantly cooler than with other stove cooking methods , but still needs to cool down before it can be safely touched .
Units may have one , two , three , four or five induction zones , but four ( normally in a 30-inch - wide unit ) is the most common in the US and Europe .
Two coils are most common in Hong Kong and three are most common in Japan .
Some have touch - sensitive controls .
Some induction stoves have a memory setting , one per element , to control the time that heat is applied .
At least one manufacturer makes a " zoneless " induction cooking surface with multiple induction coils .
This allows up to five utensils to be used at once anywhere on the cooking surface , not just on pre - defined zones .
Small stand - alone portable induction cookers are relatively inexpensive , priced from around in some markets .
COOKWARE
Section::::Cookware .
Cookware must be compatible with induction heating ; in most models , only ferrous metal can be heated .
Cookware will have a flat bottom since the magnetic field drops rapidly with distance from the surface .
( Special and costly wok - shaped tops are available for use with round - bottom woks . )
Induction disks are metal plates that are heated by induction and heat non - ferrous pots by thermal contact , but these are much less efficient than ferrous cooking vessels .
Induction compatible cookware for an induction cooking surface can nearly always be used on other stoves .
Some cookware or packaging is marked with symbols to indicate compatibility with induction , gas , or electric heat .
Induction cooking surfaces work well with any pans with a high ferrous metal content at the base .
Cast iron pans and any black metal or iron pans will work on an induction cooking surface .
Stainless steel pans will work on an induction cooking surface if the base of the pan is a magnetic grade of stainless steel .
If a magnet sticks well to the sole of the pan , it will work on an induction cooking surface .
An " all - metal " cooker will work with non - ferrous cookware , but available models are limited .
Aluminum or copper alone does not work on an induction stove because of the materials ' magnetic and electrical properties .
Aluminum and copper cookware are more conductive than steel , but the skin depth in these materials is larger since they are non - magnetic .
The current flows in a thicker layer in the metal , encounters less resistance and so produces less heat .
The induction cooker will not work efficiently with such pots .
However , aluminum and copper are desirable in cookware , since they conduct heat better .
Because of this ' tri - ply ' pans often have an induction - compatible skin of stainless steel containing a layer of thermally conductive aluminum .
For frying , a pan with a base that is a good heat conductor is needed to spread the heat quickly and evenly .
The sole of the pan will be either a steel plate pressed into the aluminum , or a layer of stainless steel over the aluminum .
The high thermal conductivity of aluminum pans makes the temperature more uniform across the pan .
Stainless frying pans with an aluminum base will not have the same temperature at their sides as an aluminum sided pan will have .
Cast iron frying pans work well with induction cooking surfaces but the material is not as good a thermal conductor as aluminum .
When boiling water , the circulating water spreads the heat and prevents hot spots .
For products such as sauces , it is important that at least the base of the pan incorporates a good heat conducting material to spread the heat evenly .
For delicate products such as thick sauces , a pan with aluminum throughout is better , since the heat flows up the sides through the aluminum , allowing the cook to heat the sauce rapidly but evenly .
The heat that can be produced in a pot is a function of the surface resistance .
A higher surface resistance produces more heat for similar currents .
This is a " figure of merit " that can be used to rank the suitability of a material for induction heating .
The surface resistance in a thick metal conductor is proportional to the resistivity divided by the skin depth .
Where the thickness is less than the skin depth , the actual thickness can be used to calculate surface resistance .
Some common materials are listed in this table .
+ Skin depth at 24 kHz !
Material !
Resistivity(10 ohm - inches ) !
Relativepermeability !
Skin depth , inches ( mm ) !
Surface resistance,10 ohms / square(thick material ) !
Surface resistance , relative to copper To get the same surface resistance as with carbon steel would require the metal to be thinner than is practical for a cooking vessel ; at 24 kHz a copper vessel bottom would need to be 1/56th the skin depth of carbon steel .
Since the skin depth is inversely proportional to the square root of the frequency , this suggests that much higher frequencies would be required to obtain equivalent heating in a copper pot as in an iron pot at 24 kHz .
Such high frequencies are not feasible with inexpensive power semiconductors ; in 1973 the silicon - controlled rectifiers used were limited to no more than 40 kHz .
Even a thin layer of copper on the bottom of a steel cooking vessel will shield the steel from the magnetic field and make it unusable for an induction top .
Some additional heat is created by hysteresis losses in the pot due to its ferromagnetic nature , but this creates less than ten percent of the total heat generated .
" ALL - METAL " MODELS Section::::"All - metal " models .
New types of power semiconductors and low - loss coil designs have made an all - metal cooker possible .
Panasonic Corporation in 2009 developed a consumer induction cooker that uses a higher - frequency magnetic field , and a different oscillator circuit design , to allow use with non - ferrous metals .
In 2017 Panasonic released a single - burner counter top " all metal " unit , using their trade name " Met - All " , aimed at commercial kitchens .
HISTORY Section::::History .
First patents date from the early 1900s .
Demonstration stoves were shown by the Frigidaire division of General Motors in the mid-1950s on a touring GM showcase in North America .
The induction cooker was shown heating a pot of water with a newspaper placed between the stove and the pot , to demonstrate the convenience and safety .
This unit , however , was never put into production .
Modern implementation in the USA dates from the early 1970s , with work done at the Research & Development Center of Westinghouse Electric Corporation at Churchill Borough , near Pittsburgh , That work was first put on public display at the 1971 National Association of Home Builders convention in Houston , Texas , as part of the Westinghouse Consumer Products Division display .
The stand - alone single - burner range was named the Cool Top Induction Range .
It used paralleled Delco Electronics transistors developed for automotive electronic ignition systems to drive the 25 kHz current .
Westinghouse decided to make a few hundred production units to develop the market .
Those were named Cool Top 2 ( CT2 )
Induction ranges .
The development work was done at the same R&D location by a team led by Bill Moreland and Terry Malarkey .
The ranges were priced at $ 1,500 ( $ 8,260 in 2017 dollars ) , including a set of high quality cookware made of Quadraply , a new laminate of stainless steel , carbon steel , aluminum and another layer of stainless steel ( outside to inside ) .
Production took place in 1973 through to 1975 and stopped , coincidentally , with the sale of Westinghouse Consumer Products Division to White Consolidated Industries Inc. CT2 had four " burners " of about 1,600 watts each , measured by calorimetry .
The range top was a Pyroceram ceramic sheet surrounded by a stainless - steel bezel , upon which four magnetic sliders adjusted four corresponding potentiometers set below .
That design , using no through - holes , made the range impervious to spills .
The electronics section was made of four identical modules which were cooled by a single quiet , low - speed , high - torque fan .
In each of the electronics modules , the 240 V , 60 Hz domestic line power was converted to between 20 V to 200 V of continuously variable DC by a phase - controlled rectifier .
That DC power was in turn converted to 27 kHz
30 A ( peak ) AC by two arrays of six paralleled Motorola automotive - ignition transistors in a half - bridge configuration driving a series - resonant LC oscillator , of which the inductor component was the induction - heating coil and its load , the cooking pan .
The circuit design , largely by Ray Mackenzie , successfully dealt with certain bothersome overload problems .
Control electronics included functions such as protection against over - heated cook - pans and overloads .
Provision was made to reduce radiated electrical and magnetic fields .
There was also magnetic pan detection .
CT2 was UL Listed and received Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) approval , both firsts .
Numerous patents were also issued .
CT2 won several awards , including Industrial Research Magazine 's IR-100 1972 best - product award and a citation from the United States Steel Association .
Raymond Baxter demonstrated the CT2 on the BBC series Tomorrow 's World .
He showed how the CT2 could cook through a slab of ice .
Sears Kenmore sold a free - standing oven / stove with four induction - cooking surfaces in the mid-1980s ( Model Number 103.9647910 ) .
The unit also featured a self - cleaning oven , solid - state kitchen timer and capacitive - touch control buttons ( advanced for its time ) .
The units were more expensive than standard cooking surfaces .
In 2009 Panasonic developed an all - metal induction cooker that used frequencies up to 120 kHz , three to five times higher than other cooktops , to work with non - ferrous metal cookware .
VENDORS
Section::::Vendors .
The market for induction stoves is dominated by German manufacturers , such as Bosch , Fissler , Miele , Siemens and ELAG .
The Spanish company Fagor , The Turkish Company Beko , Italian firm Smeg , Sweden 's Electrolux ( also using the brand AEG ) , French ARPA and Slovenia 's Gorenje are also key players in the European market .
Prices range from about £ 250 to £ 1,000 within the United Kingdom .
In 2006 , Stoves launched the UK 's first domestic induction range cooker at a slightly lower cost than those imported .
Single ring portable hobs have become popular in the UK , with prices as low as £ 30 from discounters such as Aldi .
The European induction cooking market for hotels , restaurants and other caterers is primarily satisfied by smaller specialist commercial induction catering equipment manufacturers such as Adventys of France , Induced Energy of Brackley in the UK , Control Induction and Target Catering Equipment of the UK and Scholl of Germany .
Taiwanese and Japanese electronics companies are the dominant players in induction cooking for East Asia .
After aggressive promotions by utilities in HK like CLP Power HK Ltd , many local brands like UNIVERSAL , icMagIC , Zanussi , iLighting , German Pool also emerged .
Their power and ratings are high , more than 2,800 watts .
They are multiple zone and capable of performing better than their gas counterpart .
The efficiency is as high as 90 % and saves a lot of energy and is environmentally friendly .
Their use by local Chinese for wok cooking is becoming popular .
Some of these companies have also started marketing in the West .
However , the product range sold in Western markets is a subset of that in their domestic market ; some Japanese electronics manufacturers only sell domestically .
In the United States , as of early 2013 there are over five dozen brands of induction - cooking equipment available , including both build - in and countertop residential equipment and commercial - grade equipment .
Even restricting to build - in residential - use units , there are over two dozen brands being sold ; residential countertop units add another two - dozen - plus brands to the count .
The National Association of Home Builders in 2012 estimated that , in the United States , induction cooktops held only 4 % of sales , compared to gas and other electric cooktops .
The global induction cooktops market was estimated at $ 9.16 ml in value during 2015 and is set to grow to $ 13.53 mil by 2022 .
In April 2010 , The New York Times reported that " In an independent survey last summer by the market research company Mintel of 2,000 Internet users who own appliances , only 5 percent of respondents said they had an induction range or cooktop . . . .
Still , 22 percent of the people Mintel surveyed in connection to their study last summer said their next range or cooktop would be induction . "
SEE ALSO * Glass - ceramic
* Microwave oven *
Electrodeless lamp REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS