GEAR OIL Gear oil is a lubricant made specifically for transmissions , transfer cases , and differentials in automobiles , trucks , and other machinery .
It is of a high viscosity and usually contains organosulfur compounds .
Some modern automatic transaxles ( integrated transmission and differential ) do not use a heavy oil at all but lubricate with the lower viscosity hydraulic fluid , which is available at pressure within the automatic transmission .
Gear oils account for about 20 % of the lubricant market .
Most lubricants for manual gearboxes and differentials contain extreme pressure
( EP ) additives and antiwear additives to cope with the sliding action of hypoid bevel gears .
Typical additives include dithiocarbamate derivatives and sulfur - treated organic compounds ( " sulfurized hydrocarbons " ) .
EP additives which contain phosphorus / sulfur compounds are corrosive to yellow metals such as the copper and/or brass used in bushings and synchronizers ; the GL-1 class of gear oils does not contain any EP additives and thus finds use in applications which contain parts made of yellow metals .
GL-5 is not necessarily backward - compatible in synchro - mesh transmissions which are designed for a GL-4 oil : GL-5 has a lower coefficient of friction due to the higher concentration of EP additives over GL-4 , and thus synchros can not engage as effectively . API RATINGS Section::::API ratings .
Gearbox oils are classified by the American Petroleum Institute using GL ratings .
The higher an oil 's GL - rating , the more pressure can be sustained without any metal - to - metal contact taking place between transmission components .
Separate differential usually have higher pressure between metal parts than gearboxes and therefore need higher GL - rating .
For example , most modern gearboxes require a GL-4 oil , and separate differentials ( where fitted ) require a GL-5 oil .
While they take the same form , the viscosity grades for gear oils are on a different scale than the viscosity grades for an engine oil .
The viscometrics for gear oils are standardized in SAE J306 .
Multigrade gear oils are becoming more common ; while gear oil does not reach the temperatures of motor oil , it does warm up appreciably as the car is driven , due mostly to shear friction ( with a small amount of heat conduction through the bellhousing from the engine block ) .
Fully synthetic gear oils are also used in many vehicles , and have a greater resistance to shear breakdown than mineral oils .
API Category GL-1 ( inactive ) designates the type of service characteristic of manual transmissions operating under such mild conditions of low unit pressures and minimum sliding velocities , that untreated oil may be used satisfactorily .
Oxidation and rust inhibitors , defoamers and pour depressants may be used to improve the characteristics of lubricants intended for this service .
Friction modifiers and extreme pressure additives shall not be used .
API Category GL-2 ( inactive ) designates the type of service characteristic of automotive type worm - gear axles operating under such conditions of load , temperature and sliding velocities , that lubricants satisfactory for API GL-1 service will not suffice .
API Category GL-3 ( inactive ) designates the type of service characteristic of manual transmissions and spiral - bevel axles operating under mild to moderate to severe conditions of speed and load .
These service conditions require a lubricant having load - carrying capacities greater than those that will satisfy APL GL-1 service , but below the requirements of lubricants satisfying the API GL-4 service .
with wide operation ranges and temperature differences in the vicinity of viscosity .
API Category GL-4 designates the type of service characteristic of spiral - bevel and hypoid gears in automotive axles operated under moderate speeds and loads .
These oils may be used in selected manual transmission and transaxle applications .
API Category GL-5 designates the type of service characteristic of gears , particularly hypoids in automotive axles under high - speed and/or low - speed , high - torque conditions .
Lubricants qualified under U.S. Military specification MIL - L-2105D ( formerly MIL - L-2015C ) , MIL - PRF-2105E and SAE J2360 satisfy the requirements of the API GL-5 service designation .
API Category GL-6 ( inactive ) designates the type of service characteristic of gears designed with a very high pinion offset .
Such designs typically require ( gear ) score protection in excess of that provided by API GL-5 gear oils .
The original API GL-6 test equipment is obsolete .
API Category MT-1 designates lubricants intended for non - synchronized manual transmissions used in buses and heavy - duty trucks .
Lubricants meeting API MT-1 provide protection against the combination of thermal degradation , component wear , and oil seal deterioration which is not provided by lubricants meeting only the requirements of API GL-4 and API GL-5 . MIL - PRF-2105E
this specification released in 1995 combines the performance requirements of its predecessor ( MIL - L-2105D ) and API MT-1 .
MIL - PRF-2105E maintains all existing chemical / physical requirements , stationary axle test requirements , field test requirements and data review by the Lubricants Review Institute that were required under MIL -
L-2105D. It also adds the stringent oil seal compatibility and thermal durability test requirements under API MT-1 .
MIL - PRF-2105E has been re - written as SAE Standard J2360 .
SAE J2360 standard is a new global quality standard that defines a level of performance equivalent to that defined by MIL - PRF-2105E , a U.S. military standard for approval that was not available to oil blenders in all parts of the world .
It includes all of the most recent axle and transmission testing requirements identified in API GL-5 , API MT-1 , and MIL - PRF-2105E including the need to demonstrate proof - of - performance through rigorous field testing .
REFERENCES