SHOT ON GOAL ( ICE HOCKEY )
In ice hockey , a shot on goal is a shot that directs the puck towards the net and either goes into the net for a goal or is stopped by the goaltender for a save .
A shot that is deflected wide or blocked by an opponent does not count as a shot on goal ; it is recorded as a blocked shot .
The player who blocks the shot is credited with a ' blocked shot ' , and the player who shoots the puck is credited with an ' attempt blocked ' .
Shots that sail wide or high of the net , and shots that hit the goalpost or crossbar , are not counted as shots on goal ; they are counted as ' missed shots ' .
Additionally , if a goaltender stops a puck that is going wide or high anyway , it is recorded as a ' missed shot ' .
Since it is not counted as a shot on goal , the goaltender does not get credit for a save .
An attempted shot that hits the pipe framing the goal mouth is not counted as a shot on goal , unless the puck goes into the goal without further contact from the team attempting the shot .
A puck that is not shot with the intention of scoring ( dump in , deflected pass ) , and ends up stopped by the goalie , should not be counted as a shot on goal .
SHOTS ON
NET Section::::Shots on net .
A shot on net is any touch of the puck towards the net , that if not for the goaltender intervening , would result in a goal .
Blocked shots do n't count .
If someone shoots the puck and it 's tipped , only the " tip " counts as a shot , and the original shot becomes a " pass " .
If a clearing attempt from the other team ends up on net it should be a shot on goal .
If someone swats at a rebound and sends it toward the net it should be a shot on goal .
clearing attempts that end up on net should most definitely count and most scorers will count them .
In the case of a partially blocked shot , or a tipped shot that was on net and is tipped off net , these are not supposed to be counted as shots on goal , as only the " final " touch is a " shot " and the final touch sent those pucks wide .
Wrap arounds and stuff attempts can be an issue .
If the goalie 's pad blocks a wrap around before he gets around far enough , then the puck would go " across " the crease instead of into the net .
Therefore , it should n't be regarded as a shot on goal .
REFERENCES