INDIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM
The Indian Antarctic Program is a multi - disciplinary , multi - institutional program under the control of the National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research , Ministry of Earth Sciences , Government of India .
It was initiated in 1981 with the first Indian expedition to Antarctica .
The program gained global acceptance with India 's signing of the Antarctic Treaty and subsequent construction of the Dakshin Gangotri Antarctic research base in 1983 , superseded by the Maitri base from 1990 .
The newest base commissioned in 2015 is Bharati , constructed out of 134 shipping containers .
Under the program , atmospheric , biological , earth , chemical , and medical sciences are studied by India , which has carried out 30 scientific expeditions to the Antarctic as of 14 October 2010 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origin of the Indian missions to the Antarctic are traced to the joint Indian Space Research Organisation – Hydrometeorological Centre of Russia agreements , which led to Indians , such as Dr. Paramjit Singh Sehra , joining the 17th Soviet Antarctic expedition of 1971–1973 .
India officially acceded to the Antarctic Treaty System on 1 August 1983 .
On 12 September 1983 , the country became the fifteenth Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
The National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research — a research and development body functioning under the Ministry of Earth Sciences , Government of India — controls the Indian Antarctic program .
The NCAOR and the Department of Ocean Development select the members for India 's Antarctic expeditions .
After medical tests and subsequent acclimatization training at the Himalayas , these selected members are also trained in survival , environment ethics , firefighting and operating in a group .
One expedition costs up to .
Logistical support to the various activities of the Indian Antarctic program is provided by the relevant branches of the Indian armed forces .
The launching point of Indian expeditions has varied from Goa in India to Cape Town in South Africa on 19th expedition during the time of NCAOR Founding Director Dr. P C Pandey in December 1999 .
Over 70 institutes in India contributed to its Antarctic program as of 2007 .
GLOBAL COOPERATION Section::::Global cooperation .
The Indian Antarctic program is bound by the rules of the Antarctic Treaty System , which India signed in 1983 .
Pandey ( 2007 ) outlines the various international activities that India has undertaken as a part of its Antarctic program :
India also collaborates with the international community as a member of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission , Regional Committee of Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission in Coastal Indian Ocean ( IOCINDIO ) , International Seabed Authority ( ISBA ) , and the State Parties of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas ( UNCLOS ) .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Antarctica holds scientific interest for global research projects due to a number of reasons : ' Origin of continents , climate change , meteorology and pollution ' are among the reasons cited by S.D. Gad ( 2008 ) .
Mrinalini G. Walawalkar ( 2005 ) holds that : ' ice – ocean interaction and the global processes ; paleoenvironment and paleoclimatic studies ; geological evolution of earth and Gondwanaland reconstruction ; Antarctic ecosystems , biodiversity and environment physiology ; solar terrestrial processes and their coupling ; medical physiology , adaptation techniques and human psychology ; environment impact assessment and monitoring ; enabling low temperature technology development ; and studies on earthquakes ' are among the areas of study under the Indian Antarctic program .
Close to 1,300 Indians had been to the continent as of 2001 as a part of the country 's Antarctic program .
Indian expeditions to the Antarctic also study the fauna and the molecular biodiversity of the region .
A total of 120 new microbes had been discovered as a result of international scientific effort in the Antarctic by 2005 .
30 of these microbes had been discovered by Indian scientists .
India has also published over 300 research publications based on Antarctic studies as of 2007 .
The ' ice cores ' retrieved by drilling holes in Antarctic 's vast ice - sheets yield information ' on the palaeoclimate and eco - history of the earth as records of wind - blown dust , volcanic ash or radioactivity are preserved in the ice as it gets accumulated over time ' .
The NCAOR developed a polar research & development laboratory with a ' low - temperature laboratory complex at −20 ° C for preservation and analysis of ice core and snow samples ' according to S.D. Gad ( 2008 ) .
The ' ice core ' samples are held , processed , and analyzed in containment units designed by such technology .
Storage cases made of poly propylene also ensure that the samples do not alter characteristics and are preserved for analysis in the form that they were recovered .
RESEARCH STATIONS Section::::Research stations .
In 1981 the Indian flag unfurled for the first time in Antarctica , marking the start of Southern Ocean expeditions under the environmental protocol of the Antarctic Treaty ( 1959 ) .
DAKSHIN GANGOTRI Section::::Dakshin Gangotri .
The first permanent settlement was built in 1983 and named Dakshin Gangotri .
In 1989 it was excavated and is being used again as supply base and transit camp .
MAITRI Section::::Maitri .
The second permanent settlement , Maitri , was put up in 1989 on the Schirmacher Oasis and has been conducting experiments in geology , geography and medicine .
India built a freshwater lake around Maitri known as Lake Priyadarshini .
Maitri accomplished the mission of geomorphologic mapping of Schirmacher Oasis .
BHARATI
Section::::Bharati .
Located beside Larsmann Hill at 69 ° S ,
76 ° E , Bharati is established in 2015 .
This newest research station for oceanographic research will collect evidence of continental breakup to reveal the 120-million - year - old ancient history of the Indian subcontinent .
In news sources this station was variously spelled " Bharathi " , " Bharti " and " Bharati " .
INDIAN ANTARCTIC
EXPEDITIONS
Section::::Indian Antarctic expeditions .
Lieutenant Ram Charan , an Indian Navy meteorologist , was the first Indian to visit the Antarctica , in the South Pole , when he accompanied an Australian polar expedition in 1960 .
He died in a road accident in 1961 . !
Date !
Expedition !
Leader !
Deputy Leader 2002–2003 Shri R. P. Lal
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Gad , S. D. ( 2008 ) , " India in the Antarctic " , Current Science , 95 ( 2 ) : 151 , Bangalore : Indian Academy of Sciences .
* Pandey , P.C. ( 2007 ) in " India : Antarctic Program " , Encyclopedia of the Antarctic edited by Beau Riffenburgh , pp .
529–530 , Abingdon and New York :
Taylor & Francis , .
* Pursuit and Promotion of Science – The Indian Experience ( 2001 ) , New Delhi : Indian National Science Academy .
* Walawalkar , M. G. ( 2005 ) , " Antarctica and Arctic : India 's contribution " , Current Science , 685 , Bangalore : Indian Academy of Science .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research ( NCAOR ) , Ministry of Earth Sciences , Government of India .