GEEK SQUAD Geek Squad Inc. is a subsidiary of American multinational consumer electronics corporation Best Buy , headquartered in Richfield , Minnesota .
The subsidiary was originally an independent company founded by " Chief Inspector " Robert Stephens on June 16 , 1994 , and offers various computer - related services and accessories for residential and commercial clients .
In 2002 , they merged with Best Buy , retaining Stephens as the primary corporate leadership for the subsidiary .
The Geek Squad provides services in - store , on - site , and over the Internet via remote access , and also provides 24-hour telephone and emergency on - site support .
Geek Squad no longer works solely on computer - related devices .
It now diagnoses issues in and repairs all consumer electronics , as well as appliances , continually expanding its services to keep pace with ever - changing technology .
LOCATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS Section::::Locations and partnerships .
Geek Squad precincts exist in most Best Buy stores in the United States , Puerto Rico , Canada and the Netherlands .
They offer in - store , in - home , online , and remote / over the phone services .
Best Buy terminated its partnership with Office Depot in Orlando , Florida , where Geek Squad precincts were located in 10 Office Depot locations .
The brand is also located in select FedEx Office locations .
In October 2006 , it was reported that Geek Squad would be launching in the United Kingdom in a joint 50 - 50 venture with Carphone Warehouse , where today it exists as both an onsite service and a remote repair service .
It is now fully operational with onsite services in Greater London , the Home Counties , the South Coast and North West areas of England , with phone and remote support undertaken from Tulketh Mill in Preston ( Lancashire ) and repairs completed at a site in Wednesbury ( West Midlands ) .
From November 2015 repairs will be completed at a Dixons Carphone repair center based in Newark ( East Midlands )
In 2008 Best Buy partnered with online tech support provider SupportSpace to offer remote Virtual Agent services to its clients .
SupportSpace was founded in 2006 and provided immediate online tech support services .
On July 15 , 2013 , all Geek Squad business was transferred away from SupportSpace and moved in house to Geek Squad agents .
A 2013 agreement with Atomic Learning , Inc. provides all Geek Squad tech subscribers with access to over 60,000 on - demand tutorial training videos .
Carphone Warehouse and Best Buy 's collaboration company , Best Buy Europe , that also own Phone House , has since also begun launching Geek Squad in Phone House stores .
France , Germany , Netherlands , Sweden , Spain and Portugal all have Agents now .
It 's still in a startup phase in most of the countries .
TOTAL SERVICES Section::::Total Services .
In 2007 , Geek Squad officially added Magnolia Home Theater installation teams as well as Best Buy Mobile Installers to the Geek Squad brand .
The change was titled , " Total Services " and was aimed towards the combination of major Best Buy services into one cohesive unit .
Best Buy mobile installers and Magnolia Home Theater installers have now switched from their previous grey and blue uniforms to grey and orange shirts with grey cargo pants .
This change removed all " Magnolia Home Theater Installation " branding and was replaced by " Geek Squad Installation Units " instead .
This has now allowed Geek Squad to incorporate home theater installation as one of the in home services offered via telephone .
STAFF Section::::Staff .
Mark Atlan is featured on the mobile application and the current spokesperson for Geek Squad .
Geek Squad employees are known as Agents and are assigned titles similar to those used by intelligence agencies – Counter Intelligence Agent ( CIA ) , Deputy of Counter Intelligence ( DCI ) , Double Agent - Covert ( DAC ) , Covert Agent ( CA ) , Special Agent ( SA ) , Deputy Covert Operations ( DCO ) and Deputy Field Marshal ( DFM ) , to name a few .
Unlike most computer repair facilities , Best Buy US does not require any industry certifications for its in - store technicians .
However , Best Buy Canada requires at least A+ Certification to work as a CIA .
They also require MECP certification for all technical mobile electronics installers .
UNIFORMS AND VEHICLES Section::::Uniforms and vehicles .
In - store PC agents , and in - home PC field agents , wear a white , short - sleeved , pocketless dress shirt .
Agents are required to wear a black clip - on tie with the Geek Squad logo pin .
Male agents wear black trousers , white socks and black lace - up shoes that used to have the Geek Squad logo on the sole .
Female agents may wear either black trousers , white socks , and black shoes ; or , a black skirt with hose and black shoes .
White and black are the only colors allowed in Geek Squad uniforms .
Agents who have served in an eligible capacity within any branch of Geek Squad for eighteen months , or who have held certain positions prior to 2014 including on - site Double Agents , Special Agents , and Deputies of Counter Intelligence carry a metal police - style badge with their Agent Number engraved on it .
The Minnesota Historical Society added the official uniform to its permanent collection in 2000 .
Geek Squad Autotechs and GSIs ( Home Theater Installers ) wear a grey button - up work shirt or black short sleeved and collared dress shirt with the Geek Squad logo on the front and optional certification patches on the arms .
Matching pants or shorts are worn as well as a bright orange undershirt .
These agents also have the option of wearing a grey Geek Squad hat and/or black Geeks Squad nylon jacket .
Prior to 2016 , Double Agents & Special Agents drove black - and - white Volkswagen New Beetles ( dubbed " Geekmobiles " ) with an orange - and - black company logo on the door .
Geekmobiles in California are all - black with white roof and running boards due to a request by the California Highway Patrol that the vehicles no longer resemble the paint scheme of their police vehicles ( a violation of California law ) .
In 2016 , Geek Squad began phasing out the New Beetles and replacing them with Toyota Prius Cs .
Due to a number of financial issues , including a large number of parking tickets and thousands of dollars lost for parking garage fees the Geekmobile program was ended in Manhattan New York City Geek Squad Precincts .
In the UK , Double Agents used Smart cars initially , but due to the congestion charge , agents operating in the centre of London later relied on the London Underground system .
The Double Agent program in the UK ceased in late 2012 .
All technical support services continued in store or via Mission Control , Tulketh Mill .
From here , the Covert or Covert Operations Agent title was established , Agents from Covert Operations are responsible for the technical support of desktop or laptop devices .
They provide support for narrow range of approved issues verbally over the phone , or Agents will connect to clients devices remotely and fix any issues if the computer is able to connect to the internet .
GEEK SQUAD
CITY Section::::Geek Squad City .
Located in Brooks , Kentucky , Geek Squad City is the largest Geek Squad computer repair site at 240,000 square feet .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Geek Squad technicians have been caught on numerous occasions searching and copying pornographic content stored on their clients ' computers without permission .
When asked about the incident , Geek Squad founder Robert Stephens refused to discuss the topic and focused on whether bloggers should be considered true journalists .
At least one former Geek Squad employee had come forward with allegations that the practice of surreptitiously searching for pornography on their clients ' computers is not restricted to isolated employees , but is often shared with management .
Geek Squad employees have allegedly engaged in peeping tom activities on female customers during in - house service visits .
A 2007 case alleges that a Geek Squad employee used his cell phone to record a 22-year - old female customer while she showered without her knowledge or permission .
The employee was arrested and Best Buy was sued over the incident .
In another case , a Geek Squad employee allegedly stole nude photographs of a 27-year - old female customer from her computer while it was being serviced .
The employee then allegedly shared the photos on the internet .
In 2002 , during a spate of legal threats and challenges to competitors with " geek " in their names , Geek Squad attempted to block the trademark registration of New England area competitor Geek Housecalls claiming that it violated their trademarks .
When Geek Housecalls refused to budge , Geek Squad filed civil suit .
After two years of wrangling , Geek Squad and Geek Housecalls arrived at an out - of - court settlement , the details of which can not be disclosed according to the terms of the settlement except to state that Geek Housecalls retained its name .
In 2006 , Geek Squad was sued for allegedly using unauthorized copies of Winternals ' Emergency Repair Disk Commander .
The lawsuit filed by Austin - based Winternals claims that employees of Geek Squad have continued using the unlicensed versions of the software after the commercial licensing agreement broke off .
Best Buy and Geek Squad were accused of copyright infringement , circumvention of copyright infringement systems , and misappropriation of trade secrets .
A settlement was eventually reached , and Winternals created a three - year agreement in place with Best Buy , allowing Geek Squad employees to lawfully use their licensed programs , including the ERD Commander .
In 2010 , Best Buy issued a trademark infringement cease and desist letter against a priest in Wisconsin for painting " God Squad " on his car .
In 2013 , Geek Squad was sued for invasion of privacy and several other civil infractions for allegedly releasing nude images found on a customer 's computer .
The suit is ongoing .
In June 2015 , the court denied Best Buy 's motions for summary judgment on all claims except the claim for " negligence / wantonness . "
On March 7 , 2018 , NPR reported that " FBI Used Paid Informants On Best Buy 's Geek Squad To Flag Child Pornography " according to a document that was released by the Electronic Frontier Foundation .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In the TV series Chuck , the main character works as a member of the Nerd Herd at a Buy More and drives in a Nerd - Herd - branded car , respectively alluding to Geek Squad , Best Buy , and its GeekMobile .
*
In the US version of TV series The Office , the tech help - desk Geek Squad 's logo has appeared ( logo on the wall of Toby 's cubicle and a toy of the Geek Squad Volkswagen car atop a filing cabinet , in " Michael 's Birthday " and " Drug Testing " , respectively ) .
*
In the Season 9 episode of American Dad ! entitled " Kung Pao Turkey " , Roger comes to the Smith home as a repairman named Trevor that works for a in - home tech support company called the " Nerd Squad " to fix Stan 's TV after his father in - law breaks it .
*
In , Charlie Conway has a Geek Squad sticker on the front of his helmet .
*
In the pilot episode of Drop Dead Diva , a Geek Squad sign can be seen on a building out of the window .
*
In Silicon Valley , the 5th episode of season 3 , a Geek Squad agent arrives at a home in a van .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS