HOT SAUCE Hot sauce , also known as chili sauce or pepper sauce , is any condiment , seasoning , or salsa made from chili peppers and other ingredients .
A very popular addition to different types of food , hot sauce allows individuals to enhance the flavor of their meals .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Humans have used chili peppers and other hot spices for thousands of years .
Inhabitants of Mexico , Central America and South America had chili peppers more than 6,000 years ago .
Within decades of contact with Spain and Portugal in the 16th century , the American plant was carried across Europe and into Africa and Asia , and altered through selective breeding .
One of the first commercially available bottled hot sauces in America appeared in 1807 in Massachusetts .
Few of the early brands from the 1800s survive to this day , however .
Tabasco sauce is the earliest recognizable brand in the United States hot sauce industry , appearing in 1868 .
As of 2010 , it was the number 13 best - selling seasoning in the United States preceded by Frank 's RedHot Sauce in 12th place , which was the sauce first used to create buffalo wings .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Many recipes for hot sauces exist , but the only common ingredient is some variety of chili pepper .
Many hot sauces are made by using chili peppers as the base and can be as simple as adding salt and vinegar .
Other sauces use some type of fruits or vegetables as the base and add the chili peppers to make them hot .
Manufacturers use many different processes from aging in containers to pureeing and cooking the ingredients to achieve a desired flavor .
Because of their ratings on the Scoville scale , Ghost pepper and Habanero peppers are used to make the hotter sauces but additional ingredients are used to add extra heat , such as pure capsaicin extract and mustard oil .
Other common ingredients include vinegar and spices .
Vinegar is used primarily as a natural preservative , but flavored vinegars can be used to alter the flavour .
STYLES SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA BELIZE
Section::::Styles .
Section::::South and Central America .
Section::::Belize .
Belizean hot sauces are usually extremely hot and use habaneros , carrots , and onions as primary ingredients .
Marie Sharp 's is a popular brand of hot sauce produced in Dangriga .
PANAMA Section::::Panama .
Traditional Panamanian hot sauce is usually made with " Aji Chombo " , Scotch Bonnet peppers .
Picante Chombo D'Elidas is a popular brand in Panama , with three major sauces .
The yellow sauce , made with habanero and mustard , is the most distinctive .
They also produce red and green varieties which are heavier on vinegar content and without mustard .
Although the majority of Panamanian cuisine lacks in spice , D'Elidas is seen as an authentic Panamanian hot sauce usually serviced with Rice with Chicken or soups .
Peru and Bolivian medium hot , frutal locoto sauces are popular .
CHILE Section::::Chile .
The most popular sauce is the Diaguitas brand , made of pure red ( very hot ) or yellow ( hot ) Chilean peppers mixed only with water and salt .
Other hot sauces are made from puta madre , cacho de cabra , rocoto , oro and cristal peppers , mixed with various ingredients .
Mild hot sauces include some " creamy style " ( like ají crema ) , or a pebre - style sauce , from many local producers , varying in hotness and quality .
NORTH AMERICA
MEXICO Section::::North America .
Section::::Mexico .
Mexicans prefer to eat chili peppers chopped , but when making hot sauces they are typically focused more on flavor than on intense heat .
Chipotles are a very popular ingredient of Mexican hot sauce and although the sauces are hot , the individual flavors of the peppers are more pronounced .
Vinegar is used sparingly or not at all in Mexican sauces , but some particular styles are high in vinegar content similar to the American Louisiana - style sauces .
Some hot sauces may include using the seeds from the popular achiote plant for coloring or a slight flavor additive .
The process of adobos ( marinade ) has been used in the past as a preservative but now it is mainly used to enhance the flavor of the peppers and they rely more on the use of vinegar .
Mexican - style sauces are primarily produced in Mexico but they are also produced internationally .
The Spanish term for sauce is salsa , and in English - speaking countries usually refers to the often tomato - based , hot sauces typical of Mexican cuisine , particularly those used as dips .
There are many types of salsa which usually vary throughout Latin America .
These are some of the notable companies producing Mexican style hot sauce .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The varieties of peppers that are used often are cayenne , chipotle , habanero and jalapeño .
Some hot sauces , notably Tabasco sauce , are aged in wooden casks similar to the preparation of wine and fermented vinegar .
Other ingredients , including fruits and vegetables such as raspberries , mangoes , carrots , and chayote squash are sometimes used to add flavor , mellow the heat of the chilis , and thicken the sauce 's consistency .
Artisan hot sauces are manufactured by smaller producers and private labels in the United States .
Their products are produced in smaller quantities in a variety of flavors .
Many sauces have a theme to catch consumers attention .
A very mild chili sauce is produced by Heinz and other manufacturers , and is frequently found in cookbooks in the U.S.
This style chili sauce is based on tomatoes , green and/or red bell peppers , and spices ; and contains little chili pepper .
This sauce is more akin to tomato ketchup and cocktail sauce than predominantly chili pepper - based sauces .
LOUISIANA - STYLE NEW MEXICO
WEST INDIES Section::::West Indies .
Hot pepper sauces , as they are most commonly known there , feature heavily in Caribbean cuisine like Caribbean style Bacchanal Pepper Sauce .
They are prepared from chilli peppers and vinegar , with fruits and vegetables added for extra flavor .
The most common peppers used are habanero and Scotch bonnet , the latter being the most common in Jamaica .
Both are very hot peppers , making for strong sauces .
Over the years , each island developed its own distinctive recipes , and home - made sauces are still common .
TRINIDAD Section::::Trinidad .
Trinidad Scorpion is considered one of the hottest and most frutal families of strains , and is cultivated and hybridized in the United States , United Kingdom , Australia and elsewhere .
BARBADOS HAITI PUERTO RICO
JAMAICA
ASIA EAST ASIA
CHINA Section::::Asia .
Section::::East Asia .
Section::::China .
Chinese chili sauces usually come as a thick paste , and are used either as a dipping sauce or in stir frying .
JAPAN KOREA SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA Section::::South and Southeast Asia .
Chili ( Hindi : mirch ) , fresh , semi - dried or dried , is a crucial ingredient throughout South Asia , with multiple strains having arrived through Portuguese trade from the sixteenth century .
Many varieties are now popular in different parts of the sub - continent such as Naga Chilli from Nagaland , Chamba Chukh from Himachal Pradesh , Guntur Chilli from Andhra Pradesh , Jwala Chilli from Gujarat among others .
Hot sauces proper , however , were not common until recent decades , as varieties such as bhut jolokia and naga morich attained global fame .
INDONESIA , MALAYSIA , SINGAPORE , BRUNEI , SRI LANKA
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Thais put raw chilies on a very wide variety of food , in lieu of chili sauces .
Chili sauces are eaten as condiments but they can also be used as an ingredient .
VIETNAM MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
LEVANT
MAGHREB YEMEN SUB - SAHARAN
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
MALAWI
EUROPE UNITED KINGDOM Section::::Europe .
Section::::United Kingdom .
Two of the hottest chilies in the world , the Naga Viper and Infinity chili were developed in the United Kingdom and are available as sauces which have been claimed to be the hottest natural chili sauces ( without added pepper extract ) available in the world ( The Naga Viper and Infinity were considered the hottest two chili peppers in the world until the Naga Viper was unseated by the Trinidad Moruga Scorpion in late 2011 . )
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
Erős Pista ( lit . "
Strong Steve " ) and Piros Arany ( lit . "
Red Gold " ) hot pepper paste , both made from minced hot paprika ( Capsicum annuum L. ) ; paprika is commonly grown in Hungary and both hot and mild paprika are in common usage there .
PORTUGAL
Section::::Portugal .
Piri piri is the popular chili sauce ; the term " piri piri " came to English through the Portuguese language through contact with Portuguese Mozambique .
OCEANIA
PACIFIC ISLANDS
Section::::Oceania .
Section::::Pacific Islands .
The Pacific Islands are influenced by Asian and European cuisines .
Hot chili sauce is a thick Chinese style sauce .
Sweet chili sauce is a Thai style sweet dipping sauce .
Peri Peri sauce is a Portuguese style piri piri sauce .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
The availability of a wide variety of hot sauces is a relatively recent event in Australia ( with little more than the flagship Tabasco cayenne variety and thick , medium hot Indochinese sauces widely available last century ) , although very faithful locally produced versions of habanero and Trinidad Scorpion sauces are now available .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Many influences reflecting the increasingly diverse ethnicity of its population .
Common styles available in supermarkets are : HEAT Section::::Heat .
The heat , or burning sensation , experienced when consuming hot sauce is caused by capsaicin and related capsaicinoids .
The burning sensation is not " real " in the sense of damage being wrought on tissues .
The mechanism of action is instead a chemical interaction with the neurological system .
The seemingly subjective perceived heat of hot sauces can be measured by the Scoville scale .
The Scoville scale number indicates how many times something must be diluted with an equal volume of water until people can no longer feel any sensation from the capsaicin .
The hottest hot sauce scientifically possible is one rated at 16,000,000 Scoville units , which is pure capsaicin .
An example of a hot sauce marketed as achieving this level of heat is Blair 's 16 Million Reserve ( due to production variances , it is up to 16 million Scoville units ) , marketed by Blair 's Sauces and Snacks .
By comparison , Tabasco sauce is rated between 2,500 and 5,000 Scoville units ( batches vary ) - with one of the mildest commercially available condiments , Cackalacky Classic Condiment Company 's Spice Sauce , weighing in at less than 1000 Scoville units on the standard heat scale .
A general way to estimate the heat of a sauce is to look at the ingredients list .
Sauces tend to vary in heat based on the kind of peppers used , and the further down the list , the less the amount of pepper .
* Cayenne - Sauces made with cayenne , including most of the Louisiana - style sauces , are usually hotter than jalapeño , but milder than other sauces .
* Chile de árbol - A thin and potent Mexican chili pepper also known as bird 's beak chile and rat 's tail chile .
Their heat index uses to be between 15,000 and 30,000 Scoville units , but it can reach over 100,000 units .
In cooking substitutions , the Chile de árbol pepper can be traded with Cayenne pepper .
* Habanero - Habanero pepper sauces were known as the hottest natural pepper sauces , but nowadays species like Bhut jolokia , Naga jolokia or Trinidad Scorpion Moruga are even five or ten - fold hotter .
* Jalapeño - These sauces include green and red jalapeño chilis , and chipotle ( ripened and smoked ) .
Green jalapeño and chipotle are usually the mildest sauces available .
Red jalapeño sauce is generally hotter .
* Naga Bhut Jolokia -
The pepper is also known as Bhut Jolokia , ghost pepper , ghost chili pepper , red naga chilli , and ghost chilli .
In 2007 , Guinness World Records certified that the Ghost Pepper ( Bhut Jolokia ) was the world 's hottest chili pepper , 400 times hotter than Tabasco sauce ; however , in 2011 it has since been superseded by the Trinidad Moruga Scorpion .
* Piri piri -
The Peri Peri pepper has been naturalized into South Africa and is also known as the African Bird 's Eye pepper , Piri - Piri pepper or Pili - Pili pepper , depending on what area of the country you 're in .
The pepper ranges from one half to one inch in length and tapers at a blunt point .
The small package packs a mighty punch with a 175,000 rating on the Scoville scale , near the Habanero , but the Peri Peri is smaller and has a much different flavor .
It is most commonly used in a hot sauce , combined with other spices and seasonings because it has a very light , fresh citrus - herbal flavor that blends well with the flavors of most other ingredients .
* Scotch Bonnet - Similar in heat to the Habanero are these peppers popular in the Caribbean .
Often found in Jamaican hot sauces .
* Tabasco peppers - Sauces made with tabasco peppers are generally hotter than cayenne pepper sauces .
Along with Tabasco , a number of sauces are made using tabasco peppers .
*
Trinidad Moruga Scorpion
The golf ball - sized chili pepper has a tender fruit - like flavor .
According to the New Mexico State University Chile Institute , the Trinidad Scorpion Moruga Blend ranks as high as 2,009,231 SHU on the Scoville scale .
* Carolina Reaper -
The Carolina Reaper
® is a super hot pepper which has been described as a roasted sweetness delivering an instant level of heat .
Developed by Puckerbutt Founder Ed Currie in Rock Hill , South Carolina , the Carolina Reaper averages over 1.5 million SHU and was awarded the Guinness World Record in November of 2013 .
* Capsaicin extract - The hottest sauces are made from capsaicin extract .
These range from extremely hot pepper sauce blends to pure capsaicin extracts .
These sauces are extremely hot and should be considered with caution by those not used to fiery foods .
Many are too hot to consume more than a drop or two in a pot of food .
These novelty sauces are typically only sold by specialty retailers and are usually more expensive .
* Other ingredients - heat is also affected by other ingredients .
Mustard oil and wasabi can be added to increase the sensation of heat but generally , more ingredients in a sauce dilute the effect of the chilis , resulting in a milder flavor .
Many sauces contain tomatoes , carrots , onions , garlic or other vegetables and seasonings .
Vinegar or lemon juice are also common ingredients in many hot sauces because their acidity will help keep the sauce from oxidizing , thus acting as a preservative .
REMEDIES Section::::Remedies .
Capsaicinoids are the chemicals responsible for the " hot " taste of chili peppers .
They are fat soluble and therefore water will be of no assistance when countering the burn .
The most effective way to relieve the burning sensation is with dairy products , such as milk and yogurt .
A protein called casein occurs in dairy products which binds to the capsaicin , effectively making it less available to " burn " the mouth , and the milk fat helps keep it in suspension .
Rice is also useful for mitigating the impact , especially when it is included with a mouthful of the hot food .
These foods are typically included in the cuisine of cultures that specialise in the use of chilis .
Mechanical stimulation of the mouth by chewing food will also partially mask the pain sensation .
SEE ALSO
* Chili pepper water
* List of condiments * List of hot sauces * Sambal , sauce typically made from a variety of chili peppers .
* Jerk spice , a marinade of spices and hot peppers commonly used in Jamaican cuisine .
*
Pepper
jelly *
Scoville scale
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS