SOFT TISSUE INJURY
A soft tissue injury ( STI ) is the damage of muscles , ligaments and tendons throughout the body .
Common soft tissue injuries usually occur from a sprain , strain , a one off blow resulting in a contusion or overuse of a particular part of the body .
Soft tissue injuries can result in pain , swelling , bruising and loss of function .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS SPRAINS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Section::::Sprains .
A sprain is a type of acute injury which results from the stretching or tearing of a ligament .
Depending on the severity of the sprain , the movement on the joint can be compromised since ligaments aid in the stability and support of joints .
Sprains are commonly seen in vulnerable areas such as the wrists , knees and ankles .
They can occur from movements such as falling on an outstretched hand or a twisting of the ankle or foot .
The severity of a sprain can be classified :
* Grade 1 :
Only some of the fibers in the ligament are torn , and the injured site is moderately painful and swollen .
Function in the joint will be unaffected for the most part .
* Grade 2 : Many of the ligament fibers are torn , and pain and swelling is moderate .
The functionality of the joint is compromised .
* Grade 3 :
The soft tissue is completely torn , and functionality and strength on the joint is completely compromised .
In most cases , surgery is needed to repair the damage .
STRAINS Section::::Strains .
A strain is a type of acute injury that occurs to the muscle or tendon .
Similar to sprains , it can vary in severity , from a stretching of the muscle or tendon to a complete tear of the tendon from the muscle .
Some of the most common places that strains occur are in the foot , back of the leg ( hamstring ) , or back .
BRUISING ( CONTUSION )
Section::::Bruising ( contusion ) .
A contusion is the discoloration of the skin , which results from underlying muscle fibers and connective tissue being crushed .
This can happen in a variety of ways such as a direct blow to the skin , or a fall taken against a hard surface .
The discoloration in the skin is present when blood begins to pool around the injury .
TENDINITIS Section::::Tendinitis .
Tendinitis is a type of overuse injury to the tendons , which demonstrates signs of inflammation of tendons around a joint .
Tendinitis is the most common cause of shoulder pain .
Tendinitis occurs when there is repetitive stress on the subacromial bursa , which causes the bones to make contact with the tendons and irritate them .
DIAGNOSIS
CLASSIFICATIONS
ACUTE INJURIES Section::::Diagnosis .
Section::::Classifications .
Section::::Acute injuries .
Any type of injury that occurs to the body through sudden trauma , such as a fall , twist or blow to the body .
A few examples of this type of injury would be sprains , strains and contusions .
OVERUSE INJURIES
Section::::Overuse injuries .
An overuse injury occurs when a certain activity is repeated frequently and the body does not have enough time to recover between occurrences .
Examples include bursitis and tendinitis .
COMMONLY
INJURED TISSUES
Section::::Commonly injured tissues .
With examples of each .
Parentheses indicate location in body * Ligaments
* Muscles * Tendons
* Nerves
* Bones * Cartilage MANAGEMENT RICE METHOD : ( REST , ICE , COMPRESSION , ELEVATION )
Section::::Management .
Section::::RICE method : ( Rest , Ice , Compression , Elevation ) .
The RICE method is an effective procedure used in the initial treatment of a soft tissue injury .
NO HARM PROTOCOL : ( HEAT , ALCOHOL , RE - INJURY , MASSAGE ) Section::::No
HARM Protocol : ( Heat , Alcohol , Re - injury , Massage ) .
This method should not be used within the first 48–72 hours after the injury in order to speed up the recovery process .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
If severe pain persists after the first 24hours it is recommended that an individual consult with a professional who can make a diagnosis and implement a treatment plan so the patient can return to everyday activities .
To make a full diagnosis , a professional may use nerve conduction studies to localize nerve dysfunction ( e.g. carpal tunnel syndrome ) , assess severity , and help with prognosis .
Electrodiagnosis also helps differentiate between myopathy and neuropathy .
Ultimately , the best method of imaging soft tissue is magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , though it is cost - prohibitive and carries a high false positive rate .
REFERENCES SOURCES
* Flegel , Melinda J. ( 2004 ) .
Sport first aid : A coach 's guide to preventing and responding to injuries .
Hong Kong , Japan : Human Kinetics .
* Lindsay , R. , Watson , G. , Hickmont , D. , Broadfoot , A. , & Bruynel , L. ( 1994 ) .
Treat your own strains sprains and bruises .
New Zealand : Spinal Publications .
* Lovering , R.M. ( 2008 ) .
" Physical therapy and related interventions " .
In P.M. Tiidus ( ed . ) , Skeletal muscle damage and repair ( pp .
219–230 ) .
United States of America : Human Kinetics .
* Prentice , William E. " Tissue Response to Injury " , Principles of Athletic Training : A Competency Based Approach .
14th ed .
New York :
McGraw Hill Companies , 2011 .
260 - 277 .
* Subotnick , Steven ( 1991 ) .
Sports and Exercise Injuries : Conventional , Homeopathic and Alternative Treatments .
California , United States of America : North Atlantic Books .