FORT HAMILTON Fort Hamilton is a United States Army installation in the southwestern corner of the New York City borough of Brooklyn , surrounded by the communities of Bay Ridge and Dyker Heights .
It is one of several posts that are part of the region which is headquartered by the Military District of Washington .
Its mission is to provide the New York metropolitan area with military installation support for the Army National Guard and the United States Army Reserve .
The original fort was completed in 1831 , with major additions made in the 1870s and 1900s .
However , all defenses except about half of the original fort have been demolished or buried .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On July 4 , 1776 , a small American battery ( the Narrows Fort ) on the site of today 's Fort Hamilton ( the east side of the Narrows ) fired into one of the British men - of - war convoying troops to suppress the American Revolution .
HMS Asia suffered damage and casualties , but opposition to the immense fleet could be little more than symbolic .
However , this very significant event marked one of the earliest uses of the site for military purposes .
The War of 1812 underscored the importance of coastal defense ( since the British burned parts of Washington , DC ) and helped to promote a new round of fort building .
The new forts , including Fort Hamilton , were eventually termed the third system of US seacoast forts .
The cornerstone for Fort Hamilton was set in place by its designer , Simon Bernard , on June 11 , 1825 .
Bernard was previously a French military engineer under Napoleon , who had joined the US Army after Napoleon 's defeat in 1815 .
Six years and a half million dollars later , the fort was ready to receive its garrison , initially Battery F of the 4th US Artillery .
Fort Hamilton ( now the Casemate Fort , Whiting Quadrangle ) was designed primarily as a landward defense for Fort Lafayette , although it had a sea - facing front as well .
Fort Lafayette was offshore on Hendricks Reef , and was demolished in the 1960s to make room for the eastern tower of the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge .
Fort Hamilton was in the shape of a trapezoid , with the wide side facing the Narrows and the narrow side facing inland .
It had two tiers of cannon all around : a casemated tier inside the fort and a barbette tier on the roof .
Loopholes for muskets were provided on the three landward sides .
A dry ditch also protected these three sides .
A caponier , a rare feature in US forts , projected into the ditch to defend it against attack .
Two smaller caponiers enclosed the ends of the ditch , projecting off the seacoast front .
The fort 's sally port was in the middle of this front .
A square redoubt with its own ditch was located behind the fort to provide an initial landward defense position .
Though references to the structure as Fort Hamilton occur as early as 1826 , it was not officially named for the former Senior Officer of the United States Army and first Secretary of the Treasury , Alexander Hamilton , until the twentieth century .
In 1839 the Federal government gave permission to New York State 's 27th Regiment to drill at the fort , thus qualifying it as the nation 's first National Guard training camp .
The following year , it allocated $ 20,000 to improve the fort 's armaments , and Captain Robert E. Lee , then an officer of the Army Corps of Engineers , was assigned the task of improving the defenses of the fort as well as those of other military installations in the area .
Lee served as Fort Hamilton 's post engineer from 1841 to 1846 and is credited with the initial design of several subsequent New York - area forts , notably the rebuilt Fort Richmond and Fort Tompkins , along with the Fort at Willets Point and the Fort at Sandy Hook .
Lieutenant Thomas " Stonewall " Jackson also served at Fort Hamilton , and Captain Abner Doubleday served as the post commander in 1861 , shortly after serving at Fort Sumter during the bombardment that started the Civil War .
CIVIL WAR Section::::Civil War .
During the Civil War , Fort Hamilton 's garrison expanded .
A ship barrier across the Narrows assisted Fort Hamilton and its sister forts on Staten Island , now called Fort Wadsworth , in protecting the harbor against the possibility of Confederate raiders .
The forts also provided troops to help put down the New York Draft Riots of 1863 .
Fort Hamilton also served as a prisoner - of - war camp , and an exterior " New Battery " of guns was added .
Rifled cannon made vertical - walled masonry fortifications obsolete during the Civil War .
The first response of the US coast defense forces to this was a series of new batteries , with guns in open positions behind low earth walls and brick magazines with heavy earth cover between the guns .
Most of these were located near existing forts .
In 1871 construction began at Fort Hamilton on an 8-gun water battery and a 15-gun mortar battery , but the latter was never completed or armed .
Money for these projects ran out in the late 1870s , and US coast defense languished , with few improvements completed for nearly 20 years .
ENDICOTT PROGRAM Section::::Endicott program .
The 1885 Board of Fortifications , chaired by Secretary of War William C. Endicott and also called the Endicott Board , recommended sweeping improvements to US coast defenses , with a new generation of modern breech - loading rifled guns and numerous new gun batteries .
Most of the Board 's recommendations were adopted as the Endicott program , and that included major changes and improvements for Fort Hamilton .
More than half of the old fort was demolished to make room for new concrete gun batteries .
Fort Hamilton became part of the Artillery District of New York , renamed in 1913 as the Coast Defenses of Southern New York .
The following table shows the gun batteries completed at Fort Hamilton from 1898 to 1905 .
In most cases references do not indicate the precise model of gun or carriage at a particular battery , or the batteries ' namesakes : !
bgcolor="efefef"Name !
bgcolor="efefef"No .
of guns !
bgcolor="efefef"Gun type !
bgcolor="efefef"Carriage type !
bgcolor="efefef"Years active Piper812-inch mortarbarbette1901 - 1942 Harvey Brown212-inch gundisappearing1902- ?
Doubleday212-inch gundisappearing1900 - 1943
Neary212-inch gun
M1888barbette M18921900
- 1937
Gillmore410-inch gundisappearing1899 - 1942 Spear310-inch
gundisappearing1898 - 1917
Burke46-inch gun M1900pedestal M19001903 - 1917
Livingston26-inch gun M1905disappearing M19031905 - 1920 ?
Livingston26-inch gun
M1900pedestal M19001905 - 1948
Johnston26-inch gun M1900pedestal M19001902 - 1943 Mendenhall46-inch
gundisappearing1905 - 1917
Griffin24.72-inch/45 caliber
Armstrong gunpedestal1899 - 1913 Griffin23-inch gun M1898masking parapet M18981902 - 1920 Griffin23-inch gun M1903pedestal M19031903 - 1946
Several batteries ( Burke , Johnston , Brown , and Griffin ) were directly in front of the remains of the old fort , with Battery Griffin in front of and below the others .
The other batteries extended in a line southeast of the old fort , with Battery Piper , the mortar battery , well to the rear of the line .
Battery Griffin seems to have been designed as a mixed battery of two each M1898 and M1903 3-inch guns .
The 4.72-inch guns of this battery were hastily added after the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in 1898 ; they were British guns purchased because most of the Endicott program was still years from completion .
The 4.72-inch/45 caliber guns were transferred to Fort Kamehameha , Hawaii in 1913 to concentrate this type of weapon in one area .
Battery Livingston was also an unusual combination of two disappearing 6-inch guns and two guns on pedestal mounts .
Batteries Gillmore and Spear were originally a 7-gun battery under the former name , but were split up in 1903 , probably for improved fire control .
WORLD
WAR
I Section::::World War I.
The American entry into World War
I brought many changes to Fort Hamilton , as at most other coast defense installations .
Numerous temporary buildings were constructed to house the influx of new recruits , draftees , and units in training prior to deployment overseas .
As the Coast Artillery was one of the Army 's few sources of trained personnel , the branch was chosen to operate almost all US - manned heavy and railway artillery in that war , most of which was French- or British - made .
Most personnel at the forts were transferred to new heavy artillery regiments .
Also , several of Fort Hamilton 's guns were dismounted for potential service on the Western Front ; however , very few Army Coast Artillery weapons were actually used in that war , due to shipping priorities and extensive training .
Battery Spear 's three 10-inch guns were dismounted for potential use as railway artillery .
The eight 6-inch guns of Batteries Burke and Mendenhall were dismounted for potential use on field carriages .
Two of these guns , along with four of Battery Piper 's 12-inch mortars , were used as the first batteries of Fort Tilden in nearby Far Rockaway , Queens .
The removal of half of the mortars was also part of a forcewide program to improve the rate of fire of the remaining mortars .
None of the weapons removed from Fort Hamilton in World War I were returned to the fort .
BETWEEN THE WARS Section::::Between the wars .
The end of World War I also meant more changes for Fort Hamilton .
Around 1920 Battery Livingston 's pair of 6-inch disappearing guns were transferred to West Point to be used for training cadets .
These two guns are preserved today at Fort Pickens near Pensacola , Florida and Battery Chamberlin at the Presidio of San Francisco , the last 6-inch disappearing guns outside of the Philippines .
Battery Griffin 's pair of 3-inch M1898 guns was removed in 1920 , part of a withdrawal from service of some gun types .
In 1921 two long - range batteries of 12-inch guns were completed at Fort Hancock , New Jersey , and by 1924 the installation of 16-inch guns at Fort Tilden relegated Fort Hamilton to the second line of New York 's coast defenses .
In 1937 Battery Neary 's pair of 12-inch guns was removed .
WORLD WAR II Section::::World War II .
In World War II Fort Hamilton primarily served as a mobilization center , as it had in World War I. Except for the two remaining 6-inch pedestal guns of Battery Livingston and the pair of 3-inch guns at Battery Griffin , the remaining guns were gradually scrapped ; the pair of 16-inch guns at the Highlands Military Reservation in New Jersey along with Fort Tilden superseded the older defenses .
An anti - aircraft battery , probably of 90 mm guns , was at the fort during the war .
POST
WORLD WAR II
Section::::Post World War II .
Shortly after World War II it was decided that gun coast defenses were obsolete .
In 1948 , the last coast defense gun was removed from Fort Hamilton .
A battery of four 120 mm M1 guns was at the fort 1952 - 54 , part of the Cold War air defense system .
In the late 1950s and early 1960s the now - disused gun batteries were demolished or buried for the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge and the Belt Parkway .
UNITS Section::::Units .
The following Regular Army units were established at Fort Hamilton :
* 12th Infantry Regiment : October 20 , 1861
* 21st Infantry Regiment : May 20 , 1862 *
5th Coast Artillery Regiment , 1924
In the 1960s , Fort Hamilton also served as the home for the United States Army Chaplain School as it moved from the recently closed Fort Slocum .
Hundreds of Army , Army Reserve and Army National Guard Chaplains and their assistants were trained here for active duty and reserve ministries to soldiers and their dependents .
The school was later moved across the Narrows to Fort Wadsworth , and still later to Fort Jackson , South Carolina where it now resides .
TODAY Section::::Today .
Fort Hamilton is the last active - duty military post in New York City .
Fort Hamilton was once a sister fortification to Fort Wadsworth on Staten Island .
The two forts were part of a system of military installations in New York City , including Fort Tilden and Fort Totten in Queens ; Fort Wood and Governors Island in Manhattan ; Hart Island and Fort Schuyler in the Bronx ; and Brooklyn Army Terminal , Brooklyn Navy Yard and Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn .
At present , U.S. Army Fort Hamilton Garrison is the home of the New York City Recruiting Battalion , the Military Entrance Processing Station , the North Atlantic Division Headquarters of the United States Army Corps of Engineers , the 1179th Transportation Brigade and the 722nd Aeromedical Staging Squadron , the latter organization being a geographically separated unit ( GSU ) of the 439th Airlift Wing of the Air Force Reserve Command .
Fort Hamilton also supports many Army Reserve and New York Army National Guard units , These Army National Guard units include the 133d Quartermaster Company , Company C/642d Aviation Support Battalion , 222d Chemical Company , and the 107th Military Police Company .
In October 1997 , Fort Hamilton came under the command of the Military District of Washington and in October 2002 , under Army Transformation , Fort Hamilton became part of the Installation Management Agency - Northeast Region .
The construction of the Verrazzano - Narrows Bridge in the early 1960s did away with several historic structures , including Fort Lafayette , which was located near the Brooklyn shore where the bridge tower now rises from the water .
During the same period , efforts toward saving the historical heritage of the Narrows increased .
Part of the U.S. Army 's contribution to preserving this heritage is in the Harbor Defense Museum at Fort Hamilton .
The original fort later became the Officers ' Club and now houses the Community Club .
The caponier , a miniature fort guarding the main fort 's gate , now houses the Harbor Defense Museum .
Other notable landmarks include the Robert E. Lee House , where Lee , then a captain , resided while post engineer of the garrison , and Colonels ' Row , six historic townhouses that used to house senior officers .
All of these structures are listed on the National Register of Historic Places .
In the 2000s , the historic parade field that once lay behind the old New York Area Command ( NYAC ) Headquarters Building and the Military Personnel Office , former site of numerous ceremonies and festivities , was developed into swiftly built privatized housing .
The historic flag pole and cannon are still present at the site , near the old headquarters building and across from the Post Exchange barber shop .
In 2007 , the historic , brick barracks , located on the plot of land within Pershing Loop on the eastern portion of the base , which formerly housed the New York Area Command 's Ceremonial Platoon and Military Police Company , was demolished .
The ceremonial platoon , consisting of only infantrymen , once performed funeral honors and ceremonial functions ( such as deployment as color guards in New York City parades , or firing cannons to start the New York City Marathon ) , in the greater N.Y. area , including Long Island , New York City , as well as parts of New Jersey , along with the 26th Army Band unit that was similar to the Old Guard in Washington ,
D.C. A Civil War - era experimental 20-inch Rodman gun , one of two remaining and the largest gun produced by either side in that period , is in John Paul Jones Park immediately north of the fort .
Numerous shells for this weapon are displayed on the fort grounds .
An ex - Navy 12"/45 caliber Mark V Mod 8 gun is also displayed on post , representative of the type of weapon the fort had in the Endicott era .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Fort Hamilton is the setting for nearly all of Nelson DeMille 's novel , Word of Honor .
SEE ALSO
* Seacoast defense in the United States * United States Army Coast Artillery Corps
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Fort Hamilton ( U.S. Army Garrison )
* Harbor Defense Museum Official site * Harbor Defense Museum at NYC
Arts.org * Harbor Defense Museum at New York magazine * North Atlantic Division , U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
* New York State Military Museum - Information about Fort Hamilton * American Forts Network , lists forts in the US , former US territories , Canada , and Central America
* List of all US coastal forts and batteries at the Coast Defense Study Group , Inc. website * FortWiki , lists most CONUS and Canadian forts