HERE COMES THE SUN
" Here Comes the Sun " is a song written by George Harrison that was first released on the Beatles ' 1969 album Abbey Road .
Along with " Something " and " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , it is one of Harrison 's best - known compositions from the Beatles era .
The song was written at the country house of his friend Eric Clapton , where Harrison had chosen to play truant for the day , to avoid attending a meeting at the Beatles ' Apple Corps organisation .
The lyrics reflect the composer 's relief at both the arrival of spring and the temporary respite he was experiencing from the band 's business affairs .
The Beatles recorded " Here Comes the Sun " at London 's EMI Studios in the summer of 1969 .
Led by Harrison 's acoustic guitar , the recording also features Moog synthesizer , which he had introduced to the Beatles ' sound after acquiring an early model of the instrument in California .
Reflecting the continued influence of Indian classical music on Harrison 's writing , the composition includes a series of unusual time changes .
" Here Comes the Sun " has received acclaim from music critics .
Combined with his other contribution to Abbey Road , " Something " , it gained for Harrison the level of recognition as a songwriter that had previously been reserved for his bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney .
Harrison played the song during many of his relatively rare live performances as a solo artist , including at the Concert for Bangladesh in 1971 and , with Paul Simon , during his appearance on Saturday Night Live in 1976 .
Richie Havens and Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel each had hit singles with " Here Comes the Sun " in the 1970s .
Nina Simone , George Benson , Booker T. & the M.G. 's , Peter Tosh and Joe Brown are among the many other artists who have covered the song .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
The early months of 1969 were a difficult period for Harrison : he had quit the band temporarily , he was arrested for marijuana possession , and he had his tonsils removed .
Harrison states in his autobiography , I ,
Me , Mine : As Clapton states in his autobiography , the house in question , in Ewhurst , Surrey , is known as Hurtwood Edge .
When interviewed in the Martin Scorsese documentary , Clapton said he believed the month was April .
Data from two meteorological stations in the London area show that April 1969 set a record for sunlight hours for the 1960s .
The Greenwich station recorded 189 hours for April , a high that was not beaten until 1984 .
The Greenwich data also show that February and March were much colder than the norm for the 1960s , which would account for Harrison 's reference to a " long , cold , lonely winter " .
MUSICAL STRUCTURE
Section::::Musical structure .
The song is in the key of A major .
The main refrain uses a IV ( D chord ) to V - of - V ( B chord ) progression ( the reverse of that used in " Eight Days a Week " and " Sgt .
Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " ) .
The melody in the verse and refrain basically follows the pentatonic scale from E up to C ( scale steps 5 , 6 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) .
One feature is the increasing syncopation in the vocal parts .
Another feature is the guitar flat - picking that embellishes the E7 ( V7 ) chord from 2:03 to 2:11 , creating tension for resolution on the tonic A chord at " Little darlin ' " .
The bridge involves a III - VII - IV - I - V7 triple descending 4th ( or Tri - Plagal ) progression ( with an extra V7 ) as the vocals move from " Sun " ( III or C chord ) to " sun " ( VII or G chord ) to " sun " ( IV or D chord ) to " comes " ( I or A chord ) and the additional 4th descent to a V7 ( E7 ) chord .
The lyric here ( " Sun , sun , sun , here it comes " ) has been described as taking " on the quality of a meditator 's mantra " .
The song also features extreme 4/4 ( in the verse ) and a sequence of 11/8 + 4/4 + 7/8 ( which can also be transcribed as 11/8 + 15/8 ) in the bridge , phrasing interludes which Harrison drew from Indian music influences .
In the second verse ( 0:59–1:13 ) the Moog synthesizer doubles the solo guitar line and in the third verse the Moog adds an obbligato line an octave above .
The last four bars ( 2:54–3:04 ) juxtapose the guitar break with a repeat of the bridge .
RECORDING
Section::::Recording .
Harrison , Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr recorded the rhythm track in 13 takes on 7 July 1969 .
John Lennon did not contribute to the song as he was recovering from a car crash .
Towards the end of the session Harrison spent an hour re - recording his acoustic guitar part .
He capoed his guitar on the 7th fret , resulting in the final key of A major ( in fact , slightly above A major due to the track being varispeeded by less than a semitone ) .
He also used the same technique on his 1965 song " If I Needed Someone " , which shares a similar melodic pattern .
The following day he taped his lead vocals , and he and McCartney recorded their backing vocals twice to give a fuller sound .
A harmonium and handclaps were added on 16 July .
Harrison added an electric guitar run through a Leslie speaker on 6 August , and the orchestral parts ( George Martin 's score for four violas , four cellos , double bass , two piccolos , two flutes , two alto flutes and two clarinets ) were added on 15 August .
"
Here Comes the Sun " was completed four days later with the addition of Harrison 's Moog synthesizer part .
The master tapes reveal that Harrison recorded a guitar solo that was not included in the final mix at that time .
RELEASE AND RECEPTION Section::::Release and reception .
Abbey Road was released on 26 September 1969 with " Here Comes the Sun " sequenced as the opening track on side two of the LP .
Along with " Something " , which was issued as a single from the album , the song established Harrison as a composer to match Lennon and McCartney .
According to author Alan Clayson , Harrison 's two Abbey Road compositions received " the most widespread syndication " of all the tracks on the album , partly through the number of cover versions they attracted .
Nine years later , Harrison recorded " Here Comes the Moon " as a lyrical successor to the song .
In Japan , " Here Comes the Sun " was issued on a single in 1970 , as the B - side to McCartney 's Abbey Road track " Oh ! Darling " .
While the Beatles never released the track on a single in Britain , new rules implemented to the UK Singles Chart in 2007 allowed any song to enter the charts based on download sales .
This allowed several songs recorded by the Beatles to list on the charts when the group 's back catalogue became available for download on iTunes in 2010 , including " Here Comes the Sun " , which peaked at number 58 on 27 November that year .
Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Mikal Gilmore likened " Here Comes the Sun " to the McCartney - written "
Let It Be " and Lennon 's " Imagine " , as Harrison 's " graceful anthem of hope amid difficult realities " .
While expressing regret at having underestimated Harrison as a songwriter , Martin described " Here Comes the Sun " as being " in some ways one of the best songs ever written " .
CULTURAL REFERENCES AND LEGACY Section::::Cultural references and legacy .
In 1977 , astronomer and science populariser Carl Sagan attempted to have " Here Comes the Sun " included on a disc of music accompanying the Voyager space mission .
Titled the Voyager Golden Record , copies of the disc were put on board both spacecraft in the Voyager program in order to provide any entity that recovered them with a representative sample of human civilization .
Writing in his book Murmurs of Earth , Sagan recalls that the Beatles favoured the idea , but " [ they ] did not own the copyright , and the legal status of the piece seemed too murky to risk .
" When the probes were launched in 1977 , the song was not included .
The track has appeared in many critics ' lists of the Beatles ' best recordings .
Among these , the NME placed it at number 4 in the magazine 's 2015 list of " the 100 Greatest Beatles Songs " .
In a similar poll compiled by Mojo in 2006 , where the song appeared at number 21 , Danny Eccleston described it as " perhaps the best song – outside ' Jerusalem ' – that religion can claim credit for " , adding : " Those who professed surprise at Harrison 's immediate elevation to Most Successful Solo Beatle status [ in 1970 ]
clearly were n't listening to this . "
" Here Comes the Sun " appeared at number 28 on Rolling Stones 2010 list , where the editors commented : " Along with ' Something , ' it gave notice that the Beatles now had three formidable composers .
"
In 1994 , when BMI published its US radio airplay figures , " Here Comes the Sun " was listed as having been played more than 2 million times .
" Here Comes the Sun " was played as the entrance music for Ivanka Trump at the 2016 Republican National Convention .
The George Harrison estate complained about the song being used to support Donald Trump 's presidential campaign , saying it was " offensive and against the wishes of the George Harrison estate " .
The Harrison family later tweeted : " If it had been Beware of Darkness , then we MAY have approved it !
# TrumpYourself . "
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2012–17 ) !
Peakposition US Hot Rock Songs ( Billboard )
align="center"14 CERTIFICATIONS
COVER
VERSIONS
STEVE HARLEY & COCKNEY
REBEL Section::::Cover versions .
Section::::Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel .
In 1976 , " Here Comes the Sun " was covered by the British rock band Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel , and released as the lead single from their fifth studio album , Love 's a Prima Donna .
The lineup on their version was Steve Harley on vocals and guitar , Jim Cregan on lead guitar and backing vocals , Jo Partridge on guitar and backing vocals , George Ford on bass guitar and backing vocals , Duncan Mackay on keyboards , and Stuart Elliott on drums .
Additional backing vocals were provided by Yvonne Keeley , John G. Perry and Tony Rivers , while Lindsey Elliott played percussion .
" Here Comes the Sun " was the first cover version that Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel had chosen to record .
The song peaked at number 10 on the UK Singles Chart and number 7 in Ireland .
It was the band 's last top 40 single .
OTHER ARTISTS
Section::::Other artists .
In August 1971 , Harrison performed the song at the Concert for Bangladesh , accompanied by Pete Ham of the group Badfinger .
He also played it during his appearance on Saturday Night Live in November 1976 , as a duet with Paul Simon .
A live version from his 1991 Japanese tour with Eric Clapton appears on Harrison 's Live in Japan double album .
Booker T. & the M.G. 's included the song on their 1970 Abbey Road tribute album , McLemore Avenue .
That same year , " Here Comes the Sun " was covered by Peter Tosh and released as a single , although it was not widely available until its inclusion on Ca n't Blame the Youth in 2004 .
We Five released a version on their 1970 album Catch the Wind .
Richie Havens played the song at Woodstock and had a US hit with a version which peaked at number 16 the week of 22 May 1971 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart .
Nina Simone recorded " Here Comes the Sun " as the title track to her 1971 covers album .
Sandy Farina covered "
Here Comes the Sun " on the Martin - produced soundtrack to the 1978 film Sgt .
Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band .
In 1980 , on their album Flaming Schoolgirls , the Runaways recorded " Here Comes the Sun " .
Dave Edmunds , Debbie Gibson and Raffi sang a live cover version in a Japanese television special aired in 1990 .
On their 1994 debut album , Who Is , This Is ? , ska - punk band Voodoo Glow Skulls recorded a version of the song .
Linda Eder released a version of " Here Comes the Sun " in 2002 on her Gold album .
On 29 November that year , Joe Brown performed the song at the Concert for George tribute , which was organised by Clapton and held at the Royal Albert Hall in London .
Brown 's performance was included on the subsequent live album from the event and in David Leland 's concert film .
Sheryl Crow sang " Here Comes the Sun " in the 2007 animated film Bee Movie .
Swedish heavy metal band Ghost released a version of the song as a bonus track on the Japanese edition of their 2010 album Opus Eponymous .
Marina Prior recorded the song for her 2012 album
Both Sides Now .
Malaysian singer Yuna recorded her version for the 2012 film Savages .
It can be heard in the ending credits .
Naya Rivera and Demi Lovato performed the song , as Santana Lopez and Dani respectively , in Glee fifth season episode
" Tina in the Sky with Diamonds " .
Their duet version appears on the album Glee Sings the Beatles , released in September 2013 .
Writing for MTV , Jocelyn Vena commented that the two singers sang " in perfect harmony over a plucky guitar . "
Idolator also pointed out " their beautiful harmonies " as a highlight .
Paul Simon has often performed " Here Comes the Sun " in concert , as a tribute to Harrison .
In September 2014 , Simon played the song live on the TBS television show Conan as part of the show 's " George Harrison Week " initiative .
PERSONNEL Section::::Personnel .
According to Ian MacDonald , the line - up on the Beatles ' recording was as follows .
The Beatles * George Harrison – lead and backing vocals , acoustic and electric guitars , harmonium , Moog synthesizer , handclaps * Paul McCartney – backing vocal , bass , handclaps * Ringo Starr – drums , handclaps Additional musicians
* Uncredited – four violas , four cellos , double bass , two piccolos , two flutes , two alto flutes , two clarinets * George Martin – orchestral arrangement and conducting REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* [ Review ] from AllMusic * Full lyrics for the song at the Beatles ' official website