STEAM EXPLOSION
A steam explosion is an explosion caused by violent boiling or flashing of water into steam , occurring when water is either superheated , rapidly heated by fine hot debris produced within it , or heated by the interaction of molten metals ( as in a fuel – coolant interaction , or FCI , of molten nuclear - reactor fuel rods with water in a nuclear reactor core following a core - meltdown ) .
Pressure vessels , such as pressurized water ( nuclear ) reactors , that operate above atmospheric pressure can also provide the conditions for a steam explosion .
The water changes from a liquid to a gas with extreme speed , increasing dramatically in volume .
A steam explosion sprays steam and boiling - hot water and the hot medium that heated it in all directions ( if not otherwise confined , e.g. by the walls of a container ) , creating a danger of scalding and burning .
Steam explosions are not normally chemical explosions , although a number of substances react chemically with steam ( for example , zirconium and superheated graphite react with steam and air respectively to give off hydrogen , which burns violently in air ) so that chemical explosions and fires may follow .
Some steam explosions appear to be special kinds of boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion ( BLEVE ) , and rely on the release of stored superheat .
But many large - scale events , including foundry accidents , show evidence of an energy - release front propagating through the material ( see description of FCI below ) , where the forces create fragments and mix the hot phase into the cold volatile one ; and the rapid heat transfer at the front sustains the propagation .
If a steam explosion occurs in a confined tank of water due to rapid heating of the water , the pressure wave and rapidly expanding steam can cause severe water hammer .
This was the mechanism that , in Idaho , USA , in 1961 , caused the SL-1 nuclear reactor vessel to jump over in the air when it was destroyed by a criticality accident .
In the case of SL-1 , the fuel and fuel elements vaporized from instantaneous overheating .
Events of this general type are also possible if the fuel and fuel elements of a liquid - cooled nuclear reactor gradually melt .
Such explosions are known as fuel – coolant interactions ( FCI ) .
In these events the passage of the pressure wave through the predispersed material creates flow forces which further fragment the melt , resulting in rapid heat transfer , and thus sustaining the wave .
Much of the physical destruction in the Chernobyl disaster , a graphite - moderated , light - water - cooled RBMK-1000 reactor , is thought to have been due to such a steam explosion .
In a nuclear meltdown , the most severe outcome of a steam explosion is early containment failure .
Two possibilities are the ejection at high pressure of molten fuel into the containment , causing rapid heating ; or an in - vessel steam explosion causing ejection of a missile ( such as the upper head ) into , and through , the containment .
Less dramatic but still significant is that the molten mass of fuel and reactor core melts through the floor of the reactor building and reaches ground water ; a steam explosion might occur , but the debris would probably be contained , and would in fact , being dispersed , probably be more easily cooled .
See
WASH-1400 for details .
Steam explosions are often encountered where hot lava meets sea water .
Such an occurrence is also called a littoral explosion .
A dangerous steam explosion can also be created when liquid water encounters hot , molten metal .
As the water explodes into steam , it splashes the burning hot liquid metal along with it , causing an extreme risk of severe burns to anyone located nearby and creating a fire hazard .
PRACTICAL USES STEAM
TURBINES
Section::::Practical uses .
Section::::Steam turbines .
A water vapor explosion creates a high volume of gas without producing environmentally harmful leftovers .
The controlled explosion of water has been used for generating steam in power stations and in modern types of steam turbines .
Newer steam engines use heated oil to force drops of water to explode and create high pressure in a controlled chamber .
The pressure is then used to run a turbine or a converted combustion engine .
Hot oil and water explosions are becoming particularly popular in concentrated solar generators , because the water can be separated from the oil in a closed loop without any external energy .
Water explosion is considered to be environmentally friendly if the heat is generated by a renewable resource .
FLASH BOILING IN COOKING
Section::::Flash boiling in cooking .
A cooking technique called flash boiling uses a small amount of water to quicken the process of boiling .
For example , this technique can be used to melt a slice of cheese onto a hamburger patty .
The cheese slice is placed on top of the meat on a hot surface such as a frying pan , and a small quantity of cold water is thrown onto the surface near the patty .
A vessel ( such as a pot or frying - pan cover ) is then used to quickly seal the steam - flash reaction , dispersing much of the steamed water on the cheese and patty .
This results in a large release of heat , transferred via vaporized water condensing back into a liquid ( a principle also utilized in refrigerator and freezer production ) .
OTHER RAPID BOILING PHENOMENA
Section::::Other
rapid boiling phenomena .
High steam generation rates are possible under other circumstances , such as boiler - drum failure , or at a quench front ( for example when water re - enters a hot dry boiler ) .
Though potentially damaging , they are usually less energetic than events in which the hot ( " fuel " ) phase is molten and so can be finely fragmented within the volatile ( " coolant " ) phase .
Some examples follow : Steam explosions are naturally produced by certain volcanoes , especially stratovolcanoes , and are a major cause of human fatalities in volcanic eruptions .
The 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster in Soviet Union was feared to cause major steam explosion ( and resulting Europe - wide fallout ) upon melting the lava - like nuclear fuel through the reactor 's basement towards contact with residue fire - fighting water and groundwater .
The threat was averted by frantic tunneling underneath the reactor in order to pump out water and reinforce underlying soil with concrete .
When a pressurized container such as the waterside of a steam boiler ruptures , it is always followed by some degree of steam explosion .
A common operating temperature and pressure for a marine boiler is around 950 P.S.I. ( 6.55 MPa ) and 850 ° F ( 454 ° C ) at the outlet of the superheater .
A steam boiler has an interface of steam and water in the steam drum , which is where the water is finally evaporating due to the heat input , usually oil - fired burners .
When a water tube fails due to any of a variety of reasons , it causes the water in the boiler to expand out of the opening into the furnace area that is only a few P.S.I. above atmospheric pressure .
This will likely extinguish all fires and expands over the large surface area on the sides of the boiler .
To decrease the likelihood of a devastating explosion , boilers have gone from the " fire - tube " designs , where the heat was added by passing hot gases through tubes in a body of water , to " water - tube " boilers that have the water inside of the tubes and the furnace area is around the tubes .
Old " fire - tube " boilers often failed due to poor build quality or lack of maintenance ( such as corrosion of the fire tubes , or fatigue of the boiler shell due to constant expansion and contraction ) .
A failure of fire tubes forces large volumes of high pressure , high temperature steam back down the fire tubes in a fraction of a second and often blows the burners off the front of the boiler , whereas a failure of the pressure vessel surrounding the water would lead to a full and entire evacuation of the boiler 's contents in a large steam explosion .
On a marine boiler , this would certainly destroy the ship 's propulsion plant and possibly the corresponding end of the ship .
In a more domestic setting , steam explosions can be a result of trying to extinguish burning oil with water .
When oil in a pan is on fire , the natural impulse may be to extinguish it with water .
However , doing so will cause the water to become superheated by the hot oil .
Upon turning to steam , it will disperse upwards and outwards rapidly and violently in a spray also containing the ignited oil .
It is for this reason that the correct course of action for dealing with such fires is to either use a damp cloth or a tight lid on the pan ; both help deprive the fire of oxygen , and the cloth also serves to cool it down .
Alternatively , a non - volatile purpose designed fire retardant agent or simply a fire blanket can be used instead .
SEE ALSO
* BLEVE * Boiler explosion
* Multiphase flow
* 2007 New York City steam explosion BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Triggered Steam Explosions by Lloyd S. Nelson , Paul W. Brooks , Riccardo Bonazza and Michael L. Corradini ...
Kjetil Hildal