1947 WORLD SERIES
The 1947 World Series matched the New York Yankees against the Brooklyn Dodgers .
The Yankees won the Series in seven games for their first title since , and their eleventh World Series championship in team history .
Yankees manager Bucky Harris won the Series for the first time since managing the Washington Senators to their only title in .
In 1947 , Jackie Robinson , a Brooklyn Dodger , desegregated major league baseball .
For the first time in World Series history , a racially integrated team played .
SUMMARY
MATCHUPS GAME 1
Section::::Matchups .
Section::::Game 1 .
There were 73,365 in the house for Game 1 .
Brooklyn struck first in the first on Dixie Walker 's RBI single with Pete Reiser at second off of Spec Shea , but starter Ralph Branca was knocked out in a five - run fifth .
A single , walk and hit - by - pitch loaded the bases before Johnny Lindell 's two - run double put the Yankees up 2–1 After a walk re - loaded the bases , another walk forced in a run , then after a groundout , Tommy Henrich 's RBI single to left off of Hank Behrman capped the inning 's scoring .
The Dodgers chipped away at the Yankees lead , getting a run in the sixth on Carl Furillo 's RBI single off of Joe Page and Page 's wild pitch in the seventh with Pee Wee Reese at second , but Page held the Dodgers scoreless afterward as the Yankees took a 1–0 series lead .
GAME 2 Section::::Game 2 .
The Yankees struck first in Game 2 on Johnny Lindell 's double - play ground ball after two leadoff singles in the first off of Vic Lombardi , scoring Snuffy Stirnweiss , but the Dodgers tied the game in the third on Jackie Robinson 's RBI single .
The Yankees regained the lead in the bottom on Lindell 's RBI triple with a runner at third , but the Dodgers again tied the game in the fourth on Dixie Walker 's home run .
In the bottom half , after a leadoff triple , Phil Rizzuto 's RBI double put the Yankees back in front 3–2 .
Next the inning , Tommy Henrich 's lead - off home run extended their lead to 4–2 .
After a ground - rule double knocked Lombardi out of the game , George McQuinn 's RBI single off of Hal Gregg made it 5–2 Yankees .
The Yankees added another run in the sixth on Lindell 's sacrifice fly before breaking it open in the seventh .
After a leadoff single and wild pitch by Hank Behrman , Billy Johnson 's RBI single made it 7–2 Yankees .
After a pop out and intentional walk , Reynolds 's RBI single made it 8–2 Yankees .
Rex Barney relieved Berhman and allowed an RBI single to Snuffy Stirnweiss and threw a wild pitch that turned the Yanks ' advantage to 10 - 2 .
The Dodgers scored one more run in the ninth on Spider Jorgensen 's groundout off of Allie Reynolds , who scattered nine hits in a complete - game win .
GAME 3 Section::::Game 3 .
The series shifted to Ebbets Field and the stadium shook in the second inning as the Dodgers rang up six runs .
After a one - out walk , Bruce Edwards 's double and Pee Wee Reese 's single scored a run each .
One out later , after a single and passed ball , Eddie Stanky 's two - run double was the end for Yankee starter Bobo Newsom , but the runs kept coming with a Carl Furillo two - run double after a single off of Vic Raschi .
The rest of the day , the Yankees pecked away .
Back - to - back RBI singles by Johnny Lindell and Joe DiMaggio off of Joe Hatten made it 6–2 Dodgers in the third .
After the Dodgers scored a run in the bottom half on Spider Jorgensen 's RBI single after a hit - by - pitch and wild pitch by Karl Drews , Sherm Lollar hit an RBI double in the fourth after a walk and Snuffy Stirnweiss added an RBI single .
After two walks in the bottom half off of Spud Chandler , the Dodgers got those runs back on back - to - back RBI singles by Dixie Walker and Gene Hermanski , but Joe DiMaggio hit a two - run home run in the fifth after a walk .
The next inning , Tommy Henrich 's RBI double and Yogi Berra 's home run in the seventh off of Ralph Branca made it 9 - 8 Dodgers .
In a panic , Dodger fans let out a sigh of relief as reliever Hugh Casey set down Billy Johnson , Phil Rizzuto and Berra in order in the ninth .
Upon the completion of the series , game 3 set a peculiar record .
The number of Yankee runs put up , 8 , is the largest number of runs accumulated in a World Series game , by a team which lost the game , yet went on to win the series .
This record is shared in common only with game 2 of 1956 .
GAME 4 Section::::Game 4 .
The Yankees entered Game 4 aiming to take a three games to one lead in the best - of - seven series , and came one out away from doing this .
They scored a run in the first on a bases - loaded walk off of Harry Taylor and another in the fourth on Johnny Lindell 's double after a leadoff triple off of Hal Gregg .
Bill Bevens , the Yankee starter , pitched innings without allowing a base hit , but allowed a run in the fifth on Pee Wee Reese 's fielder 's choice after two walks and a sacrifice bunt .
No pitcher had ever thrown a no - hitter in a major league World Series game ( although the so - called " Negro World Series " had produced complete - game no - hit pitching performances prior to 1947 ) .
Going into the bottom of the ninth inning , Bevens and the Yankees led 2–1 .
Bevens got Bruce Edwards to fly out , and then walked Carl Furillo .
Spider Jorgensen fouled out for the 2nd out .
Al Gionfriddo pinch - ran for Furillo .
Pete Reiser pinch - hit for pitcher Hugh Casey ; during the at - bat , Gionfriddo stole second base .
The Yankees then intentionally walked Reiser .
This was criticized in hindsight for two reasons : one was the old axiom of never intentionally putting the winning run on base ; the other is that Reiser was playing injured , and the odds of getting him out seemed reasonable .
Eddie Miksis pinch - ran for Reiser , and the Dodgers sent Cookie Lavagetto to pinch - hit for Eddie Stanky .
Lavagetto lined a 1–0 fastball to right field ; the ball ricocheted off the wall with a peculiar bounce and hit Yankee right fielder Tommy Henrich in the shoulder , as Gionfriddo and Miksis raced around to score .
The play ended the no - hitter and won the game for the Dodgers .
The hit was the last of Lavagetto 's career .
Additionally , neither Lavagetto nor Bevens nor Gionfriddo would play in the majors again following this Series .
The Dodgers , with this hit , avoided a three - games - to - one deficit , avoided becoming the victim of a no - hitter , and tied the Series at two games each .
The rapid and dramatic reversal of fortunes may have provided a momentum swing .
GAME 5 Section::::Game 5 .
Nine walks in fewer than five innings proved the undoing of Rex Barney in this start for Brooklyn .
A pair of walks and RBI single by opposing pitcher Spec Shea in the fourth put the Yankees up 1 - 0 .
Joe DiMaggio homered to left in the fifth .
That was all the runs the visiting Yanks would get at Ebbets Field , but this was Shea 's stadium this day .
A hit by Jackie Robinson in the sixth scored Al Gionfriddo to pull the Dodgers within 2 - 1 .
Then in the ninth , after a Bruce Edwards leadoff single and sacrifice bunt by Carl Furillo , the tying run died on base .
Shea got Spider Jorgensen on a fly to right , and with Brooklyn 's fans on their feet , pinch - hitter Cookie Lavagetto struck out .
GAME 6 Section::::Game 6 .
The Dodgers won Game 6 to force a seventh and deciding game .
Three straight singles loaded the bases in the first with no outs , then Dixie Walker 's double play and Allie Reynolds 's passed ball scored a run each .
In the third , three straight doubles by Pee Wee Reese , Jackie Robinson and Walker made it 4–0 Dodgers .
In the bottom of the inning , after a double and wild pitch by Vic Lombardi , an error on Snuffy Stirnweiss 's ground ball allowed a run to score .
After a single , Johnny Lindell 's RBI single cut the Dodgers ' lead to 4–2 .
After another single knocked Lombardie out of the game , RBI singles by Billy Johnson and Bobby Brown off of Ralph Branca tied the game .
Yogi Berra 's RBI single next inning put the Yankees up 5–4 .
In the sixth , after a leadoff single and double off of Joe Page , Cookie Lavagetto 's sacrifice fly tied the game , then Bobby Bragan 's RBI single put the Dodgers up 6–5 .
After a single knocked Page out of the game , Reese 's two - run single off of Bobo Newsom made it 8–5 Dodgers .
A catch made by Al Gionfriddo , replayed countless times , may be the most remembered play of this game , and one of the most remembered plays of the Series .
In the last of the sixth , the Dodgers sent Al Gionfriddo to left field as a defensive replacement for Eddie Miksis .
Joe Hatten came in to pitch .
With two on and two outs , Joe DiMaggio came to bat for the Yankees , representing the potential tying run .
Radio announcer Red Barber provided the play - by - play , which has often accompanied re - played film footage :
The gusto Barber produced , along with his " back - back - back " expression , inspired future generations of sports broadcasters .
Many announcers since that time have used variations of the call , especially Chris Berman of ESPN .
These announcers have tended , for whatever reasons , to describe the ball itself as going " back - back - back " .
In Barber 's call , it was the outfielder who was going " back - back - back " .
The ball was hit so hard and deep that Gionfriddo , already playing deep , did not have time to turn around , literally having to " back - back - back"-pedal to snare the ball just in front of the bullpen - alley fence , near the marker posted to the center field side of the bullpen alley ( the sign on the left field side of the alley was posted as 402 ) .
It is also worth noting that had DiMaggio hit the ball in Ebbets Field ,
whose left - center area was some closer , it might have landed in the upper deck and certainly would have been a game - tying homer .
Films of the play showed DiMaggio , heading for second , kick the dirt in disgust after he realized Gionfriddo had caught the ball .
This was a surprise to many who witnessed it , since DiMaggio was known to never show his emotions while playing .
Red Barber declared it , " probably the only time ever that DiMaggio was publicly and visibly upset . "
Three of the 1947 Series ' prominent figures , Gionfriddo , Lavagetto and Bevens , finished their playing careers in this Series .
Gionfriddo did not play in Game 7 , and his catch of DiMaggio 's drive was his only put - out in this game .
So Gionfriddo 's famous catch was his final put - out in his major league career .
The Yankees loaded the bases in the bottom of the ninth off of Joe Hatten and Hugh Casey , but scored only once on a groundout .
GAME 7 Section::::Game 7 .
Joe Page pitched five innings of one - hit , shutout relief as the Yankees racked up yet another World Series championship .
Starting pitcher Spec Shea was removed in the second inning after allowing a triple to Gene Hermanski , RBI single to Bruce Edwards , and another single to Carl Furillo , and Brooklyn 's Spider Jorgensen greeted reliever Bill Bevens with a run - scoring double to right field to put the Dodgers on top , 2–0 .
The Yankees cut the lead to 2–1 in the bottom half on Phil Rizutto 's RBI single after two walks off of Hal Gregg .
In the fourth , a two - out , two - on Bobby Brown single tied the game , then after reliever Hank Behrman allowed a walk to load the bases , Tommy Henrich 's RBI single put the Yankees up 3–2 .
Allie Clark 's RBI single off Joe Hatten in the sixth made it 4 - 2 .
Then another run for good measure came on Aaron Robinson 's sacrifice fly following a Billy Johnson triple off of the Hugh Casey .
COMPOSITE LINE SCORE Section::::Composite line score .
1947 World Series ( 4–3 ) :
New York Yankees ( A.L. ) over Brooklyn Dodgers ( N.L. ) RECORDS AND IMPORTANT EVENTS Section::::Records and important events .
For the first time , a World Series produced total receipts over 2,000,000 dollars : Gate receipts were $ 1,781,348.92 , radio rights $ 175,000.00 and television rights $ 65,000 .
Yogi Berra pinch - hit for Sherm Lollar in the seventh inning of Game 3 and hit the first pinch - hit home run in World Series history .
Ralph Branca served the pitch .
This was the first World Series to be televised , although games were only seen in a small number of Eastern markets with stations connected via coaxial cable : New York City , New York ; Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; Schenectady , New York ; Washington , District of Columbia ; and environs surrounding these cities .
The October 1947 edition of Billboard reported over 3.9 million people viewed the games , primarily on TV sets located in bars ( 5,400 tavern TV sets in NYC alone ) .
The October 13 , 1947 , edition of Time magazine reported that President Truman , who had just made the first Oval Office TV appearance on October 5 , 1947 , and received the first TV for the White House , watched parts of the Series but " skipped the last innings " .
At the direction of Commissioner Happy Chandler , the Series , for the first time , used six umpires to make calls .
Series from 1918 through 1946 used four umpires in the infield , with two alternates available for security .
However , no alternate had ever been needed , and Chandler believed that enlisting these umpires to make calls along the outfield lines would put these men and their skills to better use .
However , not until 1964 would the additional two umpires rotate into the infield during the course of the Series .
As of 2018 , this is the only World Series the Yankees have won with Game 7 being in their home stadium .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Baseball 's 25 Greatest Moments : Cookie Lavagetto beats Bill Bevens * Audio : Bill Bevens describes his lost no - hit bid * Audio :
Al Gionfriddo 's Catch of DiMaggio 's Blast
* Bill Bevens No - Hit Bid in ' 47 World Series
* Audio : Cookie Lavagetto breaks up Bill Bevens ' No - Hit Bid in 1947 World Series * Gionfriddo Recalls His Famous Catch in Baseball Digest , February 1973