MITOCHONDRIAL MATRIX
In the mitochondrion , the matrix is the space within the inner membrane .
The word " matrix " stems from the fact that this space is viscous , compared to the relatively aqueous cytoplasm .
The mitochondrial matrix contains the mitochondria 's DNA , ribosomes , soluble enzymes , small organic molecules , nucleotide cofactors , and inorganic ions .
The enzymes in the matrix facilitate reactions responsible for the production of ATP , such as the citric acid cycle , oxidative phosphorylation , oxidation of pyruvate and the beta oxidation of fatty acids .
The composition of the matrix based on its structures and contents produce an environment that allows the anabolic and catabolic pathways to proceed favorably for .
The electron transport chain and enzymes in the matrix play a large role in the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation .
The citric acid cycle produces NADH and FADH2 through oxidation that will be reduced in oxidative phosphorylation to produce ATP .
The cytosolic , intermembrane space , compartment has a water content of 3.8 μl / mg protein , while the mitochondrial matrix 0.8 μl / mg protein .
It is not known how mitochondria maintain osmotic balance across the inner mitochondrial membrane , although the membrane contains aquaporins that are believed to be conduits for regulated water transport .
Mitochondrial matrix has a pH of about 7.8 .
Mitochondrial DNA was discovered by Nash and Margit in 1963 .
One to many double stranded mainly circular DNA is present in mitochondrial matrix .
Mitochondrial DNA is 1 % of total DNA of a cell .
It is rich in Guanine and Cytosine content .
Mitochondria of mammals have 55s ribosomes .
COMPOSITION METABOLITES Section::::Composition .
Section::::Metabolites .
The matrix is host to a wide variety of metabolites involved in processes within the matrix .
The citric acid cycle involves acyl - CoA , Pyruvate , acetyl - CoA , citrate , isocitrate , α - Ketoglutarate , succinyl - CoA , fumarate , Succinate , L - Malate , and Oxaloacetate .
The Urea Cycle makes use of L - Ornithine , Carbamoyl Phosphate , and L - Citrulline .
The electron transport chain oxidizes coenzymes NADH , FADH2 .
Protein synthesis makes use of mitochondrial DNA , RNA , and tRNA .
Regulation of processes makes use of ions(Ca / K / Mg ) .
Additional metabolites present in the matrix are CO HO , O ATP , ADP , and P. ENZYMES Section::::Enzymes .
Enzymes from processes that take place in the matrix .
The Citric Acid Cycle is facilitated by Pyruvate dehydrogenase , Citrate synthase , Aconitase , Isocitrate dehydrogenase , α - ketoglutarate dehydrogenase , Succinyl - CoA Synthetase , Fumarase , and Malate dehydrogenase .
The Urea Cycle is facilitated by Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I and Ornithine transcarbamylase .
β - Oxidation uses pyruvate carboxylase , Acyl - CoA dehydrogenase , and 𝛽-Ketothiolase .
Amino acid production is facilitated by transaminases .
INNER MEMBRANE COMPONENTS Section::::Inner membrane components .
The inner membrane is a phospholipid bilayer that contains the complexes of oxidative phosphorylation .
which contains the electron transport chain that is found on the cristae of the inner membrane and consists of four protein complexes and ATP synthase .
These complexes are Protein complex
I ( NADH : Coenzyme Q Oxidoreductase ) , protein complex II ( Succinate : Coenzyme Q Oxidoreductase ) , protein complex III ( Coenzyme Q : Cytochrome C Oxidoreductase ) , and protein complex IV ( Cytochrome C Oxidase ) .
INNER MEMBRANE CONTROL OVER MATRIX COMPOSITION Section::::Inner membrane control over matrix composition .
The electron transport chain is responsible for establishing a pH and electrochemical gradient that facilitates the production of ATP through the pumping of protons .
The gradient also provides control of the concentration of ions such as Ca driven by the mitochondrial membrane potential .
The membrane only allows nonpolar molecules such as CO and O and small non charged polar molecules such as HO to enter the matrix .
Molecules enter and exit the mitochondrial matrix through transport proteins and ion transporters .
Molecules are then able to leave the mitochondria through porin .
These attributed characteristics allow for control over concentrations of ions and metabolites necessary for regulation and determines the rate of ATP production .
PROCESSES
CITRIC ACID CYCLE
Section::::Processes .
Section::::Citric acid cycle .
Following glycolysis , the citric acid cycle is activated by the production of acetyl - CoA. The oxidation of pyruvate by Pyruvate dehydrogenase in the matrix produces CO , acetyl - CoA , and NADH .
Beta oxidation of fatty acids serves as an alternate catabolic pathway that produces acetyl - CoA , NADH , and FADH .
The production of acetyl - CoA begins the citric acid cycle while the co - enzymes produced are used in the electron transport chain .
All of the enzymes for the citric acid cycle are in the matrix ( e.g. citrate synthase , iso - citrate dehydrogenase , alpha - ketoglutarate dehydrogenase , fumarase , and malate dehydrogenase ) except for succinate dehydrogenase which is on the inner membrane and is part of protein complex II in the electron transport chain .
The cycle produces coenzymes NADH and FADH through the oxidation of carbons in two cycles .
The oxidation of NADH and FADH produces GTP from succinyl - CoA synthetase .
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION Section::::Oxidative phosphorylation .
NADH and FADH2 are produced in the matrix or transported in through porin and transport proteins in order to undergo oxidation through oxidative phosphorylation .
NADH and FADH2 undergo oxidation in the electron transport chain by transferring a electrons to regenerate NADand FAD .
Protons are pulled into the intermembrane space by the energy of the electrons going through the electron transport chain .
Four electrons are finally accepted by oxygen in the matrix to complete the electron transport chain .
The protons return to the mitochondrial matrix through the protein ATP synthase .
The energy is used in order to rotate ATP synthase which facilitates the passage of a proton , producing ATP .
A pH difference in the matrix and intermembrane space creates an electrochemical gradient by which ATP synthase can pass a proton into the matrix favorably .
UREA CYCLE Section::::Urea cycle .
The first two steps of the urea cycle take place within the mitochondrial matrix of liver and kidney cells .
In the first step ammonia is converted into carbamoyl phosphate through the investment of two ATP molecules .
This step is facilitated by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I. The second step facilitated by ornithine transcarbamylase converts carbamoyl phosphate and ornithine into citrulline .
After these initial steps the urea cycle continues in the inner membrane space until ornithine once again enters the matrix through a transport channel to continue the first to steps within matrix .
TRANSAMINATION Section::::Transamination .
α - Ketoglutarate and oxaloacetate can be converted into amino acids within the matrix through the process of transamination .
These reactions are facilitated by transaminases in order to produce aspartate and asparagine from oxaloacetate .
Transamination of α - ketoglutarate produces glutamate , proline and arginine .
These amino acids are then used either within the matrix or transported into the cytosol to produce proteins .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
Regulation within the matrix is primarily controlled by ion concentration , metabolite concentration and energy charge .
Availability of ions such as Ca control various functions of the Citric Acid Cycle .
in the matrix activates pyruvate dehydrogenase , isocitrate dehydrogenase , and alpha - ketoglutarate dehydrogenase which increases the reaction rate in the cycle .
Concentration of intermediates and coenzymes in the matrix also increase or decrease the rate of ATP production due to anaplerotic and cataplerotic effects .
NADH can act as an inhibitor for α - ketoglutarate , isocitrate dehydrogenase , citrate synthase , and pyruvate dehydrogenase .
The concentration of oxaloacetate in particular is kept low , so any fluctuations in this concentrations serve to drive the Citric Acid cycle forward .
The production of ATP also serves as a means of regulation by acting as an inhibitor for Isocitrate dehydrogenase , Pyruvate dehydrogenase , the electron transport chain protein complexes , and ATP syntahase .
While ADP acts as an activator .
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS Section::::Protein synthesis .
The mitochondria contains its own set of DNA used to produce proteins found in the electron transport chain .
The mitochondrial DNA only codes for about thirteen proteins that are used in processing mitochondrial transcripts , ribosomal proteins , ribosomal RNA , transfer RNA , and protein subunits found in the protein complexes of the electron transport chain .
SEE ALSO
* Matrix ( biology )
* Mitochondrial DNA
* Mitochondrion REFERENCES