NAMES OF THE DAYS OF THE WEEK
The names of the days of the week in many languages are derived from the names of the classical planets in Hellenistic astrology , which were in turn named after contemporary deities , a system introduced by the Roman Empire during Late Antiquity .
In some other languages , the days are named after corresponding deities of the regional culture , either beginning with Sunday or with Monday .
In the international standard ISO 8601 , Monday is treated as the first day of the week .
DAYS
NAMED AFTER PLANETS GRECO - ROMAN TRADITION Section::::Days named after planets .
Section::::Greco - Roman tradition .
Between the 1st and 3rd centuries , the Roman Empire gradually replaced the eight - day Roman nundinal cycle with the seven - day week .
Our earliest evidence for this new system is a Pompeiian graffito referring to the 6th February ( viii idus Februarius ) of the year AD 60 as dies solis ( " Sunday " ) .
Another early witness is a reference to a lost treatise by Plutarch , written in about AD 100 , which addressed the question of Why are the days named after the planets reckoned in a different order from the actual order ? .
The days were named after the planets of Hellenistic astrology , in the order Sun , Moon , Mars ( Ares ) , Mercury ( Hermes ) , Jupiter ( Zeus ) , Venus ( Aphrodite ) and Saturn ( Cronos ) .
The seven - day week spread throughout the Roman Empire in Late Antiquity .
By the 4th century , it was in wide use throughout the Empire , and it had also reached India and ChinaIrregularities ) !
SundaySōl or Helios(Sun ) !
MondayLuna or Selene(Moon ) !
TuesdayMars or Ares(Mars ) !
WednesdayMercurius or Hermes(Mercury ) !
ThursdayIuppiter or Zeus(Jupiter ) !
FridayVenus or
Aphrodite(Venus ) !
SaturdaySaturnus or Kronos(Saturn ) !
Greek !
Latin ROMANCE
LANGUAGES
Section::::Romance languages .
Except for modern Portuguese and Mirandese , the Romance languages preserved the Latin names , except for the names of Sunday , which was replaced by [ dies ] Dominicus ( Dominica ) , i.e. " the Lord 's Day " and of Saturday , which was named for the Sabbath .
In Corsican , the Saturday is known either by Sabatu or De SadornIrregularities ) !
Italian !
Old Portuguese !
Galician !
Spanish !
Romanian !
French !
Occitan !
Catalan !
Asturian !
Lombard ( Milanese ) !
Lombard ( Bresciano ) !
Ligurian !
Venetian !
Friulian !
Neapolitan !
Sardinian !
Sicilian !
Corsican CELTIC
LANGUAGES Section::::Celtic languages .
Early Old IrishIrregularities ) !
Old Irish Diu srolDies scrol Diu luna Diu mart Diu eathamon
Diu triach Diu saturn !
Old Irish ( later ) !
Irish !
Scottish Gaelic !
Welsh !
Cornish !
Breton !
Manx ADOPTIONS FROM ROMANCE Irregularities ) !
Albanian !
Filipino !
Chamorro Damenggo
Lunes
Mattes
Metkoles
Huebes Betnes Sabalu !
Māori !
Interlingua !
Ido !
Esperanto GERMANIC TRADITION
Section::::Germanic tradition .
The Germanic peoples adapted the system introduced by the Romans by substituting the Germanic deities for the Roman ones ( with the exception of Saturday ) in a process known as interpretatio germanica .
The date of the introduction of this system is not known exactly , but it must have happened later than AD 200 but before the introduction of Christianity during the 6th to 7th centuries , i.e. , during the final phase or soon after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire .
This period is later than the Common Germanic stage , but still during the phase of undifferentiated West Germanic .
The names of the days of the week in North Germanic languages were not calqued from Latin directly , but taken from the West Germanic names .
* Sunday : Old English Sunnandæg ( ) ,
meaning " sun 's day " .
This is a translation of the Latin phrase dies Solis .
English , like most of the Germanic languages , preserves the day 's association with the sun .
Many other European languages , including all of the Romance languages , have changed its name to the equivalent of " the Lord 's day " ( based on Ecclesiastical Latin dies Dominica ) .
In both West Germanic and North Germanic mythology , the Sun is personified as Sunna / Sól .
* Monday : Old English Mōnandæg ( ) , meaning " Moon 's day " .
This is equivalent to the Latin name dies lunae .
In North Germanic mythology , the Moon is personified as Máni .
* Tuesday : Old English Tīwesdæg ( ) ,
meaning " Tiw 's day " .
Tiw ( Norse Týr ) was a one - handed god associated with single combat and pledges in Norse mythology and also attested prominently in wider Germanic paganism .
The name of the day is also related to the Latin name dies Martis , " Day of Mars " .
* Wednesday : Old English Wōdnesdæg ( )
meaning the day of the Germanic god Woden ( known as Óðinn among the North Germanic peoples ) , and a prominent god of the Anglo - Saxons ( and other Germanic peoples ) in England until about the seventh century .
It is also vaguely related to the Latin counterpart dies Mercurii , " Day of Mercury " .
The Icelandic Miðviku , German Mittwoch , Low German Middeweek and Finnish keskiviikko all mean mid - week .
* Thursday : Old English Þūnresdæg ( ) , meaning ' Þunor 's day ' .
Þunor means thunder or its personification , the Norse god known in Modern English as Thor .
Similarly Dutch donderdag , German Donnerstag ( ' thunder 's day ' ) , Finnish torstai , and Scandinavian Torsdag ( ' Thor 's day ' ) .
Thor 's day corresponds to Latin
dies Iovis , " day of Jupiter " .
* Friday : Old English Frīgedæg ( ) , meaning the day of the Anglo - Saxon goddess Fríge .
The Norse name for the planet Venus was Friggjarstjarna , ' Frigg 's star ' .
It is based on the Latin dies Veneris , " Day of Venus " .
* Saturday : named after the Roman god Saturn associated with the Titan Cronus , father of Zeus and many Olympians .
Its original Anglo - Saxon rendering was Sæturnesdæg ( ) .
In Latin , it was dies Saturni , " Day of Saturn " .
The Scandinavian Lørdag / Lördag deviates significantly as it has no reference to either the Norse or the Roman pantheon ; it derives from old Norse laugardagr , literally " washing - day " .
The German Sonnabend ( mainly used in northern and eastern Germany ) and the Low German words Sünnavend mean " Sunday Eve " , the German word Samstag ( mainly used in southern and western Germany ) derives from the name for Shabbat .
Irregularities ) !
Proto - Germanic !
Old English !
Old Saxon !
Old High German !
Middle Low German !
German !
Yiddish !
Scots !
Dutch !
Afrikaans !
Luxembourgish !
West Frisian !
Low Saxon !
Old Norse !
Faroese !
Icelandic !
Norwegian Bokmål !
Norwegian Nynorsk !
Danish !
Swedish !
Elfdalian ADOPTIONS FROM GERMANIC Irregularities ) !
Finnish !
Estonian !
Maori ( transliteration ; translation )
INDIAN TRADITION Section::::Indian tradition .
Hindu astrology uses the concept of days under the regency of a planet under the term vāra , the days of the week being called āditya- , soma- , maṅgala- , budha- , guru- , śukra- , and śani - vāra .
śukrá is a name of Venus ( regarded as a son of Bhṛgu ) ; guru is here a title of Bṛhaspati , and hence of Jupiter ; budha " Mercury " is regarded as a son of Soma , i.e. the Moon .
Knowledge of Greek astrology existed since about the 2nd century BC , but references to the vāra occur somewhat later , during the Gupta period ( Yājñavalkya Smṛti , c. 3rd to 5th century ) , i.e. at roughly the same period the system was introduced in the Roman Empire .
SOUTH ASIAN
LANGUAGES
Section::::South Asian languages .
Sunday the Sun !
Balti !
Bengali !
Bhojpuri !
Burushaski !
Chitrali !
Gujarati !
Hindi !
Hindko !
Konkani !
Maldivian !
Marathi शनिवार Shanivār !
Kashmiri !
Kannada !
Malayalam
ഞായര്‍ Nhāyar !
Nepali !
Pashto !
Punjabi !
Odia !
Sinhala !
Telugu !
Tamil !
Sanskrit !
Shina !
Sindhi !
Sylheti !
Urdu !
SOUTHEAST ASIAN LANGUAGES Section::::Southeast Asian languages .
The Southeast Asian tradition also uses the Hindu names of the days of the week .
Hindu astrology adopted the concept of days under the regency of a planet under the term vāra , the days of the week being called āditya- , soma- , maṅgala- , budha- , guru- , śukra- , and śani - vāra .
śukrá is a name of Venus ( regarded as a son of Bhṛgu ) ; guru is here a title of Bṛhaspati , and hence of Jupiter ; budha " Mercury " is regarded as a son of Soma , i.e. the Moon . !
Burmese !
Mon !
Khmer !
Lao !
Cham !
Shan !
Thai !
Javanese !
Balinese EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES
Section::::East Asian languages .
Sunday
the Sun !
Mongolian EAST ASIAN TRADITION Section::::East Asian tradition .
The East Asian naming system for the days of the week closely parallels that of the Latin system and is ordered after the " Seven Luminaries " ( 七曜 qī yào ) , which consists of the Sun , Moon and the five planets visible to the naked eye .
The Chinese seem to have adopted the seven - day week from the Hellenistic system by the 4th century , although by which route is not entirely clear .
It was again transmitted to China in the 8th century by Manichaeans , via the country of Kang ( a Central Asian polity near Samarkand ) .
The 4th - century date , according to the Cihai encyclopedia , is due to a reference to Fan Ning ( 範寧/范宁 ) , an astrologer of the Jin Dynasty .
The renewed adoption from Manichaeans in the 8th century ( Tang Dynasty ) is documented with the writings of the Chinese Buddhist monk Yijing and the Ceylonese Buddhist monk Bu Kong .
The Chinese transliteration of the planetary system was soon brought to Japan by the Japanese monk Kobo Daishi ; surviving diaries of the Japanese statesman Fujiwara Michinaga show the seven day system in use in Heian Period Japan as early as 1007 .
In Japan , the seven day system was kept in use ( for astrological purposes ) until its promotion to a full - fledged ( Western - style ) calendrical basis during the Meiji era .
In China , with the founding of the Republic of China in 1911 , Monday through Saturday in China are now named after the luminaries implicitly with the numbers . !
Celestial Object !
Classical Chinese !
Standard Modern Chinese !
Japanese !
Korean !
Mongolian !
Tibetan NUMBERED DAYS OF THE WEEK DAYS NUMBERED FROM SUNDAY
Section::::Numbered days of the week .
Section::::Days numbered from Sunday .
Sunday comes first in order in calendars shown in the table below .
In the Judeo - Christian or Abrahamic tradition , the first day of the week is Sunday .
Biblical Sabbath
( corresponding to Saturday ) , when God rested from , made the day following Sabbath the first day of the week ( corresponding to Sunday ) .
Seventh - day Sabbaths were sanctified for celebration and rest .
After the week was adopted in early Christianity , Sunday remained the first day of the week , but also gradually displaced Saturday as the day of celebration and rest , being considered the Lord 's Day .
Saint Martin of Dumio ( c. 520–580 ) , archbishop of Braga , decided not to call days by pagan gods and to use ecclesiastic terminology to designate them .
While the custom of numbering the days of the week was mostly prevalent in the Eastern Church , Portuguese and Galician , due to Martin 's influence , are the only Romance languages in which the names of the days come from numbers rather than planetary names .
Icelandic is a special case within the Germanic languages , maintaining only the Sun and Moon ( sunnudagur and mánudagur respectively ) , while dispensing with the names of the explicitly heathen gods in favour of a combination of numbered days and days whose names are linked to pious or domestic routine ( föstudagur , " Fasting Day " and laugardagur , " Washing Day " ) .
The " washing day " is also used in other North Germanic languages , but otherwise the names correspond to those of English . !
Icelandic !
Faroese !
Hebrew !
Ecclesiastical Latin !
Portuguese !
Galician !
Mirandese !
Tetum !
Greek !
Georgian !
Armenian !
Vietnamese !
Somali !
Amharic !
Arabic ( yawm ) al - ithnayn !
Maltese !
Malay(includes
Indonesian ) !
Javanese !
Sundanese !
Persian !
Khowar !
Kurdish !
Old Turkic !
Turkish !
Uzbek !
Navajo DAYS NUMBERED FROM MONDAY Section::::Days numbered from Monday .
The ISO prescribes Monday as the first day of the week with ISO-8601 for software date formats .
The Slavic , Baltic and Uralic languages ( except Finnish and partially Estonian ) adopted numbering but took Monday rather than Sunday as the " first day " .
This convention is also found in some Austronesian languages whose speakers were converted to Christianity by European missionaries .
In Slavic languages , some of the names correspond to numerals after Sunday :
compare Russian vtornik " Tuesday " and vtoroj " the following " , chetverg " Thursday " and chetvertyj " the fourth " , pyatnitsa " Friday " and pyatyj " the fifth " ; see also the Notes . !
ISO 8601
# !
Russian !
Belarusian !
Ukrainian !
Bulgarian !
Polish !
Kashubian !
Slovak !
Czech !
Slovene !
Bosnian !
Croatian !
Serbian !
Macedonian !
Lithuanian !
Latvian !
Hungarian !
Estonian !
Mongolian ( numerical ) !
Mongolian ( Tibetan ) !
Luo !
Tok Pisin ( Melanesian Pidgin ) !
Apma ( Vanuatu )
In Standard Chinese , the week is referred to as the cycle of the stars ( ) .
The modern Chinese names for the days of the week are based on a simple numerical sequence .
The word for " week " ( which is literally translated to " star day " ) is followed by a number indicating the day :
" Monday " is literally " star day one " , " Tuesday " is " star day two " , etc .
The exception is Sunday , where rì ( 日 ) , meaning " sun " or " day " , is used instead of a number .
Day !
Standard Chinese DAYS NUMBERED FROM SATURDAY Section::::Days numbered from Saturday .
In Swahili , the day begins at sunrise , unlike in the Arabic and Hebrew calendars where the day starts at sunset ( therefore an offset of twelve hours ) , and unlike in the Western world where the day starts at midnight ( therefore an offset of six hours ) .
Saturday is therefore the first day of the week , as it is the day that includes the first night of the week in Arabic .
Etymologically speaking , Swahili has two " fifth " days .
The words for Saturday through Wednesday contain the Bantu - derived Swahili words for " one " through " five " .
The word for Thursday , Alhamisi , is of Arabic origin and means " the fifth " ( day ) .
The word for Friday , Ijumaa , is also Arabic and means ( day of ) " gathering " for the Friday noon prayers in Islam . !
Swahili MIXING OF NUMBERING AND ASTRONOMY
Section::::Mixing of numbering and astronomy .
In the Žejane dialect of Istro - Romanian , lur ( Monday ) and virer ( Friday ) follow the Latin convention , while utorek ( Tuesday ) , sredu ( Wednesday ) , and četrtok ( Thursday ) follow the Slavic convention .
Day !
Istro - Romanian
, Žejane dialect
There are several systems in the different Basque dialects . !
Day !
Monday !
Tuesday !
Wednesday !
Thursday !
Friday !
Saturday !
Sunday !
Standard Basque , Guipuscoan Basque !
Biscayne Basque
In Judaeo - Spanish ( Ladino ) , which is mainly based on a medieval version of Spanish , the five days of Monday – Friday closely follow the Spanish names .
Sunday uses the Arabic name , which is based on numbering , because a Jewish language was not likely to adapt a name based on " Lord 's Day " for Sunday .
As in Spanish , the Ladino name for Saturday is based on Sabbath .
However , as a Jewish language — and with Saturday being the actual day of rest in the Jewish community — Ladino directly adapted the Hebrew name , Shabbat .
Day !
Judaeo - Spanish ( Ladino ) SEE
ALSO
* Akan names of the seven - day week , known as Nawotwe * Bahá'í calendar ( section Weekdays )
* Calculating the day of the week
* Week
* Work Week * Feria NOTES SUNDAY Section::::Notes .
Section::::Sunday .
From Latin Dominicus ( Dominica ) or Greek Κυριακή ( Christian Sabbath )
MONDAY Section::::Monday .
After No Work .
In Russian also " Day After Week(end ) " - see понедельник TUESDAY Section::::Tuesday .
Thing ( Assembly ) , of which god Tyr / Ziu was the patron .
WEDNESDAY Section::::Wednesday .
Mid - week or Middle THURSDAY Section::::Thursday . The day between two fasts ( An Dé idir dhá aoin , contracted to An Déardaoin ) ( Christianity ) FRIDAY Section::::Friday . The Fast or Fasting Day ( Christianity ) Good Friday or Preparation ( Christianity ) SATURDAY Section::::Saturday .
Shabbat ( Jewish Sabbath )
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Neugebauer , Otto ( 1979 ) .
Ethiopic astronomy and computus , Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften , philosophisch - historische klasse , sitzungsberichte , 347 ( Vienna )