WHERE THE RED FERN GROWS
Where the Red Fern Grows is a 1961 children 's novel by Wilson Rawls about a boy who buys and trains two Redbone Coonhound hunting dogs .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
When leaving work in Idaho 's Snake River Valley , Billy Colman sees a pack of dogs attacking a stray coonhound .
He takes the stray home to feed it .
Once it has rested , Billy sets it free , knowing that it will return home .
The experience reminds Billy of his childhood in the Ozark Mountains of Oklahoma .
He wants a dog , and his parents offer to get him a collie from a neighbor .
But Billy does n't want just any dog ; he wants two coonhounds , but his parents can not afford them .
Billy finds a magazine ad for a Kentucky kennel which breeds Redbone Coonhounds and sells them for $ 25 each .
He goes to work performing odd jobs and saves the $ 50 he needs with the help of his grandfather .
Since it takes two years to do so , his grandfather writes to see if the kennel will honor the ad .
They do and the price has dropped , so the two puppies only cost $ 40 .
Billy 's dogs are delivered to the freight depot in Tahlequah .
His family does not have transportation , so he finds his own way to get to the depot and walks through the hills .
He picks up his puppies , which are a male and a female .
He buys a gift for each member of his family with his extra $ 10 before heading back home .
On the way back home , he spends the night in Robber 's Cave in the Sparrow Hawk Mountains .
There he builds a fire and plays with the puppies .
While trying to sleep , he hears a noise that he realizes
is the cry of a mountain lion .
In the morning , he continues on .
He comes to a sycamore tree with the names Dan and Ann carved inside a heart in the bark and decides to name the puppies Old Dan and Little Ann .
To train Old Dan and Little Ann , Billy traps a raccoon with the help of his grandfather and uses its pelt to teach them to hunt .
During their training , their personalities become apparent : Old Dan is brave and strong , while Little Ann is very intelligent .
Both are very loyal to each other and to Billy .
On the first night of hunting season , Billy takes Old Dan and Little Ann out for their first hunt .
He promises them that if they tree a raccoon , he will do the rest .
They tree one in a large sycamore .
As he tries to call them off , they look at him sadly and he cuts the tree down , though it takes two days and costs him blistered hands .
In the end , when he 's about to give up his effort , Billy offers a short prayer for strength to continue .
A strong wind starts to blow and the tree falls .
Billy and his hounds go hunting almost every night and become well - known in the Ozarks .
Billy and his grandfather make a bet with Rubin and Rainie Pritchard that Old Dan and Little Ann can tree the elusive " ghost coon " .
It leads them on a long , complicated hunt , and Rubin and Rainie want to give up .
When they finally have the raccoon in a tree , Billy refuses to kill it .
Rubin then lets his dog , Old Blue , attack Old Dan and Little Ann , and Rubin starts to beat Billy .
Little Ann helps Old Dan gain the upper hand in the battle , and together they injure Old Blue ; Rubin runs to attack them with an axe , but he trips , falls on it and dies .
Billy 's grandfather enters him into a championship coon hunt , putting him against experienced hunters and the finest dogs in the country .
Before it starts , he enters Little Ann into a conformation contest , where she wins the silver cup .
On the fourth night of the hunt , Old Dan and Little Ann tree three raccoons , making it to the final round .
The sixth night , they tree one before a blizzard hits .
Billy , his father , grandfather , and the judge lose sight of the dogs .
When they finally find them , Billy 's grandfather sprains his ankle .
They build a fire , and when Billy 's father chops down a tree , three raccoons jump out .
Old Dan and Little Ann take two of them down , and chase the third to another tree .
In the morning , the hunters find them covered with ice circling the tree .
That raccoon wins them the championship , gold cup , and $ 300 of jackpot money .
One night Old Dan and Little Ann see a mountain lion , and it attacks .
Billy enters the fight with his axe , hoping to save his dogs , but they end up having to save him .
Eventually , they kill the mountain lion , but Old Dan is badly wounded , and he dies late that night .
Billy is heartbroken , and Little Ann loses the will to live , stops eating , and dies of grief a few days later on Old Dan 's grave .
Billy 's father tries to tell him that it is all for the best , because with the money they received from winning the championship hunt , they can move to town .
He goes to visit Old Dan and Little Ann 's graves and finds a giant red fern between them .
According to Native American legend , only an angel can plant one .
He feels ready to move on .
FILMS
Section::::Films .
The novel was made into a 1974 film starring Stewart Petersen , James Whitmore , Beverly Garland , and Jack Ging .
It was followed by a sequel in 1992 , which starred Wilford Brimley , Chad McQueen , Lisa Whelchel , and Karen Carlson .
The film was remade in 2003 and starred Joseph Ashton , Dabney Coleman , Ned Beatty and Dave Matthews .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Although sales of the novel began slowly , by 1974 over 90,000 copies had been sold .
In 2001 , Publishers Weekly estimated that it had sold 6,754,308 copies .
Today Where the Red Fern Grows is required reading in many American schools .
One critic said it will please adults as well as children .
There is a statue of Billy and his dogs at the Idaho Falls Public Library .
SEE ALSO
* List of Where the Red Fern Grows Characters
FOOTNOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
Oracle Think Quest , Education Foundation : Where the Red Fern Grows .
* SparkNotes : Where the Red Fern Grows .