HAROUN AND THE SEA OF STORIES Haroun and the Sea of Stories is a 1990 children 's book by Salman Rushdie .
It was Rushdie 's fifth novel after The Satanic Verses .
It is a phantasmagorical story that begins in a city so old and ruinous that it has forgotten its name .
Haroun and the Sea of Stories is an allegory for several problems existing in society today , especially in the Indian subcontinent .
It looks at these problems from the viewpoint of the young protagonist Haroun .
Rushdie dedicated this book to his son , from whom he was separated for some time .
Many elements of the story deal with the problems of censorship : an issue particularly pertinent to Rushdie because of the fatwa against him backed by Ayatollah Khomeini .
The book is highly allusive and puns in multiple languages .
Many of the major character 's names allude to some aspect of speech or silence .
It was made into an audiobook read by Rushdie himself .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
At the beginning of the story , protagonist Haroun Khalifa lives with his father Rashid , a famous storyteller , and his mother Soraya , until the latter is seduced by their neighbor ' Mr. Sengupta ' to leave home .
Thereafter Rashid is hired to speak on behalf of local politicians but fails his initial assignment .
The two are thence conveyed to the ' Valley of K ' by courier ' Mr. Butt ' , to speak for ' Snooty Buttoo ' , another politician .
Attempting to sleep aboard Buttoo 's yacht , Haroun discovers ' Iff the Water Genie ' , assigned to detach Rashid 's imagination , and demands conversation against this decision with Iff 's supervisor , the Walrus .
They are then carried to the eponymous ' Sea of Stories ' by an artificial intelligence in the form of a hoopoe , nicknamed ' Butt ' after the courier .
Of the Sea of Stories , Haroun learns it is endangered by antagonist ' Khattam - Shud , ' who represents " the end . "
In the Kingdom of Gup , King Chattergy , Prince Bolo , General Kitab , and the Walrus announce their plans for war against the neighbouring kingdom of Chup , to recapture Bolo 's betrothed Princess Batcheat .
Rashid joins them here , having witnessed Batcheat 's kidnapping .
Thereafter Haroun and his companions join the Guppee army of ' Pages ' toward Chup , where they befriend Mudra , Khattam - Shud 's former second - in - command .
Haroun , Iff , Butt the Hoopoe , and Mali the stories ' gardener , investigating the Sea 's ' Old Zone ' , are captured by Khattam - Shud 's animated shadow , who plans to plug the Story Source at the bottom of the Sea .
Before he can do so , Mali destroys the machines used by him to poison the Sea , and Haroun restores the Sea 's long - annulled alternation of night and day – – – thus destroying the antagonist 's shadow and those assisting him , and diverting the giant ' Plug ' meant to seal the Source .
In Chup , the Guppee army destroy the Chupwalas ' army and release Princess Batcheat ; whereupon Khattam - Shud himself is crushed beneath a collapsing statue commissioned by himself .
Thereafter the Walrus promises Haroun a happy ending of his own story .
On return to the human world , Rashid reveals Haroun 's adventures to local citizens , who expel Snooty Buttoo .
When Rashid and Haroun return home , the people of their city have become joyous to replace their customary misery , and Soraya has returned to her son and husband .
The novel concludes with an appendix explaining the meaning of each major character 's name .
PLACES
* A work of magic realism , the story begins and takes place partly in " a sad city , the saddest of cities , a city so ruinously sad it had forgotten its name " , which is located beside " a mournful sea full of glumfish , which were so miserable to eat that they made people belch with melancholy " .
This city is thickly populated by people , of whom only the lead character Haroun and his parents are ever happy , while in the north of the city are factories wherein sadness is allegedly manufactured and exported .
The factories produce air pollution that is only relieved during rain which also heralds the arrival of pomfret into the nearby waters .
At the end of the city with no name is revealed to be named Kahani .
* Most of the Earthly locations present in the book are located in the fictional nation of Alifbay , which is a combination of first two letters of the Arabic script based Urdu alphabet , Alif and Bay and therefore contains many places named after letters , such as the " Valley of K " and the " Tunnel of I ( which was also known as J ) " .
*
In the center of the Valley of K is the Dull Lake , which is said in the novel 's appendix to be named after the Dal Lake in Kashmir .
This implies that Kashmir is the place on which K is based .
The Dull Lake itself is the location of the Moody Land , a landscape whose weather changes to reflect the emotions of the people currently present in it .
It is the place where the lead characters go at the behest of a corrupt politician , and where their adventures begin .
* The larger part of the plot occurs on a fictional moon of earth , named Kahani , whose orbit is controlled by a " Process Too Complicated To Explain " also referred to in the book as the " P2C2E " .
These processes enable it to fly over every single point on Earth like a satellite .
Kahani consists of a massive Ocean which is composed of an infinite number of stories , each story taking the form of a current or stream of a unique color .
The colours encompass the whole visible spectrum and extend beyond into spectra that are not known to exist .
Various islands and a continent are also shown on the moon .
The name " Kahani " itself means " Story " in Urdu and Hindi , and is ultimately revealed to be the name of the sad city ; a revelation that removes the sadness from the city 's people .
*
The Moon Kahani is , throughout most of the plot , divided into two sections equal in size , one of which is kept in perpetual daylight and the other in perpetual darkness .
The two are separated by a narrow strip of twilight , which is marked by a force field named Chattergy 's Wall .
The daylight side is called Gup , a Hindi and Urdu word ( meaning " gossip " , " nonsense " , or " fib " in English ) and the night - darkened side is called Chup ( meaning " quiet " ) .
Inhabitants of Gup value speech and are called " Guppees " , meaning " talkative people " , while inhabitants of Chup are stated to have historically valued silence and are called " Chupwalas " , meaning " quiet fellows " .
The " u " in " Gup " rhymes with the " u " in " cup " , the " u " in " Chup " is pronounced similarly to the " oo " in " good " , and the " w " in " Chupwala " resembles a sound lying midway between the English letters " w " and " v " .
At the South Pole of Kahani is a spring known as the Source of Stories , from which ( according to the premise of the plot ) originated all stories ever communicated .
The prevention of this spring 's blockage therefore forms the climax of the novel 's plot .
CHARACTERS IN THE BOOK Section::::Characters in the book .
Haroun :
The main character / central consciousness of the story .
A young , curious , courageous , outspoken child .
He struggles throughout most of the story with a form of attention - deficit disorder caused by his mother running away with Mr. Sengupta at exactly eleven o'clock , and under its influence he is unable to concentrate for a longer period of time ( not more than eleven minutes ) .
But he eventually overcomes his disorder at the climax , never to suffer from it again .
He and his father are both named after the " legendary Caliph of Baghdad , Haroun al - Rashid , who features in many Arabian Nights tales .
Their surname Khalifa actually means Caliph " Rashid :
Haroun 's father , known as the Shah of Blah and the Ocean of Notions for his ability to devise stories impromptu , Rashid is a professional storyteller sometimes hired by corrupt politicians to persuade constituents in their favour .
His attachment to his wife and to his practice of storytelling , is probably his greatest psychological weaknesses ; when either of them is lost , he becomes depressed and tends to lose the other .
In the story , to recover the latter , he travels to Kahani by means known as ' Rapture ' , through which he is able to travel inside his dreams and wake up in the world , his dream has created .
Having reached Kahani , he alerts the Guppees about the location of their Princess Batcheat and later joins their army to rescue her from the Chupwalas .
Soraya :
Rashid 's wife , who is tired of his imagination and leaves him for the dull and dreary Mr. Sengupta , a neighbour .
That she is becoming alienated from Rashid is implied early in the story , where she is said to have abandoned her daily songs .
At the end , she returns to Rashid , and revives her affection for her husband and son .
Upon her return , the depression overwhelming Rashid and the syndrome manifested by Haroun do not reappear .
Her name is probably Persian in origin .
Mr. Sengupta : Haroun 's neighbour , who elopes with Soraya .
As a rule , Mr. Sengupta despises imagination and stories , which sets the stage for his later appearance on Kahani as antagonist Khattam - Shud .
Khattam - Shud 's defeat seems to correspond with Soraya 's desertion of Mr. Sengupta , who does not appear again in person .
His name is a legitimate Bengali surname .
Miss Oneeta : Mr. Sengupta 's obese , talkative , self - important , overwhelmingly emotional , generous wife , disappointed in her husband after he has eloped with Soraya .
In her dismay , she disowns him and her married name .
It is she who reveals that Soraya has deserted her family and that her act has given Haroun his disorder , and also announces her return .
Mr. Butt : The mail courier , a reckless driver who , when requested to provide transport for Haroun and Rashid ( who is expected to speak at an election of public officers ) , ignores all other demands to take them to their destination before dusk .
He is implied equivalent of the Hoopoe , who also serves as Haroun 's transportation .
Snooty Buttoo : A corrupt politician who hires Rashid to convince constituents that he ( Buttoo ) should be re - elected .
Buttoo is a class - conscious , pompous , arrogant , self - assured person whose chief hold over his constituents is that he has been re - elected before .
To persuade Rashid to sympathise with him , he offers both Rashid and Haroun a stay on a luxurious houseboat called ' The Arabian Nights Plus One ' .
Ultimately driven from his district by popular demand .
Butt the Hoopoe :
A mechanical Hoopoe who becomes Haroun 's steed in Kahani , capable of almost all known mental feats , including telepathy ( the latter producing a recurrent joke that he " spoke without moving [ his ] beak " ) .
He is also capable of flying at impossible speeds , between Earth and Kahani .
Because he shares with Mr. Butt the idiosyncrasy of saying "
but but but " at the beginning of sentences , in addition to some superficial details of appearance , he is called by the same name .
At his introduction , he is described as " the bird that leads all other birds through many dangerous places to their ultimate goal " .
Iff : A " water genie " from Kahani who accompanies Haroun in Kahani .
Iff 's task is to control Rashid 's imagination , in the form of waters transmitted to Rashid via an invisible faucet by means called a " Process Too Complicated To Explain " .
Iff himself is a benevolent character having a blue mustache and beard ; an effusive , somewhat cantankerous personality ; and a habit of speaking in lists of synonyms .
Prince Bolo :
A possible parody of the archetypal awe - inspiring hero or Prince Charming
, Bolo is a reckless , slightly stupid , melodramatic figure , nominally the leader of the charge to rescue Princess Batcheat from Chup , but holding little authority ; prone to becoming excited at the least provocation ; obsessed with rescuing Batcheat , so that all other things appear to him of little significance .
He frequently draws his sword when it is unwise to fight ; once extends diplomatic immunity to an assassin bent on killing him ; and often gives the impression to readers of being somewhat out of harmony with the realities of his situations .
Princess Batcheat : A damsel in distress .
Batcheat is the daughter of King Chattergy , ruler of Gup , and the fiancée of Prince Bolo .
She is somewhat foolish ; sentimental ; reckless ; and completely infatuated with Bolo , who is the only person to think her beautiful ; all other characters have low opinions of her nose , teeth , and singing voice .
Most references ( including , in one passage , those of the narration ) to any of these , conclude " ...
there 's no need to go into that " , and no exact description is given of Batcheat 's face at all .
Her name if pronounced " Baat - cheat " , is translated as " conversation " .
When Princess Batcheat is captured by Chupwalas during an excursion to the border between Gup and Chup , they plot to sew her mouth shut and rename her Khamosh , meaning " silent " , but never carry this out .
General Kitab : Literally " General Book "
, General Kitab is the commander of the Guppee Army , called the " Library " .
It consists of a multitude of Pages .
The General participates in every debate regarding the worth of the cause on which the army has embarked , and frequently foments such debates on purpose to resolve all conflict of interest or opinion .
The whole army , therefore , takes part in every campaign of Rogerian argument , whose sole aim is to produce conciliation and eventual unity among the Pages .
Because Guppee laws permit an unlimited freedom of speech , these debates are unrestrained to an extent that would ( as Haroun remarks ) be considered insubordination in the reader 's world .
General Kitab himself is often flustered and embarrassed by Prince Bolo 's impetuosity .
King Chattergy :
Princess Batcheat 's father and Prince Bolo 's father - in - law , who forms the nominal head of Gup 's government but has little real power .
He is given very little role in most of the story .
The Wall dividing Gup from Chup is named after him .
His name is a legitimate name in India , though usually spelled ' Chatterjee ' .
Blabbermouth : A female Page of the Library of Gup .
Blabbermouth is a talkative , ill - tempered , contemptuous , stubborn , unscrupulous , quarrelsome girl who despises Princess Batcheat , disguises herself as a boy , and is skilled at the art of juggling .
Blabbermouth joins the army of Gup to march on Chup , but is later exposed as a girl and expelled from the army by Bolo .
She then becomes aide to Mudra , an ally of the Guppees , with whom she is implied to be infatuated .
Mudra :
Second - in - command to Khattam - Shud , who becomes disgruntled with his master 's policies and defects to the Guppee side .
His shadow , like the shadows of each and every person in Chup , can behave independently of himself and is therefore his sidekick .
Mudra himself is an able warrior skilled in the art of hand - to - hand combat .
He is described as having green paint and exaggerated features covering his face ; as being clad in bulky armour that increases his appearance of size ; and as having eyes white at the pupil , grey at the iris , and black at the sclera .
Such eyes are common to all Chupwalas , and are entirely blind in bright light .
Mudra is nearly mute , being able only to communicate his own name and that he " speaks " by Abhinaya , the sign language used in classical Indian dance .
His own name is said in the appendix to be the generic term for all signs used in this language .
After the climax , Mudra becomes President of Chup .
Whether he reciprocates Blabbermouth 's infatuation is never stated .
Khattam - Shud :
The villain of the story , whose name means " completely finished " .
As a character , he is the " Prince of Silence and the Foe of Speech " feared by most Guppees .
He is the ruler of Chup , the Kahanian counterpart of Mr. Sengupta , and the founder of a religion whose supreme commandment is abstinence from speech .
During the sack of Chup 's capital , he is crushed by his own symbol of power , the statue ' Bezaban ' .
The Eggheads : Here , the technicians of Kahani : white - coated , completely bald , enthusiastic , cheerful , and intelligent .
The Eggheads of Gup City are said to be the inventors of all " Processes Too Complicated To Explain " , by which impossible feats such as Kahani 's bizarre orbit , the creation of artificial happy endings for stories , and the transmission of " story water " to Earthly storytellers are easily accomplished .
They are in awe of their superintendent , the Walrus , for his possession of a mustache .
Walrus :
The superintendent of the Eggheads , distinguished from them by his possession of a small mustache which gives him his name .
Plentimaw Fish : Angelfish the size of giant sharks .
The name is derived from their multiplicity of mouths , through which they constantly ingest the stories conveyed by the waters .
Inside their bodies , the stories combine to form new stories .
Plentimaw Fish mate for life and always travel in pairs , which then speak in rhyme .
The name is also used to assonate with Buttoo 's statement that " there are plenty more fish in the sea " , whereas the angelfish - like physique of the two recalls Rashid 's reply that " [ one ] must go a long , long way to find an Angel Fish " .
Mali :
A ' Floating Gardener ' composed of interwoven flowering vines and water plants that behave as a single organism .
He is one of many , whose task is to prevent stories from becoming irretrievably convoluted and to cut away weeds on the Ocean 's surface .
Floating Gardeners are divided into a hierarchy of classes , of which Mali belongs to the First Class ; presumably the highest .
Mali , and presumably other Floating Gardeners , is virtually invulnerable , being able to withstand any and all attacks made against him by the Chupwalas .
Though normally taciturn by human standards , he is shown singing rhymes when defying the attacks .
ALLUSIONS / REFERENCES TO OTHER WORKS Section::::Allusions / references to other works .
" Sea of the Rivers of Story " is the English equivalent of Kathāsaritsāgara , the title of an 11th - century collection of Indian legends .
Elements of the story are indicated to have been drawn from Baum 's The Wizard of Oz , Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings , and Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , as well as having been compared to the popular children 's novel
The Phantom Tollbooth .
Another obvious reference is to the stories of One Thousand and One Nights .
Haroun , the son of Rashid Khalifa refers to Harun al - Rashid , a caliph who ruled from 786 to 809 and who features frequently in Thousand and One Nights stories .
" Iff the Water Genie " is a reference to the genie in " Aladdin 's Magic Lamp " .
Haroun steals Iff 's magic wrench , and as a result , Iff is forced to do Haroun 's bidding , just as the genie did when Aladdin came into possession of the magic lamp .
The Walrus plays off of The Beatles song "
I Am the Walrus " and Lewis Carroll 's The Walrus and the Carpenter .
When the character Mudra is first encountered , the noises he emits are the gurgling sound " Gogogol " and the coughing noise " Kafkafka " , as references to writers Nikolai Gogol and Franz Kafka , whose names they are distorting .
Rushdie makes another reference to Kafka when Iff describes the Plentimaw Fish in the sea , who swallow stories , as hunger artists .
A reference is made to the folktale Rapunzel in the book 's fourth chapter .
Haroun encounters a warrior who is fighting his own shadow .
This is possibly a reference to J.M Barrie 's Peter Pan . " Goopy " and " Bagha , " the names of the Plentimaws , allude to the characters Goopy and Bagha created by Bengali author Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury .
His grandson , the Academy Award - winning director Satyajit Ray , directed two films with Goopy and Bagha as protagonists .
FILM , TV OR THEATRICAL
ADAPTATIONS
*
A play based on the book was adapted for the stage by Tim Supple and David Tushingham .
It had its stage premiere in 1998 at the Royal National Theatre in London .
* An opera , Haroun and the Sea of Stories , by Charles Wuorinen with libretto by James Fenton , written in 2001 , was premiered at the New York City Opera in Fall 2004 .
REFERENCES