KNOCKIN ' ON HEAVEN 'S DOOR " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " is a song by Bob Dylan , written for the soundtrack of the 1973 film Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid .
Released as a single , it reached No . 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart .
Described by Dylan biographer Clinton Heylin as " an exercise in splendid simplicity " , the song , in terms of the number of other artists who have covered it , is one of Dylan 's most popular post-1960s compositions .
In 1990 , the band Guns N ' Roses released a cover version to chart success .
Members of the Western Writers of America chose it as one of the Top 100 Western songs of all time .
CHART HISTORY
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Chart history .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1973 - 74 ) !
Peakposition Australia KMR
Canada RPM Top Singles Canada RPM Adult Contemporary Netherlands UK ( OCC ) US Billboard Hot
100 US Billboard Adult Contemporary US Cash Box Top 100 align="center"10 YEAR - END CHARTS Joel Whitburn 's Pop Annual )
COVER VERSIONS
ERIC
CLAPTON VERSION Section::::Cover versions .
Section::::Eric Clapton version .
In January 1975 Eric Clapton played on Jamaican singer Arthur Louis ' recording of " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " arranged in a reggae style .
Subsequently , Clapton recorded his own reggae - style version of the song which was released in August 1975 , two weeks after Louis 's version was released as a single in July 1975 .
Clapton 's single peaked at No . 38 in the UK Singles Chart .
The single was less successful in the US , only reaching No . 109 in Cash Box .
Clapton 's 1996 boxed set features a performance recorded in London in April 1977 .
The song was also performed during the Journeyman and One More Car , One More Rider world tours in 1990 and 2003 .
Additionally , the song has been included on several Clapton compilation albums , such as , Backtrackin ' , The Cream of Clapton and Complete Clapton .
GUNS N ' ROSES VERSIONS Section::::Guns N ' Roses versions .
In 1987 , Guns N ' Roses started performing the song .
A live version of the song was released on the maxi - single of " Welcome to the Jungle " the same year .
They recorded a studio version in 1990 for the soundtrack of the film Days of Thunder which reached No . 18 on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart in 1990 .
This version was slightly modified for the 1991 album Use Your Illusion II ( basically discarding the responses in the second verse ) .
Released as the fourth single from the album , it reached No . 2 on the UK Singles Chart and the New Zealand Singles Chart .
Elsewhere , the single topped the charts of Belgium and the Netherlands .
In Ireland , where the song also reached No . 1 , it became Guns N ' Roses ' third ( and to date last )
number - one single as well as their ninth consecutive top - five hit .
Their performance of the song at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert in 1992 was used as the B - side for the single release and was also included on their album , released in 1999 .
The music video for this version of the song was directed by Andy Morahan .
CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Weekly charts !
scope="col"Chart ( 1992 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition !
scope="row"Finland
( Suomen virallinen lista ) 7 Year - end charts !
scope="col"Chart ( 1992 ) !
scope="col"Position !
scope="row"Australia ( ARIA ) 35 !
scope="row"Austria
( Ö3 Austria Top 40 ) 9 !
scope="row"Belgium (
Ultratop 50 Flanders ) 5 !
scope="row"Germany ( Official German Charts ) 9 !
scope="row"Netherlands ( Single Top 100 ) 1 !
scope="row"New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) 20 !
scope="row"Switzerland
( Schweizer Hitparade ) 8 CERTIFICATIONS DUNBLANE TRIBUTE Section::::Dunblane tribute .
In 1996 and with the consent of Dylan , Scottish musician Ted Christopher wrote a new verse for " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " in memory of the schoolchildren and teacher killed in the Dunblane school massacre .
This has been , according to some sources , one of the few times Dylan has officially authorized anybody to add or change the lyrics to one of his songs .
This version of the song , including children from the village singing the chorus with guitarist and producer of Dylan 's album Infidels ( 1983 ) , Mark Knopfler , was released on December 9 in the United Kingdom and reached No . 1 on the UK Singles Chart and Scottish Singles Chart , as well as number six in Ireland .
The proceeds went to charities for children .
The song was featured on the compilation album Hits 97 , where all royalties from the song were given to three separate charities .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 1996 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 1996 ) !
scope="col"Position ! scope="row"UK
Singles ( Official Charts Company )
31 CERTIFICATIONS
SAMPLED VERSION
Section::::Sampled version .
Gabrielle 's single " Rise " ( 2000 ) sampled from this song .
SOUNDTRACK INCLUSIONS Section::::Soundtrack inclusions . !
Film / TV show !
Year !
Performer IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Nick Talevski used the title for his book , Knocking On Heaven 's Door : Rock Obituaries .
The title is used as the name of Rohan Kishibe 's Stand , " Heaven 's Door " , in the fourth part of the manga " Jojo 's Bizarre Adventure " , Diamond is Unbreakable .
Covered by The Jenerators , the song was used during a tribute to the death of cast member Miguel Ferrer of at the end of the Season 8 Episode 16 " New Tricks " , broadcast on March 5 , 2017 .
Ferrer was a member of The Jenerators .
REFERENCES