LIFE IS A HIGHWAY
" Life Is a Highway " is a song written by Tom Cochrane , from his 1991 album Mad Mad World .
The song was Cochrane 's most famous song , becoming a number one hit in his native Canada .
The song also peaked at number six on the Billboard charts in the United States in 1992 .
The song has been covered by Rascal Flatts for the Cars soundtrack , as well as by Chris LeDoux , Jerry Jeff Walker , and Home Free . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In an interview with The Canadian Press , Cochrane said the song was originally envisioned several years before its release as " Love is a Highway " , but was shelved while he was still working with his band mates in Tom Cochrane and Red Rider during the late 1980s .
Following a trip with his family to Eastern Africa , where he helped to raise awareness and money for the World Vision famine relief organization , he revisited the song with advice from his friend John Webster , an instrumentalist on Mad Mad World .
In an interview with The Canadian Press to mark the song 's 25th anniversary , Cochrane said Webster encouraged him to revisit the demo recording , which only had mumbled vocals and improvised lyrics , but not the song 's well - known chorus .
Eventually that version was released on the 25th - anniversary reissue of the album as " Love is a Highway " .
While his trip to Africa was influential to a notable portion of the Mad Mad World album , it was especially formative to the final version of " Life is a Highway " .
Cochrane says he was trying to unpack the poverty he witnessed on his trip , which he found " shocking and traumatic " .
He later said the uptempo spirit of the song came from looking for something positive to " hang the experience on . "
Most of the vocals on the track were recorded in the small studio in his backyard .
" It became a pep talk to myself ... saying you ca n't really control all of this stuff , you just do the best you can " , he told The Canadian Press in an interview " .
" All the details of going into a country like Mozambique , which was in a protracted civil war at the time , you ca n't be distracted with all of that . "
Places mentioned in the song are Mozambique , Memphis , Khyber Pass , and Vancouver .
The song was Cochrane 's only Top 40 hit in the United States .
In Canada , three other singles from the album charted .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
align="center"Chart ( 1991 ) !
align="center"Peakposition !
scope="row"Canada
Top Singles ( RPM )
align="center"1
YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1991 ) !
Position align="left"Canada
Top Singles ( RPM )
align="center"5 ! align="left"Chart ( 1992 ) !
align="center"Position align="left"New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ )
align="center"9 US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"18 for next print
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The original video for " Life Is a Highway " was produced by Albert Botha who went on to line produce two films for Saturday Night Live , Superstar starring Molly Shannon and The Ladies Man starring Tim Meadows .
The video was shot in Alberta 's Badlands , near the town of Drumheller .
Many of the shots are in familiar locations along the Dinosaur Trail , including Cochrane playing guitar amid the Hoodoos and the couple , Kait Shane and Brennan Elliott running around the car while it rides the Bleriot Ferry across the Red Deer River .
It also has an older man ( gas station attendant ) , a couple ( tall man , short wife ) , and two women from an Anabaptist religious order ( Alberta has a population of Hutterites ) .
The car which is featured in the music video is a 1965 Chevrolet Impala Super Sport .
The video is notable for depicting Cochrane holding a Fender Telecaster which he never plays .
The plot for the video is a pastiche of the 1991 Canadian dark comedy , Highway 61 .
The song was originally offered by Capitol Records to the film 's director , Bruce McDonald , to use in the film .
McDonald declined the offer , saying the song was " too poppy " .
The Family Guy episode " The Woof of Wall Street " features a few clips of the video throughout the episode .
RASCAL FLATTS VERSION Section::::Rascal Flatts version .
In 2006 , American country band Rascal Flatts recorded a cover of this song for the Pixar animated film Cars , which was released on June 9 , 2006 .
The song sold a large quantity of digital downloads , leading to a # 7 peak on the Billboard Hot 100 ( one position lower than the Tom Cochrane original ) .
In addition , the cover was placed as a bonus track on later versions of the album Me and My Gang , and also was included on their Greatest Hits Volume 1 .
This version also won the " Favorite Song from a Movie " award at the 33rd People 's Choice Awards .
The instrumental of the Rascal Flatts ' cover version was prominently featured in the , which aired February 11 , 2007 .
The song is included on the soundtrack for Lego Rock Band .
It topped the 2 million mark in paid downloads as of the chart dated March 28 , 2009 .
As of March 2013 , the song has sold over 3 million copies in the US .
On July 14 , 2015 , Scott Walker , Republican Governor of Wisconsin , launched his presidential campaign as Republican Party nominee in Waukesha , Wisconsin using the song .
Cochrane requested that it not be used again .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video portrays the three band members pulling into a drive - in theater driving three vintage vehicles .
The cars allude to three characters from the movie :
Lightning McQueen , Doc Hudson and Mater .
As the projector rolls , scenes from the Disney / Pixar movie Cars are shown as the band plays through the number .
It was directed by Shaun Silva .
CHARTS Section::::Charts .
The Rascal Flatts version subsequently became a hit on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , where it peaked at number No . 7 .
Even though it was not officially released to country radio , many country stations played the song as an album cut , overlapping with their then - current country single
" My Wish " .
The unsolicited country airplay brought " Life Is a Highway " to number No . 18 on the US Country Song chart .
The song has sold 3.4 million copies in the US as of June 2016 .
WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Weekly Charts . !
Chart ( 2006 ) !
Peakposition US
Billboard Pop 100
align="center"9
YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - End Charts . !
Charts ( 2006 ) !
Position US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"76
CHRIS LEDOUX VERSION Section::::Chris LeDoux version .
In 1998 , Chris LeDoux covered " Life Is a Highway " for his album One Road Man .
The song is one of Chris ' most popular .
Changes include the intro to the song , the timing of vocal entrances on the chorus , and location names between the first and second chorus .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for the song takes place on multiple roads and highways as well as a blue and red static themed room .
When on roads and highways , there is a chance for Chris himself to appear on a television that is sitting on a sidewalk or grass , however , while the background behind Chris ( that appears on the TV ) is the same background as everything behind the TV itself , Chris does not appear to be standing behind the TV .
In most locations , Chris is walking down a road as at the start of the music video .
The video ends with Chris signing the chorus while appearing on a flap - down TV inside of someones car , then transitioning to Chris being once again in the static room and then walking out of it .
After Chris leaves the room , the screen will slowly fade - out to black and the video will end .
OTHER COVERS Section::::Other covers .
In 2007 , Alvin and the Chipmunks covered the song for their video game Alvin and the Chipmunks , which also appeared in the 2011 video game .
In 2012 , VeggieTales released a cover of the song on their album , Bob & Larry Go Country .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Tom Cochrane
" Life Is a Highway " music video at YouTube
* Rascal Flatts
" Life Is a Highway " music video at YouTube