DON MILLS
STATION
Don Mills is a subway station , which is the eastern terminus of Line 4 Sheppard in Toronto , Ontario , Canada .
The station is located at the northeast corner of Sheppard Avenue East and Don Mills Road , within the residential communities of Don Valley Village and Henry Farm , adjacent to Fairview Mall shopping centre .
The station is located close to the Highway 401 , Highway 404 , and Don Valley Parkway .
Other nearby landmarks include Fairview Mall , Georges Vanier Secondary School , and the Fairview district branch of the Toronto Public Library .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station opened in 2002 as part of the original Line 4 .
A plaque located at the platform level commemorates John Marinzel , a worker who died on April 18 , 2001 , of injuries sustained in an accident during the construction of the station .
A Vivastation for the Viva Green line of York Region 's Viva Rapid Transit system opened on October 16 , 2005 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Like all stations on the Sheppard line , Don Mills is fully accessible .
The station is equipped with three elevators connecting the concourse level with the bus platforms and two street entrances , and a single elevator between the island train platform and the concourse .
Stairs and escalators provide regular pedestrian access between all levels .
There are three accessible entrances around the Don Mills Road and Sheppard Avenue intersection .
Two of the entrances are on the northeast and southeast sides of Sheppard Avenue , respectively , and one automatic entrance in the parking garage at Fairview Mall near the Sears entrance .
Above the bus terminal , on the street level , is a multi - storey public parking lot , providing 366 parking spaces for commuters .
Parking costs $ 7 from 5:00am to 9:30am and is free after 9:30am and all day on weekends and holidays .
TTC commuter spaces are restricted to levels 4 and 5 as the lower floors are for mall patrons only .
Outside the parking lot , next to a manned pedestrian entrance to the station , is a passenger pick - up area with 18 temporary parking spaces .
SUBWAY INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE VICINITY Section::::Subway infrastructure in the vicinity .
As this is a terminal station , there is a diamond crossover to the west of the platform for arriving trains to cross over to the westbound track , and for departing trains on the eastbound track to cross to the westbound track .
There are also tail tracks beyond the east end of the platform .
However , unlike the case with other terminal stations where the tail tracks are at least as long as a standard six - car train for overnight storage , those at Don Mills are only about two cars in length .
This is likely because storage capacity is available at Sheppard – Yonge , which can store enough trains to service the line .
ARCHITECTURE AND ART Section::::Architecture and art .
The station was designed by Stevens Group Architects , who also built and stations .
There are two pieces of public art in the station .
The piece before / after : 1997 / 2002 spans the concourse and platform levels in the station .
Created by Toronto artist Stephen Cruise , it consists of tile work on walls and inlays on the terrazzo floors :
* On the concourse level , the tilework on walls represents the geologic strata through which the line travels , plus graphical depictions of local flora and fauna .
*
On the concourse and platform levels , bronze inlays in the floor depict fossils of fish , turtles , and leaves found on the site ; the Sheppard line is also depicted in an abstract form on the floor .
Outside the station ( on the north side of Don Mills Road , south of the bus entrance ) is a tribute to Northern Dancer , a famous racehorse foaled at E. P. Taylor 's Windfields Farm , which was then located on " nearby " Bayview Avenue .
SURFACE CONNECTIONS Section::::Surface connections .
Don Mills station has a bus terminal which is also underground .
It allows for connection to both TTC bus routes and York Region Transit ( YRT ) routes .
TORONTO TRANSIT COMMISSION ROUTES Section::::Toronto Transit Commission routes .
When the subway is closed , passengers may board buses at the intersection of Don Mills Road and Sheppard Avenue .
This is an on - street transfer , and a paper transfer is required for connection . !
Route !
Name !
Additional Information !
10 !
24B !
25A !
25B !
25C !
85 !
85A !
85B !
85D !
85J !
167A !
167B !
169A !
169B !
925 !
985A
Eastbound to Scarborough Centre station !
985B
Eastbound to Meadowvale Road !
325 !
385 YORK REGION TRANSIT ROUTES Section::::York Region Transit routes .
York Region Transit vehicles drops passengers off outside of the station .
The bus stops within the terminal are for passenger pick up only .
This is to ensure passengers pay a separate fare for utilizing TTC services .
This is one of only three subway stations , the others being and Sheppard West , where boarding for other transit agency 's buses is done within the TTC bus terminal rather than at a separate facility . !
Route !
Name !
Additional Information !
24 Woodbine to Honda Canada ! 90 to Richmond Green Secondary School !
90B to 16th Avenue via East Beaver Creek ( AM ) to Highway 7 via East Beaver Creek ( PM ) !
Viva Green to Highway 7 at McCowan Road PRIOR PROPOSALS Section::::Prior proposals .
As part of the Transit City plan , the TTC proposed the construction of the Sheppard LRT ( light rail transit ) line to connect Don Mills station to Sheppard East station on the proposed extension of Line 3 Scarborough .
This replaced previous plans to extend Line 4 Sheppard to Scarborough Centre station on Line 3 .
The Transit City plan included an LRT along Don Mills Road from Pape station on Line 2 Bloor – Danforth through Don Mills station to Steeles Avenue .
However , the transit line , along with other Transit City lines , was cancelled by Rob Ford when he became mayor in December 2010 .
In a 2015 study , one of the options for a proposed Toronto relief line connected to Don Mills Station .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS