CUP
- TIED
In association football , a player who has appeared for a football club during a knockout cup but
subsequently transfers to another club is ineligible to play for the new club in the remainder of that season 's cup competition .
Such a player is said to be cup - tied i.e. tied to their original club for the duration of the cup tournament .
They become eligible for their new club in the following season .
The rule is intended to prevent teams which progress in the competition buying talented players from teams which have already been eliminated , in an attempt to increase their chances of winning .
It also discourages players from requesting a transfer once their team has been eliminated , in a quest for silverware .
Since the introduction of transfer windows , which the cup - tied system pre - dates , some have criticised the rule as outdated .
Nevertheless it remains widely applied .
Almost all cup competitions worldwide operate a cup - tied rule , but leagues do not ( as leagues do not eliminate teams during the season ) .
Cup - tied players are only prevented from playing in that specific competition , so for example a player who is cup - tied in the FA Cup may still be eligible to play in the League Cup ( or vice versa ) .
UEFA competitions are an exception : because teams can switch between the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League during the season , UEFA has a more complex system for determining whether a player is cup - tied in one or both of those competitions .
THE CUP - TIED RULE Section::::The cup - tied rule .
In almost all domestic and international club cup competitions , any player who makes an appearance for a club at any stage of the competition is " tied " to that club for all future matches during that season in the same competition .
This prevents a wealthy team still in the competition from gaining an unfair advantage by signing talented players from clubs that may have lost out in earlier rounds , in an attempt to increase their cup chances .
The rule applies to individual cup competitions , such that a player who plays in the English FA Cup , but not the Football League Cup , for example , is cup - tied only in the former competition .
If the player signs for a new club in the same season , he is thus eligible for the Football League Cup , but not the FA Cup .
Breaching the cup - tied rule can result in a result being declared invalid , with serious consequences for the offending club .
Governing bodies usually reserve the right to waive the rule , but do so only in exceptional circumstances .
UEFA COMPETITIONS Section::::UEFA competitions .
UEFA operates European club football competitions , primarily the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League .
UEFA 's regulations state that , with a few exceptions , players who play in any European club competition are subsequently cup - tied with respect to all European football for the remainder of the season .
On March 27th 2018 UEFA announced that they will be phasing out the cup tie rule for the Champions League and Europa League starting in the 2018 - 2019 season .
The main current exception is the UEFA Super Cup , contested by the winners of the previous seasons ' Champions League and Europa League .
As this is effectively a prestige friendly with only one round , the cup - tied rule is seen as unnecessary .
Representing a club in this fixture does not affect a player 's eligibility in other UEFA competitions .
Similarly , cup - tying did not apply to matches in the now - defunct pre - season UEFA Intertoto Cup , up to the semi - final round .
A further exemption applies : one player per club who would normally be cup - tied can be registered and eligible to play , so long as his previous club did not field him in the same competition .
This means that players can represent two different clubs in the Europa League and Champions League , but only a maximum of one player per club .
However , if the first club switches into the same competition ( e.g. transfers from the Champions League to the Europa League through finishing third in the group stage ) , the transferred player becomes ineligible .
This can lead to some complex situations .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The cup - tied rule comes in for criticism from various fans and media pundits , particularly when a high profile player is ineligible for significant matches .
Some argue that the rule is antiquated and that since the introduction of transfer windows , clubs can not buy players solely for cup matches , but will only do so for the league ( in which there is no cup - tie rule ) .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
In the 2008 FA Cup Final against Cardiff City , and in previous rounds , former Portsmouth player Jermain Defoe was cup - tied and was unable to play .
Portsmouth won the cup final .
There were similar cases with Earl Barrett 's transfer to 1995 FA Cup winners Everton from Aston Villa , while beaten finalists Manchester United were unable to select Andy Cole , as he had played for Newcastle United in the third round a few days before his transfer .
In 2006 , Robbie Fowler was cup - tied for the victorious Liverpool team after his mid - season return to Anfield from Manchester City .
In February 1993 , Arsenal re - signed defender Martin Keown from Everton , nearly seven years after he had first left the club .
They went on the win the League Cup and FA Cup that season , but Keown was unable to play in either of the finals , having already turned out for Everton earlier in both competitions .
In January 1991 , defender Viv Anderson was sold to Sheffield Wednesday by Manchester United , and three months later the two teams met in the League Cup final .
Sheffield Wednesday won the game , but Anderson had been unable to play as he had appeared - and scored - in a second round tie for Manchester United six months before .
In another instance , Ronaldo bought out his contract with Real Madrid to move to Milan ; he was cup - tied to Madrid in the Champions League , which decreased his value to Milan .
Milan went on to win the tournament , but Ronaldo was not allowed to play in any of their games .
Andrei Arshavin was cup - tied in the Champions League after moving to Arsenal during the January 2009 transfer window , having earlier represented Zenit St. Petersburg in the group stage of that competition .
Another Liverpool example , this time in the UEFA Champions League , Fernando Morientes was cup - tied for their games leading up to and including the final of the competition in 2005 , which Liverpool won .
This was due to Morientes playing in the group stage of the competition with Real Madrid .
ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
In the 1999–2000 Football League Cup , West Ham United were ordered to replay a match they had won against Aston Villa , after bringing on as a substitute Emmanuel Omoyinmi , who had appeared for Gillingham in an earlier round .
West Ham lost the replay .
A notable example of non - enforcement was in the 1957–58 FA Cup .
Stan Crowther and Ernie Taylor would normally have been cup - tied and thus ineligible to play for Manchester United .
However they were granted an exemption and allowed to play because the club had suffered the Munich air disaster earlier that season .
In that air crash , eight United players died and two others were so seriously injured that they never played again , while five others had still not fully recovered from their injuries when the match was played .
The Football Association therefore waived the cup - tied rule .
UEFA
Section::::UEFA .
UEFA 's rules regarding their linked competitions and potential exceptions can lead to some complex situations .
This was the case with Alan Hutton , who could not play in Europe for Tottenham Hotspur following his former club Rangers ' coming third in their Champions League group , which meant they switched to the Europa League for the remainder of the competition .
Had Rangers come 1st , 2nd or 4th in their group , Hutton would have been able to play for Tottenham .
Another interesting case came in 2009 , when Real Madrid purchased Klaas - Jan Huntelaar and Lassana Diarra – both of whom had already played European football during the season for Ajax and Portsmouth , respectively – during the winter transfer window .
Because of UEFA rules , Madrid could only pick one of these players , and ended up selecting Diarra for their European roster .
Despite the rule , Real Madrid attempted to circumvent the restriction , to no avail .
MANIPULATION Section::::Manipulation .
Football managers can sometimes decide whether to field a player in order to deliberately cup - tie ( or avoid cup - tying ) the player .
This can be used to manipulate their value on the transfer market for the remainder of the season , because it affects whether any potential new club can field them in the cup .
There are two major motivations for deciding to cup - tie a player or not : TO INCREASE A PLAYER 'S VALUE Section::::To
increase a player 's value .
A team that wishes to transfer a player may deliberately choose not to field them in cup competitions to ensure they are not cup - tied , increasing the player 's usefulness to a club that is still involved in the same competition .
Two examples of this were in the 2004–05 and 2005–06 seasons , both of which involved English Premier League club Liverpool .
In 2004–05 , Liverpool 's Michael Owen sat out of his club 's Champions League games so that other top European teams would be able to sign him ; he subsequently transferred to Real Madrid .
Ironically , Madrid were knocked out by Juventus in the round of 16 , whilst Liverpool went on to win the Champions League that season ( knocking out Juventus in the process ) .
The following season , Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez again decided to keep one of his players , Milan Baroš , out of Liverpool 's squad for their 2005–06 UEFA Champions League ties in order to retain his value to clubs interested in purchasing the Czech striker 's services .
This time the manipulation was less successful : Baroš eventually moved to Aston Villa , a club who were not involved in the Champions League and therefore gained no benefit from Baroš not being cup - tied .
TO DISCOURAGE TRANSFER INTEREST Section::::To discourage transfer interest .
Similarly , although less often , a team may deliberately cup - tie a player to discourage attempts ( by the player or interested clubs ) to transfer them during that season .
This only applies if the player would not otherwise make it onto the team – it can be achieved by bringing them on as a substitute towards the end of a game .
However , this is of limited use for international transfers , where cup - tying only applies if both teams involved in the transfer are competing in the same continental competition ( such as the UEFA Champions League or UEFA Europa League ) .
NOTES AND REFERENCES NOTES REFERENCES