YARDSTICK
A yardstick is a straightedge used to physically measure lengths of up to one yard ( 3.0 feet or 0.9144 meters long ) high .
Yardsticks are flat boards with markings at regular intervals .
In the metric system , a similar device measuring up to one meter is called a meter - stick .
Yardsticks are most often marked with a scale in inches , but sometimes also feature marks for foot increments .
Meter - sticks are usually divided with lines for each millimeter ( 1000 per meter ) and numerical markings per centimeter ( 100 per meter ) , with numbers either in centi- or millimeter .
Hybrid sticks with more than one measurement system also exist , most notably those which have metric measurements on one side and U.S. customary units on the other side ( or both on the same side ) .
The " tumstock " ( literally " thumbstick " , meaning " inch - stick " ) invented in 1883 by the Swedish engineer Karl - Hilmer Johansson Kollén was the first such hybrid stick , and was developed with the goal to help Sweden convert to the metric system .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Yardsticks are often thin and rectangular , and made of wood or metal .
Metal ones are often backed with a ' grippy ' material , such as cork , to improve friction .
They are relatively cheap , with most wood models costing under 5 US dollars .
MEASUREMENTS
Section::::Measurements .
In countries in which the metric system is used ( such as Canada and France ) , hybrid sticks bearing imperial units markings on one side ( three feet in with inch and fractional inch ) and metric units on the other ( one meter with 100 centimeters and 1000 millimeters ) are common , and are sometimes referred to as yardsticks , meter - sticks or " meter rulers " .
The spelling meter vs metre varies by country .
Sometimes the imperial units are not included .
Although not used as often , meter - sticks can be found in the United States .
For example , they are common in schools where there is a desire for students to become familiar with metric units .
They may also be used in American science labs .
The folding carpenters ' rulers used in Scandinavia are sometimes equipped with double measurements , metric and imperial on both sides , also functioning as a handy conversion table , accounting for its Scandinavian term : Tommestokk / tumstock ( thumb ( inch ) stick ) , a term with the same meaning that is also used in Dutch : duimstok .
Metric only carpenter 's rulers are however common .
APPLICATION
Section::::Application .
The yardstick is usually employed for work on a medium scale ; larger than desktop work on paper , yet smaller than large scale infrastructure work , where tape measures or longer measuring rods are used .
Typical applications of yardsticks are for building furniture , vehicles and houses .
Modern carpenters ' yardsticks are usually made to be folded for ease of transport .
Yardsticks may be used as pointing devices for posters and projections .
Yardsticks are also used as spars to make wings for remote controlled model aircraft that are made from corrugated plastic .
REFERENCES