DEWCLAW
A dewclaw is a digit – vestigial in some animals – on the foot of many mammals , birds , and reptiles ( including some extinct orders , like certain theropods ) .
It commonly grows higher on the leg than the rest of the foot , such that in digitigrade or unguligrade species it does not make contact with the ground when the animal is standing .
The name refers to the dewclaw 's alleged tendency to brush dew away from the grass .
Danziger , D. , & McCrum , M. ( 2008 ) .
The Thingummy :
A book about those everyday objects you just ca n't name .
London : Doubleday .
On dogs and cats the dewclaws are on the inside of the front legs , positioned analogously to a human thumb .
Although many animals have dewclaws , other similar species do not , such as horses , giraffes and the African wild dog .
DOGS Section::::Dogs .
Dogs almost always have dewclaws on the inside of the front legs and occasionally also on the hind legs .
Unlike front dewclaws , rear dewclaws tend to have little bone or muscle structure in most breeds .
It is normal , although not biologically necessary , that certain breeds will have more than one dewclaw on the same paw .
At least one of these dewclaws will be poorly connected to the leg , and in this case it is often surgically removed .
When a dog has extra dewclaws in addition to the usual one on each front leg , the dog is said to be double dewclawed .
For certain dog breeds a dewclaw is considered a necessity i.e. a Beauceron for sheep herding and for navigating snowy terrain .
As such , there is some debate about whether a dewclaw helps dogs to gain traction when they run because in some dogs , the dewclaw makes contact when they are running and the nail on the dewclaw often wears down in the same way that the nails on their other toes do , from contact with the ground .
In many dogs the dewclaws never contact the ground .
In this case , the dewclaw 's nail never wears away , and it is often trimmed to maintain it at a safe length .
The dewclaws are not dead appendages .
They can be used to lightly grip bones and other items that dogs hold with the paws .
In some dogs these claws may not appear to be connected to the leg at all except by a flap of skin ; in such dogs the claws do not have a use for gripping as the claw can easily fold or turn .
REAR DEWCLAWS Section::::Rear dewclaws .
Canids have four claws on the rear feet , although some domestic dog breeds or individuals have an additional claw- or more rarely , two , as is the case with the beauceron .
A more technical term for these additional digits on the rear legs is hind - limb - specific preaxial polydactyly .
Several genetic mechanisms can cause rear dewclaws ; they involve the LMBR1 gene and related parts of the genome .
Rear dewclaws often have no phalanx bones and are attached by skin only .
DEWCLAW REMOVAL Section::::Dewclaw removal .
There is some debate as to whether dewclaws should be surgically removed .
The argument for removal states that dewclaws are a weak digit , barely attached to the leg , and thus they can rip partway off or easily catch on something and break , which can be painful and prone to infection .
Dewclaw removal is most easily performed when the dog is young , around 2–5 days of age .
It can also be performed on older dogs if necessary though the surgery may be more difficult then .
The surgery is fairly straightforward and may be done with local anesthetics if the digit is not well connected to the leg .
Many dogs ca n't resist licking the surgery site in the weeks following the procedure , so an Elizabethan collar or bitterant may be used to curtail this behavior , thus preventing infection .
Some pups are commonly sold by breeders " dew clawed , " that is with the dewclaws removed ( as by a veterinarian ) for perceived health and safety reasons .
A few breed standards also call for it .
DEWCLAWS AND LOCOMOTION Section::::Dewclaws and locomotion .
Based on stop - action photographs , veterinarian M. Christine Zink of Johns Hopkins University believes that the entire front foot , including the dewclaws , contacts the ground while running .
During running , the dewclaw digs into the ground preventing twisting or torque on the rest of the leg .
Several tendons connect the front dewclaw to muscles in the lower leg , further demonstrating the front dewclaws ' functionality .
There are indications that dogs without dewclaws have more foot injuries and are more prone to arthritis .
Zink recommends " for working dogs it is best for the dewclaws not to be amputated .
If the dewclaw does suffer a traumatic injury , the problem can be dealt with at that time , including amputation if needed . "
CATS Section::::Cats .
Members of the cat family – including domestic cats and wild cats like the lion – have dewclaws .
Generally a dewclaw grows on the inside of each front leg but not on either hind leg .
The dewclaw on some cats is not vestigial .
Wild felids use the dewclaw in hunting , where it provides an additional claw with which to catch and hold prey .
HOOFED ANIMALS Section::::Hoofed animals .
Hoofed animals walk on the tips of special toes , the hoofs .
Cloven - hoofed animals walk on a central pair of hoofs , but many also have an outer pair of dewclaws on each foot .
These are somewhat farther up the leg than the main hoofs , and similar in structure to them .
In some species ( such as cattle )
the dewclaws are much smaller than the hoofs and never touch the ground .
In others ( such as pigs and many deer ) , they are only a little smaller than the hoofs , and may reach the ground in soft conditions or when jumping .
Some hoofed animals ( such as giraffes and modern horses ) have no dewclaws .
Video evidence suggests some animals use dewclaws in grooming or scratching themselves or to have better grasp during mating .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
Another look at Dewclaws