CASA BONITA
Casa Bonita ( Spanish ; literally means " beautiful house " ) is a former chain of Mexican - themed " eatertainment " restaurants which originated in Oklahoma City .
Only one location remains open in the western Denver suburb of Lakewood , Colorado .
There was also a northern Arizona chain of Mexican restaurants using the Casa Bonita name founded in 2003 .
Locations included Flagstaff , Cottonwood , Lake Havasu , Prescott , Prescott Valley , Sedona , and Paradise Valley .
They were not related to the eatertainment franchise , and in 2011 they changed their name to Plaza Bonita .
Another unrelated restaurant of the same name is located in Libertyville , Illinois . HISTORY Section::::History .
Founder Bill Waugh opened the first Casa Bonita restaurant in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , in 1968 .
By the mid-1970s , the chain had expanded to locations in adjacent states and was known for its " all you can eat " beef or chicken plates and offering sopapillas — small squares of fried bread served with honey — with every meal .
In 1982 , the company ( including Taco Bueno fast food restaurants ) was sold to Unigate ( now Uniq plc ) .
In 1992 , Unigate sold the restaurants to CKE Restaurants , owners of Carl 's Jr.
In 1997 , the two remaining Casa Bonita restaurants were spun off by CKE as part of Star Buffet .
The Tulsa location closed in September 2005 , then reopened for a 2-year run under the name Casa Viva , and went out of business in December 2007 .
Casa Bonita was reopened by Star Buffet under the original name in late July 2008 .
In March 2015 , It was announced that the Lakewood Historical Society decided to make the restaurant a historic landmark of the city .
LOCATIONS OKLAHOMA CITY , OKLAHOMA Section::::Locations .
Section::::Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
The first Casa Bonita was opened in the summer of 1968 in Oklahoma City , at a time when Mexican food was considered a novelty in the area .
The restaurant was located along U.S. Route 66 at the intersection of NW 39th and Portland .
On opening , it featured themed rooms , including the Garden Room and El Pokey , a room themed as a Mexican jail .
The Oklahoma City location closed in 1993 .
After housing other businesses , the building was demolished in 2015 .
TULSA , OKLAHOMA Section::::Tulsa , Oklahoma .
The Tulsa location opened in 1971 near the intersection of 21st and Sheridan .
The interior was designed to create the outdoor nighttime atmosphere of a Mexican village .
Its various themed dining areas , with seating for over 500 , included a village square with fountain , a 2-level lantern - lit cave , a tropical garden with 20-ft waterfall and stream , and a room resembling an aristocratic dining hall with strolling mariachis .
The Tulsa location also included a puppet and magic show theatre , a video arcade , a working carousel , and a gift shop .
It closed on September 30 , 2005 , due to a reported inability to reach suitable lease terms with the property owner .
It was reopened , as Casa Viva , in May 2006 and then closed again in December 2007 .
In late July 2008 , the restaurant , having been sold back to its previous owner group , reopened under the original Casa Bonita name .
In February 2011 , the restaurant failed to reopen after lengthy snowstorms hit Tulsa , and a sign on the door said it was closed for business .
LAKEWOOD , COLORADO Section::::Lakewood , Colorado .
The Lakewood location was built in 1973 and opened in early 1974 on Colfax Avenue west of Denver , along U.S. Route 40 / I-70 Business .
Similar in architecture to the Tulsa location ( both were previously large retail store locations ) , the Lakewood restaurant seats over 1000 people at a time , and features strolling mariachis , flame jugglers , and a waterfall with cliff divers .
It also has a small puppet theater , a " haunted tunnel " called Black Bart 's Cave , an arcade with a large skee - ball room , and a magic theater .
It was designated a historic landmark of the city in March 2015 .
As of 2017 , the Lakewood Casa Bonita location continues to be operated by Star Buffet .
FORMER LOCATIONS
* Hulen Mall , Fort Worth , Texas ( ? – c . 1986 )
* Little Rock , Arkansas ( 1969–1993 )
( 1995–2005 ) SIMILAR RESTAURANTS
* Casa Bonita founder Bill Waugh founded a similar restaurant concept , Casa Viva .
Unrelated to the Florida fast - food chain of the same name , it operated in the former Casa Bonita locations in Little Rock ( 1995–2005 ) and Tulsa ( 2006–2007 ) .
* Larry H. Miller , owner of the Utah Jazz , opened a restaurant called The Mayan Adventure ( usually just shortened to The Mayan ) in Sandy , Utah , in 2000 .
Casa Bonita sued Miller for trademark infringement ; Miller was found to have visited Casa Bonita several times .
The Mayan Adventure eventually closed in late 2011 .
* Restaurante Arroyo , in Tlalpan , Mexico , a " super - size " Mexican restaurant .
*
The Mexico Pavilion at Epcot located in Walt Disney World in Orlando , Florida was heavily influenced by Casa Bonita .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The South Park episode " Casa Bonita " prominently features the Colorado branch of the restaurant .
Other episodes that mention it briefly are : " Quest for Ratings " ( where a clock is labeled as showing the time at Casa Bonita )
, " You Have 0 Friends " , " 201 " ( where the restaurant is reportedly destroyed ) , and " Let Go , Let Gov " .
Additionally , the building that houses South Park Studios was named after the restaurant .
In as part of the DLC the main story is focused on the building .
In Eureka , a reference to " Casa Bonita " is made , where an " artificial intelligent " love - struck Andy , who is the deputy of the town Sheriff in the new alternate timeline , regards the sheriff 's " artificial intelligent " house S.A.R.A.H. as his " Case Bonita " when stuck on Titan ( Saturn 's moon ) by an accidental journey using the series ' fictional " faster - than - light " technology .
In the Reboot of Roseanne Casa Bonita is featured as the workplace of Becky Connor in Episode 4 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS