CHARLIE AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY ( FILM ) Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is a 2005 musical fantasy comedy film directed by Tim Burton and written by John August , based on the 1964 British novel of the same name by Roald Dahl .
The film stars Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka and Freddie Highmore as Charlie Bucket .
The storyline follows Charlie , who wins a contest and , along with four other contest winners , is led by Wonka on a tour of his chocolate factory , the most magnificent in the world .
Development for a second adaptation of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory ( filmed previously as Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory in 1971 ) began in 1991 , which resulted in Warner Bros. providing the Dahl Estate with total artistic control .
Prior to Burton 's involvement , directors such as Gary Ross , Rob Minkoff , Martin Scorsese and Tom Shadyac had been involved , while actors Bill Murray , Nicolas Cage , Jim Carrey , Michael Keaton , Brad Pitt , Will Smith , Adam Sandler , and many others , were either in discussion with or considered by the studio to play Wonka .
Burton immediately brought regular collaborators Depp and Danny Elfman aboard .
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory represents the first time since The Nightmare Before Christmas that Elfman contributed to a film score using written songs and his vocals .
Filming took place from June to December 2004 at Pinewood Studios in the United Kingdom .
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was released to positive critical reception and was a box office success , grossing $ 475 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Charlie Bucket ( Freddie Highmore ) is a poor boy who lives near the Wonka Candy Company .
The company 's owner , Willy Wonka ( Johnny Depp ) , has for long closed access to his factory due to problems concerning industrial espionage that led him to fire all his employees , among them
Charlie 's Grandpa Joe ( David Kelly ) .
One day , Wonka announces a contest , in which Golden Tickets have been placed in five random Wonka Bars worldwide , and the winners will be given a full tour of the factory as well as a lifetime supply of chocolate , while one ticketholder will be given a special prize at the end of the tour .
Wonka 's sales subsequently skyrocket , and the first four tickets are found fairly quickly .
The recipients are Augustus Gloop ( Philip Wiegratz ) , a gluttonous German boy ; Veruca Salt ( Julia Winter ) , a very spoiled English girl ; Violet Beauregarde ( AnnaSophia Robb ) , a competitive gum chewer , and Mike Teavee ( Jordan Fry ) , an arrogant television and video game addict .
Charlie tries twice to find a ticket , but both bars come up empty .
After overhearing that the final ticket was found in Russia , Charlie finds a ten - dollar note , and purchases a Wonka Bar at a news shop .
At the exact moment it was revealed that the Russian ticket was forged , Charlie discovers the real fifth ticket inside the wrapper .
Charlie receives monetary offers for the ticket , but decides to keep it and bring Grandpa Joe to accompany him on the factory tour .
Charlie and the other ticket holders are greeted by Wonka outside the factory , who then leads them into the facility .
Individual character flaws cause four children to give into temptation and the Oompa - Loompas ( Deep Roy ) sing a song of morality after each elimination .
During the tour , flashbacks reveal Wonka 's troubled past ; his father , a prominent dentist named Wilbur ( Christopher Lee ) , strictly forbade Wonka from consuming candy due to the potential risk to his teeth .
After sneaking over a piece of candy , Wonka was instantly hooked , and ran away to follow his dreams .
When he returned , both his father and their house were gone .
After the tour , the four children leave the factory with an exaggerated characteristic or deformity related to their demise , while Charlie learns Wonka intended to find a worthy heir to his factory .
Since Charlie was the " least rotten " of the five , Wonka invites Charlie to come live and work in the factory with him , but declines as his family is the most important thing in his life .
Charlie and his family are living contently a while later , however Wonka is too depressed to make candy the way he used to , causing his candy to sell poorly and his company to decline .
He turns to Charlie for advice .
Charlie decides to help Wonka confront and reconcile with his estranged father ; Wonka finally realizes the value of family , while his father learns to accept his son for who he is , and not what he does .
In the end , Wonka finally allows Charlie 's family to move into the factory .
CAST * Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka * Blair Dunlop as Young Willy Wonka * Freddie Highmore as Charlie Bucket * David Kelly as
Grandpa Joe * Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Bucket * Noah Taylor as Mr. Bucket
* Missi Pyle as Mrs. Beauregarde
* James Fox as Mr. Salt * Adam Godley as Mr. Teavee
* Franziska Troegner as Mrs. Gloop * Christopher Lee as Dr. Wilbur Wonka
* Deep Roy as Oompa - Loompas ( with vocal work by Danny Elfman )
* AnnaSophia Robb as Violet Beauregarde * Philip Wiegratz as Augustus Gloop
* Julia Winter as Veruca Salt
* Jordan Fry as Mike Teavee * Liz Smith as Grandma Georgina
* Eileen Essell as Grandma Josephine
* David Morris as Grandpa George * Geoffrey Holder as the Narrator
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Author Roald Dahl disapproved of the 1971 film adaptation and declined the film rights to produce the sequel , Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator .
Warner Bros. and Brillstein - Grey Entertainment entered discussions with the Dahl estate in 1991 , hoping to purchase the rights to produce another film version of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory .
The purchase was finalized in 1998 , with Dahl 's widow , Felicity ( " Liccy " ) , and daughter , Lucy , receiving total artistic control and final privilege on the choices of actors , directors and writers .
The Dahl Estate 's subsequent protection of the source material was the main reason that Charlie and the Chocolate Factory had languished in development hell since the 1990s .
Scott Frank was hired to write the screenplay in February 1999 , after approaching Warner Bros. for the job .
Frank , a recent Oscar - nominee for the R - rated crime film Out of Sight , wanted to work on a film that his children could enjoy .
As an enthusiastic fan of the book , he intended to remain more faithful to Dahl 's vision than the 1971 film had been .
Nicolas Cage was under discussions for Willy Wonka , but lost interest .
Gary Ross signed to direct in February 2000 , which resulted in Frank completing two drafts of the screenplay , before leaving with Ross in September 2001 .
Both Warner Bros. and the Dahl Estate wanted Frank to stay on the project , but he faced scheduling conflicts and contractual obligations with Minority Report ( 2002 ) and The Lookout ( 2007 ) .
Rob Minkoff entered negotiations to take the director 's position in October 2001 , and Gwyn Lurie was hired to start from scratch on a new script in February 2002 .
Lurie said she would adapt the original book and ignore the 1971 film adaptation .
Dahl 's estate championed Lurie after being impressed with her work on another Dahl adaptation , a live - action adaptation of The BFG , for Paramount Pictures , which was never made ( Paramount distributed the earlier 1971 film version of Charlie , and later sold the rights to WB ) .
In April 2002 , Martin Scorsese was involved with the film , albeit briefly , but opted to direct The Aviator instead .
Warner Bros. president Alan F. Horn wanted Tom Shadyac to direct Jim Carrey as Willy Wonka , believing the duo could make Charlie and the Chocolate Factory relevant to mainstream audiences , but Liccy Dahl opposed this .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
After receiving enthusiastic approval from the Dahl Estate , Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct in May 2003 .
Burton compared the project 's languishing development to Batman ( 1989 ) , which he directed , in how there had been varied creative efforts with both films .
He said , " Scott Frank 's version was the best , probably the clearest , and the most interesting , but they had abandoned that . "
Liccy Dahl commented that Burton was the first and only director the estate was happy with .
He had previously produced another of the author 's adaptations with James and the Giant Peach ( 1996 ) , and , like Roald and Liccy , disliked the 1971 film because it strayed from the book 's storyline .
During pre - production Burton visited Dahl 's former home in the Buckinghamshire village of Great Missenden .
Liccy Dahl remembers Burton entering Dahl 's famed writing shed and saying , " This is the Buckets ' house ! " and thinking to herself , " Thank God , somebody gets it . "
Liccy also showed Burton the original handwritten manuscripts , which Burton discovered were more politically incorrect than the published book .
The manuscripts included a child named Herpes , after the sexually transmitted disease .
Burton immediately thought of Johnny Depp for the role of Willy Wonka , who in August 2003 joined the film , his fourth collaboration with the director .
Lurie 's script received a rewrite by Pamela Pettler , who worked with Burton on Corpse Bride , but the director hired Big Fish screenwriter John August in December 2003 to start from scratch .
Both August and Burton were fans of the book since their childhoods .
August first read Charlie and the Chocolate Factory when he was eight years old , and subsequently sent Dahl a fan letter .
He did not see the 1971 film prior to his hiring , which Burton believed would be fundamental in having August stay closer to the book .
The writer updated the Mike Teavee character into an obsessive video game player , as compared to the novel , in which he fantasized about violent crime films .
The characters Arthur Slugworth and Prodnose were reduced to brief cameo appearances , while Mr. Beauregarde was entirely omitted .
Burton and August also worked together in creating Wilbur Wonka , Willy 's domineering dentist father .
Burton thought the paternal character would help explain Willy Wonka himself and that otherwise he would be " just a weird guy " .
The element of an estranged father - son relationship had previously appeared in Big Fish , similarly directed by Burton and written by August .
Warner Bros. and the director held differences over the characterizations of Charlie Bucket and Willy Wonka .
The studio wanted to entirely delete Mr. Bucket and make Willy Wonka the idyllic father figure Charlie had longed for his entire life .
Burton believed that Wonka would not be a good father , finding the character similar to a recluse .
Burton said , " In some ways , he 's more screwed up than the kids . "
Warner Bros. also wanted Charlie to be a whiz kid , but Burton resisted the characterization .
He wanted Charlie to be an average child who would be in the background and not get in trouble .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Prior to Burton 's involvement , Warner Bros. considered or discussed Willy Wonka with Bill Murray , Christopher Walken , Steve Martin , Robin Williams , Nicolas Cage , Jim Carrey , Michael Keaton , Robert De Niro , Brad Pitt , Will Smith , Mike Myers , Ben Stiller , Leslie Nielsen , John Cleese , Eric Idle , Michael Palin , Patrick Stewart , and Adam Sandler .
Dustin Hoffman and Marilyn Manson reportedly wanted the role as well .
Pitt 's production company , Plan B Entertainment , however , stayed on to co - finance the film with Warner Bros. Coincidentally , Cleese , Idle and Palin ( as well as the other three Monty Python members ) had all previously expressed interest in playing Wonka in the 1971 film adaptation .
Johnny Depp was the only actor Burton considered for the role , although Dwayne Johnson was Burton 's second choice in case
Depp was unavailable .
Depp signed on without reading the script under the intention of going with a completely different approach than what Gene Wilder did in the 1971 film adaptation .
Depp said regardless of the original film , Gene Wilder 's characterization of Willy Wonka stood out as a unique portrayal .
Depp and Burton derived their Willy Wonka from children 's television show hosts such as Bob Keeshan ( Captain Kangaroo ) , Fred Rogers , and Al Lewis from The Uncle Al Show , and Depp also took inspiration from various game show hosts .
Burton recalled from his childhood that the characters were bizarre but left lasting impressions .
He said , " It was kind of a strange amalgamation of these weird children 's TV show hosts . "
Depp based Wonka 's look ( exaggerated bob cut and sunglasses ) on Vogue magazine editor Anna Wintour .
Comparisons were drawn between Willy Wonka and Michael Jackson .
Burton disagreed with the comparisons and said Jackson , unlike Wonka , liked children .
Depp said the similarities with Jackson never occurred to him .
Instead , he compared Wonka to Howard Hughes due to his " reclusive , germaphobe , controlling " nature .
Burton agreed with the similarity to Hughes .
He also cited Charles Foster Kane from Citizen Kane as an inspiration for Wonka , as Kane is " somebody who was brilliant but then was traumatized and then retreats into their own world " .
Depp wanted to sport prosthetic makeup for the part and have a long , elongated nose , but Burton believed it would be too outrageous .
During production , Gene Wilder , in an interview with The Daily Telegraph , accused the filmmakers of only remaking the 1971 film for the purpose of money .
Depp said he was disappointed by Wilder 's comment , and responded that the film was not a remake , but a new adaptation of Dahl 's 1964 book .
The casting calls for Charlie Bucket , Violet Beauregarde , Veruca Salt , and Mike Teavee took place in the United States and United Kingdom , while Augustus Gloop 's casting took place in Germany .
Burton said he sought actors " who had something of the character in them " , and found Mike Teavee the hardest character to cast .
Burton was finding trouble casting Charlie , until Depp , who had worked with Freddie Highmore on Finding Neverland , suggested Highmore for the part .
Highmore had already read the book before , but decided to read it once more prior to auditioning .
The actor did not see the original film adaptation , and chose not to see it until after Burton 's production , so his portrayal would not be influenced .
Before Adam Godley was officially cast as Mr. Teavee , Dan Castellaneta , Tim Allen , Ed O'Neill , Bob Saget , and Ray Romano were all considered for the role .
It has been rumored that Gregory Peck was considered for the role of Grandpa Joe .
Other actors that were considered for
Grandpa Joe included Richard Attenborough , Kirk Douglas , Albert Finney , Anthony Hopkins , Paul Newman , Max von Sydow , David Warner , Christopher Lloyd and Peter Ustinov .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory started on June 21 , 2004 at Pinewood Studios in England .
Director Tim Burton and composer Danny Elfman found filming somewhat difficult because they were simultaneously working on Corpse Bride .
The Wonka Factory exterior was coincidentally constructed on the same backlot Burton had used for Gotham City in Batman ( 1989 ) .
The ceremonial scene required 500 local extras .
The Chocolate Room / River setpiece filled Pinewood 's 007 Stage .
As a consequence of British Equity rules , which state that children can only work four and a half hours a day , filming for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory took six months , ending in December 2004 .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The architecture of the Bucket family home was influenced by Burton 's visit to Roald Dahl 's writing hut .
Like the book , the film has a " timeless " setting and is not set in a specific country .
" We 've tried not to pinpoint it to any place , " production designer Alex McDowell explained .
"
The cars , in fact , drive down the middle of the road .
"
The town , whose design was shaped by the black and white urban photography of Bill Brandt , as well as Pittsburgh and Northern England , is arranged like a medieval village , with Wonka 's estate on top and the Bucket shack below .
The filmmakers also used fascist architecture for Wonka 's factory exterior , and designed most of the sets on 360 ° sound stages , similar to cycloramas .
Burton biographer Mark Salisbury wrote that Charlie and the Chocolate Factory " melds 1950s and ' 70s visuals with a futuristic sensibility that seems straight out of a 1960s sense of the future .
"
The " TV Room " was patterned after photographs from the films , , and THX 1138 .
Danger Diabolik also served as inspiration for the Nut Room and Inventing Room .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Tim Burton avoided using too many digital effects because he wanted the younger actors to feel as if they were working in a realistic environment .
As a result , forced perspective techniques , oversized props and scale models were used to avoid computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) .
Deep Roy was cast to play the Oompa - Loompas based on his previous collaborations with Burton on Planet of the Apes and Big Fish .
The actor was able to play various Oompa - Loompas using split screen photography , digital and front projection effects .
"
Tim told me that the Oompa - Loompas were strictly programmed , like robots — all they do is work , work , work , " Roy commented . "
So when it comes time to dance , they 're like a regiment ; they do the same steps . "
A practical method was considered for the scene in which Violet Beauregarde turns blue and swells up into a giant 10-foot blueberry .
A suit with an air hose was considered at one point for the beginnings of the swelling scene , before the decision was made to do the entire transformation in CGI .
The visual effects house Cinesite was recruited for this assignment .
In some shots of AnnaSophia Robb 's head , a facial prosthetic was worn to give the impression that her cheeks had swelled up as well .
Because this decision was made late in the film 's production , any traces of Violet 's blueberry scene were omitted from trailers or promotional material .
Rather than rely on CGI , Burton wanted the 40 squirrels in the Nut Room to be real .
The animals were trained every day for 10 weeks before filming commenced .
They began their coaching while newborns , fed by bottles to form relationships with human trainers .
The squirrels were each taught how to sit upon a little blue bar stool , tap and then open a walnut , and deposit its meat onto a conveyor belt . "
Ultimately , the scene was supplemented by CGI and animatronics , " Burton said , " but for the close - ups and the main action , they 're the real thing . "
Wonka 's Viking boat for the Chocolate River sequence floats down a realistic river filled with 192,000 gallons of faux melted chocolate . "
Having seen the first film , we wanted to make the chocolate river look edible , " McDowell said .
" In the first film , it 's so distasteful .
" The production first considered a CGI river , but Burton was impressed with the artificial substance when he saw how it clung to the boat 's oars .
Nine shades of chocolate were tested before Burton settled on the proper hue .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The original music score was written by Danny Elfman , a frequent collaborator with director Tim Burton .
Elfman 's score is based around three primary themes : a gentle family theme for the Buckets , generally set in upper woodwinds ; a mystical , string - driven waltz for Willy Wonka ; and a hyper - upbeat factory theme for full orchestra , Elfman 's homemade synthesizer samples and the diminutive chanting voices of the Oompa - Loompas .
Elfman also wrote and performed the vocals for four songs , with pitch changes and modulations to represent different singers .
The lyrics to the Oompa - Loompa songs are adapted from the original book , and are thus credited to Roald Dahl .
Following Burton 's suggestion , each song in the score is designed to reflect a different archetype .
"
Wonka 's Welcome Song " is a maddeningly cheerful theme park ditty , " Augustus Gloop " a Bollywood spectacle ( per Deep Roy 's suggestion ) , " Violet Beauregarde " is 1970s funk , " Veruca Salt " is 1960s bubblegum pop / psychedelic pop , and " Mike Teavee " is a tribute to late 1970s hard rock ( such as Queen ) and early 1980s hair bands .
The original motion picture soundtrack was released on July 12 , 2005 by Warner Bros. Records .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory had its premiere at the Grauman 's Chinese Theatre , on July 10 , 2005 , where money for the Make - a - Wish Foundation was raised .
The film was released in the United States on July 15 , 2005 in 3,770 theaters ( including IMAX theaters ) .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Early in the development of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory in February 2000 , Warner Bros. announced their intention of marketing the film with a Broadway theatre musical after release .
The studio reiterated their interest in May 2003 , however , the idea was postponed by the time filming began in June 2004 .
The main tie - in for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory focused on The Willy Wonka Candy Company , a division of Nestlé .
A small range of Wonka Bars were launched , utilizing their prominence in the film .
The release of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory also rekindled public interest in Roald Dahl 's 1964 book , and appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list from July 3 to October 23 , 2005 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory earned $ 56,178,450 in its opening weekend , the fifth - highest opening weekend gross for 2005 , and stayed at # 1 for two weeks .
The film eventually grossed $ 206,459,076 in US totals and $ 268,509,687 in foreign countries , coming to a worldwide total of $ 474,968,763 .
It was the fifty - eighth highest - grossing film of all time when released , as well as seventh - highest for the US and eighth - highest worldwide for the year of 2005 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 83 % based on 222 reviews , with an average rating of 7.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Closer to the source material than 1971 's Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is for people who like their Chocolate visually appealing and dark . "
On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 72 out of 100 , based on 40 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , writing " Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka may be a stone freak , but he is also one of Burton 's classic crackpot conjurers , like Beetlejuice or Ed Wood . "
Roger Ebert gave an overall positive review and enjoyed the film .
He was primarily impressed by Tim Burton 's direction of the younger cast members , but was disappointed with Depp 's performance : " What was Depp thinking of ?
In he was famously channeling Keith Richards , which may have primed us to look for possible inspirations for this performance . " Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle found Charlie and the Chocolate Factory Burton 's " best work in years .
If all the laughs come from Depp , who gives Willy the mannerisms of a classic Hollywood diva , the film 's heart comes from Highmore , a gifted young performer whose performance is sincere , deep and unforced in a way that 's rare in a child actor .
"
Peter Travers wrote in Rolling Stone magazine that " Depp 's deliciously demented take on Willy Wonka demands to be seen .
Depp goes deeper to find the bruises on Wonka 's secret heart than what Gene Wilder did .
Depp and Burton may fly too high on the vapors of pure imagination , but it 's hard to not get hooked on something this tasty .
And how about that army of Oompa - Loompas , all played by Deep Roy , in musical numbers that appear to have been choreographed by Busby Berkeley on crack . "
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post criticized Depp 's acting .
" The cumulative effect is n't pretty .
Nor is it kooky , funny , eccentric or even mildly interesting .
Indeed , throughout his fey , simpering performance , Depp seems to be straining so hard for weirdness that the entire enterprise begins to feel like those excruciating occasions when your parents tried to be hip .
Aside from Burton 's usual eye - popping direction , the film 's strenuous efforts at becoming a camp classic eventually begin to wear thin . "
In 2007 , Gene Wilder said he chose not to see the film .
"
The thing that put me off ...
I like Johnny Depp
, I like him , as an actor
I like him very much ...
but when I saw little pieces in the promotion of what he was doing , I said I do n't want to see the film , because I do n't want to be disappointed in him .
"
In 2013 , when Wilder was asked about the Burton remake , he said " I think it 's an insult .
It 's probably Warner Bros. ' insult . "
He also criticized the choices that Burton made as a director , saying " I do n't care for that director .
He 's a talented man , but I do n't care for him doing stuff like he did . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Costume designer Gabriella Pescucci received an Academy Award nomination , but lost to Colleen Atwood for Memoirs of a Geisha .
Johnny Depp lost the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy to Joaquin Phoenix in Walk the Line .
More nominations followed from the British Academy Film Awards for Visual Effects , Costume Design ( Pescucci ) , Makeup & Hair ( Peter Owen and Ivana Primorac ) and Production Design ( Alex McDowell ) .
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , as well as Performance by a Younger Actor ( Freddie Highmore ) , Music ( Danny Elfman ) and Costume ( Pescucci ) .
Elfman and screenwriter John August were nominated for a Grammy Award with " Wonka 's Welcome Song " .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring miniature people
* Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * A Golden Ticket