HEATHROW TERMINAL
5 STATION Heathrow Terminal 5 is a shared railway and London Underground station serving London Heathrow Airport Terminal 5 .
The station serves as a terminus for the Heathrow Express services to Paddington in central London , and for Piccadilly line services towards Cockfosters .
The station is staffed entirely by Heathrow Express staff , unlike the other underground stations serving Terminal 4 and Terminals 2 & 3 .
The London Underground section of the station is situated in Travelcard Zone 6 ; it is the westernmost below - ground station on the London Underground network .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station was opened on 27 March 2008 .
It was designed by architects HOK International in conjunction with Rogers , Stirk , Harbour & Partners .
Although situated underground , parts of the station 's roofing are made of translucent ETFE laminate panels , allowing natural daylight to flood down both ends of all six platforms .
It is the only station at Heathrow Airport where both the Piccadilly line and Heathrow Express services share the same station .
SERVICES Section::::Services .
The Terminal 5 station is served by the following rail services :
* Piccadilly line : half the trains on the Heathrow branch terminate here , via Hatton Cross and Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 .
The other half do not serve Heathrow Terminal 5 , running instead via the loop to service Heathrow Terminal 4 and Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 , before returning eastbound .
* Heathrow Express to / from Paddington Station terminate here .
FREE INTRA - TERMINAL
TRANSFERS Section::::Free intra - terminal transfers .
Until 2012 , free transfer was not possible between terminals via the Underground , unlike on the Heathrow Express .
In January 2012 , free travel was introduced for Oyster card and contactless payment card holders between the Heathrow stations on the Piccadilly line .
Journeys from Heathrow Terminal 5 to Terminal 4 via the Piccadilly line require a change at Hatton Cross ; this journey is free , despite Hatton Cross not being part of the free travel zone .
FUTURE LINKS Section::::Future links .
From 2019 , Heathrow Terminal 5 will be served by the Elizabeth Line , as part of the Crossrail project .
Network Rail has put forward a proposal for a Western Rail Approach to Heathrow , a short spur of track in tunnel which would run from a junction east of to Terminal 5 station .
This would permit Great Western Main Line trains to run directly from and into Heathrow , without the need to change at Paddington .
The proposal is currently at consultation stage and remains unconfirmed .
In addition to the above rail links , the T5 Rail Station also has two safeguarded " heavy rail " platforms for use by a west - facing connection to the National Rail network .
The south - leaning proposal would spur off the WSW line from London west of Staines railway station ( to be dubbed Heathrow Airtrack ) .
It proposes direct rail services to London Waterloo , Reading , Woking , Guildford and London Gatwick Airport .
Due to the cost of replacing three level crossings , one in a very urban part of Egham , the proposals are currently unfunded .
CONNECTIONS Section::::Connections . London Buses Routes 350 , 423 , 482 , 490 and Night Route N9 serve the station .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Proposed AirTrack Rail Link