HARMONIZED SYSTEM
The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System , also known as the Harmonized System ( HS ) of tariff nomenclature is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products .
It came into effect in 1988 and has since been developed and maintained by the World Customs Organization ( WCO ) ( formerly the Customs Co - operation Council ) , an independent intergovernmental organization based in Brussels , Belgium , with over 200 member countries .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The HS is organized logically by economic activity or component material .
For example , animals and animal products are found in one section of the HS , while machinery and mechanical appliances are found in another .
The HS is organized into 21 sections , which are subdivided into 97 chapters .
The 97 HS chapters are further subdivided into approximately 5,000 headings and subheadings .
Section and Chapter titles describe broad categories of goods , while headings and subheadings describe products in more detail .
Generally , HS sections and chapters are arranged in order of a product 's degree of manufacture or in terms of its technological complexity .
Natural commodities , such as live animals and vegetables , for example , are described in the early sections of the HS , whereas more evolved goods such as machinery and precision instruments are described in later sections .
Chapters within the individual sections are also usually organized in order of complexity or degree of manufacture .
For example , within Section X ( Pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic material ; Recovered ( waste and scrap ) paper or paperboard ; Paper and paperboard and articles thereof ) , Chapter 47 provides for pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic materials , whereas Chapter 49 covers printed books , newspapers , and other printed matter .
Finally , the headings within individual Chapters follow a similar order .
For example , the first heading in Chapter 50 ( Silk ) provides for silk worm cocoons while articles made of silk are covered by the chapter 's later headings .
The HS code consists of 6-digits .
The first two digits designate the HS Chapter .
The second two digits designate the HS heading .
The third two digits designate the HS subheading .
HS code 1006.30 , for example indicates Chapter 10 ( Cereals ) , Heading 06 ( Rice ) , and Subheading 30 ( Semi - milled or wholly milled rice , whether or not polished or glazed ) .
In addition to the HS codes and commodity descriptions , each Section and Chapter of the HS is prefaced by Legal Notes , which are designed to clarify the proper classification of goods .
To ensure harmonization , the contracting parties to the Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System , have agreed to base their national tariff schedules on the HS nomenclature and Legal Notes .
Parties are permitted to subdivide the HS nomenclature beyond 6-digits and add their own Legal Notes according to their own tariff and statistical requirements .
Parties often set their customs duties at the 8-digit " tariff code " level .
Statistical suffixes are often added to the 8-digit tariff code for a total of 10 digits .
HS Chapter 77 is reserved for common use by the parties internationally .
Chapters 98 and 99 are reserved for national use .
Chapter 98 comprises special classification provisions , and chapter 99 contains temporary modifications pursuant to a parties ' national directive or legislation .
Since its creation , the HS has undergone several revisions - ostensibly , to either eliminate headings and subheadings describing commodities that are no longer traded , or to create headings and subheadings that address technological advancements and environmental concerns .
The current version of the HS became effective on January 1 , 2017 .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The process of assigning HS codes is known as " HS Classification " .
All products can be classified in the HS by using the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System ( " GRI " ) .
HS codes can be determined by a variety of factors including a product 's composition , its form and its function .
An example of a product classified according to its form would be whole potatoes .
The classification will also change depending on whether the potatoes are fresh or frozen .
Fresh potatoes are classified in position 0701.90 , under the Header Potatoes , fresh or chilled , Sub header Other , while frozen potatoes are classified in position 0710.10 under the Header Vegetables ( uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water ) , frozen , Subheader Potatoes .
An example of a product classified according its material composition is a picture frame .
Picture frames made of wood are classified under subheading 4414.00 , which provides for Wooden frames for paintings , photographs , mirrors or similar objects .
Picture frames made of plastic are classified under subheading 3924.90 , which provides for Tableware , kitchenware , other household articles and hygienic or toilet articles , of plastics .
Other .
Picture frames made of glass are classified under subheading 7020.00 , which provides for Other articles of glass .
And so on .
An example of a product classified according to its form is personal hygiene soap .
When in the form of a bar , cake or moulded shape , such soap is classified under subheading 3401.11 , which provides for Soap and organic surface - active products and preparations , in the form of bars , cakes , moulded pieces or shapes , and paper , wadding , felt and nonwovens , impregnated , coated or covered with soap or detergent : For toilet use ( including medicated products ) .
Conversely , liquid personal hygiene soap is classified under either 3401.20 , which provides for Soap in other forms , or 3401.30 , which provides for Organic surface - active products and preparations for washing the skin , in the form of liquid or cream and put up for retail sale , whether or not containing soap .
An example of a product classified according to its function is a carbon monoxide ( CO ) detector .
If the CO detector captures and displays gas measurements , then it is properly classified under subheading 9027.10 , which provides for Instruments and apparatus for physical or chemical analysis ( for example , polarimeters , refractometers , spectrometers , gas or smoke analysis apparatus ; instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking viscosity , porosity , expansion , surface tension or the like ; instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking quantities of heat , sound or light ( including exposure meters ) ; microtomes .
Gas or smoke analysis apparatus .
If the CO detector does not capture and display gas measurements , then it is properly classified under subheading 8531.10 , which provides for Electric sound or visual signaling apparatus ( for example , bells , sirens , indicator panels , burglar or fire alarms ) , other than those of heading 85.12 or 85.30 .
Burglar or fire alarms and similar apparatus .
Although every product and every part of every product is classifiable in the HS , very few are explicitly described in the HS nomenclature .
Any product for which there is no explicit description can be classified under a " residual " or " basket " heading or subheading , which provide for Other goods .
Residual codes normally occur last in numerical order under their related headings and subheadings .
An example of a product classified under a residual heading is a live dog , which must be classified under heading 01.06 , which provides for Other live animals because dogs are not covered by headings 01.01 through 01.05 , which explicitly provide for live equine , live bovine , live swine , live sheep and goats , and live poultry , respectively .
APPLICATIONS Section::::Applications .
As of 2015 , there were 180 countries or territories applying the Harmonized System worldwide , HS code are used by Customs authorities , statistical agencies , and other government regulatory bodies , to monitor and control the import and export of commodities through : * Customs tariffs * Collection of international trade statistics * Rules of origin * Collection of internal taxes
* Trade negotiations ( e.g. , the World Trade Organization schedules of tariff concessions ) * Transport tariffs and statistics
* Monitoring of controlled goods ( e.g. , wastes , narcotics , chemical weapons , ozone layer depleting substances , endangered species )
* Areas of Customs controls and procedures , including risk assessment , information technology and compliance .
Companies use HS codes to calculate the total landed cost of imported products and parts , and to identify selling and sourcing opportunities abroad .
CHALLENGES IN CLASSIFICATION FOR COMPANIES Section::::Challenges in classification for companies .
HS classification is not always straightforward .
Many automotive parts , for example , are not classified under heading 87.08 , which provides for Parts and accessories of the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05 .
Automotive seats are classified as articles of furniture under heading 94.01 , which provides for Seats ( other than those of heading 94.02 ) , whether or not convertible into beds , and parts thereof , and more specifically under subheading 9401.20 , which provides for Seats of a kind used for motor vehicles .
In many jurisdictions , traders alone bear the legal responsibility to accurately classify their goods .
Depending on the severity of the infraction , incorrect classification can result in the imposition of non - compliance penalties , border delays or seizures , or denial of import privileges .
There are several resources available to traders to assist in properly classifying their goods including : *
The Official Explanatory Notes to the Harmonized System , published by the World Customs Organization
* The US Census " Classify your Commodity " engine : https://uscensus.prod.3ceonline.com/
* Classify your Commodity video tutorial by US Census : https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/data/video022.html * Explanatory notes to the Combined Nomenclature of the European Union by the European Commission
* Customs Rulings Online Search System ( CROSS ) , by U.S. Customs and Border Protection *
Binding Tariff Information ( BTI ) , by the European Commission * Informed compliance publications , by U.S. Customs and Border Protection
* Classification Guides , by HM Revenue & Customs SEE
ALSO
* Automated Export System
* Broad Economic Categories * Combined Nomenclature * Customs tariff * Harmonized Tariff Schedule for the United States * Standard International Trade Classification * TARIC Coding System
* UNSPSC * World Customs Organization
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Why HS codes are important * ITC 's Product Conversion Table on Market Access Map , an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements .
The table allows you to search for product codes by name and convert them into any HS revision .
* World Bank 's list of HS Codes products * World Bank , Concordances from HS to other nomenclatures
* HS Code Search Database by Foreign Trade
Online
* EU Combined Nomenclature Search Engine by European Commission - Eurostat TARIFFS
BY REGION
* Customs Tariff of Canada ( Canada Border Services Agency )
* Integrated Tariff of the European Union - TARIC * Central Excise Tariff of India by Department of Customs , Ministry of Revenue
* East Africa Community Common External Tariff by Customs and Trade , East Africa Community , Governments of Burundi , Rwanda , Kenya , Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania
* Japan Tariff Association –
webpage refers to Japan Harmonised System Code Search
* Mexico import - export codes ( Harmonized Tariff Schedule ) by SIICEX and CAAAREM
* UK Tariff Codes Datasets by Data .
Gov .
UK
* Official Tariff Book of South Africa ( South African Revenue Service )
* United States of America
* Australian Customs & Border Protection Service - Working tariff 2012