RATIONING IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Rationing was introduced temporarily by the British government several times during the 20th century , during and immediately after a war .
At the start of the Second World War in 1939 , the United Kingdom was importing 20,000,000 long tons of food per year , including about 70 % of its cheese and sugar , nearly 80 % of fruits and about 70 % of cereals and fats .
The UK also imported more than half of its meat , and relied on imported feed to support its domestic meat production .
The civilian population of the country was about 50 million .
It was one of the principal strategies of the Germans in the Battle of the Atlantic to attack shipping bound for Britain , restricting British industry and potentially starving the nation into submission .
To deal with sometimes extreme shortages , the Ministry of Food instituted a system of rationing .
To buy most rationed items , each person had to register at chosen shops , and was provided with a ration book containing coupons .
The shopkeeper was provided with enough food for registered customers .
Purchasers had to take ration books with them when shopping , so that the relevant coupon or coupons could be cancelled .
FIRST WORLD
WAR Section::::First World War .
In line with its business as usual policy during the First World War , the government was initially reluctant to try to control the food markets .
It fought off attempts to introduce minimum prices in cereal production , though relenting in the area of control of essential imports ( sugar , meat , and grains ) .
When it did introduce changes , they were limited .
In 1916 , it became illegal to consume more than two courses while lunching in a public eating place or more than three for dinner ; fines were introduced for members of the public found feeding the pigeons or stray animals .
In January 1917 , Germany started unrestricted submarine warfare to try to starve Britain into submission .
To meet this threat , voluntary rationing was introduced in February 1917 .
Bread was subsidised from September that year ; prompted by local authorities taking matters into their own hands , compulsory rationing was introduced in stages between December 1917 and February 1918 as Britain 's supply of wheat decreased to just six weeks ' worth .
To help the process , ration books were introduced in July 1918 for butter , margarine , lard , meat , and sugar .
For the most part , rationing benefited the health of the country .
During the war , average energy intake decreased by only 3 % , but protein intake by 6 % .
THE GENERAL STRIKE Section::::The general strike .
The government made preparations to ration food in 1925 , in advance of an expected general strike , and appointed Food Control Officers for each region .
In the event , the Trades Unions of the London docks organized blockades by crowds , but convoys of lorries under military escort took the heart out of the strike , so that the measures did not have to be implemented .
SECOND WORLD
WAR Section::::Second World War .
After the Second World War began in September 1939 the first commodity to be controlled was petrol .
On 8 January 1940 bacon , butter and sugar were rationed .
This was followed by successive ration schemes for meat , tea , jam , biscuits , breakfast cereals , cheese , eggs , lard , milk , and canned and dried fruit .
In June 1942 the Combined Food Board was set up by Great Britain and the United States to coordinate the world supply of food to the Allies , with special attention to flows from the U.S. and Canada to Britain .
Almost all foods apart from vegetables and bread were rationed by August 1942 .
Strict rationing inevitably created a black market .
Almost all controlled items were rationed by weight but meat was rationed by price .
Fresh vegetables and fruit were not rationed but supplies were limited .
Some types of imported fruit all but disappeared .
Lemons and bananas became unobtainable for most of the war ; oranges continued to be sold but greengrocers customarily reserved them for children and pregnant women , who could prove their status by producing their distinctive ration books .
Other domestically grown fruit such as apples still appeared from time to time , but again the sellers imposed their own restrictions so that customers were often not allowed to buy , for example , more than one apple each .
Many people grew their own vegetables , greatly encouraged by the highly successful " Dig for Victory " motivational campaign .
In 1942 numerous children between five and seven years old had become used to wartime restrictions .
When questioned about bananas , many did not believe such items existed .
Game meat such as rabbit and pigeon were not rationed but were not always available .
A popular music - hall song , written 20 years previously but sung ironically , was " Yes !
We Have No Bananas " .
During the food rationing , British biologists ate laboratory rats .
Most controversial was bread ; it was not rationed until after the war ended , but the " national loaf " of wholemeal bread replaced the ordinary white variety , to the distaste of most housewives who found it mushy , grey and easy to blame for digestion problems .
In May 1942 , an order was passed that meals served in hotels and restaurants must not cost over 5 shillings per customer , must not be of more than three courses , and at most one course could contain meat , fish or poultry .
This was partly in response to increasing public concerns that " luxury " off - ration foodstuffs were being unfairly obtained by those who could afford to dine regularly in restaurants .
Fish was not rationed , but prices increased considerably as the war progressed .
The government initially allowed this , since it realised that fishermen would need to be able to collect a premium for their catch if they were at risk of enemy attack while at sea , but prices were controlled from 1941 .
Like other non - rationed items , fish was rarely freely available , as supplies dropped to 30 % of pre - war levels , and long queues built up at fishmongers and fish and chip shops .
The quality of wartime chips was often felt to be below standard , because of the low - quality fat available .
As the war progressed rationing was extended to other commodities such as clothing .
Clothing was rationed on a points system .
When it was introduced , on 1 June 1941 , no clothing coupons had been issued , and at first the unused margarine coupons in ration books were valid for clothing .
Initially the allowance was for about one new outfit per year ; as the war progressed the points were reduced , until buying a coat used almost a year 's clothing coupons .
On 1 July 1942 the basic civilian petrol ration was abolished ; this had been announced on 13 March 1942 .
( Ivor Novello was a British public figure sent to prison for four weeks for misusing petrol coupons . )
After that , vehicle fuel was only available to official users , such as the emergency services , bus companies and farmers .
The priority users of fuel were always , of course , the armed forces .
Fuel supplied to approved users was dyed , and use of this fuel for non - essential purposes was an offence .
Certain foodstuffs that the 1940s British consumer would find unusual , for example whale meat and canned snoek fish from South Africa , were not rationed .
Despite this they did not prove popular .
In addition to rationing , the government equalized the food supply through subsidies on items consumed by the poor and the working class .
In 1942–43 , £ 145 million was spent on food subsidies , including £ 35 million on bread , flour and oatmeal , £ 23 million on meat and the same on potatoes , £ 11 million on milk , and £ 13 million on eggs .
PUBLIC CATERING Section::::Public catering .
Restaurants were initially exempt from rationing but this was resented , as people with more money could supplement their food rations by eating out frequently .
The Ministry of Food in May 1942 issued new restrictions on restaurants :
* Meals were limited to three courses ; only one component dish could contain fish or game or poultry ( but not more than one of these )
*
In general no meals could be served between 11:00 p.m. ( midnight in London ) and 5:00 a.m. without a special licence
*
The maximum price of a meal was 5 shillings , with extra charges allowed for cabaret shows and luxury hotels .
About 2,000 new wartime establishments called British Restaurants were run by local authorities in schools and church halls .
Here a plain three - course meal cost only 9d and no ration coupons were required .
They evolved from the London County Council 's Londoners ' Meals Service , which began as an emergency system for feeding people who had been blitzed out of their homes .
They were open to all and mostly served office and industrial workers .
HEALTH EFFECTS Section::::Health effects .
In December 1939 Elsie Widdowson and Robert McCance of the University of Cambridge tested whether the United Kingdom could survive with only domestic food production if U - boats ended all imports .
Using 1938 food production data , they fed themselves and other volunteers one egg , one pound of meat and four ounces of fish a week ; one quarter pint ( 0.14 litre ) of milk a day ; four ounces of margarine ; and unlimited amounts of potatoes , vegetables and wholemeal bread .
Two weeks of intensive outdoor exercise simulated the strenuous wartime physical work Britons would likely have to perform .
The scientists found that the subjects ' health and performance remained very good after three months ; the only negative results were the increased time needed for meals to consume the necessary calories from bread and potatoes , and what they described as a " remarkable " increase in flatulence from the large amount of starch in the diet .
The scientists also noted that their faeces had increased by 250 % in volume .
The results — kept secret until after the war — gave the government confidence that , if necessary , food could be distributed equally to all , including high - value war workers , without causing widespread health problems .
Britons ' actual wartime diet was never as severe as in the Cambridge study because imports from the United States avoided the U - boats , but rationing improved the health of British people ; infant mortality declined and life expectancy rose , excluding deaths caused by hostilities .
This was because it ensured that everyone had access to a varied diet with enough vitamins .
STANDARD RATIONING DURING THE SECOND WORLD WAR Section::::Standard rationing during the Second World War .
The standard rations during the Second World War were as follows .
Quantities are per week unless otherwise stated .
FOOD RATIONS
Section::::Food rations . !
Item!!Maximum
level!!Minimum level!!April 1945 Vegetarians were allowed an extra cheese ARMY AND MERCHANT NAVY RATIONS Section::::Army and Merchant Navy rations . !
rowspan="2"Item !
colspan="2"Army Rations Home Service Scale !
rowspan="2"Seamen on weekly articles !
Men !
Women Meat Bacon and ham(uncooked , free of bone ) Butter and margarine ( not more than butter )
Cheese Cooking fats
Sugar
Tea Preserves
* jam
* syrup * ( for boys and young soldiers battalions)(jam , marmalade or syrup )
jam , marmalade or syrup )
( jam , marmalade , syrup ) 1s 2d bought about of meat .
Offal and sausages were only rationed from 1942 to 1944 .
When sausages were not rationed , the meat needed to make them was so scarce that they often contained a high proportion of bread .
Eggs were rationed and " allocated to ordinary consumers as available " ; in 1944 thirty allocations of one egg each were made .
Children and some invalids were allowed three a week ; expectant mothers two on each allocation .
* 1 egg per week or 1 packet ( makes 12 ersatz eggs ) of egg powder per month ( vegetarians were allowed two eggs ) *
plus , 24 points for four weeks for tinned and dried food .
Arrangements were made for vegetarians so that other goods were substituted for their rations of meat .
Milk was supplied at each week with priority for expectant mothers and children under 5 ; for those under 18 ; children unable to attend school , certain invalids up to .
Each consumer received one tin of milk powder ( equivalent to ) every eight weeks .
SPECIAL
CIVILIAN RATIONS
Section::::Special civilian rations .
Persons falling within the following descriptions were allowed of cheese a week in place of the general ration of : * vegetarians ( meat and bacon coupons must be surrendered ) * underground mine workers * agricultural workers holding unemployment insurance books or cards bearing stamps marked " Agriculture " * county roadmen * forestry workers ( including fellers and hauliers ) * land drainage workers ( including Catchment Board workers ) * members of the Auxiliary Force of the Women 's Land Army * railway train crews ( including crews of shunting engines but not including dining car staffs ) * railway signalmen and permanent way men who have not access to canteen facilities *
certain types of agricultural industry workers ( workers employed on threshing machines , tractor workers who are not included in the Agricultural Unemployment Insurance Stamp Scheme , hay pressers and trussers ) .
WEEKLY SUPPLEMENTARY ALLOWANCES OF RATIONED FOODS FOR INVALIDS
Section::::Weekly supplementary allowances of rationed foods for invalids . !
Disease !
Foodsupplementary allowance !
Quantity !
Coupons to besurrendered Diabetes Butter and margarine Sugar Diabetes Meat 2s .
4d .
, adult 1s , 2d .
, child under six Sugar Diabetes — vegetarians
only Cheese
Sugar
Hypoglycaemia
Sugar
Steatorrhoea Meat 4s .
8d .
adult , 2s .
4d .
child under six Butter and margarine Nephritis with grossalbuminuria and gross oedema , also nephrosis Meat 3s .
6d .
adult , 1s .
9d .
child under six NON - FOOD RATIONS CLOTHING Section::::Non - food rations .
Section::::Clothing .
In Britain during the Second World War , clothes rationing was announced on June 1,1941 .
This was majorly caused by the increased need for clothing materials to be utilized for producing uniforms .
By this point in the war , one fourth of the population was now wearing uniforms .
Much of the female population that needed uniforms were part of the women 's auxiliary forces .
There were also a lot of volunteer based services and organizations .
Of the many things affected by this rationing , the materials tarpaulin and tyre were heavily affected .
It also became difficult for civilians to get shoes and boots .
Another major part of rationing was the implementation of a coupon system .
There were 66 points for clothing per year ; in 1942 it was cut to 48 , in 1943 to 36 , and in 1945 to 24 .
This system operated through a " points " system .
Clothing was ranked and based on this ranking , civilians would be able to purchase clothing .
Clothing rationing points could also be used for wool , cotton and household textiles .
Before rationing lace and frills were popular on knickers but these were soon banned so that material could be saved .
The amount of points that each piece of clothing would be valued at was determined by not only how much labor went into making it , but also how much material was used .
A dress could run someone 11 coupons , whereas a pair of stockings only cost 2 .
Similarly , Men 's shoes cost 7 tickets , whiles women 's cost only 5 .
In 1945 , an overcoat ( wool and fully lined ) was 18 coupons ; a man 's suit , 26–29 ( according to lining ) ; Children aged 14–16 got 20 more coupons .
When purchasing clothing not only did civilians need to have coupons , but they also had to purchase things with money .
No points were required for second - hand clothing or fur coats , but their prices were fixed .
People had extra points for work clothes , such as overalls for factory work .
If you were a manual worker , civilian uniform wearer , a diplomat or a performer , you would most likely receive more tickets .
New mothers also received extra coupons .
From March to May 1942 clothing austerity measures were introduced which restricted the number of buttons , pockets and pleats ( among other things ) on clothes .
Clothes rationing ended on 15 March 1949 .
SOAP Section::::Soap .
All types of soap were rationed .
Coupons were allotted by weight or ( if liquid ) by quantity .
In 1945 , the ration gave four coupons each month ; babies and some workers and invalids were allowed more .
A coupon would yield : * bar hard soap * bar toilet soap
* No . 1 liquid soap *
soft soap
* soap flakes
* powdered soap FUEL Section::::Fuel .
The Fuel and Lighting ( Coal ) Order 1941 came into force in January 1942 .
Central heating was prohibited " in the summer months " .
Domestic coal was rationed to for those in London and the south of England ; for the rest ( the southern part of England having generally a milder climate ) .
Some kinds of coal such as anthracite were not rationed , and in the coal - mining areas were eagerly gathered as they were in the Great Depression ( see The Road to Wigan Pier ) .
PAPER Section::::Paper .
Newspapers were limited from September 1939 , at first to 60 % of their pre - war consumption of newsprint .
Paper supply came under the No 48 Paper Control Order , 4 September 1942 and was controlled by the Ministry of Production .
By 1945 newspapers were limited to 25 % of their pre - war consumption .
Wrapping paper for most goods was prohibited .
The paper shortage often made it more difficult than usual for authors to get work published .
In 1944 , George Orwell wrote : OTHER PRODUCTS
Section::::Other products .
Whether rationed or not , many consumer goods became difficult to obtain because of the shortage of components .
Examples included razor blades , baby bottles , alarm clocks , frying pans and pots .
Balloons and sugar for cakes for birthday parties were partially or completely unavailable .
Many fathers saved bits of wood to build toys for Christmas presents , and Christmas trees were almost impossible to obtain due to timber rationing .
POST - SECOND WORLD WAR Section::::Post - Second World War .
On 8 May 1945 , the Second World War ended in Europe , but rationing continued .
Some aspects of rationing became stricter for some years after the war .
At the time this was presented as needed to feed people in European areas under British control , whose economies had been devastated by the fighting .
This was partly true , but with many British men still mobilised in the armed forces , an austere economic climate , and a centrally - planned economy under the post - war Labour government , resources were not available to expand food production and food imports .
Frequent strikes by some workers ( most critically dock workers ) made things worse .
A common ration book fraud was the ration books of the dead being kept and used by the living .
POLITICAL REACTION
Section::::Political reaction .
In the late 1940s the Conservative Party exploited and incited growing public anger at rationing , scarcity , controls , austerity and government bureaucracy .
They used the dissatisfaction with the socialistic and egalitarian policies of the Labour Party to rally middle - class supporters and build a political comeback that won the 1951 general election .
Their appeal was especially effective to housewives , who faced more difficult shopping conditions after the war than during it .
TIMELINE * 27 May 1945 : Bacon ration cut from 4 to 3 ounces / week .
Cooking fat ration cut from 2 to 1 ounces / week .
Soap ration cut by an eighth , except for babies and young children .
The referenced newspaper article predicted that households would be grossly hampered in making food items that included pastry .
* 1 June 1945 :
The basic petrol ration for civilians was restored .
*
19 July 1945 :
In order to preserve the egalitarian nature of rationing , gift food parcels from overseas weighing more than would be deducted from the recipient 's ration .
* Summer 1946 : Continual rain ruined Britain 's wheat crop .
Bread rationing started .
* January – March 1947 : Winter of 1946–1947 in the United Kingdom : long hard frost and deep snow .
Frost destroyed a huge amount of stored potatoes .
Potato rationing started .
* Mid-1947 : A transport and dock strike , which among other effects caused much loss of imported meat left to rot on the docks , until the Army broke the strike .
The basic petrol ration was stopped .
* 1 June 1948 :
The Motor Spirit ( Regulation ) Act 1948 was passed , ordering a red dye to be to put into some petrol , and that red petrol was only allowed to be used in commercial vehicles .
A private car driver could lose his driving licence for a year if red petrol was found in his car .
A petrol station could be shut down if it sold red petrol to a private car driver .
See List of Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , 1940–1959 : 1948 .
* June 1948 : The basic petrol ration was restored , at a third of its previous size .
* 1948 : Bread came off ration .
* May 1949 : Clothes rationing ended .
According to one author , this was because attempts to enforce it were defeated by continual massive illegality ( black market , unofficial trade in loose clothing coupons ( many forged ) , bulk thefts of unissued clothes ration books ) .
* 23 February 1950 : The 1950 general election is fought largely on the issue of rationing .
The Conservative Party campaigned on a manifesto of ending rationing as quickly as possible .
The Labour Party argued for the continuation of rationing indefinitely .
Labour was returned , but with its majority badly slashed to 5 seats .
* 26 May 1950 : Petrol rationing ended .
* 25 October 1951 : United Kingdom general election , 1951 .
The Conservatives came back into power .
* February 1953 : Confectionery rationing ended .
* September 1953 : Sugar rationing ended .
* 4 July 1954 : Meat and all other food rationing ended in Britain .
Section::::Timeline .
Although rationing formally ended in 1954 , cheese production remained depressed for decades afterwards .
During rationing , most milk in Britain was used to make one kind of cheese , nicknamed Government Cheddar ( not to be confused with the government cheese issued by the US welfare system ) .
This wiped out nearly all other cheese production in the country , and some indigenous varieties of cheese almost disappeared .
Later government controls on milk prices through the Milk Marketing Board continued to discourage production of other varieties of cheese until well into the 1980s , and it was only in the mid-1990s ( following the effective abolition of the MMB ) that the revival of the British cheese industry began in earnest .
SUEZ CRISIS Section::::Suez Crisis .
Petrol rationing was briefly reintroduced in late 1956 during the Suez Crisis but ended again on 14 May 1957 .
Advertising of petrol on the recently introduced ITV was banned for a period .
1970S OIL CRISES Section::::1970s oil crises .
Petrol coupons were issued for a short time as preparation for the possibility of petrol rationing during the 1973 oil crisis .
The rationing never came about , in large part because increasing North Sea oil production allowed the UK to offset much of the lost imports .
By the time of the 1979 energy crisis , the United Kingdom had become a net exporter of oil , so on that occasion the government did not even have to consider petrol rationing .
SEE ALSO * British cuisine * List of renewable resources produced and traded by the United Kingdom * Ration stamp * Utility clothing * Utility furniture
* Woolton pie REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Beckett , Ian F. W. The Home Front 1914–1918 : How Britain Survived the Great War ( 2006 ) .
*
Hammond , R. J. Food and agriculture in Britain , 1939–45 : Aspects of wartime control ( Food , agriculture , and World War II )
( Stanford U.P. 1954 ) ; summary of his three volume official history entitled Food ( 1951–53 ) * Zweiniger - Bargielowska , Ina .
Austerity in Britain :
Rationing , Controls & Consumption , 1939–1955 ( 2000 ) 286p .
online
* Zweiniger - Bargielowska , Ina .
" Rationing , austerity and the Conservative party recovery after 1945 " , Historical Journal ( 1994 )
37#1
pp
173–97
in JSTOR EXTERNAL LINKS
* History in Focus : War – Rationing in Second World War London World War
* Information about clothes rationing * Information about clothes rationing NOTES