NISSAN TITAN
The Nissan Titan is a full - size pickup truck manufactured in the United States for the North American market by Nissan .
It was named for the Titans of Greek mythology .
FIRST GENERATION
( 2003–2015 )
Section::::First generation ( 2003–2015 ) .
Development of the Titan began in September 1999 , with design work under Diane Allen .
Giovanny Arroba 's TA60 exterior was chosen in late 2000 , with a final production freeze in July 2001 .
The design language of the future truck was previewed by the 2001 Alpha T concept shown at the 2001 Detroit Auto Show , which had previously developed through November 2000 .
Production began on September 21 , 2003 and sales on December 1 , 2003 .
The Titan used Nissan 's new full - size F - Alpha platform .
This new platform was shared with the Nissan Armada and Infiniti QX56 SUVs , with all three manufactured in Canton , Mississippi , United States .
The first generation Titan continued without a major redesign through 2015 .
SPECIFICATIONS MODELS AND EQUIPMENT Section::::Specifications . Section::::Models and equipment .
All models came standard with a 32-valve , 5.6-liter engine , VK56DE , which generates ( on 2004–2006 models ) and of torque .
The first generation Titan came equipped with a fully boxed ladder frame and was available in either rear - wheel drive or a shift - on - the - fly four - wheel - drive system coupled with a five - speed RE505A automatic transmission .
An automatic brake - limited slip ( ABLS ) system was available on all Titans .
The first generation was available as a King Cab ( extended cab ) or a crew cab with a full - sized back seat , with no regular cab being offered .
The King Cab featured a bed , while the crew cab had a bed .
In 2008 , a longer wheelbase model was offered with either an bed on the King Cab or a bed on the crew cab .
There were originally four trim levels available : the S , SV , Pro-4x , SE , and LE .
The SE and LE trim was eventually replaced by the luxury SL trim .
The S was the base model , the SV a mid - level model with more features , the PRO-4X was the off - road - oriented version , and the top level SL was offered with features like 20-inch alloy wheels as standard equipment .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Features available on the first generation included : *
Bluetooth hands - free * Navigation system * DVD player with screen
* Side airbags * Pro-4X off - road package * Traction control
* Sunroof * Big tow package with transmission temperature gauge and telescoping mirrors
* XM Satellite Radio
* Leather split power bench seat * Utili - Track bed rail system * Lockable bedside storage box
* Leather - appointed heated captains chairs with console automatic shifter
*
Rear sonar warning system *
Automatic windows down with key fob * Power adjustable pedals * Flexible fuel vehicle
* 168-degree king cab rear door openings SAFETY Section::::Safety .
The first generation Titan carried a five - star rating from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration for driver frontal crash , and a four - star rating for passenger frontal crash .
* Vehicle dynamic control standard on 2010 models and up * Side and front airbags standard on 2010 models and up * Antilock brakes standard on all SECOND GENERATION ( 2016–PRESENT ) Section::::Second generation ( 2016–present ) .
The second - generation Titan was to be a lightly reskinned , rebadged version of the Dodge Ram , but those plans fell through with the 2008 worldwide financial crisis .
Nissan unveiled the second generation Titan at the 2015 North American International Auto Show .
The second generation Titan was designed in California , engineered in Michigan , tested in Arizona , and is assembled in Mississippi .
The V8 Cummins is built in Indiana and Tennessee .
Cummins has partnered with Nissan and has announced that the next generation Titan will offer a Cummins 5.0-liter turbo diesel V8 ( after plans with Dodge fell through ) that produces almost of torque .
The engine is referred to as the ISV .
The engine will be built in Columbus , Indiana , and have a different version of the engine for commercial trucks .
The 5.6-liter gasoline engine will remain standard .
Additionally , the gasoline engine has increased in power compared to the previous model , producing and of torque mated to a 7-speed automatic .
The 2nd - generation Titan is available in two forms , regular and XD , with the XD having been released for sale first .
The XD version is built on a heavy - duty frame based on Nissan 's commercial vehicle line and includes the Cummins diesel engine as an option .
The platform is shared with the Nissan NV .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
Calendar year !
United States
REFERENCES
SEE ALSO
*
Nissan Junior
EXTERNAL LINKS * NHTSA crash test results