POLYORCHIDISM Polyorchidism is the incidence of more than two testicles .
It is a very rare congenital disorder , with fewer than 201 cases reported in medical literature and 6 cases ( two horses , two dogs and two cats ) in veterinary literature .
Polyorchidism is generally diagnosed via an ultrasound examination of the testicles .
However , the diagnosis of polyorchidism should include histological confirmation .
The most common form is triorchidism , or tritestes , where three testicles are present .
The condition is usually asymptomatic .
A man who has polyorchidism is known as a polyorchid .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Polyorchidism occurs in two primary forms : Type A and Type B.
* Type A : The supernumerary testicle is connected to a vas deferens .
These testicles are usually reproductively functional .
Type A is further subdivided into :
* Type A1 :
Complete duplication of the testicle , epididymis and vas deferens .
* Type A2 :
The supernumerary testicle has its own epididymis and shares a vas deferens .
* Type A3 :
The supernumerary testicle shares the epididymis and the vas deferens of the other testicles .
* Type B : The supernumerary testicle is not connected to a vas deferens and is therefore not reproductively functional .
Type B is further subdivided into :
* Type B1 : The supernumerary testicle has its own epididymis but is not connected to a vas deferens
* Type B2 : The supernumerary testicle consists only of testicular tissue .
Type A3 is the most common form of polyorchidism , and types A2 and A3 together account for more than 90 % of cases .
In 65 % of cases , the supernumerary testicle is found in the left scrotal sac .
NUMERIC SYSTEM Section::::Numeric system .
An older system of classification structures polyorchidism into similar types , but with no subdivision between connected and disconnected testicles :
* Type 1 : The supernumerary testicle lacks an epididymis and vas deferens and has no connection to the other testicles .
* Type 2 :
The supernumerary testicle shares the epididymis and the vas deferens of the other testicles .
* Type 3 : The supernumerary testicle has its own epididymis and shares a vas deferens .
* Type 4 : Complete duplication of the testicle , epididymis and vas deferens . CAUSE COMPLICATIONS Section::::Cause .
Section::::Complications .
Most cases of polyorchidism are asymptomatic , and are discovered incidentally , in the course of treating another condition .
In the majority of cases , the supernumerary testicle is found in the scrotum .
However , polyorchidism can occur in conjunction with cryptorchidism , where the supernumerary testicle is undescended or found elsewhere in the body .
These cases are associated with a significant increase in the incidence of testicular cancer : 0.004 % for the general population vs 5.7 % for a supernumerary testicle not found in the scrotum .
Polyorchidism can also occur in conjunction with infertility , inguinal hernia , testicular torsion , epididymitis , hydrocele testis and varicocele .
However , it is not clear whether polyorchidism causes or aggravates these conditions , or whether the existence of these conditions leads sufferers to seek medical attention and thus become diagnosed with a previously undetected supernumerary testicle .
MANAGEMENT Section::::Management .
Because polyorchidism is very uncommon , there is no standard treatment for the condition .
Prior to advances in ultrasound technology , it was common practice to remove the supernumerary testicle .
Several cases have been described where routine follow - up examinations conducted over a period of years showed that the supernumerary testicle was stable .
A meta - analysis in 2009 suggested removing non - scrotal supernumerary testicles because of the increased risk of cancer , and regular follow - up in the remaining cases to ensure that the supernumerary testicle remains stable .
REFERENCES