WHEEL AND AXLE
The wheel and axle are one of six simple machines identified by Renaissance scientists drawing from Greek texts on technology .
The wheel and axle consists of a wheel attached to a smaller axle so that these two parts rotate together in which a force is transferred from one to the other .
A hinge or bearing supports the axle , allowing rotation .
It can amplify force ; a small force applied to the periphery of the large wheel can move a larger load attached to the axle .
The wheel and axle can be viewed as a version of the lever , with a drive force applied tangentially to the perimeter of the wheel and a load force applied to the axle , respectively , that are balanced around the hinge which is the fulcrum .
The mechanical advantage of the wheel and axle is the ratio of the distances from the fulcrum to the applied loads , or what is the same thing the ratio of the diameter of the wheel and axle .
A major application is in wheeled vehicles , in which the wheel and axle are used to reduce friction of the moving vehicle with the ground .
Other examples of devices which use the wheel and axle are capstans , belt drives and gears .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Halaf culture of 6500–5100 BCE has been credited with the earliest depiction of a wheeled vehicle , but this is doubtful as there is no evidence of Halafians using either wheeled vehicles or even pottery wheels .
One of the first applications of the wheel to appear was the potter 's wheel , used by prehistoric cultures to fabricate clay pots .
The earliest type , known as " tournettes " or " slow wheels " , were known in the Middle East by the 5th millennium BCE ( one of the earliest examples was discovered at Tepe Pardis , Iran , and dated to 5200–4700 BCE ) .
These were made of stone or clay and secured to the ground with a peg in the center , but required effort to turn .
True ( freely - spinning ) wheels were apparently in use in Mesopotamia by 3500 BCE and possibly as early as 4000 BCE , and the oldest surviving example , which was found in Ur ( modern day Iraq ) , dates to approximately 3100 BCE .
Evidence of wheeled vehicles appears in the second half of the 4th millennium BCE , near - simultaneously in Mesopotamia ( Sumerian civilization ) , the Northern Caucasus ( Maykop culture ) and Central Europe ( Cucuteni - Trypillian culture ) .
An early well - dated depiction of a wheeled vehicle ( a wagon — four wheels , two axles ) is on the Bronocice pot , a ca .
3635–3370 BCE ceramic vase , excavated in a Funnelbeaker culture settlement in southern Poland .
The oldest known example of a wooden wheel and its axle was found in 2002 at the Ljubljana Marshes some 20 km south of Ljubljana , the capital of Slovenia .
According to radiocarbon dating , it is between 5,100 and 5,350 years old .
The wheel was made of ash and oak and had a radius of 70 cm and the axle was 120 cm long and made of oak .
In Roman Egypt , Hero of Alexandria identified the wheel and axle as one of the simple machines used to lift weights .
This is thought to have been in the form of the windlass which consists of a crank or pulley connected to a cylindrical barrel that provides mechanical advantage to wind up a rope and lift a load such as a bucket from the well .
MECHANICAL ADVANTAGE Section::::Mechanical advantage .
The simple machine called a wheel and axle refers to the assembly formed by two disks , or cylinders , of different diameters mounted so they rotate together around the same axis .
The thin rod which needs to be turned is called the axle and the wider object fixed to the axle , on which we apply force is called the wheel .
A tangential force applied to the periphery of the large disk can exert a larger force on a load attached to the axle , achieving mechanical advantage .
When used as the wheel of a wheeled vehicle the smaller cylinder is the axle of the wheel , but when used in a windlass , winch , and other similar applications ( see medieval mining lift to right )
the smaller cylinder may be separate from the axle mounted in the bearings .
It can not be used separately .
Assuming the wheel and axle does not dissipate or store energy
, that is it has no friction or elasticity , the power input by the force applied to the wheel must equal the power output at the axle .
As the wheel and axle system rotates around its bearings , points on the circumference , or edge , of the wheel move faster than points on the circumference , or edge , of the axle .
Therefore , a force applied to the edge of the wheel must be less than the force applied to the edge of the axle , because power is the product of force and velocity .
Let a and b be the distances from the center of the bearing to the edges of the wheel A and the axle
B.
If the input force F is applied to the edge of the wheel A and the force F at the edge of the axle B is the output , then the ratio of the velocities of points A and B is given by a / b , so the ratio of the output force to the input force , or mechanical advantage , is given by
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine like the wheel and axle is computed as the ratio of the resistance to the effort .
The larger the ratio the greater the multiplication of force ( torque ) created or distance achieved .
By varying the radii of the axle and/or wheel , any amount of mechanical advantage may be gained .
In this manner , the size of the wheel may be increased to an inconvenient extent .
In this case a system or combination of wheels ( often toothed , that is , gears ) are used .
As a wheel and axle is a type of lever , a system of wheels and axles is like a compound lever .
IDEAL MECHANICAL ADVANTAGE Section::::Ideal mechanical advantage .
The mechanical advantage of a wheel and axle with no friction is called the ideal mechanical advantage ( IMA ) .
It is calculated with the following formula :
ACTUAL MECHANICAL
ADVANTAGE Section::::Actual mechanical advantage .
All actual wheels have friction , which dissipates some of the power as heat .
The actual mechanical advantage ( AMA ) of a wheel and axle is calculated with the following formula : where REFERENCES ADDITIONAL RESOURCES Section::::Additional Resources .
Basic Machines and How They Work , United States .
Bureau of Naval Personnel , Courier Dover Publications 1965 , pp .
3–1 and following preview online