CHICKENHAWK ( BIRD )
In the United States , chickenhawk or chicken hawk is an unofficial designation for three species of North American hawks in the family
Accipitridae : Cooper 's hawk , also called a quail hawk , the sharp - shinned hawk , and the red - tailed hawk .
The term " chicken hawk " , however , is inaccurate .
Although Cooper 's and sharp - shinned hawks may attack other birds , chickens do not make up a significant part of their diets ; red - tailed hawks have varied diets , but may opportunistically hunt free - range poultry .
Historically , misinterpretation of the name " chicken hawk " has labelled these birds as pests , hence justifying their slaughter .
Officially , per the American Ornithologists ' Union 's list of bird names , the term has become obsolete as applied to birds , but still enjoys widespread colloquial use in rural areas where any of the three species has been seen as a threat to small outdoor animals kept as pets or livestock , especially chickens .
While the term is still widely used by those who keep such animals , it is too ambiguous to be of any scholarly usefulness , especially since the meaning of hawk differs between America and Europe ; thus , the term 's propriety ( or lack thereof ) depends entirely upon context .
The unofficial names of other raptors that are derived from their supposed prey include : duck hawk ( peregrine falcon ) , sparrowhawk ( American kestrel ) , goshawk ( northern goshawk ) , pigeon hawk ( merlin ) , fish hawk ( osprey ) , and quail hawk ( Cooper 's hawk ) .
IN POPULAR
CULTURE
* Henery Hawk was a cartoon character created by Chuck Jones and Robert McKimson in the Looney Tunes series .
The premise of this character was that he was too young to know what a chicken was and
hence , although having a great deal of energy , was easily tricked into thinking that other animals ( usually the Barnyard Dawg or Sylvester ) were chickens .
The character Foghorn Leghorn was introduced to complement the Henery Hawk character , but quickly eclipsed him in popularity .
He , along with the rest of the Looney Tunes cast , returned in the latest Looney Tunes installment , a sitcom called The Looney Tunes Show .
* Jim Henson 's Animal Show featured Armstrong the Chickenhawk ( performed by Bill Barretta ) who is the show 's expert on birds .
*
The animated TV show features an alien named Kickin Hawk .
REFERENCES
* The stars of Looney Tunes .