PEA COAT
A pea coat ( or pea jacket , pilot jacket ) is an outer coat , generally of a navy - coloured heavy wool , originally worn by sailors of European and later American navies .
Pea coats are characterized by short length , broad lapels , double - breasted fronts , often large wooden , metal or plastic buttons , and vertical or slash pockets .
References to the pea jacket appear in American newspapers at least as early as the 1720s , and modern renditions still maintain the original design and composition .
A bridge coat is a pea coat that extends to the thighs , and is a uniform exclusively for officers and chief petty officers .
The reefer is for officers and chief petty officers only , and is identical to the basic design but usually has gold buttons and epaulettes .
Only officers wear the epaulettes .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Today the style is considered a classic , and pea coats are now worn by all manner of individuals .
The style has evolved to the addition of hoods .
A few of the jackets seen on the street are genuine navy surplus ; being a classic garment , it is frequently available from retailers , though often with small design changes that reflect the current fashion trends .
The standard for historical pea coats was wool , most often made of heavy Melton cloth through the 1970s in the U.S. Navy .
Presently coats are made from wool .
While pea coats are offered in many colors by retailers , the US Navy - issue pea coat is dark blue .
A black leather version of the reefer jacket was worn by Kriegsmarine U - Boat officers during World War II , including Admiral Dönitz .
It was also worn with a peaked cap by Red Army commissars , tank commanders and pilots .
Christopher Eccleston wore an identical coat when portraying The Doctor .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
According to a 1975 edition of the Mariner 's Mirror , the term pea coat originated from the Dutch or West Frisian word pijjekker or pijjakker , in which pij referred to the type of cloth used , a coarse kind of twilled blue cloth with a nap on one side . ' '
Jakker ' ' designates a man 's short , heavy , coat .
Another theory , favoured by the US Navy , is that the heavy topcoat worn in cold , miserable weather by seafaring men was once tailored from " pilot cloth " – a heavy , coarse , stout kind of twilled blue cloth with the nap on one side .
This was sometimes called P - cloth from the initial letter of pilot , and the garment made from it was called a P - jacket – later a pea coat .
The term has been used since 1723 to denote coats made from that cloth .
SEE ALSO
* Chesterfield coat
* Covert coat
*
Paletot * Duffle coat * Polo coat *
Trench coat REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS