BRAKE FLUID Brake fluid is a type of hydraulic fluid used in hydraulic brake and hydraulic clutch applications in automobiles , motorcycles , light trucks , and some bicycles .
It is used to transfer force into pressure , and to amplify braking force .
It works because liquids are not appreciably compressible .
Most brake fluids used today are glycol - ether based , but mineral oil (
Citroën / Rolls - Royce liquide hydraulique minéral ( LHM ) ) and silicone - based ( DOT 5 ) fluids are also available .
STANDARDS Section::::Standards .
Brake fluids must meet certain requirements as defined by various standards set by organizations such as the Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) , or local government equivalents .
The SAE has published standards J1703 , J1704 , and J1705 , reflecting progressively higher performance for brake fluids .
The International Standards Organisation has published its standard ISO 4925 , defining equivalent classes 3 , 4 , and 5 , as well as class 5 - 1 and class 6 .
Most brake fluid sold in North America is classified by the US Department of Transportation ( DOT ) under its own ratings such as " DOT 3 " and " DOT 4 " and these are widely used in other countries .
Their classifications broadly reflect the SAE 's specifications , but with local details - Alaska and the Azores for example , have different normal temperature and humidity ranges to consider .
DOT 3 is equivalent to SAE J1703 and ISO class 3 , DOT 4 to SAE J1704 and ISO class 4 , etc .
All approved fluids must be colorless or amber to be acceptable for street use in the U.S , except for DOT 5 silicone , which must be purple .
DOT 4 Section::::DOT 4 .
While a vehicle that uses DOT 3 may also use DOT 4 or 5.1 if the elastomers in the system accept the borate compounds that raise the boiling point , ( a temperature upgrade )
a vehicle that requires DOT 4 might boil the brake fluid if a DOT 3 ( a temperature downgrade ) is used .
Additionally , these polyglycol - ether - based fluids can not be mixed with DOT 5.0 , which is silicone based . , most cars produced in the U.S. use DOT 4 brake fluid .
DOT 5 Section::::DOT 5 .
DOT 5 is a silicone - based fluid and is separate from the series of DOT 2 , 3 , 4 , 5.1 .
It is immiscible with water , and with other brake fluids , and must not be mixed with them .
Systems can only change fluid after a complete system changeover , such as a total restoration .
It contains at least 70 % by weight of a diorgano polysiloxane .
Unlike polyethylene glycol based fluids , Dot 5 is hydrophobic .
An advantage over other forms of brake fluid is that silicone has a more stable viscosity index over a wider temperature range .
Another property is that it does not damage paint .
DOT 5 brake fluid is not compatible with anti - lock braking systems .
DOT 5 fluid can aerate when the anti - lock brake system is activated .
DOT 5 brake fluid absorbs a small amount of air requiring care when bleeding the system of air .
Lack of acceptance of silicone - based fluids led to the development of DOT 5.1 , a fluid giving the performance advantages of silicone , whilst retaining some familiarity and compatibility with the glycol ester fluids .
CITROËN HYDROPNEUMATIC SUSPENSION Section::::Citroën hydropneumatic suspension .
In the 1950s , Citroën introduced a hydropneumatic suspension system , powered by an engine - driven pump and also used to operate the braking system .
This used a Citroën - specific hydraulic fluid .
The first fluid was LHS , a vegetable oil - based fluid .
This was later replaced by LHM , a mineral fluid .
LHS was hygroscopic and gave problems with internal corrosion .
Although the two fluids are incompatible , LHM has been universal since 1967 , and most older cars have been converted to use it .
This system was also used on Rolls - Royce and some Maserati models .
HYDRAGAS AND HYDROLASTIC SUSPENSION
Section::::Hydragas and Hydrolastic suspension .
Hydragas and Hydrolastic suspension were a widely - used form of hydropneumatic suspension , designed by Alex Moulton , and used on British Leyland cars from the 1960s .
This system was not engine - driven and did not involve the braking system .
The fluid was a low vicosity fluid based on diluted alcohol .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Brake fluids must have certain characteristics and meet certain quality standards for the braking system to work properly .
VISCOSITY Section::::Viscosity .
For reliable , consistent brake system operation , brake fluid must maintain a constant viscosity under a wide range of temperatures , including extreme cold .
This is especially important in systems with an anti - lock braking system ( ABS ) , traction control , and stability control ( ESP ) , as these systems often use micro - valves and require very rapid activation .
DOT 5.1 fluids are specified with low viscosity over a wide range of temperatures , although not all cars fitted with ABS or ESP specify DOT 5.1 brake fluid .
BOILING POINT
Section::::Boiling point .
Brake fluid is subjected to very high temperatures , especially in the wheel cylinders of drum brakes and disk brake calipers .
It must have a high boiling point to avoid vaporizing in the lines .
This vaporization creates a problem because vapor is highly compressible relative to liquid , and therefore negates the hydraulic transfer of braking force - so the brakes will fail to stop the vehicle .
Quality standards refer to a brake fluid 's " dry " and " wet " boiling points .
The wet boiling point , which is usually much lower ( although above most normal service temperatures ) , refers to the fluid 's boiling point after absorbing a certain amount of moisture .
This is several ( single digit ) percent , varying from formulation to formulation .
Glycol - ether ( DOT 3 , 4 , and 5.1 ) brake fluids are hygroscopic ( water absorbing ) , which means they absorb moisture from the atmosphere under normal humidity levels .
Non - hygroscopic fluids ( e.g. silicone / DOT 5 and mineral oil based formulations ) , are hydrophobic , and can maintain an acceptable boiling point over the fluid 's service life .
Silicone based fluid is more compressible than glycol based fluid , leading to brakes with a spongy feeling .
It can potentially suffer phase separation / water pooling and freezing / boiling in the system over time - the main reason single phase hygroscopic fluids are used .
+ Characteristics of common braking fluids ! !
Dry boiling point !
Wet boiling point !
Viscosity limit !
Primary constituent CORROSION Section::::Corrosion .
Brake fluids must not corrode the metals used inside components such as calipers , wheel cylinders , master cylinders and ABS control valves .
They must also protect against corrosion as moisture enters the system .
Additives ( corrosion inhibitors ) are added to the base fluid to accomplish this .
Silicone is less corrosive to paintwork unlike glycol - ether based DOT fluids .
The advantage of the Citroën LHM mineral oil based brake fluid is the absence of corrosion .
Seals may wear out at high mileages but otherwise these systems have exceptional longevity .
It can not be used as a substitute without changing seals due to incompatibility with the rubber .
COMPRESSIBILITY Section::::Compressibility .
Brake fluids must maintain a low level of compressibility , even with varying temperatures to accommodate different environmental conditions .
This is important to ensure consistent brake pedal feel .
As compressibility increases , more brake pedal travel is necessary for the same amount of brake caliper piston force .
SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE Section::::Service and maintenance .
Most automotive professionals agree that glycol - based brake fluid , ( DOT 3 , DOT 4 , DOT 5.1 ) should be flushed , or changed , every 1–2 years under non - racing conditions .
Many manufacturers also require periodic fluid changes to ensure reliability and safety .
Once installed , moisture diffuses into the fluid through brake hoses and rubber seals and , eventually , the fluid will have to be replaced when the water content becomes too high .
Electronic testers and test strips are commercially available to measure moisture content , however moisture test strips were taken off the market because they absorb moisture in the air before they can be used .
The corrosion inhibitors also degrade over time .
Degraded inhibitors allow corrosion in the braking system .
The first metal to corrode is copper .
You can determine when it is time to replace brake fluid when copper ions hit 200ppm .
New fluid should always be stored in a sealed container to avoid moisture intrusion .
DOT 2 ( mineral oil )
DOT 5
( silicone ) fluids are not hygroscopic and do n't have to be replaced when the water content becomes too high .
Ideally , silicone fluid should be used only to fill non - ABS systems that have not been previously filled with glycol based fluid .
Any system that has used glycol - based fluid ( DOT 3/4/5.1 ) will contain moisture ; glycol fluid disperses the moisture throughout the system and contains corrosion inhibitors .
Silicone fluid does not allow moisture to enter the system , but does not disperse any that is already there , either .
A system filled from dry with silicone fluid does not require the fluid to be changed at intervals , only when the system has been disturbed for a component repair or renewal .
The United States armed forces have standardised on silicone brake fluid since the 1990s .
Silicone fluid is used extensively in cold climates , particularly in Russia and Finland .
A small drop in brake fluid level in the master cylinder reservoir can be " topped up " but if the level consistently drops , the cause should be investigated and repaired .
Brake fluid level in the master cylinder will drop as the linings ( pads or shoes ) wear and the calipers or wheel cylinders extend further to compensate .
Overspill from pushing back pistons should be avoided , because glycol based fluid will quickly lift or strip paints and other coatings on contact ( it can be removed by quickly washing with water , not wiping ) .
Brake fluid level may also be low because of a leak , which could result in a loss of hydraulic pressure and consequently a significant loss of braking ability .
Modern cars have redundant hydraulic circuits ( two separate circuits ) to ensure against total hydraulic failure .
Brake fluids with different DOT ratings can not always be mixed .
DOT 5 should not be mixed with any of the others as mixing of glycol with silicone fluid may cause corrosion because of trapped moisture .
DOT 2 should not be mixed with any of the others .
DOT 3 , DOT 4 , and DOT 5.1 are all based on glycol esters and can be mixed , although it is preferable to completely replace existing fluids with fresh to obtain the specified performance .
Brake fluid is toxic and can damage painted surfaces .
COMPONENTS CASTOR OIL - BASED ( PRE - DOT , DOT 2 )
* Castor oil
* Alcohol , usually butanol ( red / crimson fluid ) or ethanol ( yellow fluid ) ( methanol ) GLYCOL - BASED ( DOT 3 , 4 , 5.1 ) *
Alkyl ester * Aliphatic amine
* Diethylene glycol
* Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether
* Diethylene glycol monomethyl ether
*
Dimethyl dipropylene glycol * Polyethylene glycol monobutyl ether
* Polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether * Polyethylene oxide
* Triethylene glycol monobutyl ether
* Triethylene glycol monoethyl ether
* Triethylene glycol monomethyl ether SILICONE - BASED
( DOT 5 )
*
Di-2-ethylhexyl sebacate
* Dimethyl polysiloxane
*
Tributyl phosphate SEE
ALSO
* Hydropneumatic * Pascal 's law
* Brake fluid pressure sensor REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Car care council
* How Stuff Works : What are the different types of brake fluid ?
* StopTech : Brake Fluid 1A