NADIA BJORLIN Nadia Alexandra Björlin ( born August 2 , 1980 ) is an American actress , singer , and model .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Björlin was born on August 2 , 1980 in Newport , Rhode Island .
She is the second eldest child of Swedish composer and conductor Ulf Björlin and Fary Björlin ( née Dadashi ) , an Iranian interior designer .
Björlin is fluent in English , Swedish , and Farsi and is also schooled in French , Italian , and Russian .
She has an older brother Ulf Alexander Jr. and a younger brother Jean - Paul .
She also has an older half - brother Kaj , and two older half - sisters Katja and Kamilla , from her mother 's first marriage .
Björlin 's family moved to her father 's native country of Sweden while she was still an infant .
She has described her childhood as " wonderful " with " loving parents and siblings to lean on " , although Björlin recalls being " oblivious " to racial tensions going on in Sweden .
Although she never attended school there , a few of her siblings did
and she remembers them talking about how they " experienced some torment " from classmates due to being half - Iranian .
Being born after the Revolution of Iran , Björlin says she " grew up in a time where Iranians were looked down upon in places of the world " .
Björlin 's family moved back and forth between the States and Sweden before she was seven years old .
They moved a few times because of her father 's work , living in Stockholm , Los Angeles and Palm Beach Florida .
For her education , she attended the Interlochen Center for the Arts and the Boston University Tanglewood Institute , where she was honored for her excellence in theatre , voice , music and dance .
Along with her brothers Ulf and Jean Paul , Björlin attended the Palm Beach County School of the Arts ( now Dreyfoos School of the Arts ) for her first 2 years of high school .
During her time there , Björlin sang with the Palm Beach Opera and in 1996 , she competed in a large international vocal competition in Verona , Italy , where she was part of the choir who won the gold medal .
While she was a junior in high school her family moved , this time to New York City .
Björlin was able to attend the Professional Children 's School , where she studied alongside other famous actors and actresses , including Julia Stiles , Gaby Hoffman , and Macaulay Culkin .
In May 1999 , Björlin won first place in the Metro Lyric Opera Competition , taking place in NYC .
When she graduated from high school , she decided to shift her focus from singing to acting .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Björlin 's first major role was in April 1999 as Chloe Lane on the soap opera Days of Our Lives .
In late 1999 , she appeared as a go - go dancer in the music video for Ricky Martin 's song Shake Your Bon - Bon .
Björlin left Days in June 2003 to concentrate on her singing career but returned later in December 2003 .
In September 2005 , Björlin left Days of our Lives again and joined the cast of the UPN series Sex , Love & Secrets .
The show was canceled by the network , but Björlin continued to make guest appearances on television series such as Jake in Progress and Out of Practice .
Björlin appeared in the 2007 independent feature film
If I Had Known
I Was a Genius , starring Markus Redmond , Whoopi Goldberg , Sharon Stone , and Tara Reid .
The film was screened at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival .
Björlin was also cast as the female lead of the Chicago Pictures ' feature film , Redline .
The film starred Eddie Griffin and Nathan Phillips , and was released in theaters on April 13 , 2007 .
Björlin returned to Days of Our Lives as Chloe on November 29 , 2007 , and left the show again in September 2011 to pursue acting in films .
Since 2009 , Björlin has starred as lesbian author Lara in the web series .
In 2010 , Björlin had a small role in NCIS as a suburban housewife wearing a bikini during a door - to - door canvasing by one of the NCIS investigators .
That same year she guest starred on the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men as Evelyn Harper 's ( Holland Taylor )
lesbian lover , Jill .
In 2011 , Björlin was one of the stars of the reality television series Dirty Soap which gave viewers a behind - the - scenes view of Nadia 's departure from Days of Our Lives , and afterward , including a bit of insight into the tenuous relationship between Nadia 's live - in boyfriend and her mother who does n't like him because she believes that he does n't treat her well enough .
Björlin returned to her role on Days of Our Lives as Chloe for a two - episode stint on August 3 , and 4 , 2013 , to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the daytime serial .
Björlin guest starred on 2 Broke Girls as the owner of a cat found by the girls in an episode aired on October 7 , 2013 .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Björlin dated Los Angeles radio personality Frank Kramer around 2000 or 2001 ; Kramer would often refer to her on his show as " Tuesday " .
She also dated Bruce Willis around 2001–2002 .
Björlin was once engaged to subprime lending tycoon Daniel Sadek , who produced her film Redline .
Bjorlin had been in a relationship with actor Brandon Beemer for seven years until 2013 .
Björlin became engaged to boyfriend Grant Turnbull , a property developer and home builder , in August 2014 .
Bjorlin married Turnbull on May 15 , 2015 in Palm Springs .
The couple have two sons , Torin Mathias ( born May 4 , 2016 ) , and Viggo Sebastian ( born September 1 , 2017 ) .
Björlin is good friends with her former Days of Our Lives co - star Farah Fath .
Björlin 's father Ulf Bjorlin died in 1993 at age 60 due to Leukemia .
Since then , Björlin has been involved in several charities and fundraisers to help raise awareness and money for research on this type of cancer .
She has even formed her own team ; Nadia 's Cancer Crusaders to help find a cure for this disease .
On June 15 , 2013 , Björlin and her then - boyfriend Brandon Beemer participated in and hosted the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society 's annual " Light the Night " walk at the Skirball Cultural Center in Los Angeles , California with the goal of raising $ 500,000 for Leukemia research and to help people fight the disease .
On October 5 , 2013 , Björlin again participated in the " Light the Night " at Sunset Gower Studios in Hollywood .
Apart from singing and acting , Björlin is also a musician and plays the flute , harp , guitar , and piano .
She also has a couple of pet birds , and a puppy named Tiger .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography .
+
Film !
Year !
Title !
Role + Television !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes + Web series !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and Nominations . !
Year !
Work !
Role !
Award !
Category !
Result 2011 Laura Miller SEE
ALSO
* Iranian American REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS