BACTERIAL CAPSULE
The bacterial capsule is a very large structure of many bacteria .
It is a polysaccharide layer that lies outside the cell envelope , and is thus deemed part of the outer envelope of a bacterial cell .
It is a well - organized layer , not easily washed off , and it can be the cause of various diseases .
The capsule — which can be found in both gram negative and gram - positive bacteria — is different to the second lipid membrane – bacterial outer membrane , which contains lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins and is found only in gram - negative bacteria .
When the amorphous viscid secretion ( that makes up the capsule ) diffuses into the surrounding medium and remains as a loose undemarcated secretion , it is known as slime layer .
Capsule and slime layer are sometimes summarized under the term glycocalyx .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
It usually consists of polysaccharides , but can be composed of other materials such as glycoprotein , polypeptide D - glutamic acid in B. anthracis , and peptidoglycan and muramic acid found in E.coli bacterial capsule .
Because most capsules are so tightly packed , they are difficult to stain because most standard stains can not adhere to the capsule .
For examination under the microscope , the bacteria and their background are stained darker than the capsule , which does n't stain .
When viewed , bacterial cells as well as the surface they are on , are stained dark , while the capsule remains pale or colorless and appears as a ring , or halo , around the cell .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The capsule is considered a virulence factor because it enhances the ability of bacteria to cause disease ( e.g. prevents phagocytosis ) .
The capsule can protect cells from engulfment by eukaryotic cells , such as macrophages .
A capsule - specific antibody may be required for phagocytosis to occur .
Capsules also contain water which protects the bacteria against desiccation .
They also exclude bacterial viruses and most hydrophobic toxic materials such as detergents .
Immunity to one capsule type does not result in immunity to the other types .
Capsules also help cells adhere to surfaces .
As a group where the capsule is present they are known as polysaccharide encapsulated bacteria or encapsulated bacteria .
DIVERSITY Section::::Diversity .
The capsule is found most commonly among gram - negative bacteria :
* Escherichia coli ( in some strains )
* Neisseria meningitidis *
Klebsiella pneumoniae * Haemophilus influenzae
* Pseudomonas aeruginosa * Salmonella
However , some gram - positive bacteria may also have a capsule :
* Bacillus megaterium for example , synthesizes a capsule composed of polypeptide and polysaccharides .
*
Streptococcus pyogenes synthesizes a hyaluronic acid capsule .
* Streptococcus pneumoniae has at least 91 different capsular serotypes .
These serotypes are the basis for the pneumococcal vaccines .
* Streptococcus agalactiae produces a polysaccharide capsule of nine antigenic types that all contain sialic acid ( Ia , Ib , II , III , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII ) .
* Staphylococcus epidermidis
* Staphylococcus aureus
The yeast Cryptococcus neoformans , though not a bacterium , has a similar capsule .
Capsules too small to be seen with an ordinary microscope , such as the M protein of Streptococcus pyogenes , are called microcapsules .
DEMONSTRATION OF CAPSULE
* India ink staining : the capsule appears as a clear halo around the bacterium as the ink ca n't penetrate the capsule .
*
* Maneval 's capsule stain : the capsule appears as a clear halo between the pink - stained bacterium and the bluish - grey stained background .
The background stain is the acidic stain Congo red ( which changes color to bluish - grey due to the pH ) , and the pink stain is acid fuschin .
* * Serological methods : Capsular material is antigenic and can be demonstrated by mixing it with a specific anticapsular serum .
When examined under the microscope , the capsule appears ' swollen ' due to an increase in its refractivity .
This phenomenon is the basis of Quellung reaction .
* USE IN VACCINATION Section::::Use in vaccination .
Vaccination using capsular material is effective against some organisms ( e.g. , H. influenzae type b , S. pneumoniae , and N. meningitidis ) .
However , polysaccharides are not highly antigenic , especially in children , so many capsular vaccines contain polysaccharides conjugated with protein carriers , such as the tetanus toxoid or diphtheria toxoid .
This stimulates a much more robust immune response .
SEE ALSO * Bacterial cell structure
* Quellung reaction , a method to visualize capsule under a microscope REFERENCES