COACH CARTER Coach Carter is a 2005 American biographical sports drama film directed by Thomas Carter .
It is based on the true story of Richmond High School basketball coach Ken Carter ( portrayed by Samuel L. Jackson ) , who made headlines in 1999 for suspending his undefeated high school basketball team due to poor academic results .
The story was conceived from a screenplay co - written by John Gatins and Mark Schwahn , who created the TV series One Tree Hill .
The film also recycles a handful of plot devices from another television series , The White Shadow , which director Carter also co - starred in .
The ensemble cast features Rob Brown , Channing Tatum , Debbi Morgan , and musical entertainer
Ashanti .
The film was a co - production between the motion picture studios of MTV Films and Tollin / Robbins Productions .
Theatrically and for the home video rental market , it was commercially distributed by Paramount Pictures .
Coach Carter explores professional ethics , academics and athletics .
The sports action in the film was coordinated by the production company ReelSports .
On January 11 , 2005 , the original motion picture soundtrack was released by the Capitol Records music label .
The film score was composed and orchestrated by musician Trevor Rabin .
Coach Carter premiered in theaters nationwide in the United States on January 14 , 2005 grossing $ 67,264,877 in domestic ticket receipts .
The film took in an additional $ 9,404,929 in business through international release for a combined worldwide total of $ 76,669,806 .
Preceding its initial screening in cinemas , the film was generally met with positive critical reviews .
With its initial foray into the home video marketplace ; the widescreen DVD edition of the film featuring deleted scenes , a music video , and special features among other highlights , was released in the United States on June 21 , 2005 .
Despite the film being based on real events taking place during the 1999–2000 school year , there are several references that would have been impossible to make in 1999 , including a reference to a player possibly going into the NBA straight out of high school being similar to LeBron James , who was a freshman during the 1999–2000 school year .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1999 , Ken Carter takes over the head coaching job for the basketball team at his former high school Richmond , having played on the team himself and earning records .
Carter quickly sees that the athletes are rude and disrespectful , and are in need of discipline .
He hands the players individual contracts , instructing them to attend all of their classes , sit in the front row of those classes , wear dress shirts and ties on game days , refer to everyone ( players and coach alike ) as " sir " , and maintain a 2.3 ( C+ ) grade point average , among other requirements .
Carter also asks the school staff for progress reports on the players ' grades and attendance .
He teaches them to play a disciplined brand of basketball .
In the gym , Carter is faced by hostility from the players and one of them , Timo Cruz attempts to punch Carter but Carter stops Cruz by putting his arm on Cruz 's back and pushing him against the wall .
Cruz quits the team in anger along with two other players , the previous season top scorers .
Carter warns them that , if they are late for practice , then they will run suicides ( a type of sprint touching the court 's lines ) , and , if they act disrespectfully towards him , then they will do push - ups .
He then orders them to do a series of suicides for one hour and seven minutes to improve their conditioning .
Later , Carter 's son , Damien , decides to join the team , after quitting the private school St. Francis .
Shocked , Carter asks why he did this , and Damien tells him that he wants to play for his father .
Carter reluctantly agrees but holds his son to a higher set of standards than the rest of the team .
Kenyon Stone struggles to come to terms with his girlfriend , Kyra who is pregnant , unsure if he can juggle basketball and prepare for college as well as be a parent .
In their opener against Hercules , Cruz watches the team win and then asks Carter what he has to do to get back on to the team .
Carter agrees but on one condition : he needs to do 2,500 push - ups and 1,000 suicides before Friday .
During a practice , Carter tells Cruz to give up because it is impossible to complete all of the push ups and suicides by Friday .
When the day arrives , Cruz is short by 500 push - ups and 80 suicides .
Other players , however , volunteer to do push - ups and suicides for him , saying they are a team
and when one person fails they all fail , when one person triumphs , they all triumph , thereby getting him back on the team .
On a game day , Carter asks Cruz what his biggest fear is , and Cruz is confused by the question .
Later , the team won the game .
Carter learns that one particular student does not attend classes : Junior Battle .
Later in practice , Carter talks to Battle , who does not seem to be worried about it , so Carter suspends him for games .
After a confrontation , Battle leaves the team in anger .
Afterwards , Battle 's mother asks Carter to let him back on the team .
Carter says that he needs to hear that from Battle himself .
Battle apologizes for what he did and is allowed back on the team , but is told that he had to do 1,000 push - ups and 1,000 suicides to make up for it .
At the winter dance , Stone talks to his girlfriend about the baby and says he does not want to live that way .
He asks her what she 's going to do after the baby is born and believes that she would not know what to do .
She angrily tells him that she is having the baby with or without his support .
The team goes on to have an undefeated record , eventually winning the Bay Hill Holiday tournament .
The team go off to a party hosted in a girl 's house , without the knowledge of her parents .
After looking for the players to celebrate , Carter goes to the house and orders his team to leave .
In the bus going home , Carter criticizes his team for their reckless behavior , while Cruz points out that they won the tournament and already gave Carter what he wanted : winners .
Back at school , Carter discovers that the progress reports show that some of the students have been skipping classes and failing academically .
Enraged , Carter locks the gym , and sends his players to the library to study with their teachers .
This upsets the players , especially Cruz , who quits the team again , stating that he had tried so hard to do all those push - ups and suicides for Carter , to get back on the team in the first place .
Later , although this priority to good values is praised in the national media , Carter is criticized by parents and academic personnel alike for his decision to lock down the gym .
One night , someone throws a brick through Carter 's store window for not letting the team play .
The next day , a man pulls up next to Carter 's car at a stoplight then proceeds to spit on his window , taunting him about his decision to lock down the gym .
Carter became enraged and tries to hit him , but Damien breaks up the fight .
Later that evening , while Cruz is hanging out with his drug dealer cousin Renny , he saves three of his teammates from being harassed by some gangsters , but when the drug deal goes wrong , his cousin is shot dead , leaving Cruz distraught .
Cruz goes to the Carters ' house and begs to be allowed back on the team .
Carter comforts him and allows it .
The school board eventually confronts Carter , who explains how he wants to give his team the opportunity and option for further education so that they wo n't turn their lives around into crime , asserting that achieving a sound education is more important for the students than winning basketball games .
A man suggests that Carter should be removed from the basketball coach position , which the board does not have the power to decide that , which then leads him to suggest that they should end the lockout .
Carter promises that he will quit if the lockout is ended .
Principal Garrison and the chairman vote to not end the lockout , but the other board members ( four ) vote in favor of ending it .
Afterwards , Carter is shocked to find his players in the gym with desks and teachers , studying and working to bring their grades back up .
The athletes decide to fulfill Carter 's original intention of them pursuing academic achievement before continuing to play their next game .
Cruz answers Carter 's question about fear and thanks him for saving his life .
They work hard and eventually raise their grade point average to a point that fulfills their contracts .
Later , Stone talks to Kyra about the baby and tells her that he worked it out so she and the baby go to college with him .
She reveals that she had an abortion by her own choice , and tells Kenyon that he should focus on playing college basketball .
He asked Kyra to come with him to college with or without the baby and she agrees .
The Oilers eventually end up competing in the state CIF high school playoffs , but come up short to St. Francis by just 2 points after a game winning three - point shot by rival Ty Crane .
Nevertheless , Carter is proud of his players accomplishing their goals of having a proper education .
The film 's epilogue displays a series of graphics stating that a number of players went on to attend college and play basketball , such as Kenyon , Lyle , Junior , " Worm " , Cruz , and Damien .
CAST
* Samuel L. Jackson as Coach Ken Carter
* Rob Brown as Kenyon Stone * Robert Ri'chard as Damien Carter * Rick Gonzalez as Timo Cruz
* Nana Gbewonyo as Junior Battle * Antwon Tanner as Jaron " Worm " Willis * Channing Tatum as Jason Lyle * Matt Jaworski as Colin Girod
*
Ashanti as Kyra * Texas Battle as Maddux * Adrienne Eliza Bailon as Dominique * Dana Davis as Peyton
* Octavia Spencer as Mrs. Willa Battle * Denise Dowse as Principal Garrison * Tadhg Deevy as Polish Snake Tamer * Debbi Morgan as Tonya * Roberto Luis Santana as Kennedy Coach * Chauntal Lewis as St. Francis Cheerleader * Massiel Sanchez as Daryl 's Girlfriend * Robert Hoffman as Dancer PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming locations for the motion picture included , Long Beach , California and Los Angeles .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The original motion picture soundtrack for Coach Carter was released by the Capitol Records label on January 11 , 2005 .
The score for the film was orchestrated by Trevor Rabin .
An extensive list of songs is featured on the soundtrack , which differs from the soundtrack recording .
The recording includes five songs which were not featured in the film : " About da Game " by Trey Songz ; " Balla " by Mack 10 featuring Da Hood ; " Beauty Queen " by CzarNok ; " What Love Can Do " by Letoya ; and " Would n't You Like to Ride " , by Kanye West , Malik Yusef , and Common .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Following its cinematic release in theaters , the Region 1 Code widescreen edition of the film was released on DVD in the United States on June 21 , 2005 .
Special features for the DVD include ; two commentaries : Coach Carter :
The Man Behind the Movie , Fast Break at Richmond High , Deleted Scenes , Music Video : " Hope " by Twista Featuring Faith Evans , Previews and Scene Selection .
A restored widescreen hi - definition Blu - ray Disc version of the film was released on December 16 , 2008 .
Special features include ; two commentaries - The Man Behind the Movie ; Fast Break at Richmond High ; 6 Deleted scenes ; " Hope " music video by Twista featuring Faith Evans ; Writing Coach Carter :
The Two Man Game ; Coach Carter :
Making the Cut ; and the theatrical trailer in HD .
An additional viewing option for the film in the media format of Video on demand has been made available as well .
RESPONSE CRITICAL RECEPTION
Section::::Response .
Section::::Critical reception .
Coach Carter received generally positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 64 % based on 148 reviews , with an average rating of 6.1/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , "
Even though it 's based on a true story , Coach Carter is pretty formulaic stuff , but it 's effective and energetic , thanks to a strong central performance from Samuel L. Jackson . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average , the film has a score of 57 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Coach Carter premiered in cinemas on January 14 , 2005 in wide release throughout the United States .
During that weekend , the film opened in 1st place grossing $ 24.2 million from 2,524 locations , beating out Meet the Fockers ( $ 19.3 million ) .
The film 's revenue dropped by 24 % in its second week of release , earning $ 8,015,331 .
For that particular weekend , the film slipped to 5th place with a slightly higher theater count at 2,574 .
The thriller film Hide and Seek opened in 1st place with $ 21,959,233 in box office business .
During its final week in release , Coach Carter opened in 61st place grossing a marginal $ 26,554 in revenue .
For that weekend period , The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy starring Martin Freeman opened in 1st place with $ 21,103,203 in box office receipts .
Coach Carter went on to top out domestically at $ 67,264,877 in total ticket sales through an initial 16-week theatrical run .
For 2005 as a whole , the film would cumulatively rank at a box office performance position of 36 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated and won several awards in 2005–06 . !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result 2005
BET Awards rowspan=32005
Black Movie Awards
rowspan=4Black Reel Awards of 2006 ESPY Awards 2005
rowspan=42005 37th NAACP Image Awards 2005
MTV Movie Awards
2006 38th
People 's Choice Awards rowspan=32005
Teen Choice Awards SEE ALSO * 2005 in film *
Ken Carter
*
Richmond High School
REFERENCES Footnotes
Further reading EXTERNAL LINKS
* Coach Carter 's official website