THE GOLDEN COMPASS ( FILM )
The Golden Compass is a 2007 fantasy adventure film based on Northern Lights , the first novel in Philip Pullman 's trilogy His Dark Materials .
Written and directed by Chris Weitz , it stars Nicole Kidman , Dakota Blue Richards , Daniel Craig , Sam Elliott , Eva Green , and Ian McKellen .
The project was announced in February 2002 , but difficulties over the script and the selection of a director caused significant delays .
At US$ 180 million , it was one of New Line Cinema 's most expensive projects ever , and its disappointing results in the US contributed to New Line 's February 2008 restructuring .
The film depicts the adventures of Lyra Belacqua , an orphan living in a parallel universe where a dogmatic ruling power called the Magisterium opposes free inquiry .
Children in that universe are being kidnapped by an unknown group called the Gobblers who are supported by the Magisterium .
Lyra joins a tribe of sea - farers on a trip to the far North , the land of the armoured polar bears , in search of the missing children .
Before its release , the film received criticism from secularist organisations and fans of His Dark Materials for the dilution of elements of the story which were critical of religion , as well as from some religious organisations for the source material 's anti - Catholic themes .
The studio ordered significant changes late in post - production , which Weitz later called a " terrible " experience .
Although the film 's visual effects ( which Weitz has called the film 's " most successful element " ) won both a BAFTA and an Academy Award , critical reception was mixed and revenue lower than anticipated .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story takes place in an alternate world dominated by a powerful church called the Magisterium , and where part of the spirit resides outside a person as an animal companion called a dæmon .
At present , poor , orphan and Gyptian children are disappearing at the hands of a group that the children call the Gobblers .
Lyra Belacqua ( Dakota Blue Richards ) is an orphan raised at Jordan College in Oxford , while her uncle , esteemed explorer and scholar Lord Asriel ( Daniel Craig ) , is busy seeking the elusive Dust , a cosmic particle of which the Magisterium has forbidden even the mention .
When Asriel returns from his latest expedition , Lyra and her dæmon Pantalaimon ( Freddie Highmore ) witness a Magisterium agent poison his wine .
Lyra warns her uncle , saving his life ; then she watches Asriel give a presentation regarding his findings on the North Pole , where he was able to prove the Dust 's existence .
The college gives Asriel a grant to fund another expedition that could lead to the discovery of the infinite worlds linked by Dust , which would severely undermine the Magisterium 's hold on the world .
At dinner , Lyra meets Mrs. Coulter ( Nicole Kidman ) , a wealthy , powerful woman who is presented as " a friend of the college " .
Mrs. Coulter insists on taking Lyra on a trip north as her assistant .
Before Lyra leaves , the Master of the college entrusts her with the only remaining alethiometer , a compass - like artifact that reveals the truth .
The Magisterium has seized or destroyed all the others .
He instructs her to keep it secret , especially from Mrs. Coulter .
Mrs. Coulter takes Lyra into her home , in a big city that resembles a retrofuturistic London , and starts taking her to socialite dinners and parties .
In her bedroom , Lyra gazes upon the alethiometer and notices that it continuously points to a lady , a lightning bolt and a baby .
She does not know what to make of her observation , however , and says nothing of it to Mrs. Coulter .
Despite initially projecting the image of a free - spirited woman , she reveals herself to be extremely respectful of the Magisterium and its function .
One night , Lyra casually mentions Dust ; this puts Mrs. Coulter on edge as she warns Lyra never to mention it again , and also insists that she stop carrying around the bag secretly containing the aleithiometer .
Mrs. Coulter 's dæmon ( a golden monkey ) attacks Pantalaimon , causing Lyra to give in .
Lyra and Pantalaimon discover that Mrs. Coulter is head of the General Oblation Board , also known as the " Gobblers " , who have been kidnapping local children .
Lyra also learns that her best friend Roger and her Gyptian friend Billy have been both taken by the Gobblers .
Lyra and Pantalaimon walk in on Mrs. Coulter 's dæmon attempting to steal the alethiometer and they escape into the streets .
The Gobblers pursue her , but she is saved by Billy 's mother , who takes her to the ship of the King of the Gyptians , heading north to rescue all the captured children .
Lyra shows the alethiometer to a wise Gyptian elder , Farder Coram ( Tom Courtenay ) , and it is revealed that she is able to decipher the device 's answers .
After consulting with the Magisterium agent , Mrs. Coulter sends two mechanical spy - flies after Lyra .
One is batted away but the other is caught and sealed in a can by Farder Coram , who explains that the spy - fly has a sting with a sleeping poison .
Meanwhile , Lord Asriel has reached Svalbard , the kingdom of the Ice Bears , but he is captured by Samoyed tribesmen hired by Mrs. Coulter .
One night , Lyra is visited on the ship by a witch queen , Serafina Pekkala ( Eva Green ) .
She tells Lyra that the missing children are in an experimental station called Bolvangar .
At a northern port , Lyra is befriended by a Texan aeronaut named Lee Scoresby ( Sam Elliott ) , who advises her to hire himself and his friend Iorek Byrnison ( Ian McKellen ) , an armoured bear that Lee has come to rescue .
Once a prince of his people , but now exiled in shame , the giant polar bear has been tricked out of his armour by the local townspeople .
Using the alethiometer , Lyra tells Iorek where to find his armour .
After recovering his armour , Iorek joins the Gyptian trek northward , along with Lee .
While the group is camped for the night , Lyra rides on Iorek 's back to an abandoned building the alethiometer pointed her toward .
There , Lyra finds an escaped , cowering Billy separated from his dæmon named Ratter and realises that is what the Gobblers are doing to the kidnapped children , something they call " intercision " .
Lyra reunites Billy with his mother just as the group is attacked by Samoyeds , who capture Lyra .
Iorek and Lee follow her in Lee 's airship .
Taken to the bear king Ragnar Sturlusson ( Ian McShane ) , Lyra tricks him into fighting Iorek one on one .
At first , Ragnar , who had already beaten Iorek while usurping his throne , seems to have the upper hand in the fight , but Iorek eventually manages to kill his rival , becoming the new and rightful king .
Iorek carries Lyra to a thin ice bridge near Bolvangar , but only Lyra is able to cross over before the bridge breaks .
Upon reaching the station , Lyra is welcomed in and taken to eat dinner with the children , where she is reunited with Roger .
While sneaking around , Lyra hears Mrs. Coulter tell the station scientists that Asriel has escaped capture and set up a laboratory , but Magisterium soldiers are on their way to arrest and execute him for heresy .
She also hears the scientists talk about their experiments to sever the bond between a child and his or her dæmon .
Caught spying , Lyra and Pantalaimon are thrown in the intercision chamber , and end up unconscious .
On seeing Lyra in the chamber , Mrs. Coulter rescues her and takes her to her quarters .
When Lyra wakes up , Mrs. Coulter explains to Lyra how , in her and the Magisterium 's view , the intercision is needed to save the children from the corrupting influence of the Dust .
She also reveals she is Lyra 's mother , but was forced to give her away because at the time of her birth she was not married .
Lyra correctly guesses that Asriel is her father .
When Mrs. Coulter asks for the alethiometer , Lyra gives her the can containing the spy - fly instead .
The fly stings Mrs. Coulter , knocking her and her dæmon out .
Lyra runs to the room with the intercision machine and manages to destroy it , setting off a series of explosions that tear the facility apart .
Outside , the fleeing children are attacked by Tartar mercenaries and their wolf dæmons .
The battle is joined by Iorek , Lee Scoresby , the Gyptians , and a band of flying witches led by Serafina Pekkala .
The Tartars are defeated and the children are rescued .
Rather than returning south , Lyra , Roger , Iorek , Lee and Serafina fly further north in search of Asriel .
Confirming Serafina 's prophecy of an upcoming war with Lyra at the centre , Lyra is determined to fight the Magisterium and stop their plans , which include taking over all the other worlds in the universe .
CAST * Dakota Blue Richards as Lyra Belacqua , who embarks on a voyage to battle the forces of evil and rescue her best friend .
New Line Cinema announced 11-year - old Richards ' casting in June 2006 .
It was her first acting role .
* Nicole Kidman as Mrs. Coulter , an influential woman who takes an interest in Lyra ( and later admits that she is Lyra 's mother ) .
Kidman was author Philip Pullman 's preferred choice for the role ten years before production of the film , and despite initially rejecting the offer to star as she did not want to play a villain , she signed on after receiving a personal letter from Pullman .
* Daniel Craig as Lord Asriel , Lyra 's strict and mysterious adventurer uncle ( later revealed to be her father ) .
In July 2006 , it was reported that Paul Bettany was in talks to play the role .
* Sam Elliott as Lee Scoresby , a Texan aeronaut who comes to Lyra 's aid .
Pullman has singled out Elliott 's performance as one the film got " just right " .
* Eva Green as Serafina Pekkala , a witch queen .
* Jim Carter as John Faa , the king of the Gyptians .
* Clare Higgins as Ma Costa , member of a Gyptian family that aids Lyra .
* Ben Walker as Roger Parslow , Lyra 's best friend , who is kidnapped and taken north .
* Charlie Rowe as Billy Costa , son of Ma Costa , and Lyra 's friend .
* Christopher Lee as the Magisterium 's first high councilor .
Lee 's casting was also at New Line 's behest , rather than that of Chris Weitz .
* Tom Courtenay as Farder Coram , Gyptian second - in - command and advisor to John Faa .
* Derek Jacobi as the Magisterial emissary .
* Simon McBurney as Fra Pavel , a Magisterial agent .
* Jack Shepherd as master of Jordan College .
* Magda Szubanski as Mrs. Lonsdale * Edward de Souza as the Magisterium 's second high councilor .
VOICE CAST
* Ian McKellen as Iorek Byrnison , a panserbjørn ( armored bear ) who becomes Lyra 's friend and comrade .
Nonso Anozie had recorded lines for the part of Iorek Byrnison , but was replaced by McKellen at a late stage as New Line wanted a bigger name in the role .
New Line president of production Toby Emmerich claimed that he " never thought Anozie sounded like Iorek " and while he initially trusted director Weitz 's casting decision , he " never stopped thinking that this guy did n't sound right .
" The recasting was against Weitz 's wishes , though he later said " if you 're going to have anyone recast in your movie , you 're happy
it 's Ian McKellen .
"
* Freddie Highmore as Pantalaimon , Lyra 's dæmon .
Pan was originally to be voiced by an older actor , but they called in Highmore instead , as it would be more of an intimate relationship if Pan and Lyra were the same age , and also would underscore the contrast between Lyra 's relationship with him versus her relationships with older male characters such as Lord Asriel , Lee Scoresby and Iorek .
* Ian McShane as Ragnar Sturlusson , king of the panserbjørne .
Ragnar 's name in the book was Iofur Raknison , but the name was changed to prevent confusion between him and Iorek .
However , in the German - language version of the film , the dialogue retains the name " Iofur Raknison " , whilst the subtitles reflect the change .
* Kathy Bates as Hester , Lee Scoresby 's jackrabbit dæmon .
* Kristin Scott Thomas as Stelmaria , Lord Asriel 's dæmon .
PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Philip Pullman 's His Dark Materials trilogy .
In July 2003 Tom Stoppard was commissioned to write the screenplay .
Directors Brett Ratner and Sam Mendes expressed interest in the film , but a year later , Chris Weitz was hired to direct after approaching the studio with an unsolicited 40-page treatment .
The studio rejected the script , asking Weitz to start from scratch .
Since Weitz was a fan of Stoppard , he decided not to read the adaptation in case he " subconsciously poached things from him . "
After delivering his script , Weitz cited Barry Lyndon and Star Wars as stylistic influences on the film .
In 2004 , Weitz was invited by The Lord of the Rings director Peter Jackson onto the set of King Kong in order to gather information on directing a blockbuster film , and to receive advice on dealing with New Line Cinema , for whom Jackson had worked on Lord of the Rings .
After a subsequent interview in which Weitz said the novel 's attacks on organised religion would have to be softened , he was criticised by some fans , and on December 15 , 2004 , Weitz announced his resignation as director of the trilogy , citing the enormous technical challenges of the epic .
He later indicated that he had envisioned the possibility of being denounced by both the book 's fans and its detractors , as well as a studio hoping for another Lord of the Rings .
On August 9 , 2005 , it was announced that British director Anand Tucker would take over from Weitz .
Tucker felt the film would thematically be about Lyra " looking for a family " , and Pullman agreed : " He has plenty of very good ideas , and he is n't daunted by the technical challenges .
But the best thing from the point of view of all who care about the story is his awareness that it is n't about computer graphics ; it is n't about fantastic adventures in amazing - looking worlds ; it 's about Lyra . "
Tucker resigned on May 8 , 2006 , citing creative disagreements with New Line , and Weitz returned to direct .
Weitz said " I 'm both the first and third director on the film … but I did a lot of growing in the interim . "
According to producer Deborah Forte , Tucker wanted to make a smaller , less exciting film than New Line wanted .
New Line production president Toby Emmerich said of Weitz 's return : " I think Chris realised that if he did n't come back in and step up , maybe the movie was n't going to get made … We really did n't have a Plan B at that point .
" Weitz was attracted back to the project after receiving a letter from Pullman asking him to reconsider .
Since his departure , blueprints , production design and visual effects strategies had been put into position , and while Weitz admitted that his fears did not vanish , the project suddenly seemed feasible for the director .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began at Shepperton Studios on September 4 , 2006 , with additional sequences shot in Switzerland and Norway .
Filming also took place at the Old Royal Naval College at Greenwich , Chiswick House in London , and in Radcliffe Square , Christ Church , Oxford , Exeter College , Oxford ,
The Queen 's College , Oxford , The Historic Dockyard Chatham and Hedsor House in Buckinghamshire .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Production designer Dennis Gassner says of his work on the film : Rhythm and Hues Studios created the main dæmons and Framestore CFC created all the bears .
British company Cinesite created the secondary dæmons .
DIFFERENCES FROM THE NOVEL
Section::::Differences from the novel .
Numerous scenes from the novel did not feature in the film or were markedly changed .
On December 7 , 2007 , New York magazine reviewed draft scripts from both Stoppard and Weitz ; both were significantly longer than the final version , and Weitz 's draft ( which , unlike Stoppard 's , did not feature significant additions to the source material ) was pronounced the best of the three .
The magazine concluded that instead of a " likely three hours of running time " that included such scenes as Mrs. Coulter 's London party and Lyra 's meeting with a witch representative , the studio had opted for a " failed " length of under two hours in order to maximise revenue .
On October 9 , 2007 , Weitz revealed that the final three chapters from Northern Lights had been moved to the film 's potential sequel , The Subtle Knife , in order to provide " the most promising conclusion to the first film and the best possible beginning to the second , " though he also said less than a month later that there had been " tremendous marketing pressure " to create " an upbeat ending . "
( The San Francisco Chronicle found this " truncated " ending abrupt . )
Author Pullman publicly supported these changes , saying that " every film has to make changes to the story that the original book tells — not to change the outcome , but to make it fit the dimensions and the medium of film " .
In addition to removing the novel 's unsettling ending , the film reverses the order in which Lyra travels to Bolvangar , the Gobbler 's outpost , and then Svalbard , the armoured bears ' kingdom .
( Neither deviation from the book features in Scholastic Publishing 's The Golden Compass : The Story of the Movie novelisation . )
In July 2009 , Weitz told a Comic Con audience that the film had been " recut by [ New Line ] , and my experience with it ended being quite a terrible one " ; he also told Time.com that he had felt that by " being faithful to the book I was working at odds with the studio " .
In 2011 , Pullman told an audience at the British Humanist Association annual conference that he was also disappointed by this decision , and hoped that a director 's cut of the film would be released some day including the footage cut by New Line .
In the book the Jordan College Master reluctantly poisons Lord Asriel 's wine ; in the film a visiting Magisterium official undertakes ( more willingly )
this action .
The alethiometer is mentioned multiple times throughout the film as a " golden compass " .
In the film , Billy Costa replaces Tony Makarios as the victim of intercision , and Tony is left out .
Billy has the daemon Ratter , which is Tony 's in the book .
Billy features in the first scene of the film , whereas , in the book , he is first seen at Bolvangar , and is saved before ever having to go through intercision .
Tasha Robinson of The A.V. Club argued that through the use of a spoken introduction and other exposition - filled dialogue , the film fails by " baldly revealing up front everything that the novel is trying to get you to wonder about and to explore slowly " .
Youyoung Lee wrote in a December 2007 Entertainment Weekly that the film " leaves out the gore " , such as the book 's ritualistic heart - eating that concludes the bear fight , " to create family - friendlier fare " .
Lee also said that the film " downplays the Magisterium 's religious nature " , but Robinson argued that the depiction of the church in the film is as " a hierarchical organisation of formally robed , iconography - heavy priests who dictate and define morality for their followers , are based out of cathedrals , and decry teachings counter to theirs as ' heresy . '
... doing ugly things to children under cover of secrecy " .
Robinson then asks , " Who are most people going to think of besides the Catholic Church ? "
The film gives more prominence to scenes showing the Magisterium officials ' perspective than the novel .
The novel rarely mentions explicitly the Magisterium 's intentions , relying on the gossip of others , and the comments of Mrs. Coulter .
Although the character of Mrs. Coulter has black hair in the novel , Pullman responded to the blonde Kidman 's portrayal by saying " I was clearly wrong .
You sometimes are wrong about your characters .
She 's blonde .
She has to be . "
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
Several key themes of the novels , such as the rejection of religion and the abuse of power in a fictionalised version of the Church , were diluted in the adaptation .
Director Weitz said that " in the books the Magisterium is a version of the Catholic Church gone wildly astray from its roots " , but that the organization portrayed in his film would not directly match that of Pullman 's books .
Instead , the Magisterium represents all dogmatic organisations .
Weitz said New Line Cinema had feared the story 's anti - religious themes would make the film financially unviable in the US , and so religion and God ( " the Authority " in the books ) would not be referenced directly .
Attempting to reassure fans of the novels , Weitz said that religion would instead appear in euphemistic terms , yet the decision was criticised by some fans , anti - censorship groups , and the National Secular Society ( of which Pullman is an honorary associate ) , which said " they are taking the heart out of it , losing the point of it , castrating it ... " and " this is part of a long - term problem over freedom of speech .
"
The Atlantic Monthly said also " With $ 180 million at stake , the studio opted to kidnap the book 's body and leave behind its soul .
" The changes from the novel have been present since Tom Stoppard 's rejected version of the script , and Pullman expected the film to be " faithful , " although he also said , " They do know where to put the theology and that 's off the film . "
A Christianity Today review of the film noted that " ' Magisterium ' does refer , in the real world , to the teaching authority of the Roman Catholic Church , and the film [ is ] peppered with religiously significant words like ' oblation ' and ' heresy ' " , adding that when one character smashes through the wall of a Magisterium building , the damaged exterior is " decorated with [ Christian ] Byzantine icons . "
On October 7 , 2007 , the Catholic League called for a boycott of the film .
League president William A. Donohue said he would not ordinarily object to the film , but that while the religious elements are diluted from the source material , the film will encourage children to read the novels , which he says denigrate Christianity and promote atheism for children .
He cited Pullman telling The Washington Post in 2001 that he is trying to undermine the basis of Christian belief .
The league hoped that " the film [ would fail ] to meet box office expectations and that [ Pullman 's ] books attract few buyers " , declaring the boycott campaign a success after a North American opening weekend which was lower than anticipated .
One week after the film 's release , Roger Ebert said of the campaign , " any bad buzz on a family film can be mortal , and that seems to have been the case this time . "
Albert Mohler , the president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary , agreed that the broad appeal of the film was a dangerous lure to the novels , which he criticised for carrying a clear agenda to expose what [ Pullman ] believes is the " tyranny of the Christian faith " and for " [ providing ] a liberating mythology for a new secular age . "
Denny Wayman of the Free Methodist Church made the assertion that The Golden Compass is a " film trying to preach an atheistic message " .
Other evangelical groups , such as the Christian Film and Television Commission , adopted a " wait - and - see " approach to the film before deciding upon any action , as did the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales .
Some religious scholars have challenged the view that the story carries atheistic themes , while in November 2007 , a review of the film by the director and staff reviewer of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops ' ( USCCB ) Office for Film and Broadcasting appeared on the website of the Catholic News Service and in Catholic newspapers across the country .
The review suggested that instead of a boycott , it may be appropriate for Catholic parents to " talk through any thorny philosophical issues " with their children .
However , on December 10 , 2007 the review was removed from the website at the USCCB 's request .
On December 19 , 2007 , the Vatican newspaper , L'Osservatore Romano , published an editorial in which it denounced the film as godless .
Pullman said of Donohue 's call for a boycott , " Why do n't we trust readers ?
Why do n't we trust filmgoers ?
Oh , it causes me to shake my head with sorrow that such nitwits could be loose in the world .
"
In a discussion with Donohue on CBS 's Early Show , Ellen Johnson , president of American Atheists , said that rather than promote atheism , the film would encourage children to question authority , saying that would not be a bad thing for children to learn .
Director Weitz says that he believes His Dark Materials is " not an atheistic work , but a highly spiritual and reverent piece of writing , " and Nicole Kidman defended her decision to star in the film , saying that " I would n't be able to do this film if I thought it were at all anti - Catholic . "
Some commentators indicated that they believed both sides ' criticism would prove ultimately impotent and that the negative publicity would prove a boon for the film 's box office .
Nonetheless , the film trilogy has not been continued , prompting actor Sam Elliott to blame censorship and the Catholic Church .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered in London on November 27 , 2007 , and was released on December 5 , 2007 , in British cinemas by Entertainment Film Distributors and released on December 7 , 2007 , in American cinemas by New Line Cinema .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc formats in the United Kingdom on April 28 , 2008 , and the United States on April 29 , 2008 .
The movie is closed - captioned by the National Captioning Institute on its first Home Video release .
The extra material on the single - disc DVD consists of previews of upcoming New Line Cinema films .
The two - disc edition includes a commentary from writer / director Chris Weitz , eleven " making - of " featurettes , a photo gallery , and theatrical and teaser trailers .
The Blu - ray Disc features the same extras from the two - disc DVD edition .
Exclusive to Blu - ray Disc is visual commentary picture - in - picture feature which enables viewers to access behind - the - scene features while watching the movie .
Shortly before the film 's release , Weitz suggested that an extended cut of the film could be released on DVD , saying " I 'd really love to do a fuller cut of the film " ; he further speculated that such a version " could probably end up at two and a half hours .
" This proposed cut would presumably not include the original ending : MTV reported in December 2007 that Weitz hoped to include that material at the beginning of a possible The Subtle Knife adaptation , and that a Compass Director 's Cut might feature " a moment " of it as a " teaser " .
Cast members Craig and Green have echoed this hope for such a DVD cut ; so far , however , no official announcement has been made .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The North American opening weekend return was " a little disappointing " for New Line Cinema , earning US$ 25.8 million with total domestic box office of $ 70 million compared to an estimated $ 180 million production budget .
Despite this , the film 's fortunes rebounded as its performance outside the United States was described as " stellar " by Variety , and as " astonishing " by New Line .
In the United Kingdom , the film grossed $ 53,198,635 and became the second - highest - grossing non - sequel of 2007 there ( behind The Simpsons Movie ) .
In Japan , the film was officially released in March 2008 on 700 screens , ultimately grossing $ 33,501,399 ; but previews of the film between February 23–24 , 2008 , earned $ 2.5 million .
By July 6 , 2008 , it had earned $ 302,127,136 internationally , totaling $ 372,234,864 worldwide .
Overseas rights to the film were sold to fund the $ 180 million production budget for the film , so most of these profits did not go to New Line .
This has been cited as a possible " last straw " in Time Warner 's decision to merge New Line Cinema into Warner Bros. Pictures .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Reviews of The Golden Compass were mixed .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a 42 per cent rating , based on 193 reviews .
The critical consensus reads : " Without the bite or the controversy of the source material , The Golden Compass is reduced to impressive visuals overcompensating for lax storytelling . "
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film has received an average score of 51 , based on 33 reviews .
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said that the film " crams so many events , characters , ... twists and turns , sumptuously appointed rooms and ethereally strange vistas ... that [ it ] risks losing you in the whirl " and that while The Golden Compass is " an honorable work , " it is " hampered by its fealty to the book and its madly rushed pace . "
James Berardinelli of ReelReviews gave the film two and a half stars out of four , calling it " adequate , but not inspired " and criticising the first hour for its rushed pace and sketchily - developed characters .
James Christopher of The Times was disappointed , praising the " marvellous " special effects and casting , but saying that the " books weave a magic the film simply can not match " and citing a " lack of genuine drama . "
Time rated it a " B " and called it a " good , if familiar fantasy , " saying " The find is Dakota Blue Richards ... who 's both grounded and magical . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian rated it four stars out of five , praising Nicole Kidman 's casting and saying it had " no other challengers as [ 2007 's ] big Christmas movie . "
Leonard Maltin gave the film three out of four stars , and said that " Richards is persuasive " and that it " does a good job of introducing us to an unfamiliar world . "
Critic Roger Ebert awarded the film four out of four stars and called it " a darker , deeper fantasy epic than the " Rings " trilogy ( The Lord of the Rings ) , The Chronicles of Narnia or the Potter films , " saying that it " creates villains that are more complex and poses more intriguing questions .
As a visual experience , it is superb .
As an escapist fantasy , it is challenging ...
I think [ it ] is a wonderfully good - looking movie , with exciting passages and a captivating heroine . "
Pullman himself was described by a Times interviewer as sounding " ambivalent " and " guarded " about the film , saying in March 2008 : " A lot of things about it were good … Nothing 's perfect .
Nothing can bring out all that 's in the book .
There are always compromises " .
He hoped , however , that the rest of the trilogy would be adapted with the same cast and crew .
In July 2009 , after this possibility had been exhausted , Weitz told Time.com that he thought the film 's special effects ended up being its " most successful element . "
At the British Humanist Association conference in 2011 , Pullman said that there were not , after all , going to be more films with the same cast and crew .
While praising the portrayals of his characters by Nicole Kidman and Dakota Blue Richards , Pullman said that he was disappointed with the final film and New Line 's re - editing of it .
In 2014 Pullman called the film " over - designed " and criticised the screenplay : " They needed an ending that would work for a single film , but one that would also work if it was the first of a trilogy .
They wanted both a cliffhanger and a resolution .
You just ca n't do that . "
Debbie Day of Premiere Magazine , said " The Golden Compass ultimately fails as a film in its broad strokes and inadequate scene development . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The Golden Compass won the 2008 BAFTA Film Award for Special Visual Effects and an Oscar for Best Visual Effects notably beating what many considered to be the front runner , Michael Bay 's Transformers which had swept the VES awards prior .
It was also nominated for two Critics ' Choice Awards in 2007 ( " Best Family Film , " and " Best Young Actress " for Dakota Blue Richards ) , five Satellite Awards and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form .
The Golden Compass was nominated for the National Movie Award for Best Family movie but lost to Disney / Pixar 's WALL - E. !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result CANCELLED SEQUELS
Section::::Cancelled sequels .
At the time of The Golden Compasss theatrical release , Chris Weitz pledged to " protect [ the ] integrity " of the prospective sequels by being " much less compromising " in the book - to - film adaptation process .
New Line Cinema commissioned Hossein Amini to write a screenplay based on the second book in the trilogy , The Subtle Knife , potentially for release in 2010 or 2011 , with the third book of the trilogy , The Amber Spyglass , to follow .
However , New Line president Toby Emmerich stressed that production of the second and third films was dependent on the financial success of The Golden Compass .
When The Golden Compass did not meet expectations at the United States box office , the likelihood of a sequel was downplayed by New Line .
According to studio co - head Michael Lynne , " The jury is still very much out on the movie , and while it 's performed very strongly overseas we 'll look at it early 2008 and see where we 're going with a sequel . "
In February 2008 , Weitz told The Daily Yomiuri , a Japanese newspaper , that he still hoped for the sequels ' production : " at first it looked like we were down for the count because in the U.S. [ the film ] underperformed , but then internationally it performed [ better ] than expectations .
So , a lot depends on Japan , frankly … I think if it does well enough here we 'll be in good shape for that . "
Although producer Deborah Forte had , in March 2008 , expressed optimism that the sequels would be made , by October 2008 , the two planned sequels were officially placed on hold , according to New Line Cinema , because of financial concerns during the global recession .
Sam Elliott , however , stated , " The Catholic Church ... lambasted them , and I think it scared New Line off . "
In 2011 , Philip Pullman remarked at the British Humanist Association annual conference that due to the first film 's disappointing sales in the United States , there would not be any sequels made .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
French composer Alexandre Desplat composed the film 's music .
British singer Kate Bush wrote and performed the song " Lyra " which is played over the end credits .
The film 's soundtrack album was released on January 22 , 2008 , by WaterTower Music .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
The video game for this film was released in November 2007 in Europe and December 2007 in North America and Australia for the PC , Wii , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation Portable , Nintendo DS and the Xbox 360 .
It was developed by Shiny Entertainment and published by Sega .
Players take control of the characters Lyra Belacqua and Iorek Byrnison in Lyra 's attempt to save her friend Roger from the General Oblation Board .
As this game does not fully take into account the changes made by the final version of the film , a small amount of footage from the film 's deleted ending can be viewed near the end of the game , and the order in which Lyra travels to Bolvangar and Svalbard follows the book and not the film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Book Vs .
Film :
The Golden Compass by The A.V. Club * The Golden Compass Production Notes