FLARE GUN
A flare gun , also known as a Very pistol or signal pistol , is a large - bore handgun that discharges flares .
The flare gun is used to create illumination for improved vision or as a distress signal .
A flare gun can be used as a deadly weapon ; however , that is not its intended function .
TYPES Section::::Types .
The most common type of flare gun is a Very ( sometimes spelled Verey ) , which was named after Edward Wilson Very ( 1847–1910 ) , an American naval officer who developed and popularized a single - shot breech - loading snub - nosed pistol that fired flares ( Very lights ) .
They have a single action trigger mechanism , hammer action , and a center fire pin .
Modern varieties are frequently made out of brightly colored , durable plastic .
The older type of Very pistol , typical of the type used in the Second World War , are of one inch bore ( 26.5 mm ) , now known as " Calibre 4 " for signal pistols .
These are still available and more recent longer barrel models can also fire parachute flares .
Many newer models fire smaller 12-gauge flares .
In countries where possession of firearms is strictly controlled , such as the United Kingdom , the use of Very pistols as emergency equipment on boats is less common than , for example , the United States .
In such locations , distress flares are more commonly fired from single - shot tube devices which are then disposed of after use .
These devices are fired by twisting or striking a pad on one end , but the contents are otherwise similar to a round from a flare gun , although the flares themselves are much larger and can burn brighter for longer ..
In the Russian Federation , which also has strict controls on firearms , a special tube - shaped flare launching device called a " Hunter 's Signal " ( Сигнал Охотника ) is available .
This is reusable but is deliberately designed in a way to avoid resemblance to a gun .
Flare guns may be used whenever someone needs to send a distress signal .
The flares must be shot directly above , making the signal visible for a longer period of time and revealing the position of whoever is in need of assistance .
There are four distinct flare calibers : 12ga , 25 mm , 26.5 mm , and 37mmthe first three being the most popular for boaters .
USE AS
WEAPONS Section::::Use as weapons .
While not intended as a weapon , flare guns have been used as such in some situations .
Towards the end of World War I during the Final Offensive of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign , on 19 October 1918 a German aircraft was destroyed on the ground by firing a Very light into the aircraft .
The D.F.W. two - seater was first seen in the air ; the first German aircraft since aerial fighting over Deraa on 16 and 17 September just prior to the beginning of the Battle of Sharon .
The two - seater was forced to land and was destroyed after the German pilot and observer had moved to safety .
In 1942 , a German pilot mistakenly landed at the Pembrey Airfield in Wales .
The duty pilot , Sgt .
Jeffreys , did not have a conventional weapon , so he grabbed a Very pistol and used it to capture the German pilot , Oberleutnant Armin Faber .
In World War II , Germany manufactured grenades designed to be fired from adapted flare guns known as the Kampfpistole , or Sturmpistole in its final form .
The weapon was designed to function as an anti - tank weapon but failed to perform to expectations due to the minuscule amount of TNT carried in the hollow charge projectiles .
In the latter stages of the Korean War , on November 2 of 1951 , Lieutenant Edward Mastronardi and his 28-man platoon of the Royal Canadian Regiment were occupying a spur halfway between UN and Chinese lines known as the Song - gok .
During the night of the 2nd-3rd , Chinese infantry launched several attacks against the spur .
During the second attack , Mastronardi personally shot two Chinese soldiers with his Inglis Hi - Power pistol , and killed a third with his flare gun .
CONVERSION KITS Section::::Conversion kits .
Conversion kits are available to convert a flare gun to accept conventional ammunition by use of barrel inserts .
Use of these kits in the Orion plastic flare gun is not recommended by the manufacturer and ATF tests have shown that repeated use results in a catastrophic failure .
In the United States , if these conversion kits are used in a flare gun , the converted gun is considered to be a firearm by the ATF .
If a rifled barrel insert is used , the converted firearm is classified as a pistol ; if a smoothbore barrel insert is used , the converted firearm is classified as an AOW subject to the additional requirements of the NFA .
Flare cartridges are low pressure compared to conventional ammunition and even metal flare guns are not designed , tested or intended to be used with conventional ammunition .
Conversion of a flare gun to fire conventional ammunition may also be restricted by local " zip gun " laws .
SEE ALSO
* 37 mm flare
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of the Very pistol with many examples
* WW German signal - pistol grenades and their use by tank crews .
* Firing Very Pistol , November 1942 , Popular Science