SALINE ( MEDICINE ) Saline , also known as saline solution , is a mixture of sodium chloride in water and has a number of uses in medicine .
Applied to the affected area it is used to clean wounds , help remove contact lenses , and help with dry eyes .
By injection into a vein it is used to treat dehydration such as from gastroenteritis and diabetic ketoacidosis .
It is also used to dilute other medications to be given by injection .
Large amounts may result in fluid overload , swelling , acidosis , and high blood sodium .
In those with long - standing low blood sodium , excessive use may result in osmotic demyelination syndrome .
Saline is in the crystalloid family of medications .
It is most commonly used as a sterile 9 g of salt per litre ( 0.9 % ) solution , known as normal saline .
Higher and lower concentrations may also occasionally be used .
Saline has a pH of 5.5 making it acidic .
The medical use of saline began around 1831 .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
The wholesale cost in the developing world is about US$ 0.60–4.20 per liter of normal saline .
CONCENTRATIONS Section::::Concentrations .
Concentrations vary from low to normal to high .
High concentrations are used rarely in medicine but frequently in molecular biology .
NORMAL Section::::Normal .
Normal saline ( NSS , NS or N / S ) is the commonly used phrase for a solution of 0.90 % w / v of NaCl , 308 mOsm / L or 9.0 g per litre .
Less commonly , this solution is referred to as physiological saline or isotonic saline ( because it closely approximates isotonic , that is , physiologically normal , solution ) ; although neither of those names is technically accurate ( because normal saline is not exactly like blood serum ) , they convey the practical effect usually seen :
good fluid balance with minimal hypotonicity or hypertonicity .
NS is used frequently in intravenous drips ( IVs ) for patients who can not take fluids orally and have developed or are in danger of developing dehydration or hypovolemia .
NS is also used for aseptic purpose .
NS is typically the first fluid used when hypovolemia is severe enough to threaten the adequacy of blood circulation , and has long been believed to be the safest fluid to give quickly in large volumes .
However , it is now known that rapid infusion of NS can cause metabolic acidosis .
The solution is 9 grams of sodium chloride ( NaCl ) dissolved in water , to a total volume of 1000 ml ( weight per unit volume(w / v ) ) .
The mass of 1 millilitre of normal saline is 1.0046 gram at 22 ° C .
The molecular weight of sodium chloride is approximately 58.5 grams per mole , so 58.5 grams of sodium chloride equals 1 mole .
Since normal saline contains 9 grams of NaCl , the concentration is 9 grams per litre divided by 58.5 grams per mole , or 0.154 mole per litre .
Since NaCl dissociates into two ions – sodium and chloride – 1 molar NaCl is 2 osmolar .
Thus , NS contains 154 mEq / L of Na and Cl .
It has a slightly higher degree of osmolarity ( i.e. more solute per litre ) than blood ( However , if you take into account the osmotic coefficient , a correction for non - ideal solutions , then the saline solution is much closer to isotonic .
Osmotic coefficient of NaCl is about 0.93 ; therefore 0.154 × 1000 × 2 × .93 = 286.44 )
Nonetheless , the osmolarity of normal saline is a close approximation to the osmolarity of NaCl in blood .
One litre of 0.9 % Saline contains : * 154 mEq of sodium ion = 154 mmol
* 154 mEq of chloride ion = 154 mmol USAGE Section::::Usage .
For medical purposes , saline is often used to flush wounds and skin abrasions .
Normal saline will not burn or sting when applied .
Saline is also used in I.V. therapy , intravenously supplying extra water to rehydrate patients or supplying the daily water and salt needs ( " maintenance " needs ) of a patient who is unable to take them by mouth .
Because infusing a solution of low osmolality can cause problems such as hemolysis , intravenous solutions with reduced saline concentrations typically have dextrose ( glucose ) added to maintain a safe osmolality while providing less sodium chloride .
The amount of normal saline infused depends largely on the needs of the patient ( e.g. ongoing diarrhea or heart failure ) .
Saline is also often used for nasal washes to relieve some of the symptoms of the common cold .
The solution exerts a softening and loosening influence on the mucus to make it easier to wash out and clear the nasal passages for both babies and adults .
In this case " home - made " saline may be used : this is made by dissolving approximately half a teaspoon of table salt into 240ml ( approx .
8 ounces ) of clean tap water .
In very rare instances , amoeba Naegleria fowleri infection can occur if amoeba enters the body through the nose , therefore water used for nasal irrigation should be sterile .
Note that clean tap water is not necessarily a sterile liquid .
EYES Section::::Eyes .
Eye drops are saline - containing drops used on the eye .
Depending on the condition being treated , they may contain steroids , antihistamines , sympathomimetics , beta receptor blockers , parasympathomimetics , parasympatholytics , prostaglandins , non - steroidal anti - inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) , antibiotics or topical anesthetics .
Eye drops sometimes do not have medications in them and are only lubricating and tear - replacing solutions .
Syringe designed saline drops ( e.g. Wallace Cameron Ultra Saline Minipod ) are distributed in modern needle - exchange programmes as drugs efficiently can be administered either by injection , or ophthalmic , which is compared to intravenous use ; By demonstration , the elimination of latanoprost acid from plasma is rapid ( half - life 17 minutes ) after either ophthalmic or intravenous administration .
However , ophthalmic use is done with sterile filtered drugs that is potent in quite small doses , and with adjusted acidity of pH 7.0–7.5 after the drug has been added , to avoid eye damage .
The human eye has a pH of approximately 7.5 , water has 7.0 .
HYPERTONIC SALINE
Section::::Hypertonic saline .
Hypertonic saline—7 % NaCl solutions are considered mucoactive agents and thus are used to hydrate thick secretions ( mucus ) in order to make it easier to cough up and out ( expectorate ) .
3 % hypertonic saline solutions are also used in critical care settings , acutely increased intracranial pressure , or severe hyponatremia .
Inhalation of hypertonic saline has also been shown to help in other respiratory problems , specifically bronchiolitis .
Hypertonic saline is currently recommended by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation as a primary part of a cystic fibrosis treatment regimen .
An 11 % solution of xylitol with 0.65 % saline stimulates the washing of the nasopharynx and has an effect on the nasal pathogenic bacteria .
This has been used in complementary and alternative medicine .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Other concentrations commonly used include : * Half - normal saline ( 0.45 % NaCl ) , often with " D5 " ( 5 % dextrose ) , contains 77 mEq / L of Na and Cl and 50
g / L dextrose .
* Quarter - normal saline ( 0.22 % NaCl ) has 39 mEq / L of Na and Cl and almost always contains 5 % dextrose for osmolality reasons .
It can be used alone in Neonatal Intensive Care Units .
* Hypertonic saline may be used in perioperative fluid management protocols to reduce excessive intravenous fluid infusions and lessen pulmonary complications .
Hypertonic saline is used in treating hyponatremia and cerebral edema Rapid correction of hyponatremia via hypertonic saline , or via any saline infusion
> 40 mmol / L ( Na+ having a valence of 1 , 40 mmol / L = 40 mEq / L ) greatly increases risk of central pontine myelinolysis ( CPM ) , and so requires constant monitoring of patient response .
Water privation combined with diuretic block does not produce as much risk of CPM as saline administration does ; however , it does not correct hyponatremia as rapidly as administration of hypertonic saline does .
Due to hypertonicity , administration may result in phlebitis and tissue necrosis .
As such , concentrations greater than 3 % NaCl should normally be administered via a central venous catheter , also known as a ' central line ' .
Such hypertonic saline is normally available in two strengths , the former of which is more commonly administered : * 3 % NaCl has 513 mEq / L of Na and Cl .
* 5 % NaCl has 856 mEq / L of Na and Cl .
* NaCl solutions that are less commonly used are 7 % ( 1200 mEq / L ) and 23.4 % ( approx 4000 mEq / L ) , both of which are used ( also via central line ) , often in conjunction with supplementary diuretics , in the treatment of traumatic brain injury .
* Dextrose ( glucose ) 4 % in 0.18 % saline is used sometimes for maintenance replacement .
SOLUTIONS WITH ADDED INGREDIENTS Section::::Solutions with added ingredients .
In medicine , common types of salines include : * Lactated Ringer 's solution * Acetated Ringer 's solution * Intravenous sugar solutions * 5 % dextrose in normal saline ( D5NS ) * 10 % dextrose in normal saline ( D10NS ) * 5 % dextrose in half - normal saline ( D5HNS )
* 10 % dextrose in half - normal saline ( D10HNS )
And in cell biology , in addition to the above the following are used : *
Phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) ( recipes from Dulbecco = D - PBS , Galfre , Kuchler , Ausubel etc . )
* TRIS - buffered saline ( TBS ) ( recipes from Goldsmith , Ausubel etc . )
* Hank 's balanced salt solution ( HBSS )
* Earle 's balanced salt solution ( EBSS ) * Standard saline citrate ( SSC ) * HEPES - buffered saline ( HBS ) ( recipes from Dittmar , Liu , Ausubel etc . )
* Gey 's balanced salt solution ( GBSS ) HISTORY Section::::History .
Saline was believed to have originated during the Indian Blue cholera pandemic that swept across Europe in 1831 .
William Brooke O'Shaughnessy , a recent graduate of Edinburgh Medical School , proposed in an article to medical journal The Lancet to inject cholera patients with highly oxygenated salts to treat the " universal stagnation of the venous system and rapid cessation of arterialisation of the blood " seen in severely dehydrated cholera patients .
He found his treatment harmless in dogs , and his proposal was soon adopted by the physician Thomas Latta in treating cholera patients to beneficial effect .
In the following decades , variations and alternatives to Latta 's solution were tested and used in treating cholera patients .
These solutions contained a range of concentrations of sodium , chloride , potassium , carbonate , phosphate , and hydroxide .
The breakthrough in achieving physiological concentrations was accomplished by Sydney Ringer in the early 1880s , when he determined the optimal salt concentrations to maintain the contractility of frog heart muscle tissue .
Normal saline is considered a descendant of the pre - Ringer solutions , as Ringer 's findings were not adopted and widely used until decades later .
The term " normal saline " itself appears to have little historical basis , except for studies done in 1882–83 by Dutch physiologist Hartog Jacob Hamburger ; these in vitro studies of red cell lysis suggested incorrectly that 0.9 % was the concentration of salt in human blood ( rather than 0.6 % , the true concentration ) .
Normal saline has become widely used in modern medicine , but due to the mismatch with real blood , other solutions have proved better .
The 2018 publication of a randomized , controlled trial with 15,000 patients showed that lactated Ringer 's solution reduced mortality risk in intensive care unit patients by 1 % compared to normal saline , which given the large number of patients is a significant reduction .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE Section::::Society and culture .
Coconut water has been used in place of normal saline in areas without access to normal saline .
Its use , however , has not been well studied .
SEE ALSO
* Intravenous therapy
* Saline water * Salinometer REFERENCES