BRASSICA OLERACEA
Brassica oleracea is a plant species that includes many common foods as cultivars , including cabbage , broccoli , cauliflower , kale , Brussels sprouts , collard greens , savoy , kohlrabi , and gai lan .
In its uncultivated form , it is called " wild cabbage , " and is native to coastal southern and western Europe .
Its high tolerance for salt and lime , and its intolerance of competition from other plants typically restrict its natural occurrence to limestone sea cliffs , like the chalk cliffs on both sides of the English Channel , and the windswept coast on the western side of the Isle of Wight .
Wild B. oleracea is a tall biennial plant that forms a stout rosette of large leaves in the first year .
The leaves are fleshier and thicker than other Brassica species — an adaptation that helps it store water and nutrients in its difficult growing environment .
In its second year , it uses the stored nutrients to produce a flower spike tall with numerous yellow flowers .
CULTIVATION AND USES Section::::Cultivation and uses .
B. oleracea has become established as an important human food crop plant , used because of its large food reserves , which are stored over the winter in its leaves .
It is rich in essential nutrients including vitamin C. A diet rich in cruciferous vegetables ( e.g. , cabbage , broccoli , cauliflower ) is linked to a reduced risk of several human cancers .
Researchers believe it has been cultivated for several thousand years , but its history as a domesticated plant is not clear before Greek and Roman times , when it was a well - established garden vegetable .
Theophrastus mentions three kinds of rhaphanos ( ῤάφανος ) : a curly - leaved , a smooth - leaved , and a wild - type .
He reports the antipathy of the cabbage and the grape vine , for the ancients believed cabbages grown near grapes would impart their flavour to the wine .
It has been bred into a wide range of cultivars , including cabbage , broccoli , cauliflower , brussels sprouts , collards , and kale , some of which are hardly recognisable as being members of the same genus , let alone species .
The historical genus of Crucifera , meaning " cross - bearing " in reference to the four - petaled flowers , may be the only unifying feature beyond taste .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
According to the Triangle of U theory , B. oleracea is very closely related to five other species of the genus Brassica .
The cultivars of B. oleracea are grouped by developmental form into seven major cultivar groups , of which the Acephala ( " non - heading " ) group remains most like the natural wild cabbage in appearance : * Brassica oleracea Acephala group – kale and collard greens
* Brassica oleracea Alboglabra group – kai - lan ( Chinese broccoli )
* Brassica oleracea Botrytis group – cauliflower , Romanesco broccoli , and broccoflower * Brassica oleracea Capitata group – cabbage * Brassica oleracea Gemmifera group – brussels sprouts
* Brassica oleracea Gongylodes group – kohlrabi * Brassica oleracea Italica group – broccoli
In places such as the Channel Islands and Canary Islands , where the frost is minimal and plants are thus freed from seasonality , some cultivars , known as Jersey cabbages , can grow up to 3 m tall .
These " tree cabbages " yield fresh leaves throughout the year , are perennial , and do not need to be destroyed at harvest as with a normal cabbage .
Their woody stalks are sometimes dried and made into walking sticks .
HISTORY Section::::History .
With the advent of agriculture and the domestication of wild crop plants , the people of the northern Mediterranean began cultivating wild cabbage .
Through artificial selection for various phenotype traits , the emergence of variations of the plant with drastic differences in looks took only a few thousand years .
Preference for leaves , terminal bud , lateral bud , stem , and inflorescence resulted in selection of varieties of wild cabbage into the many forms known today .
IMPACT OF PREFERENCE
*
The preference for the eating of the leaves led to the selection of plants with larger leaves being harvested and their seeds planted for the next growth .
Around the fifth century BC , the formation of what is now known as kale had developed .
* Preference led to further artificial selection of kale plants with more tightly bunched leaves , or terminal bud .
Somewhere around the first century AD emerged the phenotype variation of B. oleracea known as cabbage .
* Phenotype selection preferences in Germany led kale down another evolutionary pathway .
By selecting for fatter stems , the variant plant known as kohlrabi emerged around the first century AD .
* Further selection in Belgium in lateral bud led to Brussels sprouts in the 18th century .
* European preference emerged for eating immature buds , selection for inflorescence .
By the 15th century AD , cauliflower had developed , leading also to the emergence of broccoli in Italy about 100 years later .
MEDICINAL USE Section::::Medicinal use .
The Lumbee tribe of North Carolina has traditionally used the leaves of B. oleracea in medicine that they believed to have cleansing qualities , as well as a mild laxative , an anti - inflammatory , and treatment for glaucoma and pneumonia .
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars . !
Cultivar ! ! class="unsortable
" Image ! !
Name Wild cabbage data - sort - value="Brassica oleracea " Brassica oleracea var .
oleracea Cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
capitata f. alba
Savoy cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
capitata f. sabauda Red cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
capitata f. rubra Cone cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
capitata f. acuta
Gai lan ( Kai - lan )
Brassica oleracea var .
alboglabra Collard greens Brassica oleracea var .
viridis Jersey cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
longata Ornamental Kale Brassica oleracea var .
acephala Kale Brassica oleracea var .
viridis Lacinato
kale Brassica oleracea var .
palmifolia
Perpetual kale Brassica oleracea var .
ramosa Marrow
cabbage Brassica oleracea var .
medullosa Tronchuda kale Brassica oleracea var .
costata Brussels sprout Brassica oleracea var .
gemmifera Kohlrabi Brassica oleracea var .
gongylodes Broccoli Brassica oleracea var .
italica Cauliflower Brassica oleracea var .
botrytis Romanesco broccoli Brassica oleracea var .
botrytis Broccoli di
Torbole Brassica oleracea var .
botrytis
Broccoflower Brassica oleracea var .
botrytis
x italica Broccolini Brassica oleracea var .
italica × alboglabra
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* PROTAbase on Brassica oleracea ( Brussels sprouts )
* PROTAbase on Brassica oleracea ( cauliflower and broccoli )
* Video Overview of Brassica oleracea : from Untamed Science