CONVERTIBILITY PLAN
The Argentine Currency Board pegged the Argentine peso to the U.S. dollar between 1991 and 2002 in an attempt to eliminate hyperinflation and stimulate economic growth .
While it initially met with considerable success , the board 's actions ultimately failed .
In contrast to what most people think , this peg actually did not exist , except only in the first years of the plan .
From then on , the government never needed to use the foreign exchange reserves of the country in the maintenance of the peg , except when the recession and the massive bank withdrawals started in 2000 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
For most of the period between 1975 and 1990 , Argentina experienced hyperinflation ( averaging 325 % a year ) , poor or negative GDP growth , a severe lack of confidence in the national government and the Central Bank , and low levels of capital investment .
After eight currency crises since the early 1970s , inflation peaked in 1989 , reaching 5,000 % that year .
GDP was 10 % lower than in 1980 and per capita GDP had fallen by over 20 % .
Fixed investment fell by over half and , by 1989 , could not cover yearly depreciation - particularly in the industrial sector .
Social indicators deteriorated seriously : real wages collapsed to about half of their 1974 peak and income poverty rates increased from 27 % in 1980 to 47 % in 1989 .
To a large extent , the main reason behind this long period of hyperinflation was unsustainable growth of the money supply to finance the large fiscal deficits maintained by successive governments .
Driven by rising tax evasion and losses among state enterprises , the total public fiscal deficit reached 10 % of GDP in 1983 .
Austerity measures pursued by President Raúl Alfonsín trimmed this 4 % in 1985 , though the 1989 crisis pushed the shortfall to 7.6 % ( which could only be financed by suspending debt interest payments ) .
Since Argentina could not participate meaningfully in world capital markets given the great investment risk it posed , the only course available was the financing of these fiscal deficits by monetizing them .
This meant that the government levied an inflation tax to pay for the fiscal deficits , which in turn contributed to stalling growth .
Another reason for the instability of the Argentine currency was the fragility of domestic financial institutions .
The Argentine banking crisis of 1990 underlined this point , as the Central Bank moved to confiscate the deposits of commercial banks to overcome a liquidity crunch , exchanging certain types of time deposits for BONEX bonds .
Tightening domestic credit became increasingly limited to the public sector :
only US$ 17 billion of loans outstanding ( 45 % of the total ) were accounted for by private sector borrowers , and this declined to US$ 7 billion during the 1989 crisis .
Accordingly , the nation 's money supply ( M2 ) fell by nearly identical figures , while affluent Argentine nationals held over US$ 50 billion overseas .
There were also external factors that further triggered the currency crisis , such as interest rate fluctuations .
In the early 1980s , for example , the United States imposed tight monetary discipline upon its own institutions , which made it more expensive to borrow money because banks were required to keep higher reserve requirements .
Erratic or punitive responses to global financial vagaries by the Central Bank of Argentina itself often left the Argentine economy bearing the brunt .
One particularly damaging austerity policy was the Central Bank Circular 1050 .
Enacted in 1980 , it tied monthly installment payments to the value of the U.S dollar in Argentina , which rose over ten - fold between early 1981 and July 1982 , when new Central Bank President Domingo Cavallo rescinded the surcharge ( by then , commercial banks had been writing off 5 % of their loan portfolio a month ) .
The debacle shattered credit market confidence locally for the rest of the 1980s , directly contributing to the negative economic climate in Argentina during those years .
Carlos Menem took office six months in advance .
His early attempts to stabilize inflation failed , resulting in further depreciation of the austral and a serious reduction in the Central Bank 's foreign currency reserves .
In April 1991 , Menem reverted the country 's policies according to ideas of Washington Consensus to what was later to be called economic neoliberalism .
This system involved a program of massive privatization and labor deregulation laws , which encouraged foreign investment and infused the country with cash to finance its fiscal deficits .
However , the linchpin of the new system was the introduction of the Convertibility System .
At the time , there was much debate in Argentina and abroad about how to control inflation and build confidence in local currencies in order to foster investment and growth .
There were three options of exchange rate management available to any government : a floating exchange rate , a super - fixed exchange rate ( including the possible use of a currency board ) , or a hybrid system .
The hybrid system consisted of various levels of control over exchange rates , and it was discredited in the early 1990s when empirical evidence from several currency crises showed that , in a world of high capital mobility , a semi - fixed exchange rate was very unstable , because it allowed a country with poor monetary policy to exercise too much discretionary power .
The consequence was that a government had to choose between either fixed or fully floating exchange rate systems .
Before the implementation of the currency board there was much debate over which currency or currencies to peg the peso against .
In the view of many economists , the peso should have been pegged to a basket of currencies from the countries that were Argentina 's major trading partners .
Others argued that the peso should be pegged to the U.S. dollar because it would provide simplicity of understanding , the highest degree of safety , greater international credibility , and the promise of increased trade with the United States .
The latter argument won the day , with both positive and negative consequences .
Argentina 's currency board established a fixed pegging of one - to - one parity between the peso and the U.S. dollar .
It also guaranteed full convertibility of pesos into U.S. dollars .
The government hoped to establish local and international credibility in the peg and to limit the amount of local control over monetary and fiscal policy .
The currency board regime intended to stabilize the peso , encourage both foreign and local investment , and foster sustained economic growth .
FLAWS IN IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Flaws in implementation .
The main qualities of an orthodox currency board are : * A currency board maintains absolute , unlimited convertibility between its notes and coins and the currency against which they are pegged , at a fixed rate of exchange , with no restrictions on current - account or capital - account transactions .
* A currency board 's foreign currency reserves must be sufficient to ensure that all holders of its notes and coins can convert them into the reserve currency ( usually 110–115 % ) .
* A currency board only earns profit from interest on reserves ( less the expense of note - issuing ) , and does not engage in forward - exchange transactions .
* A currency board has no discretionary powers to affect monetary policy and does not lend to the government .
Governments can not print money , and can only tax or borrow to meet their spending commitments .
* A currency board does not act as a lender of last resort to commercial banks , and does not regulate reserve requirements .
* A currency board does not attempt to manipulate interest rates by establishing a discount rate like a central bank .
The peg with the foreign currency tends to keep interest rates and inflation very closely aligned to those in the country against whose currency the peg is fixed .
The Argentine currency board violated all these rules at one time or another , except that of a fixed exchange rate .
Full convertibility with the U.S. dollar became jeopardized upon implementation of exchange rate controls that provided a preferential exchange rate for exports .
The currency board was allowed to hold up to one - third of its dollar - denominated reserves in the form of bonds issued by the government of Argentina .
It acted as lender of last resort and regulated reserve requirements for commercial banks .
And it engaged in monetary policy activities .
The impact of all this was to reduce the credibility of the Argentine government 's intent , and to put speculative pressure on the peso , despite the peg .
RESULTS OF THE CURRENCY BOARD Section::::Results of the currency board .
Argentina implemented its currency board in April 1991 .
Its main achievement was in controlling inflation , which was brought down from more than 3,000 % in 1989 to 3.4 % in 1994 .
Another major accomplishment of the system was renewed economic growth .
Enjoying the high world prices of primary products
( Argentina 's main exports ) , GDP grew at an annual rate of 8 % between 1991 until the Tequila Effect of 1995 .
Even after the Mexican crisis , until 1998 the annual growth rate was 6 % .
International trade also increased dramatically , reflecting the growing degree of openness of the country .
Imports increased from US$ 11.6 billion in 1991 to US$ 32.3 billion in 2000 .
Likewise , exports also increased from US$ 12.1 billion in 1991 to US$ 30.7 billion in 2000 .
Despite these impressive results , there were also negative side effects on social issues , such as increased unemployment , unequal income distribution and decreased wage rates .
Unemployment increased from 6.1 % in 1991 to 15 % in 2000 as the fixed exchange rate increased foreign price competition and forced local firms to invest in more advanced technologies that required less labor and higher productivity .
Income distribution also showed no improvement — indeed it moved in the wrong direction : the bottom 20 % of the population decreased its participation in national income from 4.6 % in 1991 to 4.1 % in 2000 , while the top 20 % of the population increased its share of income from 50.4 % to 51.4 % .
Initially , the poverty rate declined as hyperinflation receded , reaching 17 % by 1993 ( implying that the inflation tax was primarily absorbed by low - income households ) , but after the Mexican crisis the trend reversed .
Although overall wages increased , they did not benefit all workers equally .
Skilled and unskilled workers lost ground compared to managerial and professional income groups .
Government debt increased sharply .
Unwilling or unable to raise taxes , and precluded from printing money by the currency board system , the government 's only other recourse to finance its budget deficit was to issue debt instruments in the capital markets .
Public debt increased sharply from 29.5 % of GDP in 1993 to 50.3 % in 1999 .
Moreover , this debt was in foreign currency , since the domestic private savings remained low , and it took place despite large inflows of income from the privatization of formerly state - owned companies .
Associated with the increase in public debt was an increase in the debt service ratio , which increased from 22 % of exports in 1993 to 35.2 % in 1999 , exacerbating an increasing current account deficit .
Part of President Menem 's program included large - scale privatization of state - owned companies .
Unfortunately , because of the fixed exchange rate , privatization agreements generally linked price increase flexibility to the rate of U.S. inflation , which was often higher than that in Argentina .
The relative prices of public utilities thus increased and shifted wealth from the state to the privatized firms — which , without any exchange control restraints , were free to expatriate these windfalls and invest them elsewhere .
External shocks also affected the Argentine currency board .
The first was the Mexican crisis of 1994 - 1995 , resulting in a liquidity crunch that drove interest rates sharply higher , stalling growth and spurring unemployment .
In quick succession , the ensuing 1997 Asian and 1998 Russian financial crises pounded at the economy by further increasing interest rates as foreign investors became much warier of where they invested their assets , continuing to keep the cost of borrowing high for Argentina .
The Brazilian crisis of 1999 probably had the most severe effect , because Brazil is Argentina 's largest trading partner , and the crisis was coupled with an appreciating U.S. dollar and a slump in the world prices of primary products .
Argentina 's competitiveness in world markets was severely hit , given the peso 's link to the appreciating U.S. dollar and weakening demand in its northern trading partner .
As a result , the economy stalled and subsequently contracted .
These ongoing crises and the strong U.S. dollar in the late 1990s put the spotlight on the decision to peg the peso to the U.S. dollar rather than to a basket of currencies that were better aligned with its trade patterns .
While Argentina was mostly trading with countries ( Europe and Brazil ) that did not have the U.S. dollar as their currency , the peso was fluctuating according to the U.S. dollar and not according to Argentina 's actual economic position ( this is known as the " third currency phenomenon " ) .
Simply put , the dollar peg overvalued the peso in the rest of the world , especially against a weak euro and the Brazilian real , reducing Argentina 's competitiveness and compounding the account deficit .
ABANDONMENT OF THE PEG Section::::Abandonment of the peg .
During the second half of 2001 , the pressure mounted on the currency board but there was no clear way out .
Since most of country 's debt was denominated in U.S. dollars , there would be a huge cost to breaking the peg , not to mention the long - term damage to Argentina 's credibility in world capital markets .
On the other hand , allowing the market to determine the exchange rate would radically improve competitiveness and eliminate the current account deficit along with the need to borrow money to finance it .
Many solutions were considered , including changing the peg to a currency basket of U.S. dollars and euros ( which would have entailed an effective and controlled devaluation of the peso ) , and dollarization ( using U.S. dollars as the country 's only currency ) .
On December 3 , 2001 , the minister Domingo Cavallo restricted bank deposit withdrawals to a maximum of 1000 pesos / dollars per month until 3 March 2002 .
This was popularly known as Corralito .
The effect of the Corralito was so unpopular that the president de la Rúa and Cavallo had to resign .
First Ramón Puerta took the presidency and 2 days later Rodríguez Sáa assume .
In the week he was in charge , Argentina suspended payments on its external debt .
In January 2002 , the new president Eduardo Duhalde ordered his finance minister Jorge Remes Lenicov to repeal the Convertibility Law and adopt a new , provisional fixed exchange rate of 1.4 pesos to the dollar ( a 29 % devaluation ) and the conversion of all the bank accounts denominated in dollars into pesos and its transformation in bonds ( " Corralon " ) ; soon afterward it completely abandoned its peg and allowed the peso to float freely , resulting in a swift depreciation of the peso , which lost 75 % of its value with respect to the U.S. dollar in a matter of months , stabilizing at a rate of 2.9 pesos per dollar by 2003 .
The reason of this incredible depreciation of the peso was not the economic crisis or the overvaluation , it was the " pesification " of all the accounts .
As a consequence of the pesification of every account in Argentina , the 100 billion dollars that were in the banks were changed to 100 billion pesos .
This caused an enormous demand for dollars and transformed the normal change of 1.40 pesos per dollar to 4 pesos per dollar in 5 months .
SOURCES
* Baer , Werner ; Elosegui , Pedro & Gallo , Andrés .
( 2002 )
The Achievements and Failures of Argentina 's Neo - Liberal Economic Policies , Oxford Development Studies , Vol .
30 , No . 1 , pp .
63–85 .
* Bird , Graham .
( 2002 )
Argentina 's Currency Board :
Cry for Argentina - But not for its currency board , New Economy : Surrey Centre for International Economic Studies , pp .
158–165 .
* Cavallo , Domingo F. & Cottani , Joaquin A. ( 1997 )
Argentina 's Convertibility Plan and the IMF , AEA Papers and Proceedings , May , Vol .
87 , No . 2 , pp .
17–22 .
* de la Torre , Augusto ; Levy Yeyati , Eduardo & Schmukler , Sergio L. ( 2003 )
Living and Dying with Hard Pegs :
The Rise and Fall of Argentina 's Currency Board , Journal of LACEA Economia , LACEA - LATIN AMERICAN AND CARIBBEAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION .
* Dornbusch , Rudi .
( 2001 ) Exchange Rates and the Choice of Monetary - Policy Regimes :
Fewer Monies , Better Monies , AEA Papers and Proceedings , May , Volume 91 , No . 2 , pp .
238–242 .
* Edwards , Sebastian .
( 2002 )
The Great Exchange Rate Debate after Argentina , The North American Journal of Economics and Finance , Volume 13 , Issue 3 , pp .
237–252 .
* Gurtner , Francois J. ( 2003 ) Currency Boards and Debt Traps : Evidence from Argentina and Relevance for Estonia , ( Oxford , Blackwell Publishing Ltd. ) , pp .
209–228 .
* Hanke , Steve H. ( 2002 )
On Dollarization and Currency Boards : Error and Deception , Policy Reform , Vol 5 ( 4 ) , pp .
203–222 .
* Hanke , Steve H. ( 2003 )
The Argentine Straw Man : A response to Currency Board Critics , Cato Journal , Spring / Summer , Vol .
23 , No . 1 ,
p. 47 - 57 .
* Horn , Gustav A. , Fritsche , Ulrich .
( 2002 )
Argentina in Crisis , DIW Economic Bulletin , Vol .
39 , No . 4 , pp .
119–126 .
* Levy Yeyati , Eduardo ( 2006 )
Liquidity Insurance in a Financially Dollarized Economy , NBER Working Papers 12345 , National Bureau of Economic Research ,
Inc. * Schuler , Kurt .
( 2002 )
Fixing Argentina , Policy Analysis , July 16 , No . 445 .
SEE ALSO
* Economy of Argentina
* Argentine economic crisis ( 1999 - 2002 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Crisis that Was Not Prevented : Lessons for Argentina , the IMF , and Globalisation , Jan Joost Teunissen and Age Akkerman ( eds . ) , Fondad , 2003 , book , pdf )
* Living and dying with hard pegs : the rise and fall of Argentina 's currency board , De la Torre , Augusto & Levy Yeyati , Eduardo & Schmukler , Sergio L. , 2003 )
* Levy - Yeyati , Eduardo & Martinez Peria , Maria Soledad & Schmukler , Sergio L. , 2004 .
Market discipline under systemic risk - evidence from bank runs in emerging economies , Policy Research Working Paper Series 3440 , The World Bank )