BENIGN TUMOR
A benign tumor is a mass of cells ( tumor ) that lacks the ability to invade neighboring tissue or metastasize .
These do not spread into , or invade , nearby tissues ; however , they can sometimes be quite large .
When removed , benign tumors usually do not grow back , whereas malignant tumors sometimes do .
Unlike most benign tumors elsewhere in the body , benign brain tumors can be life threatening .
Benign tumors generally have a slower growth rate than malignant tumors and the tumor cells are usually more differentiated
( cells have normal features ) .
They are typically surrounded by an outer surface ( fibrous sheath of connective tissue ) or remain with the epithelium .
Common examples of benign tumors include moles and uterine fibroids .
Although benign tumors will not metastasize or locally invade tissues , some types may still produce negative health effects .
The growth of benign tumors produces a " mass effect " that can compress tissues and may cause nerve damage , reduction of blood to an area of the body ( ischaemia ) , tissue death ( necrosis ) and organ damage .
The health effects of the tumor may be more prominent if the tumor is within an enclosed space such as the cranium , respiratory tract , sinus or inside bones .
Tumors of endocrine tissues may overproduce certain hormones , especially when the cells are well differentiated .
Examples include thyroid adenomas and adrenocortical adenomas .
Although most benign tumors are not life - threatening , many types of benign tumors have the potential to become cancerous ( malignant ) through a process known as tumor progression .
For this reason and other possible negative health effects , some benign tumors are removed by surgery .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
+ Tumors and cell origin !
Cell origin !
Cell type !
Tumor !
rowspan =
" 10 " Endodermal Papilloma !
rowspan =
" 8 " Mesenchymal
BoneOsteoma
CartilageChondroma Fat tissueLipoma
Fibrous tissueFibroma
Lymphatic vesselLymphangioma
Smooth muscleLeiomyoma
Striated muscleRhabdomyoma !
rowspan =
" 4 " Ectodermal
MelanocytesNevus
MeningesMeningioma Nerve cellsGanglioneuroma !
colspan="3"Reference Benign neoplasms are typically but not always composed of cells which bear a strong resemblance to a normal cell type in their organ of origin .
These tumors are named for the cell or tissue type from which they originate , followed by the suffix " -oma " ( but not -carcinoma , -sarcoma , or -blastoma , which are generally cancers ) .
For example , a lipoma is a common benign tumor of fat cells ( lipocytes ) , and a chondroma is a benign tumor of cartilage - forming cells ( chondrocytes ) .
Adenomas are benign tumors of gland - forming cells , and are usually specified further by their cell or organ of origin , as in hepatic adenoma ( a benign tumor of hepatocytes , or liver cells ) .
Teratomas contain many cell types such as skin , nerve , brain and thyroid , among others , because they are derived from germ cells .
Hamartomas are a group of benign tumors that have relatively normal cellular differentiation but the architecture of the tissue is disorganised .
There are a few cancers with ' benign - sounding ' names which have been retained for historical reasons , including melanoma ( a cancer of pigmented skin cells , or melanocytes ) and seminoma ( a cancer of male reproductive cells ) .
Skin tags , vocal chord polyps and hyperplastic polyps of the colon are often referred to as benign but they are actually overgrowths of normal tissue rather than neoplasms .
HEALTH EFFECTS Section::::Health effects .
Benign tumors are very diverse , and may be asymptomatic or may cause specific symptoms depending on their anatomic location and tissue type .
They grow outwards , producing large rounded masses , which can cause what is known as a " mass effect " .
This growth can cause compression of local tissues or organs , which can cause many effects such as blockage of ducts , reduced blood flow ( ischaemia ) , tissue death ( necrosis ) and nerve pain or damage .
Some tumors also produce hormones that can lead to life - threatening situations .
Insulinomas can produce large amounts of insulin leading to hypoglycemia .
Pituitary adenomas can cause elevated levels of hormones such as growth hormone and insulin - like growth factor-1 , which cause acromegaly ; prolactin ; ACTH and cortisol , which cause Cushings disease ; TSH , which causes hyperthyroidism ; and FSH and LH .
Bowel intussusception can occur with various benign colonic tumors .
Cosmetic effects can be caused by tumors , especially those of the skin , possibly causing psychological effects on the person with the tumor .
Vascular tumors can bleed , which in some cases can be substantial , leading to anemia .
CAUSES PTEN HAMARTOMA SYNDROME Section::::Causes .
Section::::PTEN hamartoma syndrome .
PTEN hamartoma syndrome comprises four distinct hamartomatous disorders characterised by genetic mutations in the PTEN gene ;
Cowden syndrome , Bannayan - Riley - Ruvalcaba syndrome , Proteus syndrome and Proteus - like syndrome .
Although they all have distinct clinical features , the formation of hamartomas is present in all four syndromes .
PTEN is a tumor suppressor gene that is involved in cellular signalling .
Absent or dysfunctional PTEN protein allows cells to over - proliferate , causing hamartomas .
Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterised by multiple benign hamartomas ( trichilemmomas and mucocutaneous papillomatous papules ) as well as a predisposition for cancers of multiple organs including the breast and thyroid .
Bannayan - Riley - Ruvalcaba syndrome is a congenital disorder characterised by hamartomatous intestinal polyposis , macrocephaly , lipomatosis , hemangiomatosis and glans penis macules .
Proteus syndrome is characterised by nevi , asymmetric overgrowth of various body parts , adipose tissue dysregulation , cystadenomas , adenomas , vascular malformation .
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS Section::::Familial adenomatous polyposis .
Familial adenomatous polyposis ( FAP ) is a familial cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the APC gene .
In this disorder adenomatous polyps are present in the colon that invariably progress into colon cancer .
The APC gene is a tumor suppressor and its product is involved in many cellular processes .
Inactivation of the APC gene leads to a buildup of a protein called β - catenin , which activates two transcription factors ; T - cell factor ( TCF ) and lymphoid enhancer factor ( LEF ) .
These cause the upregulation of many genes involved in cell proliferation , differentiation , migration and apoptosis ( programmed cell death ) , causing the growth of benign tumors .
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS COMPLEX Section::::Tuberous sclerosis complex .
Tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder caused by mutations in the genesTSC1 and TSC2 , which produce the proteins hamartin and tuberin , respectively .
This disorder presents with many benign hamartomatous tumors including angiofibromas , renal angiomyolipomas , pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis .
Tuberin and hamartin inhibit the mTOR protein in normal cellular physiology and the inactivation of the TSC tumor suppressors
causes an increase in mTOR activity .
This leads to the activation of genes and the production of proteins that increase cell growth .
VON HIPPEL - LINDAU DISEASE Section::::Von Hippel - Lindau disease .
Von Hippel - Lindau disease is a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome that massively increases the risk of various tumors including benign hemangioblastomas and malignant pheochromocytomas , renal cell carcinomas , pancreatic endocrine tumors and endolymphatic sac tumors .
It is caused by genetic mutations in the Von Hippel – Lindau tumor suppressor gene .
The VHL protein ( pVHL ) is involved in cellular signalling in oxygen starved ( hypoxic ) cells .
One role of pVHL is to cause the cellular degradation of another protein , HIF1α .
Dysfunctional pVHL leads to accumulation of HIF1α , which in turn activates the production of several genes involved in cell growth and blood vessel production ( VEGF , PDGFβ , TGFα and erythropoietin ) .
MECHANISM BENIGN
VS MALIGNANT Section::::Mechanism .
Section::::Benign vs malignant .
One of the most important factors in classifying a tumor as benign or malignant is its invasive potential .
If a tumor lacks the ability to invade adjacent tissues or spread to distant sites by metastasizing then it is benign , whereas invasive or metastatic tumors are malignant .
For this reason , benign tumors are not classed as cancer .
Benign tumors will grow in a contained area usually encapsulated in a fibrous connective tissue capsule .
The growth rates of benign and malignant tumors also differ ; benign tumors generally grow more slowly than malignant tumors .
Although benign tumors pose a lower health risk than malignant tumors , they both can be life - threatening in certain situations .
There are many general characteristics which apply to either benign or malignant tumors , but sometimes one type may show characteristics of the other .
For example , benign tumors are mostly well differentiated and malignant tumors are often undifferentiated .
However , undifferentiated benign tumors and differentiated malignant tumors can occur .
Although benign tumors generally grow slowly , cases of fast - growing benign tumors have also been documented .
Some malignant tumors are mostly non - metastatic such as in the case of basal cell carcinoma .
CT and chest radiography can be a useful diagnostic exam in visualizing a benign tumor and differentiating it from a malignant tumor .
The smaller the tumor on a radiograph the more likely
it is to be benign as 80 % of lung nodules less than 2 cm in diameter are benign .
Most benign nodules are smoothed radiopaque densities with clear margins but these are not exclusive signs of benign tumors .
MULTISTAGE CARCINOGENESIS Section::::Multistage carcinogenesis .
Tumors are formed by carcinogenesis , a process in which cellular alterations lead to the formation of cancer .
Multistage carcinogenesis involves the sequential genetic or epigenetic changes to a cell 's DNA , where each step produces a more advanced tumor .
It is often broken down into three stages ; initiation , promotion and progression , and several mutations may occur at each stage .
Initiation is where the first genetic mutation occurs in a cell .
Promotion is the clonal expansion ( repeated division ) of this transformed cell into a visible tumor that is usually benign .
Following promotion , progression may take place where more genetic mutations are acquired in a sub - population of tumor cells .
Progression changes the benign tumor into a malignant tumor .
A prominent and well studied example of this phenomenon is the tubular adenoma , a common type of colon polyp which is an important precursor to colon cancer .
The cells in tubular adenomas , like most tumors which frequently progress to cancer , show certain abnormalities of cell maturation and appearance collectively known as dysplasia .
These cellular abnormalities are not seen in benign tumors that rarely or never turn cancerous , but are seen in other pre - cancerous tissue abnormalities which do not form discrete masses , such as pre - cancerous lesions of the uterine cervix .
Some authorities prefer to refer to dysplastic tumors as " pre - malignant " , and reserve the term " benign " for tumors which rarely or never give rise to cancer .
DIAGNOSIS TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Some benign tumors need no treatment ; others may be removed if they cause problems such as seizures , discomfort or cosmetic concerns .
Surgery is usually the most effective approach and is used to treat most benign tumors .
In some case other treatments may be of use .
Adenomas of the rectum may be treated with sclerotherapy , a treatment in which chemicals are used to shrink blood vessels in order to cut off the blood supply .
Most benign tumors do not respond to chemotherapy or radiation therapy , although there are exceptions ; benign intercranial tumors are sometimes treated with radiation therapy and chemotherapy under certain circumstances .
Radiation can also be used to treat hemangiomas in the rectum .
Benign skin tumors are usually surgically resected but other treatments such as cryotherapy , curettage , electrodesiccation , laser therapy , dermabrasion , chemical peels and topical medication are used .
REFERENCES