PETER PAN ( PEANUT BUTTER )
Peter Pan is a brand of peanut butter produced by Conagra Brands and named after the J. M. Barrie character .
The product was introduced by Swift & Company ( originally through their " Derby Foods " subsidiary ) in 1920 under the name " E. K. Pond " .
The product was renamed in 1928 .
Originally packaged in a tin can with a turn key and reclosable lid , the product 's packaging was changed to glass jars because of metal shortages during World War II .
In 1988 , Peter Pan was the first brand of peanut butter to be sold in plastic jars .
Peter Pan Peanut Butter is currently sold in 13 varieties :
*
Original Creamy * Original Crunchy * Honey Roast Creamy * Honey Roast Crunchy
* Reduced - Fat Creamy * Reduced - Fat Crunchy
* Whipped Creamy * Plus Creamy ( with added vitamins and minerals )
* Natural Creamy * Natural Crunchy * Natural Honey Roast Creamy
*
Simply Ground
Original * Simply Ground Honey Roast
The product was the main ingredient in Frankford Candy & Chocolate Company 's now - discontinued product , Peter Pan Peanut Butter Cups .
Past spokesmen for Peter Pan have included actor Sterling Holloway , actor Mark Linn - Baker , comedian Alan Sues , and game - show host Art James .
In late August 2007 , it was announced that Disney 's version of the Peter Pan character would become the mascot for Peter Pan Peanut Butter , alongside many other characters from Disney 's 1953 animated film version to appear in their new advertising campaign , possibly in 2009 .
This would not be the first time : in the mid-1950s , when Peter Pan cosponsored ABC 's Disneyland TV series , Tinker Bell often appeared in their ads during the program .
In earlier versions of the product , Peter Pan was clearly pictured as a woman in a Peter Pan costume , rather than as a boy .
This would have fit very nicely into the then - usual tradition of having the character played by an actress in J. M. Barrie 's play or the musical made from it , were it not for the fact that the model used for the peanut butter label appeared very feminine , with long hair and a green skirt , unlike the actresses who had played Peter onstage .
All of them had had their hair cropped short for the role and wore green pants rather than a long green skirt .
THE " SAY WHEN ! ! "
INCIDENT Section::::The "
Say When ! !
" Incident .
During a 1964 episode of the NBC game show Say When ! !
, host Art James performed a commercial for Peter Pan , during which he unintentionally broke the glass jar he used as a prop .
Before air time , James did a series of run - throughs , dropping a table knife into the near - empty Peter Pan jar , each time without incident .
But when he did the actual commercial live on the air , the knife broke out the bottom of the jar and fell through onto his podium .
Amid scattered laughter from the audience , James continued the spot as the bottom part of the jar came " unglued " from the peanut butter .
At the end of the commercial , James finally lost his composure and stated that " It 's great peanut butter ; the jar is something else " .
The incident has been replayed on many TV blooper specials through the years .
RECALL Section::::Recall .
In February 2007 , Peter Pan and some Great Value ( Walmart 's store brand )
peanut butters were linked to 425 cases of salmonellosis across the United States .
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention officials believe this is the first Salmonella outbreak involving peanut butter to occur in the United States .
The recall involved both Peter Pan and some Great Value peanut butter with a product code starting with the digits " 2111 " .
The recall included all ConAgra - produced peanut butter sold in the United States since October 2004 .
Peter Pan products returned to stores in late August 2007 .
During the January 2009 peanut butter recall , the Peanut Corporation of America recalled 21 lots of peanut butter from their plant in Blakely , Georgia over the possibility of Salmonella contamination .
Although this initially caused concern among consumers , Peter Pan has confirmed that no ingredients used to make its peanut butter have come from any location operated by Peanut Corporation of America .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official site