EL DORADO ( 1966 FILM )
El Dorado is a 1966 American Western film produced and directed by Howard Hawks and starring John Wayne and Robert Mitchum .
Written by Leigh Brackett and loosely based on the novel The Stars in Their Courses by Harry Brown , the film is about a gunfighter who comes to the aid of an old friend — a drunken sheriff struggling to defend a rancher and his family against another rancher trying to steal their water .
The gunfighter and drunken sheriff are helped by an aging Indian fighter and a young gambler .
The supporting cast features James Caan as the young gambler , Charlene Holt , Ed Asner , Paul Fix , Arthur Hunnicutt , Michele Carey , and Christopher George .
El Dorado was filmed on location in Tucson , Arizona and Kanab , Utah , and was shot in Technicolor .
The paintings in the credits are by artist Olaf Wieghorst , who makes a brief appearance as Swede Larsen in the film .
The musical score was composed by Nelson Riddle .
Paramount Pictures delayed the release of the film in the United States to avoid competing against another Paramount film , Nevada Smith with Steve McQueen .
The film was first released in Japan on December 17 , 1966 , and was finally released in the United States on June 7 , 1967 .
The film received critical praise and was successful at the box office , generating North American rentals of $ 5,950,000 on box - office receipts of $ 12 million .
El Dorado is the second of three films directed by Hawks about a sheriff defending his office against belligerent outlaw elements in the town , after Rio Bravo ( 1959 ) and before Rio Lobo ( 1970 ) , both also starring Wayne in approximately the same role .
The plotlines of all three films are almost similar enough to qualify El Dorado and Rio Lobo as remakes .
Dean Martin had portrayed the drunken deputy in Rio Bravo , preceding Mitchum in the part as a drunken sheriff , while Walter Brennan played the wild old man role later rendered by Arthur Hunnicutt , and Ricky Nelson appeared as a gunslinging newcomer similar to Caan in El Dorado .
Members of the Western Writers of America chose the film 's theme as one of the Top 100 Western songs of all time .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Cole Thornton , a gunslinger - for - hire , is hired by wealthy rancher Bart Jason to help him in a range war with the McDonald family in the Texas town of El Dorado .
The local sheriff , an old friend of Thornton , J. P. Harrah gives Cole more details that Jason had deliberately left out , including the possibility of having to side against Harrah .
Unwilling to fight his friend , Thornton quits , to the relief of saloon owner Maudie , who is in love with Thornton ( and was for a time a romantic interest of Harrah 's ) .
The McDonalds learn of Thornton 's presence in town .
Fearing that he might come for them , Kevin McDonald puts his youngest son , Luke , on guard .
When Thornton passes by on his way back from rejecting Jason 's offer , Luke , who has fallen asleep , wakes and fires a wild warning shot whereupon Thornton reflexively shoots him .
Luke is still alive when Thornton finds him , but he refuses treatment based upon the belief that a gut - shot man would n't have a chance anyway and commits suicide when Thornton turns his back on him .
Thornton subsequently brings the boy 's body to the McDonald ranch and offers an explanation .
The only McDonald daughter , Joey , impulsively rides off before Thornton can finish his story and ambushes him shortly thereafter .
Her shot is not fatal , but the bullet lodges next to Thornton 's spine and in time begins to trouble him by occasionally pressing against the spinal cord , causing temporary paralysis of his right side .
The local doctor , Dr. Miller , does not have the skill to remove the bullet and Thornton
soon departs El Dorado for a new job .
Several months later , Thornton runs into another gunslinger - for - hire named Nelson McLeod and a young greenhorn named Mississippi , who has come for revenge against one of McLeod 's men for the murder of his old friend and mentor , Johnny Diamond .
McLeod has been hired by Jason for the same job Thornton turned down and Thornton hears from McLeod about how Harrah has turned into a drunk after an unhappy love affair .
Thornton decides to return to El Dorado , hoping to save Harrah from being gunned down by McLeod and his men .
He is followed by Mississippi who also wishes to help , despite his lack of experience and terrible aim with a gun .
Once Thornton and Mississippi arrive in El Dorado , they hear more of the story behind Harrah 's change .
The two men then join with Deputy Sheriff Bull in order to get Harrah sober and cleaned up .
Mississippi contributes an old folk recipe for a hangover that he learned from Johnny Diamond , promising it will make any man unable to drink liquor for a while .
The concoction proves to be violently effective , and leaves Harrah sober and furious .
Within a day of their arrival , McLeod and his men also come to El Dorado and are hired on by Bart Jason .
When one of them shoots one of the McDonalds , Thornton , Harrah , Bull and Mississippi chase the shooter and his friends into an old church and then into Jason 's saloon .
Harrah arrests Jason and takes him to the jail for his part in the shooting of the McDonald .
Later that night , Thornton and Mississippi decide to patrol the town in the hope of keeping the peace and are deputized by Bull .
There is another shoot - out with McLeod and his men , which results in a minor leg injury for Harrah .
The next day , Maudie sends a message to Thornton and his friends , stating that McLeod 's men are frightening her and her patrons .
When Thornton and Mississippi go to help her , they are ambushed and Thornton has an attack that leaves him partially paralyzed and captured by McLeod .
Subsequently , McLeod trades the injured Thornton for Bart Jason , a trade to which Harrah agrees , despite knowing that doing so will mean that nothing will stand in the way of McLeod going after the McDonalds .
Sure enough , McLeod and his men shortly thereafter kidnap one of the McDonalds in order to force Kevin McDonald to sign over his water rights to Jason .
Thornton and the others are forced to quickly come up with a plan to rescue Kevin McDonald 's son and neutralize Jason and McLeod .
Despite Thornton 's paralysis and Harrah 's leg injury , the two of them , along with Bull and Mississippi , return to town on wagons .
While Thornton distracts Jason and McLeod outside of the front of the saloon , Mississippi , Harrah and Bull attack from the rear .
The kidnapped McDonald is rescued , with a little help from Joey McDonald .
Jason , McLeod and his men are killed , and order is restored to El Dorado .
Thornton also begins to imply that he may discontinue his wandering ways in order to stay in the town with Maudie .
CAST
* John Wayne as Cole Thornton
* Robert Mitchum as Sheriff J.P. Harrah
* James Caan as Alan Bourdillion Traherne , nicknamed " Mississippi " * Charlene Holt as Maudie
* Paul Fix as Dr. Miller * Arthur Hunnicutt as Bull Harris * Michele Carey as Josephine
" Joey " MacDonald
* R. G. Armstrong as Kevin MacDonald
* Ed Asner as Bart Jason * Christopher George as Nelson McLeod * Marina Ghane as Maria * Robert Donner as Milt ( McLeod gang )
* John Gabriel as Pedro
* Johnny Crawford as Luke MacDonald
* Jim Davis as Jim Purvis ( Bart Jason 's foreman )
* Adam Roarke as Matt MacDonald
* John Mitchum as Elmer ( Jason 's bartender ) * Chuck Roberson as Jason 's gunman * Don Collier as Deputy Joe Braddock
* Olaf Wieghorst as Swede Larsen PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Leigh Brackett wrote the original script which she described as " the best script I had ever done in my life .
It was n't tragic , but it was one of those things where Wayne died at the end . "
However she says the closer they got to production " the more we got into doing Rio Bravo over again the sicker I got , because I hate doing things over again .
And I kept saying to Howard
I did that , and he 'd say it was okay
, we could do it over again . "
Mitchum later said , " When Howard called me , I said , ' What 's the story ? '
and he said , ' No story , just characters ' and
that 's the way it was .
Did one scene , put it away , did another , put it away . "
Shot at Old Tucson Studios just west of Tucson , Arizona , as well as in and around Kanab , Utah , from October 1965 to January 1966 , the film was Wayne 's 138th picture and was actually filmed before The War Wagon , but its release was delayed so that Paramount 's Nevada Smith with Steve McQueen would not have to compete with a John Wayne film at the box office .
El Dorado finally reached the theatres in June 1967 , a month after The War Wagon had opened .
Film footage from El Dorado was later incorporated into the opening montage of Wayne 's final film , The Shootist , to illustrate the backstory of Wayne 's character .
Director Don Siegel used no scenes from any film shot before 1948 in The Shootists frontispiece even though Wayne 's career as a leading man began in 1930 with Raoul Walsh 's lavish widescreen epic The Big Trail and had continued throughout the following two decades .
Cinematographer Harold Rosson had retired in 1958 , but Hawks persuaded him to come back to work .
In a 1970 interview with Leonard Maltin , Rosson said , " I was out of my mind
I 'd ever quit , " but went back into retirement — for good — afterwards , citing his age as a reason ( 75 at the time of the interview ) .
Caan was somehow unable to pronounce the word " boldly " as he recited " Ride boldly ride " during the course of the film , leaving audience members unfamiliar with Poe 's poem to wonder what or whom " bodie " was .
In the film , Mississippi gives Sheriff Harrah a concoction meant to deter him from further drinking .
The ingredients include ( among others )
Cayenne pepper , ipecac ( an emetic ) , mustard , croton oil ( which induces diarrhea ) , asafoetida ( often misspelled acifedida ) and gunpowder .
The movie marked the only time Wayne and Mitchum worked together in a theatrical film unless one counts The Longest Day , an ensemble epic in which they share no scenes .
POEM Section::::Poem .
The poem repeated in the film and paraphrased in the theme song is " Eldorado " , a ballad poem by Edgar Allan Poe .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film maintains a high critical praise , earning a 100 percent perfect rating on review compiler Rotten Tomatoes , based on 14 reviews .
Popular critic Roger Ebert gave the film a near - perfect rating at 3 1/2 out of four stars , stating " El Dorado is a tightly directed , humorous , altogether successful Western , turned out almost effortlessly , it would seem , by three old pros : John Wayne , Robert Mitchum and director Howard Hawks " .
Praised film poll
, They Shoot Pictures , Do n't They ?
ranked the film 799 out of 1,000 for the list of greatest films of all time .
COMIC BOOK ADAPTION
* Dell Movie Classic :
El Dorado ( October 1967 ) SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1967 * List of American films of 1966 * John Wayne filmography REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Citations Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS