COLLEGE BASEBALL College baseball is baseball that is played on the intercollegiate level at institutions of higher education .
In comparison to football and basketball , college competition in the United States plays a smaller role in developing professional players , as baseball 's professional minor leagues are more extensive , with a greater history of supplying players to the top professional league .
Moving directly from high school to the professional level is more common in baseball than in football or basketball .
However , if players do opt to enroll at a four - year college to play baseball , they must complete three years to regain professional eligibility , unless they reach age 21 before starting their third year of college .
Players who enroll at junior colleges ( i.e. , two - year institutions ) regain eligibility after one year at that level .
In the most recently completed 2017 season , there were 298 NCAA Division
I teams in the United States ( including schools transitioning from Division II to Division I ) .
As with most other U.S. intercollegiate sports , competitive college baseball is played under the auspices of either the NCAA or the NAIA .
The NCAA writes the rules of play , while each sanctioning body supervises season - ending tournaments .
The final rounds of the NCAA tournaments are known as the College World Series ; one is held on each of the three levels of competition sanctioned by the NCAA .
The College World Series for Division
I takes place in Omaha , Nebraska in June , following the regular season .
The playoff bracket for Division
I consists of 64 teams , with four teams playing at each of 16 regional sites ( in a double - elimination format ) .
The 16 winners advance to the Super Regionals at eight sites , played head - to - head in a best - of - three series .
The eight winners then advance to the College World Series , a double elimination tournament ( actually two separate four - team brackets ) to determine the two national finalists .
The finalists play a best - of - three series to determine the Division I national champion .
The most recent College World Series winner is Oregon State .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first intercollegiate baseball game took place in Pittsfield , Massachusetts , on July 1 , 1859 , between squads representing Amherst College and Williams College .
Amherst won , 73–32 .
This game was one of the last played under an earlier version of the game known as " Massachusetts rules " , which prevailed in New England until the " Knickerbocker Rules " ( or " New York Rules " ) developed in the 1840s gradually became accepted .
The first ever nine - man team college baseball game under the Knickerbocker Rules still in use today was played in New York on November 3 , 1859 between the Fordham Rose Hill Baseball Club of St. John 's College ( now Fordham University ) against The College of St. Francis Xavier , now known as Xavier High School .
RECENT GROWTH Section::::Recent growth .
Traditionally , college baseball has been played in the early part of the year , with a relatively short schedule and during a time when cold ( and/or rainy ) weather hinders the ability for games to be played , particularly in the northern and midwestern parts of the U.S.
These and other factors have historically led colleges and universities across the nation to effectively consider baseball a minor sport , both in scholarships as well as money and other points of emphasis .
College baseball has grown phenomenally in popularity since the 1980s , as coaches and athletic directors in warm - weather regions of the nation began to recognize the unrealized potential appeal of the sport .
These coaches went out and aggressively recruited the sport to potential athletes , as well as made various upgrades to their programs ; such as bigger and better stadiums , more money for staff and support salaries , and promotions .
As these efforts resulted in better players and overall programs , more television and print media coverage began to emerge .
The ESPN family of networks greatly increased television coverage of the NCAA playoffs and the College World Series since 2003 .
Soon , in many warm - weather regions , baseball came to be considered a major sport , approaching the level of football and basketball .
And even non - warm weather schools started to recognize baseball 's potential and began to put considerably more emphasis on it .
Nebraska , Notre Dame , and Oregon State are three notable examples of cold ( or rainy ) weather schools with very successful programs .
The first two made the College World Series when warm - weather schools placed major emphasis on baseball as well as had the advantage of playing earlier and more games because of favorable climates .
Oregon State won back - to - back national championships in 2006 and 2007 ; at that time , archrival Oregon had been without baseball for a quarter - century , having dropped its program in 1981 .
Many credit the Beavers ' success as a primary factor in the University of Oregon 's later decision to revive baseball in 2009 .
Before the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome was demolished in early 2014 , Minnesota took advantage of it to play the majority of their games , including hosting a prestigious preseason tournament .
With the 2010 departure of the MLB Minnesota Twins for the new Target Field , the school hoped to use the Metrodome for future Big Ten tournaments and bids on the NCAA tournament .
Along with that , many smaller conferences ( not in Division I ) played games at the Metrodome during February in order to keep up with schools in warm - weather locations .
While the Metrodome 's replacement , U.S. Bank Stadium , was designed mainly for the NFL 's Minnesota Vikings , it has movable seating banks that allow it to be configured for baseball .
For 2008 and succeeding seasons , the NCAA mandated the first ever start date for Division
I baseball , thirteen weeks before the selection of the NCAA tournament field , which takes place on Memorial Day .
COLLEGIATE RULES Section::::Collegiate rules .
The rules of college baseball are similar to the Official Baseball Rules .
Exceptions include the following : * The bat may be made of wood , or a composite material that meets NCAA standards .
Since the 2011 season , composite bats have been required to pass the " Bat - Ball Coefficient of Restitution " ( BBCOR ) test .
*
The designated hitter rule is used .
In addition , a player may serve as both pitcher and DH at the same time and may remain in one position when removed in the other .
*
One or both ends of a doubleheader are sometimes seven innings in length .
However , the NCAA has recently tightened the interpretation of what constitutes a regulation game , encouraging schools to play as many nine - inning games as possible .
Seven - inning games may be played on the final day of a conference series , or if the two teams in a non - conference match will play two games in one day , often to make up a game that could not be played earlier in the year due to inclement weather .
* A mercy rule may be in use , which terminates play when one team is ahead by 10 or more runs after seven innings ( 6½ innings if the home team is winning ) .
In games that are scheduled for seven innings the rule takes effect in the fifth .
This rule is not used in NCAA tournament games .
Several conferences institute this rule only on Sundays or the final day of a conference series so that the visiting team can travel early .
In some conferences , the mercy rule may also be used to end such games in order to start the next tournament game sooner .
*
There is an automatic ejection for maliciously running into a defender who is trying to tag a runner or execute a force out .
An automatic double play may also be called if a player slides into a base in an attempt to take out the defensive player who is trying to throw the ball to complete a double play .
*
In televised games and in tournament games , instant replay may be used to determine if a slide was malicious .
METAL VERSUS
WOOD BAT Section::::Metal versus wood bat .
Though a wood bat is legal in NCAA competition , players overwhelmingly prefer and use a metal bat .
The metal bat was implemented in college baseball in 1975 .
Use of a metal bat is somewhat controversial .
Supporters of an aluminum or composite bat note that it can increase offensive performance , as the speed of a ball off a metal bat is generally faster than off a wood bat .
Those against metal , and for wood , argue that a metal bat is not safe to use , and that a metal bat does n't prepare players for the next level , as professional baseball uses a wood bat exclusively .
In the 2011 season the NCAA changed the requirements for a metal bat , reducing the maximum allowed exit speed in a way that is said to produce a feeling more like a wood bat .
As a result , in 2011 there was a drop - off in overall " long " drives or home runs relative to past years .
DRAFT PROCESS Section::::Draft process .
All players resident in the U.S. and its territories , plus Canada , are eligible to be selected in Major League Baseball 's Rule 4 Draft upon graduating from high school .
However , once a player enrolls in a four - year college or university , he is not allowed to be drafted ( or re - drafted ) until completing three years of school or reaching age 21 , whichever comes first .
By contrast , players who enroll in junior colleges ( i.e. , two - year institutions ) are eligible for selection at any time .
The Rule 4 Draft of eligible college and high school players consists of 40 rounds .
Despite MLB 's draft being considerably longer than that of the NFL or NBA , only about 9.1 % of all NCAA senior baseball players are drafted by an MLB team .
One of the biggest controversies with the draft and these amateur athletes is the use of agents .
There have been many cases of college athletes consulting or hiring an agent prematurely in direct violation of NCAA rules .
The NCAA came up with the " no agent rule " as a result of this , claiming it was to benefit the amateur athletes .
The rule states that " [ a]n individual shall be ineligible for participation in an intercollegiate sport if he or she has agreed ( orally or in writing ) to be represented by an agent for the purpose of marketing his or her athletics ability or reputation in that sport " .
Representation of an agent is considered to be any direct contact with the professional team during the contract negotiations .
This contact can be made many different ways , whether through direct conversation , via mail or through the telephone .
This rule is strongly enforced by the NCAA and has harsh consequences if broken .
RECRUITMENT PROCESS Section::::Recruitment process .
The recruitment process is similar to that of the Major League Draft in that a high school athlete is taking the next step in his career .
The NCAA places restrictions on the coaches that are trying to convince athletes to come play for them and attend their university .
College baseball programs are only allowed to offer a limited number of scholarships each year , so the process of earning a scholarship is quite competitive .
Baseball is classified by the NCAA as an " equivalency " sport , meaning that limits on athletic financial aid are set to the equivalent of a fixed number of full scholarships .
Division I schools are allowed the equivalent of 11.7 full scholarships ; Division II schools , only 9.0 .
Schools generally choose to award multiple partial scholarships rather than exclusively full scholarships .
In Division I , the NCAA also limits the total number of players receiving baseball - related financial aid to 27 , and also requires that each of these players receive athletic aid equal to at least 25 % of a full scholarship .
The 25 % rule does not apply to schools that offer aid based solely on financial need ( most notably Ivy League members ) , and also does not apply to a player in his final year of athletic eligibility who has not previously received athletically related aid in baseball at any college .
A long - standing official NCAA rules interpretation also allows schools to count aid that would otherwise be exempt by NCAA rule ( such as purely academic awards ) toward the 25 % limit , as long as it also is included in the calculations for the team equivalency limit .
Before September 1 of a potential college player 's 11th grade year , it is illegal for a college program to give any kind of recruiting materials to the prospect .
A phone call is not even permitted to the prospect until July 1 of the student 's 11th grade year .
Once the player is committed to the school of his choice , he must sign his letter of intent during one of several signing periods .
The early signing period for a Division I baseball player is between November 8 and 15 ; the late signing period dates for these players are April 11 to August 1 .
SUBSTANCE POLICIES
Section::::Substance policies .
The substance policies for college baseball are very strict and set by the NCAA .
There is a set list of substances a college baseball player is forbidden to put in his body , and there is severe punishment for those that defy it , whether it be intentional or unintentional .
There is a very long list of these substances , including alcohol , marijuana , anabolic steroids , and heroin , to name just a few .
These substances fit into categories such as stimulants , anabolic steroids , diuretics , street drugs , hormones , anti - estrogens , and more .
Failure to pass scheduled or random drug tests can result in ineligibility .
ATTENDANCE RECORDS
TOP COLLEGE BASEBALL CROWDS OF ALL - TIME Section::::Attendance records .
Section::::Top college baseball crowds of all - time . !
Rank !
Attendance !
Teams !
Stadium !
City !
Date !
Note TOP
25 ON - CAMPUS COLLEGE BASEBALL CROWDS OF ALL - TIME LONGEST GAME IN COLLEGE BASEBALL HISTORY Section::::Longest game in college baseball history .
The longest college baseball game was played between Texas and Boston College on May 30 , 2009 , during the NCAA Division I Baseball Championship regional tournament at Austin , Texas .
Texas – which was designated the visiting team despite playing on its home field – won the game , 3–2 , in 25 innings .
The game lasted seven hours three minutes .
VIDEO GAMING
Section::::Video gaming .
After losing its license for Major League Baseball , EA Sports released MVP 06
NCAA Baseball , the first college baseball video game .
A second game , , was also released before the series was discontinued due to low sales .
SEE ALSO
* List of NCAA Division I baseball programs
* 2018 NCAA Division
I
baseball season
* NCAA Division
I
Baseball Championship *
College World Series
* NCAA Division II Baseball Championship
* NCAA Division III Baseball Championship
* NAIA Baseball World Series * NCBA World Series division
D1 championship
* NCBA World Series division D2 championship
* USA Baseball * Amateur baseball in the United States * NCAA Division I college baseball team statistics
* National College Baseball Hall of Fame
* List of college baseball awards
* List of college baseball career home run leaders
* List of collegiate summer baseball leagues
* List of Division
I colleges that do not sponsor baseball * World University Baseball Championship
* Baseball at the Summer Universiade * College athletics * College rivalries REFERENCES
General
* Arkell , Thomas J. " Agent Interference With College Athletics : What Agents Can and Can not Do and What Institutions Should Do In Response . " 4 Sports Law .
J. ( 1997 ) : 147–180 .
Web .
July 21 , 2010 .
* " College Baseball Teams .
" The Baseball Cube .
n.p .
n.d . Web .
July 20 , 2010 .
* Green , Gary A. , Frank D. Uryasz , Todd A. Petr , Corey D. Bray . "
NCAA Study of Substance Use and Abuse Habits of College Student - Athletes " Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 11.1 ( January 2001 ) :
P.51 - 56 .
Web .
July 21 , 2010 .
* Greenwald , Richard M. , Lori H. Penna , and Joseph J. Crisco .
" Differences in Batted Ball Speeds With Wood and Aluminum Baseball Bats : A Batting Cage Study . " Journal of Applied Biomechanics 17 ( 2001 ) : 241–252 .
Web .
July 20 , 2010 .
* Karcher , Richard T.
" The NCAA 's Regulations Related to the Use of Agents in the Sport of Baseball : Are the Rules Detrimental to the Best Interest of the Amateur Athlete ? " 7 Vand .
J. Ent .
L. & Prac .
( 2004–2005 ) : 215–232 .
Web .
July 21 , 2010 .
* Newlin , Clint . "
Estimated Probability of Competing in Athletics Beyond the High School Interscholastic Level . "
National Interscholastic Athletic Association .
n.p . April 20 , 2010 .
Web .
July 22 , 2010 .
* Schlegel , John .
" Texas wins NCAA record 25-inning game " , MLB.com ( MLB Advanced Media , L.P. ) , May 31 , 2009 .
* Traub , James .
" Take Me Out to the Picket Line . "
WALL ST .
J. , A12 .
July 21 , 2010 .
* " 2009 NCAA Div .
I
Baseball College World Series Bracket " ( in column 1 ( Regionals ) , click on Austin box ; then click on Texas – BC box ) , NCAA.com
( NCAA ) .
* A night to remember San Diego Union - Tribune ( March 12 , 2008 )
* BaseballAmerica.com : College * Minnesota - Louisiana Tech Boxscore Minnesota Athletic Communications ( March 27 , 2010 ) * NCAA Baseball History .
Historical Facts And Information
Relating To College Baseball
* Record Crowd Watches No . 15
Georgia Tech Top No . 12 Georgia , 12–5 Georgia Tech Sports Information ( May 11 , 2004 )
Specific EXTERNAL LINKS
* NCAA Sports.com – Baseball * NCAA.org – home page * National ( Collegiate ) Club Baseball Association * College Baseball Daily * CSTV.com – College baseball polls