NEWARK
LIBERTY INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT STATION Newark Liberty International Airport Station ( also known as Newark International Airport Station ) is a railroad station on the Northeast Corridor ( NEC ) in Newark , New Jersey .
The station provides access to Newark Liberty International Airport ( EWR ) via the AirTrain monorail which connects the station to the airport 's terminals and parking areas .
It is served by New Jersey Transit 's ( NJT )
Northeast Corridor Line and North Jersey Coast Line and Amtrak 's Northeast Regional and Keystone Service trains .
The station , located in the Dayton neighborhood of the city , has no pedestrian access , bus service , parking facility , or drop - off area .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station opened on October 21 , 2001 .
It is owned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey ( PANYNJ ) , the airport 's operator , and therefore has a different design than NJT and Amtrak stations , especially the signage , which is the same as used throughout the airport .
The Port Authority originally intended to name the station " Newark Airport " but changed it to " Newark Liberty International Airport " after the airport 's renaming , which honors the victims of the September 11 attacks and the proximity of the airport to the Statue of Liberty .
STATION LAYOUT AND SERVICE NORTHEAST CORRIDOR Section::::Station layout and service .
Section::::Northeast Corridor .
On the NEC , it is a 6-minute trip to Newark 's Penn Station , where connections are available to the Port Authority Trans - Hudson ( PATH ) system to Jersey City , Hoboken and Lower Manhattan as well as the Newark Light Rail and regional bus services .
New York City 's Penn Station , where connections are available to Long Island Rail Road and the New York City Subway , is a 22-to-25-minute trip .
Trenton is a 31-to-50-minute trip and Philadelphia is a 59-to-67-minute trip .
NJT local trains stop at Secaucus Junction , where connections are available to other New Jersey Transit Rail Operations commuter lines in northern New Jersey and Metro - North Railroad 's West of Hudson services .
AIRTRAIN
NEWARK
Section::::AirTrain Newark .
Passengers connecting between the Northeast Corridor and AirTrain Newark must pass through faregates and pay a $ 5.50 fee .
This fee is usually included in the ticket price and encoded on magnetic stripes of NJT tickets with the station as the origin or destination ( denoted with * * EWR * * ) .
Monthly pass holders who do not have Newark Airport as the origin or destination for their pass need to pay the fee , which is waived for children 11 and under .
There is a staffed Amtrak ticket counter between AirTrain and the NEC platforms .
Although there are NJ Transit staff on site , passengers are required to use the ticket vending machines ( TVMs ) on either side of the faregates for NJT service .
PLATFORM LAYOUT Section::::Platform layout .
NJ Transit trains typically stop on the outer platform tracks , while Amtrak trains typically stop on the inner platform tracks .
The two center tracks , which do not serve the station , are often used by express NJ Transit trains , as well as Amtrak service that does not stop here ( the Acela Express , some Northeast Regional , most KeystoneNJT Northeast Corridor Line toward Rahway , Jersey Avenue or Trenton ←
NJT North Jersey Coast Line toward South Amboy , Long Branch or Bay HeadAmtrak Northeast Regional toward Northern Virginia ←
Amtrak Keystone limited service toward HarrisburgNJT Northeast Corridor , North Jersey Coast PM express service does not stop here← Amtrak Northeast CorridorAmtrak Northeast Corridor services do not stop here → NJT Northeast Corridor , North Jersey CoastNJT Northeast Corridor Line toward New York → NJT North Jersey Coast Line toward Hoboken or New YorkAirTrain platforms
Track 2 ←
AirTrain Newark toward TerminalsAirTrain Newark toward Terminals PATH EXTENSION PROPOSAL Section::::PATH extension proposal .
In September 2012 , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced that work would commence on a study to explore extending the PATH system to the station .
The new station would be located at ground level to the west of the existing NJ Transit station .
A storage yard for PATH trains would also be built .
There would be a park and ride facility at the stop , with a new entrance to the surrounding Dayton neighborhood , and an overpass to the existing NJ Transit and AirTrain platforms .
In 2014 , the PANYNJ proposed a 10-year capital plan that included the PATH extension , which was approved by the Board of Commissioners on February 19 of that year .
However , in late 2014 , there were calls for reconsideration of Port Authority funding priorities .
The PATH extension followed the route of existing Manhattan - to - Newark Airport train service , while there was no funding for either the Gateway Tunnel under the Hudson River , or the replacement of the aging and overcrowded Port Authority Bus Terminal .
On January 11 , 2017 , the PANYNJ released its 10-year capital plan that included $ 1.7 billion for the extension .
Under the plan , construction is projected to start in 2020 , with service in 2026 .
Two public meetings on the project were scheduled for early December 2017 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Newark Airport Amtrak & New Jersey Transit Station ( USA RailGuide --
TrainWeb )
* Newark - Airport , NJ ( EWR )
( Amtrak 's Great American Stations )