GLACIER NATIONAL PARK ( CANADA )
Glacier National Park is one of seven national parks in British Columbia , and is part of a system of 43 parks and park reserves across Canada .
Established in 1886 , the park encompasses , and includes a portion of the Columbia Mountains .
It also contains the Rogers Pass National Historic Site .
The park 's history is closely tied to two primary Canadian transportation routes , the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) , completed in 1885 , and the Trans - Canada Highway , completed in 1963 .
The pass in the centre of the park eluded explorers until 1881 .
The railway brought with it tourism , the establishment of Glacier National Park and the construction of a popular alpine hotel .
The heavy winter snows and steep , avalanche - prone valleys of the park have been a major obstacle to transportation , necessitating much railway engineering and avalanche control measures .
The park contains high peaks , large , active glaciers , and one of Canada 's largest cave systems .
Its dense forests support populations of large mammals , birds , and alpine species .
The region is noted for its heavy snowfall .
The park has an extensive network of trails , three campgrounds , and four backcountry huts and cabins .
Due to the major transportation routes that bisect it , Glacier National Park sees large numbers of visitors .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Selkirk Mountains were first noted by Europeans when explorer David Thompson of the North West Company skirted around them on the Columbia River in 1811 .
He named them Nelson 's Mountains , after Lord Horatio Nelson , but they were later renamed after an executive for the rival Hudson 's Bay Company , Lord Thomas Douglas Selkirk .
Finding a pass through the Selkirks became a priority after construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway began .
Completion of the railway was a condition of the Colony of British Columbia upon entering Canadian Confederation in 1867 .
In 1865 , CPR surveyor Walter Moberly led an expedition up the Illecillewaet River ( which he named , using the Okanangan word for " swift water " ) .
Despite recently discovering Eagle Pass through the nearby Monashees , Moberly failed to find a pass through the Selkirks after getting sidetracked in the Tangier Creek drainage .
His party refused to explore further due to the lateness of the season , and Moberly was forced to retreat .
ROGERS PASS Section::::Rogers Pass .
An expedition led by Major Albert Bowman Rogers up the Illecillewaet discovered a viable pass in 1881 .
Rogers was awarded a five thousand dollar prize for locating a route through the mountains .
By 1885 , the CPR had constructed a line through Rogers Pass and trains were traveling west to the Pacific for the first time in Canada .
The federal government and the CPR quickly realized the tourism potential of the mountainous , heavily glaciated area .
Following a trip by Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and his wife Agnes through the Rockies on the newly completed Trancontinental Railroad , he returned to Ottawa inspired , and led the creation of Glacier and Yoho National Parks , both established on October 10 , 1886 .
They were the second and third national parks in the country , after Banff , a year earlier .
GLACIER HOUSE Section::::Glacier House .
The grade of the railway approaching Rogers Pass was too steep to allow for dining cars on the trains , so the CPR built a hotel west of the pass in 1886 .
This added to a collection of CPR - owned hotels across Canada , including Mount Stephen House in Yoho National Park , built in the same year and with the same floor plan .
Glacier House , located near the terminus of the Illecillewaet Glacier ( called the Great Glacier at the time ) , became a center for tourism , mountaineering , glaciology , and photography in the Selkirks .
The hotel was expanded in 1905 and 1911 .
It was considered one of western Canada 's premier tourist destinations at the turn of the twentieth century .
The hotel attracted alpinists from around the world .
Due to its elevation , climbers could be in the high alpine within hours of leaving their room .
In 1899 , the CPR contracted the services of several Swiss guides to assist the less mountain - savvy tourists through the high country .
Throughout the Glacier House period , many first ascents were made on peaks within the park .
The hotel also attracted naturalists and scientists keen to study the mountain environment .
Mary Vaux Walcott and her brothers , George and William Vaux , visited the area many times , and began the first scientific studies of the Illecillewaet Glacier .
MOUNTAINEERING Section::::Mountaineering .
Glacier House is considered " the first center of alpinism " in North America by American Alpine Club historian William Lowell Putnam .
It saw an influx of European and American professional climbers in its first two decades of operation .
William Spotswood Green was the first European climber to make note of the excellent climbing possibilities of peaks near the CPR line .
Green and Henry Swanzy made the first recorded ascents of major peaks in the summer of 1888 , climbing Mount Bonney and Green 's Peak .
Harold Topham , a British climber , made many first ascents in 1890 including Mount Fox ; he later joined with Henry Forster , and two Swiss climbers , Emil Huber and Carl Sulzer to explore the southern peaks of the park .
Huber and Sulzer also claimed the prized first ascent of the dramatic Mount Sir Donald .
Arthur Oliver Wheeler , a cartographer , climber , and founding member of the Alpine Club of Canada ( ACC ) , came to Glacier House in 1901 .
This started a thirty - year relationship with the northern Selkirks , which saw Wheeler map the region , publish large reference works on its geography , and explore much of the park 's terrain .
An ACC hut near the Illecillewaet campground bears his name , as well as a peak and a pass .
Professor Charles Ernest Fay , first president of the American Alpine Club , after visiting the park in the 1890s , publicized it in the club 's magazine .
By the 1900s , almost all of the park 's prominent peaks had seen human tracks .
CONNAUGHT TUNNEL AND THE TRANS - CANADA HIGHWAY Section::::Connaught Tunnel and the Trans - Canada Highway .
After its first winter in operation in 1886 , it became clear to the CPR that the heavy snows of Rogers Pass were going to be a serious challenge .
Extensive snow sheds were built to shelter the rails from frequent avalanches .
These wood sheds became a fire hazard in the summer months , so a separate summer track was built .
In 1910 , while clearing one slide , another avalanche came down Avalanche Mountain , killing 62 men .
More than half the workers killed in the slide were of Japanese descent .
In all , two hundred railway employees were killed between 1886 and 1916 .
In 1912 , the CPR admitted defeat and started the construction of an eight - kilometer tunnel under the pass and Mount Macdonald .
The Connaught Tunnel opened in 1916 .
The new tunnel bypassed Glacier House 's siding , and the resulting lack of rail passengers spelled the end for the once - popular hotel .
It was closed in 1925 , and torn down four years later .
The park saw few visitors besides campers from the Alpine Club of Canada 's summer camps for the next thirty years .
Until this point , automobile travelers crossing the Columbia Mountains had to use the circuitous " Big Bend Highway " , which followed the upper reaches of the Columbia River north in a large loop .
With the planned inundation of much of that valley by hydro projects outlined in the Columbia River Treaty , a new highway route was needed .
In 1963 , the Trans - Canada Highway was built through Rogers Pass , bringing tourists back to the park in large numbers .
Parks Canada built several new campgrounds and expanded the trail system .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The park covers the northern part of the Selkirk Mountains , a sub - range of the Columbia Mountains .
It contains numerous glaciers and large , swift waterways .
The park is bisected by two major transportation routes , the Trans - Canada Highway and the Canadian Pacific Railway .
The nearest towns are Revelstoke to the west , and Golden to the east .
The only settlement in the park is the complex at the Rogers Pass summit .
MOUNTAINS Section::::Mountains .
The Columbia Mountains rise from the plateaus of the Central Interior and extend eastward to the Rocky Mountain Trench .
Geologically distinct from the nearby Rockies , the range is divided into four sub - ranges : the Cariboos , Monashees , Selkirks , and the Purcells .
Glacier encompasses a portion of the northern Selkirks and a narrow strip of the northern Purcells .
The topography of the park varies between rounded mountains and ridges in the east , north , and west , and sharp , steep - sided peaks in the central and southern regions .
A.O. Wheeler measured many of the park 's mountains in 1901 and 1902 using a complex system of fixed points and photographs .
In the early 20th century , the area was referred to as the " Canadian Alps " .
Most names are from historical figures , including explorers , surveyors , mountaineers , and railway and Hudson 's Bay Company executives .
MAJOR PEAKS AND RANGES Section::::Major peaks and ranges .
The highest point in the park is Mount Dawson , at .
The precipitous Mount Sir Donald stands at , Mount Macdonald at , Mount McNicoll at , and Mount Abbott at .
Peaks of the Hermit Range , the Bonney and Bostock Groups , the Van Horne Range , Purity Range and the Dawson Range , all lie wholly or in part within the park , including Uto Peak at in the Sir Donald Range .
GLACIERS Section::::Glaciers .
The park has 131 glaciers over in size , covering of the park .
Throughout its history , North America has seen cycles of glaciation , where ice sheets advanced and retreated across the terrain .
The last glacial period ended about 12,000 years ago , before which all but the highest peaks of the park were covered in ice .
The movements of these rivers of ice formed the steep - sided , U - shaped valleys of the park .
They also rounded the lesser peaks ; ranges in the west of the park show this effect .
The glaciers in the park are on whole shrinking and retreating ; they are also some of the most studied glaciers in North America .
The glaciers of the park have been dramatically reduced in size in the late 20th and early 21st centuries .
Precise measurements of glacial areas started with the Vaux family and A.O. Wheeler in the 1900s .
Modern measurements using satellite imagery began with Simon Ommaney 's work in the 1980s .
Regular inventories of the parks glaciers have been performed since , with the latest collating data up to 2011 .
The most recent inventory noted a reduction of of glacial surface area from 2000 to 2011 .
Due to its location near the highway and railway , the Illecillewaet Glacier is the most visited and photographed .
Formerly known as the Great Glacier , it was a major tourist attraction during the Glacier House period from 1886 to 1925 .
The glacier 's terminus , formerly a short walk from the Glacier House site , has retreated far up the mountainside .
The névé of the glacier spreads far to the south , also spawning the Geikie Glacier .
Most of the large glacial features are south of the Trans - Canada corridor .
Other large features include the Deville , Dawson , Asulkan , Bishops , Black , Duncan , Grand , and Avalanche .
The park 's glaciers have a variety of appearances , with high altitude features smooth and uniform , cracked and riddled with crevasses on the slopes , and black with debris on the valley bottoms .
In summer , many of the glaciers take on a red tint ; this is the result of a variety of snow algae known as watermelon snow .
RIVERS Section::::Rivers .
All watercourses in the park are part of the Columbia River drainage basin .
Park rivers are swift - running and glacially - fed , and have helped carve out the steep valleys and canyons .
They carry much silt and rocky debris with them , and often have a milky white appearance .
In the summer months , these rivers have noticeable diurnal cycles ; they run high in the afternoons as the snow and ice melt is at its peak , then drop considerably with lower nighttime temperatures .
The major rivers are the Illecillewaet , the Beaver , and the headwaters of the Incomappleux and Duncan Rivers .
Large creeks and brooks include Mountain , Cougar ( which runs underground through the Nakimu Caves ) , and Battle .
The Beaver and Illecillewaet flood occasionally ; 1983 and 2012 saw flooding damage to the highway and railway .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The geology of the northern Selkirks reveals the tremendous tectonic changes that have shaped the terrain of western North America .
Like much of British Columbia , the region was first studied by the prolific surveyor and geologist Dr. George Mercer Dawson in 1890 .
Topographical maps were first produced by A.O. Wheeler in the early 1900s , and in the 1970s , Wheeler 's grandson , Dr. John Wheeler , conducted an extensive geological survey from land and air .
From Rogers Pass , layers of quartzite and slate are visible , revealing the fact that the range was part of a large , silty continental shelf 600 million years ago .
185 million years ago , successive plate movements from the west began to crumple and compress this material , driving some of it deep underground , and some into the heights of the Selkirks .
Lime from coral and other organic life was compressed into limestone , which is seen in the Cougar Brook area .
Veins of marble are present in the metamorphic rock of the high peaks .
Although erosion and the effects of the glaciers are constantly grinding down the mountain peaks , the pressure of the underlying rock continues to drive them upward .
Geologists have classed the rocks of the Columbia Mountains into groups , several of which appear in the northern Selkirks .
The slates are in the Horsethief Creek and Lardeau groups , quartzite is in the Hamill group , limestone is part of the Badshot Formation , while the metamorphic rocks are classed in the Shuswap Metamorphic Complex .
CAVES
Section::::Caves .
The limestone strata in the park is subject to water erosion by Cougar Brook , a process that has formed the Nakimu Caves .
First discovered in 1907 , and originally named the Caves of Cheops , then Deutchmann Caves , this long cave system is one of the largest in Canada .
The limestone is broken down and softened by carbonic acid in the brook 's water .
The water also contains pulverised rock from glacial processes , which serve to further etch and cut new passages in the rock .
The caves contain a large concentration of a rare substance known as moonmilk - this is a suspension of calcium carbonate kept intact by bacteria .
Due to its sensitive nature , and damage done to cave environments by early tourists , Parks Canada has closed the caves to the general public .
Access by organized groups and experienced speleologists is allowed with a permit .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Glacier National Park covers a range of habitats , from lush temperate rainforest in the western valleys , to inhospitable ice- and rock - covered alpine areas , to drier fir and pine forests on the eastern boundary .
Four of British Columbia 's biogeoclimatic zones are found within the park :
Interior cedar / hemlock , Engelmann spruce / subalpine fir , Interior Douglas - fir in the eastern extremities , and alpine tundra at high elevations .
Parks Canada characterizes these zones as " rainforest , snow forest , and no forest " .
Animal life in the park ranges from large mammals like caribou and grizzly bear to bird species such as Steller 's jay and the golden eagle .
FLORA Section::::Flora .
The valleys on the western side of the park support dense wet forests , with a thick understory .
The widest valleys , such as the Illecillewaet , contain a rare wetlands environment , featuring skunk cabbage and water hemlock .
Outside of the wetlands , the lower valleys are covered by Western Red cedar , western white pine , western hemlock , Interior douglas fir , and white birch .
Ground species include devil 's club , blueberries , liverwort , and fern species .
At middle elevations , the subalpine zone appears .
This forest has Engelmann spruce , mountain hemlock , and subalpine fir .
The understory is thick here with rhododendron and berry species , as well as deep beds of moss and lichens .
At higher elevations , this forest opens up to meadows and slide chutes , which are covered in a lush growth of grasses , herbaceous shrubs , and alpine wildflowers .
Parks botanists and others have identified 546 species of flowering plants in the park .
Late July to mid - September see an impressive display of alpine blooms .
The alpine meadows continue into the harsh alpine tundra zone , where poor soil , heavy snowfall , cold temperatures , and a very short growing season discourage all but the hardiest sedge grasses , heathers , and lichens .
FAUNA Section::::Fauna .
Glacier 's rich forests support a large wildlife population , which Parks staff monitor regularly .
There are fifty - three mammal species found within the park .
Bears dominate the snow zone ; the berry - rich avalanche slides provide an important food source for both black and grizzly species .
They spend the winters in deep dens hibernating .
Other predators include the timber wolf , coyote , red fox , wolverine , cougar , and lynx .
Mountain goats are the most common ungulates in Glacier National Park ; a 1985 study counted 300 in the high peaks and valleys of the park .
Caribou migrate through certain park valleys , while elk , mule and white - tailed deer can be found throughout .
The deep snows of winter drive most ungulates out of the park into the lower elevations of the nearby Rocky Mountain Trench and Columbia valleys .
Moose are seen in the park on rare occasions .
Several species of squirrels are found in the lower forests , and alpine mammals include pika , hoary marmots , and martens .
Glacier has 235 observed bird species , but the majority are migratory and only seen in the summer months .
The 30 species who are year - round residents include woodpeckers , golden eagles , owls , ravens , Steller 's jays , and golden - crowned kinglets .
Unpredictable explosions of pine siskins , sometimes reaching hundreds of thousands in number , will appear and stay year round , but be gone the next year .
American dippers feed in the many waterfalls and cascades of the park .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Located within the Interior Wetbelt , precipitation is a major environmental factor in the area .
The park straddles two prevalent weather systems , with warmer , wetter air from the Pacific meeting the colder , drier air of continental weather systems .
The moist air is driven to higher elevations by the mass of the Columbia Mountains .
The result is frequent rain and snowstorms , especially during winter months .
The mean annual precipitation in subalpine areas is This contributes to the large icefields and glaciers that cover much of the park 's high elevations .
Rogers Pass can receive up to of snow over the course of a winter .
The eastern edge of the park , along the Purcells , is in the rain shadow and is relatively drier .
The area can see wide variations in temperature and weather due to the extreme topography .
Winter temperatures in the Selkirks are moderate compared to similar elevations in the Rockies to the east , with summer average highs reaching the high teens Celsius .
AVALANCHE CONTROL Section::::Avalanche control .
Maintaining the Trans - Canada Highway through the snowy Rogers Pass is a constant battle .
Parks Canada works with provincial highways crews and the Canadian Armed Forces to keep the highway open as much as possible .
Parks staff play both a research and prevention role by monitoring snowpack levels and predicting avalanche probability , as well as working with the Canadian Forces to trigger controlled avalanches .
The Royal Canadian Horse Artillery operate 105 mm Howitzer cannons , based at circular gun positions along the highway .
The highway is closed to traffic , shells are fired at trigger points identified by Parks forecasters , and smaller , more controlled avalanches are started .
FACILITIES Section::::Facilities .
Although the park sees over four million visitors each year , the majority are only passing through on the Trans - Canada Highway .
About 15 % stop to use park facilities .
Of the visitors who experience the park from outside their vehicles , two - thirds are from outside of Canada .
There are of established hiking trails in the park .
The Parks Canada administration and Rogers Pass Discovery Centre are located at Rogers Pass .
The interpretive program for Glacier and Mount Revelstoke National Parks is based at the centre .
It includes a theatre , an exhibit hall with railway models , natural history displays and wildlife specimens , and a bookstore .
There are three campgrounds in the park .
Illecillewaet is the largest , with two smaller campgrounds located at Loop Brook and Sir Donald .
There are also five designated backcountry camping areas .
Parks and the Alpine Club of Canada maintain four alpine huts and cabins for backcountry users .
The Wheeler Hut is the oldest and largest , and is located near the Illecillewaet camping area .
The Asulkan hut sits at on the Asulkan Pass , the Sapphire Col hut is a basic shelter near The Dome , and the Glacier Circle cabin in the Beaver River valley is a base for travelling in the southern areas of the park .
None of the camping facilities in the park are maintained during winter months .
SEE ALSO * Glacier National Park ( U.S. ) * List of National Parks of Canada
* National Parks of Canada NOTES REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Dawson , George M. Note on the Geological Structure of the Selkirk Range .
Rochester , NY : Geological Society of America , 1891 .
* Wheeler , A. O.
The Selkirk Mountains : A Guide for Mountain Climbers and Pilgrims Winnipeg , Man , Stovel Co. , 1912 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Map of the park * Climbing to the Clouds Virtual exhibit from North Vancouver Museum