CLOCK MANAGEMENT
In gridiron football , clock management is the manipulation of a game clock and play clock to achieve a desired result , typically near the end of a match .
It is analogous to " running out the clock " ( and associated counter - tactics ) seen in many sports , and the act of trying to hasten the game 's end is often referred to by this term .
Clock managements strategies are a significant part of American football , where an elaborate set of rules dictates when the game clock stops between downs , and when it continues to run .
IN AMERICAN FOOTBALL RULES FOR THE GAME CLOCK Section::::In American football .
Section::::Rules for the game clock .
Upon kickoff , the clock is started when a member of the receiving team touches the ball , or , if the member of the receiving team touches the ball in their end zone , carries the ball out of the end zone .
The clock is stopped when that player is tackled or goes out of bounds .
( The clock never starts if the receiving team downs the ball in their own end zone for a touchback . )
The clock is then restarted when the offense snaps the ball for their first play and continues to run unless one of the following occurs , in which case the clock is stopped at the end of the play and restarts at the next snap unless otherwise provided : * A player carrying the ball goes out of bounds .
Unless after the 2-minute warning of the first half or inside the last 5 minutes of the second half / overtime , the clock is restarted when the ball is spotted , unless another condition causes the clock to start at the snap .
* A loose ball is out of bounds .
The clock is restarted when the ball is spotted , unless another condition causes the clock to start at the snap .
* A forward pass is ruled incomplete .
*
Either team calls for a timeout or an official calls for a timeout , perhaps because a player is injured or there is a penalty on the play .
Officials will restart the clock after an official timeout , but not a team timeout , has concluded unless another of the conditions applies , or if the timeout is for a penalty enforcement after the 2-minute warning of the first half or inside the last 5 minutes of the second half / overtime ( absent special timing rules for specific fouls ) .
* 10 seconds will be taken off the clock , and the clock started when the ball is spotted , if the offense , after the 2-minute warning of either half , fouls or commits certain other acts that cause the clock to stop ( including an injury when the offense is out of timeouts , except under certain circumstances ) , unless the clock will stop anyway for a different reason .
In Canadian football , the offense may execute one additional untimed play if the clock expires while the ball is not in play .
* A score or touchback occurs .
Additionally , the clock does not run during or after a conversion attempt in the NFL or NCAA college football .
* Possession of the football is transferred between teams for any reason .
*
In college football , the clock is briefly stopped when a team earns a first down to allow the chain crew to reposition themselves .
The NFL has no such stoppage .
If the clock runs out during a play , the current play is allowed to continue to its conclusion .
If the clock runs out between downs , the period ends in American football , but in Canadian football the offense is allowed one last down .
Each team is given three timeouts per half which they can use to stop the clock from running after a play .
In the NFL , teams get two timeouts in a preseason or regular season overtime period , or three in a postseason overtime half .
On a fair - catch punt , the clock starts at the snap and stops at the end of the play .
STRATEGIES STRATEGIES FOR LEADING TEAMS
ON OFFENSE Section::::Strategies .
Section::::Strategies for leading teams on offense .
A team on offense that has the higher score seeks to use as much time as possible .
A drive that scores no points may nevertheless benefit the team by taking time off the clock .
The team may : *
Favor run plays over pass plays .
* Use the center of the field rather than the sidelines to avoid going out of bounds and stopping the clock .
* Delay the start of each play until the play clock approaches 0 .
The team may use counterintuitive game plans , such as declining to score or allowing the opponents to score , to accelerate the end of the game .
If the defense does not have enough time - outs to stop the clock before the ball is turned over on downs , the offense can run out the clock by executing repeated quarterback kneels until the clock runs out .
In the NFL and college football , up to 40 seconds can be taken off the clock between plays .
The NFL also has a built - in two - minute warning that stops the clock after the play that occurs when the clock hits two minutes ends .
In order to successfully run out the clock by kneeling , there must be less than 40 seconds on the clock if the opponent has two time - outs , 1 minute 20 seconds if the opponent has one time - out , or 2 minutes if the defense has no time - outs remaining , at the beginning of the series of downs .
The offense can burn further time off the clock by timewasting : keeping the ball live ( and the clock running ) simply by keeping away from any defensive player , regardless of position on the field .
STRATEGIES FOR TRAILING TEAMS
ON OFFENSE
Section::::Strategies for trailing teams on offense .
A team on offense that has the lower score seeks to conserve time .
The team may :
* Use a no - huddle offense ; forgo detailed design of a play and instead signal and initiate a play quickly .
* Have the quarterback " spike " the ball , sacrificing a down to stop the clock .
( An explicit exception is written into the American football rule books so that the move is not penalized for intentional grounding . )
* Use a passing play ( because an incomplete pass stops the clock ) or a run play toward the sidelines ( because taking the ball out of bounds also stops the clock ) .
* Most ideal after a 1st down .
*
If a play ends such that the game clock continues running , use a timeout .
*
If the ball is still alive while the clock runs out and the team with the ball is still trailing , do everything within the team 's power to keep the ball alive until it can be advanced to the end zone .
Often this incorporates a series of lateral and backward passes to avoid the ball carrier being tackled and the game ending .
A team that is tied or trailing by one or two points but is within the red zone ( and thus in easy field goal range ) seeks to burn a specific amount of time off the clock , such that they can stop the clock with five or fewer seconds on the clock , so that their placekicker can kick a field goal with no time remaining and win the game .
One exceptionally rare strategy that a team in possession of the ball near the end of the game can use is the fair catch kick .
For the fair catch kick to be a viable option , several conditions must be met : the opposing team must have punted the ball within play and the receiving team used the fair catch to secure the ball , the punt must have been exceptionally short so that the spot of the fair catch is within field goal range and unlikely to be returned , and the team using the fair catch kick must be either tied or within three points .
STRATEGIES FOR THE DEFENSE
Section::::Strategies for the defense .
A team on defense has little control over the pace of the game .
It may expend its timeouts to ensure that there is adequate time left on the clock , in case the team regains possession .
The defense can make decisions on how to stop the ball carrier based on whether the team is trailing or leading : if the offense is trying to conserve time , the defense can foil that by tackling the ball carrier in - bounds before they can get out of bounds .
Defenses likewise can safely devote more personnel to the perimeter and leave the center of the field less defended , as an offense that can not afford to keep the clock running will have to throw toward the sidelines .
Various rules ensure that the defense can not deliberately commit fouls to manipulate the game clock , and in the most extreme such cases , an unfair act can be declared and the game forfeited to the offense .
( Likewise , if the offense commits fouls to burn off time and get extra downs , the clock is reset and unsportsmanlike conduct is called on them . )
CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::Canadian football .
In Canadian football , a team trailing by one point or tied has an additional option : a ball can be kicked from anywhere on the field in that sport , and balls kicked into or through the end zone and not returned score a single point .
This allows a team trailing by one to advance the ball upfield , then punt the ball toward the end zone in hopes of tying the game for one point ( the player could also drop kick the ball , which would allow the kicking team to win on a field goal if kicked through the uprights ) .
To prevent this scenario , defending teams will place their punter in the end zone to retrieve the ball and kick it back out of the end zone , preventing that single point from being scored .
Several of the strategies discussed above for American football above can be used in the Canadian code , however rule differences mean that running out the clock much more difficult :
* Teams are allowed only three downs to advance the ball 10 yards without losing possession ( as opposed to four in the American game ) .
*
The offensive team has only 20 seconds after the ball is whistled into play to start a new play ( as opposed to 25 seconds in American high school football and 40 seconds from the end of the last play in college football and the NFL ) .
*
After the three - minute warning in Canadian football , two key timing changes occur : *
The clock stops after every play .
The clock restarts when the referee whistles the ball in play after a tackle in bounds , and with the snap after an incomplete pass or a tackle out of bounds .
* A " time count " ( the same foul as " delay of game " in American football ) , which is a 5-yard penalty ( with the down repeated ) at other points in the game , becomes a loss of down penalty on first or second down and a 10-yard penalty on third down .
Additionally , if the referee deems a time count violation on third down in the last three minutes of a half to be deliberate , he can require the offensive team to legally place the ball in play within the 20-second count , with a violation resulting in loss of possession .
* If the clock hits 0:00 between plays , Canadian teams are required to execute one final play , even if the ball has not yet been snapped .
In the American game , if the clock hits 0:00 between plays , the game is over unless the previous play ended in a defensive penalty , a score , or circumstances warranting various types of kicks .
These differences make for radically different endgames if the team with the lead has the ball .
In the NFL , a team can run 120 seconds ( 2 minutes)--and slightly more in the NCAA -- off the clock without gaining a first down ( assuming that the defensive team is out of timeouts ) .
In the Canadian game , just over 40 seconds can be run off .
SEE ALSO
* Gaming the system
* Running out the clock REFERENCES FURTHER READING * A clock - management manual