T WAVE
In electrocardiography , the T wave represents the repolarization of the ventricles .
The interval from the beginning of the QRS complex to the apex of the T wave is referred to as the absolute refractory period .
The last half of the T wave is referred to as the relative refractory period or vulnerable period .
The T wave contains more information than the QT interval .
The T wave can be described by its symmetry , skewness , slope of ascending and descending limbs , amplitude and subintervals like the T – T interval .
In most leads , the T wave is positive .
This is due to the repolarization of the membrane .
During ventricle contraction ( QRS complex ) , the heart depolarizes .
Repolarization of the ventricle happens in the opposite direction of depolarization and is negative current , signifying the relaxation of the cardiac muscle of the ventricles .
This double negative of direction and charge is why the T wave is positive ; although the cell becomes more negatively charged , the net effect is in the positive direction , and the ECG reports this as a positive spike .
However , a negative T wave is normal in lead aVR .
Lead V1 may have a T wave with positive , negative , or biphasic where positive is followed by negative , or vice versa .
In addition , it is not uncommon to have an isolated negative T wave in lead III , aVL , or aVF .
A periodic beat - to - beat variation in the amplitude or shape of the T wave may be termed T wave alternans .
CARDIAC
PHYSIOLOGY Section::::Cardiac physiology .
The refractory period of cardiac muscle is distinct from skeletal muscle .
Nerves that innervate skeletal muscle have an extremely short refractory period after being subjected to an action potential ( 1 ms ) .
This can lead to sustained or tetanic contraction .
In the heart , contractions must be spaced to maintain a rhythm .
Unlike in muscle , repolarization occurs at a slow rate ( 100 ms ) .
This prevents the heart from undergoing sustained contractions because it forces the refractory period and cardiac action potential firing to be of the same length of time .
Repolarization depends on the charges of ions and their flow across membranes .
In skeletal muscle cells , repolarization is simple .
Sodium ions flowed into the cell earlier to depolarize it and cause skeletal muscle contraction .
Once the action potential is over , potassium ions flow out of the cell due to increased cell membrane permeability to those ions .
This high permeability contributes to the rapid repolarization of the membrane potential .
This repolarization occurs quickly enough that another action potential can cause depolarization , even before the last action potential has dissipated .
The cardiac muscle differs in that there are more calcium channels that counteract the potassium channels .
While potassium quickly flows out of the cell , calcium slowly flows into the cell .
This causes the repolarization to occur more slowly , making the refractory period as long as the action potential , preventing sustained contractions .
The T wave is representative of the repolarization of the membrane .
In an EKG reading , the T wave is notable because it must be present before the next depolarization .
An absent or strangely shaped T wave may signify disruption in repolarization or another segment of the heartbeat .
NORMAL T WAVE Section::::Normal T wave .
Normally , T waves are upright in all leads , except aVR , aVL , III and V1 leads .
Highest amplitude of T wave is found at V2 and V3 leads .
The shape of the T wave is usually asymmetrical with a rounded peak .
T wave inversions from V1 to V4 leads are frequently found and normal in children .
In normal adults , T wave inversions are less commonly found , but can be normal from V1 to V3 .
The depth of the T wave also becomes progressively shallow from one to the next lead .
The height of the T wave should not exceed 5 mm in limb leads and more than 10 mm in precordial leads .
ABNORMALITIES Section::::Abnormalities .
Both the abnormalities of the ST segment and T wave represents the abnormalities of the ventricular repolarisation or secondary to abnormalities in ventricular depolarisation .
INVERTED T WAVE Section::::Inverted T wave .
Inverted T wave is considered abnormal if inversion is deeper than 1.0 mm .
Inverted T waves found in other leads other than the V1 to V4 leads is associated with increased cardiac deaths .
Inverted T waves associated with cardiac signs and symptoms ( chest pain and cardiac murmur ) are highly suggestive of myocardial ischaemia .
Other ECG changes associated with myocardial ischaemia are : ST segment depression with an upright T wave ; ST segment depression with biphasic T wave or inverted T wave with negative QRS complex
; T wave symmetrically inverted with a pointed apex , while the ST segment is either bowed upwards or horizontally depressed , or not deviated ; and ST segment depression progressing to abnormal T wave during ischaemia free intervals .
However , ST segment depression is not suggestive of ischaemic location of the heart .
ST segment depression in eight or more leads , associated with ST segment elevation in aVR and V1 are associated with left main coronary artery disease or three - vessel disease ( blockage of all three major branches of coronary arteries ) .
ST segment depression most prominent from V1 to V3 is suggestive of posterior infarction .
Furthermore , tall or wide QRS complex with an upright T wave is further suggestive of the posterior infarction .
Wellens ' syndrome is caused by the injury or blockage of the left anterior descending artery , therefore resulting in symmetrical T wave inversions from V2 to V4 with depth more than 5 mm in 75 % of the cases .
Meanwhile , the remaining 25 % of the cases shows biphasic T wave morphology .
ST segments remains neutral in this syndrome .
Those who were treated without angiography will develop anterior wall myocardial infarction in a mean period of 9 days .
An episode of chest pain in Wellens ' syndrome is associated with ST eleveation or depression and later progressed to T wave abnormality after chest pain subsided .
T wave inversion less than 5 mm may still represents myocardial ischaemia , but is less severe than Wellens ' syndrome .
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the thickening of the left ventricle , occasionally right ventricle .
It may be associated with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction or may not be associated with it in 75 % of the cases .
ECG would be abnormal in 75 to 95 % of the patients .
Characteristic ECG changes would be large QRS complex associated with giant T wave inversion in lateral leads I , aVL , V5 , and V6 , toegther with ST segment depression in left ventricular thickening .
For right ventricular thickening , T waves are inverted from V1 to V3 leads .
ST and T waves changes may not be apparent in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , but if there is presence of ST and T waves changes indicates severe hypertrophy or ventricular systolic dysfunction .
According to Sokolow - Lyon criterion , the height of R wave in V5 or V6 + the height of S wave in V1 more than 35 mm would be suggestive of left ventricular hypertrophy .
Both right and left bundle branch blocks are associated with similar ST and T wave changes as in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , but are opposite to the direction of the QRS complex .
In pulmonary embolism , T wave can be symmetrically inverted at V1 to V4 leads but sinus tachycardia is usually the more common finding .
T wave inversion is only present in 19 % of mild pulmonary embolism , but the T inversion can be present in 85 % of the cases in severe pulmonary embolism .
Besides , T inversion can also exists in leads III and aVF .
Inversion of T waves in most of the ECG leads except aVR indicates many causes most commonly myocardial ischaemia and intracranial haemorrhage .
Others include : hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , Takotsubo cardiomyopathy ( stress - induced cardiomyopathy ) , cocaine abuse , pericarditis , pulmonary embolism , and advanced or complete atrioventricular block .
FREQUENCY OF INVERTED T - WAVES Section::::Frequency of inverted T - waves .
Numbers from Lepeschkin E in ! !
Age ( ethnicity ) !
n !
V1 !
V2 !
V3 !
V4 !
V5 !
V6 BIPHASIC T
WAVE Section::::Biphasic T wave .
As the name suggests , Biphasic T waves move in opposite directions .
The two main causes of these waves are myocardial ischemia and hypokalemia .
* Ischemic T waves rise and then fall below the cardiac resting membrane
potential * Hypokalemic T waves fall and then rise above the cardiac resting membrane potential
Wellens ' Syndrome is a pattern of biphasic T waves in V2–3 .
It is generally present in patients with ischemic chest pain .
* Type 1 : T - waves are symmetrically and deeply inverted
* Type 2 :
T - waves are biphasic with negative terminal deflection and positive initial deflection
FLATTENED T WAVE
Section::::Flattened T wave .
T wave is considered flat when the wave varies from -1.0 mm to + 1.0 mm in height .
Hypokalemia or digitalis therapy can cause flattened T wave with a prominent U wave .
As hypokalemia progressively worsens , T wave becomes more flatten while U wave becomes more prominent , with progressively deeper ST segment depression .
For digitalis toxicity , there will be sagging QT interval , flattened T wave , and prominent U wave with a shortened QT interval .
HYPERACUTE T WAVE Section::::Hyperacute T wave .
These T waves may be seen in patients displaying Prinzmetal angina .
Additionally , patients exhibiting the early stages of STEMI may display these broad and disproportional waves .
' CAMEL HUMP ' T WAVE Section::::'Camel hump '
T wave .
The name of these T waves suggests the shape it exhibits ( double peaks ) .
Since these T wave abnormalities may arise from different events , ie hypothermia and severe brain damage , they have been deemed as nonspecific , making them much more difficult to interpret .
SEE ALSO
* ECG ( Electrocardiography )
* Cardiac Action Potential * QRS Complex * P wave * Cardiac Pacemaker REFERENCES