SPINY DOGFISH
The spiny dogfish , spurdog , mud shark , or piked dogfish ( Squalus acanthias ) is one of the best known species of the Squalidae ( dogfish ) family of sharks , which is part of the Squaliformes order .
While these common names may apply to several species , Squalus acanthias is distinguished by having two spines ( one anterior to each dorsal fin ) and lacks an anal fin .
It is found mostly in shallow waters and further offshore in most parts of the world , especially in temperate waters .
Spiny dogfish in the northern Pacific Ocean have recently been reevaluated and found to constitute a separate species , now known as " Pacific spiny dogfish " , Squalus suckleyi .
DESCRIPTION AND BEHAVIOR Section::::Description and behavior .
The spiny dogfish has dorsal fins , no anal fin , and dark green spots along its back .
The caudal fin has asymmetrical lobes , forming a heterocercal tail .
The species name acanthias refers to the shark 's two spines .
These are used defensively .
If captured , the shark can arch its back to pierce its captor .
Glands at the base of the spines secrete a mild venom .
Males mature at around 11 years of age , growing to in length ; females mature in 18–21 years and are slightly larger than males , reaching .
Both sexes are greyish brown in color and are countershaded .
Males are identified by a pair of pelvic fins modified as sperm - transfer organs , or " claspers " .
The male inserts one clasper into the female cloaca during copulation .
Reproduction is aplacental viviparous , which was before called ovoviviparity .
Fertilization is internal .
The male inserts one clasper into the female oviduct orifice and injects sperm along a groove on the clasper 's dorsal section .
Immediately following fertilization , the eggs are surrounded by thin shells called " candles " with one candle usually surrounding several eggs .
Mating takes place in the winter months with gestation lasting 22–24 months .
Litters range between 2 and 11 but average 6 or 7 .
Spiny dogfish are bottom - dwellers .
They are commonly found at depths of around , but have been found deeper than .
Life span is estimated to be up to 100 years and their gestation period is 18 to 24 months , which may be the longest of any known animal .
COMMERCIAL USE Section::::Commercial use .
Spiny dogfish are consumed as human food in Europe , the United States , Canada , New Zealand and Chile .
The meat is primarily consumed in England , France , the Benelux countries and Germany .
The fins and tails are processed into fin needles and are used in less expensive versions of shark fin soup in Chinese cuisine .
In England this and other dogfish are sold in fish and chip shops as " huss " , and it was historically sold as " rock salmon " until this term was outlawed by consumer legislation .
In France it is sold as " small salmon " ( saumonette ) and in Belgium and Germany it is sold as " sea eel " ( zeepaling and Seeaal , respectively ) .
It is also used as fertilizer , liver oil , and pet food , and , because of its availability , cartilaginous skull , and manageable size , as a popular vertebrate dissection specimen , in both high schools and universities .
Reported catches in 2000–2009 varied between 13,800 ( 2008 ) and 31,700 ( 2000 ) tonnes .
Bottom trawlers and sink gillnets are the primary equipment used to harvest spiny dogfish .
In Mid - Atlantic and Southern New England fisheries , they are often caught when harvesting larger groundfish , classified as bycatch , and discarded .
Recreational fishing accounts for an insignificant portion of the spiny dogfish harvest .
The Cape Cod Commercial Fishermen 's Alliance has sponsored an initiative which promotes local , sustainably caught use of the dogfish in restaurants and fish markets in the Cape Cod area of Massachusetts .
The effort is funded by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration and attempts to get the public to consume under utilized fish .
CONSERVATION STATUS AND MANAGEMENT Section::::Conservation status and management .
Once the most abundant shark species in the world , populations of Squalus acanthias have declined significantly .
They are classified in the IUCN Red List of threatened species as Vulnerable globally and Critically endangered in the Northeast Atlantic , meaning stocks around Europe have decreased by at least 95 % .
This is a direct result of overfishing to supply northern Europe 's taste for rock salmon , saumonette or zeepaling .
Despite these alarming figures , very few management or conservation measures are in place for Squalus acanthias .
In EU waters , a Total Allowable Catch ( TAC ) has been in place since 1999 , but until 2007 it only applied to ICES Areas IIa and IV .
It was also set well above the actual weight of fish being caught until 2005 , rendering it meaningless .
Since 2009 a maximum landing size of has been imposed in order to protect the most valuable mature females .
The TAC for 2011 was set at 0 tons , ending targeted fishing for the species in EU waters .
It remains to be seen if populations will be able to recover .
In the recent past the European market for spiny dogfish has increased dramatically , which led to the overfishing and decline of the species .
This drastic increase led to the creation and implementation of many fishery management policies placing restrictions on the fishing of spiny dogfish .
However , since the species is a late maturing fish , it takes a while to rebuild the population .
In 2010 , Greenpeace International added the spiny dogfish to its seafood red list . "
The Greenpeace International seafood red list is a list of fish that are commonly sold in supermarkets around the world , and which have a very high risk of being sourced from unsustainable fisheries . "
In the same year , the Convention on Migratory Species ( CMS ; also known as the Bonn Convention ) listed the species ( Northern Hemisphere populations ) under Annex I of its Migratory Shark Memorandum of Understanding .
In recent years however , the US has implemented fishing controls and opened up the fishery .
The proposed quota for 2011 was with a trip limit of , an increase over past years in which the quota has ranged from to with trip limits from .
In 2010 , NOAA announced the Eastern US Atlantic spiny dogfish stocks to be rebuilt and in 2011 concerns about dogfish posing a serious predatory threat to other stocks resulted in an emergency amendment of the quota with nearly being added .
FOSSIL RANGE Section::::Fossil range .
As a cartilaginous fish , shark tissues usually do not fossilize .
Squalus acanthias fossils date back to the Miocene 11 MYA .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Spiny dogfish at Animal Diversity Web * Canadian Shark Research Laboratory * 3D model of a spiny dogfish splanchnocranium