TRENT DILFER Trent Farris Dilfer ( born March 13 , 1972 ) is a former American football quarterback and analyst who played 14 seasons in the National Football League ( NFL ) .
He is best known as the starting quarterback for the Baltimore Ravens during their Super Bowl - winning season in 2000 .
After six seasons with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , who drafted him in the first round of the 1994 NFL Draft , Dilfer signed with the Ravens as a backup and became the team 's starter midway through the year .
Starting in the rest of the team 's games , his time with the Ravens concluded with the franchise 's first Super Bowl victory .
Despite the championship achievement , Dilfer was not re - signed by the Ravens , becoming the first starting quarterback to be released after a Super Bowl win .
Following his season with the Ravens , Dilfer spent four years with the Seattle Seahawks , primarily as a backup , and played with the Cleveland Browns and the San Francisco 49ers for one season each before retiring in 2008 .
Shortly after announcing his retirement , Dilfer was hired by ESPN as an NFL analyst , a position he held until 2017 .
He is also the head coach of Elite 11 , a quarterback camp featuring 24 of the nation 's best high school quarterbacks in a 49-day - long training camp , and whittled down to 11 .
EARLY YEARS
Section::::Early years .
Dilfer attended Aptos High School in Aptos , California .
COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::College career .
Dilfer attended Fresno State , starting at quarterback for seasons .
Dilfer helped Fresno State win or share the conference title for three straight seasons and started in two bowl games .
In his junior season , Dilfer led the nation in pass efficiency en route to being named the WAC Offensive Player of the Year .
He also set the NCAA record for consecutive pass attempts without an interception ( 271 ) that stood until 2007 , when Kentucky quarterback
Andre '
Woodson broke it .
He then declared himself eligible for the 1994 NFL Draft , forgoing his senior season .
* 1992 : 188/360 for 3,000 yards with 21 touchdowns vs 14 interceptions .
He also ran for 90 yards with 2 touchdowns .
* 1993 : 254/396 for 3,799 yards with 30 touchdowns vs 5 interceptions .
He also ran for 1 touchdown .
He also won the Sammy Baugh Trophy for top collegiate passer .
PROFESSIONAL CAREER TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS Section::::Professional career .
Section::::Tampa Bay Buccaneers .
Dilfer 's professional football career began when he was drafted by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers with their 1st pick in the 1994 NFL Draft ( 6th overall )
after his junior season at Fresno State .
When the Indianapolis Colts passed on Dilfer in the draft in favor of Trev Alberts , ESPN Draft expert Mel Kiper , Jr. heavily criticized their decision .
This led to Colts GM Bill Tobin responding on television by asking " Who in the hell is Mel Kiper " and challenged Kiper 's credentials to evaluate the draft .
This exchange is often shown as one of the classic moments of ESPN draft coverage .
Enlisted as the starter in his second year , after seeing spot duty in his rookie year , Dilfer struggled during what was still a dark period for the Buccaneers as a whole , when in 1995 he threw only 4 touchdown passes but 18 interceptions .
The following year , he showed moderate improvement by upping his touchdown production , but failed to improve his turnover numbers ( recording a career - high 19 ) .
The following season , a year that Tampa 's offense was aided by the arrival of rookie Warrick Dunn and the emergence of Mike Alstott , Dilfer was the first Tampa Bay quarterback to ever go to the Pro Bowl , which some say was a reward for a highly efficient season in the Buccaneers ' limited offense .
In the first 12 games of that year Dilfer passed for 2213 yards , 19 touchdowns and five interceptions .
However , Dilfer 's performance was perceived to decline in his last four games .
In the playoffs the Buccaneers defeated their NFC Central rivals , the Detroit Lions , before losing to their long - time division rivals , and defending Super Bowl champions , the Green Bay Packers .
While with the Bucs , he won more games than any quarterback in franchise history and took the team to their first playoff game in 15 years .
In a 1995 game against Minnesota Dilfer was ejected for throwing a punch at Vikings defensive lineman John Randle .
As of 2018 , he is the only quarterback in NFL history to be ejected .
Dilfer threw for 21 touchdowns with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in both the 1997 and the 1998 NFL seasons .
In the 1996–1999 NFL seasons , with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , Dilfer averaged 2,729 yards a season and had a total of 58 touchdowns .
His inconsistent play continued and in Week 10 of 1999 he was injured severely , missing the rest of the season .
BALTIMORE RAVENS
Section::::Baltimore Ravens .
Dilfer signed with the Ravens on March 8 , 2000 and became the backup for Tony Banks .
After two straight losses and four straight weeks without an offensive touchdown , the Ravens replaced Banks with Dilfer .
The Ravens would lose their third straight game and fail to score a touchdown for the fifth straight week .
It would be the last time the Ravens would lose a game that season , or go without a touchdown .
The Ravens finished the season winning seven straight to earn a wild card berth at 12–4 .
The 7–1 run also gave Dilfer a 45–39 record as a starter at that point .
In the playoffs , Dilfer went 3–0 , and the Ravens advanced to Super Bowl XXXV in Tampa , Florida to meet the New York Giants .
Halfway through the first quarter he connected with Brandon Stokley on a deep post for a 38-yard touchdown , badly beating Jason Sehorn .
A third down 44-yard pass to Qadry Ismail would set up a field goal before halftime , to give Baltimore a 10–0 lead .
The Ravens eventually won 34–7 .
Dilfer 's game stats were 12 completions for 153 yards and 1 touchdown .
Although one of Dilfer 's passes was intercepted by linebacker Jessie Armstead and returned for a touchdown , the call was overturned due to a holding penalty against the Giants .
The Los Angeles Times later described Dilfer as a game manager quarterback for the Ravens that season : He " was n't elite , but he did n't make costly mistakes , and was supported by a dominant defense .
" Dilfer was n't re - signed by the Ravens , making him the only quarterback to be let go after winning a Super Bowl . SEATTLE SEAHAWKS Section::::Seattle Seahawks .
On August 3 , 2001 , the Seattle Seahawks signed Dilfer as a back - up quarterback to starter Matt Hasselbeck .
Dilfer saw his first action when Hasselbeck injured his groin in week three against the Oakland Raiders .
Dilfer started and won the next two games , before being replaced by a healthy Hasselbeck .
Dilfer came on in a relief role against the Washington Redskins , when Hasselbeck struggled .
He continued as the starter when Hasselbeck suffered a separated left shoulder .
Dilfer started the final two games of the season , and with Seattle in the playoff hunt , won them both .
He ended the season by throwing five touchdowns and two interceptions in two three - point victories .
The Seahawks ' AFC ( they were still in the AFC in 2001 )
wild - card hopes ended when the Ravens beat the Minnesota Vikings 19–3 on Monday Night Football .
At the end of the season , Dilfer 's passer rating was 92.0 and he had won 15 straight starts .
Partially because the Seattle Seahawks ' starting quarterback , Hasselbeck , was coming off a season where he went 5–7 as a starter and threw eight interceptions and seven touchdowns , Dilfer was re - signed by the team to a four - year deal on March 1 , and was slated as the starter heading into training camp .
However , in an exhibition game against Indianapolis , Dilfer sprained his medial collateral ligament in his right knee .
With the injury , Dilfer lost the starting job to Hasselbeck .
Dilfer returned to the starting position against the Arizona Cardinals with a 13–24 loss .
On October 28 , 2002 , in week 8 , he suffered a season - ending torn achilles tendon against the Dallas Cowboys on the synthetic turf at Texas Stadium .
At that point in the season , the Seahawks were 2–5 .
In 2003 , Dilfer played sparingly in a relief role , and was primarily used to mentor Hasselbeck .
In 2004 , Dilfer started in only two games , and won them both : November 28 versus the Miami Dolphins , 24–17 , and December 26 versus the Arizona Cardinals , 24–21 .
Hasselbeck and Dilfer remain close friends since their time together in Seattle .
CLEVELAND BROWNS
Section::::Cleveland Browns .
In March 2005 Dilfer was traded to the Cleveland Browns where it was hoped he would mentor rookie quarterback Charlie Frye .
Naming Dilfer the starting quarterback for the 2005 NFL season , the idea was to work Frye into the lineup under the veteran 's tutelage , but a behind - the - scenes dispute with then - offensive coordinator Maurice Carthon resulted in Dilfer 's wanting out of Cleveland almost immediately .
In his lone season for the Browns , Dilfer passed for 2,321 yards and 11 touchdowns , throwing 12 interceptions and fumbling 9 times ( losing 7 of those ) .
His passer rating was 76.9 .
He did however have the highest completion percentage of his career at 59.8 percent .
The Browns would fall to 6–10 . SAN FRANCISCO
49ERS Section::::San Francisco 49ers .
In May 2006 , Dilfer was traded to the San Francisco 49ers , this time to serve as a mentor to the 2005 first round draft pick Alex Smith .
In return , the 49ers gave the Browns Ken Dorsey and a 7th round pick in the 2007 NFL Draft .
A close friend of former 49ers quarterback John Brodie
, Dilfer received permission from Brodie and the 49ers to wear his retired number 12 in support of Brodie eventually going into the Pro Football Hall of Fame .
On September 30 , 2007 , Dilfer took over from Alex Smith following Smith 's grade three shoulder separation .
He would go on to start for the 49ers in games against the Seahawks , Ravens and Giants before conceding the starting spot back to Smith .
However , with Smith 's effectiveness in question coming back from injury , coach Mike Nolan announced on November 14 , 2007 , that Dilfer would be the starting quarterback .
Dilfer would go on to start in games against the Rams , in victory over the Cardinals in overtime , and against the Panthers .
On December 9 in a home game against the Vikings , Dilfer suffered a head injury resulting in a concussion while diving for a 1st down on 4th and 2 that took him out of the game and subsequently the season .
He was succeeded by third string backup Shaun Hill .
RETIREMENT Section::::Retirement .
Dilfer officially announced his retirement on July 9 , 2008 .
Although he had suffered an Achilles ' tendon injury playing basketball earlier in the off - season with his wife , Dilfer stated that he was planning to retire anyway .
In 2009 , Dilfer was inducted into the Fresno County Athletic Hall of Fame .
CAREER PASSING STATS Section::::Career
passing stats . align="center
" !
Year!!Team!!G!!GS!!Comp!!Att!!Pct!!Yds!!Avg!!TD!!Int!!Rat !
colspan=2Career
Totals!!130!!113!!1759!!3172!!55.5!!20518!!6.5!!113!!129!!70.2
BROADCASTING
Section::::Broadcasting .
Dilfer joined the NFL Network as a guest analyst in 2006 .
On September 15 , 2007 , he appeared on the NFL Network 's pregame show .
He was the NFL Network 's color analyst for the 2008 Senior Bowl as well as a studio analyst during the 2008 NFL playoffs .
On July 14 , 2008 Dilfer signed on as an NFL analyst for ESPN .
In 2010 it was announced that he would join Brad Nessler to call the second game of the network 's Monday Night Football doubleheader on September 13 of that year .
Dilfer has also coined the phrase " turned a stinky sandwich into an ice cream cone , " which means that a player has turned a potentially negative play into a positive one .
ESPN dismissed Dilfer in a cost - cutting move in April 2017 , replacing him with Rex Ryan .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Dilfer resides with his family in Saratoga , California in the San Francisco Bay Area .
He is married to Cassandra Dilfer , a former Fresno State swimmer , and they have three daughters ( Madeleine , Victoria , and Delaney ) and a son , now deceased ( Trevin ) ; on April 27 , 2003 , Trevin lost his 40-day battle with heart disease at the age of five .
On June 2 , 2003 , Trent made his first public comments regarding his family 's loss and , still grieving , openly wept .
Aptos High School , Dilfer 's alma mater , named their football field Trevin Dilfer Field .
Dilfer is a Christian .
On a broadcast of the Cardinals and Titans preseason game in 2012 , Dilfer admitted he was 265 lbs and drinking himself to sleep during his tenure with the Seahawks .
This was in regard to losing his son and how Matt Hasselbeck helped him to recover .
SEE ALSO
* List of NCAA major college football yearly passing leaders REFERENCES