FULLER BRUSH COMPANY
The Fuller Brush Company sells branded and private label products for personal care as well as commercial and household cleaning .
It was founded in 1906 by Alfred Fuller .
Consolidated Foods , now Sara Lee Corporation , acquired Fuller Brush in 1968 .
In 1991 the company was placed in private ownership but , in 1994 , it became a subsidiary of CPAC Inc. , which from 2007 – 2012 was owned by the private equity group Buckingham Capital Partners .
From December 2012 thru Dec 2017 , the Fuller Brush Company was owned and operated by David Sabin and Victory Park Capital .
From January 2018 the Fuller Brush is owned and operated by Galaxy Brush LLC , located in Lakewood , New Jersey HISTORY
EARLY YEARS
Section::::History .
Section::::Early years .
Alfred C. Fuller began what was to become Fuller Brush Company in a basement shop in Somerville , Massachusetts .
In 1906 he moved to Hartford , Connecticut and founded the company .
The company began with door - to - door sales of brushes of various sorts , including hairbrushes with a lifetime guarantee for which they are famous .
In 1931 , the establishment of the first of what became known as the Green River Ordinance led Fuller Brush to challenge the ordinance 's limits on door - to - door sales ; the case went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court , where on March 1 , 1937 it dismissed the appeal " for want of a substantial federal question . "
In the mid 1930s , Fuller relocated from rented space on Union Place opposite Hartford 's railroad station , to a purpose - built sprawling factory and office complex on North Main St at the Windsor town line .
World War II saw the company " cut its normal civilian output drastically to make brushes for the cleaning of guns " ; Fuller 's son Howard Fuller became president in 1943 .
After the war , Fuller added Daggett & Ramsdell , Inc. 's Débutante Cosmetics to its line of products it sold house - to - house , sold by a sales force of women , a strategy resurrected after a wartime attempt to have " Fullerettes " sell their core products .
Fuller had evidence that women could succeed at sales since Stanley Beveridge , who had left his position as Fuller 's sales vice president in 1929 , had by 1949 employed women as " dealers " to grow sales at his own company , Stanley Home Products , to $ 35 million , exceeding Fuller 's sales for the first time .
Fuller 's oldest son Howard succeeded his father as president , serving until he and his wife Dora died in the high - speed crash of his Mercedes 300SL gullwing sports car near Lunning , Nevada in May 1959 .
1959
TO 1994 Section::::1959 to 1994 .
In 1959 , Avard E. Fuller , 44 , the founder 's younger son , became Fuller Brush 's president .
Having long outgrown the Hartford location , in 1960 , the company moved to a new , purpose - built campus on Long Hill St. in East Hartford ,
Conn. In 1966 , Fuller Brush hired 17,500 women , motivated by the lack of qualified men ( the unemployment rate was 3.8 % ) and the example set by Avon Products .
Consolidated Foods , now Sara Lee Corporation , acquired Fuller Brush in 1968 ; Avard Fuller retired a year later .
Office operations moved initially to Niles , Ill. , then relocated along with manufacturing and research to Great Bend , Kansas in 1973 .
By 1985 , all of the company 's sales were still generated door - to - door .
By the mid-1980s , in recognition of the decrease in the number of women at home during the day , Fuller Brush began introducing other sales channels beyond door - to - door , including a mail - order catalog that sent out 10 million catalogs a year , and several outlet stores selling " slow - selling items , returned merchandise or slightly flawed goods " ; by mid-1989 , 35 % of that year 's estimated $ 160 million in sales came from catalogs , with another 5 % coming from its stores .
Later that same year , a group of investors from Kansas headed by Lee Turner , a trial lawyer , took Fuller private ; by 1991 the company now known as Fuller Industries and led by Stuart A. Ochiltree , had integrated its door - to - door and catalog business , with its 12,000 mostly part - time sales representatives receiving commissions for sales from either channel .
CPAC SUBSIDIARY Section::::CPAC subsidiary .
In June 1994 , Fuller , once again known as Fuller Brush Company , was acquired by CPAC Inc. , a Leicester , New York - based manufacturer of photographic chemicals ; CPAC took on the " heavy debt burden " accumulated while the company was private and whose annual sales , increasingly focused on chemicals , had shrunk to $ 24 million .
In 2007 , CPAC Inc. was acquired by Buckingham Capital Partners in a leveraged buyout .
In February , 2012 , Fuller Brush Company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy .
VICTORY PARK CAPITAL AND DAVID SABIN Section::::Victory Park Capital and David Sabin .
In December , 2012 , Victory Park Capital and CEO , David Sabin , bought the iconic American company out of its Chapter 11 bankruptcy .
The headquarters were moved from Great Bend , Kansas to Napa , California .
Galaxy Brush Purchases Iconic Brand Fuller Brush
In January of 2018 , Galaxy Brush of Lakewood , NJ purchases the name of Fuller Brush including all trademarks and patents .
Galaxy Brush now doing business as Fuller Brush also acquired the iconic and very famous name brand and trademarks of Stanley Home Products .
Galaxy Brush has since returned Fuller Brush and Stanley Home Products manufacturing back to its roots in Great Bend , Kansas where many of the original products were made .
Galaxy Brush has modernized the nostalgic Brands of Fuller Brush and Stanley Home Products with Facebook , Instagram , YouTube pages and a modern Website LOCATIONS CONNECTICUT Section::::Locations .
Section::::Connecticut .
The main factory for the Fuller Brush Company was located in East Hartford , Connecticut during the 1960s , where Fuller 's son Avard ran the company .
It had moved from Hartford on the other side of the Connecticut River some years earlier .
The Research Division was there , led by Hank Whitman , along with the plastics molding operation .
The Industrial Division , under Verne Joy , was also at the East Hartford plant , where they made large motor - driven brushes for developing newspaper printing photo metal plates .
All the mops were sewn at this plant .
The perfuming operation was there also , including a large machine to detect what was in perfume made by other companies .
In front of the East Hartford plant was a large glass case with a stuffed large boar that represented the boar hair used in some of the original Fuller brushes .
Fuller had a " private label " division , Charter Products , that sold duplicate products under other brand names chosen by the distributor .
Avard 's interest in boating resulted in experiments at the plant with plastic molding of port lights ( windows ) for boats , including full plastic hardware .
NEW YORK Section::::New York .
The plastic bottle and toothbrush manufacturing operation was in Philmont , New York .
According to Fuller 's memoir , Fuller Brush distributed the Bristlecomb , a hairbrush introduced by the Mohawk Company in 1928 .
In 1942 , Fuller Brush bought out the Mohawk Brush Company and subsequently all the hairbrushes and industrial floor brushes were manufactured at the Mohawk Plant in Albany , New York .
GREAT BEND , KANSAS Section::::Great Bend , Kansas .
Since 1973 , Fuller brushes and over 2,000 other Fuller products have been manufactured in Barton County , near Great Bend , Kansas .
NAPA , CALIFORNIA Section::::Napa , California .
Headquarters were moved from Kansas to California shortly after being purchased by David Sabin and Victory Park Capital , while the manufacturing remains in Great Bend , KS .
FORMER EMPLOYEES Section::::Former employees .
Former employees include evangelist Billy Graham , who became a Fuller Brush salesman during the summer after high school , and outsold " every other salesman in North Carolina " ; in his 1997 autobiography , Just As I Am , Graham describes in some detail his experiences selling Fuller brushes door - to - door .
Ellen Barkin was " born in the Bronx to a father who worked as a Fuller Brush man " .
Clifford Irving " was a Fuller Brush man in Syracuse . "
More recently , Groundlings Theater veteran Paul Reubens , of Pee - wee Herman fame , worked as a Fuller Brush salesman while attending California Institute of the Arts .
Other former employees include Frank Gross , photographer Tom Leutwiler , Dennis Quaid , Dick Clark , J. Bruce Llewellyn ( co - founder of 100 Black Men of America ) , Ed Mirvish , Jack Sensenbrenner , Kin Shriner , and Ed Stelmach .
Jack Nicholson and Felicia Farr were also featured in a few pictures in " The Fuller Magazine . "
Broadcaster Lowell Green admitted during his April 24 , 2014 program to selling Fuller Brushes in Montreal 's Westmount area during his college days in the 1950s .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* The Big Bad Wolf disguises himself as a Jewish Fuller Brush salesman in Disney 's 1933 Academy Award - winning Silly Symphonies version of Three Little Pigs .
*
In Warner Brothers 's 1944 cartoon " Duck Soup to Nuts , " Daffy Duck induces Porky Pig to open the window of his diving helmet by knocking on it and declaring , " It 's The Fuller Brush Man ! "
* The company also inspired two comedy films , The Fuller Brush Man , a 1948 movie starring Red Skelton and Janet Blair , and The Fuller Brush Girl , a 1950 movie starring Lucille Ball and Eddie Albert .
*
The Fuller Brush salesman is mentioned by rock and roots artist James McMurtry in the song Fuller Brush Man .
The song appears on his 1995 release , Where 'd You Hide The Body , released by Columbia Records .
* The 1972 song by John Prine , " The Frying Pan , " from his album Diamonds in the Rough , begins with the line , " I came home from work this evening , there was a note in the frying pan
, it said cook your own supper babe , I 've run off with the Fuller Brush Man . "
* A line in the song " Sneakin ' Around " from the 1982 movie
The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas mentions " dirty jokes about the Fuller brush man . "
*
In the 1987 episode " Much Ad About Scrooge " of Disney 's DuckTales , Uncle Scrooge is fast - talked into letting a Fuller Brush salesman into his house .
*
In Donnie Brasco ( film ) , Maggie Pistone ( played by Anne Heche ) quips to her visiting husband Joe ( who was using the alias Donald Brasco at the time described in the film and was played in the film by Johnny Depp ) that their two daughters might not recognize him due to his infrequent presence at home , " They might think you 're the Fuller brush man . "
*
In the 2008 film , famed evangelist Billy Graham , playted in the film by Armie Hammer , has a summer job in his college years as a door - to - door Fuller brush salesman .
( Graham 's autobiography Just As I Am refers to exactly this activity on his part , as mentioned above . )
* Often referred to as San Francisco 's last door - to - door salesman , as of 2013 , Norman Hall continues to sell Fuller Brush products in the Bay Area and was interviewed on Radio Sausalito .
*
In August 2013 , the company was featured on the AMC reality series " The Pitch " where a group of advertising agencies compete to pitch advertising campaigns to Sabin and his team at Fuller Brush .
The Monogram Group won the account with the slogan ' live fuller . '
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Carson , Gerald .
The Fuller Brush Man ( American Heritage Publishing Company , 1986 )
* Fuller , Alfred C. A Foot in the Door , the Life Appraisal of the Original Fuller Brush Man ( 1960 ) , Autobiography by founder