UNIVERSITY OF DELHI
The University of Delhi , informally known as Delhi University ( DU ) , is a collegiate public central university , located in New Delhi , India .
It was founded in 1922 by an Act of the Central Legislative Assembly .
As a collegiate university , its main functions are divided between the academic departments of the university and affiliated colleges .
Consisting of three colleges , two faculties , and 750 students at its founding , the University of Delhi has since become India 's largest institution of higher learning and among the largest in the world .
The university currently consists of 16 faculties and 86 departments distributed across its North and South campuses .
It has 77 affiliated colleges and 5 other institutes with an enrollment of over 132,000 regular students and 261,000 non - formal students .
The Vice - President of India serves as the University 's chancellor .
DU is a member of the Association of Commonwealth Universities , Association of Indian Universities , and Universitas 21 , a global network of research - intensive universities .
DU has graduated many notable alumni , including seven heads of state or government and two Nobel laureates .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The University of Delhi was established in 1922 as a unitary , teaching and residential university by an Act of the then Central Legislative Assembly of the British India .
The University was originally to be named Prince Charles University , but Rai Kedarnath , counselor to the Chief Commissioner of Delhi and founder of Ramjas College , argued that if the university should fail , that would certainly antagonise the Prince .
He suggested the name by which it is known today .
Hari Singh Gour served as the university 's first Vice - Chancellor from 1922 to 1926 .
Only four colleges existed in Delhi at the time : St. Stephen 's College founded in 1881 , Hindu College founded in 1899 , Zakir Husain Delhi College ( then known as The Delhi College ) , founded in 1692 and Ramjas College founded in 1917 , which were subsequently affiliated to the university .
The university initially had two faculties ( Arts and Science ) and approximately 750 students .
The seat of power in British India had been transferred from Calcutta to Delhi in 1911 .
The Viceregal Lodge Estate became the residence of the Viceroy of India until October 1933 , when it was given to the University of Delhi .
Since then , it has housed the office of the vice - chancellor and other offices .
When Sir Maurice Gwyer came to India in 1937 to serve as Chief Justice of British India , he became the Vice - Chancellor of the University of Delhi .
During his time , postgraduate teaching courses were introduced and laboratories were established at the university .
Members of the faculty included Daulat Singh Kothari in Physics and Panchanan Maheshwari in Botany .
Gwyer has been called the " maker of university " .
He served as Vice - Chancellor until 1950 .
The silver jubilee year of the university in 1947 coincided with India 's independence , and the national flag was hoisted in the main building for the first time by Vijayendra Kasturi Ranga Varadaraja Rao .
In that year there was no convocation ceremony due to the partition of India .
Instead a special ceremony was held in 1948 , attended by then Prime Minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru , as well as by Lord Mountbatten , Lady Mountbatten , Abul Kalam Azad , Zakir Husain and Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar .
Twenty - five years later the golden jubilee celebrations of 1973 were attended by then Prime Minister of India Indira Gandhi , Satyajit Ray , Amrita Pritam and M. S. Subbulakshmi .
PRESENT FORM
Section::::Present form .
The University has grown into one of the largest universities in India .
At present , there are 16 faculties , 86 academic departments , 77 colleges and 5 other recognised institutes spread across city , with 132,435 regular students ( 114,494 undergraduates and 17,941 postgraduates ) .
There are also 261,169 students in non - formal education programmes ( 258,831 undergraduates and 2,338 postgraduates ) .
DU 's chemistry , geology , zoology , sociology and history departments have been awarded the status of Centres of Advanced Studies .
These Centres of Advanced Studies have carved a niche for themselves as centres of excellence in teaching and research in their respective areas .
In addition , a number of the university 's departments are also receiving grants under the Special Assistance Programme of the University Grants Commission in recognition of their outstanding academic work .
DU is one of the most sought after institutions of higher education in India .
It also has one of the highest publication counts among Indian universities .
The annual honorary degree ceremony of the University have been conferred upon several distinguished people , which includes film actor Amitabh Bachchan , former Chief Minister of Delhi Sheila Dikshit , cartoonist R. K. Laxman , chemist C. N. R. Rao and former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Gordon Brown .
CAMPUS Section::::Campus .
There are 77 colleges and 16 faculties affiliated to the University of Delhi , spread across Delhi .
North Campus and South Campus serve as the two main campuses of the University .
NORTH CAMPUS Section::::North Campus .
North Campus hosts the three founding colleges of the university which constituted the University of Delhi when it was founded .
North campus proper now has 12 colleges geographically centred on the Faculty of Arts , Science , Law and Management .
which are Kirori Mal College , Daulat Ram College , Hansraj College , Hindu College , Swami Shraddhanand College , Indraprastha College for Women , Miranda House , SGTB Khalsa College .
Ramjas College , St. Stephen 's College , Shri Ram College of Commerce , and Dyal Singh College .
The extended off campus also has colleges in the Old Rajendra Nagar , Pitampura and Ashok Vihar neighborhoods of Delhi .
The campus also houses other centres and institutes of Delhi which include the Cluster Innovation Centre , Delhi School of Economics and Delhi School Of Journalism SOUTH CAMPUS Section::::South Campus .
The University of Delhi started the south campus in 1973 as an effort to cope with its expansion .
It moved to its present location on Benito Juarez Marg , near Dhaula Kuan , in 1984 .
The campus is spread across .
The various departments are located in the Faculty of Arts , Inter - disciplinary , Applied Sciences and the S.P. Jain Centre for Management Studies .
South Campus has the following colleges : Acharya Narendra Dev College , Aryabhatta College , Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College , College of Vocational Studies , Deshbandhu college , Dyal Singh College , Jesus and Mary College , Maitreyi College , Moti Lal Nehru College , Ram Lal Anand College , Pannalal Girdharlal Dayanand
Anglo Vedic College , Sri Aurobindo College , Shaheed Bhagat Singh College , Delhi College of Arts and Commerce and Sri Venkateswara College .
OTHERS Section::::Others .
Zakir Husain Delhi College , which is situated in the central part of New Delhi , is the oldest college in Delhi carrying 300 years of legacy .
The East Campus is being developed with the University College of Medical Sciences as its nucleus .
ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION GOVERNANCE Section::::Organisation and administration .
Section::::Governance .
The President of India is the Visitor , the Vice - President of India is the Chancellor and the Chief Justice of India is the Pro - Chancellor of the University .
The Court , the Executive Council , the Academic Council and the Finance Committee are the administrative authorities of the University .
The University Court is the supreme authority of the University and has the power to review the acts of the Executive Council and the Academic Council .
The Executive Council is the highest executive body of the University .
The Academic Council is the highest academic body of the University and is responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction , education and examination within the University .
It has the right to advise the Executive Council on all academic matters .
The Finance Committee is responsible for recommending financial policies , goals , and budgets that support the mission , values and strategic goals of the university .
COLLEGES
Section::::Colleges .
Though the colleges are all constituent to the University of Delhi , as it is a collegiate university , depending upon the funding Delhi Colleges broadly fall into three categories : * Colleges established by Educational or Charitable Trusts .
* Colleges maintained by Delhi Administration , which acts as trust for them .
* Colleges maintained by University of Delhi .
The colleges maintained by university get 100 % deficit maintenance grant while the colleges run by trusts get 95 % deficit grants .
The university has 65 colleges that have liberal courses in humanities , social sciences and science .
Twenty - five of these colleges are affiliated with the South Campus while the others are to the North Campus .
These colleges except two — Lady Irwin College and Institute of Home Economics — are undergraduates The total number of colleges under the university is 77 , if the colleges that run professional courses are included .
Some colleges also offer evening courses .
FACULTIES Section::::Faculties .
The University of Delhi 's 86 academic departments are divided into 16 faculties .
* Faculty of Applied Social Sciences & Humanities
* Faculty of Arts * Faculty of Commerce and Business Studies
* Faculty of Education * Faculty of Interdisciplinary and Applied Sciences * Faculty of Law
* Faculty of Management Studies
* Faculty of Mathematical Sciences * Faculty of Medical Sciences * Faculty of Music and Fine Arts
* Faculty of Open Learning : The faculty is concerned with distance education .
* Faculty of Science
* Faculty of Social Sciences
In the past , Faculty of Technology was offering courses in Engineering and Technology .
The faculty earlier included the Delhi College of Engineering , before it was transformed into the Delhi Technological University and Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology before it was transformed into the Netaji Subhas University of Technology .
AFFILIATED FACULTIES Section::::Affiliated faculties .
University of Delhi has two affiliated facilities : * Faculty of Ayurvedic & Unani Medicine : The faculty awards to degrees to its students in Ayurvedic medicine and Unani medicine .
CENTRES AND INSTITUTES Section::::Centres and institutes .
There are about 28 centres and institutes of DU .
These are divided into four categories : POSTGRADUATE CENTRES * Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre For Biomedical Research — Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research is a centre where multispecialty group of scientists work as a cohesive team and participate in active teaching and research in some of the frontline areas of basic and applied biomedical sciences .
* Institute of Informatics and Communication — focuses on the field of communication and information technology .
* Delhi School of Economics : Commonly referred to as DSE , it is a centre of post graduate learning .
Started in the year 1949 , the campus of the Delhi School of Economics houses the University of Delhi 's Departments of Economics , Commerce , Sociology and Geography .
* Delhi School of Journalism - The University of Delhi established the Delhi School of Journalism ( DSJ ) in 2017 and introduced a Five - Year Integrated Course in Journalism .
CENTRES * Cluster Innovation Centre aims to present its students with a creative and innovative study system that involves hands - on projects and connects research with application in society .
CIC is supported by the National Innovation Council and aided by Union Human Resource Development Ministry .
* D.S. Kothari Centre for Science , Ethics and Education —
The principal objective of Daulat Singh Kothari Centre for Science , Ethics and Education is to raise the standard of living of our people .
It is based on science & technology , and education that determines the level of prosperity , welfare and security of the people .
* Agricultural Economics Research Centre — The centre was established and is completely funded by the Ministry of Agriculture of India to carry out research related to rural economy and agriculture in India .
Since then , the centre has completed more than hubdreds of policy - oriented studies for the Ministry of Agriculture .
* Centre for Environmental Management of Degraded Ecosystem — The centre works towards strengthening awareness , research and training in priority areas of environmental management of degraded ecosystems .
The centre closely coordinates with the other departments of SES , viz .
Department of Environmental Biology and Centre for Interdisciplinary Studies of Mountain & Hill Environment on issues of biodiversity conservation , habitat loss , pollution and rehabilitation of displaced people due to developmental activities .
* Centre for Inter - disciplinary Studies of Mountain & Hill Environment — The concept of the centre revolves around the idea that the upland areas play a crucial role in the production and regeneration of natural resources like fresh water , forests , besides sustaining a rich genetic diversity of plant and animal life .
* The Centre for Professional Development in Higher Education is committed to provide opportunities for professional and career development to teachers across the universities of India .
Keeping in view the role of higher education in national development , CPDHE helps build competence in research methodologies and pedagogy , expansion of technologies in ICT , Science and Technology , Environment and Education .
* The Centre For Science Education & Communication is for the pursuit and teaching of science .
It is an autonomous institution in which studies can be carried out by teachers , students and other interested individuals , for the generation of ideas and materials for the improvement of science education at university and school levels ; and for the promotion of a wider interest in science and scientific issues , through all means of communications .
* Developing Countries Research Centre —
Its objective is to critically address important political and intellectual issues that emerge from the study of the post colonial world and integrate these insights into teaching at the undergraduate , post - graduate and research levels in the vast educational network of the University of Delhi .
Scholars in Political Science , Economics , Sociology , History , Education , Philosophy , Psychology and Literature have been involved in the effort .
*
The Women 's Study Development Centre is the focal point for women 's and gender studies in the university .
The activities of WSDC place women and gender at the centre of its inquiry focusing mostly on multidisciplinary perspectives of class , caste , race , ethnicity , sexuality , religion , age .
It also addresses several other contemporary socio - political issues concerning women .
* The University Science Instrumentation Centre ( USIC ) is a central facility and houses sophisticated analytical instruments .
Its main objective is to provide services to all researchers and students of science departments in the University and the constituent colleges of the University of Delhi .
RECOGNISED INSTITUTES
* The Institute of Life Long Learning ( ILLL ) is dedicated to the cause of those who believe that learning is not age - bound nor classroom - bound , but it takes place throughout life and in all kinds of situations .
*
The Ahilaya Bai College of Nursing is a leading nursing institute .
It provides practical exposure to their students , which helps them in acquiring in - depth knowledge of nursing .
*
The Amar Jyoti Institute of Physiotherapy offers degrees in physiotherapy and the institute sees it as a profession .
* The Durgabai Deshmukh College of Special Education is especially meant for Blind students .
The undergraduate course Special Education for Visually Impaired students has a motto to empower visually impaired pupils in long run .
*
Pt .
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Institute for the Physically Handicapped is an autonomous organisation under the administrative and financial control of Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment , Government of India .
It provides education to people with disabilities .
* School of Rehabilitation Sciences — Its aim is to disseminate knowledge on developmental therapy and special education on rehabilitation sciences .
AFFILIATED INSTITUTIONS * Army Hospital ( Research & Referral )
* Central Health Education Bureau
* G.B. Pant Hospital * Hindu Rao Hospital * Institute of Human Behaviour & Allied Sciences * Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied Sciences * Kasturba Hospital * National Institute of Health & Family Welfare ACADEMICS COURSES Section::::Academics .
Section::::Courses .
There are 240 courses available in University of Delhi for UG(87 ) and PG(153 ) .
UG Course Intake " Education , Computer Science , Engineering , Information Technology , Manufacturing Process and Automation Engineering , Biotechnology , Unani Medicine , Ayurveda " PG Course Intake " Political Science , Sanskrit , English , Mathematics , Commerce , History , Chemistry , Philosophy , Economics , Others College AIR - 15 , Overall Score - 289.54 , National Rating - AAAA+
There are as many as 75 courses in University running under the 3-year under - graduate programme structure , with few exceptions like MBBS , BTech etc .
Courses are mainly classified under the three faculties of the central university , including arts , commerce and science .
The University offers 70 post - graduate degrees .
DU also offers MPhil in about 28 subjects .
In addition to these , it offers 90 + Certificate courses and 28 Diplomas .
There are also 15 Advanced Diplomas offered in various languages .
The University offers PhD courses , which may be awarded by any faculty of university under ordinance
VI - B. But , speciality and super speciality medical degrees like DM , DCh etc . , could only be awarded by the faculty of medical sciences .
Due to lack of surety in quality of legal education , The Bar Council of India has issued a notification asking Delhi University ( DU ) to shut down law courses offered in evening shift at its colleges .
hindi - A , political science , globalisation , education RANKINGS Section::::Rankings .
Internationally , the University of Delhi was ranked 481 - 490 in the QS World University Rankings of 2018 .
The same rankings ranked it 72 in Asia and 41 among BRICS nations .
It was ranked 601 - 800 in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings of 2018 , 144 in Asia and 109 among BRICS & Emerging Economies University Rankings in 2017 .
In India , it was ranked 14 overall by the National Institutional Ranking Framework in 2018 and 7th among universities .
The Faculty of Law was ranked third in India by The Weeks " Top Law Colleges In 2017 . "
SPORTS Section::::Sports .
Delhi University Stadium has a rugby sevens stadium , situated within the North Campus .
Spread over , the stadium has a seating capacity of 2,500 permanent and 7,500 temporary seats .
Construction began in 2008 and the stadium was inaugurated in July 2010 , ahead of the 2010 Commonwealth Games .
It also includes a training area for netball , boxing , women 's wrestling and athletics .
After the games the stadium was handed over to the university by Commonwealth Games Organising Committee , there after in 2011 , the university initiated an extensive upgrade plan , to create a multi - purpose arena with both outdoor and indoor facilities .
After it was completed , the university opened access of its facilities in late 2011 .
NOTABLE PEOPLE
NOTABLE ALUMNI Section::::Notable people .
Section::::Notable alumni .
Notable alumni in Indian politics include Narendra Modi , 14th Prime Minister of India ; ; lawyer and former Minister of Finance Arun Jaitley ; Foreign Secretary of India Vijay Keshav Gokhale ; former diplomat , writer and Member of Parliament Shashi Tharoor ; fifth President of India Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed ; sixth Chief Minister of Delhi Sheila Dikshit ; fourth Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh and India 's first woman Chief Minister Sucheta Kriplani ; economist and former leader of the Janata Party Subramanian Swamy ; fourteenth and current Chief Minister of Odisha Naveen Patnaik ; industrialist and former Member of Parliament Naveen Jindal ; diplomat and Foreign Secretary Jyotindra Nath Dixit ; former Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission Montek Singh Ahluwalia ; former Minister of State for Corporate and Minority Affairs Salman Khurshid ; former Union Minister for Human Resource Development Kapil Sibal ; former Minister of Information and Broadcasting Ambika Soni ; former Union Minister for Disinvestment Arun Shourie ; and former Chief Minister of Delhi and Governor of Rajasthan Madan Lal Khurana .
DU has educated numerous foreign politicians and heads of state and government including State Counsellor of Myanmar Aung San Suu Kyi , third President of Malawi Bingu wa Mutharika , former Prime Minister of Nepal Girija Prasad Koirala , sixth President of Pakistan Muhammad Zia - ul - Haq , and two former Prime Ministers of Bhutan , Sangay Ngedup , and Khandu Wangchuk .
DU has also produced a large number of major actors and actresses of Indian cinema and theatre including Amitabh Bachchan , Shah Rukh Khan , Manoj Bajpayee , Konkona Sen Sharma , Anurag Kashyap , Arjun Rampal , Neha Dhupia , Sakshi Tanwar , Mallika Sherawat , Imtiaz Ali , Huma Qureshi , Siddharth , Shriya Saran , Vishal Bhardwaj , Aditi Rao Hydari , Shekhar Kapur , Nimrat Kaur , Kabir Khan , and Sidharth Malhotra .
The CWE wrestler Shanky Singh had also pursued B.Com from Maharaja Agrasen College of Delhi University .
Notable DU alumni in poetry and literature include the Sahitya Akademi Award winning dramatist and playwright Harcharan Singh , the Urdu poet Akhtar ul Iman , and the writers Vikram Seth , Anita Desai , Amitav Ghosh , Kunzang Choden , Upamanyu Chatterjee , Ali Sardar Jafri , and the Padma Vibhushan recipient Khushwant Singh .
Notable alumni in the sciences include physicist Archana Bhattacharyya , theoretical physicist Pran Nath , SLAC physicist Jogesh Pati particle physicist Amitava Raychaudhuri , chemists Charusita Chakravarty and Anil Kumar Tyagi , engineer and " father of the pentium processor
" Vinod Dham , mathematician Eknath Prabhakar Ghate , and engineer Yogi Goswami .
Notable alumni in the humanities and social sciences include professor of economics at Harvard University Gita Gopinath ; economist and Senior Vice President and Chief Economist of the World Bank Kaushik Basu ; historians Arundhati Virmani , Ramnarayan Rawat , Upinder Singh and Usha Sanyal ; professor of anthropology at Johns Hopkins University Veena Das ; Kathak dancer Uma Sharma ; and Bharatnatyam dancer Geeta Chandran . NOTABLE ACADEMICS Section::::Notable academics .
Notable faculty members of DU include eminent historian R. S. Sharma ; recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences Amartya Sen ; former Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh ; economist and a key architect of the Five - Year Plans of India Sukhamoy Chakravarty ; senior fellow for international economics at the Council on Foreign Relations and professor of economics at Columbia University Jagdish Bhagwati ; and Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan , a leading woman figure in the Pakistan Movement and wife of the first Prime Minister of Pakistan Liaquat Ali Khan .
SEE ALSO * Delhi University Community Radio * Delhi University Students ' Union
* List of colleges affiliated to the University of Delhi * List of institutions of higher education in Delhi * Rameshwari Photocopy Service shop copyright case REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS