ANTI - ROLL
BAR
An anti - roll bar ( roll bar , anti - sway bar , sway bar , stabilizer bar ) is a part of many automobile suspensions that helps reduce the body roll of a vehicle during fast cornering or over road irregularities .
It connects opposite ( left / right ) wheels together through short lever arms linked by a torsion spring .
A sway bar increases the suspension 's roll stiffness — its resistance to roll in turns , independent of its spring rate in the vertical direction .
The first stabilizer bar patent was awarded to Canadian inventor Stephen Coleman of Fredericton , New Brunswick on April 22 , 1919 .
Anti - roll bars were unusual on pre - war cars due to the generally much stiffer suspension and acceptance of body roll .
From the 1950s on , however , production cars were more commonly fitted with anti - roll bars , especially those vehicles with softer coil spring suspension .
PURPOSE AND OPERATION Section::::Purpose and operation .
An anti - sway or anti - roll bar is intended to force each side of the vehicle to lower , or rise , to similar heights , to reduce the sideways tilting ( roll ) of the vehicle on curves , sharp corners , or large bumps .
With the bar removed , a vehicle 's wheels can tilt away by much larger distances ( as shown by the SUV image at right ) .
Although there are many variations in design , a common function is to force the opposite wheel 's shock absorber , spring or suspension rod to lower , or rise , to a similar level as the other wheel .
In a fast turn , a vehicle tends to drop closer onto the outer wheels , and the sway bar soon forces the opposite wheel to also get closer to the vehicle .
As a result , the vehicle tends to " hug " the road closer in a fast turn , where all wheels are closer to the body .
After the fast turn , then the downward pressure is reduced , and the paired wheels can return to their normal height against the vehicle , kept at similar levels by the connecting sway bar .
Because each pair of wheels is cross - connected by a bar , the combined operation causes all wheels to generally offset the separate tilting of the others and the vehicle tends to remain level against the general slope of the terrain .
PRINCIPLES Section::::Principles .
A sway bar is usually a torsion spring that resists body roll motions .
It is usually constructed out of a cylindrical steel bar , formed into a " U " shape , that connects to the body at two points , and at the left and right sides of the suspension .
If the left and right wheels move together , the bar rotates about its mounting points .
If the wheels move relative to each other , the bar is subjected to torsion and forced to twist .
Each end of the bar is connected to an end link through a flexible joint .
The sway bar end link connects in turn to a spot near a wheel or axle , transferring forces from a heavily loaded axle to the opposite side .
Forces are therefore transferred : * from the heavily loaded axle * * to the connected end link via a bushing
* * to the anti - sway ( torsion ) bar via a flexible joint
*
* to the connected end link on the opposite side of the vehicle
*
* to the opposite axle .
*
The bar resists the torsion through its stiffness .
The stiffness of an anti - roll bar is proportional to the stiffness of the material , the fourth power of its radius , and the inverse of the length of the lever arms ( i.e. , the shorter the lever arm , the stiffer the bar ) .
Stiffness is also related to the geometry of the mounting points and the rigidity of the bar 's mounting points .
The stiffer the bar , the more force required to move the left and right wheels relative to each other .
This increases the amount of force required to make the body roll .
In a turn the sprung mass of the vehicle 's body produces a lateral force at the centre of gravity ( CG ) , proportional to lateral acceleration .
Because the CG is usually not on the roll axis , the lateral force creates a moment about the roll axis that tends to roll the body .
( The roll axis is a line that joins the front and rear roll centers ) .
The moment is called the roll couple .
Roll couple is resisted by the suspension roll stiffness , which is a function of the spring rate of the vehicle 's springs and of the anti - roll bars , if any .
The use of anti - roll bars allows designers to reduce roll without making the suspension 's springs stiffer in the vertical plane , which allows improved body control with less compromise of ride quality .
One effect of body ( frame ) lean , for typical suspension geometry , is positive camber of the wheels on the outside of the turn and negative on the inside , which reduces their cornering grip ( especially with cross ply tires ) .
MAIN FUNCTIONS Section::::Main functions .
Anti - roll bars provide two main functions .
The first function is the reduction of body lean .
The reduction of body lean is dependent on the total roll stiffness of the vehicle .
Increasing the total roll stiffness of a vehicle does not change the steady state total load ( weight ) transfer from the inside wheels to the outside wheels , it only reduces body lean .
The total lateral load transfer is determined by the CG height and track width .
The other function of anti - roll bars is to tune the handling balance of a car .
Understeer or oversteer behavior can be tuned out by changing the proportion of the total roll stiffness that comes from the front and rear axles .
Increasing the proportion of roll stiffness at the front increases the proportion of the total load transfer that the front axle reacts to — and decreases the proportion that the rear axle reacts to .
In general , this makes the outer front wheel run at a comparatively higher slip angle , and the outer rear wheel to run at a comparatively lower slip angle , which is an understeer effect .
Increasing the proportion of roll stiffness at the rear axle has the opposite effect and decreases understeer .
DRAWBACKS Section::::Drawbacks .
Because an anti - roll bar connects wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle , the bar transmits the force of a bump on one wheel to the opposite wheel .
On rough or broken pavement , anti - roll bars can produce jarring , side - to - side body motions ( a " waddling " sensation ) , which increase in severity with the diameter and stiffness of the sway bars .
Other suspension techniques can delay or dampen this effect of the connecting bar .
Excessive roll stiffness , typically achieved by configuring an anti - roll bar too aggressively , can make the inside wheels lift off the ground during hard cornering .
This can be used to advantage : many front wheel drive production cars lift a rear wheel when cornering hard in order to overload the opposite wheel , limiting understeer .
ADJUSTABLE BARS Section::::Adjustable bars .
Some anti - roll bars , particularly those intended for use in auto racing , are externally adjustable while the car is in the pit whereas some systems can be adjusted in real time by the driver from inside the car , such as in Super GT .
This allows the stiffness to be altered , for example by increasing or reducing the length of the lever arms on some systems , or by rotating a flat lever arm from a stiff edge - on position to a more flexible flat - side - on position on other systems .
This lets a mechanic tune the roll stiffness for different situations without replacing the entire bar .
MACPHERSON STRUTS
Section::::MacPherson struts .
The MacPherson strut is a common form of strut suspension .
This was not the first attempt at strut suspension , but in MacPherson 's original patent , the anti - roll bar forms an integral and essential part of the suspension , in addition to its usual function in controlling body roll .
A strut suspension like MacPherson 's requires a hinged lower member between the chassis and wheel hub to control the wheel position both inwards and outwards ( controlling the track ) , and also forwards and backwards .
This may be provided by a wishbone with a number of joints , or by using an additional radius rod .
MacPherson 's design replaced the wishbone with a simpler and cheaper track control arm , with a single inboard joint , to control the track .
Forward and backward position was controlled through the anti - roll bar .
Overall this required a simpler and cheaper set of suspension members than with wishbones , also allowing a reduction in unsprung weight .
As the anti - roll bar is required to control wheel position , the bars of a MacPherson strut suspension may be connected through ball joints .
However many later " MacPherson strut " suspensions have reverted to using wishbones rather than the simplified track control arm of the original design .
ACTIVE SYSTEMS
Section::::Active systems .
The first to use an active anti - roll bar in 1994 was the Citroen Xantia Activa , a medium - sized sedan sold in Europe .
The SC.CAR ( Systeme Citroën de Contrôle Actif du Roulis ) system featured an anti - roll bar that could be stiffened under the command of the suspension ECU during hard cornering .
The car rolled a maximum of 2 degrees .
In 2001 the BMW 7 Series ( E65 ) introduced Active Roll Stabilization ( ARS ) " active " anti - roll bars that can be proportionally controlled automatically by a suspension - control computer , reducing body lean in turns while improving rough - road ride quality .
In 2006 Toyota introduced its Active Stabilizer Suspension System .
By altering stabilizer bar stiffness , this system acts to reduce body tilt during cornering , keeping the vehicle more level during turns and improving handling , as opposed to the natural tendency of a vehicle to roll due to the lateral forces experienced during high - speed maneuvering .
The active stabilizer system relies on vehicle body sensors and electric motors .
The first production usage of this system was introduced in August 2005 with
the Lexus GS430 sport sedan Porsche Panamera introduced the same system Porsche Dynamic Chassis Control ( PDCC ) in 2009 .
Range Rover Sport introduced Dynamic Response active anti - roll bars .
Mercedes - Benz S - Class Active Body Control system uses another approach : the computer uses sensors to detect lateral load , lateral force , and height difference in the suspension strut , then uses hydraulic pressure to raise or lower the spring to counter roll .
This system removes the anti - roll bar .
Most active roll control systems allow a small degree of roll to give a more natural feel .
Toyota also uses a mechanical system called Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System ( KDSS ) that essentially disengages the stabilizer bars when off - road , allowing for greater vehicle articulation and ride quality .
SEE ALSO
* Panhard rod * Torsion bar suspension REFERENCES