THE ROAD NOT TAKEN
" The Road Not Taken " is a poem by Robert Frost , published in 1916 as the first poem in the collection Mountain Interval .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Frost spent the years 1912 to 1915 in England , where among his acquaintances was the writer Edward Thomas .
Thomas and Frost became close friends and took many walks together .
After Frost returned to New Hampshire in 1915 , he sent Thomas an advance copy of " The Road Not Taken " .
Thomas took the poem seriously and personally , and it may have been significant in Thomas ' decision to enlist in World War I. Thomas was killed two years later in the Battle of Arras .
ANALYSIS Section::::Analysis .
" The Road Not Taken " is a narrative poem .
It reads naturally or conversationally , and begins as a kind of photographic depiction of a quiet moment in woods .
It consists of four stanzas of 5 lines each .
The first line rhymes with the third and fourth , and the second line rhymes with the fifth ( ABAAB ) .
The meter is basically iambic tetrameter , with each line having four two - syllable feet .
Though in almost every line , in different positions , an iamb is replaced with an anapest .
The variation of the rhythm gives naturalness , a feeling of thought occurring spontaneously , and it also affects the reader 's sense of expectation .
In the only line that contains strictly iambs , the more regular rhythm supports the idea of a turning towards an acceptance of a kind of reality : " Though as for that the passing there … " In the final line , the way the rhyme and rhythm work together is significantly different , and catches the reader off guard .
It is one of Frost 's most popular works .
Some have said that it is one of his most misunderstood poems , claiming that it is not simply a poem that champions the idea of " following your own path " , but that the poem , they suggest , expresses some irony regarding that idea .
Frost 's biographer Lawrance Thompson suggests that the poem 's narrator is " one who habitually wastes energy in regretting any choice made : belatedly but wistfully he sighs over the attractive alternative rejected " .
Thompson also says that when introducing the poem in readings , Frost would say that the speaker was based on his friend Edward Thomas .
In Frost 's words , Thomas was " a person who , whichever road he went , would be sorry he did n't go the other " .
Regarding the " sigh " that is mentioned in the last stanza , it may be seen as an expression of regret or of satisfaction , but there is significance in the difference between what the speaker has just said of the two roads , and what he will say in the future .
According to biographer Lawrence Thompson , as Frost was once about to read the poem , he commented to his audience , " You have to be careful of that one ; it 's a tricky poem — very tricky , " perhaps intending to suggest the poem 's ironic possibilities .
A New York Times Sunday book review on Brian Hall 's 2008 biography Fall of Frost states : " Whichever way they go , they 're sure to miss something good on the other path . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Road Not Taken at Poets.org * 3 audio readings of The Road Not Taken * Information about the poem and about Frost 's life * Critical essays on " The Road Not Taken " * " The Most Misread Poem in America " by David Orr , The Paris Review , September 11 , 2015