CALIFORNIA STATE
ROUTE 73 State Route 73 ( SR 73 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California , running from the junction with Interstate 405 in Costa Mesa through the San Joaquin Hills to its junction with Interstate 5 in San Juan Capistrano , its northern and southern termini , respectively .
The entirety of the route is located in Orange County .
From its southern terminus , the first twelve miles of the highway are a toll road , which opened in November 1996 .
This segment of SR 73 is operated by the San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor Agency named the San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor .
The last of the highway , which opened in 1978 , are part of the Corona del Mar Freeway .
SR 73 's alignment follows an approximately parallel path between the Pacific Coast Highway and the San Diego Freeway .
For the three mile freeway segment , there are no HOV lanes currently , but the medians have been designed with sufficient clearance for their construction should the need arise in the future .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
SR 73 begins in San Juan Capistrano at an interchange with I-5 .
The freeway heads northwest into the city of Laguna Niguel before the tolled portion begins at the Greenfield Drive exit .
After passing Greenfield Drive , SR 73 enters into the city of Aliso Viejo before entering Laguna Beach , where SR 73 intersects SR 133 with a separated - grade exit .
Following this , the road passes through Crystal Cove State Park , where the main toll plazas are located .
After leaving the state park , SR 73 straddles the border between Irvine and Newport Beach and provides easy access to University of California , Irvine through the Bison Avenue exit .
Following the MacArthur Boulevard exit , the tolled part of the road ends and becomes a freeway .
SR 73 continues into Newport Beach , running along the southern boundary of Orange County John Wayne Airport ( IATA Airport Code SNA ) .
Entering Costa Mesa , SR 73 interchanges with SR 55 before merging with I-405 and terminating the route .
State Route 73 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , and is part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are considered essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility by the Federal Highway Administration .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Most of State Route 73 is a limited - access toll highway designed to reduce congestion within Orange County on the Pacific Coast Highway ( State Route 1 ) and the San Diego Freeway ( Interstates 5 , and 405 ) by providing a direct route through the San Joaquin Hills .
State Route 73 is not a toll road over its entire length .
From its northbound terminus heading southbound , the first of State Route 73 have no tolls and make up the entire Corona Del Mar Freeway .
State Route 73 's previous alignment had the freeway portion end at MacArthur Boulevard , and the SR 73 designation ran along MacArthur south to meet Route 1 in
Corona del Mar. Under the current alignment , heading southbound , State Route 73 becomes a designated toll road immediately after the Jamboree / MacArthur ramp and remains so until its southern terminus at I-5 .
Though the next ramp heading southbound ( Bison Avenue ) is part of the toll road , it is toll - free , as is the first ramp heading northbound from the southern terminus ( Greenfield Drive ) .
Design and construction of the highway cost a total of $ 800 million .
The design and construction was overseen by the San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor Agencies , or SJHTCA , an agency formed in 1988 for the express purpose of designing the tollway .
In the end , State Route 73 included 10 interchanges , 68 bridges , of retaining walls , and of excavation at completion .
Construction was divided into four different sections , each with its own management system and quality control .
A joint venture led by Kiewit Pacific Co. , a subsidiary of Kiewit Corporation , completed this project .
State Route 73 's toll road was the first to be financed with tax - exempt bonds on a stand - alone basis including construction and environmental risk .
In 2011 , $ 2.1 billion in debt for the San Joaquin Hills toll roads was restructured , which pushed back the time until the bonds are paid off and the route becomes a state - owned freeway to 2042 .
In 2014 , the debt was again restructured in an attempt to get improved interest rates , improved debt ratings , and in the process save 44 million in debt repayment .
This resulted in another 8 years of payments , delaying the pay - off date to 2050 .
Under this new plan the debt can be paid off earlier than 2050 , if ridership and revenue improves .
TOLLS Section::::Tolls .
The following table lists the tolls at each of the tolled exits for passenger cars and other two - axle vehicles ( as of July 1 , 2015 ) .
Vehicles with more than two axles pay a higher toll at the Catalina View Toll Plaza . !
Toll Booth !
FasTrak !
Toll - by - plate ExpressAccount !
One - time payment Bonita Canyon DrSouthbound Exit and Northbound Entrance$1.02$2.02$2.02 Newport Coast DrSouthbound Exit and Northbound
Entrance$2.31$3.31$3.31
CATALINA VIEW TOLL PLAZA Price assumes 2-axle automobile .
Peak :
$ 6.78Pre /
Post Peak :
$ 6.48Off - Peak : $ 5.25Weekends : $ 5.00 Peak :
$ 7.78Pre /
Post Peak : $ 7.48Off - Peak : $ 6.25Weekends : $ 6.00
All times : $ 7.48 El Toro / Laguna Canyon RdNorthbound Exit and Southbound
Entrance$2.57$3.57$3.57 Aliso Creek RdNorthbound Exit and Southbound Entrance$1.95$2.95$2.95 La Paz Road / Moulton PkwyNorthbound Exit and Southbound Entrance$1.37$2.37$2.37
The tolls on SR 73 begin only after the Bison Ave .
exit in the southbound direction .
In the northbound direction , there is a toll in effect after Greenfield Drive , the first ramp north of the highway 's terminus .
The road employs a barrier toll system , where drivers are charged flat - rate tolls based on what particular toll booths they pass through .
Travelers who drive the entire length of the 73 will only encounter one toll booth , the Catalina View Toll Plaza , which uses a congestion pricing scheme based on the time of day .
Patrons who use an exit along the toll road are charged a prorated toll .
Only certain entrance and exit ramps are tolled : !
Interchange(from south to north ) !
Directions tolled Since May 13 , 2014 , the road has been using an all - electronic , open road tolling system ; cash is no longer being accepted .
Drivers may pay using the FasTrak electronic toll collection system , license plate tolling ( under Transportation Corridor Agencies 's brand name " ExpressAccount " ) , or via a one time payment online .
Those using Fastrak are charged a lower toll than those using the other two methods .
Drivers must pay within 5 days after their trip on the toll road or they will assessed a toll violation .
EXIT LIST
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Transportation Corridor Agencies * Project Description at Kiewit
*
California @ AARoads.com - State Route 73
* Caltrans :
Route 73 highway conditions
* California Highways : SR 73