GOLD AWARD ( GIRL SCOUTS OF THE USA )
The Gold Award is the highest achievement within the Girl Scouts of the USA , earned by Senior and Ambassador Girl Scouts .
Only 5.4 % of eligible Girl Scouts successfully earn the Gold Award .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Girl Scout 's highest award was created in 1916 and has gone through changes over the years .
GOLDEN EAGLET OF MERIT : 1916 TO 1918 Section::::Golden Eaglet of Merit : 1916 to 1918 .
This award was a pin of an eagle with its wings spread , on a red , white , and blue ribbon .
GOLDEN EAGLET :
1919 TO 1938 Section::::Golden Eaglet : 1919 to 1938 .
In 1919 the name of the award was changed to the Golden Eaglet .
Requirements for the award ranged through the years from earning 14 out of 17 specific badges , earning the Medal of Merit , earning a different number of badges , and the acceptance of a letter of Commendation instead of the Medal of Merit .
The award itself changed from the spread - winged eagle and ribbon to an eagle with half - furled wings and a " G " and an " S " on either side of its head .
The founder of Girl Scouts , Juliette Gordon Low , wrote in November 1923 : " The five requirements for winning the Golden Eaglet are character , health , handicraft , happiness and service , and that others will expect to find in our Golden Eaglet a perfect specimen of girlhood : mentally , morally , and physically . "
FIRST CLASS :
1938 TO 1940
Section::::First Class : 1938 to 1940 .
In 1938 the Golden Eaglet changed to the First Class Award .
CURVED BAR :
1940
TO 1963 Section::::Curved Bar : 1940 to 1963 .
This award was earned by Intermediate Scouts who had already earned the First Class Award and were the way to bridge to Senior rank .
Because of the shortage of metal during WWII , at first the award was a curved embroidered patch worn on the uniform .
In 1947 , the Curved Bar pin was introduced .
FIRST CLASS :
1963 TO 1980
Section::::First Class : 1963 to 1980 .
In 1963 the award went back to being called First Class .
Requirements for earning the First Class Award changed over the 17 years it was offered .
Beginning in 1963 , Cadette Scouts were required to earn four Challenges , plus at least six badges in specific areas : * Social Dependability
* Emergency Preparedness
* Active Citizenship * Girl Scout Promise
In 1972 , eight new Challenges were offered : * Arts * Community Action * Environment * International Understanding * Knowing Myself * My Heritage
* Out - of - Doors * Today 's World The Scout was permitted to choose any four of the twelve Challenges .
In addition to the four Challenges , a Scout was required to earn at least one badge in each of six areas :
* Arts *
Home
* Citizenship * Out - of - Doors * Health and Safety * International Understanding Alternately , from 1972 to 1980 , a Scout could earn any seven of the twelve Challenges , with no badge requirements .
GOLD AWARD : 1980 TO PRESENT 1980 TO
2004 REQUIREMENTS Section::::Gold Award : 1980 to present . Section::::1980 to 2004 requirements .
In 1980 the Gold Award was introduced .
In 1990 , National Council Session delegates approved a proposal which would keep the name of the Gold Award in perpetuity .
Until 2004 , requirements for earning the award were :
* Earning the Girl Scout Gold Leadership Award , which requires girls to complete 30 hours of leadership work , as well as earn three Interest Projects and one Focus Book relevant to their project .
* Earning the Girl Scout Gold Career Award , which requires girls to complete 40 hours of career exploration .
* Earning the Girl Scout Gold 4Bs Challenge , which required girls to assess their community and its needs , and develop a vision for change .
Up to 15 hours work on the 4Bs challenge could be counted toward the 65 hours for the service project .
2004
TO PRESENT REQUIREMENTS
*
Complete two Girl Scout Senior or Ambassador Journeys , or complete one Girl Scout Senior or Ambassador journey and have earned the Silver Award .
* Plan and implement an individual " Take Action " project that reaches beyond the Girl Scout organization and provides a sustainable , lasting benefit to the girl 's larger community .
Section::::2004
to present requirements .
Once these steps have been met , girls use their vision for change to complete a service project that reaches beyond the Girl Scout organization and provides lasting benefit to the girl 's larger community .
It requires a minimum of 80 hours of work in planning and actually completing the project .
All of these hours must be completed by the Awardee , and though it is encouraged that the girl use troop members and others from the community to help her , their time spent does not count towards her 80-hour requirement .
Plans must be developed with the aid of an advisor , then a project proposal must be submitted and approved by the girl 's local council before starting the project , and a final report submitted and approved after the project 's completion .
INSIGNIA
Section::::Insignia .
The Gold Award emblem is presented as a pin resembling an eight - pointed gold star with rays radiating from a central , polished trefoil .
AFTER EARNING THE GOLD AWARD Section::::After earning the Gold Award .
Recipients of the Gold Award who enlist in the U.S. Armed Forces may receive advanced rank in recognition of their achievements .
Some universities and colleges offer scholarships to Gold Award recipients .
Yearly , GSUSA selects ten girls to be National Young Women of Distinction based on their Gold Award projects .
NOTABLE RECIPIENTS * Melissa Bachman - is an American huntress , producer , and host of hunting television programs , currently of the cable television program Winchester Deadly Passion on the Sportsman Channel , Pursuit Channel , and Wild TV .
* Betsy Boze - is an American academic and higher education administrator .
With 25 years administrative experience at public universities , she was the ninth president of The College of The Bahamas .
During her career she has been a Professor of Marketing , Department Chair , Dean , and the CEO of Kent State University at Stark .
She is a Senior Fellow at the American Association of State Colleges and Universities
( AASCU ) researching alternative revenue streams for public colleges and universities .
* Jan Hopkins - was the President of the Economic Club of New York from 2008 - 2015 .
She was the anchor of the daily CNN Financial News show " Street Sweep " from the New York Stock Exchange.[1 ]
Hopkins now runs her own strategic communications and marketing company .
* Hosanna Kabakoro - was an editor of Mai Life Style , the South Pacific 's first style and fashion magazine .
Kabakoro also served on the Board of Vision Fiji , was a spokesperson for the Fiji Water Foundation .
* Erin McKenney - is an American human rights activist .
*
Brianne Nadeau - is a Democratic politician in Washington , D.C. , and a member of the Council of the District of Columbia representing Ward 1 since 2015 .
She defeated long - time incumbent Jim Graham in the Democratic Party primary and won the general election with 75 % of the vote in 2014 .
She is the first woman to represent Ward 1 on the Council and the first D.C. Councilmember to give birth while serving in office .
*
Nina Vasan - is an American psychiatrist and author of the Amazon # 1 best - selling book Do Good
Well : Your Guide to Leadership , Action and Innovation .
She is a Resident Physician in Psychiatry at Stanford Hospital and Clinics and in the MBA program at Stanford Graduate School of Business .
She currently resides in the San Francisco Bay Area and has advised companies and startups including McKinsey & Co and Lyra Health .
HIGHEST AWARDS IN OTHER PROGRAMS
Section::::Highest awards in other programs .
The Gold Award is often compared to the Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America .
SEE ALSO * Silver Award ( Girl Scouts of the USA )
* Bronze Award ( Girl Scouts of the USA )
* List of Scouts * List of awards for volunteerism and community service REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Girl Scout Central 's Guide to Earning the Gold Award * National Young Women of Distinction
* Girl Scout Gold Award Young Women of Distinction - the ten best Gold Awards of 2004
* Girl Scout Gold Award Alliance
* Girl Scout Gold Award Young Women of Distinction - the ten best Gold Awards of 2005
* Girl Scout Gold Award Alliance
* 2015 National Young Women of Distinction