LAS VEGAS MONORAIL
The Las Vegas Monorail is a driverless monorail mass transit system located adjacent to the Las Vegas Strip , in Clark County , Nevada , United States .
It connects several large casinos in the unincorporated communities of Paradise and Winchester , and does not enter the City of Las Vegas .
It is owned and operated by the Las Vegas Monorail Company .
In 2013 , total annual ridership was roughly 4.2 million , down from a pre - Great Recession peak of 7.9 million in 2007 .
The monorail is a registered not - for - profit corporation , allowed under Nevada law since the monorail provides a public service .
The State of Nevada assisted in bond financing , but no public money was used in construction .
HISTORY
MGM GRAND - BALLY 'S MONORAIL Section::::History .
Section::::MGM Grand - Bally 's Monorail .
The Las Vegas Monorail originally began service as the MGM Grand - Bally 's Monorail in 1995 .
This initial system ran between the MGM Grand and Bally 's hotels using two used Mark IV monorail trains that previously operated on the Walt Disney World Monorail .
Built through a partnership between the two hotels , the MGM - Bally 's system 's construction was contracted to VSL Corporation .
The grand opening party for the monorail featured showgirls from Bally 's famed show , Jubilee ! , helping groups to the monorail .
Characters from The Wizard of Oz greeted the groups on the MGM side .
The two trains each ran back and forth on each beam , and were stored at a maintenance building near the Bally 's station ( this building still stands today , but it has been severed from the beam ) .
LATER YEARS
Section::::Later years .
In 2002 , the original system closed to begin its conversion to the current Las Vegas Monorail system .
The beam was extended from Bally 's station ( now the Bally 's & Paris station ) north to the Sahara Hotel and Casino ( now the SLS Las Vegas ) .
The track was extended south beyond the MGM station to provide for track switching for the trains , as well as a starting point for a potential future southern extension .
The original trains were replaced with nine new Bombardier Mark VI monorail trains .
During testing and commissioning , the monorail suffered several malfunctions that delayed the start of passenger service for almost a year .
The most serious of these problems related to parts falling from the monorail to the ground under the tracks .
After many delays , the finished Las Vegas Monorail opened to the public on July 15 , 2004 with the completion and testing of " Phase 1 . "
On September 8 , 2004 , more problems with falling parts led to the closing of the monorail for nearly four months .
It reopened on December 24 , 2004 .
A number of repairs were made to the monorail cars during this shutdown .
Each time the monorail system required major engineering changes , it underwent a lengthy " commissioning " process to confirm the effectiveness and safety of the repairs .
Officials reported that each day the monorail was down cost the system approximately $ 85,000 in lost fares .
Transit Systems Management officials cited the successful handling of crowds during the 2005 Consumer Electronics Show as proof that the system can handle a major convention .
On February 2 , 2005 , the monorail system was shut down due to problems with the electrical system .
Reportedly , a short circuit required replacement of a section of the power rail .
The system reopened about 12 hours later .
On July 8 , 2005 , Transit Systems Management announced that it would shut down , turning over its responsibilities to the Las Vegas Monorail Company , the system operator .
Curtis Myles , a former deputy general manager of the Regional Transportation Commission of Southern Nevada , became President of the Las Vegas Monorail Company .
On November 1 , 2005 , the County Commission approved a study into the feasibility of an airport extension .
On January 13 , 2010 , the Las Vegas Monorail filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection .
The filing will not affect system operations and will have no impact on the monorail 's hours of operation or service to its customers .
On March 11 , 2011 , the Sahara announced that it would close its doors May 16 , 2011 .
Closure of the Sahara has been cited as one of the significant reasons for ridership dropping in 2012 .
In 2014 , a new hotel casino , the SLS Las Vegas , took over the Sahara , and ridership increased from 2012 levels .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
The monorail ( Phase 1 of the overall project ) begins at the MGM Grand near the south end of The Strip , and runs roughly parallel to the Strip on its eastern side .
The monorail passes next to the Convention Center and the Westgate Las Vegas , both with stations , before ending at the SLS hotel at the north end of the Strip .
The ride takes about fifteen minutes to travel its total distance of .
The monorail generally runs behind the eastern Strip side hotels and casinos , a long block away from the Strip .
Usually , it requires a walk through a casino to get to the Strip , emerging upon the Strip in front of the property .
This lack of a direct presence on the Strip along with ticket prices has been a factor in the rather slow acceptance of the monorail .
SYSTEM NAME AND SPONSORSHIP Section::::System name and sponsorship .
The Las Vegas Monorail was named the Robert N. Broadbent Las Vegas Monorail in honor of Robert N. Broadbent , whom Las Vegas officials credit with gaining the support from the public and officials needed to bring the monorail to fruition .
Broadbent , a former Boulder City mayor , Clark County commissioner , assistant secretary of the United States Department of the Interior , and McCarran International Airport director , died in 2003 , a few months before the system 's scheduled opening .
The Las Vegas Monorail Company is the company 's official corporate name .
The Las Vegas Monorail used to be known as the MGM Grand - Bally 's Monorail .
The Las Vegas Monorail generates revenue from ticketed passengers and from corporate sponsors .
Branding rights for the seven stations and the nine trains are available , and the sponsorship prices are in the millions of dollars .
Hansens Beverage sponsored the first monorail train , featuring its Monster Energy drink .
Nextel Communications created a totally themed pavilion by branding the largest station , adjacent to the Las Vegas Convention Center .
Since the Sprint - Nextel merger in late 2005 , Nextel Central has been rebranded as Sprint Central .
However , in late February 2008 , the Sprint Nextel Corporation terminated its sponsorship contract .
CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING Section::::Construction and planning .
The Las Vegas Monorail was designed by Gensler of Nevada , engineered by Las Vegas - based Carter & Burgess ( now Jacobs Engineering Group , Inc. ) and constructed by Granite Construction , Inc. of Watsonville , California , one of the largest civil contractors in the United States .
The Las Vegas Monorail vehicles and signal systems were developed by Bombardier Transportation .
The technology for the monorail vehicles came directly from the well - tested monorail systems running in Walt Disney World .
Bombardier constructed Mark VI Monorail trains for the Walt Disney World Monorail System and for Las Vegas .
STATIONS Section::::Stations .
Stations listed from north to south : !
Name !
Platform type !
Coordinates !
Photo TRAINS Section::::Trains .
The monorail uses nine Bombardier MVI trains that have four cars in each of the fully automatic trains .
The guideway is built to the " ALWEG " track standard .
For the first seven years , the line only ran as the MGM Shuttle , between MGM and Bally 's stations .
During this time , two ex - Walt Disney World Mark IV monorail trains were used .
Though the Las Vegas and related train equipment appear superficially similar to the original ALWEG design ( as exemplified by the Seattle system ) , their suspension and propulsion systems differ substantially .
A Seattle train may be walked end - to - end which is impossible on a Las Vegas or Florida train .
The ALWEG Mark VI system used in Las Vegas Monorail consists of two inline large truck tires per car that support the load over the concrete guideway with a rectangular cross section and eight guide tires that straddle the guideway from both sides .
The total capacity of the four - car trains is roughly equivalent to two articulated buses at 80 seated and 160 standing passengers .
The maximum speed is , although that speed is only reached during one short straight segment of the line .
EXTENSIONS
TO DOWNTOWN LAS VEGAS Section::::Extensions . Section::::To Downtown Las Vegas .
Phase 2 , a long extension along Main Street to Downtown Las Vegas was planned , with new stations at the Stratosphere Hotel , Charleston Boulevard , Bonneville Avenue and Main Street Station .
Construction was planned to begin in 2005 with service starting in 2008 .
However , the anticipated funding from the federal government was not allocated in 2004 , so the plans were put on hold .
On January 27 , 2005 , the federal government announced that it would not provide money for the $ 400 million project .
The plan was to open the system in January 2004 , and for it to cover its debts and operating expenses by attracting 19 to 20 million riders .
Since the system was not only delayed in opening , but later shut down for four months , income was not as great as organizers had hoped .
This reportedly is a contributing factor for the government 's denial of Phase 2 funding .
SOUTHERN EXTENSION
Section::::Southern extension .
Phase 2 was revised to instead extend the monorail system in the opposite direction , south from the MGM Grand Station to McCarran International Airport .
Providing monorail service to the airport has been an unpopular idea with limousine and taxicab operators in the city , as trips to and from the airport form a major portion of their business .
Several hotel and casino owners on the Strip continue to support the project , and are more supportive of an extension to the airport than one to downtown Las Vegas .
On December 7 , 2006 , Clark County commissioners granted permission for the proposed extension to McCarran Airport .
Funding had not yet been identified .
On September 9 , 2008 , the monorail company provided details of the proposed expansion to the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority board .
The intended airport extension would begin at the new Terminal 3 , with the first stop near Terminal 1 , turn north on Swenson Street , then continue west on Tropicana Avenue before turning north at Koval Lane to meet up with the existing system behind the MGM Grand .
This route was proposed to be built with private funds and would have added approximately four miles to the existing route , doubling the length of the system .
When the monorail company first announced details of the extension in September 2008 , the airport extension was to be built with private funds and was expected to be built by 2012 .
However , as of March 2011 , the Las Vegas Monorail Company was still in the planning phases of the proposed extension to McCarran International Airport with a proposed stop on the UNLV campus .
The monorail company announced in May 2015 that it is proposing instead an extension to the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino and an infill station at the Sands Expo & Convention Center .
Subsequently , the Regional Transportation Commission of Southern Nevada announced that a new underground light rail system under the Las Vegas Strip , which would connect Downtown Las Vegas with the airport , is in the long - term planning phase .
MANDALAY BAY
EXTENSION Section::::Mandalay Bay extension .
In March 2018 , the Clark County Commission approved a proposed extension to Mandalay Bay , putting the monorail closer to the soon to be constructed Las Vegas Stadium .
The monorail company planned to start construction on the extension in June 2018 and have it completed by September 2020 , in time for the completion of the stadium and Las Vegas Raiders inaugural season in Las Vegas .
In November 2018 it was confirmed that two new Monorail stations would be built ; one at Mandalay Bay and another at the MSG Sphere with completion by 2021 .
SEE ALSO
* Aria Express * Mandalay Bay Tram
* List of monorail systems * List of rail transit systems in North America
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Robert N. Broadbent Las Vegas Monorail , Nevada at Monorails.org
* Ridership Graph 2005–2006
* Rail transit map of Las Vegas ( to scale )