COOL
WHIP Cool Whip is a brand of whipped cream , referred to as a whipped topping by its manufacturer , Kraft Heinz .
It is used in North America as a topping for desserts and in some no - bake pie recipes as a convenience food that does not require whipping and maintains its texture without melting .
Cool Whip has a longer shelf life than cream while frozen .
On the other hand , it does not have the same flavor and texture as whipped cream , and it costs nearly 50 percent more .
It was originally described as " non - dairy " despite containing the milk protein casein ; it now also includes milk .
The product is sold frozen and must be defrosted in the refrigerator before being used .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
Cool Whip was introduced in 1966 by the Birds Eye division of General Foods , now part of Kraft Heinz .
Within two years of introduction , it became the largest and most profitable product in the Birds Eye line of products .
Cool Whip is now the most consumed brand of whipped topping in the U.S.
Cool Whip was created in 1966 by food scientist George Lorant .
The key advantage of his invention was that the product could be distributed frozen .
Cool Whip is manufactured in Avon , New York , for the American and Canadian markets .
It is sold frozen in eight - ounce ( 226-gram ) and larger plastic tubs and is refrigerated prior to serving .
Each nine - gram serving provides 25 kcal ( 105 kJ ) of energy , of which 1.5 grams or 15 kcal ( 63 kJ ) are from fat .
Varieties offered include Original , Extra Creamy , Light , Free ( fat - free ) , and Sugar - Free ( made with NutraSweet ) .
In Canada , the fat - free variety is labeled as Ultra - low Fat .
Seasonal flavors include French vanilla , chocolate , and sweet cinnamon , all introduced in 2011 ; strawberry ; peppermint , introduced in 2016 ; and cheesecake , introduced in 2017 .
Cool Whip remains the most popular brand of whipped topping in the United States , with Reddi - wip ( whipped cream in an aerosol can ) ranking second .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Cool Whip Original is made of water , hydrogenated vegetable oil ( including coconut and palm kernel oils ) , high fructose corn syrup , corn syrup , skim milk , light cream ( less than 2 % ) , sodium caseinate , natural and artificial flavor , xanthan and guar gums , polysorbate 60 , sorbitan monostearate , sodium polyphosphate , and beta carotene ( as a coloring ) .
Cool Whip is available in an aerosol can using nitrous oxide as a propellant .
From its introduction , Cool Whip was labeled and advertised as non - dairy , but as of 2018 it contains skim milk and sodium caseinate , a milk derivative .
Even before the skim milk was introduced , Cool Whip was classified in Jewish dietary traditions as dairy because of the sodium caseinate .
SEE ALSO
* Dream Whip * Non - dairy creamer , with similar ingredients
NOTES
REFERENCES
* William Shurtleff , Akiko Aoyagi , Coffee Creamer , Cottage Cheese , and Icing / Frosting ( 1900 - 2013 ) , Bibliography And Sourcebook , SoyInfo Center ,
2013
PDF EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website