BE
COOL Be Cool
is a 2005 American crime - comedy film adapted from Elmore Leonard 's 1999 novel of the same name and the sequel to Leonard 's 1990 novel Get Shorty ( itself adapted into a 1995 film of the same name ) about mobster Chili Palmer 's entrance into the music industry .
The film adaptation of Be Cool began production in 2003 .
It was directed by F. Gary Gray , produced by Danny DeVito ( who produced and co - starred in the first film ) , and starred John Travolta , reprising his role from the first film .
The film opened in March 2005 and was released to video and DVD distribution on June 7 , 2005 .
This was Robert Pastorelli 's final film , as he died one year before its theatrical release .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Chili Palmer helps the widow of an executed friend to resurrect a record company using the talents of young and talented female vocalist and songwriter .
The plot is complicated by several facts : *
In a loan - shark subplot from Get Shorty of " who owns who " , Chili makes deals and owns all the players as a " producer " .
*
The Russian Mafia ( headed by Alex Kubik as Roman Bulkin ) are trying to kill Chili because he witnessed the execution of Athens .
* Athens ' record company owes money to a gangster / producer , Sin LaSalle .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Chili Palmer , restless after years of filmmaking , enters the music industry after witnessing a Russian mob execute his friend Tommy Athens , owner of a record company .
Chili offers to help his friend 's widow , Edie Athens , manage the failing business , which owes $ 300,000 to hip - hop producer Sin LaSalle .
Chili is impressed by singer Linda Moon and helps free her from contractual obligations to Nick Carr and Raji , who has a gay Samoan bodyguard named Elliott , an aspiring actor and the butt of Carr and Raji 's homophobic jokes .
Carr and Raji hire a hitman , Joe " Loop " Lupino to kill Chili before he can save Edie 's company by arranging a live performance for Linda along with Steven Tyler and Aerosmith .
Lasalle demands payment of the $ 300,000 , but agrees to give Chili a few days to get the money plus the vig .
When the Russians attempt to kill Chili , Joe Loop mistakenly kills Ivan Argianiyev , the Russian Mob 's hitman .
Carr is furious about the mistake .
Raji then kills Loop with a metal baseball bat after Loop " disrespects " him .
Carr then tries to trick Chili by handing him a pawn ticket , claiming that Linda 's contract is being held at a pawn shop owned by the Russians .
Edie gives the ticket to the police , who pay the Russians a visit .
Raji and Elliott set up LaSalle by making him believe that Carr tricked Chili in giving him the $ 300,000 to get Linda 's contract .
LaSalle and the DubMD confront Carr in his office , as do Bulkin and his men .
Insulted by Bulkin 's racist remarks , LaSalle kills him .
Chili squeezes in a dance scene with Edie ( a nod to the " Twist Contest " scene in Pulp Fiction ) , celebrating as Linda Moon gets to make her appearance with Aerosmith in concert .
Based on Linda 's success in that concert , Chili tempers LaSalle by making him her producer .
But Carr is not accepting any deal , so he makes Raji put Elliott to kill Chili .
By assuring Elliott that he can help his acting career , Chili befriends him .
After learning that Chili had gotten him an audition for a Nicole Kidman film , Elliott turns on Raji , who had erased the message on his answering machine .
For all his smooth talking and flamboyant wardrobe , Raji finds himself in a firework conflagration which roasts him live on camera .
Carr is arrested on murder charges when Chili makes sure he is caught with the bat used to kill Joe Loop .
At the MTV Video Music Awards , Linda wins the awards for best new artist and video of the year .
During her acceptance speech , she thanks Edie , Sin and Chili .
Edie and Chili leave the award ceremony .
And as Chili drives off , he passes a billboard revealing that Elliott is the co - star of a new movie with Nicole Kidman .
CAST
* John Travolta as Chili Palmer
* Uma Thurman as Edie Athens
* Vince Vaughn as Roger " Raji " Lowenthal
* Cedric the Entertainer as Sin LaSalle
* André Benjamin as Dabu * Robert Pastorelli as Joseph
" Joe Loop " Lupino * Christina Milian as Linda Moon * Paul Adelstein as Hyman Gordon
* Debi Mazar as Marla * Dwayne " The Rock " Johnson as Elliot Wilhelm
* Gregory Alan Williams as Darryl * Harvey Keitel as Nick Carr * Danny DeVito as Martin Weir * Seth Green as " Shotgun " the Music Video Producer ( uncredited ) * James Woods as Tommy Athens * Alex Kubik as Roman Bulkin * George Fisher as Ivan Argianiyev
* Serdar Kalsin as Semyon * Anthony J. Ribustello as Fast Freddie
* Kimberly J. Brown as Tiffany CAMEOS
* Aerosmith ( Steven Tyler , Joe Perry , Tom Hamilton , Brad Whitford , Joey Kramer )
*
Wyclef Jean * Black Eyed Peas * Gene Simmons
* Fred Durst * Anna Nicole Smith *
Ben Levey * Della Reese SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's soundtrack was released on March 1 , 2005 .
Songs featured in the film but not included on the soundtrack are : * " Act a Ass " – E-40 * " Autumn Blue " * " Best of My Love " – Christina Milian , Carol Duboc , and Minae Noji
* " Beethoven 's 9th " –
Dean Hurley * " Brazilian Day " –
XMAN
* " Chattanooga Choo Choo " – Steve Lucky & The Rhumba Bums *
" Cooliest " –
Jimi Englund
* " Cryin ' " – Aerosmith and Christina Milian * " Deanstone " – Dean Hurley
*
"
( Everytime I Hear )
That Mellow Saxophone " – Steve Lucky & The Rhumba Bums
* " Heistus Interruptus " * " Kiss Me " –
Sixpence None the Richer * " Knockin ' On Heaven 's Door " – Bob Dylan
* " Lady Marmalade – Carol Duboc and Minae Noji
* " La Primavera " * " Melbourne Mansion " * " Marvelous Things " – Eisley ( video visible in background ) *
" Me So Horny " – 2 Live Crew
*
" Moving On " * " Praia de Genipabu " –
Barbara Mendes
* " Rock It Like Diss " – Jahmaal Rashad * " Santa Monica Man " – Dean Hurley * " Short Pimp " – Noah Lifschey and Dylan Berry * " Strings in Velvet " – Manfred Minnich *
" Travel Russia # 2 " –
The Dollhouse Players *
" Wild Out " – Cheming ( featuring XMAN ) RELEASE BOX
OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
On a production budget of $ 53 million , Be Cool grossed $ 56,046,979 in North American and $ 39,169,077 internationally , totaling up to $ 95,216,056 worldwide .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Be
Cool received a 30 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 171 reviews , with an average rating of 4.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Be Cool is tepid , square , and lukewarm ; as a parody of the music business , it has two left feet .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 37 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews .
" Halliwell called it " a palpable miss , a movie so lazy and laid back that it falls over ; there are none of those insights ... that made Get Shorty so enjoyable " .
In an August 2015 interview with Deadline , director F. Gary Gray discussed the failure of the film , stating : " With Be Cool , I made some assumptions in thinking that movie was going to work .
I 'd just made a successful PG-13 movie [ The Italian Job ] , and when I walked into Be Cool , it was rated R and then at the last minute in preproduction I was told , ' Well , you have to make
this PG-13 .
'
I should have walked off the film .
This was a movie about shylocks and gangsta rappers and if you ca n't make that world edgy , you probably should n't do it .
I walked in thinking I was going to make one movie
and then it changed .
Maybe it was arrogant of me to think because I had success in this realm of PG-13
I could make that work " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS