UNITED KINGDOM NATIONAL FOOTBALL TEAM
No United Kingdom national football team exists , as there are separate teams representing each of the nations of the United Kingdom ( England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland ) in international football .
These national teams compete in the FIFA World Cup and UEFA European Championships and other internationals .
A United Kingdom team has played in friendly matches , though never in a full FIFA international and not since 1955 .
However , the United Kingdom has competed in the association football tournament at the Summer Olympic Games , where it is represented by the Great Britain Olympic football team .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
When the world 's first football association , The Football Association ( FA ) , was formed in 1863 , its geographical remit was not clear : there was no specification of whether it covered just England , all of the United Kingdom , the British Empire or even the entire world .
The question was answered when the Scottish Football Association ( SFA ) was founded in 1873 .
The third national football association , the Football Association of Wales ( FAW ) was founded in 1876 and a fourth , the Irish Football Association ( IFA ) , was founded in 1880 .
Football therefore developed with separate associations and national teams for each of the countries of the United Kingdom or " Home Nations " .
Representative international matches between England and Scotland were played as far back as 1872 , and the Home Nations formed the International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) in 1886 to co - ordinate matches between their teams .
FIFA was formed by non - British associations in 1904 , and by 1913 the Home Nations were in FIFA and FIFA was on the IFAB .
In 1921 , around the time of the partition of Ireland , the Football Association of Ireland ( FAI ) split from the IFA and disputed its authority .
In 1923 , an agreement between the IFAB and FIFA meant the FAI would represent the Irish Free State and the IFA Northern Ireland ; also , FIFA agreed that relationships between the Home Nations would be outside its remit .
England and Scotland separately played internationals against various European teams , but the Home Nations withdrew from FIFA in 1928 , in a dispute over amateurism , and did not rejoin till 1946 , missing the first three World Cups .
England have been the only Home Nation to have any major success internationally , winning the 1966 World Cup .
Scotland have qualified for the final tournaments of eight World Cups and two European Championships , but have never progressed beyond the group stage of any international tournament .
Northern Ireland have not qualified for a World Cup finals tournament since 1986 , and Wales since 1958 .
This is sometimes raised as an argument in favour of a single United Kingdom national team :
based on statistical analysis .
In June 2006 , it was estimated that a United Kingdom national team would have had a one - third greater chance of winning the 2006 World Cup , than England did at the tournament 's outset .
Opponents of the plan argue that the existing footballing identities of the fans of the Home Nations should not be sacrificed simply to stand a better chance of success .
There has been limited support for the creation of a permanent British national team .
Although often hypothetical in nature , such a proposal has been put forward by prominent government ministers , including Jack Straw and Tony Banks .
In July 2014 , after England performed poorly in the 2014 World Cup , Conservative MP Laurence Robertson submitted an early day motion , calling for a United Kingdom Football Team .
MATCHES Section::::Matches .
colspan=2
The kits worn in the two past matches : •
Scotland 's blue in 1947 .
•
Northern Ireland 's green in 1955 .
Despite this , the Home Nations have previously united to play two friendly internationals against ' Rest of Europe ' representative sides .
On both occasions , they included all four Home Nations : England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland .
Despite Northern Ireland 's participation , both matches were played under the name of ' Great Britain ' .
* 10 May 1947 ; Hampden Park , Glasgow : Great Britain 6–1 Rest of Europe * 13 August 1955 ; Windsor Park , Belfast : Great Britain 1–4 Rest of Europe 1947 : THE MATCH OF THE CENTURY Section::::1947 : the Match of the Century .
The 1947 game , dubbed the ' Match of the Century ' , was played to celebrate the return of the Home Nations to FIFA , which they had left in 1920 .
For the match , played at Scotland 's Hampden Park in front of 135,000 spectators , the Great Britain side wore a navy blue strip in honour of the host association .
The gate receipts , totalling £ 35,000 , helped boost the finances of FIFA , which had been damaged by the lack of competition during World War II .
On that occasion , the Great Britain team consisted of : 1955 :
IRISH FA 'S ANNIVERSARY Section::::1955 : Irish FA 's anniversary .
The 1955 game was played to celebrate the Irish Football Association 's seventy - fifth anniversary .
For this reason , the match was held at Belfast 's Windsor Park , and the British team took to the field wearing Northern Ireland 's green strip .
The Great Britain team fielded comprised : OTHER MATCHES
Section::::Other matches .
Two other games were played between Wales and a team representing the rest of the United Kingdom , with players from England , Scotland , and Northern Ireland .
The first match , in 1951 , commemorated the seventy - fifth anniversary of the Football Association of Wales .
The second match , in 1969 , commemorated the investiture of the Prince of Wales .
In both cases , the England , Scotland and Northern Ireland select team played under the name of ' Rest of the United Kingdom ' .
* 3 December 1951 ; Ninian Park , Cardiff : Wales 3–2 Rest of the United Kingdom * 21 July 1969 ; Ninian Park , Cardiff : Wales 0–1 Rest of the United Kingdom
There was also a match played at Wembley in 1973 to commemorate the entry of the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark into the European Economic Community .
This match , called " The Three " v " The Six " , involved a select team from those three countries playing against a selection of players from the original six members of the EEC : West Germany , Belgium , Netherlands , Luxembourg , France and Italy .
Ten of the thirteen players used by " The Three " were from the United Kingdom , with only Johnny Giles and two Danish players representing the other two countries .
Henning Jensen and Colin Stein scored as The Three won 2–0 .
A Great British team lined up against another Rest of Europe XI in 1965 for Stanley Matthews ' testimonial .
Europe won 6–4 .
A Scotland XI team played a Rest of Great Britain team in a testimonial match for Alan Mullery .
Scotland were defeated 3–2 at Craven Cottage on 22 March 1976 .
OLYMPIC TEAM
Section::::Olympic team .
From the 1904 Summer Olympics to the 1972 Summer Olympics , and again for the 2012 Summer Olympics , the UK has competed in either the Olympic football tournament or its qualifying competition .
During the first tournament , played as a demonstration sport at the 1900 Summer Olympics but retrospectively accredited by the IOC , Upton Park F.C. represented the UK and won gold .
Following this Great Britain won gold medals at the 1908 and 1912 Games .
All ' Great Britain ' Olympic football teams were organised by The Football Association ( FA ) with the acquiescence of the other Home Nations ' football associations , and after the FA scrapped the distinction between professional and amateur players in 1974 , no more British Olympic teams were entered .
Although professional players were allowed into the Olympics from 1992 , no British teams were entered because the individual home nations , rather than a unified team , participated in the qualifying competition .
The 2012 Summer Olympics were hosted by London , which meant that Great Britain qualified as right of being host nation .
After much discussion between the Home Nations and opposition from the Northern Irish , Scottish and Welsh associations , men 's and women 's teams organised by the ( English ) FA were entered to the 2012 Olympics .
UNIVERSIADE TEAM
Section::::Universiade team .
At the Universiade , the United Kingdom team has won three medals : two silver medals in 2011 and 2013 and a bronze medal in 1991 .
FOOTNOTES