LYING IN STATE Lying in state is the tradition in which the body of a dead official is placed in a state building , either outside or inside a coffin , to allow the public to pay their respects .
It traditionally takes place in the principal government building of a country , state , or city .
While the practice differs among countries , a viewing in a location other than the principal government building may be referred to as lying in repose .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , official lying in state is a part of a state funeral , an honor generally reserved for former Governors General and former Prime Ministers .
It is held in the Centre Block of Parliament Hill , in the national capital , Ottawa , Ontario .
Ex - governors general lie in state in the Senate Chamber while former prime ministers lie in the Hall of Honour .
During the period of lying in state , the coffins are flanked at each corner by a Guard of honour , made up of four members drawn from the Canadian Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police , as well as members of the Governor General 's Foot Guards for former governors general , and guards from the parliamentary security forces for former prime ministers .
Guards stand at each corner with heads bowed and weapons inverted ( resting on Arms reversed ) with their backs turned towards the casket .
Provinces may also mount state funerals and have a lying in state for a distinguished former resident .
For instance , Maurice Richard , nationally known hockey player , was given a state funeral by the province of Quebec when he died in 2000 ; his coffin lay in state at the Molson Centre .
This process was repeated for fellow Canadiens legend Jean Béliveau in December 2014 .
Municipalities may offer civic funerals to prominent deceased current or former politicians .
NORTH KOREA Section::::North Korea .
In North Korea , the body of the late leader Kim Jong - il was displayed in a glass coffin surrounded with red flowers at the Kumsusan Memorial Palace in Pyongyang prior to his funeral , which began and ended at the palace .
An honor guard armed with AK-47s was present .
Jong - il 's father Kim Il - sung , the founding president , is on display elsewhere in the palace .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
In Russia , during the time of the Soviet Union ( 1917–1991 ) , the state funerals of the most senior political and military leaders , such as Vladimir Lenin , Joseph Stalin , Leonid Brezhnev , Yuri Andropov , and Konstantin Chernenko all followed the same basic outline .
They took place in Moscow , beginning with a public lying in state of the deceased in the House of the Unions , and ending with an interment at Red Square .
For the lying in state at the House of the Unions , the coffin would be placed on display in the Column Hall , which would be decorated by flowers , numerous red flags and other communist symbols .
The mourners , which usually would be brought in by the thousands , shuffled up a marble staircase beneath chandeliers draped in black gauze .
On the stage at the left side of the Column Hall , a full orchestra in black tailcoats played classical music .
The deceased 's embalmed body , dressed in a black suit , white shirt and a tie , was displayed in an open coffin on a catafalque banked with carnations , red roses and tulips , facing the queue of mourners .
A small guard of honour would be in attendance in the background .
At the right side of the hall , seats were placed for guests of honour , with the front row reserved for the dead leader 's family .
On the day of the funeral , a military funeral parade would take place during which the coffin would be conveyed from the House of the Unions to Red Square where burial would take place .
Lenin and Stalin were placed inside the Lenin Mausoleum , while Brezhnev , Andropov , and Chernenko were interred in individual graves in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
At state funerals in Singapore , the national flag is put on the coffin .
The vigil guard may be deployed during the public lying in state of the deceased person at Parliament House .
The deployment of the vigil guard is the highest form of respect accorded by the nation to the deceased .
Similar to British traditions , the vigil guard is composed of groups of five commissioned officers from the Singapore Armed Forces ( SAF ) and Singapore Police Force ( SPF ) who stand guard around the clock in shifts of 30 minutes .
One of the five officers stands facing outward at each of the four corners of the casket , while the fifth and most senior one stands in front and faces inward .
Their heads are bowed and their ceremonial swords are inverted .
Vigil guards were stationed at the public lying in state of Goh Keng Swee in May 2010 , Lee Kuan Yew in March 2015 as well as S R Nathan in August 2016 .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
Nelson Mandela was the first democratically elected president to lie in state in South Africa .
The event took place at the Union Buildings , the same site where he was inaugurated as the President of South Africa on May 10 , 1994 .
The body of Mandela was lying in State for three days , starting on Wednesday , December 11 , 2013 and ending Friday , December 13 .
The body was viewed by thousands of South Africans before it was airlifted to Qunu in the Eastern Cape where Mandela was buried on December 15 , 2013 .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In state and ceremonial funerals in the United Kingdom , the lying - in - state takes place in Westminster Hall .
The coffin is placed on a catafalque and is guarded , around the clock , by detachments , each of four men , from the following units : * Sovereign 's Bodyguard * Her Majesty 's Bodyguard of the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen - at - Arms *
The Queen 's Bodyguard of the Yeomen of the Guard
* The Royal Company of Archers , The Queen 's Bodyguard for Scotland
* Household Cavalry
* The Life Guards * The Blues and Royals ( Royal Horse Guards and 1st Dragoons )
* Foot Guards * Grenadier Guards
* Coldstream Guards
* Scots Guards * Irish Guards
* Welsh Guards
Each unit mans the guard for a total of six hours , with each detachment standing post for twenty minutes .
The four men stand at each corner with heads bowed and weapons inverted ; their backs are turned towards the coffin .
On two occasions , the guard has been mounted by four male members of the Royal Family .
At the lying in state of King George V in 1936 , the guard was mounted by his four sons King Edward VIII , the Duke of York
( George VI ) , the Duke of Gloucester and the Duke of Kent .
For Queen Elizabeth
The Queen Mother 's lying - in - state in 2002 , the guard was mounted by her four grandsons , the Prince of Wales , the Duke of York , the Earl of Wessex , and Viscount Linley .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Lying in state in the United States is the rare honor either authorized by a congressional resolution or approved by the congressional leadership , when permission is granted by survivors , to a deceased member of government ( or former member ) whereby his or her remains are placed in the rotunda of the United States Capitol in Washington , D.C. for public viewing .
The casket is guarded by members of the armed forces .
By regulation and custom , only Presidents , military commanders , and members of Congress are granted the honor of lying in state .
Except for Presidents and former Presidents , the honor is not automatic .
Not all those entitled to the honor have it accepted by their survivors .
The first leader to receive this honor was Henry Clay , former Speaker of the House of Representatives , when he died in 1852 .
Since then , the honor has been extended to 32 people , including 12 Presidents , and four Unknown Soldiers , representing U.S. service members who have died without their remains being identified .
STATES AND CITIES Section::::States and cities .
Some U.S. states and cities extend similar honors .
For example , in the state of Hawaii , three people have lain in state at the Hawaii State Capitol , among which include famous Hawaiian singer Israel Kamakawiwoʻole upon his death in 1997 , and the aforementioned Daniel Inouye , President pro tempore of the U.S. Senate and Senator from Hawaii .
Similarly , after the death of U.S. Senator John McCain , it was announced that he would lie in state at the State Capitol in his home state of Arizona before receiving the same honor at the U.S. Capitol .
In the City of San Francisco , California , Mayor Ed Lee lay in state at the Rotunda of San Francisco City Hall after his death in office in 2017 .
VATICAN CITY Section::::Vatican City .
A deceased pope customarily lies in state in the chapel of the Apostolic Palace and then in St. Peter 's Basilica , between the holding of a Mass of Visitation and a Mass of Requiem .
The funeral of Pope John Paul II was an example of this custom .
COPTIC
PATRIARCHATE Section::::Coptic Patriarchate .
The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria has a tradition of mummifying the deceased pope and placing his body on his throne to enable church followers to have a farewell look at him for a short period of time .
This tradition is one of the ways that ancient Egyptian rituals have survived in the Egyptian church .
OTHER NOTABLE
FUNERALS * Death and state funeral of Josip Broz Tito * Death and funeral of Corazon Aquino * Death and state funeral of Omar Bongo * Death and state funeral of Pierre Trudeau * Death and state funeral of Lech and Maria Kaczyński SEE ALSO
* Caisson * Death and state funeral of Ronald Reagan * Catafalque * Death and funeral of Richard Nixon
* Funeral train * Lying in repose *
Lincoln Catafalque *
Missing man formation
*
Riderless horse * State funeral * State funeral of John F. Kennedy * State funerals in the United States
* Vigil of the Princes REFERENCES