NAVAL BASE
SAN DIEGO Naval Base San Diego , which locals refer to as 32nd Street Naval Station , is the second largest Surface Ship base of the United States Navy and is located in San Diego , California .
Naval Base San Diego is the principal homeport of the Pacific Fleet , consisting of over 50 ships and over 190 tenant commands .
The base is composed of 13 piers stretched over of land and of water .
The total on base population is over 24,000 military personnel and over 10,000 civilians .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The of the land on which the Naval Base sits today was occupied in 1918 by a coalition of concrete ship building firms known as the Emergency Fleet Corporation , under the single company name Pacific Marine Construction .
But Pacific Marine began to lose profits with the conclusion of World War I , and negotiated a return of the land back to the City of San Diego .
Meanwhile , the Navy was exploring the small tract of land to establish a west coast ship repair facility and moved on the opportunity to acquire the land .
By 1920 , the Navy and the Emergency Fleet Corporation had negotiated the transfer of land improvements to the United States Navy .
Still , three obstacles stood in the way of a Navy repair facility : the coalition company , Schofield Engineering Co. , still retained an option to purchase the existing plant , a local shipping board had not granted permission for more construction , and finally , Congress had not yet passed an appropriations bill to authorize funds to begin work .
Nevertheless , by June 1920 , Congress passed the appropriations bill- $ 750,000 of which was earmarked for the navy repair base .
With the money appropriated , Schofield still delayed in releasing their option on the land .
At the time , Admiral Roger Welles , then Commandant of the 11th Naval District , had grown weary of Schofield 's delaying tactics and threatened to pull stakes and establish a repair base in San Pedro , Los Angeles , California .
His threats worked .
On 21 February 1921 , Welles assumed formal custody of the property .
In May 1921 , Commander H.N. Jensen , Commanding Officer of the repair tender USS Prairie , was directed to moor at the site to establish repair operations .
On 23 February 1922 , acting Secretary of the Navy , Teddy Roosevelt Jr. issued General Order 78 establishing the facility as the U.S. Destroyer Base , San Diego .
The base has been officially renamed almost half - a - dozen times during its lifetime .
During its first years in commission , the base grew rapidly as repair facilities expanded , torpedo and radio schools were established and more shops were constructed .
During 1924 , the base decommissioned 77 destroyers and commissioned seven .
By 1937 , the Destroyer Base had added two additional tracts of land and by then its 29 buildings and other improvements amounted to a cost of more than $ 3.2 million .
The base then expanded heavily during World War II and by 1942 , the Navy had added expanded fleet training schools , and an amphibious force training unit .
By the following year , it was determined the scope of operations exceeded the base 's basic function as a Destroyer Base .
On 7 October 1943 , the base was re - designated the U.S. Repair Base , San Diego , a title it retained throughout World War II .
Between 1943 and 1945 the newly named base performed conversion , overhaul , maintenance and battle damage repair to more than 5,117 ships .
Central to this maintenance were the Navy 's construction and delivery of 155 new floating dry docks deployed to various bases , including three 3,000-ton , three 1,000-ton and one 900-ton floating docks remaining at the San Diego Repair Base .
The floating dry docks became the central repair and training facilities on the base which were crucial to the World War II mission .
After World War II , base operations were again reorganized , with a post - war mission to provide logistical support ( including repair and dry - docking ) to ships of the active fleet .
On 15 September 1946 , the Secretary of the Navy re - designated the repair base Naval Station , San Diego .
By the end of 1946 the base had grown to 294 buildings with floor space square footage of more than , berthing facilities included five piers of more than of berthing space .
Land then totaled more than and of roads .
Barracks could accommodate 380 officers and 18,000 enlisted men .
More than 3,500 sailors could be fed in the galley at a single sitting on the base .
Later , in the 1990s , the Naval Station became the principal homeport of the then U.S. Pacific Fleet when the Long Beach Naval Shipyard was closed for the final time on 30 September 1994 .
Naval Station San Diego was realigned under Commander , Navy Region Southwest and became one in a triad of metropolitan Navy bases that now make up the bulk of the metro area Navy 's presence .
With that change , the base became the hub of all Navy port operations for the Region , assumed logistical responsibility for both Naval Medical Center San Diego and the Region headquarters and was re - designated Naval Base San Diego .
Because of its geographic location , and the positioning of its main entrance , the Naval Base has been known as the 32nd Street Naval Station not only by the local community , but also by sailors and veterans around the world .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
Naval Base San Diego is home port to approximately 54 ships , including 46 U.S. Navy ships , two Littoral Combat Ships , two U.S. Coast Guard cutters , and eight ships of the Military Sealift Command , as well as research and auxiliary vessels .
Ashore , the base has approximately 120 separate tenant commands and other Navy support facilities , each having specific and specialized fleet support missions .
The base is a workplace for approximately 26,000 military , civilian , and contract personnel .
Additionally , the base has rooms to house more than 4,000 men and women in modern apartment - like barracks , including newer state - of - the - art residential towers .
Support services on base includes less direct and indirect fleet support :
waterfront operations , force protection ( security ) , supply , Navy Exchange and Commissary shopping centers , bachelor quarters , food services , public affairs , administration , transient personnel administration , fiscal management , equal employment opportunity , civil engineering , family services , recreation on the base and near various military family housing areas , medical and dental care , religious services , transportation , utilities , legal support , counseling and assistance , facility maintenance , fire protection , educational services , and child care for more than 300 children daily at the base Child Development Center .
The base has a plant value of $ 2.1 billion .
HOMEPORTED SHIPS Section::::Homeported ships . !
Cruisers ( 8) ! !
Destroyers ( 14 ) ! !
Amphibious ( 15 ) ! !
valign =
top valign =
top valign =
top } !
Littoral Combat Ship ( 9 ) ! !
Mine Counter Measures ( 3 ) ! !
Support Ships ( 5 ) ! !
valign =
top valign =
top valign =
top } Carriers ( 2 ) IN FICTION AND LITERATURE Section::::In fiction and literature .
Naval Base San Diego is the setting for the 2005 naval thriller , Treason , by Don Brown .
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* NAVBASE SD Official Website * NB San Diego Installation Overview at NavyUSA.org * Naval Base San Diego on navy.mil
* DoD Lodging Worldwide