GREEN BEAN Green beans are the unripe , young fruit and protective pods of various cultivars of the common bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris ) .
Immature or young pods of the runner bean ( Phaseolus coccineus ) ,
yardlong bean ( Vigna unguiculata subsp .
sesquipedalis ) , and hyacinth bean
( Lablab purpureus ) are used in a similar way .
Green beans are known by many common names , including French beans , string beans ( for old varieties ; modern varieties are stringless ) , snap beans , snaps , and the French name .
They are distinguished from the many other varieties of beans in that green beans are harvested and consumed with their enclosing pods , before the bean seeds inside have fully matured .
An analogous practice is the harvest and consumption of unripened pea pods , as is done with snow peas or sugar snap peas .
Historically , green bean pods contained a string , a hard fibrous strand running the length of one side of the pod .
This string was either removed before cooking , or made swallowable by cutting the pod into short segments .
Modern , commercially grown green bean varieties are stringless and lack strings , though heirloom varieties may retain this trait .
CULINARY USE AND NUTRITION Section::::Culinary use and nutrition .
Green beans are eaten around the world , and are sold fresh , canned , and frozen .
They can be eaten raw or steamed , boiled , stir - fried , or baked in casseroles .
A dish with green beans popular throughout the US , particularly at Thanksgiving , is green bean casserole , a dish of green beans , cream of mushroom soup , and French - fried onions .
Some US restaurants serve green beans that are battered and fried , such as green bean tempura .
Green beans are also sold dried , and/or fried with vegetables such as carrots , corn , and peas , as vegetable chips .
Nutritionally , green beans are a healthy vegetable and the flavonol miquelianin ( Quercetin 3-O - glucuronide ) can be found in green beans .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
The first " stringless " bean was bred in 1894 by Calvin Keeney , called the " father of the stringless bean " , while working in Le Roy , New York .
Most modern green bean varieties do not have strings .
PLANT Section::::Plant .
Green beans are classified by growth habit into two major groups , " bush " ( or " dwarf " ) beans and " pole " ( or " climbing " ) beans .
* Bush beans are short plants , growing to not more than in height , often without requiring supports .
They generally reach maturity and produce all of their fruit in a relatively short period of time , then cease to produce .
Owing to this concentrated production and ease of mechanized harvesting , bush - type beans are those most often grown on commercial farms .
Bush green beans are usually cultivars of the common bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris ) .
*
Pole beans have a climbing habit and produce a twisting vine , which must be supported by " poles " , trellises , or other means .
Pole beans may be common beans ( Phaseolus vulgaris ) , runner beans ( Phaseolus coccineus ) or yardlong beans ( Vigna unguiculata subsp .
sesquipedalis ) .
Half - runner beans have both bush and pole characteristics , and are sometimes classified separately from bush and pole varieties .
Their runners can be about 3–10 feet long .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Over 130 varieties of green bean are known .
Varieties specialized for use as green beans , selected for the succulence and flavor of their pods , are the ones usually grown in the home vegetable garden , and many varieties exist .
Pod color can be green , purple , red , or streaked .
Shapes range from thin " fillet " types to wide " romano " types and more common types in between .
Yellow - podded green beans are also known as wax beans .
All of the following varieties have green pods and are Phaseolus vulgaris , unless otherwise specified : BUSH ( DWARF ) TYPES * Blue Lake 274 * Improved Commodore / Bush Kentucky Wonder
* Derby ( 1990 AAS winner )
* Purple Teepee ( purple pods ) POLE ( CLIMBING ) TYPES *
Algarve * Blue Lake * Golden Gate ( yellow / wax ) * Kentucky Blue ( AAS Winner ) * Kentucky Wonder * Scarlet Runner ( Phaseolus coccineus ) PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
According to UN Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAOSTAT ) , the top producers of green beans ( in metric tonnes ) in 2012 . !
Rank ! !
Country ! !
Production ( t ) REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Green beans at United States Department of Agriculture