CLARET JUG
The Golf Champion Trophy , commonly known as the Claret Jug , is the trophy presented to the winner of The Open Championship ( often called the " British Open " ) , one of the four major championships in golf .
The awarding of the Claret Jug dates from 1872 , when a new trophy was needed after Young Tom Morris had won the original Challenge Belt ( presented by Prestwick Golf Club )
outright in 1870 by winning the Championship three years in a row .
Prestwick had both hosted and organised the Championship from 1860 to 1870 .
By the time that Prestwick had reached agreement with the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews and the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers ( based at Musselburgh ) for the championship to rotate at these three venues , more than a year had passed .
So , there was no event in 1871 .
Each club contributed £ 10 to the cost of the new trophy , which is inscribed ' The Golf Champion Trophy ' , and was made by Mackay Cunningham & Company of Edinburgh .
When the 1872 event was played , the trophy still was n't ready in time to be presented to Morris ( who had won his fourth in a row )
although his name was the first to be engraved on it .
In 1872 , Morris was presented with a medal as have all subsequent winners .
In 1873 Tom Kidd became the first winner to be actually presented with the Claret Jug after winning the Championship .
The original Claret Jug has been on permanent display at the clubhouse of The Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews since 1928 .
The original Challenge Belt is also on display at the same site , having been donated in 1908 by the Morris family .
The current Claret Jug was first awarded to Walter Hagen for winning the 1928 Open .
The winner must return the trophy before the next year 's Open , and receives a replica to keep permanently .
Three other replicas exist : one in the British Museum of Golf at St Andrews , and two used for travelling exhibitions .
Every year , the winner 's name is engraved on the Claret Jug before it is presented to him .
The BBC always shows the engraver poised to start work , and the commentators like to speculate about when he will be sure enough of the outcome to begin .
Despite some suggestions , at the 1999 Open Championship , Jean van de Velde 's name was not engraved on the trophy before he famously choked with a triple - bogey on the 18th hole and Paul Lawrie subsequently won the playoff - engraver Alex Harvey stated " No , I did n't start engraving the Jug with his name .
I 've got to wait until the secretary hands me a slip of paper with the winner 's name on it , and they always wait until the last putt is dropped . " .
Upon being awarded the Jug in 1989 , Mark Calcavecchia said , " How 's my name going to fit on that thing ? "
The Claret Jug has twice appeared on commemorative £ 5 Scottish banknotes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland : first in 2004 , for the 250th Anniversary of The Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews , then in 2005 , the jug is shown held by Jack Nicklaus to mark his retirement .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The history of the Challenge Belt and the Claret Jug