COMPRESSION FITTING Compression fittings are used in plumbing and electrical conduit systems to join two tubes or thin - walled pipes together .
In instances where two pipes made of dissimilar materials are to be joined ( most commonly PVC and copper ) , the fittings will be made of one or more compatible materials appropriate for the connection .
Compression fittings for attaching tubing ( piping ) commonly have ferrules ( or olives in the UK ) in them .
Compression fittings are also used extensively for hot and cold water faucets ( taps ) and toilet stop valves ; compression fittings are well suited to this application , as these valves are usually located in confined spaces where copper pipe would be difficult to solder without creating a fire hazard .
Also , the fittings allow easy disconnection and reconnection .
HOW THEY WORK Section::::How they work .
In small sizes , the compression fitting is composed of an outer compression nut and an inner compression ring or ferrule ( sometimes referred to as an " olive " ) that is typically made of brass or copper .
Ferrules vary in shape and material but are most commonly in the shape of a ring with beveled edges .
To work properly , the ferrule must be oriented correctly — usually the ferrule is fitted such that the longest sloping face of the ferrule faces away from the nut .
When the nut is tightened , the ferrule is compressed between the nut and the receiving fitting ; the ends of the ferrule are clamped around the pipe , and the middle of the ferrule bows away from the pipe , making the ferrule effectively thicker .
The result is that the ferrule seals the space between the pipe , nut , and receiving fitting , thereby forming a tight joint .
Larger sizes of compression
fitting do not have a single nut to compress the ferrule but a flange with a ring of bolts that performs this task .
The bolts have to be tightened evenly .
Thread sealants such as joint compound ( pipe dope or thread seal tape such as PTFE tape ) are unnecessary on compression fitting threads , as it is not the thread that seals the joint but rather the compression of the ferrule between the nut and pipe .
However , a small amount of plumber 's grease or light oil applied to the threads will provide lubrication to help ensure a smooth , consistent tightening of the compression nut .
It is critical to avoid over - tightening the nut or else the integrity of the compression fitting will be compromised by the excessive force .
If the nut is overtightened the ferrule will deform improperly causing the joint to fail .
Indeed , overtightening is the most common cause of leaks in compression fittings .
A good rule of thumb is to tighten the nut first by hand until it is too difficult to continue and then tighten the nut one half - turn more with the aid of a wrench ; the actual amount varies with the size of the fitting , as a larger one requires less tightening .
The fitting is then tested : if slight weeping is observed , the fitting is gradually tightened until the weeping stops .
The integrity of the compression fitting is determined by the ferrule , which is easily prone to damage .
Thus care should be taken to when handling and tightening the fitting , although if the ferrule is damaged it is easily replaced .
TYPES OF FITTINGS Section::::Types of fittings .
There are two traditional types of compression fitting , standard ( British type - A / non - manipulative ) and flare fittings ( British type - B / manipulative ) .
Standard fittings require no modifications to the tubing .
Flare fittings require modification of the tubing with a special tool .
Standard fittings are typically used for water and compressed air connections , whereas flare fittings are used for gas and high pressure lines .
A standard fitting can be installed using an ordinary wrench to tighten the surrounding nut .
To remove it , a specialized puller is often used to slide the nut and ferrule off the tube .
If the ferrule is difficult to remove it can be weakened with a cut , care being taken to not nick the pipe while cutting .
A newer type is push - in compression fittings .
These fit over the end of a tube using a grip ring to hold the sides of the tube and an O - ring to form a seal at the end .
ADVANTAGES
Section::::Advantages .
Compression fittings are popular because they do not require soldering , so they are comparatively quick and easy to use .
They require no special tools or skills to operate .
They work at higher pressures and with toxic gases .
Compression fittings are especially useful in installations that may require occasional disassembly or partial removal for maintenance etc . , since these joints can be broken and remade without affecting the integrity of the joint .
They are also used in situations where a heat source , in particular a soldering torch , is prohibited , or where it is difficult to remove remains of water from inside the pipe which prevent the pipe heating up to allow soldering .
DISADVANTAGES Section::::Disadvantages .
Compression fittings are not as robust as soldered fittings .
They are typically used in applications where the fitting will not be disturbed and not subjected to flexing or bending .
A soldered joint is highly tolerant of flexing and bending ( such as when pipes knock or shake from sudden pressure changes ) .
Compression fittings are much more sensitive to these type of dynamic stresses .
They are also bulkier , and may be considered less aesthetically pleasing than a neatly soldered joint .
Compression fittings work best when tightened once and not disturbed .
Some compression connectors may never be reused , such as a ferrule ring type .
It can never be reused once they have been compressed .
This connector is directly placed over the pipe and the nut is tightened compressing the ferrule between the pipe and the body of the fitting .
Compression of this ferrule also results in deformation of the copper tubing .
If a compression type connection needs to be redone , more often than not the compressed copper / ferrule would need to be cut off and a new ferrule is to be used on a clean non - compressed piece of pipe end .
This is to assure a leak proof sound connection .
SEE ALSO
* AN thread *
Flare fitting
* JIC fitting NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS