SAN DIEGO –
CORONADO BRIDGE
The San Diego – Coronado Bridge , locally referred to as the Coronado Bridge , is a prestressed concrete / steel girder bridge , crossing over San Diego Bay in the United States , linking San Diego with Coronado , California .
The bridge is signed as part of State Route 75 .
DESCRIPTION CONSTRUCTION Section::::Description .
Section::::Construction .
In 1926 , John D. Spreckels recommended that a bridge be built between San Diego and Coronado , but voters dismissed the plan .
The U.S. Navy initially did not support a bridge that would span San Diego Bay to connect San Diego to Coronado .
They feared a bridge could be collapsed by attack or an earthquake and trap the ships stationed at Naval Base San Diego .
In 1935 , an officer at the naval air station at North Island argued that if a bridge was built to cross the bay then the Navy would leave San Diego .
In 1951–52 , the Coronado City Council initiated plans for bridge feasibility studies .
By 1964 the Navy supported a bridge if there was at least of clearance for ships which operate out of the nearby Naval Base San Diego to pass underneath it .
To achieve this clearance with a reasonable grade , the bridge length was increased by taking a curved path , rather than a more direct path to Coronado .
The clearance would allow an empty oil - fired aircraft carrier to pass beneath itit is not sufficient for Nimitz - class nuclear aircraft carriers in light load condition .
The principal architect was Robert Mosher .
Construction on the San Diego – Coronado Bay Bridge started in February 1967 .
The bridge required 20,000 tons of steel ( 13,000 tons in structural steel and 7,000 in reinforcing steel ) and 94,000 cubic yards of concrete .
To add the concrete girders , 900,000 cubic yards of fill was dredged and the caissons for the towers were drilled and blasted 100 feet into the bed of the bay .
The bridge opened to traffic on August 3 , 1969 , during the celebration of the 200th anniversary of the founding of San Diego .
The 11,179-foot - long ( 3,407 m or 2.1 mi ) bridge ascends from Coronado at a 4.67 percent grade before curving 80 degrees toward San Diego .
It is supported by 27 concrete girders , the longest ever made at the time of construction .
In 1970 , it won an award of merit for long span bridge from the American Institute of Steel Construction .
The five - lane bridge featured the longest continuous box girder in the world until it was surpassed by the Shibanpo Yangtze River Bridge in Chongqing , China in 2008 .
The bridge is the third largest orthogonal box in the countrythe box is the center part of the bridge , between piers 18 and 21 over the main shipping channel .
TOLLS AND TOLLBOOTHS Section::::Tolls and tollbooths .
Originally , the toll was $ 0.60 in each direction .
Several years later , this was changed to a $ 1.00 toll collected for traffic going westbound to Coronado only .
Although the bridge was supposed to become " toll - free " once the original bridge bond was paid ( which occurred in 1986 ) , the tolls continued for sixteen additional years .
On June 27 , 2002 , it became the last toll bridge in Southern California to discontinue tolls , despite objections from some residents that traffic to the island would increase .
The islands upon which the toll booths sat , as well as the canopy over the toll plaza area , are still intact , located at the western end of the bridge in the westbound lanes .
Though tolls are no longer collected , beginning February 19 , 2009 there was talk of resuming westbound toll collection to fund major traffic solutions and a tunnel .
However nothing came of the discussions , and more recently there have been discussions of removing the unused toll plaza completely .
LANES AND TRAFFIC Section::::Lanes and traffic .
The bridge contains five lanes : two eastbound , two westbound , and a reversible middle lane with a moveable barrier system installed in 1993 which can be used to create a third lane in either direction in response to traffic volume .
The eastern end of the bridge connects directly to a T interchange with Interstate 5 , just southeast of downtown San Diego .
It is designated and signed as part of California State Highway 75 .
The bridge was designed entirely and exclusively for motor vehicle traffic ; there are no pedestrian walkways , bike paths , or shoulders ( " breakdown lanes " ) .
Once a year beginning in 1986 , a lane is opened to pedestrians for the Navy Bay Bridge Run
/ Walk , a fundraiser sponsored by and benefiting the Navy Morale , Welfare , and Recreation program .
Beginning in 2008 , cyclists have the once - a - year opportunity to ride over the bridge in the Bike the Bay " fun ride " .
ARTWORK Section::::Artwork .
The pillars supporting the bridge on the eastern end are painted with huge murals as part of Chicano Park , the largest collection of Chicano art murals in the world .
This neighborhood park and mural display were created in response to a community uprising in 1970 , which protested the negative effects of the bridge and Interstate 5 on the Barrio Logan community .
Local artist Salvador Torres proposed using the bridge and freeway pillars as a giant canvas for Chicano art at a time when urban wall murals were rare in the United States , and he and many other artists created the murals when permission for the park was finally granted in 1973 .
SUICIDES Section::::Suicides .
The Coronado Bridge is frequently used as a suicide bridge ; as of July 2017 , at least 405 suicide deaths by bridge jumpers have occurred on the Coronado , trailing only the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco as the bridge most - often used for suicide in the United States .
Solar - powered phones were once installed on the Skyway to offer direct help for those contemplating suicide , but have since been removed .
Signs have been placed on the bridge urging potential suicides to call a hotline .
However , call boxes are not provided .
After an accident in 2016 , where a driver drove a pickup truck off the bridge and into Chicano Park , killing 4 and injuring 9 , state senator Ben Hueso proposed a state funding bill to cover safety measures on the Coronado , and require reports to the state legislature on progress .
In February 2017 , Caltrans announced its intent to perform a feasibility study for suicide - dissuasion options for the bridge .
Hueso stated that " the safety of residents and visitors traveling on the bridge , and those who gather below it in Chicano Park , is of the utmost importance . "
On March 26 , 2018 , Caltrans released its report ; it outlined suicide - dissuasion options such as netting , fencing , and glass barriers .
One " suicide " was later determined to be a murder .
Authorities determined that Jewell P. Hutchings , 52 , of Cerritos had been forced to jump at gunpoint ; her husband , James Albert Hutchings , was subsequently charged with murdering her and pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter .
BRIDGE LIGHTING Section::::Bridge lighting .
In April 2008 , the Port released an international call for artists seeking qualifications of artist - led teams interested in developing environmentally - friendly lighting concept proposals for the bridge .
In 2010 , a London - based design group led by Peter Fink was chosen .
The winning concept envisages illuminating the bridge with programmable LED lighting in an energy neutral manner using electricity generated by wind turbines .
In 2012 , two long years after choosing Fink 's project , the Port finally cut a check for $ 75,000 to initiate fundraising in concert with the San Diego Foundation .
The Port of San Diego says no taxpayer dollars will be used .
Instead , they are relying on grants and private donations to fund this lighting project , which will ideally be complete by 2019 to coincide with the bridge 's 50th anniversary .
As of March 2014 , the working target date is 2019 .
URBAN LEGEND Section::::Urban legend .
A decades - old local urban legend claims the center span of the bridge was engineered to float in the event of collapse , allowing Naval ships to push the debris and clear the bay .
The myth may have developed as a result of the hollow box design of the 1,880-foot center span , combined with the low - profile barges that made it appear to float on its own during construction .
However , Caltrans and the bridge 's principal architect , Robert Mosher , maintain that the legend is false .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * CaltransBridge History and Facts
* CaltransBridge Contracts * California Department of TransportationThe San Diego - Coronado Bridge
* City of CoronadoTransportation Management Association Bridge