EXCLUSIONARY RULE
In the United States , the exclusionary rule is a legal rule , based on constitutional law .
The rule prevents evidence collected or analyzed in violation of the defendant 's constitutional rights from being used in a court of law .
This may be considered an example of a prophylactic rule formulated by the judiciary in order to protect a constitutional right .
The exclusionary rule may also , in some circumstances at least , be considered to follow directly from the constitutional language , such as the Fifth Amendment 's command that no person " shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself " and that no person " shall be deprived of life , liberty or property without due process of law " .
" The exclusionary rule is grounded in the Fourth Amendment and it is intended to protect citizens from illegal searches and seizures .
" The exclusionary rule is also designed to provide a remedy and disincentive , which is short of criminal prosecution in response to prosecutors and police who illegally gather evidence in violation of the Fifth Amendment in the Bill of Rights compelled to self - incrimination .
The exclusionary rule also protects against violations of the Sixth Amendment , which guarantees the right to counsel .
Most states also have their own exclusionary remedies for illegally obtained evidence under their state constitutions and/or statutes , some of which predate the federal constitutional guarantees against unlawful searches and seizures and compelled self - incrimination .
This rule is occasionally referred to as a legal technicality because it allows defendants a defense that does not address whether the crime was actually committed .
In this respect , it is similar to the explicit rule in the Fifth Amendment protecting people from double jeopardy .
In strict cases , when an illegal action is used by police / prosecution to gain any incriminating result , all evidence whose recovery stemmed from the illegal action — this evidence is known as " fruit of the poisonous tree"—can be thrown out from a jury ( or be grounds for a mistrial if too much information has been irrevocably revealed ) .
The exclusionary rule applies to all persons within the United States regardless of whether they are citizens , immigrants ( legal or illegal ) , or visitors .
HISTORY OF THE RULE Section::::History of the rule .
Up until the independence of the United States , the courts of England excluded self - incriminating evidence that was provided as a result of official compulsion , regardless of its reliability .
In 1769 , Lord Chief Justice Mansfield explained as follows :
Chief Justice Mansfield also explained that " If any evidence or confession has been extorted from her , it will be of no prejudice to her on the trial . "
Additionally , a defendant could sue to suppress and regain possession of at least some types of illegally seized evidence , in a common law action for replevin .
However , in the 1783 case of Ceglinski v. Orr , the English courts declined to suppress evidence obtained by illegal coercion .
In the Warickshall case , evidence was gathered as a result of an involuntary confession , and the court held that the evidence ( but not the confession itself ) could be admitted .
It is questionable whether the Warickshall rule became known in the United States before 1789 ( when the U.S. Bill of Rights was written ) , and whether it applied to confessions obtained by both governmental and private parties .
In any event , no decision by the Supreme Court of the United States has ever endorsed the Warickshall rule as a constitutional matter .
Generally speaking , English law before 1789 did not provide as strong an exclusionary rule as the one that later developed under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution , regarding unlawful searches and seizures .
The Fourth Amendment , after all , was partly a reaction against English law including the general warrant and the writs of assistance .
In the 1886 case of Boyd v. United States , the U.S. Supreme Court addressed compulsory production of business papers , and the Court excluded those papers based on a combination of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments .
Boyd was closely limited to its facts , and several years later the Court stated that the Fourth Amendment does not extend to " excluding testimony " about wrongful searches and seizures .
In 1897 , the U.S. Supreme Court held , in Bram v. United States , that involuntary confessions are inadmissible as evidence .
The Court in Bram did not announce a strong version of the exclusionary rule that would apply uniformly to exclude all evidence gathered in violation of the Bill of Rights , but instead announced a weak version that excluded only self - incriminating testimony that was compelled in violation of the Fifth Amendment .
The distinction between testimonial versus other self - incriminating evidence is a matter of continuing debate .
Before a strong version of the exclusionary rule was addressed and adopted by the federal courts , it had already been adopted by at least one state court , namely the Iowa Supreme Court , as that court would later describe :
In 1914 , the U.S. Supreme Court announced a strong version of the exclusionary rule , in the case of Weeks v. United States , under the Fourth Amendment prohibiting unreasonable searches and seizures .
This decision , however , created the rule only on the federal level .
The " Weeks rule , " which made an exception for cases at the state level , was adopted by numerous states at a time during prohibition .
In adopting the rule , actions by states often reflected attitudes towards prohibition , which was enacted by adoption of the Eighteenth Amendment and was enforced through the Volstead Act .
Concerns about privacy violations also extended to other instances where criminal sanctions were permitted for " victimless " crime , such as illegal gambling or narcotics violations .
In 1920 , the U.S. Supreme Court adopted the " fruit of the poisonous tree " doctrine in the case of Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States .
The Court stated that allowing evidence gathered as an indirect result of an unconstitutional search and seizure " reduces the Fourth Amendment to a form of words " .
Wolf v. Colorado ruled that states were not required to adopt the exclusionary rule .
Despite the ruling , some states adopted the exclusionary rule .
In 1955 , the Supreme Court of California ruled in People v. Cahan that the exclusionary rule applied for cases in the state of California .
By 1960 , 22 states had adopted the rule without substantial qualifications : California , Delaware , Florida , Idaho , Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Mississippi , Missouri , Montana , North Carolina , Oklahoma , Oregon , Rhode Island , Tennessee , Washington , Texas , West Virginia , Wisconsin , Wyoming .
Michigan also had an exclusionary rule , but with limitations for some narcotics and firearms evidence .
In Alabama , Maryland , and South Dakota , the exclusionary rule applied in some situations .
It was not until Mapp v. Ohio in 1961 that the exclusionary rule was also held to be binding on the states through the Fourteenth Amendment , which guarantees due process .
Up until Mapp , the exclusionary rule had been rejected by most states .
In 2016 , Utah v. Strieff dealt with the exclusionary rule and outstanding warrants and was viewed to be generally favorable towards police .
LIMITATIONS OF THE RULE Section::::Limitations of the rule .
The exclusionary rule does not apply in a civil case , in a grand jury proceeding , or in a parole revocation hearing .
Even in a criminal case , the exclusionary rule does not simply bar the introduction of all evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth , Fifth , or Sixth Amendment .
In Hudson v. Michigan , Justice Scalia wrote for the U.S. Supreme Court :
Limitations on the exclusionary rule have included the following :
* Evidence unlawfully obtained from the defendant by a private person is admissible .
The exclusionary rule is designed to protect privacy rights , with the Fourth Amendment applying specifically to government officials .
* Evidence can only be suppressed if the illegal search violated the person 's own ( the person making the court motion ) constitutional rights .
The exclusionary rule does not apply to privacy rights of a third party .
However , there is a narrow exception to this standing requirement , the jus tertii standing exception .
* The defendant can not take advantage of the situation ( police breaching rules ) to turn the case to his advantage , in face of other evidence against himself .
This falls under the exigent circumstances exception .
*
The Silver Platter doctrine which was ruled unconstitutional in the case of Elkins v. United States in 1960 .
State officials that obtained evidence illegally were allowed to turn over evidence to federal officials , and have that evidence be admitted into trial .
*
Nix v. Williams held that if the evidence obtained in the unlawful search would almost definitely have been found eventually even without said search ( inevitable discovery ) , the evidence may be brought forth in court .
*
If police officers acting in good faith ( bona fides ) rely upon a defective search warrant , then the evidence acquired may still be used under the good - faith exception .
The exclusionary rule is not applicable to non - U.S. nationals residing outside of U.S. borders .
In United States v. Alvarez - Machain , the U.S. Supreme Court decided that property owned by aliens in a foreign country is admissible in court .
Certain persons in the U.S. receive limited protections , such as prisoners , probationers , parolees , and persons crossing U.S. borders .
Corporations , by virtue of being , also have limited rights under the Fourth Amendment ( see corporate personhood ) .
In the case of Florida v. Jimeno it was found that the evidence found to convict Jimeno , although at first was not admissible , later was found to in fact be admissible since it passed the test of reasonable standards .
The defendant consented to a search of his car , and when the officer searched a package and found drugs , it was not said to be in violation because a reasonable person would expect illegal narcotics to be kept in a package or container .
PARALLEL CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Parallel construction .
The Special Operations Division of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration advises DEA agents to follow a process of parallel construction when launching criminal investigations of Americans based on SOD tips that may be based on warrantless surveillance .
CRITICISM AND DEFENSE Section::::Criticism and defense .
The exclusionary rule as it has developed in the United States has been long criticized .
Judge Benjamin Cardozo , Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals between 1927 and 1932 , stated that under the rule , " The criminal is to go free because the constable has blundered .
"
The judge noted that many states had rejected the rule , but suggested that the adoption by the federal courts would affect the practice in the sovereign states .
In the 1970s , Dallin H. Oaks , Malcolm Wilkey , and others called for the exclusionary rule to be replaced with a comprehensive judicial remedy against all illegal arrests and searches and seizures ( e.g. , tort remedy ) .
By the 1980s , the exclusionary rule remained controversial and was strongly opposed by President Ronald Reagan .
But , some opponents began seeking to have the rule modified , rather than abolished altogether .
The case , Illinois v. Gates , before the Supreme Court brought the exclusionary rule for reconsideration .
The Supreme Court also considered allowing exceptions for errors made by police in good faith .
The Reagan administration also asked Congress to ease the rule .
It has been proposed that the exclusionary rule be replaced with restitution to victims of police misconduct .
A major criticism of the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule is that it allegedly defies the original intent of the Constitution .
Yale Law Professor Akhil Amar , for example , has argued that " nothing in the text , history , or structure of the Fourth Amendment " supports the rule .
Critics like Amar , Oaks and Wilkey point to the fact that the text of the Fourth Amendment does not indicate that illegally seized evidence must be excluded .
Some legal historians argue that the Constitution 's Framers intended only that victims of unreasonable searches or seizures could file civil lawsuits .
In 2009 , Roger Roots presented evidence that the idea of exclusion can be found in the earliest set of law books published in American history .
In 2014 , Roots elaborated that certain eighteenth - century British law books and pamphlets which discuss the exclusion of illegally seized evidence circulated widely in the American colonies and were owned by numerous prominent Framing - era lawyers and statesmen .
Also in 2014 , Professor Richard Re proposed that the Due Process Clause provides an ample basis for the Exclusionary Rule .
SEE ALSO
* Consent search *
Parallel construction
* Herring v. United States ( 2009 Supreme Court decision about the good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule )
* Sugar bowl ( legal maxim ) * Bunning v Cross , an Australian case for which the ruling may be formulated as an exclusionary rule
* Section 24(2 ) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , a constitutional provision explicitly excluding unconstitutionally obtained evidence if its admission would bring the administration of justice into disrepute
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Berg , B.L. Criminal Investigation ( McGraw - Hill , 2008 )