COLLECTIVELY EXHAUSTIVE EVENTS
In probability theory and logic , a set of events is jointly or collectively exhaustive if at least one of the events must occur .
For example , when rolling a six - sided die , the events 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 ( each consisting of a single outcome ) are collectively exhaustive , because they encompass the entire range of possible outcomes .
Another way to describe collectively exhaustive events is that their union must cover all the events within the entire sample space .
For example , events A and B are said to be collectively exhaustive if where S is the sample space .
Compare this to the concept of a set of mutually exclusive events .
In such a set no more than one event can occur at a given time .
( In some forms of mutual exclusion only one event can ever occur . )
The set of all possible die rolls is both mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive ( i.e. , " MECE " ) .
The events 1 and 6 are mutually exclusive but not collectively exhaustive .
The events " even " ( 2,4 or 6 ) and " not-6 " ( 1,2,3,4 , or 5 ) are collectively exhaustive but not mutually exclusive .
In some forms of mutual exclusion only one event can ever occur , whether collectively exhaustive or not .
For example , tossing a particular biscuit for a group of several dogs can not be repeated , no matter which dog snaps it up .
One example of an event that is both collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive is tossing a coin .
The outcome must be either heads or tails , or p ( heads or tails ) =
1 , so the outcomes are collectively exhaustive .
When heads occurs , tails ca n't occur , or p ( heads and tails ) = 0 , so the outcomes are also mutually exclusive .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The term " exhaustive " has been used in the literature since at least 1914 .
Here are a few examples :
The following appears as a footnote on page 23 of Couturat 's text , The Algebra of Logic ( 1914 ) :
In Stephen Kleene 's discussion of cardinal numbers , in Introduction to Metamathematics ( 1952 ) , he uses the term " mutually exclusive " together with " exhaustive " : SEE ALSO
* Event structure
* MECE principle
* Probability theory
* Set theory REFERENCES ADDITIONAL SOURCES
* LCCCN : 59 - 12841