FETAL VIABILITY Fetal viability or foetal viability is the ability of a fetus to survive outside the uterus .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
Viability , as the word has been used in United States constitutional law since Roe v. Wade , is the potential of the fetus to survive outside the uterus after birth , natural or induced , when supported by up - to - date medicine .
Fetal viability depends largely on the fetal organ maturity , and environmental conditions .
Another definition for viability , as used in the medical phrase limit of viability , is the expectation that a fetus has an equal chance of surviving and not surviving outside his or her mother 's womb .
According to Websters Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language , viability of a fetus means having reached such a stage of development as to be capable of living , under normal conditions , outside the uterus .
Viability exists as a function of biomedical and technological capacities , which are different in different parts of the world .
As a consequence , there is , at the present time , no worldwide , uniform gestational age that defines viability .
MEDICAL VIABILITY Section::::Medical viability .
There is no sharp limit of development , gestational age , or weight at which a human fetus automatically becomes viable .
According to studies between 2003 and 2005 , 20 to 35 percent of babies born at 23 weeks of gestation survive , while 50 to 70 percent of babies born at 24 to 25 weeks , and more than 90 percent born at 26 to 27 weeks , survive .
It is rare for a baby weighing less than 500 g ( 17.6 ounces ) to survive .
A baby 's chances for survival increase 3 - 4 % per day between 23 and 24 weeks of gestation and about 2 - 3 % per day between 24 and 26 weeks of gestation .
After 26 weeks the rate of survival increases at a much slower rate because survival is high already . !
Completed weeks of gestation at birth !
Chance of survival PERIOD OF VIABILITY Section::::Period of viability .
The period of viability refers ( traditionally ) to the period after the twenty - eighth week , or more recently the twenty - fourth week , of gestation when a human fetus is capable of living outside of the womb .
Whether the fetus is in the period of viability has legal ramifications as far as the fetus ' rights of protection are concerned .
It sometimes incorporates weight as well as gestational age .
UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT Section::::United States Supreme Court .
The United States Supreme Court stated in Roe v. Wade ( 1973 )
that viability ( i.e. , the " interim point at which the fetus becomes ... potentially able to live outside the mother 's womb , albeit with artificial aid " ) " is usually placed at about seven months ( 28 weeks ) but may occur earlier , even at 24 weeks .
" The 28-week definition became part of the " trimester framework " marking the point at which the " compelling state interest " ( under the doctrine of strict scrutiny ) in preserving potential life became possibly controlling , permitting states to freely regulate and even ban abortion after the 28th week .
The subsequent Planned Parenthood v. Casey ( 1992 ) modified the " trimester framework , " permitting the states to regulate abortion in ways not posing an " undue burden " on the right of the mother to an abortion at any point before viability ; on account of technological developments between 1973 and 1992 , viability itself was legally dissociated from the hard line of 28 weeks , leaving the point at which " undue burdens " were permissible variable depending on the technology of the time and the judgment of the state legislatures .
BORN - ALIVE INFANTS PROTECTION ACT OF 2002 Section::::Born - Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002 .
In 2002 , the U.S. Government enacted the Born - Alive Infants Protection Act .
Whereas a fetus may be viable or not viable in utero , this law provides a legal definition for personal human life when not in utero .
It defines " born alive " as " the complete expulsion or extraction from his or her mother of that member , at any stage of development , who after such expulsion or extraction breathes or has a beating heart , pulsation of the umbilical cord , or definite movement of voluntary muscles " and specifies that any of these is the action of a living human person .
While the implications of this law for defining viability in medicine may not be fully explored , in practice doctors and nurses are advised not to resuscitate such persons with gestational age of 22 weeks or less , under 400 g weight , with anencephaly , or with a confirmed diagnosis of trisomy 13 or 18 .
U.S. STATE LAW Section::::U.S. State Law .
Forty - three states have laws restricting post - viability abortions .
Some allow doctors to decide for themselves if the fetus is viable .
Some require doctors to perform tests to prove a fetus is pre - viable and require multiple doctors to certify the findings .
The procedure intact dilation and extraction ( IDX ) became a focal point in the abortion debate , based on the belief that it is used mainly post - viability .
IDX was made illegal in most circumstances by the Partial - Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003 , which the U.S. Supreme Court upheld in the case of Gonzales v. Carhart .
LIMIT OF VIABILITY Section::::Limit of viability .
The limit of viability is the gestational age at which a prematurely born fetus / infant has a 50 % chance of long - term survival outside its mother 's womb .
With the support of neonatal intensive care units , the limit of viability in the developed world has declined since 50 years ago , but has remained unchanged since the late 90s .
Currently , the limit of viability is considered to be around 24 weeks , although the incidence of major disabilities remains high at this point .
Neo - natologists generally would not provide intensive care at 23 weeks , but would from 26 weeks . , the two youngest children to survive premature birth are thought to be James Elgin Gill ( born on 20 May 1987 in Ottawa , Ontario , Canada , at 21 weeks and 5 days gestational age ) , and Amillia Taylor ( an IVF pregnancy , born on 24 October 2006 in Miami , Florida , at 21 weeks and 6 days gestational age ) .
Both children were born just under 20 weeks from fertilization ( or 22 weeks ' gestation ) .
At birth , Taylor was long and weighed 10 ounces ( 283 grams ) .
She suffered digestive and respiratory problems , together with a brain hemorrhage .
She was discharged from the Baptist Children 's Hospital on 20 February 2007 .
As of 2013 , Taylor was in kindergarten and at the small end of the normal growth curve with some developmental delays .
A preterm birth , also known as premature birth , is defined as babies born alive before 37 weeks of pregnancy are completed .
There are three types of preterm births : extremely preterm ( less than 28 weeks ) , very preterm ( 28 to 32 weeks ) and moderate to late preterm ( 32 to 37 weeks ) .
FACTORS
THAT INFLUENCE THE CHANCE OF SURVIVAL Section::::Factors that influence the chance of survival .
There are several factors that affect the chance of survival of the baby .
Two notable factors are age and weight .
The baby 's gestational age ( number of completed weeks of pregnancy ) at the time of birth and the baby 's weight ( also a measure of growth ) influence whether the baby will survive .
Other major factors include race and gender .
For a given weight , Black babies have a slightly better chance of survival than White , while most other races have a rate between the two .
Male infants are slightly less mature and have a slightly higher risk of dying than female infants .
Several types of health problems also influence fetal viability .
For example , breathing problems , congenital abnormalities or malformations , and the presence of other severe diseases , especially infection , threaten the survival of the neonate .
Other factors may influence survival by altering the rate of organ maturation or by changing the supply of oxygen to the developing fetus .
The mother 's health plays a significant role in the child 's viability .
Diabetes in the mother , if not well controlled , slows organ maturation ; infants of such mothers have a higher mortality .
Severe high blood pressure before the 8th month of pregnancy may cause changes in the placenta , decreasing the delivery of nutrients and/or oxygen to the developing fetus and leading to problems before and after delivery .
Rupture of the fetal membranes before 24 weeks of gestation with loss of amniotic fluid markedly decreases the baby 's chances of survival , even if the baby is delivered much later .
The quality of the facility- whether the hospital offers neonatal critical care services , whether it is a Level I pediatric trauma care facility , the availability of corticosteroids and other medications at the facility , the experience and number of physicians and nurses in neonatology and obstetrics and of the providers has a limited but still significant impact on fetal viability .
Facilities that have obstetrical services and emergency rooms and operating facilities , even if smaller , can be used in areas where higher services are not available to stabilize the mother and fetus or neonate until they can be transferred to an appropriate facility .
SEE ALSO
* Beginning of human personhood
* Futile medical care * Office for Human Research Protections#Additional protection for pregnant women , human fetuses , and neonates REFERENCES * United States .
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research ( 2006 - 05 - 23 ) .
FETAL VIABILITY AND DEATH .
[ ONLINE ] Available at : https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/bitstream/handle/1805/583/OS76-127_VII.pdf?sequence=1 .
[
Last Accessed 17 November 2012 ] .