( DON'T FEAR )
THE REAPER " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " is a song by American rock band Blue Öyster Cult from the band 's 1976 album Agents of Fortune .
The song , written and sung by lead guitarist Donald " Buck Dharma " Roeser , deals with eternal love and the inevitability of death .
Dharma wrote the song while picturing an early death for himself .
Released as an edited single ( omitting the slow building interlude in the original ) , the song was Blue Öyster Cult 's highest chart success , reaching # 7 in Cash Box and # 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 in late 1976 .
Critical reception was mainly positive , and in 2004 , " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " was listed at number 405 on the Rolling Stone list of the top 500 songs of all time .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The song is about the inevitability of death and the foolishness of fearing it , and was written when Dharma was thinking about what would happen if he died at a young age .
Lyrics such as " Romeo and Juliet are together in eternity " have led many listeners to interpret the song to be about a murder - suicide pact , but Dharma says the song is about eternal love , rather than suicide .
He used Romeo and Juliet as motifs to describe a couple believing they would meet again in the afterlife .
He guessed that " 40,000 men and women " died each day , and the figure was used several times in the lyrics ; this rate was 100,000 off the mark .
COMPOSITION AND RECORDING Section::::Composition and recording .
" ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " was written and sung by lead guitarist Buck Dharma and produced by David Lucas , Murray Krugman , and Sandy Pearlman .
The song 's distinctive guitar riff is built on the " i - VII - VI " chord progression , in an A minor scale .
The riff was recorded with Krugman 's Gibson ES-175 guitar , which was run through a Music Man 410 combo amplifier , and Dharma 's vocals were captured with a Telefunken U47 tube microphone .
The guitar solo and guitar rhythm sections were recorded in one take , while a four - track tape machine amplified them on the recording .
Sound engineer Shelly Yakus remembers piecing together the separate vocals , guitar and rhythm section into a master track , with the overdubbing occurring in that order .
Mojo described its creation : " ' Guys , this is it ! '
engineer Shelly Yakus announced at the end of the first take . '
The legendary once - in - a - lifetime groove ! '
… What evolved in the studio was the extended solo section ; it took them nearly as long to edit the five - minute track down to manageable length as it did to record it . "
The song features prominent use of the cowbell percussion instrument , overdubbed on the original recording .
Bassist Joe Bouchard remembered the producer requesting his brother , drummer Albert Bouchard , play the cowbell : " Albert thought he was crazy .
But he put all this tape around a cowbell and played it .
It really pulled the track together . "
However , producer David Lucas says that he played it , a claim supported by bandmember Eric Bloom .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The song was on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for 20 weeks , reaching number 12 for the weeks beginning November 6 and November 13 in 1976 .
It was BÖC 's highest - charting U.S. song and helped Agents of Fortune reach number 29 on the Billboard 200 . "
( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " charted even higher in Canada , peaking at number 7 .
The single edit was released in the UK in July 1976 ( CBS 4483 ) but failed to chart .
However the unedited album version was released as a single ( CBS 6333 ) in May 1978 , where it reached number 16 on the UK Singles Chart .
Critical reaction was mostly positive .
Denise Sullivan of Allmusic praised the song 's " gentle vocals and virtuoso guitar " and " haunting middle break which delivers the listener straight back to the heart of the song once the thunder is finished " .
Nathan Beckett called it
BÖC 's " masterpiece " and compared the vocals to the Beach Boys .
Writing for PopMatters , James Mann hailed it as a " landmark , genre - defining masterpiece " that was " as grand and emotional as American rock and roll ever got " .
Pitchfork Media also referred to the song as a " masterpiece " .
" Extremely poetic " was the verdict of Fountains of Wayne founder Chris Collingwood . "
A sad ballad about a man who wants to die with his true love before their love is spoiled by earthly things . " ' CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance . !
Year !
Chart !
Peakposition rowspan="2"1976
align="center"7 align="center"12 rowspan="2 " 1978 align="left
" Ireland ( IRMA ) align="center"17 align="left"UK Singles ( The Official Charts Company )
align="center"16 2017 align="center"11 ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades .
In 1976 Rolling Stone named " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " the song of the year and , in 2004 , the magazine placed the song at number 397 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " ; however , the 2010 version of the list moved it down to number 405 .
In 1997 Mojo listed the song as the 80th best single of all time , while Q ranked " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " number 404 in its 2003 countdown of the " 1001 Best Songs Ever . "
When The Guardian released its unranked list of the " 1000 Songs Everyone Must Hear " in 2009 , the song was included .
The publication wrote that the song 's charm " lies in the disjuncture between its gothic storyline and the sprightly , Byrdsian guitar line that carries it . "
In his book The Heart of Rock and Soul : The 1001 Greatest Singles Ever Made , rock critic Dave Marsh ranked the song at number 997 .
OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
Blue Öyster Cult performed a live version of " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " on the band 's 1978 album Some Enchanted Evening .
A live version appears on their 1982 album Extraterrestrial Live .
Blue Öyster Cult 's 1991 live album Live 1976 features " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " .
A live version appears on their 2002 album A Long Day 's Night .
Buck Dharma released an acoustic version of the song on the 1994 various artists compilation album Guitar Practicing Musicians 3 .
Gus Black covered the song in 1996 for the Scream soundtrack .
Finnish gothic rock band HIM recorded a version of the song on their 1997 debut album Greatest Lovesongs , Vol .
666 .
Pop rock band
the Goo Goo Dolls recorded a cover of " ( Do n't Fear ) The Reaper " on their 1987 self - titled album .
In 1992 , Clint Ruin and Lydia Lunch released the extended play Do n't Fear the Reaper , on which their rendition of the song appears .
Apollo 440 transcribed an electronic version of the track on the 1995 debut album Millennium Fever .
In 1998 , Jive Bunny & the Mastermixers recorded a cover of the song on their Rock the Party album .
Celtic rock band Big Country included a cover of the song on their 2001 covers album Under Cover .
The Mutton Birds recorded a version for the 1996 movie The Frighteners ; this version is also included on their 2002 greatest hits compilation Flock : The Best of the Mutton Birds .
Folk rock band Unto Ashes issued a rendition of " ( Do n't Fear ) The Reaper " on the 2003 album Empty into White .
Alternative rock group
The Beautiful South covered the song on their 2004 album Golddiggas , Headnodders and Pholk Songs . "
( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " was covered by hardcore punk band Snuff on their 2005 album Six of One , Half a Dozen of the Other : 1986 - 2002 .
Synthpop band Heaven 17 recorded a cover of the song on their album Before After , also released in 2005 .
Pat DiNizio , frontman for the Smithereens , covered the song on his 2006 solo album
This is Pat DiNizio .
In 2008 , jam band moe . recorded a live version of the song on their Dr. Stan 's Prescription , Volume 2 album .
Rock band L.A. Guns added a version of the song on their 2010 covers album Covered in Guns .
Pierce the Veil covered the song on the Punk Goes Classic Rock ( 2010 ) compilation .
Swedish doom metal band Candlemass covered the song on their 2010 EP
Do n't Fear The Reaper .
LEGACY
" MORE COWBELL " Section::::Legacy .
Section::::"More cowbell " .
The song was memorialized in the April 2000 Saturday Night Live comedy sketch " More Cowbell " .
The six - minute sketch presents a fictionalized version of the recording of " ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " on an episode of VH1 's Behind the Music .
Will Ferrell wrote the sketch and played Gene Frenkle , an overweight cowbell player .
" Legendary " producer Bruce Dickinson , played by Christopher Walken , asked Frenkle to " really explore the studio space " and up the ante on his cowbell playing .
The rest of the band are visibly annoyed by Frenkle , but Dickinson tells everyone , " I got a fever , and the only prescription -- is more cowbell ! "
Buck Dharma said that the sketch was fantastic and he never gets tired of it but also lamented that it made the song lose its ' creepy ' vibe for some time .
A segment of the song was performed by Red Hot Chili Peppers on May 22 , 2014 , as the conclusion of a drumming contest between the band 's drummer Chad Smith and actor Ferrell .
In a repeat of the 2000 SNL sketch , Ferrell again played cowbell for the rendition , which appeared on an episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon .
IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
Stephen King cited the song as the inspiration for his novel The Stand , and it appears as the theme song for the TV miniseries based on the novel .
Its lyrics are also quoted at the beginning of the novel .
The coat - of - arms of British fantasy writer Terry Pratchett , granted to him in 2010 , has Noli Timere Messorem ( Do n't Fear the Reaper ) as its motto .
References to the song have appeared in Pratchett 's work before and Death personified as The Reaper plays a recurring role in his books .
The song appears in John Carpenter 's Halloween to thematic effect .
The protagonist , Laurie Strode , and her friend Annie Brackett are driving to the houses where they are babysitting and the song plays on the radio .
It seems that it would mirror the Michael Myers character as the reaper , as he would later kill Annie , and the concept of fate and inevitability play heavily in the film .
The song is playing during the sixth episode of , " Return to Murder House " .
The scene depicts Miriam Mead ( played by Kathy Bates ) kidnapping a young girl in order to perform a satanic ritual .
The song also appears in Ash VS Evil Dead , Rifting Appart TRACK LISTING 7 "
Vinyl *
" ( Do n't Fear )
The Reaper " ( Roeser ) – 3:45
* * " Tattoo Vampire " ( Albert Bouchard , Helen Robbins ) –
2:40 * PERSONNEL * Eric Bloom – guitar , percussion ,
backing vocals
* Donald " Buck Dharma " Roeser – guitar , synthesizer , percussion , lead vocals * Allen Lanier – keyboards , guitar , bass * Joe Bouchard – bass ,
piano
* Albert Bouchard – drums , acoustic guitar , percussion , harmonica with : * Michael and Randy Brecker - horns .
Their contribution appears only on the extended album track and was edited out of the released single .
* David Lucas – backing vocals , keyboards , percussion , cowbell NOTES REFERENCES