OPERATING CASH FLOW
In financial accounting , operating cash flow ( OCF ) , cash flow provided by operations , cash flow from operating activities ( CFO ) or free cash flow from operations ( FCFO ) , refers to the amount of cash a company generates from the revenues it brings in , excluding costs associated with long - term investment on capital items or investment in securities .
The International Financial Reporting Standards defines operating cash flow as cash generated from operations less taxation and interest paid , investment income received and less dividends paid gives rise to operating cash flows .
To calculate cash generated from operations , one must calculate cash generated from customers and cash paid to suppliers .
The difference between the two reflects cash generated from operations .
Cash generated from operating customers * revenue as reported * - increase ( decrease ) in operating trade receivables ( 1 ) * - investment income ( Profit on asset Sales , disclosed separately in Investment Cash Flow ) * - other income that is non cash and/or non sales related Cash paid to operating suppliers * costs of sales- Stock Variation = Purchase of goods .
( 2 ) * + all other expenses * - increase ( decrease ) in operating trade payables ( 1 ) * - non cash expense items such as depreciation , provisioning , impairments , bad debts , etc .
* - financing expenses ( disclosed separately in Finance Cash Flow ) ( 1 ) :
operating : Variations of Assets Suppliers and Clients accounts will be disclosed in the Financial Cash Flow ( 2 ) :
Cost of Sales = Stock Out for sales .
It is Cash Neutral .
Cost of Sales - Stock Variation = Stock out -
( Stock out - Stock In)= Stock
In = Purchase of goods : Cash Out OPERATING CASH FLOW VS .
NET INCOME , EBIT , AND EBITDA
Section::::Operating Cash Flow vs. Net Income , EBIT , and EBITDA .
Interest is an operating flow .
Since it adjusts for liabilities , receivables , and depreciation , operating cash flow is a more accurate measure of how much cash a company has generated ( or used ) than traditional measures of profitability such as net income or EBIT .
For example , a company with numerous fixed assets on its books ( e.g. factories , machinery , etc . ) would likely have decreased net income due to depreciation ; however , as depreciation is a non - cash expense the operating cash flow would provide a more accurate picture of the company 's current cash holdings than the artificially low net income .
Earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) is a non - GAAP metric that can be used to evaluate a company 's profitability based on net working capital .
The difference between EBITDA and OCF would then reflect how the entity finances its net working capital in the short term .
OCF is not a measure of free cash flow and the effect of investment activities would need to be considered to arrive at the free cash flow of the entity .
SEE ALSO
* Cash flow
* Cash flow statement
* Free cash flow REFERENCES