ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME
In the United States income tax system , adjusted gross income ( AGI ) is an individual 's total gross income minus specific deductions .
Taxable income is adjusted gross income minus allowances for personal exemptions and itemized deductions .
For most individual tax purposes , AGI is more relevant than gross income .
Gross income is sales price of goods or property , minus cost of the property sold , plus other income .
It includes wages , interest , dividends , business income , rental income , and all other types of income .
Adjusted gross income is gross income less deductions from a business or rental activity and 21 other specific items .
Several deductions ( e.g. medical expenses and miscellaneous itemized deductions ) are limited based on a percentage of AGI .
Certain phase outs , including those of lower tax rates and itemized deductions , are based on levels of AGI .
Many states base state income tax on AGI with certain deductions .
Adjusted gross income is calculated by subtracting Above - the - line deduction from gross income .
GROSS INCOME Section::::Gross income .
Gross income includes " all income from whatever source , " and is not limited to cash received .
It specifically includes wages , salary , bonuses , interest , dividends , rents , royalties , income from operating a business , alimony , pensions and annuities , share of income from partnerships and S corporations , and income tax refunds .
Gross income includes net gains for disposal of assets , including capital gains and capital losses .
Losses on personal assets are not deducted in computing gross income or adjusted gross income .
Gifts and inheritances are excluded .
ADJUSTMENTS Section::::Adjustments .
Gross income is reduced by certain items to arrive at adjusted gross income .
These include : * Expenses of carrying on a trade or business including most rental activities ( other than as an employee )
* Certain business expenses of teachers , reservists , performing artists , and fee - basis government officials , * Health savings account deductions , *
Certain moving expenses
* One - half of self - employment tax , * Allowable contributions to certain retirement arrangements ( SEP IRA , SIMPLE IRA , and qualified plans ) and Individual Retirement Accounts ( IRAs ) , * Penalties imposed by financial institutions and others on early withdrawal of savings , * Alimony paid ( which the recipient must include in gross income ) ,
* College tuition , fees , and student loan interest ( with limitations and exceptions ) , *
Jury duty pay remitted to the juror 's employer , * Domestic production activities deduction , and * Certain other items of limited applicability .
REPORTING
ON FORM 1040 Section::::Reporting on Form 1040 .
Gross income is reported on U.S. federal individual income tax returns ( Form 1040 series ) type of income .
Supporting schedules and forms are required in some cases , e.g. , Schedule B for interest and dividends .
Income of business and rental activities , including those through partnerships or S corporations , is reported net of the expenses of the business .
These are reported on Schedule C for business income , Schedule E for rental income , and Schedule Ffor farm income .
MODIFIED AGI Section::::Modified AGI .
Certain tax calculations are based on modified versions of AGI .
The definition of " modified AGI " varies according to the purpose for which the related calculation is being used .
These modified versions of AGI may add certain items to AGI that were excluded in computing both gross income and adjusted gross income .
Common additions include tax exempt interest , the excluded portion of Social Security benefits and tax - free foreign earned income .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
Section::::Further reading .
IRS Materials
* Publication 17
Your Federal Income Tax
* Form 1040 series of forms and instructions * Social Security 's booklet " Medicare Premiums : Rules for Higher - Income Beneficiaries " and the calculation of the Social Security MAGI .