10050
CIELO DRIVE 10050
Cielo Drive is the street address of a former luxury home in Benedict Canyon , a part of Beverly Crest , north of Beverly Hills , California , where the Charles Manson " family " committed the Tate murders in 1969 .
The residence had been occupied by various famous Hollywood and music industry figures .
In 1994 , the house was demolished , a new house was constructed on the site and the street address was changed to 10066 Cielo Drive .
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Architecture .
The original house was designed by Robert Byrd in 1942 and completed in 1944 for French actress Michèle Morgan .
It was extremely similar , but not exactly identical , to the house which sat on its own plateau directly below 10050 , 10048 Cielo Drive , which was often called the Twin House .
They were originally built on land called The Bedrock Properties and were built at the same time .
The French country - style structure was located on at the end of a cul - de - sac on Cielo Drive in Benedict Canyon , an area west of Hollywood in the Santa Monica Mountains that overlooks Beverly Hills and Bel Air .
The hillside structure faced east and featured stone fireplaces , beamed ceilings , paned windows , a loft above the living room , a swimming pool and a guest house , and was surrounded by thick pine and flowering cherry trees .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Michèle Morgan , French actress for RKO Radio Pictures , had architect Robert Byrd design and J. F. Wadkins
build the luxury home resembling an early 19th - century European style farmhouse .
The house was completed in 1944 , with an address of 10050 Cielo Drive .
Beverly Hills , California .
By the end of World War II , Morgan had returned to France and in 1946 Lillian Gish moved in with her mother while filming Duel in the Sun ( 1946 ) . Rudolph Altobelli , a music and film industry talent manager , bought the house for $ 86,000 in the early 1960s ( ) and often rented it out .
Residents included Cary Grant and Dyan Cannon
( it was their honeymoon nest in 1965 ) , Henry Fonda , George Chakiris , Mark Lindsay , Paul Revere & the Raiders , Samantha Eggar , and Olivia Hussey .
Charles Manson visited the house in late 1968 , when it was occupied by couple Terry Melcher ( the son of actress Doris Day ) and Candice Bergen with roommate / talent - manager Roger Hart .
The couple split in early 1969 , with Melcher relocating to Malibu .
In February 1969 , Roman Polanski and his wife Sharon Tate began renting the home from Altobelli .
On August 9 , 1969 , the home became the scene of the murders of Tate , Wojciech Frykowski , Abigail Folger , Jay Sebring , and Steven Parent at the hands of the Manson " Family " .
William Garretson , Altobelli 's caretaker and an acquaintance of Parent , lived in the guest house behind the main house and was unaware of the murders until the next morning , when he was taken into custody by police officers who had arrived at the scene .
He was later cleared of all charges .
Altobelli moved into the house just three weeks after the murders and resided there for the next 20 years .
During an interview on ABC 's show 20/20 , he said that while living there , he felt " safe , secure , loved and beauty . "
He sold the property for $ 1.6 million in 1989 ( equivalent to $ million in ) .
NINE INCH NAILS Section::::Nine Inch Nails .
The final resident of the original house was the musician Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails .
Reznor began renting the house in 1992 and set up a recording studio there .
This studio , dubbed " Pig " ( sometimes called " Le Pig " ) in a reference to murderer Susan Atkins ' writing " Pig " in Tate 's blood on the front door of the house , was the site of recording sessions for most of the Nine Inch Nails album
The Downward Spiral ( 1994 ) .
Reznor moved out of the house in December 1993 , later explaining " there was too much history in that house for me to handle . "
Reznor made a statement about working in the Tate house during a 1997 interview with Rolling Stone :
Reznor took the front door of the house with him when he moved out , installing it at Nothing Studios , his new recording studio / record label headquarters in New Orleans .
Nothing Studios was sold and the façade of the building was changed .
The front door Reznor moved from 10050 Cielo Drive is currently preserved in the possession of the owner of the building .
DESTRUCTION Section::::Destruction .
In 1994 , the owner demolished the house and built a replacement home called Villa Bella , with a new street address of 10066 Cielo Drive .
The owner of the property as of 2013 is Hollywood producer Jeff Franklin .
The new property does not resemble the residence in which the Tate murders occurred .
REFERENCES