GOLDEN SYRUP Golden syrup or light treacle is a thick , amber - coloured form of inverted sugar syrup made in the process of refining sugar cane or sugar beet juice into sugar , or by treatment of a sugar solution with acid .
It is used in a variety of baking recipes and desserts .
It has an appearance similar to honey and is often used as a substitute where honey is unavailable or prohibitively expensive .
Many vegans also use it as a honey substitute .
It is not to be confused with amber corn syrup or amber molasses .
Regular molasses , or dark treacle , has both a richer colour and a strong , distinctive flavour .
Formulated by the chemists Charles Eastick and his brother John Joseph Eastick at the Abram Lyle & Sons ( now part of Tate & Lyle ) refinery in Plaistow , London ,
Lyle 's Golden Syrup was first canned and sold in 1885 .
In 2006 it was recognised by Guinness World Records as having the world 's oldest branding and packaging .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1883 , Charles Eastick , an English chemist at the Abram Lyle & Sons ( now part of Tate & Lyle ) refinery in Plaistow , east London , formulated how it could be refined to make a preserve and sweetener for cooking .
Charles and his brother John Joseph Eastick experimented with the refining process , of the bitter molasses - brown treacle — hitherto a waste by - product of sugar refining — into an eminently palatable syrup with the viscosity , hue , and sweetness of honey .
The resulting product was marketed commercially in 1885 as " golden syrup " .
The name " golden syrup " in connection with molasses had occurred , however , as early as 1840 in an Adelaide newspaper , the South Australian .
The tin bears a picture of the rotting carcass of a lion with a swarm of bees and the slogan
" Out of the strong came forth sweetness " .
This is a reference to the Biblical story in chapter 14 of the Book of Judges in which Samson was traveling to the land of the Philistines in search of a wife .
During the journey he killed a lion , and when he passed the same spot on his return he noticed that a swarm of bees had formed a comb of honey in the carcass .
Samson later turned this into a riddle at a wedding : " Out of the eater came forth meat and out of the strong came forth sweetness " .
While it is not known exactly why this image and slogan were chosen , Abram Lyle was a deeply religious man , and it has been suggested that they refer either to the strength of the Lyle company or the tins in which golden syrup is sold .
In 1904 , they were registered together as a trademark , and in 2006 Guinness World Records declared the mark to be the world 's oldest branding and packaging .
Lyle 's golden syrup was awarded a Royal Warrant in 1911 .
In 1921 , Lyle 's business merged with Tate , a sugar - refining firm founded by Sir Henry Tate in 1859 , to become Tate & Lyle .
In 2010 , Tate & Lyle sold its sugar refining and golden syrup business to American Sugar Refining .
Originally , golden syrup was a product made at the white sugar refinery from the recovered mother liquor ( recovered molasses ) " washed " off the raw sugar crystals in the process of creating white sugar .
This liquor is generally known as refiners return syrup .
Today most golden syrups are produced by a specialist manufacturer by inverting half the refiners return syrup to fructose and glucose and blending it back again ; this ensures the product remains liquid and will never re - crystallize .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Refiners syrup begins as a high - Brix , pale sucrose syrup made from white sugar and water designed to loosen the dried molasses found on raw sugar crystals .
The sucrose saturated content of the initial " green " syrup impedes sugar crystals from dissolving during the process of washing .
The purpose is to mix the green syrup with raw sugar crystals to form a " magma " of 8–10 % moisture content at around 60–65 degrees C that is then washed with water in a centrifuge .
After the first washing ( often termed affination ) the " washed off " molasses combines with the sucrose syrup to generate refiners return syrup , which is generally re - used several times until deemed spent .
The spent refiners return syrup is sold off to manufacturers for golden syrup production or is sent to a recovery section of the refinery often called the remelt house or boil - out section .
Here it is reheated to crystallize and recover the sucrose it contains and that is returned to the affination stage .
The final spent syrup left after the recovery process is sold as treacle ( often called refiners molasses in older texts ) .
An equivalent golden syrup product may be made from beet sugar by processing the clarified , partially evaporated beet juice to break down ( invert )
most of the disaccharide sucrose into its constituents monosaccharides glucose and fructose .
In this process none of the sucrose is ever crystallized from the beet juice .
Inversion may be done by acid hydrolysis or by adding an enzyme , invertase .
This produces a free flowing ( invert ) syrup that will not crystallize .
Typically in acid hydrolysis , the disaccharides are split by hydrochloric acid , resulting in a solution which is acidic ; neutrality is restored by the addition of lye , which is sodium hydroxide .
As a result , syrup made by this method contains some common salt , sodium chloride .
The free glucose and fructose present in golden syrups are more water - soluble than the original sucrose .
As a result , golden syrups are less likely to crystallize than a pure sucrose syrup .
The free fructose content gives the syrup a taste sweeter than that of an equivalent solution of white sugar ; when substituting golden syrup for white sugar , about 25 % less golden syrup is needed for the same level of sweetness .
The term invert comes from the method used for assessing sugar syrups .
The plane of linear polarised light passed through a sample of pure sucrose solution is rotated to the right .
As the solution is converted to a mixture of sucrose , fructose and glucose , the angle of rotation reduces , through zero and then increases in the opposite direction , thus the direction appears to have been inverted compared to light passed through the sucrose solution .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
Golden syrup is widely available across the world , made either from sugar cane or sugar beet .
Lyle 's Golden Syrup , made by Tate & Lyle , remains one of the best known UK brands .
There are two other UK sugar refiners , British Sugar who make an equivalent product under its Silver Spoon brand , and Ragus Sugars , who make the Eastick 's & Ragus Golden Syrup brand .
In South Africa , the most popular brands are the locally produced Illovo golden syrup and the imported Lyle 's Golden Syrup .
In addition to the classic golden syrup , several flavoured versions are also marketed , notably maple flavour .
In Australia , CSR Limited is the major producer , but it is also produced by Bundaberg Sugar and Smith 's .
In New Zealand , Chelsea golden syrup has been a household name since the late 19th century .
Rogers Golden Syrup and Lyle 's golden syrup are available in Canada .
In Canada , Lyle 's Golden Syrup is available in either a glass jar or the traditional tin .
King brand syrup , a mixture of corn and invert syrup , is sold in many areas of the US , often grouped with table syrups like maple syrup .
Speciality stores or those with international sections , such as Whole Foods Market and Cost Plus World Market , often stock Lyle 's golden syrup from the UK in several different packs .
In Germany , a similar product called Zuckerrübensirup ( literally " sugar - beet syrup " ) is a popular spread , especially in the western part of the country around Cologne .
The best known producer is the Grafschafter Krautfabrik which has produced Zuckerrübensirup for more than a hundred years .
This syrup is almost always made from sugar - beet ; golden syrup from sugar cane is extremely rare on the German market .
There are two types of Zuckerrübensirup in Germany , a golden one , similar to golden syrup from sugar cane , and a brown syrup which is similar to dark treacle .
The German company Schneekoppe makes a product called Frühstücks - Sirup ( breakfast syrup ) , which is a golden syrup with some added natural flavor to imitate the taste of honey .
In Sweden there is a light and a dark golden syrup , beet based .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Golden syrup is a Newtonian fluid .
Its density is approximately 1430 kg·m at room temperature , and its viscosity is 100 Pa·s .
SEE ALSO Section::::See also .
Syrups
* Molasses
* Corn syrup * Inverted
sugar syrup * Sorghum molasses
* Steen 's cane syrup Other
* Treacle * Anzac biscuits
* Oliver Lyle
* Treacle tart * Charles Eastick MBE
* Treacle sponge pudding
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS