HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC III
Heroes of Might and Magic III :
The Restoration of Erathia ( commonly referred to as Heroes of Might & Magic 3 , or simply Heroes 3 ) is a turn - based strategy game developed by Jon Van Caneghem through New World Computing originally released for Microsoft Windows by the 3DO Company in 1999 .
Its ports to several computer and console systems followed in 1999 - 2000 .
It is the third installment of the Heroes of Might and Magic series .
The game 's story is first referenced throughout and serves as a prequel to .
The player can choose to play through seven different campaigns telling the story , or play in a scenario against computer or human opponents .
The gameplay is very similar to its predecessors in that the player controls a number of heroes that command an army of creatures inspired by myth and legend .
The gameplay is divided into two parts , tactical overland exploration and a turn based combat system .
The player creates an army by spending resources at one of the eight town types in the game .
The hero will progress in experience by engaging in combat with enemy heroes and monsters .
The conditions for victory vary depending on the map , including conquest of all enemies and towns , collection of a certain amount of a resource , or finding the grail artifact .
Heroes III was released to universal acclaim and was praised by critics .
The game received the expansion packs and .
Heroes Chronicles , a series of short introductory games based on the Heroes III engine , was also released .
A special version of Heroes III titled Heroes III Complete , which included the original game and both expansion packs , was released in 2000 .
On December 10 , 2014 , Ubisoft announced an HD version of the game .
The new version features updated graphics as well as wide screen compatibility and was released on January 29 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows , iOS and Android .
However , the expansions have not been re - released because their source code is lost .
Numerous unofficial patches and mods made by the dedicated fan - such as the HD mod , In the Wake of Gods mod , and the Horn of the Abyss mod - have substantially improved the games ' stability , balance and features .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Gameplay consists of strategic exploration on the world map and tactical turn - based combat .
As with the series in general , the player controls a number of " heroes " who act as generals and command troops comprising various types of creatures inspired by myth and legend .
The player can complete or " win " a map by completing the objectives set out by the creator of the map .
Objectives may include conquering all the towns in the map , gathering a set amount of resources , or piecing together a puzzle to find the Grail artifact .
If a player loses all their heroes and towns , they will lose the game .
There are two " layers " to the world map - the aboveground and the underground .
There are typically subterranean gateways that lead to and from the underground .
Maps are filled with a huge variety of buildings , treasures , monsters , mines and so forth that reward extensive exploration .
At the very least , a player must locate mines and flag them ( whereupon they provide constant resources ) , since these resources are required to develop towns .
The player must also develop his heroes ' skills , both by battling creatures ( and enemy heroes ) and by acquiring artifacts or visiting special locations .
Heroes are given a choice of skills to upgrade upon leveling up , as well as becoming better at combat or using magic .
The skills must be chosen carefully , since they are permanent and only a limited number of skills can be learned .
The player 's towns serve many functions , but most importantly they allow recruitment of creatures to form armies .
Towns also provide funds , new spells and a fortified location to make a last stand against an invading enemy hero .
To build new structures within a town requires gold and usually one or more type of resource .
Wood and ore are needed for most structures , but more expensive buildings will also require rarer resources ( mercury , crystal , gems or sulfur ) .
All factions require a disproportionate quantity of just one of these special resources , making the acquisition of a corresponding mine essential to victory .
This same resource is also needed when hiring the most powerful creatures available to that faction .
Each faction also has a handful of unique structures available only to them .
If a player finds the Grail artifact , he can deliver it to a town to make that town the Grail 's permanent home by creating a special structure .
The Grail bestows greatly increased creature growth and weekly income , in addition to a bonus unique to the town .
The eight different castles available in Heroes III are classified as good , evil , and neutral .
Each town has seven basic creatures , each of which can be upgraded to a more powerful variant .
Each town also features two associated hero types : one that leans more toward might ( combat ) , and one that leans more toward magic .
Some towns have a predisposition toward might or magic , and the leanings of the hero classes may simply be a matter of degrees .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The game 's story unfolds primarily through a series of seven playable campaigns , all set upon the continent of Antagarich .
During the campaigns , the story is told from alternating points of view , giving players the opportunity to play as each of the town alignments .
Following the disappearance of King Roland Ironfist of Enroth prior to , his wife , Queen Catherine , is left to rule the realm .
In the meantime , her father , King Gryphonheart of Erathia , is assassinated .
Without their beloved King , the kingdom of Erathia falls to the dark forces of Nighon and Eeofol .
Queen Catherine returns home to Antagarich seeking to rally the people of her homeland and lead them against the evil that has ravaged their nation .
Erathia 's capital of Steadwick is sacked by the dungeon lords of Nighon and the Kreegans of Eeofol .
Meanwhile , the nations of Tatalia and Krewlod skirmish at the western border , seizing the chance to expand their territory .
Catherine 's first task is to establish a foothold in the conquered kingdom by enlisting the aid of allies .
The wizards of Bracada and the elves of AvLee answer her call , and together they push towards Steadwick and eventually retake it , quickly quelling the border war in the west .
Soon after , Lucifer Kreegan , a commander in the Eeofol armies , sends an envoy to Erathia claiming that Roland Ironfist is captive within their territories .
AvLee invades Eeofol , but fails to rescue Roland , who is transported to .
Afterwards , Catherine invades Nighon , pushing the dungeon armies back to their island home .
In the meantime , the necromancers of Deyja , having been responsible for the assassination of King Gryphonheart , plot to revive his corpse as a lich .
They plan to use his wisdom in leading their own armies of the undead .
However , King Gryphonheart 's will proves too much for the necromancers even in his corrupted state , and he becomes a rogue lich .
Having little other recourse , Queen Catherine is forced to ally herself with the necromancers and together they set out to destroy the lich of King Gryphonheart before he becomes too powerful .
A final bonus campaign , accessible only after the main campaigns are complete , tells the story of separatists living in the Contested Lands , a war - torn border between Erathia and AvLee .
Tired of the skirmishes that bring unrest to their homelands , they join together to fight for independence from the two large kingdoms .
It is later implied that this rising was orchestrated by Archibald Ironfist , the antagonist of Heroes of Might and Magic II .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The game was originally released for PC Windows on February 28 , 1999 .
An Apple Macintosh port was released by 3DO , and a Linux port was released by Loki Software , both later that year .
In 2000 , a Game Boy Color port entitled Heroes of Might and Magic 2 was released and the Dreamcast port was cancelled .
EXPANSION PACKS Section::::Expansion packs .
Two official expansion packs were released for Heroes III .
The first of these expansions , , introduced a ninth town alignment , the Conflux ; a random scenario generator , a variety of new creatures , heroes , and structures ; and six new playable campaigns .
The second expansion , , was a stand - alone expansion that included Restoration of Erathia and added seven new playable campaigns and a variety of new artifacts , including Combination Artifacts .
Combination Artifacts were extremely powerful items assembled by collecting a specific set of lesser artifacts .
COMPLETE EDITION Section::::Complete edition .
In 2000 , a bundle containing Heroes III and both expansion packs was released as Heroes III Complete .
More than just bundling the original game discs , however , this release reworked the game 's installation process as well as its in - game menus to reflect a unified product .
HEROES OF MIGHT & MAGIC III
– HD EDITION
Section::::Heroes of Might & Magic III – HD Edition .
On January 29 , 2015 , about 15 years after the original release of Heroes of Might & Magic III , Ubisoft released a new high - definition version of the game compatible with PCs as well as Android and iOS tablets .
The expansion packs were not included because the source code for those releases was lost .
RECEPTION SALES Section::::Reception .
Section::::Sales .
Heroes of Might and Magic III entered PC Data 's weekly computer game sales charts at # 3 for the February 28-March 6 period .
It held the position for another two weeks , before exiting the weekly top 10 in its fourth week .
It was the United States ' second - best - selling computer game of March 1999 .
PC Data , which tracked sales in the United States , reported that Heroes III had sold 185,553 copies by September 2000 .
The combined global sales of the Heroes series had reached 1.5 million copies by December 1999 .
CRITICAL REVIEWS
Section::::Critical reviews .
Heroes III was praised by critics , receiving an average score of 87 % in GameRankings .
Computer Gaming Worlds Robert Coffey said that the game " expands upon the insanely addictive play of the previous edition , retaining the core gameplay while enhancing almost every facet of the game " .
He continued to say that the game is " mind - boggling in its depth " , but criticized its uneven campaign pacing and " sluggish " connection speeds during online play .
He concluded : " Ultimately , the rewards of Heroes of Might and Magic III far outweigh its few drawbacks . ...
[ This ] is a game that strategy fans should absolutely be playing " .
Heroes of Might and Magic III was a finalist for Computer Games Strategy Pluss 1999
" Strategy Game of the Year " prize , although it lost to RollerCoaster Tycoon .
The editors wrote that Heroes of Might and Magic III " keeps this series running on all cylinders .
There 's nothing radically different here , but what would you change ? "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was well received .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://heroes.thelazy.net/ Heroes of Might and Magic Wiki