THE REMAINS OF THE DAY ( FILM )
The Remains of the Day is a 1993 British - American drama film adapted from the Booker Prize - winning 1989 novel of the same name by Kazuo Ishiguro .
The film was directed by James Ivory and produced by Ismail Merchant , Mike Nichols , and John Calley .
It stars Anthony Hopkins as Stevens and Emma Thompson as Miss Kenton , with James Fox , Christopher Reeve , and Hugh Grant in supporting roles .
The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Actor ( for Hopkins ) and Best Actress ( for Thompson ) .
In 1999 , the British Film Institute ranked The Remains of the Day the 64th greatest British film of the 20th century .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1958 post - war Britain , Stevens , the butler of Darlington Hall , receives a letter from Miss Kenton , a recently - separated former colleague employed as the housekeeper some twenty years earlier .
Lord Darlington has died a broken man , his reputation destroyed after he was exposed as a Nazi sympathizer , and his stately country manor has been sold to a retired United States Congressman , Mr. Jack Lewis .
Stevens is granted permission to borrow his Daimler , and he sets off to the West Country to meet Miss Kenton .
The film flashes back to Kenton 's arrival as housekeeper in the 1930s .
The ever - efficient Stevens managed the household well , taking great pride in his profession , and his dedication was fully displayed when , while his father lay dying , he steadfastly continued his duties .
Miss Kenton , too , proved to be a valuable servant , and she was equally efficient and strong - willed , but also warmer and less repressed .
Relations between the two eventually warmed , and it became clear she had feelings for him , yet despite their proximity and shared purpose , Stevens 's detachment remained unchanged ; his first and only loyalty was to his service as Lord Darlington 's butler .
One time , Miss Kenton embarrassed Stevens by catching him reading a romance novel ; Stevens told Miss Kenton he was reading it only to improve his vocabulary .
Meanwhile , Darlington Hall was regularly frequented by politicians of the interwar period , and many of Lord Darlington 's guests were like - minded , fascist - sympathizing British and European aristocrats , with the exception of the more pragmatic Congressman Lewis , who did not share the " noble instincts " of Lord Darlington and his guests .
Lewis informed the " gentleman politicians " in his midst that " Europe has become the arena of Realpolitik " and warned them they were " headed for disaster . "
Darlington later met Prime Minister Chamberlain and the German Ambassador , and used his influence to try to broker a policy of appeasement towards Nazi Germany , based on his belief that Germany had been unfairly treated by the Treaty of Versailles following the First World War and only desires peace .
In the midst of these events , and after overhearing Sir Geoffrey Wren praising Nazi racial laws , Darlington suddenly requested that two newly - appointed German - Jewish maids , both refugees , should be dismissed , despite Stevens 's mild protest that they were good workers .
Nevertheless , Stevens carried out Lord Darlington 's command , despite a horrified Miss Kenton threatening to resign in protest .
Miss Kenton later confided in Stevens
she had no family and nowhere to go to
should she leave Darlington Hall , and was ashamed to not follow up on her threat to resign .
Lord Darlington 's godson , journalist Reginald Cardinal , was appalled by the nature of the secret meetings in Darlington Hall ; concurring with Congressman Lewis 's earlier protestations , Cardinal told Stevens that Lord Darlington was a pawn , being used by the Nazis .
Despite Cardinal 's indignation , Stevens did not denounce or criticise his master .
Later , Lord Darlington expressed regret for having dismissed Ilsa and Irma , the two German - Jewish maids .
He asked Stevens to locate them and Stevens questioned Miss Kenton as to the maids ' whereabouts .
( It is revealed they had returned to Germany , but their ultimate fate is unknown . )
Eventually , Miss Kenton formed a relationship with a former co - worker , Tom Benn , who proposed marriage and asked Miss Kenton to move away with him to run a coastal boarding house .
Miss Kenton mentioned this proposal to Stevens , in effect offering him an ultimatum , but Stevens would not admit his feelings , offering Miss Kenton only his congratulations .
Miss Kenton left Darlington Hall prior to the outbreak of the Second World War .
Before Miss Kenton 's departure , Stevens found her crying in frustration , but the only response he could muster was to call her attention to a neglected domestic task .
En route to meeting Miss Kenton in 1958 , when asked by locals about his former employer , Stevens at first denies having served or even met Lord Darlington , but later admits to having served and respected him .
He meets Miss Kenton ( now Mrs Benn ) , and they reminisce .
Stevens mentions in conversation that Lord Darlington 's godson , Reginald Cardinal , was killed in the war .
He also says Lord Darlington died from a broken heart after the war , having sued a newspaper for libel , losing the suit and his reputation in the process .
Stevens reveals that in his declining years , Lord Darlington at times failed to recognise Stevens and carried on conversations with no one else in the room .
Miss Kenton declines Stevens 's offer to return to Darlington Hall , wishing instead to remain near her pregnant daughter .
After the meeting , Miss Kenton is emotional , while Stevens is still unable to demonstrate any feeling .
Back in Darlington Hall , Lewis asks Stevens if he remembers much of the old days , to which Stevens replies that he was too busy serving .
A pigeon then becomes trapped in the hall , and is eventually freed by the two men , leaving both Stevens and Darlington Hall far behind .
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
A film adaptation of the novel was originally planned to be directed by Mike Nichols from a script by Harold Pinter .
Some of Pinter 's script was used in the film , but , while Pinter was paid for his work , he asked to have his name removed from the credits , in keeping with his contract .
Christopher C. Hudgins observes : " During our 1994 interview , Pinter told [ Steven H. ]
Gale and me that he had learned his lesson after the revisions imposed on his script for The Handmaid 's Tale , which he has decided not to publish .
When his script for The Remains of the Day was radically revised by the James Ivory - Ismail Merchant partnership , he refused to allow his name to be listed in the credits " ( 125 ) .
Though no longer the director , Nichols remained associated with the project as one of its producers .
SETTINGS Section::::Settings .
A number of English country estates were used as locations for the film , partly owing to the persuasive power of Ismail Merchant , who was able to cajole permission for the production to borrow houses not normally open to the public .
Among them were Dyrham Park for the exterior of the house and the driveway , Powderham Castle ( staircase , hall , music room , bedroom ; used for the aqua - turquoise stairway scenes ) , Corsham Court ( library and dining room ) and Badminton House ( servants ' quarters , conservatory , entrance hall ) .
Luciana Arrighi , the production designer , scouted most of these locations .
Scenes were also shot in Weston - super - Mare , which stood in for Clevedon .
The pub where Mr Stevens stays is the Hop Pole in Limpley Stoke ; the shop featured is also in Limpley Stoke .
The pub where Miss Kenton and Mr Benn meet is the George Inn , Norton St Philip .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The character of Sir Geoffrey Wren is based loosely on that of Sir Oswald Mosley , a British fascist active in the 1930s .
Wren is depicted as a strict vegetarian .
Edward Wood ,
1st Earl of Halifax also appears in the film .
Lord Darlington tells Stevens that Halifax approved of the polish on the silver , and Halifax himself later appears when Darlington meets secretly with the German Ambassador and his aides at night .
Halifax was a chief architect of the British policy of appeasement from 1937 to 1939 .
The character of Congressman Jack Lewis in the film is a composite of two separate American characters in Kazuo Ishiguro 's novel : Congressman Lewis ( who attends the pre - WW2 conference in Darlington Hall ) , and Mr Farraday , who succeeds Lord Darlington as master of Darlington Hall .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The original score was composed by Richard Robbins .
It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score , but lost to Schindler 's List .
Track listing
* Opening Titles , Darlington Hall – 7:27
* * The Keyhole and the Chinaman – 4:14
*
* Tradition and Order – 1:51
*
* The Conference Begins – 1:33 * * Sei Mir Gegrüsst ( Schubert ) – 4:13 * *
The Cooks in the Kitchen – 1:34
*
* Sir Geoffrey Wren and Stevens , Sr . –
2:41 *
* You Mean a Great Deal to This House – 2:21 * * Loss and Separation – 6:19 * * Blue Moon – 4:57
* * Sentimental Love Story / Appeasement /
In the Rain – 5:22 * * A Portrait Returns / Darlington Hall
/ End Credits – 6:54 * CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film achieves a 95 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 40 reviews with an 8.4/10 average rating .
Its consensus states : " Smart , elegant , and blessed with impeccable performances from Anthony Hopkins and Emma Thompson , The Remains of the Day is a Merchant - Ivory classic . "
Roger Ebert particularly praised the film and called it " a subtle , thoughtful movie . "
In his review for The Washington Post , Desson Howe gave the film a favorable review , and said of it " Put Anthony Hopkins , Emma Thompson and James Fox together
and you can expect sterling performances , " praising their work in the film .
Vincent Canby of The New York Times said , in another favorable review , " Here 's a film for adults .
It 's also about time to recognize that Mr Ivory is one of our finest directors , something that critics tend to overlook because most of his films have been literary adaptations . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards , but won none : !
Award Nomination ! !
Winner
The film is # 64 at the British Film Institute 's " Top 100 British films " .
The film was also nominated for the American Film Institute 's " 100 Years ... 100 Passions " list .
NOTES
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Gale , Steven H. Sharp Cut : Harold Pinter 's Screenplays and the Artistic Process .
Lexington , Ky. : The University Press of Kentucky , 2003 .
* Gale , Steven H. , ed .
The Films of Harold Pinter .
Albany :
SUNY Press , 2001 .
* Hudgins , Christopher C. " Harold Pinter 's Lolita : ' My Sin , My Soul ' . "
In The Films of Harold Pinter .
Steven H. Gale , ed .
Albany ,
N.Y. :
SUNY Press , 2001 .
* Hudgins , Christopher C.
" Three Unpublished Harold Pinter Filmscripts : The Handmaid 's Tale , The Remains of the Day , Lolita . "
The Pinter Review :
Nobel Prize / Europe Theatre Prize Volume : 2005 – 2008 .
Francis Gillen with Steven H. Gale , eds .
Tampa , Fla. :
University of Tampa Press , 2008 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Remains of the Day at Merchant Ivory Productions