BECAUSE OF WINN - DIXIE Because of
Winn - Dixie is a children 's novel written by Kate DiCamillo , which was published in 2000 , and was the winner of a Newbery Honor distinction the following year .
In 2000 , the book won the Josette Frank Award , and in 2003 won the Mark Twain Award .
It was adapted as a 2005 family film directed by Wayne Wang , produced by Walden Media and Twentieth Century Fox , and starring AnnaSophia Robb as Opal Buloni .
In 2007 the U.S. National Education Association named Winn - Dixie one of its " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " , based on an online poll .
In 2012 it was ranked number 20 among all - time children 's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal – the first of three books by DiCamillo in the Top 100 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A 10-year - old girl named India Opal Buloni has just moved to a trailer park in the small town of Naomi , Florida , with her father who is known as The Preacher because he preaches at the local church .
While in the Winn - Dixie supermarket , Opal sees a scruffy dog wrecking the store .
Opal decides to take him home .
Miss Franny Block , a librarian , shares great stories about her past including one about her great - grandfather , whose family members died while he was fighting for the South in the Civil War .
He invented Littmus Lozenge candies , which tasted like root beer and strawberry but included a secret ingredient — sorrow .
Anyone who tasted the candies tasted sweetness mixed with sadness .
In Because of Winn - Dixie , these candies symbolize that even though life sometimes deals people a bit of sadness , there is always much to appreciate .
Opal learns that her sour faced neighbor , Amanda Wilkinson , lost her brother Carson because he drowned .
She vows to be nicer to her from then on .
Opal finds a dog collar that she wants to buy for Winn - Dixie
but she has no money and decides to work for the pet store to earn it .
Otis , the owner of Gertrude 's Pets , is unwilling to hire Opal as a cleaning girl , but she comes to work .
When Opal and Winn - Dixie step into the store , the animals panic when they see the big dog .
Otis plays his guitar to calm them .
Opal learns that Otis once went to jail for hurting a police officer after he was told that he could not play his guitar on the street because he was disturbing others .
Opal was riding her bike while Winn - Dixie pulled ahead and they meet a woman named Gloria Dump .
They become good friends .
Opal and recovering alcoholic Gloria Dump decide to host a small party , inspired by the party in Gone With the Wind , inviting everyone they know .
In the process , Opal becomes a friend to her former enemies , the brothers , Stevie and Dunlap Dewberry .
She also invites Amanda Wilkinson and Sweetie Pie Thomas , a girl who has no pet , and so had fallen in love with Winn - Dixie .
Otis and Miss Franny Block are also invited .
They set up everything outside , but it starts to rain , so they bring the party inside .
Opal ca n't find Winn - Dixie anywhere , even after searching the town .
Ten minutes later she returns to Gloria 's home to discover that Winn - Dixie had been there all the time , hiding because he is scared of storms .
The book ends with Otis playing his guitar and everyone singing one of The Preacher 's songs .
TRANSLATIONS Section::::Translations .
Translated to Persian , published in 2005 by Ghatreh .
REFERENCES