RACSO AND THE RATS OF NIMH Racso and the Rats of NIMH is the 1986 sequel to the popular book , Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH , written by
Jane Leslie Conly .
It continues where the previous book left off .
A review from the University of Chicago 's Center for Children 's books states that , " Conly has completely mastered the bucolic tone of the first book " , and that " Characterizations all around are more detailed than in O'Brien 's book " .
STORY Section::::Story .
In Racso and the Rats of NIMH , the Rats of NIMH have developed a self - sustaining community in Thorn Valley , where they are completely isolated from humanity .
Timothy Frisby , the youngest son of Mrs. Frisby , travels from his family 's home to Thorn Valley .
( Although his mother is an ordinary mouse , Timothy has inherited the extremely high intellect and long lifespan of his father , NIMH escapee Jonathan . )
During his trip , Timothy meets Racso , the son of Jenner ( a rat of NIMH introduced in first book who is widely considered to be a traitor ) .
Timothy and Racso arrive at Thorn Valley , but while Timothy integrates and begins receiving the same accelerated education as the rat children , Racso , coming from a colony of savage urban rats , has trouble adjusting to life in a cultured town of rodents .
Racso is also burdened by his family history , as his father deserted the rats ' previous colony , placing them in danger of extinction .
Life in Thorn Valley is suddenly threatened when humans begin planning to build a dam there , flooding the entire area .
Racso , Timothy , and the entire rat colony must observe and sabotage the dam construction before the valley is underwater .
CONNECTIONS TO PREVIOUS WORKS MRS .
FRISBY AND THE RATS OF NIMH Section::::Connections to previous works .
Section::::Mrs .
Frisby and the Rats of NIMH .
Racso and the Rats of NIMH is a direct sequel to the Newbery Medal - winning book Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH by Jane Leslie
Conly 's late father , Robert C. O'Brien .
Conly wrote her sequel long after O'Brien 's death in 1973 , so even though Conly 's book attempts to answer many of the open - ended questions posed by the original , it is still Conly 's work and not O'Brien 's .
One of the most anticipated events of the first book was the possibility of Mrs. Frisby 's children ( Teresa , Martin , Timothy , and Cynthia ) having grown up to visit the rats themselves and partake in adventures of their own .
Within this book , however , only Timothy is shown as having actually left for Thorn Valley .
Teresa and Cynthia are still at home , and Martin has started a family of his own .
While it ties up this plot point cleanly , many readers criticized this , feeling that the other children had much potential and deserved more exploration .
Another question from the first book that Conly chose to answer relates to the fate of Justin , one of the rats who was a major character in the first book .
In the end of the original story , O'Brien hints that Justin sacrificed his life when he went back to rescue a fallen rat .
However , Conly chose to keep Justin alive and well in her sequel .
Another subject in which more information was brought to light was that of Jenner .
In the first book it was hinted that Jenner had died , but in an event prior to those of the book .
Jenner had disagreed with Nicodemus over leaving the city , and took a group of separatists to start a new colony .
In the end of the first book , it is revealed that NIMH had found a number of unusual rats dead , and it is assumed that this is Jenner 's group .
However , according to the sequel , Jenner had in fact managed to escape the fate of the others ( the first book having left it inconclusive whether " six or seven " dead rats were found , Jenner 's group having had seven ) .
Although he and the few surviving separatists had strong philosophical opposition toward the Thorn Valley group , they kept their distance , still believing that their way of life was better .
In the sequel , it is revealed that Jenner had started a family , which Racso happens to be a part of .
Jenner later makes a surprise appearance in the story and shows that despite his questionable loyalties , he cares strongly for his son .
Some readers feel that the inclusion of Jenner as an antihero was heavily influenced by the film adaptation of the first book , The Secret of NIMH , in which Jenner played a much more central role than he did in the book .
However , Jenner only turns up rarely in the book , mainly in flashbacks , and is killed off - page during the climax .
THE SECRET OF NIMH
Section::::The Secret of NIMH .
The book sequel seems to be subtly influenced by Don Bluth 's film adaptation of the book , The Secret of NIMH .
Examples of this include Jeremy 's more whimsical personality and Mrs. Frisby 's red cape .
Despite a few plot similarities Racso and the Rats of NIMH has no connection to The Secret of NIMH 's sequel , .
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
*
Conly , Jane Leslie ; Lubin , Leonard ;
Conly , Jane ; Lubin , Leonard B. ; and O'Brien , Robert C. ( 1988 ) .
Racso and the Rats of NIMH ( reprint ed . )
HarperTrophy . .