PALO VERDE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION
The Palo Verde Generating Station is a nuclear power plant located near Tonopah , Arizona , in western Arizona .
It is located about due west of downtown Phoenix , Arizona , and it is located near the Gila River , which is dry save for the rainy season in late summer .
The Palo Verde Generating Station is the largest power plant in the United States by net generation .
Its average electric power production is about 3.3 gigawatts ( GW ) , and this power serves about four million people .
The Arizona Public Service Company ( APS ) operates and owns 29.1 % of the plant .
Its other major owners include the Salt River Project ( 17.5 % ) , the El Paso Electric Company ( 15.8 % ) , Southern California Edison ( 15.8 % ) , PNM Resources ( 10.2 % ) , the Southern California Public Power Authority ( 5.9 % ) , and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power ( 5.7 % ) .
The Palo Verde Generating Station is located in the Arizona desert , and is the only large nuclear power plant in the world that is not located near a large body of water .
The power plant evaporates the water from the treated sewage from several nearby cities and towns to provide the cooling of the steam that it produces .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Palo Verde Generating Station is located on of land , and it consists of three pressurized water reactors , each with an original capacity to produce 1.27 GW of electric power .
After a power uprate , each reactor is now able to produce 1.4 GW of electric power .
The usual power production capacity is about 70 to 95 percent of this .
This nuclear power plant is a major source of electric power for the densely populated parts of Southern Arizona and Southern California , e.g. the Phoenix , and Tucson , Arizona , Los Angeles , and San Diego , California metropolitan areas .
The Palo Verde Generating Station produces about 35 percent of the electric power that is generated in Arizona .
This power plant became fully operational by 1988 , and it took twelve years to build and cost about 5.9 billion dollars .
This power plant employs about 2,055 full - time employees .
The Palo Verde Generating Station supplies electricity at an operating cost ( including fuel and maintenance ) of 4.3 cents per kilowatt - hour in 2015 .
As of 2002 , Palo Verde supplied electricity at 1.33 cents per kilowatt - hour ; that price was cheaper than the cost of coal ( 2.26 cents per kW·h ) or natural gas ( 4.54 cents per kW·h ) in the region .
However , this power was more expensive than hydroelectric power ( 0.63 cents per kW·h ) .
In 2002 , the wholesale value of the electricity produced was 2.5 cents per kW·h .
By 2007 , the wholesale value of electricity at the Palo Verde Generating Station was 6.33 cents per kW·h .
According to the Arizona Public Service Company , power generation operations to date at Palo Verde have offset the emission of almost 484 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide ( the equivalent of taking up to 84 million cars off the road for one year ) ; more than 253,000 tonnes of sulfur dioxide ; and 618,000 tonnes of nitrogen oxide .
The company noted , " If Palo Verde were to cease operation at the end of the original license , replacement cost of natural gas generation — the least expensive alternative — would total $ 36 billion over the 20-year license renewal period . "
Due to its location in the Arizona desert , Palo Verde is the only nuclear generating facility in the world that is not located adjacent to a large body of above - ground water .
The facility evaporates water from the treated sewage of several nearby municipalities to meet its cooling needs .
20 billion US gallons ( 76,000,000 m³ ) of treated water are evaporated each year .
This water represents about 25 % of the annual overdraft of the Arizona Department of Water Resources Phoenix Active Management Area .
At the nuclear plant site , the wastewater is further treated and stored in an reservoir for use in the plant 's cooling towers .
The nuclear steam supply for each unit was designed and supplied by Combustion Engineering , designated the System 80 standard design – a predecessor of the newer standard System 80 + design .
Each primary system originally supplied 3.817 GW of thermal power to the secondary ( steam ) side of each plant .
The design is a so - called 2 × 4 , with each of four main reactor coolant pumps circulating more than 111,000 gallons per minute of primary - side water through 2 large steam generators .
The main turbine generators were supplied by General Electric .
When installed they were the largest in the world , capable of generating 1.447 GW of electricity each .
They remain the largest 60 Hz turbine generators .
Bechtel Power Corporation was the Architect / Engineer / Constructor for the facility initially under the direction of the Arizona Nuclear Power Project ( a joint APS / SRP endeavor ) , later managed exclusively by Arizona Public Service .
Edwin E. Van
Brunt was the key APS executive in charge of engineering , construction , and early operations of the plant .
William G. Bingham was the Bechtel Chief Engineer for the project .
Arthur von Boennighausen was one of the Owner 's Representatives for Arizona Public Service .
Unlike most multi - unit nuclear power plants , each unit at Palo Verde is an independent power plant , sharing only a few minor systems .
The reactor containment buildings are some of the largest in the world at about enclosed .
The three containment domes over the reactors are made of thick concrete .
The facility 's design incorporates many features to enhance safety by addressing issues identified earlier in the operation of commercial nuclear reactors .
The design is also one of the most spacious internally , providing exceptional room for the conduct of operations and maintenance by the operating staff .
The Palo Verde 500
kV switchyard is a key point in the western states power grid , and is used as a reference point in the pricing of electricity across the southwest United States .
Many 500 kV power lines from companies like Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas & Electric send power generated at the plant to Los Angeles and San Diego via Path 46 , respectively .
In addition , due to both the strategic interconnections of the substation and the large size of the generating station , the Western Electricity Coordinating Council considers a simultaneous loss of 2 of the 3 units the worst case contingency for system stability .
The owners applied for a construction permit for two additional units in the late 1970s , however these units were canceled before the permits were issued for economical risk reasons .
Contrary to popular belief , the two additional units would not have been on the same arc as the three existing units — they would have been arranged south of Unit 3 on a north – south axis .
The existing units are the only commercial reactors currently in use in the USA that were engineered to operate on 100 % MOX fuel cores , however because nuclear fuel is not reprocessed in the USA they have always operated on fresh UOX fuel .
SECURITY Section::::Security .
Palo Verde was of such strategic importance , due to a variety of its features , that it and Phoenix were documented by the former Soviet Union as target locations in the event of nuclear conflict during the Cold War .
In March 2003 , National Guard troops were dispatched to protect the site during the launch of the Iraq War amidst fears of a terrorist attack .
The site team and nearby town of Tonopah remain a key focus of work in regard to homeland security , ranking in importance along with Arizona 's major cities , military bases , ports of entry , and tourist sites .
Security guards working for the utility are armed with rifles .
They check identification and search vehicles entering the plant .
Other security measures protect the reactors , including X - ray machines , explosive " sniffers " , and heavy guarded turnstiles that require special identification to open .
These security measures are standard at every nuclear power plant in the United States .
On 2 November 2007 , a pipe with gunpowder residue was found in the bed of a contract worker 's pickup truck during normal screening of vehicles .
It was then confirmed to contain explosives by local police .
Arizona Public Service then initiated a seven - hour security lockdown of the plant , allowing no one to enter or exit the plant .
The site also declared a Notification of Unusual Event , which is the lowest of four Emergency Plan event classifications .
SAFETY CONCERNS Section::::Safety concerns .
In an Arizona Republic article dated February 22 , 2007 , it was announced that the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations ( INPO ) had decided to place Palo Verde into Category 4 , making it one of the most closely monitored nuclear power plants in the United States .
The decision was made after the INPO discovered that electrical relays in a diesel generator did not function during tests in July and September 2006 .
The finding came as the " final straw " for INPO , after Palo Verde had several citations over safety concerns and violations over the preceding years , starting with the finding of a ' dry pipe ' in the plant 's emergency core - cooling system in 2004 .
During a March 24 , 2009 public meeting , the NRC announced that it cleared the Confirmatory Action Letter ( CAL ) , and has returned Palo Verde to Column 1 on the NRC Action Matrix .
The commission 's letter stated that " The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has determined that the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station has made sufficient performance improvement that it can reduce its level of inspection oversight . "
" Performance at Palo Verde has improved substantially and we are adjusting our oversight accordingly , " said Elmo E. Collins , NRC 's Region IV Administrator .
" But we will closely monitor the plant .
We are reducing our oversight , but not our vigilance . "
To address safety concerns , fifty - eight Nuclear Sirens were installed within a ten - mile radius of the plant .
This area is known to locals as the EPZ ( Emergency Planning Zone ) .
The sirens will wail periodically in the event of any Nuclear emergency .
All sirens are tested yearly in November .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The selection of the site for Palo Verde was controversial .
Critics claim that the site was not the first choice because it was in the middle of the desert , it had little or no water supply , and it had prevailing westerly winds .
These would have put the Phoenix - Scottsdale metropolitan area into jeopardy in the event of a major accident .
Critics claimed that that site was selected over alternatives because it was owned by a relative of Keith Turley , a person who received almost two million dollars for the land .
Keith Turley was the president of APS , and also a member of the " Phoenix 40 " .
Units 1 and 2 went into commercial operation in 1986 and Unit 3 in 1988 .
On November 18 , 2005 , the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission announced approval of power uprates at two of Palo Verde 's reactors .
According to the NRC press release , " The power uprates at each unit , located near Phoenix , Arizona , increases the net generating capacity of the reactors from 1,270 to 1,313 , and 1,317 megawatts of electric power respectively , for Units 1 and 3 .
On April 21 , 2011 , the NRC renewed the operating licenses for Palo Verde 's three reactors , extending their service lives from forty to sixty years .
SEISMIC RISK Section::::Seismic risk .
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission 's estimate of the risk each year of an earthquake intense enough to cause core damage to the reactor at Palo Verde was 1 in 26,316 , ranking it # 18 in the nation according to an NRC study published in August 2010 .
SURROUNDING POPULATION
Section::::Surrounding population .
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission defines two emergency planning zones around nuclear power plants : a plume exposure pathway zone with a radius of , concerned primarily with exposure to , and inhalation of , airborne radioactive contamination , and an ingestion pathway zone of about , concerned primarily with ingestion of food and liquid contaminated by radioactivity .
The 2010 U.S. population within of Palo Verde was 4,255 , an increase of 132.9 percent in a decade , according to an analysis of U.S. Census data for msnbc.com .
The 2010 U.S. population within was 1,999,858 , an increase of 28.6 percent since 2000 .
Cities within 50 miles include Phoenix ( 47 miles to city center ) .
SEE ALSO
* List of largest power stations in the United States
* Largest nuclear power plants in the United States
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S Nuclear Plants - Palo VerdeEnergy