HORSESHOES Horseshoes is a lawn game played between two people ( or two teams of two people ) using four horseshoes and two throwing targets ( stakes ) set in a lawn or sandbox area .
The game is played by the players alternating turns tossing horseshoes at stakes in the ground , which are traditionally placed apart .
Modern games use a more stylized U - shaped bar , about twice the size of an actual horseshoe .
GAME PLAY
NHPA OFFICIAL RULES OF THE GAME OF HORSESHOES Section::::Game play .
Section::::NHPA Official Rules of the Game of Horseshoes .
The National Horseshoe Pitchers Association(NHPA ) , the sport of Horseshoes governing body maintain an up - to - date set of rules and their specifications of the game on their website .
Widely accepted as being the official way to play the game , they outline the style of play , the two most common scoring methods ( cancellation and count - all ) , acceptable equipment , and exact court specifications as well as additional methods of organizing tournament and league competitions .
There are other entities that have their own versions of the game and sanction their own events , but the largest recognized volume of sanctioned tournaments and leagues ( by far ) are those of the NHPA .
BOH CUP STYLE OF PLAY Section::::BOH Cup style of play .
The game begins with a horseshoe toss to decide who goes first .
The winner of the toss throws both horseshoes — one at a time — at the opposite stake , and then the second player throws both of their horseshoes — again , one at a time — at their end .
After scoring , the next round is done in reverse order , or by throwing back at the original stake .
Play continues until one player has at least 15 points at the end of a round .
NHPA sanctioned games are generally played to 40 points , or a shoe limit of 40 or 50 shoes .
The horseshoes can be made of either plastic or metal .
SCORING
Section::::Scoring .
In horseshoes , there are two ways to score : by throwing " ringers " or by throwing the horseshoe nearest to the stake .
A ringer is a horseshoe that has been thrown in such a way as to completely encircle the stake .
Disputes are settled by using a straightedge to touch the two points at the ends of the horseshoe , called " heel calks " .
If the straightedge does not touch the stake at any point , the throw is classified as a ringer .
One player pitches both shoes in succession to one pit , followed by the other player .
This is formally called an inning .
Normally only one pitcher can score points per inning , however some leagues and tournaments play " count all " , in which all points in each inning are counted .
A live shoe that is not a ringer , but comes to rest six inches ( 6 " ) or closer to the stake , has a value of one ( 1 ) point
( alternate scoring methods give 2 points if the horseshoe leans on the stake .
Aka a " leaner " ) .
If both of one player 's horseshoes are closer than the opponent 's , two points are scored .
A ringer scores three points .
In the case of one ringer and a closer horseshoe , both horseshoes are scored for a total of four points .
If a player throws two ringers , that player scores six points .
If each player throws a ringer , the ringers cancel and no points are scored .
If two ringers are thrown by one player and one ringer by the opponent , the player throwing two ringers scores three points .
This is typically called " two dead and three " or " three ringers three " for score keeping purposes .
Such occurrences are called " dead ringers " and are still used toward the pitcher / ringer average .
Back - yard games can be played to any number of points that is agreed upon , but are usually to 21 points , win by 2 .
In most sanctioned tournaments the handicapped divisions pitch 50 shoe games , most points win .
If there is a tie , the pitchers pitch an additional 2 innings ( alternating pitch ) until the tie is broken .
Championship divisions , or non - handicapped divisions are pitched to 40 points , regardless of the number of shoes pitched .
In Philadelphia when a player tops another players ringer the player is awarded 6 points .
Single points in amateur games must measure 6 inches or less from any part of the shoe to the nearest part of the stake .
Also , a game can not be won when an opposing player , tossing a shoe , bumps an opponent 's shoe to cause the opponent to reach the winning score
be it eleven or twenty - one .
The game - winning point must be attained by the person tossing the horseshoe pertaining to his own score .
Examples : If a player has 10 points and an opponent has 8 points , and the player with 10 points tosses a horseshoe and bumps his opponent 's horseshoe for a ringer , the opponent scores 3 points for a total of 11 points , but does not win the game because of the 2 point rule .
If a player has 9 points and an opponent 8 points and the player with 9 points tosses a horseshoe and bumps his opponent 's horseshoe for a ringer , the opponent can not score 3 points , because the winning point must be attained by his own toss .
However , the opponent can take two points , bringing his total point score to 10 .
This scoring system gives rise to the popular expression " Close only counts in horseshoes " , or alternatively " Close only counts in horseshoes and hand grenades " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The games of horseshoes and quoits are closely related .
For information on the early history of horseshoes , see the entry on quoits .
At the beginning of the twentieth century , there was general agreement about how horseshoes should be played , but details differed .
Organizers of horseshoe matches published their own rules in local newspapers .
The most dramatic difference from the modern game was the peg or pin , as the center stake was called , which protruded only two inches from the ground .
The horseshoes were true horseshoes , nearly circular in shape , and , as in quoits , the expectation was that a ringer would land around the peg and remain there , some insisting the shoe not touch the peg .
In the 1907 " World Championship " , shoes that rested two feet from the peg were declared foul , and cost the player a half - point each .
A player could score one or two points if his shoes were closer to the peg than his opponent 's .
Ringers scored five points , and leaners , three .
The scoring rewarded with ten points a player who capped or slid under an opponent 's ringer with one of their own , a difficult achievement with a two - inch peg .
Topping two ringers by an opponent with a ringer of one 's own earned fifteen points , and two ringers topping two ringers counted twenty - one points .
There were similar rewards for topping a leaner with a leaner or a leaner with a ringer .
In 1920 , the Chicago Horseshoe Tournament prescribed a peg eight inches above the ground .
A shoe resting two feet from the peg was still foul , but no longer cost the player points .
A distinction was made between a perfect ringer , which circled the peg when it struck the ground , and a scratch ringer , which circled the peg in some other manner .
These scored five points and three points respectively .
Leaners were also worth three points .
There were no bonuses for topping opponents .
By 1925 , local newspapers were citing the rules used at the national tournament , " as adopted by the national association January 1 , 1925 .
" Stakes were 40 feet apart and projected upward 10 inches .
The scoring was close to what is observed today , without penalty points , bonuses for topping , or special attention to leaners .
Even in more recent years , local rules continue .
" Whether a ' leaner ' will count as one or two points is up to the home team " in one contest .
As successful as the NHPA has been , there are still those who find a park , drive stakes in the ground about thirteen strides apart , and wait for others to appear once the chiming begins .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO * Cornhole * Digor * Gorodki * Quoits * Washers * Muckers REFERENCES
* Kane , E E. " How to Play Horseshoes " .
Lifescript .
N.p . , 4 June 2008 .
Web .
14 Oct. 2010 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rules , National Horseshoe Pitching Association .
* How to Pitch Horseshoes , NHPA .
* A Fictional Short Story About Horseshoes : Huggy and the Eggtones , clydepark.com .
* A biography of Frank Jackson , first national champion * World Horseshoe Pitching Champions