Q - SQUARED
Q - Squared ( full title – Q - Squared ) is a non - canon Star Trek novel by Peter David .
It spent two weeks on the New York Times bestseller list in 1994 .
Q - Squared was released in July 1994 as one in a series of " Giant Novels " for the Star Trek line from Pocket Books .
Although the novel was primarily based on and around the characters of , this book was particularly notable for bringing together the characters of Q from Star Trek : The Next Generation and Trelane from .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Trelane , who first appeared in the original Star Trek episode " The Squire of Gothos " , is revealed to be a member of the Q Continuum .
He taps into the power of the continuum and uses this ability to tamper with time and reality , resulting in the intersection of three different parallel universes which are also referred to as time " tracks " .
Track A is a universe in which Beverly Crusher 's husband Jack never died , and now serves as captain of the Enterprise with Jean - Luc Picard as his first officer ; in this universe , Jack 's son Wesley died as a boy and Jack and Beverly divorced .
Track B is the traditional universe depicted on Star Trek : The Next Generation .
Track C is akin to the more militaristic alternate universe shown in the Next Generation episode " Yesterday 's Enterprise " , in which the Federation is at war with the Klingons .
Q , who had been charged with the task of " mentoring " Trelane ( a task
each " adult " Q must accept at least once for an " adolescent " Q ) , enlists the help of Picard and the crew of the Enterprise - D in the three different timelines in order to teach Trelane discipline , and eventually , to stop him from destroying the fabric of the universe by collapsing the alternate universes together .
When the tracks begin to merge , the characters from separate universes begin to appear to one another , sometimes with disastrous results .
The Tashas of Track A and C encounter each other , with Tasha - A reacting with amazement at her C counterpart 's harsh appearance ; Jack Crusher confronts his ex - wife about the affair she is having with Track - A Picard ; during the argument , which Track - B Picard witnesses , she is accidentally killed ; additionally , members of Track C attempt to kill Worf , and believe all the members of the crew from the other two universes are really Klingon impostors .
Eventually , Q manages to overpower Trelane and the universes are once again separated , though not always perfectly ( at the end of the novel , Track - A Data appears to be stuck in Track C ) .
Q also spends part of the novel lost in time and space , trapped by the barrier around the galaxy ; this relates to the original series episode " Where No Man Has Gone Before " .
PARALLEL UNIVERSES
Section::::Parallel universes .
The plot of this novel continually shifts among three different parallel universes , or ' Tracks ' , each identified by a letter : * Track B is the normal Star Trek universe .
* Track A is a variation of the Trekverse , with
several differences : * James Kirk 's middle initial is R ( as shown in the original series episode " Where No Man Has Gone Before " , which apparently takes place in the Track A universe as James Kirk 's middle initial is usually T ) .
* Jack Crusher , who did not die under Picard 's command , is commanding officer of the Enterprise - D. He and Beverly are divorced ; their son Wesley died in an accident while still a toddler .
*
Geordi La Forge is a nurse in sickbay with cloned eye implants instead of his VISOR .
* Jean - Luc Picard , broken in rank by a court martial after his failure to defend the Stargazer at Maxia , is Enterprise 's first officer .
He and Beverly become romantically involved , with disastrous results when Jack discovers their affair .
*
Data is a " human - oid " ( a positronic brain in an organic body ) , and is engaged in an ongoing affair with Tasha Yar .
* William Riker and Kira Nerys have been prisoners of the Romulan Star Empire for several years .
Riker and Deanna Troi were married prior to his capture , and have a son who has never met his father .
*
Worf was not adopted by a Federation couple ; instead , he was raised in the Klingon Empire as a warrior .
He rescues Riker and Kira and kills their Romulan overseers .
* Track C is a variant of the " Klingon war " timeline as seen in " Yesterday 's Enterprise " , but one in which the Enterprise - D came across the Enterprise - C several hours after it passed into the future , and thus could not be sent back to Narendra III in 2344 to prevent the war with the Klingons ( the rift had closed and the Enterprise - C 's crew were all dead ) .
In addition , the final chapter of the book is called ' Derailment ' , in which the various realities coalesce into a single timeline .
This chapter ties all of the plots visited over the length of the book together , concluding with Q 's final confrontation with the now - deranged Trelane .
Q CONNECTIONS
Section::::Q connections .
The role of Q was originated by John de Lancie in the first episode of Star Trek :
The Next Generation , " Encounter at Farpoint " .
John de Lancie also provided the reading of the novel in the audiobook edition .
Peter David previously wrote the novel Q - in - Law for Pocket Books .
This novel also featured the main character of Q and was based in the continuity of Star Trek : The Next Generation .
CULTURAL REFERENCES Section::::Cultural references .
In one sequence of the novel , Trelane brings to life the character of Winnie the Pooh , who was originally created by A. A. Milne and is perhaps best known through the films , television series , and merchandise produced by Disney .
In the universe of Track A , the bartender in Ten - Forward is named Caryn Johnson , replacing the usual character Guinan .
In real life , Caryn Johnson is the birth name of Whoopi Goldberg , who played Guinan on Star Trek : The Next Generation .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Pocket Books ' listings for the book in eBook and eAudio formats .