CLIMATE OF SALT LAKE CITY
The climate of Salt Lake City varies widely .
Lying in the Salt Lake Valley , the city is surrounded by mountains and the Great Salt Lake .
The city has four distinct seasons : a cold , snowy winter ; a hot , dry summer ; and two relatively wet transition periods .
The climate of the Salt Lake City area is generally subhumid , not semi - arid as often claimed .
Under the Köppen climate classification , Salt Lake City is in the transition zone between a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) and a hot - summer humid continental climate ( Dfa ) , with relatively drier summers than the rest of the year .
The Pacific Ocean is the primary influence on the weather , contributing storms from about October to May , with spring being the wettest season .
Snow falls frequently during the winter , contributed largely by the lake - effect from the Great Salt Lake .
The only source of precipitation in the summer is monsoon moisture moving north from the Gulf of California .
Summers are hot , frequently reaching above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) , while winters are cold and snowy .
However , winters are warmer than one would expect at this elevation and latitude , due to the Rocky Mountains to the east and north that usually block powerful polar highs from affecting the state during the winter .
Temperatures rarely fall below 0
° F ( -18 ° C ) , but frequently stay below freezing .
Temperature inversions during winter can lead to thick overnight fog and daytime haze in the valley as cool air , moisture , and pollutants are trapped in the valley by surrounding mountains .
OVERVIEW TEMPERATURES Section::::Temperatures .
Winter temperatures are not as extreme as might be expected , given the elevation and latitude ( 40 ° 45'N ) of the city .
The Rocky Mountains to the east and northeast of the state block most cold waves from polar highs positioned in the Great Plains from reaching the city .
The frigidly cold air that does affect the city must come directly from the north or north - northwest from western Canada through fewer and lower intervening mountains .
Temperatures seldom fall below Salt Lake City has experienced sub - zero temperatures during only 4 storm cycles in the last 10 years .
However , the average sub - zero days in a year is 2.3 .
Salt Lake City averages 26 days with high temperatures at or below freezing .
In winter , warm air from the Desert Southwest is usually only drawn up to the city in advance of a cold front arriving from the northwest .
January is the coldest month with an average temperature of .
Salt Lake City 's record low maximum temperature is , set on December 22 , 1990 , during an extended period of frigid Arctic air , and its overall record low temperature is , set on February 9 , 1933 during a historic cold air surge from the north .
During spring , temperatures warm steadily and rapidly .
Wintry weather is usually last experienced by early - to - mid April .
Summery weather first arrives in early to mid May ; the earliest temperature on record was on May 2 .
Major cold fronts typically stop arriving in late May or early June .
Summer temperatures are hot , although are moderated somewhat by the cool breezes from the Great Salt Lake and by the city 's elevation .
The lack of cold fronts in summer allows the temperatures to become consistently hot due to powerful , long - lasting high pressure .
Occasional thunderstorms give almost the only relief in temperatures .
In an average year , 5 days hotter than , 23 days greater than , and 56 days greater than can be expected . .
However , such days also have very low humidity .
The low humidity and the altitude create ideal conditions for radiational cooling , and hence , large swings in temperature .
Summer nights are rather cool ; the record low even in July is .
July is the warmest month , with an average temperature of .
Salt Lake City 's record high minimum temperature is , set on July 18 , 2016 , and its record high temperature is , first set on July 26 , 1960 and again on July 13 , 2002 ( although the temperature in 2002 was slightly higher ) .
The last summer - like weather is typically experienced in mid - September ; the latest 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) temperature was recorded on September 30 .
Temperatures cool down rapidly in fall .
The first major cold fronts typically arrive anytime from mid - September to early October .
The first winter - like weather is usually experienced in early - to - mid November .
Salt Lake City 's average yearly temperature is , and the freeze - free period lasts an average of 167 days , from April 30 to October 15 , although it has lasted anywhere from 124 to 236 days .
Freezing temperatures have occurred as early as September 13 ( in 1928 ) , and as late as May 28 ( in 1954 ) .
PRECIPITATION
Section::::Precipitation .
Both precipitation and humidity are highest from March through May and lowest from June through mid - September .
Major sources of precipitation are winter snow storms originating in the Gulf of Alaska , late winter and spring rains from the Pineapple Express created in Hawaiian waters , and summer monsoons from the Gulf of California .
The airport averages of precipitation per year , with bench areas receiving up to , mainly due to increased snowfall .
May is the wettest month , averaging of precipitation .
Average year - round humidity is 55 % .
The summer monsoon rising from Mexico and Arizona passes through the region beginning in mid - July and continuing into September , bringing intense but short - lived thunderstorm activity .
Tornadoes have been known to occur during this time period , the most notable recent example being in 1999 when an F2 tornado struck downtown Salt Lake City , causing extensive damage and resulting in one death .
Many of these thunderstorms consist of dry lightning , which occurs when humidity is too low to support rainfall and the rain evaporates before reaching the ground .
This is the main cause of wildfires in Utah during summer .
Smoke from such fires in nearby areas sometimes make their way into the valley .
Despite the intensity of the thunderstorms , the low humidity , short duration , and isolationism of the thunderstorms all play a part in making this the driest season .
July is the driest month , with only 0.72 in ( 18.3 mm ) of precipitation on average .
In late fall , the Pacific Ocean usually begins to kick in again , and starting in late September precipitation begins to increase .
During late summer and fall , remnants of tropical cyclones from the East Pacific occasionally reach Utah , resulting in heavy tropical rains .
Weather events such as hail , freezing rain , and sleet are uncommon in Salt Lake City .
When they do occur , they are of short duration and rarely accumulate .
The record precipitation for a single month occurred in September 1982 , with , largely due to the remnants of Hurricane Olivia .
The record 24‑hour precipitation occurred from April 22–23 , 1957 , when fell .
The first snowfall of the season is usually recorded in October , although significant snowfall usually does not occur until mid - to - late November .
However , snow has been recorded in every month of the year in the mountains .
Snow fell in the valley as early as September 17 ( in 1965 ) .
January averages the most snowfall of any month , with .
Snowfall is common through mid - March , but the last snowfall of the season usually occurs in early or mid - April , although measurable snow has been recorded on the valley floor as late as May 18 ( in 1977 ) .
However , significant snow can fall in March and in rare cases even April .
Measurable snow falls on average from November 6 through April 18 .
The airport also averages of snow in a year , which is more than most Great Plains and Mid - Atlantic locations .
However , bench locations near the mountains receive substantially more , reaching 80 to 100 in ( 200 to 255 cm ) annually .
The four ski resorts located in Big and Little Cottonwood each average more than 500 " of snow per year .
These high snowfall totals can be credited to the lake effect , in which snow storms passing over the Great Salt Lake are amplified by the warm waters of the lake .
The lake effect is usually strongest from mid - fall through mid - winter , when lake waters are warmer and land temperatures are cold enough to support snow .
Blizzards are very rare in the Salt Lake City valley due to a rarity of extreme winds .
Although average snowfall is relatively high , large snowstorms of more than about 12 inches ( 30 cm ) are rare in the valley .
In addition , average winter temperatures in the city are usually not cold enough to support snow cover all winter long .
The maximum snow depth recorded in the city was 26 in ( 66 cm ) on January 11 , 1993 .
January 1993 was the snowiest month on record , with .
The record 24 hour snowfall occurred from February 24–25 , 1998 , when 18.9 in ( 48 cm ) fell , while the record single storm snowfall occurred from January 6–10 , 1993 , with .
The snowiest season on record was 1951 - 1952 , when fell , while the least snowy winter on record was 1939 - 1940 , with .
The airport averages around 37 and 97 days of snow and precipitation , respectively , each year .
Daily sunshine hours range from a low of 3.6 in December to a high of 12.3 in July , all for a bountiful total of nearly 3030 hours per year . ! ! !
OTHER WEATHER EVENTS
Section::::Other weather events .
The phenomena El Niño and La Niña also affect precipitation along the Great Basin , bringing occasional cycles of drought and flooding .
The largest recent flood in Salt Lake City occurred in 1983 .
Triggered by a powerful El Niño , an exceptionally large snowpack caused flooding and massive damage .
City Creek burst from its underground diversion and flooded the city .
Some streets , such as State Street and 1300 South , were converted into makeshift rivers to accommodate the overflowing creek .
Some flooding also occurred in 1987 , when the Great Salt Lake reached its all - time maximum water level .
A 2010 study indicates that this record event occurred during an overlapping period of three prominent climate cycles that are unique in the region .
Significant mid - winter temperature inversions often occur in the Salt Lake Valley .
These inversions , which often last for days and weeks , are most pronounced in mid - winter , although milder inversions sometimes occur during other seasons .
Winter temperature inversions cause cold , foggy and hazy valley conditions , with sunny and somewhat warmer conditions prevailing in the surrounding mountains .
Temperature inversions trap valley air pollutants , which often rise to unhealthy levels .
Humidity is only high enough and temperatures cold enough for fog to occur during mid - winter , although haze and smog can be found year - round .
Inversions occur when strong areas of high pressure remain parked over the Great Basin .
It usually takes a cold front to force out or break down the high pressure .
Consequently , inversions are rare in spring and fall , when the weather takes on a more progressive pattern , with frequent fronts moving through .
Such recurring and persistent patterns of inversions follow a unique timescale of about 30 days , providing a means for long - range weather prediction .
Such prediction of persistent inversion up to 30 days has been made operational .
Tornadoes are also relatively uncommon .
However , there has been at least one damaging tornado in the city .
The Salt Lake City Tornado of August 11 , 1999 , which killed one person and injured 60 , resulted in only the second ever fatality from a tornado in Utah , and caused about $ 500 million in damage .
As a result of extended drought patterns , Salt Lake City constructed several reservoirs to hold excess water during flood periods and provide water during drought conditions .
Additionally , artesian wells and water siphoned from Utah Lake miles to the south act as alternate water sources for the city .
RECENT WEATHER EVENTS Section::::Recent weather events .
Utah was in a consistent drought from late 1998 through 2004 , although experts warn that the drought - breaking conditions experienced in 2004 and 2005 could actually just be a break in a more extended drought pattern .
July 2003 set the record for the warmest month ever in Salt Lake City .
2003 overall was the second warmest year on record , and recorded the second - warmest January , August , and October on record , but with the warmest month ever ( July ) .
January 2003 saw a record high January temperature of 63 ° F ( 17 ° C ) and record low January snowfall ( a trace ) .
That winter was the sixth warmest and third least snowy on record .
May 2003 also set a record high May temperature of 99 ° F ( 37 ° C ) on two consecutive days .
July 2002 also saw a record - tying high temperature of 107 ° F ( 41 ° C ) , while July 2003 saw a record high minimum temperature ( 80 ° F ; 27 ° C ) and a record streak of 100 degree weather ( July contributed 10 of that summer 's 24 days over 100 degrees ) .
In late December 2003 , a large snowstorm dumped more than 18 inches ( 460 mm ) of snow across the valley , with up to 40 inches ( 1,000 mm ) in high bench areas and up to 100 inches ( 2,500 mm ) in the Wasatch Range .
From December 25–29 , the official station saw 21.9 inches ( 56 cm ) .
This snowstorm also caused widespread power outages .
Accompanied by subsequent snowstorms and a very cold January and February , snow from this storm remained on the ground for the remainder of the winter .
From January 3–26 , Salt Lake City spent a record amount of time below freezing .
January and February were both very cold , but this was followed by the fourth - warmest March on record , which also saw a record - tying March high .
Before 2005 , 1998 was the last year to see above - average precipitation .
Near record - setting snowpack in the mountains during the 2004 to 2005 season , as well as heavy spring rains , ended the drought nearly statewide .
Heavy winter and spring rains caused flooding throughout the state .
In late January , heavy rains overflowed the Santa Clara River in Washington County in the southwest corner of the state , destroying several homes in Ivins , Santa Clara , and Saint George , and essentially cutting off the small town of Gunlock .
Heavy spring rains in late April caused widespread but minor flooding in northern Utah .
Heat returned in the summer of 2006 , with July 2006 becoming the second - hottest July on record .
Summer 2006 ( June – August ) closed as the 4th - hottest on record , tempered only by a near - average August .
January 2007 became the coldest month since December 1990 , and the coldest January since 1978 .
April 29 , 2007 , saw a record April high temperature of 89 ° F .
Snow levels in the ski resorts were near record lows .
It became one of the driest springs on record in Salt Lake City .
Heat returned again in the summer of 2007 , with July 2007 breaking the aforementioned July 2003 record .
July 2007 also set the record for the highest average monthly minimum temperature .
December 2007 became the third - wettest on record .
Snowfall was also abnormally high throughout the winter of 2007 - 2008 as snow came at an unusually frequent pace .
Snow totals ended only slightly under the totals of 2003 - 2004 without a major snowstorm to boost the totals .
Spring 2008 was once again dry but was very cool .
Heat returned that summer once again and July 2008 became the fifth - warmest month on record .
NOTES REFERENCES
* Climate charts , retrieved November 2004
EXTERNAL
LINKS * National Weather Service - Salt Lake City * Climate summary
* Detailed climate statistics