SEARS CATALOG HOME Sears Catalog Homes ( sold under the Sears Modern Homes name ) were catalog and kit houses sold primarily through mail order by Sears , Roebuck and Company , an American retailer .
Sears reported that more than 70,000 of these homes were sold in North America between 1908 and 1940 .
More than 370 different home designs in a wide range of architectural styles and sizes were offered over the program 's 33-year history .
Sears homes can be found across the continental United States .
While sold primarily to East Coast and Midwest states , Sears homes have been located as far south as Florida and as far west as California .
Examples have also been found in Alaska .
A handful of Sears homes have been identified in Canada .
Sears Modern Homes offered the latest technology available to house buyers in the early part of the twentieth century .
Central heating , indoor plumbing , and electricity were all new developments in house design that " Modern Homes " incorporated , although not all of the houses were designed with these conveniences .
Primarily shipped via railroad boxcars , these kits included most of the materials needed to build a house .
Once delivered , many of these houses were assembled by the new homeowner , relatives , friends and neighbors , in a fashion similar to the traditional barn - raisings of farming families .
Other homeowners relied on local carpenters or contractors to assemble the houses .
In some cases , Sears provided construction services to assemble the homes .
Some builders and companies purchased homes directly from Sears to build as model homes , speculative homes or homes for customers or employees .
Sears discontinued its Modern Homes catalog after 1940 .
A few years later , all sales records were destroyed during a corporate house cleaning .
As only a small percentage of these homes were documented when built , finding these houses today often requires detailed research to properly identify them .
Because the various kit home companies often copied plan elements or designs from each other , there are a number of catalog and kit models from different manufacturers that look similar or identical to models offered by Sears .
Determining which company manufactured a particular catalog and kit home may require additional research to determine the origin of that home .
National and regional competitors in the catalog and kit home market included Aladdin , Bennett , Gordon - Van Tine , Harris Brothers , Lewis , Pacific Ready Cut Homes , Sterling and Montgomery Ward ( Wardway ) Homes .
SEARS MODERN HOMES 1908–1942 Section::::Sears Modern Homes 1908–1942 .
In 1906 , Frank W. Kushel , a Sears manager , was given responsibility for the catalog company 's unwieldy , unprofitable building materials department .
Sales were down , and there was excess inventory languishing in warehouses .
He is credited with suggesting to Richard Sears that the company assemble kits of all the parts needed and sell entire houses through mail order .
In the same year , the Aladdin Company of Bay City , Michigan , offered for sale the first kit homes through mail order .
In 1908 , Sears issued its first specialty catalog for houses , Book of Modern Homes and Building Plans , featuring 44 house styles ranging in price from US $ 360–$2,890 .
The first mail order for a Sears house was filled in 1908 .
As Sears mail - order catalogs were in millions of homes , Sears had a distinct advantage over many of its competitors as it was able to promote its " Modern Homes " plans to large numbers of prospective customers through its general merchandise catalog .
As sales grew , Sears expanded its production , shipping and sales offices to locations across the US .
To provide the materials needed for the Modern Homes division , Sears operated a lumber mill in Cairo , Illinois .
Later , Sears constructed a second mill in Port Newark , New Jersey and purchased the Norwood Sash and Door Company in Norwood , Ohio .
The ability to mass - produce the materials used in Sears homes reduced manufacturing costs , which allowed Sears to pass along the savings in lower prices for customers .
Precut framing timbers , an innovation pioneered by Aladdin , was first offered by Sears in 1916 .
Precut lumber was cut to the appropriate lengths and angles based on where the framing timber would be used in the house .
Prior to 1916 , the prospective home builder had to cut their Sears - supplied lumber to appropriate lengths .
These pre-1916 houses are not generally considered to be " kit houses " but do fall under the definition of a " catalog house " .
Construction of a house with pre - cut lumber reduced construction time by up to 40 % according to Sears .
Sears 's use of " balloon style " framing systems did not require a team of skilled carpenters , as did previous methods .
Balloon frames could be built faster and generally only required one carpenter .
This system used precut timber of mostly standard sizes ( 2"x4 " and 2"x8 " ) for framing .
Shipped by railroad boxcar , and then usually trucked to a home site , the average Sears Modern Home kit had approximately 25 tons of materials , with over 30,000 parts .
Plumbing , electrical fixtures and heating systems were not included in the base price of the house but could be included , at an additional cost , with the house order .
The Modern Homes features of central heating , indoor plumbing , and electrical wiring were the first steps for many families to modern HVAC systems , kitchens , and bathrooms .
During the Modern Homes program , large quantities of asphalt shingles became available .
Asphalt shingles were cheap to manufacture and ship , and easy and inexpensive to install .
Sears also offered a plasterboard product similar to modern drywall as an alternative to the plaster and lath wall - building techniques which required skilled carpenters and plasterers .
This product offered the advantages of low price , ease of installation , and added fire protection .
Local building requirements sometimes dictated that certain elements of the house construction be done professionally and varied depending on where the house was constructed .
Sears began offering financing plans around 1912 .
Early mortgage loans were typically for 5 – 15 years at 6 % – 7 % interest .
Sales peaked in 1929 , just before the Great Depression .
While financing through Sears helped many homeowners purchase homes , the Great Depression led to rising payment defaults , resulting in increasing strain on the Modern Homes program .
By 1934 , Sears had stopped offering mortgages after the company was forced to liquidate $ 11 million in defaulted debt .
Sears stopped selling homes for a short time in 1934 before restarting sales .
Sales slowly recovered as the United States emerged from the Great Depression .
SEARS MODERN HOMES AFTER 1940 Section::::Sears Modern Homes after 1940 .
The last Sears Modern Homes catalog was issued in 1940 .
Although it is sometimes claimed that no Sears kit homes were built after 1940 , Sears continued to offer pre - cut kit homes through 1941 and 1942 .
Many of these homes were based on models from the 1940 and earlier Sears catalogs but not all were , leading to debate over whether these homes qualify as " Sears Catalog Homes " .
Because these homes were constructed using pre - cut lumber and plans provided by Sears , these homes can be considered to be " Sears Catalog Homes " .
Many of these homes were built in Sears planned " Home Club Plan " developments in New Jersey , New York and Ohio .
Homes were also built for industrial firms like Bethlehem Steel which purchased and constructed 61 Sears homes in Hellertown , Pennsylvania .
MODELS Section::::Models .
Over the 32 years that Sears offered homes by catalog , Sears offered 370 different models .
In the early years , the models were identified with numbers .
After several years , Sears also began assigning names to the various models , a convention that carried through to the end of the program .
Some models were offered with variations , the most common of those being expanded floor plans and additional finished living spaces .
Sears houses could also be ordered with reversed floor plans .
While the vast majority of models were for single - family house designs , Sears did offer a smaller number of duplex house designs and even a few larger multiple - family buildings .
Certain models were more popular than others and the most popular models were offered over multiple years .
Other models were only offered for one year and some models that were offered have yet to be identified as ever having been actually built .
Some models were offered in both wood siding and brick veneer versions with different names attributed to the same or almost identical home plan .
The models listed below are some of the most popular models .
* Alhambra * Argyle * Avondale * Barrington * Conway / Uriel * Crescent * Dover * Elsmore
* Gladstone / Langston * Hathaway * Lewiston * Lynnhaven
* Osborn * Starlight * Vallonia * Westly
* Willard
* Winona
The largest and one of the most expensive Sears models was the Magnolia .
Only seven Magnolias are known to be still standing .
One Magnolia built in Lincoln , Nebraska was demolished .
IDENTIFYING SEARS MODERN HOMES
Section::::Identifying Sears Modern Homes .
Sears Homes have become increasingly popular among history enthusiasts because of their sturdy structure , the do - it - yourself nature of construction and the popular architectural design concepts .
However , many houses described as Sears Homes are not true Sears Homes , being either the product of another kit home manufacturer or not a kit home at all .
Sears houses can be identified and/or authenticated using the following methods .
* Sears Catalog homes were only offered between 1908 and 1942 .
Any homes built before 1908 , or after 1942 , can not be a Sears Catalog home .
However , there is some debate about whether some homes from Sears that were built in 1941 and 1942 qualify as Sears Catalog homes .
Some of these homes were based on models offered in the Sears Modern Homes catalog .
Others were not but were still pre - cut kit homes from Sears .
*
* Original paperwork for the house including blueprints and letters of correspondence from Sears .
* * Public records : From 1911 to 1933 , Sears offered home mortgages and Sears company officials or the Sears Roebuck corporation may be named on the mortgage or deed associated with the property where the home was constructed .
Sears company officials most commonly listed on mortgages and deeds include : * Cities that have records of building permits may list Sears Roebuck as the original architect .
Also , homes in southern Ohio may have financing documents through the " Norwood Sash and Door Company " of Norwood , Ohio .
* Shipping labels : Often found on the back of millwork like baseboard molding or door and window trim , shipping labels associated with Sears may indicate that the home is a Sears Catalog house .
Most of the millwork was fulfilled by the Sears - owned " Norwood Sash and Door Company " of Cincinnati , Ohio .
However , building materials like millwork could be purchased separately from Sears so millwork with shipping labels is not , by itself , a definitive indicator of a Sears Catalog house .
* * Stamped lumber : Most easily found in unfinished spaces like a basement or attic , framing members were stamped with a letter and a number .
These stamps are normally located on or near the ends of pieces of framing timber .
However , these stamps were not used on lumber shipped before 1916 , when Sears first started offering pre - cut lumber .
* * Compare house designs to original catalog images .
Some models of Sears homes were very similar in design to models offered by other kit home manufacturers or through plan books .
Designs may have been modified but generally should match in layout and dimensions .
*
* Sears Catalog homes built in the 1930s may have a small circled " SR " cast into the bathtub in the lower corner ( furthest from the tub spout and near the floor ) and on the underside of the kitchen or bathroom sink .
*
* Goodwall sheet plaster was an early drywall - like product offered by Sears and may be an indication of a Sears Catalog house .
* EXISTING SEARS HOMES Section::::Existing Sears Homes .
Because the Modern Homes division sales records were destroyed , there is no way to definitively verify the number of Sears houses that still exist .
Documented Sears houses have been found across the United States and in a few locations in Canada .
Cities with large numbers of documented Sears Catalog Homes include : * Aurora , Illinois with 117 * Carlinville , Illinois with 149 in the Standard Addition neighborhood as well as several other Sears houses elsewhere in the city .
Carlinville is said to have " the highest concentration of contiguous Sears homes in the nation . "
* Cincinnati , Ohio and surrounding communities in southern Ohio and Northern Kentucky with over 450 * Downers Grove , Illinois with 67 .
* Elgin , Illinois with 213 .
* Rockford , Illinois with 144 .
* Massapequa Park , New York : Several dozen houses were built in the 1920s and 1930s .
The largest number were built on Grand Boulevard .
* Washington , D.C. with 300 .
* Wood River , Illinois with 23 .
The Carlinville , Illinois concentration consists of houses bought in bulk by the Standard Oil Company in 1918 to house its mineworkers at a total cost of approximately US $ 1 million .
The houses , comprising eight different models , were all built in a 12-block area known as the Standard Addition .
Building of the houses took nine months which were completed in 1919 .
The bulk order is the largest known order for Sears Modern Homes and led to Sears , Roebuck naming their " Carlin " model after the city .
Not all Sears houses became private residences .
At Greenlawn Cemetery , near the Hampton Roads waterfront in the Newport News , Virginia , area , the cemetery office building is a 1936 Sears Catalog Home .
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES Section::::National Register of Historic Places .
Several Sears catalog houses are listed on the National Register of Historic Places .
Among those are : * Alhambra : At Triangle Ranch near Philips , South Dakota
* Saratoga : The Hogue House in Chelsea , Oklahoma
*
Strathmore : Chester Valentine House in Saranac Lake , NY Sears catalog houses can also be found in historic districts listed in the National Register of Historic Places :
* Eastwood Historic District : 10 Sears catalog houses of various models in Cincinnati , Ohio * Old Town College Park : Includes a Sears Alhambra and Sears Sheridan in College Park , Maryland
According to Carolyn Fraser 's Pulitzer - winning book , Prairie Fires : The American Dreams of Laura Ingalls Wilder , the house that Rose Wilder Lane built for her parents , Laura Ingalls Wilder and Almanzo Wilder , at Rocky Ridge Farm in Missouri was from a Sears kit .
The kit was greatly modified by Lane 's ambitious designs .
Her parents did not care much for the house and eventually moved back into their original farmhouse .
MODERN INTERPRETATIONS OF SEARS
CATALOG HOUSES Section::::Modern interpretations of Sears Catalog Houses .
There are examples of modern homes built based on the design of Sears Catalog homes .
In some cases , homeowners used plans from original Sears Catalog homes to recreate a modern version of a Sears home .
In other cases , the home followed the general design of a Sears house without being an exact duplicate .
One well - known replica of a Sears catalog house is at the " Farm at Prophetstown " museum in Battle Ground , Indiana , which features a replica of a Hillrose model .
The house forms part of the farmstead at the museum .
SEE ALSO
* Kit houses in North America
* American Foursquare
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * Reiff , Daniel D. , ( 2000 ) Houses from Books : The Influence of Treatises , Pattern Books , and Catalogs in American Architecture , 1738 - 1950
Pennsylvania State Univ Press
* Stevenson , Katherine Cole , and Jandl , H. Ward , ( 1995 )
Houses By Mail :
A Guide to Houses from Sears , Roebuck and Company John Wiley & Sons ; Hoboken , New Jersey
* Thornton , Rosemary ( 2002 )
The Houses That Sears Built : Everything You Ever Wanted To Know About Sears Catalog Homes Gentle Beam Publications ; Alton , Illinois * Thornton , Rosemary ( 2004 )
Finding The Houses That Sears Built : A Guide to Their 60 Most Popular Designs Gentle Beam Publications ; Alton , Illinois * Davis , Michael W.R. and Schweitzer , Robert ( 1990 )
America 's Favorite Homes .
Wayne State University Press ; Detroit , Michigan
* Gowans , Alan ( 1989 )
The Comfortable House : North American Suburban Architecture 1890 - 1930 .
The MIT Press EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sears Archives
* Sears Modern Homes * Sears Homes of Chicagoland Scanned Catalogs
* 1908 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1911 - 12 Sears Modern Homes catalog
* 1913 - 14 Sears
Modern Homes catalog * 1914 - 15 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1916 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1917 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1918 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1919 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1920
Ready Made Buildings catalog * 1921 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1921 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1923 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1925 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1927 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1929 Sears Brick Veneer catalog * 1930 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1932 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1933 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1935 Sears Modern Homes - house models only * 1936 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1938 Sears Modern Homes catalog * 1940 Sears Modern Homes catalog