DECEASED WIFE 'S SISTER 'S MARRIAGE ACT 1907
The Deceased Wife 's Sister 's Marriage Act 1907 ( 7 Edw.7 c.47 ) was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , allowing a man to marry his dead wife 's sister , which had previously been forbidden .
This prohibition had derived from a doctrine of canon law whereby those who were connected by marriage were regarded as being related to each other in a way which made marriage between them improper .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The doctrine that such marriages were illicit was reflected in the Table of kindred and affinity in the Anglican ( Church of England )
Book of Common Prayer .
Prohibition of marriage between certain degrees of kindred outlawed what is known as incest ; prohibition between degrees of relationship by marriage ( affinity ) as opposed to blood ( consanguinity ) seems to have reflected an analogous taboo .
At least one novel , Felicia Skene 's The Inheritance of Evil ( 1849 ) , addressed the topic in polemic fictional form .
Under ecclesiastical law , a marriage within the prohibited degrees was not absolutely void but it was voidable at the suit of any interested party .
Matthew Boulton married his deceased wife 's sister in 1760 .
He advised silence , secrecy and Scotland , although they married in London ; the marriage was opposed by her brother .
Similarly Charles Austen , the younger brother of Jane Austen , married his deceased wife 's sister in 1820 and remained married to her until he died in 1852 .
1835
MARRIAGE ACT
Section::::1835 Marriage Act .
The Marriage Act 1835 ( 5&6 Will.4 c.54 ) , however , hardened the law into an absolute prohibition ( whilst , however , validating any such marriages which had already taken place ) , so that such marriages could no longer take place in the United Kingdom and colonies at all ( in Scotland they were prohibited by a Scottish Marriage Act of 1567 ) .
Such marriages from that date had to take place abroad : see , for example , William Holman Hunt and John Collier , both painters , who married the sisters of their deceased wives in Switzerland and in Norway respectively .
However , this was only possible for those who could afford it .
CAMPAIGNS Section::::Campaigns .
In 1842 a Marriage to a Deceased Wife 's Sister Bill was introduced and defeated by strong opposition . "
Although seemingly a minor skirmish , [ it ] had far - ranging implications and was fought on the political scene almost annually for most of the Victorian period " .
Peter Ferriday observed in his biography of Edmund Beckett
, 1st Baron Grimthorpe : "
Was there a single eminent Victorian who did not at some time or other announce his views on the ' deceased wife 's sister ' ?
She was the teething ring of all Victorian controversialists ... " .
Widowers ' desires to marry their sisters - in - law became the subject of particular agitation from the 1860s onwards and strong feelings were roused on both sides .
However , it was to be nearly 50 years before the campaign for a change in the law was successful , despite the introduction of draft legislation in Parliament on many occasions .
The lengthy nature of the campaign was referred to in the Gilbert and Sullivan opera Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , in which the Queen of the Fairies sings " He shall prick that annual blister , marriage with deceased wife 's sister " .
Mrs Dinah Maria Craik wrote a book entitled Hannah , published in 1871 , which tells the story of a man who , after the loss of his wife , falls in love with her sister when he calls on her to care for his baby daughter .
Mrs Craik had acted as chaperone to Edith Waugh when she travelled to Switzerland to marry the painter Holman Hunt after the death of his first wife , her sister Fanny .
1907
ACT AND SUBSEQUENT LEGISLATION Section::::1907
Act and subsequent legislation .
The Deceased Wife 's Sister 's Marriage Act 1907 ( 7 Edw.7 c.47 ) removed the prohibition ( although it allowed individual clergy , if they chose , to refuse to conduct marriages which would previously have been prohibited ) .
The Act did exactly what it said and no more ; so , for example , it was not until 1921 that the Deceased Brother 's Widow 's Marriage Act 1921 ( 11 & 12 Geo.5 c.24 ) was passed .
The Marriage ( Prohibited Degrees )
Relationship Act 1931 ( 21 & 22 Geo.5 c.31 ) extended the operation of the 1907 Act to allow the marriages of nieces and nephews by marriage as well .
All three Acts were repealed and replaced by the Marriage Enabling Act 1960 ( 1960 c.29 ) , which permitted marriage with a relative of a divorced former spouse , as well as of a deceased spouse .
( The prohibition on marriage with a divorced wife 's sister is the crux of the plot of When the Wind Blows by Cyril Hare ( 1949 ) . )
The Deceased Brother 's Widow 's Marriage Act ( Northern Ireland ) 1924 was passed to remove doubts as to the application of the Deceased Brother 's Widow 's Marriage Act , 1921 , to Northern Ireland .
REFERENCES
SEE ALSO * Marriage Act 1753
* Marriage Act ( disambiguation ) * Catherine of Aragon as wife and widow of Arthur
* Howards End by E.M. Forster EXTERNAL LINKS
* The text of the 1907 Act may be read here .