PERIPHERALLY
INSERTED CENTRAL CATHETER
A peripherally inserted central catheter ( PICC or PIC line ) , less commonly called a percutaneous indwelling central catheter , is a form of intravenous access that can be used for a prolonged period of time ( e.g. , for long chemotherapy regimens , extended antibiotic therapy , or total parenteral nutrition ) or for administration of substances that should not be done peripherally ( e.g. , antihypotensive agents a.k.a . pressors ) .
It is a catheter that enters the body through the skin ( percutaneously ) at a peripheral site , extends to the superior vena cava ( a central venous trunk ) , and stays in place ( dwells within the veins ) for days or weeks .
First described in 1975 , it is an alternative to central venous catheters in major veins such as the subclavian vein , the internal jugular vein or the femoral vein .
Subclavian and jugular line placements may result in pneumothorax ( air in the pleural space of lung ) , while PICC lines have no such issue because of the method of placement .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
In those who are very unwell PICC lines are appropriate when more than two weeks of treatment is needed .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
Side effects include blood clots and infection .
Other complications may include catheter occlusion , phlebitis and bleeding .
Urokinase or low - dose tPA may be used to break down obstructions .
The type of occlusion ( caused by medication precipitate or by thrombus ) may determine which drug will be used in an attempt to clear the line .
To decrease the risk of infection , particularly a blood stream infection , those involved in the management of the PICC must adhere to strict infection control procedures .
INSERTION Section::::Insertion .
A PICC is inserted in a peripheral vein in the arm , such as the cephalic vein , basilic vein or brachial vein , and then advanced proximally toward the heart through increasingly larger veins , until the tip rests in the distal superior vena cava or cavoatrial junction .
PICCs are usually inserted by physicians , physician assistants ( in the US ) , radiologist assistants ( in the US ) , respiratory therapists , nurse practitioners , or specially trained certified registered nurses and radiologic technologists using ultrasound , chest radiographs , and fluoroscopy to aid in their insertion and to confirm placement .
PICC insertion is a sterile procedure , but does not require the use of an operating room .
When done at bedside ( that is , in the patient 's room ) , a suitable sterile field must be established and maintained throughout the procedure .
For this reason , visitors are normally requested to leave the room until the insertion is complete , and some form of skin preparation should be used to clean the patient 's skin .
The insertable portion of a PICC varies from 25 to 60 cm in length , that being adequate to reach the desired tip position in most patients .
Some lines are designed to be trimmed to the desired length before insertion ; others are simply inserted to the needed depth with the excess left outside .
As supplied , the line has a guide wire inside .
This wire is provided to stiffen the ( otherwise very flexible ) line so it can be threaded through the veins .
The wire is removed and discarded after insertion .
The PICC is also provided with a " wing " having holes for either sutures or an adhesive securing device .
Securing the catheter prevents post - insertion movements of the line , which otherwise could place the tip in an unsafe position .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
PICCs can remain in situ for extended periods of time , from seven days to 4 months up to 12 months although little information is available with respect to viability timeframes .
They are used in both the hospital and community settings .
PICCs can be used for intravenous delivery of total parenteral nutrition ( TPN ) , chemotherapy , antibiotics or other medications , and can also be used for blood sampling if the lumen is 4 French or larger in size ( Arrow and Bard manufacturers guidelines ) .
To maintain patency , PICC management should include regular flushing with normal saline and " locking " with Heparin or normal saline when not in use .
The type of locking procedure depends on the type of PICC and bung ; Groshong PICCs have a three - way valve at the tip so the use of a heparin lock is not necessary , and there are no clamps on the external length .
In comparison , Arrow PICCs have clamps on the exterior line and require a heparin lock .
The use of heparin to maintain line patency , though , is questionable , and currently randomized clinical control trials are investigating this further .
Heparin locks have been associated with complications , including heparin - induced thrombocytopaenia .
Blood pressure should not be taken on the arm with a PICC , which is a problem if there are reasons not to take pressure on the other arm , such as a dialysis shunt , abscess , cast , infection , lymph node removal , etc .
Blood pressure readings on legs are often 10–20 % higher than those on the brachial artery .
Certain types of PICCs have recently been approved by the FDA for use in power injection .
These types , often referred to as power - injectable PICCs , are designed to withstand the high pressures associated with radiocontrast studies .
PICCs can also be used to measure central venous pressure , which is a rough estimate of the right atrial pressures of the heart and can give valuable information about fluid status .
REMOVAL Section::::Removal .
In most cases the removal of a PICC is a simple procedure .
Generally , the catheter line can be safely and quickly removed by a trained nurse , even in the patient 's own home , in a matter of minutes .
After removal , the insertion site is normally bandaged with sterile gauze and kept dry for a few days , during which the wound can close and begin healing .
Usually , a smaller adhesive bandage can be placed over the wound site after the gauze is removed if the wound is slow to heal .
The tip of the catheter is sent for MCS ( microscopy culture and sensitivity ) if the patient is systemically unwell at the time of removal of the PICC .
In certain units , it is sent as routine investigation .
SEE ALSO
*
Central venous catheter * Broviac catheter *
Hickman line
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING * Bender , C. M. , Rosenzweig , M. , & Green , E. ( 2006 ) .
" Cancer " .
In S. Goldsworthy & M. A. Barry .
Medical - Surgical Nursing in Canada :
Assessment and Management of Clinical Problems ( 1st Canadian ed . ) .
Mosby : Toronto . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Description and images of PICC line insertion