THE LOVELY BONES
The Lovely Bones is a 2002 novel by American writer Alice Sebold .
It is the story of a teenage girl who , after being raped and murdered , watches from her personal Heaven as her family and friends struggle to move on with their lives while she comes to terms with her own death .
The novel received critical praise and became an instant bestseller .
A film adaptation , directed by Peter Jackson , who personally purchased the rights , was released in 2009 .
TITLE Section::::Title .
The novel 's title is taken from a quotation at the story 's conclusion , when Susie ponders her friends ' and family 's newfound strength after her death : PLOT Section::::Plot .
On December 6 , 1973 , 14-year - old Susie Salmon takes her usual shortcut home from her school through a cornfield in Norristown , Pennsylvania .
George Harvey , her 36-year - old neighbor who lives alone and builds doll houses for a living , persuades her to have a look at an underground den he has recently constructed in the field .
Once she enters , he rapes and murders her , then dismembers her body and puts her remains in a safe that he dumps in a sinkhole .
Susie 's spirit flees toward her personal Heaven , and in doing so , rushes past one of her classmates , social outcast Ruth Connors .
The Salmon family at first refuses to believe that Susie is dead , until a neighbor 's dog finds Susie 's elbow .
The police talk to Harvey , finding him strange but seeing no reason to suspect him .
Susie 's father , Jack , begins to suspect Harvey , a sentiment his surviving daughter Lindsey comes to share .
Jack takes an extended leave from work .
Meanwhile , another of Susie 's classmates , Ray Singh , who had a crush on Susie in school and had made plans a few days before her murder to go out with her , develops a relationship with Ruth , as they are drawn together by their connection with Susie .
Later , Len Fenerman , the detective assigned to the case , tells the Salmons the police have exhausted all leads and are dropping the investigation .
That night in his study , Jack looks out the window and sees a flashlight in the cornfield .
Thinking it is Harvey returning to destroy more evidence , Jack runs out to confront him , armed with a baseball bat .
The figure is not Harvey , but Clarissa , Susie 's best friend who is dating Brian , one of Susie 's classmates .
As Susie watches in horror from heaven , Brian — who was going to meet Clarissa in the cornfield —
nearly beats Jack to death , and Clarissa breaks Jack 's knee .
While Jack recovers from knee replacement surgery , Susie 's mother , Abigail , begins cheating on Jack with the widowed Fenerman .
Trying to help her father prove his suspicions , Lindsey sneaks into Harvey 's house and finds a diagram of the underground den , but is forced to leave when Harvey returns unexpectedly .
The police do not arrest Lindsey for breaking and entering .
Harvey flees from Norristown .
Later , evidence is discovered linking Harvey to Susie 's murder as well as to those of several other girls .
Meanwhile , Susie meets Harvey 's other victims in heaven and sees into his traumatic childhood .
Abigail leaves Jack and eventually takes a job at a winery in California .
Abigail 's mother , Grandma Lynn , moves into the Salmons ' home to care for Buckley ( Susie 's younger brother ) and Lindsey .
Eight years later , Lindsey and her boyfriend , Samuel Heckler , become engaged after finishing college , find an old house in the woods owned by a classmate 's father , and decide to fix it up and live there .
Sometime after the celebration , while arguing with his son Buckley , Jack suffers a heart attack .
The emergency prompts Abigail to return from California , but the reunion is tempered by Buckley 's lingering bitterness for her having abandoned the family for most of his childhood .
Meanwhile , Harvey returns to Norristown , which has become more developed .
He explores his old neighborhood and notices the school is being expanded into the cornfield where he murdered Susie .
He drives by the sinkhole where Susie 's body rests and where Ruth and Ray are standing .
Ruth senses the women Harvey has killed and is physically overcome .
Susie , watching from heaven , is also overwhelmed with emotion and feels how she and Ruth transcend their present existence , and the two girls exchange positions : Susie , her spirit now in Ruth 's body , connects with Ray , who senses Susie 's presence and is stunned by the fact that Susie is briefly back with him .
The two make love as Susie has longed to do after witnessing her sister and Samuel .
Afterwards , Susie returns to Heaven .
Susie moves on to another , larger part of Heaven , but occasionally watches earthbound events .
Lindsey and Samuel have a daughter together named Abigail Suzanne .
While stalking a young woman in New Hampshire , Harvey is hit on the shoulder by an icicle and falls to his death down a snow - covered slope into the ravine below .
At the end of the novel , a Norristown couple finds Susie 's charm bracelet but do n't realize its significance , and Susie closes the story by wishing the reader " a long and happy life " .
CHARACTERS
* Susie Salmon , a 14-year - old girl who is raped and murdered in the first chapter .
She narrates the novel from Heaven , witnessing the events on earth and experiencing hopes and longings for the everyday things she can no longer do .
* Jack Salmon , her father , who works for an insurance agency in Chadds Ford , Pennsylvania .
After Susie 's death , he is consumed with guilt at having failed to save her .
* Abigail Salmon , her mother , whose growing family responsibilities frustrate her youthful dreams .
After her daughter 's death , she leaves her husband and moves to California , but returns years later .
* Lindsey Salmon , Susie 's younger sister by one year .
She tries to help her father investigate Harvey .
* Buckley Salmon , Susie 's younger brother by 10 years .
His unplanned birth forced Abigail to cancel her plans for a teaching career .
He sometimes sees Susie while she watches him in her heaven .
* Grandma Lynn , Abigail 's mother , an eccentric alcoholic who comes to live with the Salmons when her son - in - law asks her to help Abigail cope with Susie 's death .
After Abigail leaves , Lynn helps raise her grandchildren .
* George Harvey , the Salmons ' neighbor .
A serial killer of young girls , he murders Susie and goes unpunished , even though the Salmons come to suspect him .
He eventually leaves Norristown to escape the investigation and continues killing as he moves across the country .
Years later , he dies in an accident while stalking a potential victim .
Throughout the novel Susie refers to him as Mr. Harvey , the name she had addressed him by in life .
* Ruth Connors , a classmate whom Susie 's spirit touches as Susie leaves the earth .
Ruth becomes fascinated with Susie , despite having barely known her while she was alive , and begins writing about seeing visions of the dead .
* Ray Singh , a boy from India ( via England ) , the first and only boy to kiss Susie , who later becomes Ruth 's friend .
He is first suspected by the police of murdering Susie , but he later proves his alibi .
He is the one Susie spends her short time on earth with that she is granted years after her death .
* Ruana Singh , Ray 's mother , with whom Abigail Salmon sometimes smokes cigarettes .
* Samuel Heckler , Lindsey 's boyfriend and later her husband .
* Hal Heckler , Sam 's older brother who runs a motorcycle repair shop .
* Len Fenerman , the police detective in charge of investigating Susie 's death .
His wife commits suicide some time before the events of the novel take place , and he later has an affair with Abigail .
* Clarissa , Susie 's best friend , whom Susie explains that she admires , because Clarissa was always allowed to do things Susie was not , like wear platform shoes and smoke .
*
Nate , Buckley 's best friend , who screams for help when he 's choking .
* Brian Nelson , Clarissa 's boyfriend .
He sees Jack Salmon holding a bat , with a distraught Clarissa nearby .
He assumes Clarissa is Jack 's victim and takes the bat , beating up Jack .
*
Holly , Susie 's best friend in heaven .
While the text does not say so explicitly , it is implied she is Vietnamese American .
She has no accent and took her name from Audrey Hepburn 's character Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany 's .
* Franny , a woman who worked as a social worker before being shot .
She becomes Susie and Holly 's mentor in their Heaven .
* Mr. Dewitt , the boys ' soccer coach at school .
Mr. Dewitt encourages Lindsey , a successful athlete , to try out for his team .
* Mrs. Dewitt , Mr. Dewitt 's wife , an English teacher at Susie 's school .
She teaches both Lindsey and Susie .
* Holiday , Susie 's dog .
* Principal Caden , the principal of Susie and Lindsey 's school .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critics in the US were generally positive ; many noted that the story had more promise than the idea of a brutally murdered teenage girl going to heaven , and following her family and friends as they get on with their lives would have suggested .
" This is a high - wire act for a first novelist , and Alice Sebold maintains almost perfect balance " , wrote Katherine Bouton in The New York Times Book Review .
Ali Smith of The Guardian wrote that The Lovely Bones " is a determined reiteration of innocence , a teeth - gritted celebration of something not dismembered or shattered at all , but continuous : the notion of the American family unit , dysfunctional , yes , but pure and good nonetheless . "
The Observer 's Philip Hensher considers that the novel was " very readable " but " ultimately it seems like a slick , overpoweringly saccharine and unfeeling exercise in sentiment and whimsy " .
Hensher notes too that " It 's a very God - free heaven , with no suggestion that anyone has been judged , or found wanting " .
However , Sebold has stated that the book is not intended to be religious , " but if people want to take things and interpret them , then I ca n't do anything about that .
It is a book that has faith and hope and giant universal themes in it , but it 's not meant to be , ' This is the way you should look at the afterlife ' " .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Director Peter Jackson secured the book 's film rights .
In a 2005 interview , he stated the reader has " an experience when you read the book that is unlike any other .
I do n't want the tone or the mood to be different or lost in the film .
" In the same interview , regarding Susie 's heaven , he said the movie version would endeavor to make it appear " somehow ethereal and emotional , but it ca n't be hokey " .
The film stars Saoirse Ronan as Susie Salmon , Mark Wahlberg as Jack Salmon , Stanley Tucci as George Harvey , Rachel Weisz as Abigail Salmon , Susan Sarandon as Susie 's Grandmother Lynn , and Rose McIver as Lindsey Salmon .
The film opened to a limited release in three U.S. theaters on December 11 , 2009 , and received international and wide release on January 15 , 2010 .
It met with mixed reviews , but nonetheless garnered an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor ( Tucci ) .
STAGE ADAPTATION Section::::Stage adaptation .
A stage adaptation of the novel , adapted by Bryony Lavery and directed by Melly Still , made its world premiere at the Royal & Derngate , Northampton on 1 September 2018 before touring to Everyman Theatre , Liverpool , Northern Stage , Birmingham Repertory Theatre and New Wolsey Theatre .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A Dark First Novel Suddenly Soars to the Top in The New York Times