1998 STANLEY CUP FINALS
The 1998 Stanley Cup Finals was the championship series of the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) 1997–98 season , and the culmination of the 1998 Stanley Cup playoffs .
It was contested by the Western Conference champion and defending Stanley Cup champion Detroit Red Wings and the Eastern Conference champion Washington Capitals .
It was the 105th year of the Stanley Cup being contested .
The series was the Capitals ' first appearance in a Stanley Cup Final since the franchise 's inception in 1974 .
The Red Wings won the series for the second year in a row , four games to none .
It was the Wings ' ninth Stanley Cup , and the most recent time when a Finals concluded with a sweep ( as of 2018 ) .
This was also the last time until that a Stanley Cup Finals ended after an NBA Finals in the same season had concluded .
Detroit coach Scotty Bowman won his eighth Stanley Cup in that capacity ( having previously done so with the Montreal Canadiens in , , , , and , the Pittsburgh Penguins in , and the Wings the previous year ) , tying him with former Canadiens coach Toe Blake for the record of most Cups won by a coach ( which he would break when he helped the Red Wings win the 2002 Cup ) .
MOTIVATION TO WIN A SECOND
STRAIGHT
TITLE Section::::Motivation to win a second straight title .
Just six days after sweeping the Philadelphia Flyers in the 1997 Finals , Red Wings defenseman Vladimir Konstantinov and masseur Sergei Mnatsakanov sustained serious brain injuries when the limousine in which they were riding crashed .
Viacheslav Fetisov was also in the limousine but was not seriously injured .
The Red Wings subsequently dedicated their 1997–98 season to the two injured members and wore a patch on their jerseys bearing the players ' initials .
When the Red Wings were presented with the Stanley Cup , they wheeled Konstantinov onto the ice and placed the Cup in his lap .
They also took him for a victory lap around the rink .
PATHS TO THE FINALS
Section::::Paths to the Finals .
Detroit advanced to the Finals by defeating the Phoenix Coyotes , St. Louis Blues , and Dallas Stars in six games each .
Washington defeated the Boston Bruins 4–2 , the Ottawa Senators 4–1 , and the Buffalo Sabres 4–2 .
GAME SUMMARIES Section::::Game summaries .
In this series , Capitals head coach Ron Wilson became the first person to head coach in both an Olympics and a Stanley Cup Final in the same year , having coached team USA at the Nagano Olympics .
Peter Laviolette would join him in this feat in while with the Carolina Hurricanes during their championship season , having coached the American ice hockey team during the Torino Olympics .
GAME ONE Section::::Game one .
At home , Detroit took an early lead in the first period and scored two goals within two minutes and 14 seconds of each other .
The Red Wings were able to hold off a Washington assault and take the first game of the series with a score of 2–1 .
GAME TWO Section::::Game two .
It looked as if the Capitals would to tie the series with a 4–2 lead in the third period , but after a Detroit goal to make it 4–3 , Capitals forward Esa Tikkanen had a shot midway through the third period that would have likely put Detroit away before the venue changed back to Washington 's MCI Center , and also would have changed the entire dynamic of the series , but he missed the open net shot .
Detroit then rallied late in the third period to tie the game and send it into overtime .
Kris Draper scored with four minutes left in the first overtime to give the Red Wings a 5–4 victory and a 2–0 lead in the series .
GAME THREE
Section::::Game three .
Detroit scored in the first 35 seconds to take an early lead which held up until the third period .
The Capitals tied the game midway through the third period , but Sergei Fedorov scored to give the Wings a three games to none lead in the series .
GAME FOUR Section::::Game four .
In game four , Detroit was dominant throughout to win the game by a score of 4–1 and sweep the series .
BROADCASTING
Section::::Broadcasting .
In Canada , the series was televised on CBC .
In the United States , Fox broadcast game one while ESPN televised games two through four .
Had the series extended , games five and seven would have been broadcast on Fox , and ESPN would have aired game six .
DETROIT RED WINGS — 1998
STANLEY CUP
CHAMPIONS
STANLEY CUP ENGRAVINGS
* Konstantinov 's career ended in a car accident .
The Red Wings still recognized him as part of the team and got permission from the league to have his name engraved .
*
Wally Crossman was the oldest person engraved on the Stanley Cup at age 87 .
* Detroit wanted to include a record 55 names on the Stanley Cup in 1997–98 .
Following that request , the NHL decided to limit the number of names to 52 to make sure all names fit on the Cup .
Players who play in Stanley Cup Finals , or play at least 41 regular season games for the winning team , must be included on the Cup each year .
Other players who do not officially qualify may also be included if requested by the team .
There are no rules for which non - players must be included on the Stanley Cup , only a limit on total number of names going on the cup .
No player who officially qualifies may be left off to include more non - players .
Included on the team picture , but left off the Stanley Cup * # 34 Norm Maracle† ( G – 4 games played )
, # 21 Darryl Laplante† ( D – played 2 games ) did not qualify to win the Stanley Cup .
Both players spent majority of the season of in the minors .
Maracle played 66 games in goal for Adirondack while Darryl Laplante played 77 on defence .
* Art Mnatsusakanov† , Johnny Remejes† , Mike Vella†
( Dressing Room Asst . )
– all 5 members were awarded Stanley Cup Rings SEE ALSO * 1997–98 NHL season * List of Stanley Cup champions REFERENCES