PORT OF PORTLAND ( OREGON )
The Port of Portland is the port district responsible for overseeing Portland International Airport , general aviation , and marine activities in the Portland , Oregon metropolitan area in the United States , established in 1891 by the 16th Oregon Legislative Assembly .
The current incarnation was created by the 1970 legislature , combining the original Port with the Portland Commission of Public Docks , a city agency dating from 1910 .
The Port of Portland owns four marine terminals , including Oregon 's only deep - draft container port , and three airports .
The Port manages five industrial parks around the metropolitan area , and they own and operate the Dredge Oregon to help maintain the navigation channel on the lower Columbia and Willamette rivers .
HISTORY 19TH CENTURY Section::::History .
Section::::19th century .
In 1891 , the Oregon Legislature created the Port to dredge and maintain a shipping channel from the city of Portland to the Pacific Ocean .
Through the years , the Port acquired the Commission of Public Docks , which operated public - use docks in Portland Harbor , and they built Portland 's first airport .
20TH CENTURY Section::::20th century .
The Port of Portland 's administration was embroiled in questionable business practices in the early 1930s .
Port authorities , including James H. Polhemus , the general manager of the port from 1923–1936 , were found guilty of mismanagement , both through conflict of interest and cronyism , as well as negligence , sale of equipment at lower than assessed prices , carelessness , and preferential treatment of some private shippers .
Much of the blame was because of discounted rates for using the port 's dry dock .
Companies specifically named as beneficiaries of this graft were McCormick Steamship Company and States Steamship Company .
The investigating committee called for the resignation of Polhemus and other staff .
On November 20 , 1933 , shortly after the commission found Polhemus and his staff guilty , professional auditor Frank Akin was found shot to death .
His murder was never solved , leading to many conspiracy theories .
In mid - December , the Port commissioners voted to reject the investigating committee brief , meaning Polhemus was exonerated .
Polhemus stayed with the Port for another three years before becoming a vice president at Portland General Electric .
MacColl summarized the events in 1979 , saying this : 21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
In 2010 , the port signed a 25-year lease to allow Philippines - based International Container Terminal Services to operate Terminal 6 , the sole shipping container terminal in Oregon .
Workers at the terminal claimed that ICTSI " decimated labor relations with its Portland workforce by creating a work atmosphere of hostility , based on a model of employee intimidation that is ICTSI 's method of operation around the world . "
In February 2014 , a safety inspection at Terminal 6 by the US Occupational Safety and Health Administration " found ICTSI Oregon to be in violation of more than a dozen worker safety codes , such as not informing employees about potential exposure to airborne lead and having workers operate machinery that lacked proper guards against flying objects .
"
OSHA imposed fines of $ 18,360 against ICTSI Oregon for the violations .
Hanjin , a South Korean - based shipping line which accounted for 78 % of all container traffic to the Port of Portland , stopped serving the Port at Terminal 6 on March 9 , 2015 .
This decision came during a labor dispute between the terminal operator ICTSI and the International Longshore and Warehouse Union which represents dockworkers at all West Coast ports , including Portland .
In 2013 , when first announcing its intent to withdraw from Portland , Hanjin executives cited " substantially increased costs " under ICTSI management as a cause for its departure to other ports .
The second - largest shipping line , Hapag - Lloyd , ended service on March 26 , 2015 .
To replace connections to Idaho , the Port began a barge service carrying pulse exports from Lewiston to Portland in December of that year .
Westwood Shipping Lines ceased service to Terminal 6 in May 2016 , with no container ships calling on Terminal 6 since that time .
In February 2017 , the Port of Portland and ICTSI announced they had reached a deal to end their lease agreement early .
JURISDICTION Section::::Jurisdiction .
The Port of Portland has been considered a regional government with jurisdiction in Multnomah , Washington and Clackamas counties since 1973 .
Nine commissioners regulate the organization ; they are appointed by the Governor and approved by the State Senate .
Each commissioner serves a four - year term and can be reinstated to the same post indefinitely .
One requirement of commissioners is that , of the nine , two must live in each of Multnomah , Washington , and Clackamas counties while the remaining three are free to live where they choose .
Commissioners elect the Port of Portland 's executive director who oversees the daily operations of the port .
Commissioners meet monthly to discuss the policies of the Port of Portland .
OWNERSHIP
* Four marine terminals
* Five industrial parks ( including a few others referenced below ) * Three airports * Portland International Airport * Troutdale Airport * Hillsboro Airport * Swan Island Municipal Airport ( 1927–40 ) MARINE TERMINALS Section::::Marine terminals .
Port of Portland 's marine terminals are located outside the population center with nearby main line rail and interstate highways minimizing congestion for both rail and truck traffic .
The Portland Harbor exports the second largest amount of wheat from the United States and the Columbia River system , including Portland , is third largest wheat export gateway in the world .
The Port is the fifth largest auto import gateway in the country , and the largest mineral bulk port on the U.S. west coast .
Marine terminals are located along the Willamette River and the Columbia River .
Terminals are served by rail ( Union Pacific and BNSF railroads ) , connecting interstates , and river barges .
Around one thousand businesses and corporations are said to use the Port 's marine facilities .
Over 17 million tons of cargo move through Portland each year .
Twelve million tons of this cargo moves through the Port of Portland - owned and operated facilities .
Major exports include grain , soda ash , potash , automobiles , and hay ; major imports are automobiles , steel , machinery , mineral bulks and other varied products .
Imports and exports at the Port of Portland total about $ 15.4 billion USD , annually .
The Port 's terminal facilities ( T-2 , T-4 , and T-5 are on the Willamette River ; T-6 is on the Columbia River ) : Terminal
T-2
* 52.5 acres ( 212,450 m² )
*
Break Bulk
* Bulk * Army Corps of Engineers Terminal T-4 * 261.5 acres ( 1.1 km² )
*
Liquid shipping *
Mineral shipping *
Auto shipping Terminal
T-5 * 159 acres ( 643,450 m² ) *
Grain shipping
* Minerals shipping * Warehouse / manufacturing Terminal T-6 * 419 acres ( 2.0 km² )
* Cargo containers
*
Auto shipping *
Steel
* Break Bulk
* Rail yard access and operation INDUSTRIAL / BUSINESS PARKS Section::::Industrial / Business Parks .
The Port of Portland owns several business parks in the Portland metropolitan area :
* Rivergate Industrial District
* 2,800 acres ( 11 km² )
* Located 9 miles ( 14 km ) NW of downtown Portland * Operates two marine terminals
* Rail access ( Burlington Northern Santa Fe and Union Pacific railroads )
* Swan Island Industrial Park and Port Center * 430 acres ( 1.7 km² ) * 4.5 miles ( 7 km )
north of downtown Portland
* Rail access ( Union Pacific ) * Gresham Vista Business Park * 222 acres * Nine general industrial lots on 172 acres *
Mocks Landing
* 150 acres ( 607,000 m² )
* Rail access ( Union Pacific ) *
Near Swan Island Industrial Park and Port Center * Portland International Center * 458 acres ( 1.9 km² )
*
At Portland International Airport
* Rail access ( MAX Light Rail )
* Troutdale Reynolds Industrial Park * 75 acres ( 304,000 m² )
*
At the Troutdale Airport * Brookwood Corporate Park * 32 acres ( 129,000 m² )
*
At the Hillsboro Airport AIRPORTS Section::::Airports .
The Portland International Airport ( PDX ) is owned and operated by the Port of Portland .
It is the 30th busiest airport in the United States .
The PDX capture region serves a population of more than 3.5 million people in two states ( Oregon and Washington ) .
The airport offers scheduled nonstop passenger service flights to over 69 domestic destinations and 11 international cities .
PDX served nearly 17 million passengers in 2015 , breaking the all - time passenger record of 15.9 million in 2014 .
The airport averages more than 230 scheduled passenger departures daily during the busiest travel seasons , and 17 different domestic and international passenger airlines serve PDX .
Portland is also well - served by 10 all - air cargo carriers .
PDX serves the commercial , passenger , transport needs of the Portland Metro area , while Hillsboro Airport , also owned by the Port , serves an integral part of the region 's transportation system , providing well - maintained , financially viable general aviation facilities to businesses and residents of Washington County and beyond .
The Port also owns Portland - Troutdale Airport which serves as a flight training and recreational airport with an increasing emphasis on business class capability .
The first airport operated by the Port of Portland was Swan Island Municipal Airport in 1927 .
It owned Portland - Mulino Airport , a general aviation field , from 1988 until 2009 , when Portland - Mulino was transferred to the Oregon Department of Aviation .
SEE ALSO
* United States container ports
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Port of Portland