MOTHER 'S DAY ( UNITED STATES )
Mother 's Day in the United States is an annual holiday celebrated on the second Sunday in May. Mother 's Day recognizes mothers , motherhood and maternal bonds in general , as well as the positive contributions that they make to society .
It was established by Anna Jarvis , with the first official Mother 's Day celebrated at St. Andrew 's Methodist Church in Grafton , West Virginia , on May 10 , 1908 .
In the United States , Mother 's Day complements similar celebrations honoring family members , such as Father 's Day , Siblings Day and Grandparents Day .
Internationally , there are a large variety of Mother 's Day celebrations with different origins and traditions , some now also having been influenced by this more recent American tradition .
HISTORY FIRST ATTEMPTS TO ESTABLISH A HOLIDAY Section::::History .
Section::::First attempts to establish a holiday .
During the 19th century , women 's peace groups in the United States tried to establish holidays and regular activities in favor of peace and against war .
A common early activity was the meeting of groups of mothers whose sons had fought or died on opposite sides of the American Civil War .
In 1868 , Ann Jarvis , Anna Jarvis 's mother , organised a committee to establish a " Mother 's Friendship Day " , the purpose of which was " to reunite families that had been divided during the Civil War . "
Ann Jarvis , who had previously organized Mother 's Day Work Clubs to improve sanitation and health for both Union and Confederate encampments undergoing a typhoid outbreak , wanted to expand these into an annual memorial for mothers , but she died in 1905 before the annual celebration was established .
Her daughter , who became almost obsessed with her , would continue her mother 's efforts .
There were several limited observances in the 1870s and the 1880s but none achieved resonance beyond the local level .
At the time , Protestant schools in the United States already held many celebrations and observations such as Children 's Day , Temperance Sunday , Roll Call Day , Decision Day , Missionary Day and others .
In New York City , Julia Ward Howe led a " Mother 's Day for Peace " anti - war observance on June 2 , 1872 , which was accompanied by a " Appeal to womanhood throughout the world " ( nowadays known as Mother 's Day Proclamation ) .
The observance continued in Boston for about 10 years under Howe 's personal sponsorship , then died out .
In these celebrations , mothers all around the world would work towards world peace .
Several years later a Mother 's Day observance on May 13 , 1877 was held in Albion , Michigan over a dispute related to the temperance movement .
According to local legend , Albion pioneer Juliet Calhoun Blakeley stepped up to complete the sermon of the Rev. Myron Daughterty who was distraught because an anti - temperance group had forced his son and two other temperance advocates at gunpoint to spend the night in a saloon and become publicly drunk .
From the pulpit Blakeley called on other mothers to join her .
Blakeley 's two sons , both traveling salesmen , were so moved that they vowed to return each year to pay tribute to her and embarked on a campaign to urge their business contacts to do likewise .
At their urging , in the early 1880s , the Methodist Episcopal Church in Albion set aside the second Sunday in May to recognize the special contributions of mothers .
Frank E. Hering , alumnus and administrator at the University of Notre Dame and President of the Fraternal Order of Eagles , made a plea for " setting aside one day in the year as a nationwide memorial to the memories of Mothers and motherhood " in 1904 .
After observing a class of Notre Dame students sending home penny postcards to their mothers , Hering went on to be a vocal advocate for a national Mother 's Day for the next decade .
As Hering stated in a 1941 issue of Scholastic : " Throughout history the great men of the world have given their credit for their achievements to their mothers .
[ The ] Holy Church recognizes this , as does Notre Dame especially , and Our Lady who watches over our great institution . "
ESTABLISHMENT OF HOLIDAY Section::::Establishment of holiday .
In its present form , Mother 's Day was established by Anna Jarvis with the help of Philadelphia merchant John Wanamaker following the death of her mother , Ann Jarvis , on May 9 , 1905 .
Jarvis never mentioned Howe or Mothering Sunday , and she never mentioned any connection to the Protestant school celebrations , always claiming that the creation of Mother 's Day was hers alone .
A small service was held on May 12 , 1907 in the Andrew 's Methodist Episcopal Church in Grafton , West Virginia , where Anna 's mother had been teaching Sunday school .
The first " official " service was on May 10 , 1908 , in the same church , accompanied by a larger ceremony in the Wanamaker Auditorium in the Wanamaker 's store in Philadelphia .
The next year the day was reported to be widely celebrated in New York .
Jarvis then campaigned to establish Mother 's Day first as a U.S. national holiday and then later as an international holiday .
The holiday was declared officially by the state of West Virginia in 1910 , and the rest of the states followed quickly .
On May 10 , 1913 , the U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution calling on all federal government officials ( from the president down ) to wear a white carnation the following day in observance of Mother 's Day .
On May 8 , 1914 , the U.S. Congress passed a law designating the second Sunday in May as Mother 's Day and requesting a proclamation .
The next day , President Woodrow Wilson issued a proclamation declaring the first national Mother 's Day as a day for American citizens to show the flag in honor of those mothers whose sons had died in war .
In 1934 , U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved a stamp commemorating the holiday .
In May 2008 , the U.S. House of Representatives voted twice on a resolution commemorating Mother 's Day , the first one being passed without a dissenting vote ( 21 members not voting ) .
The Grafton church , where the first celebration was held , is now the International Mother 's Day Shrine and is a National Historic Landmark .
SPELLING
Section::::Spelling .
In 1912 Anna Jarvis trademarked the phrases " Second Sunday in May " and " Mother 's Day " , and created the Mother 's Day International Association .
She specifically noted that " Mother 's " should " be a singular possessive , for each family to honor its own mother , not a plural possessive commemorating all mothers in the world .
" This is also the spelling used by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson in his 1914 presidential proclamation , by the U.S. Congress in relevant bills , and by various U.S. presidents in their proclamations concerning Mother 's Day . TRADITIONS Section::::Traditions .
Traditions on Mother 's Day include churchgoing , the distribution of carnations , and family dinners .
Mother 's Day is the third largest holiday in the United States for sending cards .
According to the greeting card industry , it is estimated that more than 50 percent of American households send greeting cards on this holiday .
The holiday has been heavily commercialized by advertisers and retailers , and has been criticized by some as a Hallmark Holiday .
CARNATIONS Section::::Carnations .
Carnations have come to represent Mother 's Day since Anna Jarvis delivered 500 of them at the first celebration in 1908 .
Many religious services held later adopted the custom of giving away carnations .
This also started the custom of wearing a carnation on Mother 's Day .
The founder , Anna Jarvis , chose the carnation because it was the favorite flower of her mother .
In part due to the shortage of white carnations , and in part due to the efforts to expand the sales of more types of flowers in Mother 's Day , florists invented the idea of wearing a pink carnation if your mother was living , or a white one if she was dead ; this was tirelessly promoted until it made its way into the popular observations at churches .
Other less traditional flower options may include roses , a live blooming plant , flower leis , or a bouquet of a variety of different flowers .
COMMERCIALIZATION
Section::::Commercialization .
The commercialization of the American holiday began very early , and only nine years after the first official Mother 's Day it had become so rampant that Anna Jarvis herself became a major opponent of what the holiday had become , spending all her inheritance and the rest of her life fighting what she saw as an abuse of the celebration .
She decried the practice of purchasing greeting cards , which she saw as a sign of being too lazy to write a personal letter .
She was arrested in 1948 for disturbing the peace while protesting against the commercialization of Mother 's Day , and she finally said that she " ... wished she would have never started the day because it became so out of control ...
" She died later that year .
Mother 's Day is now one of the most commercially successful American occasions , having become the most popular day of the year to dine out at a restaurant in the United States and generating a significant portion of the U.S. jewelry industry 's annual revenue , from custom gifts like mother 's rings .
Americans spend approximately $ 2.6 billion on flowers , $ 1.53 billion on pampering gifts — like spa treatments — and another $ 68 million on greeting cards .
Commercialization has ensured that the holiday has continued , while other holidays from the same time , such as Children 's Day and Temperance Sunday , are no longer celebrated .
SPORTS Section::::Sports .
From 2005 to 2013 , the Southern 500 auto race was held on Saturday of Mother 's Day weekend .
Since 2014 , the NASCAR Cup Series hosts the KC Masterpiece 400 at Kansas on Saturday of Mother 's Day weekend .
Also , the IndyCar Grand Prix has been held on Saturday of Mother 's Day weekend since 2014 .
From 2007 - 2018 , The Players Championship men 's golf tournament was held on Mother 's Day weekend , except in 2011 and 2016 when May 1 fell on a Sunday .
In those cases , it was held the next weekend .
Previously , the Kingsmill Championship women 's golf tournament was played on Mother 's Day weekend from 2004 to 2009 .
Professional sports players often wear pink clothing accessories on Mother 's Day weekend .
SEE ALSO
* Father 's Day
* National Grandparents Day
REFERENCES
Notes Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S. Presidential Proclamation on Mother 's Day