CHRIS EVANS ( ACTOR )
Christopher Robert Evans ( born June 13 , 1981 ) is an American actor .
Evans is known for his superhero roles as the Marvel Comics characters Captain America in the Marvel Cinematic Universe and Human Torch in Fantastic Four ( 2005 ) and .
Evans began his career on the 2000 television series Opposite Sex , and in addition to his work in superhero films , he has featured in such films as Not Another Teen Movie ( 2001 ) , Sunshine ( 2007 ) , Scott Pilgrim vs. the World ( 2010 ) , Snowpiercer ( 2013 ) , and Gifted ( 2017 ) .
In 2014 , he made his directorial debut with the drama film Before We Go , in which he also starred .
Evans made his Broadway debut in a 2018 production of Lobby Hero .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Evans was born in Boston , Massachusetts , and raised in the town of Sudbury .
His mother , Lisa ( née Capuano ) , is an artistic director at the Concord Youth Theater , and his father , G. Robert Evans III , is a dentist .
He has two sisters , Carly and Shanna , and a younger brother , Scott .
Carly is a graduate of New York University 's Tisch School of the Arts and a high school drama and English teacher at Lincoln - Sudbury Regional High School , while Scott is an actor who was featured on the ABC soap opera One Life to Live .
Their uncle , Mike Capuano , represents the same Massachusetts Congressional district formerly represented by Tip O'Neill .
His mother is of half Italian and half Irish ancestry , while his father is of half British and half German descent .
He and his siblings were raised Catholic .
Evans graduated from Lincoln - Sudbury Regional High School .
He moved to New York City and took classes at the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Evans 's first credited appearance was in a short educational video titled Biodiversity :
Wild About Life !
in 1997 .
In 1999 , Evans was the model for " Tyler " in Hasbro 's board game Mystery Date .
The special edition of the game included an electronic phone , which Evans is shown speaking into on the game box .
After filming wrapped on Not Another Teen Movie , Evans landed lead roles in The Perfect Score and Cellular , and then starred in two independent films in Chicago :
Dirk Wittenborn 's Fierce People , playing the sinister Bryce , and London , playing a drug user with relationship problems .
He then played the superhero the Human Torch in the 2005 comic book adaptation Fantastic Four .
Evans reprised the role in the 2007 sequel .
That year , he starred as engineer - turned - astronaut Mace in Danny Boyle 's science - fiction film Sunshine .
In 2008 , Evans appeared in Street Kings , co - starring Keanu Reeves , and the Tennessee Williams screenplay adaptation The Loss of a Teardrop Diamond , co - starring Bryce Dallas Howard and Ellen Burstyn .
The following year he appeared in the science - fiction thriller Push , with Dakota Fanning and Camilla Belle .
Evans performed his own fight scenes , which took weeks to film , and was bruised during filming .
In 2010 , he completed filming on co - directors Mark Kassen and Adam Kassen 's Puncture in Houston , Texas .
The film was selected to debut at the 2011 Tribeca Film Festival as one of the Spotlight projects for the 10th anniversary of the festival .
Also that year , Evans appeared in Sylvain White 's The Losers , an adaptation of the comic - book series from the DC Comics imprint Vertigo .
Evans then appeared in another comic - book adaptation , Edgar Wright 's Scott Pilgrim vs. the World , where he portrayed Lucas Lee , one of Ramona Flowers ' seven evil exes .
In 2011 , Evans played the Marvel Comics character Captain America in , and starred in the film
What 's Your Number ? , a romantic comedy co - starring Anna Faris .
There were initially scheduling conflicts , as both films were set to film in mid-2010 .
Evans had signed on to appear in multiple films as Captain America , and first reprised the role in the 2012 film The Avengers .
He next starred opposite Michael Shannon in The Iceman , replacing James Franco , who had dropped out .
Evans wore a long wig and grew out a beard for the role .
He starred in South Korean director Bong Joon - ho 's English - language film Snowpiercer .
In 2014 , Evans starred in .
He starred opposite Michelle Monaghan in the romantic comedy Playing It Cool .
His directorial debut , Before We Go , debuted at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival .
In 2015 , he played Captain America again in , and reprised the role in the 2016 sequel , as well as in 2018 's , and its upcoming 2019 sequel , .
Evans said in March 2014 that once his contract with Marvel is up , he might consider doing less acting so he could work more on directing .
In September 2015 , he said that he would be willing to sign on for more films as Captain America after Infinity War if Marvel wanted to extend his contract .
However , he has since stated that he will leave the role after the fourth Avengers film .
Evans starred in the family drama Gifted in 2017 .
He made his Broadway debut in Lobby Hero , directed by Trip Cullman , which opened in March 2018 at the Helen Hayes Theatre as a part of Second Stage Theatre 's first Broadway season .
In 2018 , he will star as an Israeli Mossad agent in the thriller film The Red Sea Diving Resort .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Evans is a fan of the New England Patriots and narrated .
Although raised Catholic , he has expressed pantheistic views and a great interest in the philosophies of Buddhism .
Evans is a supporter of gay marriage .
In 2012 , he said " Are you kidding me ?
It 's insane that civil rights are being denied people in this day and age .
It 's embarrassing , and it 's heartbreaking .
It goes without saying that I 'm completely in support of gay marriage .
In 10 years we 'll be ashamed that this was an issue . "
In 2017 , Evans was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences .
While filming Gifted in 2015 , Evans adopted a dog named Dodger from a local animal shelter the movie filmed at .
Evans dated actress Jenny Slate for nine months until they broke up in early 2017 .
They got back together in the fall of 2017 , but Evans confirmed in March 2018 that they had separated once more .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes 1997 Biodiversity : Wild About Life !
Rick Short film 2000
The Newcomers
Judd 2001 Not
Another Teen Movie
Jake Wyler 2003 Ben Harris
Short film
Kyle
Cellular
Ryan
Fierce People Bryce Langley
Fantastic Four Johnny Storm / Human Torch
London
Syd
TMNT Casey Jones Voice role Sunshine James Mace Johnny Storm / Human Torch Hayden " Harvard Hottie " Battle for Terra Stewart Stanton
Voice role Street Kings Detective Paul Diskant Jimmy Dobyne
Push Nick Gant Jake Jensen Scott Pilgrim vs. the World Lucas Lee Puncture Michael David " Mike " Weiss Steve Rogers / Captain America
What 's Your Number ?
Colin Shea Steve Rogers / Captain America
The Iceman Robert
" Mr. Freezy " Pronge Snowpiercer Curtis Everett
Loki masquerading as Steve Rogers / Captain America
Uncredited cameo Steve Rogers / Captain America
Before We Go Nick Vaughan
Also director and producer Steve Rogers /
Captain America
Ant - Man
Playing It
Cool
Me 2016 Steve Rogers / Captain America
Gifted Frank Adler Steve Rogers /
Captain America Cameo Steve Rogers / Captain America 2019 Steve Rogers / Captain America
In post - production Knives Out Filming
The Red Sea Diving Resort Ari Levinson
In post - production TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes
Opposite Sex Cary Baston 8 episodes Zack Lardner
Episode : " Guilt " 2001 Boston Public Neil Mavromates Episode : " Chapter Nine " 2002 Eastwick
Adam Pilot 2003
Skin
Brian Episode : " Pilot " 2008 Robot Chicken Various voices
Episode : " Monstourage " THEATRE Section::::Theatre . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Venue 2018 Lobby Hero
Bill Helen Hayes
Theatre VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games . !
Year !
Title !
Voice role 2005
Fantastic Four
Johnny Storm / Human Torch 2011 Steve Rogers / Captain America 2012 Discovered Himself 2016 Lego Marvel 's Avengers Steve Rogers / Captain America AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominated work ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " 2005 MTV Movie Awards
Best On - Screen Team Fantastic Four rowspan="2"Teen Choice Awards Choice Movie Actor :
Action Adventure
rowspan=2Fantastic Four :
Rise of the Silver Surfer Choice Movie : Rumble Scream Awards
Best Superhero rowspan=6Captain America :
The First Avenger Saturn Awards Best Actor People 's Choice Awards Favorite Movie Superhero MTV Movie Awards MTV Movie Award for Best Hero
rowspan="3"Teen
Choice Awards
Choice Summer Movie Star :
Male rowspan="2"2012 Choice Movie :
Fight Choice Movie : Male Scene Stealer rowspan=4The Avengers rowspan="2"People 's Choice Awards Favorite Action Movie Star Favorite Movie Superhero
MTV Movie Awards
Best Fight REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS