CABIN FEVER Cabin fever is an idiomatic term for a claustrophobic reaction that takes place when a person or group ends up in an isolated or solitary location , or stuck indoors in confined quarters for an extended period of time .
Cabin fever describes the extreme irritability and restlessness a person may feel in these limiting situations .
Cabin fever is also associated with boredom from being indoors for a lengthy amount of time .
A person may experience cabin fever in a situation such as being isolated within a vacation cottage out in the country , or away from a civilization .
When experiencing cabin fever , a person may tend to sleep , to have a distrust of anyone they are with , or to have an urge to go outside even in bad weather .
The phrase is also used humorously to indicate simple boredom from being home alone for an extended period of time .
Cabin fever is not directly fatal to an individual suffering from the peculiar disorder .
However , related symptoms can lead the sufferer to make irrational decisions that could potentially cause them to lose their life .
Some examples would be suicide or paranoia , or leaving the safety of a cabin during a terrible snow storm that one may be stuck in .
THERAPY Section::::Therapy .
One therapy for cabin fever is as simple as getting out and interacting with nature directly .
Research has demonstrated that even brief interactions with nature can promote improved cognitive functioning , support a positive mood , and overall well - being .
Escaping the confinement of the indoors and changing one 's scenery and surroundings can easily help an individual experiencing cabin fever overcome their mania .
Going outside to experience the openness of the world will stimulate the brain and body enough to eliminate feelings of intense claustrophobia , paranoia , and restlessness associated with cabin fever .
There is little evidence of those suffering from cabin fever seeing therapists or counselors for treatment , most sufferers simply discuss their symptoms with family or friends as a way of changing the feelings of loneliness and boredom .
However , there are cases of " cabin fever " that are diagnosed as mid - winter depression or Seasonal Affective Disorder ( SAD ) .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The concept of Cabin fever was used as a theme in Charlie Chaplin 's 1925 film The Gold Rush , the 1980 horror film
The Shining , The Simpsons episode " Mountain of Madness " , and the 2010 video game Alan Wake .
A song called " Cabin Fever " features in the 1996 musical comedy Muppet Treasure Island , afflicting sailors on a ship trapped in the doldrums .
Cabin Fever was the name of Wiz Khalifa 's 2011 mixtape which was released February 17th .
There is a quest in the popular MMORPG RuneScape of the same name .
Cabin fever is one of the possible afflictions the player character can suffer from in the video game set in the post - apocalyptic Canadian wasteland , The Long Dark ; the condition prevents one from sleeping indoors , thus forcing them to brave the elements in order to rest .
In Blade Runner 2049 , fictional female character Joi , who is a virtual girlfriend of main character K , at the beginning of the movie is stating that she is suffering from " cabin fever " .
Cabin Fever is a 2002 American horror film directed by Eli Roth and starring Rider Strong , Jordan Ladd , James DeBello , and Giuseppe Andrews .
The story follows a group of college graduates who rent a cabin in the woods and begin to fall victim to a flesh - eating virus .
The inspiration for the film 's story came from a real life experience during a trip to Iceland when Roth developed a skin infection .
The film spawned a sequel ( 2009 ) , a prequel ( 2014 ) , and a 2016 remake of the original , also called Cabin Fever .
SEE ALSO
* Stir crazy * Piblokto
* Prairie madness REFERENCES