ALOE VERA
Aloe vera ( or ) is a succulent plant species of the genus Aloe .
An evergreen perennial , it originates from the Arabian Peninsula but grows wild in tropical climates around the world and is cultivated for agricultural and medicinal uses .
The species is also used for decorative purposes and grows successfully indoors as a potted plant .
It is found in many consumer products including beverages , skin lotion , cosmetics , or ointments for minor burns and sunburns .
There is little scientific evidence of the effectiveness or safety of Aloe vera extracts for either cosmetic or medicinal purposes .
Studies finding positive evidence are frequently contradicted by other studies .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Aloe vera is a stemless or very short - stemmed plant growing to 60–100 cm ( 24–39 in ) tall , spreading by offsets .
The leaves are thick and fleshy , green to grey - green , with some varieties showing white flecks on their upper and lower stem surfaces .
The margin of the leaf is serrated and has small white teeth .
The flowers are produced in summer on a spike up to tall , each flower being pendulous , with a yellow tubular corolla 2–3 cm ( 0.8–1.2 in ) long .
Like other Aloe species , Aloe vera forms arbuscular mycorrhiza , a symbiosis that allows the plant better access to mineral nutrients in soil .
Aloe vera leaves contain phytochemicals under study for possible bioactivity , such as acetylated mannans , polymannans , anthraquinone C - glycosides , anthrones , and other anthraquinones , such as emodin and various lectins .
TAXONOMY AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Taxonomy and etymology .
The species has a number of synonyms : A. barbadensis Mill .
, Aloe indica Royle , Aloe perfoliata L. var .
vera and A. vulgaris Lam .
Common names include Chinese Aloe , Indian Aloe , True Aloe , Barbados Aloe , Burn Aloe , First Aid Plant .
The species epithet vera means " true " or " genuine " .
Some literature identifies the white - spotted form of Aloe vera as Aloe vera var .
chinensis ; however , the species varies widely with regard to leaf spots and it has been suggested that the spotted form of Aloe vera may be conspecific with A. massawana .
The species was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 as Aloe perfoliata var .
vera , and was described again in 1768 by Nicolaas Laurens Burman as Aloe vera in Flora Indica on 6 April and by Philip Miller as Aloe barbadensis some ten days after Burman in the Gardener 's Dictionary .
Techniques based on DNA comparison suggest Aloe vera is relatively closely related to Aloe perryi , a species endemic to Yemen .
Similar techniques , using chloroplast DNA sequence comparison and ISSR profiling have also suggested it is closely related to Aloe forbesii , Aloe inermis , Aloe scobinifolia , Aloe sinkatana , and Aloe striata .
With the exception of the South African species A. striata , these Aloe species are native to Socotra ( Yemen ) , Somalia , and Sudan .
The lack of obvious natural populations of the species has led some authors to suggest Aloe vera may be of hybrid origin .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
A. vera is considered to be native only to the south - west Arabian Peninsula .
However , it has been widely cultivated around the world , and has become naturalized in North Africa , as well as Sudan and neighboring countries , along with the Canary Islands , Cape Verde , and Madeira Islands .
It is also naturalized in wild areas across southern Spain , especially in the region of Murcia , being the only place in Europe where it has been found naturalized .
The species was introduced to China and various parts of southern Europe in the 17th century .
It is widely naturalized elsewhere , occurring in temperate and tropical regions of Australia , South America , Mexico , the Caribbean and southeastern US states .
The current distribution may be the result of human cultivation .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Aloe vera has been widely grown as an ornamental plant .
The species is popular with modern gardeners as a putatively medicinal plant and for its interesting flowers , form , and succulence .
This succulence enables the species to survive in areas of low natural rainfall , making it ideal for rockeries and other low water - use gardens .
The species is hardy in zones 8–11 , and is intolerant of heavy frost and snow .
The species is relatively resistant to most insect pests , though spider mites , mealy bugs , scale insects , and aphid species may cause a decline in plant health .
This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit .
In pots , the species requires well - drained , sandy potting soil and bright , sunny conditions .
Aloe plants can burn under too much sun or shrivel when the pot does not drain water .
The use of a good - quality commercial propagation mix or packaged " cacti and succulent mix " is recommended , as they allow good drainage .
Terra cotta pots are preferable as they are porous .
Potted plants should be allowed to completely dry before rewatering .
When potted , aloes can become crowded with " pups " growing from the sides of the " mother plant " .
Plants that have become crowded should be divided and repotted to allow room for further growth and help prevent pest infestations .
During winter , Aloe vera may become dormant , during which little moisture is required .
In areas that receive frost or snow , the species is best kept indoors or in heated glasshouses .
There is large - scale agricultural production of Aloe vera in Australia , Bangladesh , Cuba , the Dominican Republic , China , Mexico , India , Jamaica , Spain , where it grows
even well inland , Kenya , Tanzania and South Africa , along with the USA to supply the cosmetics industry .
USES RESEARCH Section::::Uses .
Section::::Research .
Although there is little scientific evidence of the effectiveness or safety of Aloe vera extracts for either cosmetic or medicinal purposes , the cosmetic and alternative medicine industries regularly make claims regarding the soothing , moisturizing , and healing properties of aloe vera .
There is no good evidence aloe vera is of use in treating wounds or burns , nor that topical application is effective for treating genital herpes or psoriasis .
A 2014 Cochrane review found insufficient evidence for using aloe vera topically to treat or prevent phlebitis caused by intravenous infusion .
Aloe vera gel is used commercially as an ingredient in yogurts , beverages , and some desserts , but at certain high doses , its toxic properties could be severe when taken orally .
DIETARY SUPPLEMENT Section::::Dietary supplement .
Aloin , a compound found in the exudate of some Aloe species , was the common ingredient in over - the - counter ( OTC ) laxative products in the United States until 2002 when the Food and Drug Administration banned it because the companies manufacturing it failed to provide the necessary safety data .
Aloe vera has potential toxicity , with side effects occurring at some dose levels both when ingested or applied topically .
Although toxicity may be less when aloin is removed by processing , Aloe vera that contains aloin in excess amounts may induce side effects .
Aloe vera juice is marketed to support the health of the digestive system , but there is neither scientific evidence nor regulatory approval to support this claim .
The extracts and quantities typically used for such purposes appear to be dose - dependent for toxic effects .
TRADITIONAL MEDICINE
Section::::Traditional medicine .
Aloe vera is used in traditional medicine as a skin treatment .
In Ayurvedic medicine it is called kathalai , as are extracts from agave .
Early records of Aloe vera use appear in the Ebers Papyrus from the 16th century BC , and in Dioscorides ' De Materia Medica and Pliny the Elder 's Natural History – both written in the mid - first century AD .
It is also written of in the Juliana Anicia Codex of 512 AD .
COMMODITIES Section::::Commodities .
Aloe vera is used on facial tissues where it is promoted as a moisturizer and anti - irritant to reduce chafing of the nose .
Cosmetic companies commonly add sap or other derivatives from Aloe vera to products such as makeup , tissues , moisturizers , soaps , sunscreens , incense , shaving cream , or shampoos .
A review of academic literature notes that its inclusion in many hygiene products is due to its " moisturizing emollient effect " .
Other potential uses for extracts of Aloe vera include the dilution of semen for the artificial fertilization of sheep , as a fresh food preservative , or for water conservation in small farms .
It has also been suggested that biofuels could be obtained from Aloe vera seeds .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
Under the guidelines of California Proposition 65 , orally ingested non - decolorized aloe vera leaf extract has been listed by the OEHHA , along with goldenseal , among " chemicals known to the state to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity " .
Use of topical aloe vera is not associated with significant side effects .
Oral ingestion of aloe vera , however , is potentially toxic , and may cause abdominal cramps and diarrhea which in turn can decrease the absorption of drugs .
IARC studies have found ingested non - decolorized liquid aloe vera is a possible carcinogen when eaten or ingested by humans .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Herbal medicine
* Medicinal plants
* Succulent plants REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS