TK MAXX TK Maxx , often stylised as T·k·maxx , is a subsidiary of the American apparel and home goods company TJX Companies based in Framingham , Massachusetts .
It uses a slightly different name from that of the TJ Maxx stores in the United States , to avoid confusion with the British retailer T. J. Hughes .
TK Maxx stores are operated throughout the United Kingdom , Australia , Ireland , Germany , Poland , Austria and the Netherlands , totalling 515 stores in Europe ( up from 407 in December 2014 ) and 35 in Australia in April 2017 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1976 , T.J. Maxx was founded in Framingham , Massachusetts , United States , by Bernard Cammarata .
The first British store opened in Bristol in 1994 .
The company modified the name to TK Maxx to avoid confusion with the established British retail chain T. J. Hughes ( which is not affiliated with TJX ) .
In 2007 , TK Maxx began winding down new store openings within the United Kingdom .
Focus was given to revamping older inner city stores , or relocating them .
This decision led to the creation of Maxx Maxx , moving from a budget reputation into a large department store format with a wider product range .
Opening of stores in the Netherlands between 1999 and 2001 was not as successful as the company wished .
The first store in Germany opened on October 4 , 2007 , in Lübeck .
In August 2008 , TK Maxx opened a store on Kensington High Street , London , England , its first central London store , on a site formerly occupied by Habitat .
In the following year , TK Maxx became locked in a dispute over its plans to open a store at Piccadilly Circus , London .
It had signed an agreement in February 2009 to occupy a unit , formerly used by Virgin Megastores and later Zavvi , with a £ 1.55 million a year rent .
The freehold to the land is owned by the Crown Estate which had the final decision over allowing the company to move into the unit .
The Crown Estate rejected the plans , saying that it did not fit in with the strategy it had for the site , which was meant to give the area an upmarket appeal .
The decision was met with condemnation from publicist Max Clifford , who launched a campaign in conjunction with Look to persuade the Crown Estate to allow the store to open in the unit .
A court appeal by TK Maxx against the decision failed ; Dutch retailer
The Sting took the building as their first store in the United Kingdom .
In March 2009 , the TK Maxx e - commerce site was launched , initially selling only handbags , but later also selling other accessories .
In October 2015 , the first Dutch store opened in Eindhoven .
Followed by two more stores in Groningen and Rotterdam .
In 2017 , the brand was launched in Australia when it took over the 35 Trade Secret discount department stores .
The stores opened in April in Brisbane , Sydney and Melbourne with stores in Cairns , Townsville , Toowoomba , Newcastle , Wollongong , Canberra , Albury , the Sunshine Coast and the Gold Coast by the end of May.
In November 2018 , a mass brawl between hostile extended families took place in Osnabrück .
CHARITY WORK Section::::Charity work .
In June 2007 , TK Maxx was an active participant of UK Comic Relief , having been the sole retailer of the Red Nose Day T - shirts which generated £ 2 million for the Comic Relief cause .
In June 2009 , TK Maxx was again the sole retailer of the Red Nose Day T - shirts , with exclusive designs by Stella McCartney , raising a total of £ 3,200,589 .
TK Maxx also worked with the Woodland Trust by starting to charge for plastic carrier bags in August 2008 and donating the proceeds to the Trust .
The proceeds allowed the Woodland Trust to plant 30,000 new trees on a site near Elmstead Market , Essex .
The usage of carrier bags from TK Maxx dropped by 73 % since the scheme was launched .
At the time , shops usually provided free carrier bags ; since 2015 a charge , usually donated to charity , is required by law throughout the United Kingdom .
Since 2004
TK Maxx has held a Christmas card recycling scheme in conjunction with the Trust .
TK Maxx also runs a ' Give Up Clothes For Good ' campaign , where customers are encouraged to bring in unwanted clothes for Cancer Research UK .
In Ireland , TK Maxx actively supports Enable Ireland , a charity which helps provide free services to children with disabilities .
NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS