O , THE OPRAH MAGAZINE O , The Oprah Magazine , sometimes simply abbreviated to O , is a monthly magazine founded by Oprah Winfrey and Hearst Communications , primarily marketed at women .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
It was first published on April 19 , 2000 .
, its average paid circulation was over 2.7 million copies , two thirds by subscription .
A South African edition was first published in April 2002 ; according to the South African Advertising Research Foundation , its average readership was over 300,000 .
The editor of the South African edition is Samantha Page .
While most US magazine sales declined in 2009 , O Magazine increased its newsstand sales by 5.8 percent to 662,304 copies during the second half of the year .
The magazine 's newsstand sales fell 15.8 % during the first half of 2010 , while its subscription circulation increased , and sales fell 8.2 % in the later half of the year .
Since its inception , Oprah has appeared on the cover of each issue .
The first shared cover is her April 2009 issue in which she appears with the First Lady Michelle Obama .
The second shared cover is with fellow daytime host Ellen DeGeneres on the December 2009 issue .
Four separate covers were shot for this special holiday issue .
The December issue of O hit newsstands on November 12 , 2009 .
O , the Oprah Magazine serves 63.6 % Caucasian , 29.8 % African - American , 8.8 % Hispanic , 1.8 % Asian and 6.6 % other women .
It is directed towards a median age of 47.9 , median home value of $ 214,281 , median HHI of $ 68,911 , and median IEI of $ 38,756 .
The mission statement of O Magazine presented by O Media Kit is to " Live Your Best Life " .
They also stated in their mission statement , " As the only magazine devoted to personal growth , O , The Oprah Magazine engages and addresses every aspect of a woman 's life - from beauty and style , to food , health , and more .
We inspire , motivate and celebrate our reader 's journeys to live their best life . " DIGITAL EDITIONS Section::::Digital editions .
The December 2010 issue of The Oprah Magazine was the first released digitally through the magazine 's app for the iPad .
The app features exclusive videos of Oprah , allows readers to preview and purchase books presented in the magazine 's Reading Room and O List sections , and gives users the ability to purchase monthly or yearly subscriptions .
Individual issues are also available for download through the app .
STAFF Section::::Staff .
In July 2009 , Susan Casey became the editor - in - chief of the magazine .
Before joining , she was the development editor of Time Inc .. Casey was editor - in - chief of Sports Illustrated Women , editor - at - large for Time Inc. , and creative director of Outside .
Casey wrote The New York Times bestseller , and The Wave .
In September 2009 , the magazine hired former Publishers Weekly editor – in – chief Sara Nelson as books editor at O.
In May 2013 , Lucy Kaylin was promoted to editor - in - chief , replacing Susan Casey .
BOOKS Section::::Books .
In 2015 , the magazine teamed up with Flatiron Books of St. Martin 's Press and published a series of inspiration books , including O 's Little Book of Happiness and , in 2016 , O 's Little Book of Love & Friendship .
PUBLIC PERCEPTION
Section::::Public perception .
In a March 2001 an article entitled O Positive , Noreen O'Leary argued that Winfrey was well on her way to influencing the content of women 's magazines beyond her own , just as she has helped reshape daytime TV and the world of book publishing .
BROCKMEYER LAWSUIT Section::::Brockmeyer lawsuit .
In April 2001 , Oprah Winfrey and the Hearst Corporation were sued for trademark infringement by Ronald Brockmeyer , the publisher of « O » Magazine , a German erotic periodical which predated Winfrey 's magazine by several years .
In a March 2003 decision , Judge John Koeltl dismissed the suit , citing the different content of the two magazines and the irregular publication schedule and minimal American sales of the German magazine .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official magazine websites : Oprah Winfrey and Hearst * Magazine summary , including ABC Circulation information and mission statement
*
Oprah gives O magazine staffers $ 10 K each to celebrate 10th anniversary