ZOEY BARTLET Zoey Patricia Bartlet is a fictional character played by Elisabeth Moss on the television serial drama The West Wing .
Zoey is the youngest of President Josiah Bartlet and Abbey Bartlet 's three daughters , and is featured more prominently in the series than either of her sisters .
Zoey and presidential aide Charlie Young become romantically involved in the first season of The West Wing .
Their interracial relationship prompts a white supremacist organization to target Young unsuccessfully for assassination , although President Bartlet is shot and Deputy Chief of Staff Josh Lyman is badly wounded in the shooting .
Zoey and Charlie 's relationship ends in the second season , largely due to Charlie 's demanding work schedule .
By the fourth season , Zoey is seen dating a young French man named Jean - Paul Pierre Claude Charpentier .
Zoey graduates summa cum laude from Georgetown University .
On her graduation day , she is kidnapped and held for several days , which leads President Bartlet to invoke the 25th Amendment , transferring presidential authority to Speaker of the House Glen Allen Walken as Acting President of the United States .
Jean - Paul 's unintentional complicity in the kidnapping ( he spikes her drink with what he thinks is ecstasy , but is actually GHB ) ends their relationship .
Zoey is found and recovered by the FBI after approximately 50 hours of being missing .
Later , in the sixth season , Charlie and Zoey are shown to have resumed their relationship , with Charlie even considering asking Zoey to marry him .
No mention is made of the relationship , or her occupation , in the seventh and final season , and she is seen only once attending Leo McGarry 's funeral .
According to President Bartlet , Zoey speaks fluent Italian .
Her Secret Service codename is " Bookbag " .
Her birthday is in December , which is established in the episode "
In the Room " .
SEE ALSO
*
The West Wing
* List of characters in The West Wing * List of politicians in The West Wing * List of The West Wing episodes NOTES