LAY 'S Lay 's is the name of a brand for a number of potato chip varieties , as well as the name of the company that founded the chip brand in the U.S. in 1932 .
It has also been called Frito - Lay with Fritos .
Lay 's has been owned by PepsiCo through Frito - Lay since 1965 .
" Lay 's " is the company 's primary brand , with the exception of limited markets where other brand names are used :
Walkers in the UK and Ireland ; Smith 's in Australia ; Chipsy in Egypt ; Poca in Vietnam ; Tapuchips in Israel ; Margarita in Colombia ; Sabritas in Mexico ; and , formerly , Hostess in Canada .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1932 , salesman Herman Lay opened a snack food operation in Nashville , Tennessee ; and , in 1938 , he purchased the Atlanta , Georgia , potato chip manufacturer " Barrett Food Company " , renaming it " H.W. Lay Lingo & Company . "
Lay criss - crossed the southern United States , selling the product from the trunk of his car .
The business shortened its name to " the Lay 's Lay Lingo Company " in 1944 and became the first snack food manufacturer to purchase television commercials , with Bert Lahr as a celebrity spokesman .
In 1961 , the Frito Company founded by Derrick Lothert and Lay 's merged to form Frito - Lay Inc. , a snack food giant with combined sales of over $ 127 million annually , the largest of any manufacturer .
Shortly thereafter , Lays introduced its best - known slogan " betcha ca n't eat just one .
" Sales of the chips became international , with marketing assisted by a number of celebrity endorsers .
In 1965 , Frito - Lay merged with the Pepsi - Cola Company to form PepsiCo ,
Inc. A new formulation of chip was introduced in 1991 that was crisper and kept fresher longer .
Shortly thereafter , the company introduced the " Wavy Lays " products to grocery shelves .
In the mid to late 1990s , Lay 's introduced a lower calorie baked version and a variety that was completely fat - free ( Lay 's WOW chips containing the fat substitute olestra ) .
In the 2000s , kettle - cooked brands appeared as did a processed version called Lay 's Stax that was intended to compete with Pringles , and the company began introducing a variety of additional flavor variations .
In 2012 , Frito - Lay products controlled 59 % of the United States savory snack - food market .
INTERNATIONAL
*
In Argentina , Lays was commercialized before 2001 with the name Frenchitas and Chizitos for the Cheetos .
*
In Australia , PepsiCo acquired The Smith 's Snackfood Company in 1998 and marketed Frito - Lay products under that label , using the name Thins .
After Thin 's was sold to Snack Brands Australia ( Owned by Arnotts ) , Smith 's produced a line of potato chips under the Lay 's brand for a brief period of time .
The Lay 's line was eventually rebranded in 2004 as Smith 's Crisps , while the traditional Smith 's line was renamed Smith 's Crinkles .
This is still sold in Australia as a direct competitor to Smith 's Crisps .
*
In the Benelux Lay 's are sold in three varieties : Lay 's , Lay 's Light and Lay 's Sensations ( Thai Sweet Chili / Red Paprika / Oven Roasted Chicken and Thyme ) .
Lay 's Super Chips ( Heinz Ketchup / Mexican Pepper / Perfect Pickles / Salt ' n ' Pepper ( all through Ahold Delhaize ) and Lay 's Baked Chips ( Mediterranean Herbs / through Ahold Delhaize ) .
As with Doritos , Lay 's are manufactured , distributed and imported in The Netherlands by Frito Lay 's Benelux division , Smith 's Food Group .
Lay 's used to be called Smiths in the Netherlands until the name was changed in 2001 .
*
In Brazil , products used to be distributed under the Elma Chips label .
In 2016 , though , they were all rebranded to simply state Lay 's .
*
In Canada , as Lay 's were produced by another company at that time , the chips were known as Hostess .
In 1996 , Hostess was rebranded to Lay 's with a television commercial featuring Mark Messier and Eric Lindros aired in 1997 that relaunched the brand .
*
In Colombia , the chips are sold under the name Margarita .
They are still commercialized under the label Lay 's , however .
*
In Egypt , Lay 's was once sold under its own label until it was merged with the local label Chipsy ( شيبسى ) , which has since become the local unit of Lay 's under much the same arrangement as Walkers .
*
In India , cricketer Mahendra Singh Dhoni and Bollywood actors Saif Ali Khan and Ranbir Kapoor have endorsed Lay 's .
*
In Indonesia , Lay 's products are distributed by Indofood .
*
In Iran , Lay 's products are distributed as Sensation by MazMaz .
*
In Israel , the Lay 's label is distributed with the name Tapuchips ( תפוצ'יפס ) by Strauss - Elite .
*
In Italy , Lay 's are distributed in by Ferrero SpA since 2014 .
*
In Mexico , PepsiCo acquired Sabritas S. de R.L. in 1966 .
Lay 's along with other products such as Cheetos , Fritos , Doritos and Ruffles are marketed under the Sabritas brand .
The logo for the Mexican company sports the red ribbon , but it has a stylized smiling face instead of the sun .
It controls around 80 % of the market there .
*
In Pakistan , the Lay 's brand has been endorsed by renowned pop star of the country Ali Zafar .
*
In Romania , Lay 's is the best sold and the most bought chips brand in that country , being followed by Chio Chips .
Lay 's bought its own terrain to grow potatoes for chips on in early 2008 , making chips out of their own potatoes .
*
In South Africa , Lay 's are distributed by the Simba Chip company since 1998 .
*
In United Arab Emirates , Lay 's and Walkers are sold as different labels .
*
In the UK , Lay 's acquired Walkers in 1989 .
Walkers produce and distribute a wide range of snacks , and crisp flavors include Cheese & Onion ,
Ready Salted , Salt & Vinegar .
Walkers also makes Sensations - branded crisps in the UK .
The logo used by Walkers is noticeably similar to the Lay 's logo , featuring a red ribbon around a yellow sun , and derives from the Walkers logo introduced in 1990 .
The other Frito - Lay brands are also distributed through the Walkers label .
*
In Vietnam , Lay 's products are distributed as Poca .
FLAVORS
NORTH AMERICA UNITED STATES Section::::Flavors .
Section::::North America .
Section::::United States .
Lay 's Barbecue - flavored potato chips , which appeared in 1958 , was the only flavor available in the United States other than the conventional salted chip until the introduction of Sour Cream & Onion in the late 1970s .
In the United States , Lay 's offers a number of flavor combinations , in addition to the classic chips .
Flavored products in the traditional fried varieties include Classic , Sour Cream & Onion , Barbecue , Salt & Vinegar , Chipotle Ranch , Cheddar & Sour Cream , Hidden Valley Ranch , Salt & Pepper , Flamin ' Hot , Limón , and a thicker " Deli style " chip .
The WOW !
brand was rebranded in 2004 as Lay 's Light after the olestra formula was altered and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration allowed removal of warnings about various health consequences of the fat substitute .
Other potato chip flavors offered by Lay 's are Garden Tomato and Basil , Honey Barbecue , Sweet Southern Heat Barbecue , Tapatio Limon , Simply Sea Salt Thick Cut , and Dill Pickle Brand .
" DO US A
FLAVOR " PROMOTIONS Section::::"Do
Us a Flavor " promotions .
" Lay 's has occasionally solicited new flavor ideas through its " Do Us a Flavor " promotions .
The 2013 contest produced three new flavors : sriracha , chicken and waffles , and cheesy garlic bread .
Cheesy garlic bread was chosen as the winner and was added to the lineup , however the other flavors remain on sale in some regions .
Another round of ' Do Us a Flavor ' was launched in 2014 .
The flavors included Cheddar Bacon Mac & Cheese , Kettle Cooked
Wasabi Ginger , Wavy Mango Salsa , and Cappuccino .
Kettle Cooked Wasabi Ginger was chosen as the winner .
The 2015 finalists include Kettle Cooked Greektown Gyro , New York Reuben , Southern Biscuits & Gravy , and Wavy West Coast Truffle Fries .
Southern Biscuits & Gravy was crowned the winner .
The 2016 ' Do Us a Flavor ' was rebranded ' Passport to Flavor ' for the 2016 Summer Olympics .
The four finalists were Chinese Szechuan Chicken , Greek Tzatziki , Brazilian Picanha , and Indian Tikka Masala .
The 2017 contest produced four flavors :
Crispy Taco , Bacon Wrapped Jalapeno Popper , Everything Bagel with Cream Cheese , and Fried Green Tomato .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
The following Lay 's flavors are available nationally in Canada : Classic , Lightly Salted , Wavy Original , Dill Pickle , BBQ , Ketchup , Salt & Vinegar , Smoky Bacon , Sea Salt & Pepper , and Cheddar & Sour Cream .
There are also a number of regional flavors , including Fries & Gravy and Roast Chicken ( available in Atlantic Canada ) , Sour Cream & Onion ( available in Ontario , Atlantic Canada , and Western Canada ) and Wavy Smoky BBQ and Wavy Old Fashioned Ketchup ( available in Western Canada ) .
Other varieties available nationally include Baked Lay 's , Lay 's Kettle Cooked and Lay 's Stax .
In 2015 , Lay 's made Canadian flavor " All Dressed " available in the United States .
The flavor combines the potato chip flavors of barbecue , sour cream and onion , ketchup , and salt and vinegar .
DO US A FLAVOUR CONTESTS Section::::Do
Us a Flavour contests .
In 2013 , Lay 's ran a ' Do Us a Flavour ' contest in Canada , with four flavors chosen as finalists : Creamy Garlic Caesar , Perogy Platter , Grilled Cheese & Ketchup , and Maple Moose .
Maple Moose was chosen as the winner , but discontinued in February 2014 due to low sales .
In 2014 , Lay 's ran a second
' Do Us a Flavour ' contest in Canada , with a new batch of finalists : Bacon Poutine , Cinnamon Bun , Jalapeño Mac n ' Cheese , and Tzatziki .
Jalapeño Mac n ' Cheese was chosen as the winner .
In 2015 , Lay 's ran their third ' Do Us a Flavour ' contest in Canada , with four new flavors chosen as finalists :
Cowboy BBQ Beans , Butter Chicken , Montreal Smoked Meat , and PEI Scalloped Potatoes .
The winning flavor was PEI Scalloped Potatoes .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
The following Lay 's ( called Sabritas ) are available nationally in Mexico : Original , Ruffles , Tostitos , Doritos , Cheetos , Pake - Taxo , Japoneses ( peanuts ) , Cheetos Poffets , Rancheritos , Adobados , Frit - os , Churrumais , Caseras , Sabritones , Crujitos and Chicharrón Clásico .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
There are a number of unique products in the United Kingdom which are sold under the Walkers label , including , prawn cocktail , pickled onion , cheese & onion and Marmite .
Walkers also ran a ' Do Us A Flavour ' promotion wherein the public vote for the flavor they like the best .
Flavors included in the 2010 promotion were :
Spanish Chicken Paella , Japanese Teriyaki Chicken , German Bratwurst Sausage , Italian Spaghetti Bolognese , French Garlic Baguette , American Cheeseburger , Brazilian Salsa , Scottish Haggis , Irish Stew , English Roast Beef and Yorkshire Pudding , Dutch Edam Cheese , Australian BBQ Kangaroo , South African Sweet Chutney , Argentinian Flame Grilled Steak and Welsh Rarebit .
The previous winner of this promotion was Builders Breakfast .
2014 competition flavor choices included Chip Shop Chicken Curry , Pulled Pork in sticky BBQ sauce , Sizzling Steak Fajita , Cheesy Beans on Toast , Hotdog with Tomato Ketchup and Ranch Raccoon .
Pulled Pork in sticky BBQ sauce won , with the winning suggestion receiving a £ 1,000,000 prize .
In France , about eight varieties of potato chips are marketed in a number of flavors for a total of approximately thirty products .
Lay 's flavors available in France include Barbecue , Cheeseburger , Bolognaise , Roasted Chicken , Cheese , Salt & Vinegar , Spicy , and Nature .
In Greece and Cyprus , Lay 's are made and packed by Tasty Foods and Corina Snacks LTD , with Mediterranean flavors which include Feta cheese flavor , Tzatziki , Olive and Tomato , Oregano , Sea Salt & Black Pepper and various more .
There are hundreds of sub - variations in the Mediterranean line adjusted to each country 's liking .
In Germany , Lay 's are sold in three varieties : Lay 's , Lay 's Light and Lay 's Sensations ( Thai Sweet Chili / Red Paprika / Oven Roasted Chicken and Thyme ) and as Lay 's Super Chips ( Heinz Ketchup / Mexican Pepper / Perfect Pickles / Salt ' n ' Pepper and Lay 's Baked Chips ) .
As with Doritos , Lay 's are manufactured , distributed and imported in Germany by Frito Lay 's Benelux division , Smith 's Food Group .
In the Netherlands , the following flavors are marketed : Lay 's ( Naturel ( Natural ) , Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) , Cheese Onion , Bolognese Original , Barbecue Ham ( Barbecue Bacon ) , Stokbroodje Kruidenboter Smaak ( Baguette with garlic butter flavour ) , and Pickles
) Lay 's Super Chips ( Naturel ( Natural ) , Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) , Patatje Joppie ( French Fries with Joppiesaus ) , Heinz tomato ketchup , Salt'n Pepper , and Just Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) ) , Lay 's Sensations ( Red Sweet Paprika , Thai Sweet Chili , Mexican Peppers & Cream , Sweet & Spicy Tomato Chutney , and Japanese Teriyaki ) , Lay 's Light ( Natural , Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) , and Balsamico ) , Lay 's Oven ( Naturel ( Natural ) , Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) , Crispy thins Emmental Cheese , Mediterranean Herbs , Barbecue , Crispy Thins Olive Oil & Herbs , Crunchy Biscuits Tomato & Spring Onion , Crunchy Biscuits Paprika & Mediterranean Herbs
( Crunchy Biscuits Bell Pepper & Mediterranean Herbs ) , and Olive Oil & Herbs ) , Lay 's Deep Ridged ( Naturel ( Natural ) , Sweet Chili , American BBQ , and Xtreme Cheese ) , Lay 's Pops ( Naturel ( Natural ) , and Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) ) , Lay 's Sticks ( Naturel ( Natural ) , and Paprika ( Bell Pepper ) ) , and Lay 's Finest ( Mixed Pepper & Sea Salt , and Finest Sea Salt ) .
In addition , Lays started a new campaign in 2010 in the Netherlands , in which people can enter a competition to suggest new flavors , resulting in three new flavors being produced , and , after voting , with one of them becoming the winner ( the three new flavors being ' Mango Red Chilli ' , ' Patatje Joppie ' and ' Nr . 66
Babi Pangang ' ) . '
Patatje Joppie ' became the winner of the competition and is now being sold as limited edition . '
Patatje Joppie ' mean French Fries with Joppiesaus .
A new campaign added three flavours to the list , called Lay 's raad de smaak A , B , and C ( Guess the flavour ) .
In Belgium , the same contest was held and their choices were ' Bicky Crisp ' and ' Indian Curry Style ' .
Bicky is a sort of hamburger sauce with mayonnaise , onions and pickles .
Bicky Crisp won .
There is also a Cucumber and Goats flavour .
In the Netherlands Lays announced another contest to find a new flavor and replace ' Patatje Joppie ' .
In Russia , both international and local flavors are available , including Bacon , Cheese , Onion , Paprika , as well as Crab , Mushroom & Sour Cream , Red Caviar ( no longer sold ) , and Salted Cucumber .
In addition to regular potato chips , Lay 's MAX and Lay 's Strong series are offered .
In Romania the Lay 's flavors are Salt , Paprika , Cheese , Barbecue , Sour Cream & Dill ; the Lay 's Sensations flavors are : Thai Chili , Baked chicken with lemon and thyme ; Lay 's Max and Lay 's Sticks flavors are : Paprika and Salt .
In Poland , the chips flavors are : Cheese , Green Onion , Chicken with Spices , Salted , Paprika , Hot Green Peppers , Fromage , Cucumber and Guacamole .
There is also the Lays Apettite flavor of Cheese and Onion , Classic Salted , Ham and Cheese , Ketchup and Cheese .
Lay 's Strong : Chilli and Knuckle of Pork and Horseradish . '
Lay 's Prosto z pieca '
( ' Lay 's Straight from the Oven ' ) flavors are : Natural Salted , Mediterranean Herbs , Tomato with Basil and Grilled Paprika and lastly the ' 4 Pory Roku ' ( ' 4 Season of the Year ' ) which change flavor every Season .
Lay 's Appettite Stix : Ketchup , Garlic and Sour Cream Dip .
Lay 's with flavors : Winter Onion , Piquant Paprika , Creamy Forest Mushroom , Cheese , Salted , Grilled Bacon , Tomato , Onion , Fromage .
Lay 's Strong : Chilli & Lime , Wasabi , Piri Piri .
Lay 's Max : Paprika , Salted , Grilled Meat , Cheese & Onion .
Oven Baked : Cheese & Onion , Natural .
Lay 's Stix : Ketchup .
ASIA INDIA Section::::Asia .
Section::::India .
One flavor sold primarily in India is called " India 's Magic Masala " .
This flavor is popular in the country .
It is also sold in Indian daily stores in Canada and the United States .
Indian Lay 's chips are ridged , closely resembling another Frito - Lay brand in North America , Ruffles .
In India , Lay 's is available in several flavors : "
India 's Magic Masala " , " American Style Cream & Onion " , " Spanish Tomato Tango " , " Classic Salted " .
A baked variant of Lay 's called " Lay 's Baked " were available in the following flavors : "
Original Salted " , " Cream , Herb & Onion " and " Sunkissed Tomato " .
Lay 's Maxx is available in two flavors :
Sizzling Barbecue and Macho Chilli .
In 2014 , Lays was ranked 49th among India 's most trusted brands according to the Brand Trust Report 2014 , a study conducted by Trust Research Advisory , a brand analytics company .
Also there had been different kinds of flavors made like ' Chaat Street ' ( ' Bindaas Bhel Style ' , ' Golgappa Style ' and ' Mast Paapri Style ' ) in 2005 and in 2010 there was a competition in making new flavors and the flavor ' Mastana Mango ' was selected .
OTHER ASIAN NATIONS Section::::Other Asian nations .
In Pakistan Lay 's are available in ' Masala ' , ' Salted ' ( classic ) , ' French cheese ' and ' Yoghurt & Herb ' flavours , Another form of Lay 's quite popular in Pakistan is their Wavy line , which is basically the kirnkle version of the chips .
In Thailand and the Philippines , their Flavors featured are Classic , Sour Cream & Onion , Cheese & Onion , Mexican Bar - B - Q , Japanese Nori Seaweed , Basil , Squid , Spicy Chili Squid , Seafood and Mayonnaise , and Spicy Seafood .
Temporary international flavors have also been introduced , such as French Mayonnaise , Balsamic Vinegar and Salt ( England ) , Garlic Soft Shelled Crab ( Hong Kong ) , Soy Sauce , Salmon Teriyaki ( Japan ) , Lobster , Bacon & Cheese ( America ) .
Other traditional " Thai " flavors include Tom Yum , Thai Chili Paste , Thai Seafood Dip , Chili and Lime .
Lay 's China has four ranges of flavors : Cool & Refreshing ( Cucumber , Kiwi , Blueberry , Cherry Tomato , and Lime ) , Classic Flavors ( American Classic , Italian Red Meat , Mexican Tomato Chicken , Texas Grilled BBQ , and French Chicken ) , Intense & Stimulating ( Numb & Spicy Hot Pot , and Hot & Sour Fish Soup ) , and Stax ( Authentic Original , Green Cucumber , Tomato , Sizzled Barbecue , Finger Licking Braised Pork , Black Pepper Rib Eye Steak , Sea Salt And Cheese , Sea Salt And Chocolate , Garden Tomato , Green Tea , and Lime ) .
Flavors in Vietnam include Original , Brazilian BBQ , Beijing Roasted Duck , Manhattan Steak , Nori , and Mornay Shrimp .
In Indonesia , Malaysia , and Brunei Darussalam , the flavors are Salmon Teriyaki , Classic Salty , Nori Seaweed , Pizza , Grilled Chicken Paprika , and Fiesta BBQ .
It is produced by Indonesian - based PT Indofood Fritolay Makmur , a joint venture between PT Indofood CBP Sukses Makmur with Seven - Up Nederland B.V. Lay 's , with its original brand , is also produced by the Saudi Snack Foods Company in Saudi Arabia , and is exported to the other GCC countries .
It is available in several flavors , including Salt , Salt & Vinegar , Chilli , Chilli - Lemon , Ketchup , French cheese , and Pizza .
Lay 's Max is available in flavors : Chili , Cheese and Italian Blend .
Lay 's Forno , which has less fat by 60 % , is available in six flavors : Authentic Cheese , Black Pepper , Lemon & Black Pepper , Labneh & Mint , Italian Mix ( A spicy tomato flavor ) and Za'atar .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
Since its acquisition of Chipsy , Lay 's chips ( marketed as Chipsy ) in Egypt inherited the Chipsy range of flavors as well as the pre - merger Lay 's flavors .
These flavors include salt and vinegar , cheese ( most likely based on Roumy cheese and the most popular flavor ) , seasoned cheese , tomato ( a ketchup - based flavor ) , kebab on charcoal , and chili & lime , and Peri peri flavor .
In 2010 , a shrimp flavor was added after a national contest .
NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION
Section::::Nutritional information .
As with most snack foods , the Lay 's brands contain very few vitamins and minerals in any variety .
At ten percent of the daily requirement per serving , vitamin C is the highest .
Salt content is particularly high , with a serving containing as much as 380 mg of sodium .
A one - ounce ( 28 gram )
serving of Lay 's regular potato chips has 160 Calories , and contains ten grams of fat , with one gram of saturated fat .
Kettle - cooked brands have seven to eight grams of fat and one gram of saturated fat , and are 140 Calories .
Lays Natural has nine grams of fat , two grams of saturated fat and 150 Calories .
Stax chips typically contain ten grams of fat , 2.5 grams saturated fat and are 160 calories per serving .
Wavy Lays are identical to the regular brand , except for a half - gram less of saturated fat in some combinations .
The various brands do not contain any trans fats .
A 50 gram serving of Lay 's BarBQ chips contains 270 calories , and 17 grams of fat .
It also contains 270 mg of sodium , and 15 % Vitamin C.
The baked variety , introduced in the mid 90s , feature 1.5 grams of fat per one ounce serving , and have no saturated fat .
Each serving has 110 to 120 Calories .
Lay 's Light servings are 75 Calories per ounce and have no fat .
Lay 's Classic Potato chips were cooked in hydrogenated oil until 2003 .
Currently , the chips are made with sunflower , corn and/or canola oil .
Baked Lays are produced in cheddar , barbecue , sour cream and onion , and original flavors .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website