SHE 'S LIKE THE WIND
" She 's Like the Wind " is a 1987 power ballad from the film Dirty Dancing , performed by Patrick Swayze .
Though Swayze is the primary vocalist on the single , it was billed as being performed by " Patrick Swayze & Wendy Fraser " .
Fraser is heard throughout much of the song , specifically in the final chorus .
The single reached number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Adult Contemporary chart .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Swayze and Stacy Widelitz co - wrote the song in 1984 .
It was originally intended for the soundtrack of Grandview , U.S.A. and was meant to be about Jamie Lee Curtis ' character in the film .
However , the song was not used in that film .
During production of Dirty Dancing in 1987 , Swayze played the demo for producer Linda Gottlieb and director Emile Ardolino .
They loved it and passed it on to Jimmy Ienner and Bob Feiden , the soundtrack 's executive producers .
It was recorded for the soundtrack in November 1986 , with Michael Lloyd producing .
The song , like the film in which it was featured , was a success , reaching number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on Adult Contemporary , and was a hit around the world .
It is still in circulation on radio .
The soundtrack album was number one for 18 weeks ( 9 weeks from December 5 1987 to 9 January 1988 , then 9 weeks from March 12 to May 7 1988 ) HISTORY Section::::History .
Swayze co - wrote and performed two tracks on the soundtrack to the film Road House ( 1989 ) , plus he co - wrote and performed a duet with Larry Gatlin for the film Next of Kin ( 1989 ) .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video in black and white features clips from the movie Dirty Dancing .
The video can be seen on the Ultimate Dirty Dancing DVD .
RELEASES Section::::Releases .
The song was released commercially on 7 " vinyl in many countries , with a 3-track 12 " maxi single and 2-track cassette also produced .
CD singles were a relatively new format , however ; a 2 and 3-track 5 " CD and Japanese mini CD single were commercially released .
TRACK LISTING
CHART HISTORY
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Chart history .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1987 - 88 ) !
Peakposition Australian Singles Chart align="center"6
Austrian Singles Chart
align="center"15
Canada RPM Adult Contemporary Canada RPM Top Singles
Dutch Mega Top 100 align="center"13
German Singles Chart align="center"14 Irish Singles Chart
align="center"4
New Zealand Singles Chart align="center"27 Norwegian Singles Chart
align="center"7 South African Singles Chart align="center"13
Swedish Singles Chart
align="center"8
Swiss Singles Chart
align="center"23 UK Singles Chart align="center"17 US Billboard Hot 100
align="center"3
US Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks
align="center"1
US Cash Box Top 100
align="center"2 !
Chart ( 1992 - 93 ) !
Peakposition
French SNEP Singles Chart
align="center"7 !
Chart ( 2009 ) !
Peakposition Swiss Singles Chart align="center"67
YEAR - END CHARTS LUMIDEE Section::::Lumidee .
" She 's Like the Wind " is a cover recorded by American recording artists Lumidee and Tony Sunshine for Lumidee 's second album ,
Unexpected ( 2007 ) .
It was released as the lead single from Unexpected in the US and Europe on April 3 , 2007 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
According to Lumidee , the idea to record a remake of Patrick Swayze 's 1987 song "
She 's Like The Wind " was inspired by her European label when she recommended a collaboration with fellow New York recording artist Tony Sunshine .
She also said , " We 'd been talking about working together but had n't been able to .
But he loved the idea of doing something with this song . "
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for this version was directed by Dayo .
TRACK LISTING
*
" She 's Like the Wind " ( radio edit ) – 4:17
* * " She 's Like the Wind " ( Spanglish version ) – 3:53
* * " She 's Like the Wind " ( instrumental ) – 4:18
* * " She 's Like the Wind " ( a cappella ) – 4:15 * CHARTS Section::::Charts .
!
align="left"Chart ( 2007 ) !
align="center"Peakposition OTHER VERSIONS
*
The song was later covered by Vibekingz featuring Maliq , Phonkillaz ( 2002 ) , and Patrick Nuo , and in 2007 by Lumidee featuring Tony Sunshine , released on Lumidee 's album Unexpected .
*
The Vibekingz version reached # 2 on Germany 's pop charts in 2006 , and stayed in the top ten for two months .
The version by Lumidee received widespread airplay in the United States , reaching the top 20 .
Tony Sunshine sings the original part by Swayze , while Lumidee raps with original verses related to the theme of the song .
* A mashup song and video of " She 's Like the Wind " with " Minimal " by
Pet Shop Boys has been a featured video on YouTube .
* Girls Aloud covered "
She 's Like the Wind " in the Dirty Dancing Medley on their ; it was Kimberley Walsh 's solo .
* Ultrabeat covered the song on their 2008 album , .
*
Jan Wayne covered it on his album Back Again .
* Performed as a tribute to Patrick Swayze on Season 9 Dancing with the Stars Result Show by Dmitry Chaplin and Chelsie Hightower .
* John Sage covered the song as a single release in 2013 .
* Boston artist Michael Spaulding also covered the song for his new album released in 2013 .
*
The song is briefly used in a scene of the 2009 movie ( 500 ) Days of Summer .
*
Swaytrick released their She 's Like
the Wind ( Club Mixes ) album in 2014 .
Besides the original Swaytrick versions the album features summery house remixes by The Moodshapers .
* Urban Zouk Music Producer Jay Bee did a bootleg remix of the song in 2015 " .
* Calum Scott performed a version used in the 2017 TV movie version of Dirty Dancing .
REFERENCES