BOARDING PASS A boarding pass is a document provided by an airline during check - in , giving a passenger permission to enter the restricted area of an airport and to board the airplane for a particular flight .
At a minimum , it identifies the passenger , the flight number , and the date and scheduled time for departure .
In some cases , flyers can check in online and print the boarding passes themselves .
A boarding pass may be required for a passenger to enter a secure area of an airport .
Generally , a passenger with an electronic ticket will only need a boarding pass .
If a passenger has a paper airline ticket , that ticket ( or flight coupon ) may be required to be attached to the boarding pass for him or her to board the aircraft .
For " connecting flights " , a boarding pass is required for each new leg ( distinguished by a different flight number ) , regardless of whether a different aircraft is boarded or not .
The paper boarding pass ( and ticket , if any ) , or portions thereof , are sometimes collected and counted for cross - check of passenger counts by gate agents , but more frequently are scanned ( via barcode or magnetic strip ) .
The standards for bar codes and magnetic stripes on boarding passes are published by IATA .
The bar code standard ( BCBP ) defines the 2D bar code printed on paper boarding passes or sent to mobile phones for electronic boarding passes .
The magnetic stripe standard ( ATB2 ) expired in 2010 .
Most airports and airlines have automatic readers that will verify the validity of the boarding pass at the jetway door or boarding gate .
This also automatically updates the airline 's database that shows the passenger has boarded and the seat is used , and that the checked baggage for that passenger may stay aboard .
This speeds up the paperwork process at the gate , but requires passengers with paper tickets to check in , surrender the ticket , and receive the digitized boarding pass .
BAR - CODES Section::::Bar - codes .
BCBP ( bar - coded boarding pass ) is the name of the standard used by more than 200 airlines .
BCBP defines the 2-Dimensional ( 2D ) bar code printed on a boarding pass or sent to a mobile phone for electronic boarding passes .
BCBP was part of the IATA Simplifying the Business program , which issued an industry mandate for all boarding passes to be bar coded .
This was achieved in 2010 .
Airlines and third parties use a barcode reader to read the bar codes and capture the data .
Reading the bar code usually takes place in the boarding process , but can also happen when entering the airport security checkpoints .
The standard was originally published in 2005 by IATA and updated in 2008 to include symbologies for mobile phones and in 2009 to include a field for a digital signature in the mobile bar codes .
Future developments of the standard will include a near field communication format .
SECURITY CONCERNS
Section::::Security concerns .
In recent years concerns have been raised both to the security of the boarding pass bar - codes ,
the data they contain and the PNR ( Passenger Name Record ) data that they link to .
Some airline bar - codes can be scanned by mobile phone applications to reveal names , dates of birth , source and destination airports and the PNR locator code .
This code is a 6-digit alphanumeric code also sometimes referred to as a booking reference number .
This code plus the surname of the traveller can be used to login to the airline 's website and access information on the traveller .
PAPER BOARDING
PASSES Section::::Paper boarding passes .
Paper boarding passes are issued either by agents at a check - in counter , self - service kiosks , or by airline web check - in site .
BCBP can be printed at the airport by an ATB ( Automated Ticket & Boarding Pass ) printer or a direct thermal printer , or by a personal laser printer .
The symbology for paper boarding passes is PDF417 .
IATA 's Board of Governors ' mandate stated that all the IATA member airlines would be capable of issuing BCBP by the end of 2008 , and all boarding passes would contain the 2D bar code by the end of 2010 .
The BCBP standard were published in 2005 .
It has been progressively adopted by airlines :
End 2005 , 9 airlines were BCBP capable ; 32 by end 2006 ; 101 by end 2007 ; and 200 by end 2008 ( source : IATA ) .
MOBILE BOARDING
PASSES
Section::::Mobile boarding passes .
Electronic boarding passes were ' the industry 's next major technological innovation after e - ticketing ' .
According to SITA 's Airline IT Trend Survey 2009 , mobile BCBP accounted for 2.1 % of use ( vs. paper boarding passes ) , forecast rising to 11.6 % in 2012 .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Many airlines have moved to issuing electronic boarding passes , whereby the passenger checks in either online or via a mobile device , and the boarding pass is then sent to the mobile device as an SMS or e - mail .
Upon completing an online reservation , the passenger can tick a box offering a mobile boarding pass .
Most carriers offer two ways to get it : have one sent to mobile device ( via e - mail or text message ) when checking in online , or use an airline app to check in , and the boarding pass will appear within the application .
The mobile pass is equipped with the same bar code as a standard paper boarding pass , and it is completely machine readable .
The gate attendant simply scans the code displayed on the phone .
IATA 's BCBP standard defines the three symbologies accepted for mobile phones : Aztec code , Datamatrix and QR code .
The United Nations International Telecommunications Union expected mobile phone subscribers to hit the 4 billion mark by the end of 2008 .
AIRLINES USING MOBILE BOARDING PASSES Section::::Airlines using mobile boarding passes .
In 2007 , Continental Airlines ( now United ) first began testing mobile boarding passes .
Now , most of the major carriers offer mobile boarding passes at many airports .
Airlines that issue electronic boarding passes include : In Europe , Lufthansa was one of the first airlines to launch Mobile BCBP in April 2008 .
In the US , the Transportation Security Administration runs a pilot program of a Boarding Pass Scanning System , using the IATA BCBP standard .
*
On October 15 , 2008 , the TSA announced that scanners would be deployed within a year and scanning mobile BCBP would enable to better track wait times .
The TSA keeps adding new pilot airports : Cleveland on October 23 , 2008 .
*
On October 14 , 2008 , Alaska Airlines started piloting mobile boarding passes at Seattle Seatac Airport .
*
On November 3 , 2008 , Air New Zealand launched the mpass , a boarding pass received on the mobile phone .
*
On November 10 , 2008 , Qatar Airways launched their online check - in : passengers can have their boarding passes sent directly to their mobile phones .
*
On November 13 , 2008 , American Airlines started offering mobile boarding passes in Chicago O'Hare airport .
*
On December 18 , 2008 , Cathay Pacific launched its mobile Check - in service , including the delivery of the barcode to the mobile phone .
*
On February 24 , 2009 , Austrian Airlines begun offering paperless boarding passes to customers on selected routes .
*
On April 16 , 2009 , SAS joined the mobile boarding pass bandwagon .
*
On May 26 , 2009 , Air China offered its customers to receive a two - dimensional bar - code e - boarding pass on their mobile phone , with which they can go through security procedures at any channel in Beijing Airport Terminal 3 , enabling a completely paperless check - in service .
*
On October 1 , 2009 , Swiss introduced mobile boarding pass to its customers .
*
On November 12 , 2009 , Finnair explained that " The mobile boarding pass system cuts passengers ' carbon footprint by removing the need for passengers to print out and keep track of a paper boarding pass " .
*
On 15 March 2010 , United began to offer mobile boarding passes to customers equipped with smartphones .
*
In July / August 2014 , Ryanair became the latest airline to offer mobile boarding passes to customers equipped with smartphones .
BENEFITS
*
Practical : Travelers do n't always have access to a printer , so choosing a mobile boarding pass eliminates the hassle of stopping at a kiosk at the airport .
*
Ecological : Issuing electronic boarding passes is much more environmentally friendly than constantly using up paper for boarding passes .
DRAWBACKS
* Using a mobile boarding pass is risky if one 's phone battery dies ( rendering the boarding pass inaccessible ) or there are any problems reading the e - boarding pass .
* Using a mobile boarding pass can also be a challenge when traveling with multiple people on one reservation , because not all airline apps handle multiple mobile boarding passes .
( However , some airlines , like Alaska Airlines , does allows users to switch between multiple boarding passes within their apps . )
PRINT - AT - HOME BOARDING PASSES Section::::Print - at - home boarding passes .
A print - at - home boarding pass is a document that a traveller can print at home , at their office , or anywhere with an Internet connection and printer , giving them permission to board an airplane for a particular flight .
British Airways CitiExpress , the first to pioneer this self - service initiative , piloted it on its London City Airport routes to minimize queues at check - in desks , in 1999 .
The CAA ( Civil Aviation Authority ) approved the introduction of the 3D boarding pass in February 2000 .
Early adoption with passengers was slow , except for Business Travellers .
However , the advent of low - cost carriers that charged for not using print - at - home boarding passes was the catalyst to shift consumers away from traditional at - airport check - in functions .
Many airlines encourage travellers to check in online up to a month before their flight and obtain their boarding pass before arriving at the airport .
Some carriers offer incentives for doing so ( e.g. , in 2015 , US Airways offered 1000 bonus miles to anyone checking in online , ) , while others charge fees for checking in or printing one 's boarding pass at the airport .
BENEFITS
* Cost efficient for the airline –
Passengers who print their own boarding pass reduce airline and airport staff , and infrastructure costs for check - in PROBLEMS
* Passengers have to remember to check - in in advance of their flight .
* Passengers need to have access to a printer and provide the paper and ink themselves , to avoid being charged to print their boarding passes at the airport .
Affordable access to printers equipped with paper and ink one can use to print one 's boarding pass can be difficult to find while travelling away from home , although some airlines have responded by allowing passengers to check - in further in advance .
PRINT - AT - HOME BOARDING PASS ADVERTISING Section::::Print - at - home boarding pass advertising .
In a bid to boost ancillary revenue from other sources of in - flight advertising , many airlines have turned to targeted advertising technologies aimed at passengers from their departure city to their destination .
Print - at - home boarding passes display adverts chosen specifically for given travellers based on their anonymised passenger information , which does not contain any personally identifiable data .
Advertisers are able to target specific demographic information ( age range , gender , nationality ) and route information ( origin and destination of flight ) .
The same technology can also be used to serve advertising on airline booking confirmation emails , itinerary emails , and pre - departure reminders .
PROVIDERS OF PRINT - AT - HOME BOARDING PASS ADVERTISING Section::::Providers of print - at - home boarding pass advertising .
Ink is a leader in travel media and technology providing over 20 targeted advertising options across print - at - home boarding passes for over 12 airline partners and its advertiser partners .
ADVANTAGES OF PRINT - AT - HOME BOARDING PASS ADVERTISING
* Ability to use targeted advertising technologies to target messaging to relevant demographics and routes – providing travellers with offers that are likely to be relevant and useful * High engagement level – research by the Global Passenger Survey has shown that on average , travellers look at their boarding pass over four times across 12 keytouch points in their journey
*
The revenues airlines gain from advertising can help to offset operating costs and reduce ticket price rises for passengers CONCERNS OF PRINT - AT - HOME BOARDING
PASS ADVERTISING
*
Some passengers find the advertising intrusive *
The advertising uses additional quantities of the passenger 's ink when printing at home SEE ALSO
* Airline ticket * Secondary Security Screening Selection ( SSSS rating )
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * Qantas boosts mobile device check - in options
* Northwest Airlines offer E - Boarding Pass functionality for their passengers
* Vueling : Now You Can Use Your Mobile as a Boarding Pass !
* Lufthansa offers mobile boarding pass worldwide
* Bar Coded Boarding Passes – Secure , Mobile and On the way
* Qatar launch mobile boarding pass service
* Mobile Boarding Pass Innovation Takes off with Qatar
* TSA Expands Paperless Boarding Pass Pilot Program to Additional Airports and Airlines
* Mobile boarding passes come to Barcelona Airport
* Spanair extend their mobile boarding pass service EXTERNAL LINKS *
The Latest Development of paperless boarding
pass technology
* International Air Transport Association ( IATA )