SUTTON RAILWAY STATION ( LONDON )
Sutton railway station is in the London Borough of Sutton in south London and is the main station serving Sutton town .
It is served by Southern and Thameslink trains , and lies in Travelcard Zone 5 , down the line from , measured via Forest Hill .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Sutton station was opened by the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway ( LB&SCR ) on 10 May 1847 , when the railway opened its line from West Croydon to Epsom .
A branch to Epsom Downs was opened on 22 May 1865 , followed by a line to Mitcham Junction on 1 October 1868 .
The final change to the station came when the branch to Wimbledon opened on 5 January 1930 .
Until the early 1980s , it was possible to catch a direct express train to the coast from Sutton to Bognor Regis , Chichester or Portsmouth .
Since the mid-1980s , these express services have been routed via East Croydon in order to serve Gatwick Airport ; passengers from Sutton for the south coast now have to change at Horsham , or alternatively travel to West Croydon station and walk , take the bus or use Croydon 's Tramlink service to reach East Croydon station .
Today , travel to London Victoria takes just over 25 minutes on the direct route via and .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
The four platforms at Sutton station are numbered 1 to 4 from north to south .
Platforms 1 and 2 are on the lines to Wimbledon , Epsom , Leatherhead , Dorking , and Horsham .
Platforms 3 and 4 are on the Epsom Downs Line , which becomes single - track about south of the station .
Platforms 1 and 3 are used by services from outer termini to Central London .
Trains from Central London use platforms 2 and 4 .
Terminating trains which return to central London generally use platform 4 .
Platforms 1 and 2 can accommodate 12-coach trains , and were used by the express services to and Portsmouth Harbour until they were diverted in the early 1980s to serve Gatwick Airport .
Nowadays all trains calling at Sutton are formed of ten coaches or fewer .
At the London end of platform 1 , there are the remains of a fifth platform , which was a bay for local services via Mitcham Junction .
Two waiting rooms serve the station .
One has its own cafe ; the other has a Starbucks kiosk adjacent to it .
An M&S Food to Go shop sits adjacent to the concourse within the station building .
Three lifts serve all platforms – one each for platforms one , two / three and four .
The installation of a side entrance serving the Quadrant was completed in summer 2014 .
WIMBLEDON BRANCH Section::::Wimbledon branch .
Parliamentary approval for a line from Wimbledon to Sutton had been obtained by the Wimbledon and Sutton Railway ( W&SR ) in 1910 , but work had been delayed by the First World War .
From the W&SR 's inception , the District Railway ( DR , now the District line ) was a shareholder of the company and had rights to run trains over the line when built .
In the 1920s , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL , precursor of London Underground ) planned , through its ownership of the DR , to use part of the route for an extension of the City and South London Railway ( C&SLR , now the Northern line ) to Sutton .
The SR objected and an agreement was reached that enabled the C&SLR to extend as far as Morden in exchange for the UERL giving up its rights over the W&SR route .
The SR subsequently built the line , one of the last to be built in the London area .
In both the 1910 and 1920s proposals , the next station towards Wimbledon was to be Cheam on Cheam Road , but the SR dropped this station and replaced it with West Sutton station .
The line opened on 5 January 1930 when full services on the line were extended from South Merton .
SERVICES Section::::Services .
All services at Sutton are operated by Govia Thameslink Railway , under the Southern and Thameslink brands .
The typical off - peak service ( Monday to Saturday ) from the station is : * 8 tph ( trains per hour ) to London Victoria * 4tph via Carshalton
* 4tph via Wallington and Norbury
* 2tph to London Bridge via Wallington semi - fast * 2tph to St Albans via Mitcham Junction and London Blackfriars * 2tph to St Albans via St Helier and Wimbledon * 4tph to Epsom
* 2tph to Epsom Downs
* 2tph to Dorking * 1tph to Horsham via Dorking
There are direct services to / from Guildford , Clandon , Dulwich , and Peckham Rye during weekday mornings and evenings .
On a Sunday the service from this station is : * 2tph ( trains per hour ) to London Victoria ; Semi - fast * 2tph to London Victoria via Mitcham Junction * 2tph to Luton via Mitcham Junction and London Blackfriars * 4tph to London Victoria via Wallington and Norbury * 2tph to St Albans via St Helier and Wimbledon * 2tph to Epsom
* 2tph to Dorking
* 2tph to Epsom Downs CONNECTIONS
Section::::Connections .
London Buses routes 80 , 164 , 280 , 470 , S1 , S3 and S4 , night route
N44 and non - TFL route 420 serve the station .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
A planned extension to the Tramlink light rail or a separate bus rapid transit ( BRT ) system called the Sutton Link will create a new tram or BRT / rail interchange in Sutton , offering services to South Wimbledon via St Helier .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS