MONEY FOR NOTHING ( SONG ) " Money for Nothing " is a single by British rock band Dire Straits , taken from their 1985 studio album Brothers in Arms .
The song 's lyrics are written from the point of view of two working - class men watching music videos and commenting on what they see .
The song features a guest appearance by Sting singing background vocals , providing both the signature falsetto introduction and backing chorus of " I want my MTV .
" The groundbreaking video was the first to be aired on MTV Europe when the network launched on 1 August 1987 .
It was Dire Straits ' most commercially successful single , peaking at number 1 for three weeks in the United States , number 1 for three weeks on the US Top Rock Tracks chart and number 4 in the band 's native UK .
" Money for Nothing " won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal in 1986 at the 28th Annual Grammy Awards and the video won Video of the Year at the 3rd MTV Video Music Awards .
PRODUCTION
MUSIC
Section::::Production .
Section::::Music .
Knopfler modeled his guitar sound on ZZ Top guitarist Billy Gibbons ' trademark guitar tone , as ZZ Top 's music videos were already a staple of early MTV .
Gibbons later told a Musician magazine interviewer in 1986 that Knopfler had solicited Gibbons ' help in replicating the tone , adding , " He did n't do a half - bad job , considering that I did n't tell him a thing ! "
Knopfler duplicated Gibbons ' use of a Gibson Les Paul guitar ( rather than his usual Fender Stratocaster ) , which he plugged into a Marshall amplifier .
Another factor in trying to recreate the sound was a wah - wah pedal which was turned on , just set to a certain position .
The specific guitar sound in the song was made with a Gibson Les Paul going through a Laney amplifier , with the sound coloured by the accidental position of two Shure SM57 microphones without any processing during the mix .
Following the initial sessions in Montserrat , at which that particular guitar part was recorded , Neil Dorfsman attempted to recreate the sound during subsequent sessions at the Power Station in New York but was unsuccessful in doing so .
( Knopfler also chose to use the Les Paul on a couple of other Brothers in Arms tracks . )
The recording contains a very recognisable hook , in the form of the guitar riff that begins the song proper .
The guitar riff continues throughout the song , played in permutation during the verses , and played in full after each chorus .
The song 's extended overture was shortened for radio and music video .
LYRICS Section::::Lyrics .
Mark Knopfler described the writing of the song in a 1984 interview with critic Bill Flanagan :
In 2000 , Knopfler appeared on Parkinson on BBC One and explained again where the lyrics originated .
According to Knopfler , he was in New York and stopped by an appliance store .
At the back of the store , they had a wall of TVs which were all tuned to MTV .
Knopfler said there was a man working there dressed in a baseball cap , work boots , and a checkered shirt delivering boxes who was standing next to him watching .
As they were standing there watching MTV , Knopfler remembers the man coming up with lines such as " what are those , Hawaiian noises? ... that ai n't workin ' , " etc .
Knopfler asked for a pen to write some of these lines down and then eventually put those words to music .
The first - person narrating character in the lyrics refers to a musician " banging on the bongos like a chimpanzee " and a woman " stickin ' in the camera , man we could have some fun " .
He describes a singer as " that little faggot with the earring and the make - up " , and bemoans that these artists get " money for nothing and chicks for free " .
Mötley Crüe bassist Nikki Sixx claimed that the song was about his band 's outrageous lifestyle .
In an interview , he related an apocryphal story that the members of Dire Straits were in a store that sold televisions , and a row of TVs were all playing Mötley Crüe videos .
The songwriting credits are shared between Mark Knopfler and Sting .
Sting has stated that his only compositional contribution was the " I want my MTV " line , which followed the melody from his song " Do n't Stand So Close to Me " .
" Sting used to come to Montserrat to go windsurfing , " recalled John Illsley , " and he came up for supper at the studio .
We played him ' Money for Nothing ' and he turned round and said , ' You 've done it this time , you bastards . '
Mark said if he thought it was so good , why did n't he go and add something to it .
He did his bit there and then . "
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The lyrics for the song have been criticised as being homophobic .
In a late 1985 interview in Rolling Stone magazine , Knopfler expressed mixed feelings on the controversy :
Dire Straits often performed the song in live concerts and when on tour , where the second verse was included but usually altered slightly .
For the band 's 10 July 1985 concert ( televised in the United Kingdom on The Tube on Channel 4 in January 1986 ) , Knopfler replaced the word faggot with Queenie ( in this context also a term that implies homosexuality ) :
In January 2011 , the Canadian Broadcast Standards Council ( CBSC ) ruled that the unedited version of the song was unacceptable for air play on private Canadian radio stations , as it breached the Canadian Association of Broadcasters ' code of ethics and their equitable portrayal code .
The CBSC concluded that " like other racially driven words in the English language , ' faggot ' is one that , even if entirely or marginally acceptable in earlier days , is no longer so . "
The CBSC 's proceedings came in response to a radio listener 's Ruling Request stemming from a playing of the song by CHOZ - FM in St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador , which in turn followed the radio listener 's dissatisfaction with the radio station 's reply to their complaint about a gay slur in the lyrics .
Not all stations abided by this ruling ; at least two stations , CIRK - FM in Edmonton and CFRQ - FM in Halifax , played the unedited version of " Money for Nothing " repeatedly for one hour out of protest .
Galaxie , which was owned by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation at the time of the controversy , also continues to play the song .
On 21 January 2011 , the Canadian Radio - television and Telecommunications Commission asked the CBSC for a review on the ban , in response to the public outcry against the CBSC 's actions ; the commission reportedly received over 250 complaints erroneously sent to them , instead of the CBSC .
The regulator requested the CBSC to appoint a nationwide panel to review the case , as the decision on the ban was reviewed by a regional panel for the Maritimes and Newfoundland .
On 31 August , the CBSC reiterated that it found the slur to be inappropriate ; however , because of considerations in regard to its use in context , the CBSC has left it up to the stations to decide whether to play the original or edited versions of the song .
Most of the CBSC panelists thought the slur was inappropriate , but it was used only in a satirical , non - hateful manner .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for the song featured early computer animation illustrating the lyrics .
The video was one of the first uses of computer - animated human characters and was considered ground - breaking at the time of its release .
Two other music videos are also featured within " Money for Nothing " .
The Hungarian pop band Első Emelet and their video " Állj , Vagy Lövök ! "
( " Stop or I 'll Shoot ! " ) appears as " Baby , Baby " by " First Floor " during the second verse ( The name " első emelet " translates to " first floor " , and the song is credited as being on " Magyar Records " :
" Magyar " means " Hungarian " in the Hungarian language . )
The other one is fictional , " Sally " by the " Ian Pearson Band " .
The fictional album for the first video was listed as " Turn Left " and the second was " Hot Dogs " .
For the second video , the record company appears as " Rush Records " , and it was filmed on Fisherman 's Bastion , Budapest .
Originally , Mark Knopfler was not at all enthusiastic about the concept of the music video .
MTV , however , was insistent on it .
Director Steve Barron , of Rushes Postproduction in London , was contacted by Warner Bros. to persuade Knopfler to relent .
Describing the contrasting attitudes of Knopfler and MTV , he said : Barron then flew to Budapest to convince Knopfler of their concept .
Meeting together after a gig , Knopfler was reportedly still unimpressed , but this time his girlfriend was present and took a hand .
According to Barron : Ian Pearson and Gavin Blair created the animation , using a Bosch FGS-4000 CGI system and a Quantel Paintbox system .
The animators went on to found computer animation studio Mainframe Entertainment ( today Rainmaker Studios ) , and referenced the " Money for Nothing " video in an episode of their ReBoot series .
The video also included stage footage of Dire Straits performing , with partially rotoscoped animation in bright neon colours , as seen on the cover of the compilation album of the same name .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rolling Stone listed the song as the 94th greatest guitar song of all time , noting how Mark Knopfler " traded his pristine , rootsy tone for a dry , over - processed sound achieved by running a Les Paul through a wah - wah pedal on a track that became one of the [ MTV ] network 's earliest hits .
" The video was awarded " Video of the Year " ( among many other nominations ) at the third annual MTV Video Music Awards in 1986 .
NOTABLE PERFORMANCES Section::::Notable performances .
When Dire Straits performed " Money for Nothing " at the 1985 Live Aid Concert at Wembley Stadium , the performance featured a guest appearance by Sting .
Knopfler performed " Money for Nothing " using his Pensa - Suhr signature MK-1 model guitar with a pair of Soldano SLO-100 tube / valve amplifier heads and Marshall speaker cabinets during the Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute and the Prince 's Trust concerts in 1986 with Sting , as well as the Nordoff - Robbins charity show at Knebworth in 1990 and the On Every Street world tours in 1991/1992 .
These versions featured extended guitar solos by Knopfler , backed by Eric Clapton and Phil Palmer .
CHARTS AND CERTIFICATIONS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts and certifications .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1985 ) !
Peakposition !
scope="row"Australia ( Kent Music Report ) 4 !
scope="row"Finland
( Suomen virallinen lista )
align="center"4 Poland ( LP3 )
align="center"2 !
scope="row"Spain ( AFYVE ) 25 ! scope="row"US
Billboard Hot
100 1 ! scope="row"US
Billboard Top Rock Tracks
1 ! scope="row"US Cash Box 1 YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1985 ) !
Position !
scope="row"Australia ( Kent Music Report ) 7 !
scope="row"Canada
Top Singles ( RPM ) 34 ! scope="row"US
Billboard Hot
100 8 ! scope="row"US Cash Box 2 CERTIFICATIONS AND SALES SEE ALSO
* List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 1985 * List of Billboard Mainstream Rock number - one songs of the 1980s
* List of Cash Box Top 100 number - one singles of 1985
* List of number - one singles of 1985 ( Canada ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Mix Online Classic Tracks :
Dire Straits ' " Money for Nothing "