THE FIVE HEARTBEATS
The Five Heartbeats is a 1991 musical drama film directed by Robert Townsend , who co - wrote the script with Keenen Ivory Wayans .
Produced and distributed by 20th Century Fox , the film 's main cast includes Townsend , Michael Wright , Leon Robinson , Harry J. Lennix , Tico Wells , Harold Nicholas of the Nicholas Brothers , and Diahann Carroll .
The plot of the film ( which is loosely based on the lives of several artists : The Dells , The Temptations , Four Tops , Wilson Pickett , James Brown , Frankie Lymon , Sam Cooke and others ) follows the three decade career of the rhythm and blues vocal group
The Five Heartbeats .
The film depicts the rise and fall of a Motown inspired soul act through the eyes of one of the Heartbeats , Donald " Duck " Matthews .
The film was released to most North American audiences on March 29 , 1991 however it was not made available to audiences in other continents until 2002 when a DVD was released prior to another DVD release in 2006 for the film 's 15th anniversary .
The movie received mixed reviews from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Donald " Duck " Matthews , Anthony " Choirboy " Stone , J.T. Matthews , Terrence " Dresser " Williams , and Eddie King Jr. perform at a Battle of the Bands contest as The Heartbeats .
The group loses to Flash and the Ebony Sparks but pleases the crowd and is noticed by Jimmy Potter .
Jimmy offers to manage the group , promising them $ 100 if they do not win the next month 's Battle of the Bands contest .
After the group loses , Jimmy pays them .
When the owner of the club asks to hire them , they agree to let Jimmy manage them .
Bird and The Midnight Falcons witness the Heartbeats rehearsing for a competition and are concerned they could lose ; frontman Victor " Bird " Thomas asks his girlfriend to invite her friends and boo The Heartbeats while cheering The Falcons .
The announcer , a cousin of one of the Falcons , forces The Heartbeats to use the house piano player .
Duck grows frustrated with the house piano player and shoves him off the piano stool .
Eddie leads the group in a number that results in Bird 's girlfriend fainting in Eddie 's arms .
The Heartbeats win the contest and the interest of Big Red Davis , who owns Big Red Records .
Big Red offers them a deal , but Jimmy and his wife Eleanor , aware of Big Red 's corruption , decline .
The group instead releases their first single on Jimmy 's own independent label and searches for a record company they can trust , but no one else is interested aside from a label which wants to buy Duck 's songs for a group they 've already signed , The Five Horsemen , prompting the Heartbeats to sign with Big Red .
The group goes on the road , but the travel is marred by racism and poor living conditions .
Dresser 's girlfriend visits and reveals she is pregnant , and the group is faced with their first album cover featuring white people , despite the label having earlier approved a photo of the Heartbeats as the cover .
Throughout the mid - to - late 1960s
The Five Heartbeats receive numerous awards , chart several hits , and are featured on magazine covers .
Eddie , however , starts abusing alcohol and cocaine , affecting his performance and prompting his girlfriend Baby Doll to break up with him .
Convinced that Jimmy intends to replace him due to his deteriorating condition , he cuts a deal with Big Red to have Jimmy cut out of his contract .
In retaliation , Jimmy threatens to go to the authorities with information about bootlegged LPs , cooked books and payola that could have Big Red arrested , leading Red to have Jimmy killed in a hit disguised as an accident .
Soon after Jimmy 's funeral , the group learns that Eddie 's deceit caused the fallout between Jimmy and Big Red .
Big Red is eventually convicted of Jimmy 's murder , forcing the group to sign with a new record label , and causing a guilt - ridden Eddie to leave in disgrace .
Eddie later turns up at several Heartbeats concerts to try to convince his friends to let him back into the group , but his drug and alcohol abuse has taken its toll on him , and all the other Heartbeats can do is supply him with money out of sympathy ; Duck later hears on the radio that Eddie was involved in an armed robbery and , after a shootout with the police , was in critical condition .
The Heartbeats add Flash as their lead singer .
Duck comes to suspect his fiancé , Tanya Sawyer , is having an affair with Choirboy .
He follows her to a hotel , only to discover that Tanya is meeting with J.T. , not Choirboy .
Tanya 's relationship with J.T. predates her relationship with Duck , but she says she is now in love with Duck .
J.T. urges Tanya to disclose the affair , but she refuses .
At an awards ceremony celebrating their success , Flash announces he is going solo .
Duck reveals that he knows about Tanya and J.T. and also leaves .
The film then skips ahead to the early 1990s .
Choirboy , true to his nickname , has returned to singing in his father 's church .
After converting to Christianity , Eddie became clean and sober .
He is now married to Baby Doll , sings in Choirboy 's choir , and manages a group .
He asks Duck to write songs for them , to which he agrees .
J.T. has a wife and two children , including a son named " Duck " .
The brothers reconcile .
The only member to have maintained a singing career is Flash , who transitioned from doo - wop to pop music , and is part of the group Flash and The Five Horsemen .
At a family gathering , Eleanor Potter , coming to terms with her husband 's death , forgives Eddie .
The Five Heartbeats reunite in front of their families and friends , as they try to show off their old moves .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
THE FIVE HEARTBEATS * Robert Townsend as Donald " Duck " Matthews :
Duck hails from a poor family .
He is The Five Heartbeats ' co - founder and brother of fellow Heartbeat 's member J.T. Matthews , and originally was only the composer and musician for the group .
He is a permanent vocalist after Bobby disappears .
He serves as the movie 's narrator , with the film beginning as he reminisces about the group 's career .
* Leon Robinson as J.T. Matthews : J.T. is the older brother of Duck .
A womanizer ; he and his brother Duck share a close and sometimes turbulent relationship .
* Michael Wright as Eddie King , Jr. :
Eddie comes from an area that features predominantly poor individuals , his own father believing his attempts to start a career in the music industry will be unsuccessful .
He is one of the founding members of The Heartbeats and serves as the crowd pleaser whose voice leads to success in many of their performances .
Similar to David Ruffin , Eddie is the lead vocalist of the band and falls into a life of drugs and alcohol that eventually leads to his expulsion from the group as well as emotional trauma .
After hitting rock - bottom several times , he eventually converts to Christianity , cleans and sobers himself up , marries his longtime sweetheart Baby Doll , and manages his own group .
*
Tico Wells as Anthony " Choirboy " Stone :
Stone is given the nickname " Choirboy " ( much to his chagrin ) for his past as a choir boy in his father 's church .
Similar to Eddie , Stone 's father does not support his decision to become a music artist fearing rock and jazz are " the devil 's music . "
He becomes more of a womanizer as the group becomes more successful , but later goes back to being a part of his father 's ministry after the group disbands .
* Harry J. Lennix as Terrence " Dresser " Williams : The original choreographer of The Heartbeats , Dresser serves as the groups bass singer and one of the founding members .
He is replaced by Ernest " Sarge " Johnson as the choreographer after Sarge out - dances Dresser .
OTHER CHARACTERS * Hawthorne James as Big Red Davis : Corrupt owner of the first record label
The Five Heartbeats are signed to .
* Chuck Patterson as Jimmy Potter :
The Heartbeats ' manager , Jimmy is responsible for giving the group the opportunity to perform at more publicized events and receive training from Ernest " Sarge " Johnson .
* Diahann Carroll as Eleanor Potter :
Jimmy Potter 's wife , Eleanor along with her husband are the original supporters of The Five Heartbeats .
* John Canada Terrell as Michael " Flash " Turner :
Lead singer of Flash and the Ebony Sparks , the Heartbeats ' only competition .
When Eddie goes into a downward spiral , Flash is brought in as the new lead singer .
* Roy Fegan as Victor " Bird " Thomas : Bird is the lead singer of Bird and The Midnight Falcons .
Early in the film the character attempts to defeat The Five Heartbeats in a vocal contest .
After Big Red orchestrates the murder of Jimmy Potter , Bird , who was previously attacked and intimidated by Big Red during a party , joins members of the Heartbeats in testifying against Red and helps to convict him of the murder .
* Harold Nicholas of The Nicholas Brothers as Ernest " Sarge " Johnson : Johnson is The Five Heartbeat 's choreographer .
Sarge is last seen in the hospital on his birthday .
* Troy Beyer as Baby Doll : Eddie 's girlfriend , who leaves him after he abuses drugs and alcohol .
She later marries Eddie and they are shown singing together in a choir .
* Theresa Randle as Brenda : Dresser 's girlfriend , who later becomes his wife .
She and Dresser have a daughter named Monica .
* Lamont Johnson as Bobby Cassanova :
Bobby and Eddie are the original co - lead singers of the group .
Bobby is only seen in the movie 's opening scenes when he and Eddie are caught cheating at a high - stakes poker game .
Bobby gets shot in the leg and is replaced by Eddie as the lead singer .
* Carla Brothers as Tanya Sawyer : Duck 's love interest .
His earlier attempts to win her heart are unsuccessful but they reconnect at a party for the group and later date .
Tanya and Duck were set to be we d , but Duck 's suspicion about Tanya and Choir Boy had him follow her to a hotel only to find out that his brother J.T. was the one seeing her .
This led Duck to estrange himself from the Heartbeats and his brother for years .
* Tressa Thomas as " Duck 's Little Sister " : Clara Matthews , Duck 's little sister , was also his muse , often helping him compose and arrange songs for the group as they did household chores .
She was instrumental in arranging the vocals for " We Have n't Finished Yet " .
OTHER BANDS
* Bird and The Midnight Falcons portrayed by actors Roy Fegan , Gregory Alexander , Roger Rose , Jimmy Woodard : The group The Five Heartbeats compete against in their second onscreen performance .
The Midnight Falcons attempt to cheat by ordering their girlfriends to deliberately cheer against The Heartbeats .
They would later sign with Big Red Records along with the Five Heartbeats .
* Flash and the Ebony Sparks portrayed by John Canada Terrell , Ron Jackson , Recoe Walker and Wayne " Crescendo " Ward :
The Ebony Sparks defeat The Five Heartbeats in singing competitions — many of which are rigged — prior to their mainstream popularity .
Flash later becomes the lead singer for the Five Heartbeats .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After writing ( along with Keenen Ivory Wayans ) , producing , directing , and starring in his first film Hollywood Shuffle , Robert Townsend had attained near - cult status among independent filmmakers due to his dedication to that film — a project which caused him to max out all his credit cards and spend nearly $ 100,000 of his own money raised through savings and various acting jobs in order to produce the film .
When writing Townsend 's first studio film
The Five Heartbeats , Townsend and Wayans kept comedy an important aspect of the film , but also explored complex characters in a more dramatic way .
The Five Heartbeats was originally set up as a development deal at Warner Bros. in 1988 , with Keenan Ivory Wayans , his brother Damon , and others tapped to star .
Warner passed on the project , and the Wayans moved on to develop and star in the Fox sketch comedy show In Living Color instead .
Townsend resurrected Heartbeats at 20th Century Fox in 1990 .
The original screenplay had been inspired by the lives and careers of Motown group
The Temptations , and Townsend had met with former lead singers David Ruffin and Eddie Kendrick with the intention of hiring them as technical advisors .
Fox vetoed bringing Ruffin and Kendrick onto the production , for fear that Motown founder Berry Gordy , Jr. might sue the studio .
Rhythm and blues - singing group The Dells , who were renowned for their four - decade career , became the technical advisors instead .
Townsend used his film to depict a similar story to the careers of the Temptations and the Dells , following the lives of three friends who aspire to musical stardom .
Given the setting of the film , he was able to tie in other elements , such as race relations , as well .
Due to the production 's budgetary constraints , Townsend used little - known actors of the time , with the exceptions of Leon Robinson , Diahann Carroll and Harold Nicholas of The Nicholas Brothers .
Townsend had considered Denzel Washington as Eddie King , Jr. and Whitney Houston as Baby Doll .
The former was not cast due to budget concerns and the latter passed on the role as it was felt to be too small .
PROMOTION Section::::Promotion .
To promote the film prior to its release , Townsend , along with the other actors who portrayed the fictional musical quartet
The Five Heartbeats ( Leon Robinson , Michael Wright , Harry J. Lennix , and Tico Wells ) performed in a concert with real - life Soul / R&B vocal group The Dells , one of many groups that inspired the film .
The Dells sang and recorded the vocals as the actors lip synced .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack for the film was released by Virgin Records , featuring original music by various artists .
Both " Nights like This " and " A Heart Is a House for Love " became top 20 hits on the U.S. Billboard Hot R&B Singles chart .
Many of the tracks are credited to fictional characters in the film as opposed to the actual vocalists .
* A Heart Is a House for Love - Billy Valentine/
The Dells *
* We Have n't Finished Yet - Patti LaBelle , Tressa Thomas , Billy Valentine
* * Nights like This - After 7
* * Bring Back the Days - U.S. Male * *
Baby Stop Running Around - Bird & The Midnight Falcons
* * In the Middle - Dee Harvey
* * Nothing but Love - The Dells with Billy Valentine
*
* Are You Ready for Me - Dee Harvey
*
* Stay in My Corner - The Dells * *
I Feel Like Going On - Andraé Crouch * RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film grossed approximately $ 8,500,000 after being released in 862 theaters throughout North America .
However , despite the film 's moderate success , it was not well received by a majority of critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes The Five Heartbeats accumulated an average of 35 % , although only 17 reviews were counted ( 6 of which were positive , the remaining 11 negative ) .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times commented that : Due to the nature of the film , music montages were often used to progress the plot ; critics considered this a major flaw .
The numerous musical performances in the film were highly acclaimed .
All Music complimented the Dells ' lead singer Marvin Junior ( who provided the singing voice for fictional character Eddie King Jr. ) stating that he was " one of the most underrated voices in pop music . "
Tressa Thomas ' performance of " We Have n't Finished Yet , " in particular , was given favorable attention by critics .
The film received an ASCAP award for Most Performed Songs in a Motion Picture for the song " Nights Like This . "
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases .
A DVD was released for the film in 2002 , a special edition was also released in 2006 for the film 's 15th Anniversary which includes additional content .
FOOTNOTES EXTERNAL LINKS