NETHERLAND DWARF
RABBIT
The Netherland Dwarf is a breed of domestic rabbit that originated in the Netherlands .
Weighing , the Netherland Dwarf is one of the smallest rabbit breeds .
Its popularity as a pet or show rabbit may stem from its neotenic appearance .
The Netherland Dwarf is recognized by both the American Rabbit Breeders Association ( ARBA ) and the British Rabbit Council ( BRC ) .
The Netherland Dwarf is often confused with the Polish breed of rabbit , but the latter has longer ears , a non - brachycephalic head , and less cobbiness .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Netherland Dwarf breed was first produced in the Netherlands in the early 20th century .
Small Polish rabbits were bred with smaller wild rabbits ; after several generations the resulting animal was a very small domestic rabbit available in a wide variety of colors and patterns .
Netherland Dwarfs were first imported into the United Kingdom in 1948 .
In the 1960s and 1970s the United States imported its first Netherland Dwarf rabbits .
The breed was accepted by the American Rabbit Breeders Association in 1969 using a modification of the British standard .
Early dwarfs , even into the 1970s and 1980s , had fearful and sometimes aggressive temperaments .
This was a result of breeders selecting wild breeding animals for their size .
The first dwarf rabbits behaved more like these wild rabbits than domestic animals and were not good pets .
However , through generations of selective breeding , the modern Netherland Dwarf has become a gentle , friendly pet rabbit , though it still can retain a more energetic disposition than larger breeds .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
The Netherland Dwarf 's head and eyes are disproportionately large with respect to its short - coupled and stout ( " cobby " ) body .
Its ears are notably short and carried high on the head and its face is rounded and brachycephalic .
These neotenic features , a result of dwarfism , cause the Netherland Dwarf to retain an infantile appearance even into adulthood .
The Netherland Dwarf has been bred in a wide variety of colors , including : Ruby Eyed White , Blue Eyed White , Black , Blue , Chocolate , Lilac , Red , Siamese Sable , Siamese Smoke , Sealpoint , Blue Point , Chocolate Point , Tortoiseshell , Agouti , Red Agouti , Opal , Cinnamon , Lynx , Chinchilla , Squirrel , Tan , Marten Sable , Marten Smoke , Black Otter , Blue Otter , Chocolate Otter , Lilac Otter , Fox , Orange , Fawn , Hotot , Himalayan , Harlequin , Magpie , Broken , Butterfly , Mantle and .
NETHERLAND DWARFS
AS PETS Section::::Netherland Dwarfs as pets .
Due to their size and overall disposition , Netherlands Dwarfs often do not make good pets for children ( although suitability will vary between individual rabbits ) .
There is often a mismatch with small children , because they like to play with the pet or pick it up to cuddle with it .
Dwarf rabbits do not like to be picked up or held tightly ; and they can bite , scratch or struggle wildly if the child does so .
This often leads to accidents if the child drops them out of fright , leading to major injuries because a rabbit has very fragile bones .
Larger breeds of rabbits are recommended for children , because they have fewer issues with temperament .
However , dwarf rabbits can make excellent pets for adults .
They thrive in a quiet , stable environment with plenty of human interaction .
They are trainable , quiet and clean .
Grooming needs are minimal , but the rabbit enjoys a daily brushing .
Time is needed to bond with the rabbit and to build trust , because Dwarf breeds are often more nervous and more aloof than larger breeds .
However , when the rabbit has bonded with their owner they make affectionate pets .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
They can be litter - trained because they have a natural tendency to choose the same spot for their droppings .
Netherlands Dwarfs can be skittish , wild , and/or of a disagreeable nature .
This is a leftover stereotype from the beginnings of the breed .
This has changed through selective breeding ; however , they are skittish and aloof .
They are extremely active and energetic , requiring the same amount of exercise as other breeds of rabbit .
They also have a higher tendency towards nervousness and stress .
As with any species , disposition will vary from individual to individual .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Their diet consists of good quality pellets , veggies , and an unlimited supply of hay .
Root vegetables and fruit are high in sugar and should not be given often or in large amounts .
Pellets should be fed in limited amounts—1/8 cup per pound of body weight .
Vegetables , namely dark , leafy greens , should also be given , at 2 cups or more per 6 pounds of body weight . )
At a juvenile age , Netherland Dwarfs ( as with most other rabbit breeds ) should be fed unlimited quantities of alfalfa pellets and hay .
As they age , the alfalfa should be gradually replaced with other hays and pellets .
The pellets should be reduced to proportion with the weight of the rabbit .
DWARF BREEDS
Section::::Dwarf breeds .
Rabbit breeds derived from breeding larger rabbits with the Netherland Dwarf ( or any rabbit with a dwarf gene ) are known as dwarf breeds .
Most smaller breeds , like the Mini Rex , the Jersey Wooly , and the Holland Lop , are results of such breedings .
Generally dwarf
breeds are slightly larger than the typical Netherland Dwarf , not growing larger than 4 to 5 lb ( 1.8 to 2.3 kg ) .
Most have shortened faces compared to larger rabbits , and some even preserve the rounded head , large eyes , or small ears of the Netherland Dwarf .
These features make them look little .
Specifically , the Netherland Dwarf body should be round , compact , and equally broad from front to back .
Dwarf rabbits also have short legs and a large head in relation to the body .
Their foreheads are broad and they have well developed muzzles .
Furthermore , the eyes are large and prominent .
Their ears are erect and close together , reaching between one and three inches in length .
They have to be shorter than 2 inches and a half ( ARBA ) , if not , this is a disqualification from competition in the Netherland Dwarf breed .
Dwarf rabbits typically weigh 2 to 2.5 pounds according to ARBA .
BREEDING Section::::Breeding .
The gene ( symbol Dw ) responsible for the common appearance of the dwarf was discovered in the United States during the beginning of the 20th century .
When two " true dwarfs " ( both buck and doe ) are bred , the genetic pattern which makes them " true dwarfs " ( Dwdw ) ensures that 25 percentage of their offspring will inherit the lethal genetic combination dwdw .
These offspring , often called " peanuts " by rabbit breeders , are destined to struggle with life for up to three weeks , and then to die .
Reasons behind the death are unknown , but it is believed that peanuts have underdeveloped digestive tracts .
The condition is 100 % fatal , although if fed by hand every hour and kept warm it is possible for a peanut to survive , even though it will be handicapped for its entire life .
Many ethical breeders humanely euthanize peanuts upon finding them soon after birth .
Peanuts are easily distinguished from non - peanuts ; they have extremely pinched hindquarters , a bulbous head , and their ears are often set further back than normal ( sometimes almost onto the neck ) .
If two true dwarfs are bred , the statistical result will be 25 % fatal 25 % false , and 50 % true .
The actual numbers of true / false / peanuts in a real litter varies .
"
False Dwarfs " tend to have longer bodies , longer / larger ears , longer faces , and are mostly heavier than the 2.5 pound maximum weight for showing .
While false dwarfs ( referred to as BUD ' s by breeders , BUD meaning big ugly doe ) do not make good show rabbits , does from a good background are vital to a breeder 's program .
They have the same " good genes " as a true dwarf and are capable mothers , possibly even having larger and more successful litters than true dwarfs .
Also False Dwarfs are unable to produce peanuts .
Their litters will be 50 % false dwarfs and 50 % true dwarfs if they are bred to a true dwarf buck .
False dwarfs are easily judged for quality as the traits are generally the same , only bigger .
Ear thickness / shape , fullness of hindquarter , topline , and other traits are the same .
It is common practice among Netherland Dwarf breeders to breed a proven show quality true dwarf buck to a quality false dwarf doe .
This eliminates the chance of peanuts and yields quality offspring .
The chances of false dwarfs is higher , but those offspring generally go toward breeding ( some false dwarf bucks have proven themselves valuable to a breeding program ) or are sold as pets .
Usually false dwarf bucks are not kept by breeders .
SEE ALSO
* Dwarf rabbit
* List of rabbit breeds
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * American Netherland Dwarf
Rabbit Club
* Dwarf Rabbits Articles
* Netherland Dwarf Rabbit Breed History
* Breeds of Rabbits Chart