THE ROOKIE ( 2002 FILM )
The Rookie is a 2002 American sports drama film directed by John Lee Hancock and produced by Walt Disney Pictures .
It is based on the true story of Jim Morris , who had a brief , but famous Major League Baseball career in 1999–2000 .
The film stars Dennis Quaid , Rachel Griffiths , Jay Hernandez , and Brian Cox .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Jim Morris is the son of a career Navy man , who moves the family from Hollywood , Florida to Big Lake , Texas , in order to maintain job security .
Jim is shown to be a very skilled pitcher , though his father disapproves of Jim 's dream of making it to Major League Baseball .
It is later mentioned that the town to which Jim 's family moved , Big Lake , has lost its love for baseball , preferring football instead .
Thus , he was unable to play baseball in high school .
He later gets a chance when he is drafted by the Milwaukee Brewers , but he tears up his shoulder , ending his hopes of achieving his lifelong dream .
Years later in 1999 , Jim , married with three children , is a high school science teacher , as well as head baseball coach .
His team , the Big Lake Owls , is very unsuccessful with many of his players skilled , but unmotivated , especially with very little community support .
One day after practice , the team catcher offers to play catch with Jim .
There it is revealed that Jim may still have his fastball , and it is soon displayed to the rest of the team .
The Owls believe that Jim could possibly pitch in the major leagues and offer him a deal : If the Owls can win district and make the state playoffs , Jim will try out again , which Jim accepts .
Furthermore , the team urges him to throw his fastball in batting practice , which immensely improves their hitting .
The Owls end up winning district and after their final win , the team tells Jim that , since they kept up their end of the deal , it is now his turn to do his part .
After the Owls ' season ends with a loss in the state tournament , Jim is told of a tryout nearby for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays , and Jim goes , without telling his wife , afraid that her fear of him re - injuring his shoulder would keep him from going .
After his tryout , the professional scouts discover his ability to repeatedly throw a baseball at 98 miles per hour .
The lead scout tells Jim that he could be signed to a minor - league deal .
Jim 's wife finds out after getting two phone messages from the Tampa Bay scouts and she is at first reluctant to let Jim go , citing his home responsibilities , but after seeing how Jim is inspiring their son , Hunter , she allows him to go .
Jim tells his father , with whom he still has a cold relationship , of his situation , and his father once again tries to dissuade Jim from trying to achieve his dream again , telling Jim , " It 's OK to think about what you want to do until it 's time to start doing what you were meant to do . "
He is initially assigned to the minor league Class AA Orlando Rays ( now the Montgomery Biscuits ) but quickly moves up to the AAA Durham Bulls .
Concerned for his family due to mounting bills ( the pay in the minor leagues being low )
Jim decides to give it up and come home .
But his wife Lorri talks him out of it , not wanting Jim to give up again .
Jim gets inspired again when he watches a Little League game one night , remembering the same love for baseball he had as a kid .
In September , Jim is told that the Major League club has called him up , and that they will be playing in Texas against the Rangers .
Jim calls his family , who in turn informs the town .
Advising his wife of the dress code in the majors , Jim finds his sports coat , a necktie and his St. Rita necklace hanging in his locker .
St. Rita is the saint of impossible dreams .
His family , high school players and many townspeople go to the game .
Jim impresses many of the coaches in warm - ups with his fastball , and late in the game , with Tampa Bay losing badly , Jim is called into the game to pitch to Royce Clayton and end the inning .
Jim ends up striking out Clayton on three straight fastballs .
After the game , Jim gets interviewed by the press .
During the interview , Jim notices his father had also come to the game .
Jim 's father finally admits that he is proud of what Jim has done and also apologizes for never supporting him .
Jim thanks him and gives him the ball with which he had gotten the strikeout , and the two finally repair their relationship .
Jim then meets with his family and all the townspeople who had come to the game , applauding Jim on his amazing success story .
The final scene shows the Big Lake high school trophy case , which has Jim 's Major League jersey prominently displayed .
It is then mentioned that Jim would go on to pitch in the majors for two seasons before retiring and returning to teaching in Texas .
CAST
* Dennis Quaid as Jim Morris
* Rachel Griffiths as Lorri Morris
* Jay Hernandez as Joaquin '
Wack ' Campos * Beth Grant as Olline * Angus T. Jones as Hunter Morris
* Brian Cox as
Jim Morris Sr .
* Rick Gonzalez as Rudy Bonilla ( Owls pitcher ) * Chad Lindberg as Joe David Werst * Angelo Spizzirri as Joel De La Garza ( Owls catcher ) * Royce D. Applegate as Henry * Russell Richardson as Brooks * Raynor Scheine as Frank * David Blackwell as Cal * Chris Sheffield as Snow Covered Catcher * Blue Deckert as Baseball Scout
Dave Patterson
* Danny Kamin as Durham Manager Mac ( as Daniel Kamin )
* Mike Smith as Fan * Kyle Christensen as Baseball Player
* Robbie Bigelow as Beefcake Bigelow
* Jim Morris as Orlando Umpire # 2 RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The movie received generally positive reviews , with Dennis Quaid 's performance receiving praise .
Review aggregation site Rotten tomatoes reports an 83 % " Certified Fresh " score from critics , with the consensus reading : " A heart - warming sports flick , The Rookie greatly benefits from understated direction and the emotional honesty Dennis Quaid brings to the role of Jim Morris . "
Critics on Metacritic give it a 72 out of 100 based on 31 reviews .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2006 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Cheers – Nominated FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
The Rookie was filmed almost entirely in North and Central Texas .
Apart from scenes filmed at The Ballpark in Arlington , locations included the following : * The city of Thorndale , Texas , was used predominantly in the opening half of the film as the small town of Big Lake .
Thorndale High School 's interior , exterior parts of the building and baseball field were used for Big Lake High School 's campus .
Thorndale 's Main Street and downtown area was also used extensively in the film .
*
Neighboring Thrall High School in Thrall , Texas , was dressed for several differing scenes , including scenes of several different " away " baseball games filmed on the school 's field .
Thrall 's then - recently completed football stadium stood in as Big Lake 's .
Thrall 's old football field , dressing rooms and recreation pavilion were dressed as an oil refinery 's outlay in a deleted scene viewable on the DVD 's special features .
* A scene shot in front of a motel supposedly in Florida was actually filmed in front of what is now a Best Western in Taylor , Texas .
Most of the population portrayed in this movie of Big Lake , Texas were fictional .
Only the baseball team and those directly connected were based on real people .
The Bulls game was shot in Round Rock , Texas at the Dell Diamond .
The tryout scenes were filmed at Taylor High School in Taylor , Texas .
The Orlando Rays game was shot at Austin ISD 's Nelson Field .
The oilfield scene was shot on the Heep Ranch south of Austin .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS