CASHIER 'S CHECK
A cashier 's check ( or cashier 's cheque ) is a check guaranteed by a bank , drawn on the bank 's own funds and signed by a cashier .
Cashier 's checks are treated as guaranteed funds because the bank , rather than the purchaser , is responsible for paying the amount .
They are commonly required for real estate and brokerage transactions .
Cashier 's checks deposited into a bank account are usually cleared the next day .
The customer can request " next - day availability " when depositing a cashier 's check in person .
When cashier 's checks took weeks to clear the banks , they were often forged in fraud schemes .
The recipient of the check would deposit it in their account and withdraw funds under next - day availability , assuming it was legitimate .
The bank might not be informed the check was fraudulent until , perhaps , weeks after the customer had withdrawn funds made available by the fraudulent deposit , by which time the customer would be legally liable for the cash already withdrawn .
A customer asks a bank for a cashier 's check , and the bank debits the amount from the customer 's account immediately , and assumes the responsibility for covering the cashier 's check .
That is in contrast with a personal check , in which the bank does not debit the amount from the customer 's account until the check is deposited or cashed by the recipient .
A cashier 's check is not the same as a teller 's check , also known as a banker 's draft , which is a check provided to a customer of a bank or acquired from a bank for remittance purposes and drawn by the bank , and drawn on another bank or payable through or at a bank .
A cashier 's check is also different from a certified check , which is a personal check written by the customer and drawn on the customer 's account , on which the bank certifies that the signature is genuine and that the customer has sufficient funds in the account to cover the check .
Also , it should not be confused with a counter check , which is a non - personalized check provided by the bank for the convenience of a customer in making withdrawals or payments but is not guaranteed and is functionally equivalent to a personal check .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Cashier 's checks feature the name of the issuing bank in a prominent location , usually the upper left - hand corner or upper centre of the check .
In addition , they are generally produced with enhanced security features , including watermarks , security thread , color - shifting ink , and special bond paper .
These are designed to decrease the vulnerability to counterfeit items .
To be recognized as a cashier 's check , words to that effect must be included in a prominent place on the front of the item .
The payee 's name , the written and numeric amount to be tendered , the remitter 's information , and other tracking information ( such as the branch of issue ) , are printed on the front of the check .
The check is generally signed by one or two bank employees or officers ; however , some banks issue cashier 's checks featuring a facsimile signature of the bank 's chief executive officer or other senior official .
Some banks contract out the maintenance of their cashier 's check accounts and check issuing .
One leading contractor is Integrated Payment Systems , which issues cashier 's checks and coordinates redemption of the items for many banks , in addition to issuing money orders and other payment instruments .
In theory , checks issued by a financial institution but drawn on another institution , as is often the case with credit unions , are teller 's checks .
Due to an increase in fraudulent activities , starting in 2006 many banks insist upon waiting for a cashier 's check to clear the originating institution before making funds available for withdrawal .
Personal checks will thus have the same utility in such transactions .
LEGAL DEFINITION
Section::::Legal definition .
In the United States , under Article 3 of the Uniform Commercial Code , a cashier 's check is effective as a note of the issuing bank .
Also , according to Regulation CC ( Reg CC ) of the Federal Reserve , cashier 's checks are recognized as " guaranteed funds " and amounts under $ 5,000 are not subject to deposit hold , except in the case of new accounts .
The length of a hold varies ( 2 days to 2 weeks ) depending on the bank .
It is not clear what length of time may pass before a bank can be held responsible for accepting a bad cashier 's check .
In Canada , bank drafts do not carry any different legal weight as opposed to a standard check , but are provided as a service to clients as a payment instrument with guaranteed funds .
Drafts ( or money orders depending on the issuing institution ) usually have better security features than standard checks , and as such are often preferred when the receiver is concerned about receiving fraudulent payment instruments .
However , bank drafts can also be subject to counterfeiting , and as such can be held or verified by depositing institutions in accordance with their hold funds policy , prior to providing access to the funds .
The term money order is used non - uniformly in Canada , with some institutions offering both money orders and bank drafts depending on the amount , with others only offering one or the other for any amount .
Generally , both bank drafts and money orders are treated the same in regards to guaranteed funds and hold policies .
ALTERNATIVES AND RISKS Section::::Alternatives and risks .
In many nations Money orders are a popular alternative to cashier 's checks and are considered safer than personal bank checks .
However , in the United States , they are generally not recognized as " guaranteed funds " under Reg CC and are limited to a specified maximum amount ( $ 1,000 or less under U.S. law for domestic postal money orders ) .
Because of US regulatory requirements associated with the Patriot Act and the Bank Secrecy Act due to updated concerns over money laundering , most insurance and brokerage firms will no longer accept money orders as payment for insurance premiums or as deposits into brokerage accounts .
Counterfeit money orders and cashier 's checks have been used in certain scams to steal from those who sell their goods online on sites such as eBay and Craigslist .
The counterfeit cashier 's check scam is a scheme where the victim is sent a cashier 's check or money order for payment on an item for sale on the Internet .
When the money order is taken to the bank it may not be detected as counterfeit for 10 business days or more , but the bank will deposit the money into the account and state that it has been " verified " or is " clear " in about 24 hours .
This gives the victim a false feeling of security that the money order was real , so they proceed with the transaction .
When the bank eventually discovers that the money order is counterfeit and reverses the account credit many days later , the customer will usually have already mailed the item .
In many cases the " check " or " money order " is for more than the amount owed , and the victim is asked to refund the difference in cash .
SEE ALSO
* Certified check *
Demand draft
* Money order
* Traveler 's cheque REFERENCES