ROCK ' N ' ROLLER COASTER STARRING AEROSMITH Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster Starring Aerosmith is a launched roller coaster located at Disney 's Hollywood Studios within Walt Disney World and at Walt Disney Studios Park within Disneyland Paris .
Manufactured by Vekoma , the enclosed roller coaster features LSM electromagnetic technology , and the first of two installations opened at Disney World on July 29 , 1999 .
It features recorded music and appearances from Aerosmith .
The second installation opened at Disneyland Paris on March 16 , 2002 , and it is considered the fastest roller coaster in France .
Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster accelerates from 0 to in 2.8 seconds .
Riders experience up to 5 G 's ( for comparison , a rocket launch is only 3 G 's ) and travel through three inversions , which include half - vertical loops , half - corkscrews , and a sea serpent roll .
Both versions of the attraction feature five trains , although only four can run at one time .
It was announced in February 2018 that the Paris version of the ride will close for renovations , and that its theme would be changed to the Iron Man and Avengers franchise .
The Hollywood Studios version will remain unchanged .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Construction on the ride in Florida began in February 1998 , with cast member previews and a soft opening initially held in June 1999 .
The grand opening of the ride took place on July 29 , 1999 , with a special , invitation - only party , with Aerosmith as the guests of honor .
Winners rode to Disney 's Hollywood Studios in stretch limousines and were treated to an all - you - can - eat buffet and bar .
After a special performance by painter Denny Dent , winners got the chance to ride the roller coaster with one of the Aerosmith band members .
At the exit of the ride , outside of the gift shop , there hangs a picture from the special event .
The paintings Denny Dent made of the five band members hang in various employee office locations on Walt Disney World property .
The pre - show has changed from when the attraction first opened .
Currently , band member Joe Perry would ask " Chris " to " grab my black Les Paul . "
A Disney cast member in the pre - show area would then pick up and remove a black guitar signed by Joe Perry from the set .
The script uses the unisex name " Chris " so either a male or female could play the part .
Although not used as often as when the ride first opened , the position is still used from time to time ( generally , if the attraction is overstaffed ) .
The film also includes a roadie saying " Hey Joe , I 'll get it for ya " as a backup , in the event that a cast member is not available for the part .
The Walt Disney Studios Park version of the ride opened on March 16 , 2002 .
In 2007 , the queue was modified to accommodate single riders in addition to FASTPASS .
It was announced at the 2018 D23 Expo in Japan that the Walt Disney Studios Park variation of the ride will be closing for a complete theme change to the Iron Man and Avengers franchise .
RIDE EXPERIENCE QUEUE Section::::Ride experience .
Section::::Queue .
Guests begin the queue by entering through a small and narrow tent , with boxes designed like instrument cases decorating the scene .
The guests then wait in an unshaded , gridded - queue area ( if the queue is long ) , and then proceed to a ramp that takes them back and forth , to curve around the front of the building , behind the giant electric guitar , and into the " G - Force Records " recording studio .
Guests then enter a circular room with a high ceiling decorated with a giant record .
Guests can see posters featuring artists Disney has signed , other miscellaneous and famous bands / singers and even the guests themselves .
These posters are displayed via LCD screens and are able to display a guest 's name to customize the visual as they walk past .
Guests then continue immediately to enter a small room with doors covered in marbles and a small exhibit of recording instruments .
Guests can interact with the marble doors and often do , and if they take the time to look at the exhibit , they will see various funny parts ( i.e. the person who organized and presented the exhibit is named Mike Rofone ) .
Guests are then called by a Cast Member to join other guests ( this is where the Fastpass+ line and Stand - by lines merge ) to enter the studio that Aerosmith is recording in .
Guests wait for the recording to stop , and the automatic doors eventually open .
As guests enter , the song " Walk This Way " plays , except , after the introduction is played , the vocals and guitar cut out , leaving only the bassline and drums ( the guitar occasionally comes back in ) .
Guests see Aerosmith and their engineer ( played by Ken Marino ) recording and wait momentarily , until the band is interrupted by their manager ( played by Illeana Douglas ) .
The manager tells the band that they have a show to get to , and they ca n't stay with the guests any longer .
Steven Tyler expresses discontent with this outcome and suggests to his manager to get the guests to their concert , along with backstage passes .
The manager reluctantly accepts , after a few seconds of persuasion .
After she accepts to give the ride and tickets to the show , the guests see her call her assistant " Sal , " who she tells to get a " stretch " limo .
After a few seconds of thinking , she takes it back and instead asks for a " super stretch .
" She then tells the guests that she has gotten a " really fast car " for them to ride to the concert because the show is all the way across town .
Guests then see the limo with the band in it already peel out of the lot , leaving the manager behind .
The automatic doors open to the outdoor parking garage , where guests will be boarding their limos .
As the doors open , the audio for " Walk This Way " plays as guests exit .
Guests walk along a fence that separates them from the limos .
Immediately after entering the garage , guests see the limos that are ready to be launched off from 0 to 57 MPH in 2.8 seconds .
As cars launch off , guests hear echoed and intense screaming , and extra added sound effects .
Guests then proceed from here through a short line to board their limo .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
While the guests wait for the ride to begin , a radio DJ presents the safety spiel , followed by a traffic report .
The highway sign flashes humorous messages like : " Traffic bug you ?
Then STEP on it ! "
Guests wait for the car ahead of them to finish the ride , and eventually they hear an introduction ( which varies , and includes messages such as " We 're only just getting started ! " or " Hold on , here we go ! " ) .
After this introduction , Steven Tyler alternates between each ear the countdown of " Five , four , three , two " , as they hear the introduction of the song they 're about to hear .
As Tyler 's countdown skips , launching on ' 1 ' instead of ' 0 ' , guests suddenly begin to accelerate from 0 to in less than 2.8 seconds .
During this initial second , the on - ride camera takes the photo of the guests .
After a long straightway , the car proceeds to do a Roll Over ( sea serpent ) roll , which is a two inversion element , and then some less intense maneuvers .
During the ride , there are neon signs on the side of the track , designed to mimic road signs .
The car continues along the track , until it reaches the third and final inversion , a corkscrew .
Finally , guests perform a humpback as they enter the " VIP parking " section for the fictitious concert .
Guests wait in a tunnel at a stop for a moment , then proceed to the VIP backstage area , where they 're greeted by a red carpet and monitors displaying their ride photos .
Guests then exit through the gift shop .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Walt Disney Imagineering worked with Aerosmith to produce a special soundtrack for the roller coaster .
Each coaster train features different Aerosmith songs .
*
The songs heard to each ride contain some new lyrics written specifically for the attraction .
( Love in an Elevator is sung as " Love in a roller coaster , " for example . )
* Car license plates and songs heard on each car ( Note : Updated Jan 2008 after 2007 refurbishment . )
* 1QKLIMO : " Nine Lives " * UGOBABE : " Love in an Elevator " ( Rollercoaster ) & " Walk This Way " ( Formerly UGOGIRL Pre-2004 Refurbishment )
* BUHBYE : " Young Lust " , " F.I.N.E.
* " & " Love in an Elevator " ( Rollercoaster ) * H8TRFFC : " Back in the Saddle " & " Dude ( Looks Like a Lady ) "
* 2FAST4U : " Sweet Emotion " ( live , as featured in A Little South of Sanity )
There is a 6th Limo in the fleet of ride vehicles of Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster .
This vehicle is without a license plate , and is always " in refurbishment .
" The vehicles are rotated in and out of use after a period of many thousands of laps around the track .
However , the maintenance teams will switch out the plate and add the proper song to the new vehicle every time a rotation is made .
The ride formerly featured Uncle Joe Benson , a well - known Los Angeles rock radio DJ , as the station 's DJ .
Currently , Bill Hart ( known as Bill St. James ) , the host of ABC Radio 's Flashback , provides the voice for the DJ of " LA 's Classic Rock Station . "
The height requirement on this ride is 48 inches .
WALT DISNEY STUDIOS PARK ATTRACTION Section::::Walt Disney Studios Park attraction .
Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster also exists in Disneyland Paris ' Walt Disney Studios Park , named " Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster avec Aerosmith " .
Although the track layout is identical to its Orlando counterpart , the theme of the ride differs — instead of guests being taken on the Los Angeles freeways , the Paris version is based around an Aerosmith music video .
Lighting rigs , projectors , strobes , and smoke effects are used in place of the road signs that exist in the U.S. version .
The name of the record company is Tour de Force ( instead of " G - Force " )
Records , and the vehicles in Paris are called " Soundtrackers " instead of limousines .
The story of the Paris version is that Aerosmith , working with engineers , have created a revolutionary new music experience at the Tour De Force Records studios .
After watching the pre - show which features Aerosmith 's Steven Tyler hyping up the ride , guests are lured into the testing area where they board one of five Soundtrackers , the prototype vehicles for the new experience .
A unique aspect of the Walt Disney Studios version is that each Soundtracker has its own theme .
There are five different lightshows and five different soundtracks , one for each Soundtracker .
The themes are as follows :
* Soundtracker 1 : green lightshow theme ; plays " Back In The Saddle " and " Dude Looks Like A Lady " .
* Soundtracker 2 : purple lightshow theme ; plays " Young Lust , " " F.I.N.E. " and " Love In An Elevator . "
* Soundtracker 3 : multicolour lightshow theme ; plays " Love In An Elevator " and " Walk This Way . "
* Soundtracker 4 : red / yellow lightshow theme ; plays " Nine Lives . "
* Soundtracker 5 : blue lightshow theme ; plays " Sweet Emotion ( live ) . "
The minimum height at Parc Walt Disney Studios is 1.2 metres ( 47 inches ) .
IRON MAN AND AVENGERS
RETHEME Section::::Iron Man and Avengers retheme .
It was announced at the 2018 D23 Expo in Japan that the Walt Disney Studios Park variation of the ride will be closing for a complete theme change to the Iron Man and Avengers franchise .
HIDDEN MICKEYS
* One in the pre - show ( found on a small chalkboard in the bottom right corner of the sound room ( this one was made by a cast member and changes at times )
* One in the pre - show ( found on the ground , formed by three coils of wire ) .
* One in place of each " Expiration Date " for the license plates on the limos .
* Many on the floor in Studio C , hidden in the carpet pattern .
* Three on the ride track itself ( one found on a yellow sign behind a red limo , two on the ground in a cityscape area ) .
* Two in the tile mosaic in the rotunda before the recording studio near the marble doors .
* One in the post show area to the right as one enters this area .
*
Many on Steven Tyler 's shirt on the poster outside .
* One on Joe Perry 's medallion on the outside poster .
SPEAKERS Section::::Speakers .
In each train , there are a total of 120 speakers .
There are seven speakers per seat including one subwoofer ( under the seat ) and six located in the headrest .
There are 820 speakers located in the ride 's show building and launch area ( not including the train ) .
This makes a total of about 900 speakers in the attraction .
SEE ALSO
* Incidents at Walt Disney World - information on incidents and accidents involving the attraction .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Disney 's Hollywood Studios Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster website *
Official Walt Disney Studios Park Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster website * Photos Magiques - Rock ' n ' Roller Coaster avec Aerosmith