AN AMERICAN IN PARIS ( FILM )
An American in Paris is a 1951 American musical film inspired by the 1928 orchestral composition An American in Paris by George Gershwin .
Starring Gene Kelly , Leslie Caron , Oscar Levant , Georges Guétary , and Nina Foch , the film is set in Paris , and was directed by Vincente Minnelli from a script by Alan Jay Lerner .
The music is by George Gershwin , with lyrics by his brother Ira , with additional music by Saul Chaplin , the music director .
The story of the film is interspersed with dance numbers choreographed by Gene Kelly and set to Gershwin 's music .
Songs and music include " I Got Rhythm " , " I 'll Build A Stairway to Paradise " , " 'S Wonderful " , and " Love Is Here to Stay " .
The climax of the film is " The American in Paris " ballet , a 17-minute dance featuring Kelly and Caron set to Gershwin 's An American in Paris .
The ballet sequence cost almost half a million dollars to shoot .
An American in Paris was an enormous success , garnering eight Academy Award nominations and winning six , as well as earning other industry honors .
In 1993 , it was selected for preservation by the United States Library of Congress in the National Film Registry for being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant .
" It is ranked # 9 among AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
American World War II veteran Jerry Mulligan ( Gene Kelly ) is an exuberant expatriate in Paris trying to make a reputation as a painter .
His friend and neighbor , Adam Cook ( Oscar Levant ) , is a struggling concert pianist and longtime associate of a French singer , Henri Baurel ( Georges Guétary ) .
At the ground - floor bar , Henri tells Adam about his cultured girlfriend , Lise Bouvier ( Leslie Caron ) .
Jerry joins them later , before going out to sell his art .
A lonely society woman and heiress , Milo Roberts ( Nina Foch ) , finds Jerry displaying his paintings in Montmartre and takes an interest in him and his art .
She brings him to her apartment to pay for his works , and invites him to a dinner party she is throwing later that night .
After singing with French children on the way home ( " I Got Rhythm " ) , Jerry goes up to Milo 's apartment .
He quickly finds out the " party " is actually a one - on - one date , and tells Milo he has no interest in being a paid escort .
When he attempts to leave after giving her money back , she insists she is only interested in his art .
They go to a crowded bar , and Milo offers to sponsor an art show for Jerry as a friendly gesture .
Some of Milo 's friends arrive , and while sitting with them , Jerry sees Lise seated with friends at the next table , and is instantly smitten .
He ignores Milo and her acquaintances , and instead pretends to know Lise already and dances with her .
She is standoffish and gives Jerry a wrong phone number , but is innocently corrected by someone at her table .
Heading home , Milo tells Jerry he was very rude cavorting with a girl he does not know while in her presence ; tired of Milo , Jerry gets out of the car and bids her farewell .
The next day , Jerry calls Lise at her work , but she tells him to never call her again .
Jerry and Milo meet at a cafe , and she informs him a collector is interested in his paintings
and she arranged a showing later that day .
Before going to the showing , he goes to the parfumerie where Lise works and she consents to a late dinner with him .
She does not want to be seen eating with him in public , but they share a romantic song and dance on the banks of the Seine River in the shadows of Notre Dame .
However , she quickly rushes off to meet Henri after his performance ( " I 'll Build a Stairway to Paradise " ) , where Henri tells her he has been asked to go on a tour of America and asks her to marry him .
Later , Adam humorously daydreams he is performing Gershwin 's Concerto in F for Piano and Orchestra for a gala audience in a concert hall .
As the scene progresses , Adam is also revealed to be the conductor , other members of the orchestra , and even an enthusiastic audience member applauding himself at the end .
Milo gets Jerry an art studio and tells him she has planned an exhibition of his work in three months .
He initially refuses the studio because he does not have the money for it , but eventually accepts it under the condition he pay Milo back when his art proceeds allow him .
Roughly a month later and after much courting , Lise abruptly runs off when she and Jerry arrive by taxi at his apartment .
When Jerry complains to Adam , Adam is shocked to realize both Henri and Jerry are involved with the same woman .
Henri and Jerry discuss the woman they each love ( " 'S Wonderful " ) , unaware she is the same woman .
That night , Jerry and Lise reunite in the same place on the banks of the Seine close to Notre Dame .
She informs him she is marrying Henri the next day and going to America .
Lise feels a sense of duty to Henri , to whom she feels indebted for keeping her safe during World War II .
She and Jerry proclaim their love for each other .
Feeling slighted , Jerry invites Milo to the art students ' masked ball and kisses her .
At the raucous party , with everyone in black - and - white costumes , they meet Henri and Lise , and Jerry finally tells Milo about his feelings for Lise — soon , Henri overhears Jerry and Lise saying goodbye to each other , and realizes the truth .
As Henri and Lise drive away , Jerry daydreams about being with Lise all over Paris to the tune of the George Gershwin composition An American in Paris .
His reverie is broken by a car horn , the sound of Henri bringing Lise back to him .
They embrace as the Gershwin composition ( and the film ) ends .
CAST
* Gene Kelly as Jerry Mulligan
* Leslie Caron as Lise Bouvier * Oscar Levant as Adam Cook * Georges Guétary as Henri
" Hank " Baurel * Nina Foch as Milo Roberts * Eugene Borden as Georges Mattieu
* John Eldredge as Jack Jansen ( uncredited ) * Anna Q. Nilsson as Kay Jansen ( uncredited ) Section::::Cast .
Hayden Rorke , best known for playing Dr. Alfred Bellows on the TV series I Dream of Jeannie ( 1965–70 ) , has an uncredited part as a friend of Milo .
Noel Neill , later to portray Lois Lane on the TV series
The Adventures of Superman , has a small role as an American art student who tries to criticize Jerry 's paintings .
Jazz musician Benny Carter plays the leader of a jazz ensemble performing in the club where Milo first takes Jerry .
Madge Blake , best known for playing Bruce Wayne 's aunt Harriet Cooper on the TV series Batman ( 1966–68 ) , has an uncredited part as a customer in the perfume shop in which Lise works .
Judy Landon , better known for her appearance in Kelly 's next musical Singin ' in the Rain ( and as the wife of Brian Keith ) , and Sue Casey appear as dancers in the " Stairway to Paradise " sequence .
MUSIC AND DANCE
* " Embraceable You " –
Lise * * " Nice Work
If You Can Get It " –
Hank * *
" By Strauss " – Jerry , Hank ,
Adam
*
* " I Got Rhythm " – Jerry * * " Tra - la - la ( This Time It 's Really Love ) " – Jerry ,
Adam
*
* " Love Is Here to Stay " – Jerry ,
Lise
* * " I 'll Build a Stairway to Paradise " –
Hank * * Concerto in F for Piano and Orchestra – Adam , The MGM Symphony Orchestra
*
* " 'S Wonderful " – Jerry , Hank * * An American in Paris Ballet – Jerry , Lise , Ensemble * Section::::Music and dance .
The 17 minute ballet sequence , with sets and costumes referencing French painters including Raoul Dufy , Pierre - Auguste Renoir , Maurice Utrillo , Henri Rousseau , and Toulouse - Lautrec , is the climax of the film , and cost the studio approximately $ 450,000 to produce .
Production on the film was halted on September 15 , 1950 .
Minnelli left to direct another film , Father 's Little Dividend .
Upon completion of that film in late October , he returned to film the ballet sequence .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Bosley Crowther of The New York Times gave a mostly positive review largely on the strength of the closing dance number which he called " one of the finest ever put upon the screen , " as well as Leslie Caron 's performance , writing that the film " takes on its own glow of magic when Miss Caron is on the screen .
When she is n't , it bumps along slowly as a patched - up , conventional music show .
" Variety called the film " one of the most imaginative musical confections turned out by Hollywood in years ...
Kelly is the picture 's top star and rates every inch of his billing .
His diversified dancing is great as ever and his thesping is standout .
"
Harrison 's Reports deemed it " an excellent entertainment , a delight to the eye and ear , presented in a way that will give all types of audiences extreme pleasure . "
Richard L. Coe of The Washington Post called it " the best musical movie I 've ever seen , " praising its " spirit of crisp originality and sophistication rarely found in a screen musical . "
John McCarten of The New Yorker called it " a thoroughly pleasant musical film ...
Never too tightly confined by its slender story , ' An American in Paris ' skips from love in the moonlight to handsome ballets with the greatest of ease , and Mr. Kelly is always ready , willing , and able to execute a tap dance .
"
The Monthly Film Bulletin called it " merely a good musical , far more attractive than most , but considerably less than the material seemed to promise .
This is due in part to unimaginative use of the Paris settings — a very obvious tourist 's view — and to the rather curious way in which the story , after building up interest in Jerry 's painting and in his one - man show , simply shelves the whole issue . "
Reviewing the film in 2011 , James Berardinelli wrote that it " falls into the category of a weak Oscar winner .
The movie is enjoyable enough to watch , but it represents a poor choice as the standard - bearer of the 1951 roster ...
It 's a fine , fun film with a lot of great songs and dancing
but there 's nothing about this production that causes it to stand out when compared to one of dozens of musicals from the era . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
According to MGM records , the film earned $ 3,750,000 in the U.S. and Canada and $ 3,231,000 in other countries during its initial theatrical release .
This resulted in the studio making a $ 1,346,000 profit .
AWARDS AND HONORS ACADEMY AWARDS Wins * Academy Award for Best Picture :
Arthur Freed , producer * Academy Award for Best Art –
Set Decoration , Color : E. Preston Ames , Cedric Gibbons , F. Keogh Gleason , and Edwin B. Willis * Academy Award for Best Cinematography , Color : John Alton and Alfred Gilks * Academy Award for Best Costume Design , Color : Orry - Kelly , Walter Plunkett , and Irene Sharaff * Academy Award for Best Music ,
Scoring of a Musical Picture : Saul Chaplin and Johnny Green * Academy Award for Best Writing , Story and Screenplay : Alan Jay Lerner Nominations
* Academy Award for Best Director :
Vincente Minnelli * Academy Award for Best Film Editing :
Adrienne Fazan
GOLDEN GLOBES Wins
* Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy Nominations
* Golden Globe Award for Best Director –
Motion Picture :
Vincente Minnelli * Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy : Gene Kelly OTHERS Section::::Awards and honors .
Section::::Others .
Kelly received an Academy Honorary Award that year for " his versatility as an actor , singer , director and dancer , and specifically for his brilliant achievements in the art of choreography on film .
" It was his only Oscar .
The film was entered into the 1952 Cannes Film Festival .
In 1993 , An American in Paris was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
American Film Institute recognition * 1998 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies – # 68 * 2002 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Passions – # 39 * 2004 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs – # 32 *
" I Got Rhythm " * 2006 : AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals – # 9 AFI also honored star Kelly as # 15 of the top 25 American male screen legends .
DIGITAL RESTORATION Section::::Digital restoration .
In 2011 , the film was digitally restored by Warner Bros. for its 60th anniversary .
STAGE
ADAPTATIONS 2008
ADAPTATION Section::::Stage adaptations .
Section::::2008 adaptation .
A stage version of the musical was adapted by Ken Ludwig , and began previews at the Alley Theatre ( Houston ) on April 29 , 2008 , officially opening on May 18 and running through June 22 .
The production , directed by Alley artistic director Gregory Boyd with choreography by Randy Skinner , starred Harry Groener and Kerry O'Malley .
The musical had many of the film 's original songs , and also incorporated other Gershwin songs , such as " They All Laughed " , " Let 's Call the Whole Thing Off " , and " Love Walked In " .
2014 ADAPTATION Section::::2014 adaptation .
In 2014 , a stage adaptation premiered in Paris at the Théâtre du Châtelet , with Robert Fairchild as Jerry Mulligan and Leanne Cope as Lise Bouvier ( here renamed Lise Dassin and turned into an aspiring ballet dancer ) .
The production , which ran from November to January 2015 , was directed and choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon , written by Craig Lucas and designed by Bob Crowley .
The musical then transferred to Broadway , with previews at Palace Theatre beginning on March 13 , 2015 , before officially opening there on April 12 .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The epilogue of the 2016 musical film La La Land references the set design and costuming of An American in Paris .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Filmsite.org 's Greatest Films An American in Paris
* Combustible Celluloid 's review of An American in Paris
* Production art from An American in Paris , Margaret Herrick Library , Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences