BEAM ME UP , SCOTTY
" Beam me up , Scotty " is a catchphrase that made its way into popular culture from the science fiction television series .
It comes from the command Captain Kirk gives his chief engineer , Montgomery " Scotty " Scott , when he needs to be transported back to the Starship Enterprise .
Though it has become irrevocably associated with the series and films , the exact phrase was never actually spoken in any Star Trek television episode or film .
Despite this , the quote has become a phrase of its own over time .
It can be used to describe one 's desire to be elsewhere , technology such as teleportation , slang for certain drugs , or as a phrase to show appreciation and association with the television show .
PRECISE QUOTATIONS
Section::::Precise quotations .
Despite the phrase entering into popular culture , it is a misquotation and has never been said in any of the television series or films , contrary to popular belief .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The popularity of the misquotation has led to many new phrases , both associated with Star Trek or otherwise .
The misquotation 's influence led to James Doohan , the actor who played Scotty , to be misrepresented in his own obituary .
In it , he is referenced as the character who " responded to the command , " Beam me up , Scotty " , despite having never responded to this exact command in the show .
Doohan himself chose to use the phrase as the title of his 1996 autobiography .
The quote " Beam me up , Scotty ! " has been extended beyond its original meaning to describe an expression of " the desire to be elsewhere " , or the desire to be out of an unwanted situation .
Along with this , it has been associated with things that are futuristic , such as the possibility of teleportation .
The phrase has also been used as slang for certain drugs .
An Oxford Reference page defined " Beam me up , Scotty " as " a mixture of phencyclidine and cocaine " and to " talk to Scotty , high off Scotty , see Scotty ... etc . "
In recent usage , the phrase has been referenced by Baxter County Sheriff 's drug slang definitions .
It is also referenced in the book " Vice Slang " by Tom Dalzell and Terry Victor , for crack cocaine , and to describe " Beamers , Beemers " , as those taking said drugs .
The exact timing of when the phrase became popular is unclear .
However , early signs of the quote 's usage to describe something separate of Star Trek can be found roughly ten years after Star Trek 's airing in 1966 , in a publication of the Royal Aeronautical Journal .
It describes a certain routine as " a sort of ' beam me up scotty ' routine ' " .
Over time , the phrase has been extended to , " Beam me up
, Scotty , there 's no intelligent life down here ! " , popularized on bumper stickers and t - shirts , despite neither quote ever being said on the show .
The science fiction parody
Spaceballs ( 1987 ) devotes a small movie scene to the misquotation .
It starts with following conversation between president Skroop , who distrust the transporter technology , and spaceship officer Zircon :
The planetarium in the animated series South Park ( 1997 ) carries the inscription " Me transmitte sursum , Caledoni ! " , which is a translation of the misquotation into Latin .
SEE ALSO
* Misquotations * James Traficant , a U.S. Congressman from Ohio who used the catchphrase during his service ( 1985–2002 ) in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1997 to 2002 .
* Beam me up Scotty ( mixtape )
* Beam Me Up
, Scotty ( D.C. Scorpio song )
REFERENCES FURTHER READING