NCAA DIVISION II
Division II is an intermediate - level division of competition in the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) .
It offers an alternative to both the larger and better - funded Division I and to the scholarship - free environment offered in Division III .
Before 1973 , the NCAA 's smaller schools were grouped together in the College Division .
In 1973 , the College Division split in two when the NCAA began using numeric designations for its competitions .
The College Division members who wanted to offer athletic scholarships or compete against those who did became Division II , while those who chose not to offer athletic scholarships became Division III .
Nationally , ESPN televises the championship game in football , CBS televises the men 's basketball championship , and ESPN2 televises the women 's basketball championship .
CBS Sports Network broadcasts six football games on Thursdays during the regular season , and one men 's basketball game per week on Saturdays during that sport 's regular season .
The official slogan of NCAA Division II , implemented in 2015 , is " Make It Yours . "
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
There are currently 300 full and 20 provisional members of Division II with seven institutions moving to full membership in September 2015 .
Division II schools tend to be smaller public universities and many private institutions .
A large minority of Division II institutions ( 133 schools / 42 % ) have fewer than 2,499 students .
Only 12 institutions have more than 15,000 undergraduates , and only UC San Diego ( which is set to move to Division I in 2020 ) and Simon Fraser University have more than 25,000 .
Division II has a diverse membership , with two active member institutions in Alaska and four in Hawaii .
Additionally , it is the only division that has member institutions in Puerto Rico and the only division that has expanded its membership to include an international member institution .
Simon Fraser University became the first institution outside the US to enter the NCAA membership process .
This occurred after the Division II Membership Committee accepted the institution 's application during a July 7–9 meeting in Indianapolis , Indiana .
Simon Fraser , located in the Vancouver suburb of Burnaby , British Columbia , began a two - year candidacy period September 1 , 2009 .
Prospective members also must complete at least one year of provisional status before being accepted as full - time Division II members .
In the fall of 2012 , the NCAA President 's Council officially approved Simon Fraser University as the organization 's first international member .
In April 2017 , the NCAA made permanent the pilot program under which Simon Fraser was admitted to the NCAA , allowing each division to determine whether to allow Canadian or Mexican schools to join .
In January 2018 , Division II became the first NCAA division to officially allow Mexican schools to apply for membership , provided that they meet the same standards as US - based D - II members , including US regional accreditation .
The Mexican school CETYS , which is fully accredited in both countries , is seeking to join the NCAA with the backing of the California Collegiate Athletic Association .
At this time , CETYS had men 's and women 's basketball , men 's and women 's volleyball , baseball , softball , men 's soccer , cheerleading and football .
Because their football team carries a larger roster than most sports , this may require the university to field six women 's teams and four men 's team in order to meet the equal gender balance requirement ( they were also looking to add a track and field team for men ) .
OVERVIEW
MEN 'S TEAM SPORTS Section::::Overview .
Section::::Men 's team sports . !
width=35Number !
width=100Sport !
width=110Teams !
width=50Conferences !
width=55Scholarshipsper team !
width=80Season !
width=200Most
Championships ! 1 align = center Football align = center 173 align
= center 16 align = center align
= center
Fall align = center Disputed !
2
align
= center Basketball align
= center 320 align = center
24 align = center align = center
Winter align
= center Kentucky Wesleyan (
8) ! 3 align
= center Baseball align = center 270 align
= center
24 align = center align = center
Spring align = center Florida Southern ( 9 ) ! 4
align
= center Soccer align = center 215 align = center
24 align = center align = center
Fall align = center Southern Connecticut State University ( 6 ) !
5
align
= center
Lacrosse align = center 65 align
= center
24 align = center align = center
Spring align = center Adelphi ( 7 ) ! 6 align
= center UCLA ( 19 ) !
7
align
= center California ( 13 ) MEN 'S INDIVIDUAL SPORTS Section::::Men 's individual sports . !
width=40No .
!
width=145Sport !
width=75Teams !
width=90Athletes !
width=95Season ! 1 ! 2 !
3 !
4 ! 5 !
6 !
7
WOMEN 'S TEAM SPORTS
Section::::Women 's team sports . !
width=35No . !
width=105Sport !
width=70Teams !
width=55Conferences !
width=55Scholarshipsper team !
width=80Season !
width=200Most
Championships !
1 ! 2 align = center
Soccer align = center 267 align
= center
24 align = center align = center
Fall align
= center Grand Valley State and Franklin Pierce ( 5 ) ! 3 align = center Volleyball align = center 308 align
= center
24 align = center align = center
Fall align = center Concordia St. Paul ( 8) ! 4 align = center Softball align
= center 299 align = center
24 align = center align =
center Spring align = center Cal State Northridge ( 4 ) !
5
align = center Rowing align
= center 16 align = center
24 align = center align =
center Spring align = center Western Washington
( 8) ! 6 align
= center
Lacrosse align = center 100 align
= center
24 align = center align = center
Spring align = center Adelphi ( 8) ! 7 align = center Field Hockey align
= center 30 align = center
24 align = center align = center
Fall
align = center Bloomsburg ( 13 ) ! 8 align = center
Water Polo *
align
= center 10 align
= center 6
align = center align =
center Spring align = center UCLA
( 7 ) * Championships are combined with D -
I WOMEN 'S INDIVIDUAL SPORTS
Section::::Women 's individual sports . !
width=40No .
!
width=145Sport !
width=75Teams !
width=90Athletes !
width=95Season ! 1 ! 2 !
3 !
4 ! 5 !
6 !
7
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
Division II institutions have to sponsor at least five sports for men and five for women ( or four for men and six for women ) , with two team sports for each sex , and each playing season represented by each sex .
Teams that consist of both men and women are counted as men 's teams for sports sponsorship purposes .
There are contest and participant minimums for each sport , as well as scheduling criteria — football and men 's and women 's basketball teams must play at least 50 percent of their games against Division II or Football Bowl Subdivision ( formerly Division I - A ) or Football Championship Subdivision ( formerly Division I - AA ) opponents .
For sports other than football and basketball there are no scheduling requirements , as long as each contest involves full varsity teams .
The only NCAA sport in which contests against club teams can count toward a team 's contest minimum is women 's rugby , in which two such contests per school year can be counted .
There are not attendance requirements for football , nor arena size requirements for basketball .
There are maximum financial aid awards for each sport , as well as a separate limit on financial aid awards in men 's sports , that a Division II school must not exceed .
Division II teams usually feature a number of local or in - state student - athletes .
Many Division II student - athletes pay for school through a combination of scholarship money , grants , student loans and employment earnings .
Division II athletics programs are financed in the institution 's budget like other academic departments on campus .
Traditional rivalries with regional institutions dominate schedules of many Division II athletics programs .
Athletic scholarships are offered in most sponsored sports at most institutions , but with more stringent limits as to the numbers offered in any one sport than at the Division I level .
For example , Division II schools may give financial aid in football equivalent to 36 full scholarships ( whereas each school in Division I FBS , the highest level , is allowed 85 individuals receiving financial aid for football ) , although some Division II conferences limit the number of scholarships to a lower level .
Division II scholarship programs are frequently the recipients of student - athletes transferring from Division I schools ; a transfer student does not have to sit out a year before resuming sports participation as would usually be the case in the event of transferring from one Division I institution to another .
Several exceptions to this rule currently exist , of which three are the most significant .
First , football players transferring from a Division I FBS school to a Division
I FCS school do not have to sit out a year , provided that the player has at least two remaining seasons of athletic eligibility .
The same also applies to players transferring from scholarship - granting FCS schools to non - scholarship FCS schools .
Second , in sports other than football , baseball , men 's and women 's basketball , and men 's ice hockey , a first - time transfer does not have to sit out a year , provided that the player 's former institution grants a scholarship release .
Additionally , student - athletes in any sport who complete a bachelor 's degree and still have athletic eligibility remaining can transfer to another school and be immediately eligible , provided that they enroll in a graduate or professional degree program at the new institution .
There are also some restrictions with transferring to another school for the same sport in the same conference .
CONFERENCES COMPETING IN DIVISION II
* California Collegiate Athletic Association * Central Atlantic Collegiate Conference *
Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association^ * Conference Carolinas * East Coast Conference * Great American Conference^ * Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference^ *
Great Lakes Valley Conference^ *
Great Midwest Athletic Conference *
Great Northwest Athletic Conference^ *
Gulf South Conference^ * Heartland Conference * Lone Star Conference^ * Mid - America
Intercollegiate Athletics Association^ *
Mountain East Conference^ *
Northeast Ten
Conference^ *
Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference^ * Pacific West Conference
* Peach Belt Conference * Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference^ * Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference^ *
South Atlantic Conference^ * Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference^ * Sunshine State Conference
Section::::Conferences competing in Division II .
The newest D - II conference is the Mountain East Conference , formed in 2012 after the football - sponsoring schools in the West Virginia Intercollegiate Athletic Conference ( WVIAC ) announced that they would leave to form a new league , a move that led to the demise of the WVIAC .
The Mountain East was approved by the NCAA Division II Membership Committee in February 2013 , and became an official conference on September 1 of that year .
The Heartland Conference will disband at the end of the 2018–19 school year .
In August 2017 , eight of its nine members announced a mass exodus to the Lone Star Conference .
The remaining Heartland member , Newman University , announced in February 2018 that it would become a de facto member of the Mid - America Intercollegiate Athletics Association at that time .
Technically , Newman will be an associate member because it does not sponsor football , a mandatory sport for full MIAA members , but it will house all of its varsity sports in that league .
One of the eight schools that originally announced a move to the LSC , Rogers State University , later changed course and instead chose to follow Newman into de facto MIAA membership ( like Newman , and indeed all other Heartland members , Rogers State does not sponsor football ) .
INDEPENDENTS
* Division II Independent schools SCHOLARSHIP LIMITS BY SPORT Section::::Scholarship limits by sport .
The NCAA imposes limits on the total financial aid each Division II member may award in each sport that the school sponsors .
All Division II sports are classified as " equivalency " sports , meaning that the NCAA restricts the total financial aid that a school can offer in a given sport to the equivalent of a set number of full scholarships .
This differs from Division I , in which some sports are " head - count " sports in which the NCAA limits the total number of individuals who can receive athletic aid .
In another practice that differs from Division I , Division II members are limited to a combined total of 60 scholarship equivalents for men 's sports apart from football and basketball .
Scholarship limits in bold are identical to those for Division
I members in the same sport for the same sex .
Most , but not all , of these sports have a single championship open to schools from all divisions ( for example bowling and rifle ) , or a combined Division I / II national championship and a separate Division III championship ( as in women 's ice hockey and men 's volleyball ) .
Examples of sports with identical scholarship numbers in the two divisions , but separate national championships for each , include men 's cross - country and women 's rowing .
In sports that conduct " National Collegiate " championships open to schools from multiple divisions , Division II schools are allowed to award the same number of scholarships as Division I members .
If the Division I scholarship limit is higher than the Division II limit , the D - II member must annually file a declaration of intent to compete under Division I rules with the NCAA prior to June 1 .
Additionally , if the NCAA sponsors a Division I championship but not a Division II championship in a given sport , D - II members are allowed to compete in the D - I championship , and are also allowed to operate under D - I scholarship limits .
An example of this situation can be seen in men 's ice hockey , which has not had a Division II championship in the 21st century .
Several schools in the Northeast-10 Conference , plus independent Post University ( which has a scheduling agreement with that league ) , compete under Division II scholarship limits ; other Division II schools with programs in that sport choose to play as Division I programs under the higher Division I scholarship limits .
Rifle is classified by the NCAA as a men 's sport , but allows competitors of both sexes . !
SportMen'sWomen 's Baseball9.0
Basketball10.010.0 Beach volleyball5.0 Bowling5.0
Cross - country / track & field12.612.6
Equestrian15.0
Fencing4.54.5 Field
hockey6.3
Football36.0
Golf3.65.4
Gymnastics5.46.0
Ice hockey13.518.0
Lacrosse10.89.9
Rifle3.6
Rowing20.0
Rugby12.0
Skiing6.36.3
Soccer9.09.9 Softball7.2 Swimming and diving8.18.1
Tennis4.56.0
Triathlon5.0
Volleyball4.58.0
Water polo4.58.0
Wrestling9.0 Notes INTERACTION
WITH OTHER DIVISIONS Section::::Interaction with other divisions .
The NCAA does not strictly prevent its member institutions from playing outside of their own division , or indeed playing against schools that are not members of the NCAA , but it is discouraged in many sports .
NAIA
Section::::NAIA .
Many Division II schools frequently schedule matches against members of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics ( NAIA ) , which consists of colleges and universities across the United States and Canada that promote competitive and character - based athletics that is controlled by its membership , as opposed to the NCAA that serves as a regulating body .
DIVISION
I Section::::Division I. Division II schools also frequently schedule " money games " , usually in football and men 's basketball , against Division I schools .
In football , D - II teams once occasionally played games against schools that are now in Division
I FBS , but
this practice has ended because under current NCAA rules , FBS schools can not use victories over schools below FCS level for establishing bowl eligibility .
Today , D - II " money games " are exclusively against FCS schools , whose postseason eligibility is less seriously impacted by scheduling a D - II opponent .
In basketball , where conference tournaments play a large role in determining postseason participants , D - I schools have less of a penalty for scheduling an occasional D - II opponent , resulting in more " money games " .
In any event , the D - II school is almost invariably the visiting team , and is invited to play with knowledge that it will likely be defeated but will receive a substantial ( at least by Division II standards ) monetary reward which will help to finance much of the rest of the season and perhaps other sports as well .
Such games are funded by Division I schools which can afford such games .
In recent years , " money games " in men 's basketball have also included preseason exhibitions against D - I programs , typically in the same region , that do not count in official statistics for either team .
Under NCAA rules , Division I teams are allowed to play two exhibition games in a season , and must host these games .
The University of Kansas helps the state 's four Division II members by rotating them onto the Jayhawks ' exhibition schedule annually .
Milwaukee , which has been a Division I member since 1990 , has continued its series with their former Division II rival Wisconsin - Parkside as part of their exhibition schedule .
When these exhibition games do happen , there are times when the Division II team does win , and against a well - respected Division
I program .
In 2009 , a Division II team beat the eventual Big East regular season champion .
In 2010 , two other Division II teams beat teams that reached the NCAA Division I tournament .
In 2011 , another Division II team defeated a Division I team that finished in the top half of the Pac-12 Conference .
In 2012 , another Division II team beat eventual Atlantic Coast Conference regular - season and tournament champion Miami .
Also in basketball , one of the best - known early - season tournaments for D - I men 's teams , the Maui Invitational , is hosted by D - II member Chaminade .
Through the 2017 edition , Chaminade competed in every tournament , but now competes only in odd - numbered years .
The now - defunct Great Alaska Shootout , which had men 's and women 's tournaments , was also hosted by a D - II member , namely Alaska – Anchorage .
Chaminade typically loses all games it plays in Maui ; Alaska – Anchorage also typically lost all of its men 's Shootout games , but was frequently competitive in the women 's version . NON - REVENUE SPORTS COMPETITION Section::::Non - revenue sports competition .
Matches between the different collegiate divisions in non - revenue sports are often quite competitive .
Indeed , in some sports , among them ice hockey and men 's volleyball , there is no Division II national championship .
In hockey , many schools whose athletic programs are otherwise Division II compete in Division I , and men 's volleyball has a truncated divisional structure with a Division III championship but no Division II championship ( as opposed to the NAIA , which fully includes men 's volleyball in its divisional structure ) .
In any sport that does not have a Division II national championship , Division II members are allowed to award the same number of scholarships as Division I members .
SEE ALSO
* List of NCAA Division II institutions FOOTNOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS