ICE PRINCESS Ice Princess is a 2005 American figure - skating film directed by Tim Fywell , written by Hadley Davis from a story by Meg Cabot and Davis , and starring Michelle Trachtenberg , Joan Cusack , Kim Cattrall and Hayden Panettiere .
The film focuses on Casey Carlyle , a normal teenager who gives up a promising future academic life in order to pursue her new - found dream of being a professional figure skater .
The film was released on March 18 , 2005 .
Ice Princess had an unsuccessful performance at the box office , grossing $ 24 million in the United States during its theatrical run against a production budget of $ 25 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Casey Carlyle ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) a very smart and talented science student , plans to pursue a scholarship to Harvard University .
For the scholarship , Casey must present a personal summer project about physics .
While watching a figure skating competition with her mathematically inclined friend Ann , Casey realizes that her favorite childhood hobby , ice skating , would make a perfect project .
She decides to try to improve her own skating by applying physics and what she has discovered from watching other skaters .
She becomes proficient and skips two levels to become a junior skater .
She helps junior skaters Gennifer " Gen " Harwood ( Hayden Panettiere )
Tiffany Lai ( Jocelyn Lai ) and Nikki Fletcher ( Kirsten Olson ) improve their skating .
Torn between her Harvard dream and her growing love of skating , Casey has difficulty juggling schoolwork , skating , and a part - time job .
Joan Carlyle ( Joan Cusack ) Casey 's mother , attempts to prevent Casey from skating due to her declining academic performance .
Meanwhile , tension arises between Casey 's mother and Casey 's coach Tina Harwood ( Kim Cattrall ) , a disgraced former skater .
Tina , who manages the rink where Casey trains , has Gen on a strict training program .
During a competition where both Casey and Gen compete , Tina sees that Casey may outrank Gen , and attempts to sabotage Casey 's performance by switching her skates .
Upset at this , and frustrated by all the restrictions of training , Gen quits .
Casey declines the Harvard scholarship competition to devote herself to skating to her mother 's dismay .
Casey asks Tina to be her personal coach and help her train for sectionals .
Her mother , upset at this change of direction in her life , refuses to watch her skate .
At the sectionals , Casey 's mind is not fully focused on the competition and she falls while attempting a triple salchow jump .
To her surprise , she discovers that her mother is in the audience .
Inspired , Casey gives a highly rated artistic performance .
The sectionals ends with Nikki going to the nationals and Casey becoming the runner - up .
Gen 's brother , Teddy ( Trevor Blumas ) , gives Casey flowers to congratulate her , and they kiss .
Later , Joan and Tina bicker about how many college courses Casey should take , Teddy and Casey 's budding romance , Casey 's sponsors , and Casey 's future in figure skating .
CAST
* Michelle Trachtenberg as Casey Carlyle * Joan Cusack as Joan Carlyle * Kim Cattrall as Tina Harwood
* Hayden Panettiere as Gennifer " Gen " Harwood
* Trevor Blumas as Teddy Harwood * Erik King as Chip Healey * Diego Klattenhoff as Kyle Dayton * Kirsten Olson as Nikki Fletcher * Signe Ronka as Emma Flanders * Juliana Cannarozzo as Zoe Bloch
* Paul Sun - Hyung Lee as Mr. Lai
* Martha MacIsaac as Mean Party Girl * Connie Ray as Mrs. Fletcher * Michelle Kwan as ESPN reporter * Jocelyn Lai as Tiffany Lai * Shanique Ollivierre - Lake as Chantal DeGroat * Amy Stewart as Ann * Kristina Whitcomb as Ms. Fisher Lee PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Blumas said that he was put on hold for two months during the audition process , and that there had been " a lot of switch - overs with the directors " .
Blumas ended up playing Teddy as a sort of father figure .
He began training to drive a Zamboni soon after arriving in Toronto ; according to him , he later ended up smoothing the ice on some mornings at the rink where they were shooting .
Panettiere did much of her own skating , including a fast spin seen at the end of the regionals short program .
Trachtenberg trained for eight months , including the time they were filming ( during which time she says she worked twenty - hour days ) .
She had to be on the ice longer than most of the other actors as she was one of the few adults on the film .
She had stunt doubles to handle the falls and some of the complex moves , although Trachtenberg did learn a specific move that could not be done by a stunt double as the differences in their build would be apparent .
She sustained some injuries while working on the film .
According to Trachtenberg , a mistake was made in one of the physics formulas her character recites , which was later fixed ; a shot of the back of her head was used and the correct term was looped in .
Trachtenberg described the film as " not a Disney kitschy movie " and was somewhat apprehensive of the idea of a sequel for fear of belittling the original .
Cusack noted that the relationship between Casey and her mother had already been well - developed in the script , but said that it generated a good deal of discussion during the production , and Cusack ultimately described her role as " meaningful " in terms of the acting and also how it related to her personally .
The film was shot from May 3 to July 23 , 2004 at several locations in Toronto , including George Bell Arena , Western Technical - Commercial School , Christie Mansion and De La Salle College .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 6,807,471 million in 2,501 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking # 4 at the box office , behind The Ring Two , Robots and The Pacifier .
By the end of its run , Ice Princess grossed $ 24,402,491 domestically and $ 3,243,000 internationally , totaling $ 27,645,491 worldwide .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Film critic Roger Ebert gives Ice Princess three out of four stars and commended the film for its entertaining nature and ability to overcome cliche and " formula " .
Reactions from other critics have been mixed , as 52 % of the T - meter critics on Rotten Tomatoes reviewed the film positively .
Todd Gilchrist of IGN questioned the speed at which Casey becomes adept at skating and pointed out some other improbabilities and clichés , but strongly praised Cusack 's and Cattrall 's performances as emotionally powerful and fully human .
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops ' Office for Film and Broadcasting rated the film A - I ( suitable for general patronage ) and provided the film a modest praise as a good family film .
Oppenheim Toy Portfolio awarded the film their platinum award .
It is rated G by the Motion Picture Association of America .
Zahra Lari , a Muslim figure skater from the United Arab Emirates , cited Ice Princess as an inspiration for her career .
A documentary about Lari and the film , highlighting Lari 's career and Disney 's influence on her , and including interviews with many involved in making the film , is currently in pre - production with Størmerlige Productions as a result of the # DreamBigPrincess campaign .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The Ice Princess Original Soundtrack was released on March 15 , 2005 in the United States by label Walt Disney Records , features tracks by Natasha Bedingfield , Emma Roberts , Hayden Panettiere , Michelle Branch , Aly & AJ , Jesse McCartney , and Raven - Symoné , and various other artists .
It peaked at number 53 on the Billboard 200 and at number 2 on Top Soundtracks .
Track listing * Reach - Caleigh Peters
*
*
If I Had It My Way - Emma Roberts *
* Get Your Shine On - Jesse McCartney
* * You Set Me Free - Michelle Branch * * Reachin ' for Heaven - Diana DeGarmo * * No One - Aly & AJ *
*
It 's Oh
So Quiet - Lucy Woodward *
* Get Up - Superchick * *
I
Fly - Hayden Panettiere * * Just a Dream - Jump5 * * Bump - Raven - Symoné
* * There is no alternative - Tina Sugandh * * Unwritten - Natasha Bedingfield * Not included on the soundtrack .
*
" Ray of Light " by Madonna appears in the background of the Casey Carlyle 's scene of the regional competition , but is not included on the soundtrack .
* " Freak Out " by Avril Lavigne appears in the official trailer , but is not included on the soundtrack .
* " Toxic " by Britney Spears was included in the ice skating scene from Zoe , but was n't included on the soundtrack .
{ class="wikitable sortable " + Chart positions forIce Princess Original Soundtrack !
Chart ( 2005 ) ! !
Peak position Billboard 200
Billboard Top Soundtracks
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS