CHIKO ROLL
The Chiko Roll is an Australian savoury snack invented by Frank McEncroe , inspired by the Chinese spring roll and first sold in 1951 as the " Chicken Roll " despite not actually containing chicken .
The snack was designed to be easily eaten on the move without a plate or cutlery .
Since 1995 they have been owned by Simplot Australia .
A Chiko Roll 's filling is primarily cabbage and barley , as well as carrot , green beans , beef , beef tallow , wheat cereal , celery and onion .
This filling is partially pulped and enclosed in a thick egg and flour pastry tube designed to survive handling at football matches .
The roll is typically deep - fried in vegetable oil .
At the peak of its popularity in the 1960s and 1970s , 40 million Chiko Rolls were sold annually in Australia .
The product has been described as an Australian cultural icon .
Other products currently available under the Chiko brand include Corn Jacks , Hawaiian and Supreme pizza subs , Spudsters , onion rings , fish cakes and vegetable nuggets .
HISTORY DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Development .
The Chiko Roll was developed by Frank McEncroe , a boilermaker from Bendigo , Victoria , who turned to catering at football matches and other outdoor events .
In 1950 , McEncroe saw a competitor selling Chinese chop suey rolls outside the Richmond Cricket Ground and decided to add a similar product to his own line .
McEncroe felt that the Chinese rolls were too flimsy to be easily handled in an informal outdoor setting and hit upon the idea of a much larger and more robust roll that would provide a quick meal that was both reasonably substantial and easily handled .
The result was the Chiko Roll , which debuted at the Wagga Wagga Agriculture Show in 1951 .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
In the 1960s , McEncroe moved to Melbourne with his family where he began to manufacture the rolls with the use of an adapted sausage machine .
As the product became more popular , McEncroe moved his production to a larger factory in the suburb of Essendon .
He later merged his business with a local company called Floyd 's Iceworks to form
Frozen Food Industries Pty Ltd. The new company went public in 1963 .
By 1965 , most Australian takeaway restaurants , especially milk bars and fish and chip shops carried Chiko Rolls , with the marketing slogan " Grab a Chiko " signifying the ease with which shop owners could take a Chiko Roll from the freezer and put it into a fryer , usually add a sauce and slide it into its own trademarked bag .
At the height of their popularity in the 1970s , 40 million Chiko Rolls were being sold Australia - wide each year and more than one million were exported to Japan .
RECENT YEARS Section::::Recent years .
Since 1995 , the Chiko brand has been owned by Simplot Australia .
All Chiko Rolls are now manufactured in Bathurst , New South Wales , on a specifically designed machine that produces the pastry and filling at the same time in long rolls .
They are then automatically sliced and then the distinctive ends are folded .
Increasing competition in the Australian takeaway food market in recent decades has seen a decline in the profile of the Chiko Roll , with consumption down to 17 million per annum in 2011 .
However , they remain a popular snack at sporting events and are still widely available at fish and chip shops and supermarkets across Australia .
In September 2016 a disagreement in the Parliament of New South Wales over the origins of the Chiko Roll occurred .
The Nationals ' Member for Calare Andrew Gee , Labor 's Member for Bendigo Lisa Chesters and Member for Riverina Michael McCormack all claimed the snack originated in their respective hometowns .
To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the creation of the Chiko Roll the current manufacturer presented gold - plated replicas to Bendigo and Wagga Wagga cities .
In October 2016 Karratha resident Mark Habermehl cooked a meat pie and a Chiko Roll on a barbeque in an attempt to avoid washing dishes .
The event made the local newspaper and prompted a nomination for Australian of the Year , recognising the ' Australian - ness ' of his choice of cuisine , selection of cooking device and ingenuity .
CHIKO CHICK Section::::Chiko Chick .
Since the 1950s , Chiko Rolls have been advertised featuring the " Chiko Chick " character , a seductive woman on a motorbike accompanied by the slogan " Could n't you go a Chiko Roll ?
"
During the early 1980s , the accompanying slogan " You ca n't knock the roll " was used .
In 2008 , the company began a nationwide search for the new " Chiko Chick " , hoping to downplay the traditionally raunchy look in favour of a more wholesome " girl next door " image .
On 17 July 2008 , the new advertising poster was unveiled at the Wagga Wagga Showgrounds featuring Annette Melton as the new face .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Chiko website * Chiko Roll ingredients and nutrition information