JEEP COMMANDER ( XK )
The Jeep Commander XK and XH ( export diesel ) is a mid - size SUV that was manufactured from 2005 to 2010 by the Jeep division of the American manufacturer Chrysler .
CONCEPT CAR
Section::::Concept car .
Jeep exhibited a concept car named Commander during the 1999 auto show circuit .
The concept featured an experimental direct methanol fuel cell that produced electricity to charge a nickel – metal hydride battery pack .
Full - time four - wheel drive was by a severe duty electric motor on each axle .
The suspension could be raised for traversing off - road purposes .
The overall styling influenced the development of the third - generation Grand Cherokee that was at that time six years away .
The concept car had the same height as production Grand Cherokees , but was about wider .
This allowed for an interior featuring an extra wide center console in the front and three bucket seats in the second row .
The Commander concept had no relation to the production SUV .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The production version of the Jeep Commander ( XK and the diesel - powered XH export version ) debuted at the 2005 New York Auto Show as a five- or seven - passenger counterpart to the third generation Jeep Grand Cherokee .
It was developed to target consumers who wanted a three - rows - of - seats SUV , but designed to be only two inches longer than the existing Grand Cherokee with its two - rows of seats as well as to be assembled on the same production line .
It shared its unibody construction , independent short / long arm front suspension and its 5-link live rear axle with the Grand Cherokee on which it was based .
It featured an upright windshield and squared - off sides .
Its stepped roof was disguised by the roof rack ; a design similar to the GMC Envoy XL and Chevrolet TrailBlazer EXT .
This allowed the second and third - row seats to be mounted higher than the first - row seats .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Standard features included : electronic stability control , traction control , electronic roll mitigation , back up sensors , immobiliser , front dual - stage and side curtain airbags , TPMS , power heated mirrors , remote keyless entry , automatic headlights , UConnect infotainment system and a full - size spare wheel .
Some optional features included : automatic wipers , a 276-watt Boston Acoustics premium sound system , hands - free phone integration , dual zone auto climate control , remote start , a power liftgate , heated first and second row seats , auto dimming mirrors , hill start assist , hill descent control , and adjustable pedals .
Smartbeam headlights were also available as well as HID headlights .
The optional Command View sunroof package included a power front sunroof and two smaller sunroofs over the second row seats .
The Commander also had an optional entertainment package which included a DVD player , TV , and backup camera .
In Europe and certain other markets like Chile , South Africa , and South Korea , the Commander offered a V6 Diesel engine .
OFF - ROAD CAPABILITIES Section::::Off - Road Capabilities .
The Commander was offered with three different four - wheel drive systems : Quadra - Trac I , Quadra - Trac II , and Quadra - Drive II .
Quadra - Trac
I was available on models equipped with the 3.7 L engine ; it is a full - time system that requires no driver input .
Quadra - Trac II was available on models equipped with a V8 engine ; it is a full - time system as well but adds a low range as well as a neutral position for towing .
Quadra - Drive II expands on Quadra - Trac II by adding electronic limited slip differentials to the front and rear axles .
When equipped with Quadra - Drive II , skid plates for the fuel tank , front suspension , and transfer case were also added .
Ground clearance
Approach angle34 ° Departure angle27 °
Breakover angle20 ° TRIMS Section::::Trims .
Base / Sport - 2006 - 2010
: Includes : 3.7 L V6 engine or 4.7 L V8 engine , AM / FM radio with CD player and six speakers , alloy wheels , cloth seats , Automatic transmission .
keyless entry , power windows , door locks , and driver 's seat , and five - passenger seating ; seven passenger seating available .
Limited - 2006 - 2010 : Includes : 4.7 L or 5.7 L HEMI V8 engine , AM / FM radio with six - disc integral CD changer and six Boston Acoustics speakers , security system , dual power seats , leather seats , and standard seven - passenger seating .
Overland - 2007 - 2009
: Includes : 5.7 L HEMI V8 engine , AM / FM radio with GPS navigation and six - disc integral CD changer , Sirius satellite radio , wire mesh grille insert , leather - and - suede seats with embroidered Overland logos , wood trimmed steering wheel , leather wrapped emergency brake handle with leather wrapped door handles as well , and dual - panel Command View sunroof .
65th Anniversary Edition - only in 2006 :
Includes 3.7 L or 4.7 L engine , unique 65th anniversary badges on the front doors and front bucket seats , power driver seat , unique embroidered floor mats , folding third row seats , automatic front headlamps , front fog lamps , premium sound system with six speakers and a 276-watt external amplifier , an AM / FM stereo with six - disc , in - dash CD / MP3 changer , Sirius satellite radio , and Radio Data System ( RDS ) , unique darkened seventeen - inch ( 17"x7.5 " )
alloy wheels , a full - sized spare tire on a matching wheel .
Rocky Mountain - ( 2007 - 2009 )
: Includes 3.7 L or 4.7 L engine , unique Rocky Mountain badges on the front doors and front bucket seats , power driver seat , folding third row seats , automatic front headlamps , front fog lamps , Boston Acoustics premium sound system with six speakers and a 276-watt external amplifier , an AM / FM stereo with six - disc , in - dash CD / MP3 changer , ( navigation available ) , Sirius satellite radio , and Radio Data System ( RDS ) , unique darkened seventeen - inch ( 17"x7.5 " )
alloy wheels , a full - sized spare tire on a matching wheel .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Years !
Engine !
Power !
Torque !
Notes 2005–20103.7
L PowerTech V6
Base / Sport 2005–20074.7 L PowerTech V8
Base / Sport / Limited 2008–20094.7 L PowerTech V8
Base / Sport / Limited 2005–20085.7 L Hemi V8 Limited
/ Overland 2009–20105.7 L Hemi V8
Limited / Overland 2006–20103.0 L OM642 Diesel V6 XH - Outside North America DISCONTINUATION Section::::Discontinuation .
The Jeep Commander was discontinued after the 2010 model year .
Chrysler announced that the 2011 Dodge Durango would be its successor ; which is produced alongside its platform mate the 2011 Jeep Grand Cherokee at Jefferson North Assembly in Detroit , Michigan .
Shortly after production ended , Chrysler CEO Sergio Marchionne said of the Commander , " That vehicle was unfit for human consumption .
We sold some .
But I do n't know why people bought them . "
In 2017 , Jeep released a three - row concept vehicle based on the Jeep Cherokee ( KL ) platform for the Chinese market , called the Jeep Yuntu , utilizing a plug - in gasoline / electric hybrid power train .
A three - row version of the Jeep Cherokee ( KL ) with slightly altered styling was released exclusively for the Chinese market named the Jeep Grand Commander .
While similar in size to the original Commander , the Grand Commander will offer four - cylinder power .
It will not be sold in any other markets .
Jeep is currently planning a successor to the Commander for the North American market , which may be named the Jeep Grand Wagoneer .
Based on the Ram 1500 platform , the all - new vehicle will be built in Warren , Michigan and will share production with a possible Dodge Ramcharger successor as well .
The all - new vehicle , which was first shown to Jeep dealerships at a dealership meeting in 2017 , is due for release in 2019 .
TOTAL AUSTRALIAN SALES
Section::::Total Australian sales . !
Calendar year !
Sales REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* xkjeeps.com
* Jeep Commander Info
* Jeep Commander 4.7 L 2007 model year test
* Jeep Commander Blog