FOG MACHINE
A fog machine , fog generator , or smoke machine is a device that emits a dense vapor that appears similar to fog or smoke .
This artificial fog is most commonly used in professional entertainment applications , but smaller , more affordable fog machines are becoming common for personal use .
Fog machines can also be found in use in a variety of industrial , training , and some military applications .
Typically , fog is created by vaporizing proprietary water and glycol - based or glycerin - based fluids or through the atomization of mineral oil .
This fluid ( often referred to colloquially as fog juice ) vaporizes or atomizes inside the fog machine .
Upon exiting the fog machine and mixing with cooler outside air the vapor condenses , resulting in a thick visible fog .
TYPES HEATED Section::::Types .
Section::::Heated .
Heated fog machines use either an inert gas or an electric pump to propel mineral oil , propylene glycol , or glycerin and water mixture into a heat exchanger , where the solution is vaporized .
Propylene glycol is used rather than ethylene glycol ( ie antifreeze ) , as the latter is toxic .
The most commonly encountered form of heated fog machine is the pump machine .
Very basic models of this type of machine consist of a fluid reservoir , an electric pump to move the fog fluid and heat exchanger which vaporizes the fluid .
More complex models may include a variety of other features , including variable speed pumps to control the output of fog , timer modules , or components for remote operation and monitoring of the fog machines ' status .
Some manufacturers have produced accessories and fluids that when combined with an ordinary heated pump machine , create fog effects similar to chilled fog machines .
Gas propelled fog machines use an inert gas ( most commonly CO or nitrogen ) to propel either mineral oil or a glycol based fluid into a heat exchanger where it is vaporized into particles , creating a fog .
Some models of gas propelled fog machine provide control over the output of fog by varying the volume of gas used to propel the fluid .
CHILLED Section::::Chilled .
Chilled fog machines are designed to create thick clouds of fog that lie close to the ground and dissipate as they rise .
They are typically created by using either dry ice , liquid nitrogen , or more recently liquid air .
Dry Ice ( solid carbon dioxide ) effects are produced by heating water to or near boiling in a suitable container ( for example : a 55-gallon drum with water heater coils in it ) , and then dropping in one or more pieces of dry ice .
Because at standard temperature and pressure carbon dioxide is a gas , the carbon dioxide sublimates and instantly produces a gas , condensing water vapor and creating a thick white fog .
A fan placed at the top of the container directs the fog where it is needed .
Liquid nitrogen
( N ) is used to create low lying fog effects in a manner similar to dry ice .
A machine heats water to at or near the boiling point , creating steam and increasing the humidity in a closed container .
When liquid nitrogen is pumped into the container , the moisture rapidly condenses , creating a thick white fog .
A fan placed at the output of the container directs the fog where it is needed , creating a rolling fog that lies low to the ground .
Liquid air is an alternative to using liquid nitrogen in generating low lying fog effects .
Liquid air is composed of N and O mixed in a ratio of 79 % nitrogen and 21 % oxygen stored as a liquid in insulated cylinders .
This ratio of nitrogen to oxygen is the same as that of atmospheric air , and indeed liquid air may be fabricated by simply liquefying atmospheric air .
Liquid air can be used as a direct replacement for liquid nitrogen in chilled - fog effects and is intended to be used in the same manner in the same equipment .
Its key advantage over liquid nitrogen is that it presents no asphyxiation hazard , since it contains oxygen .
A disadvantage is that it supports combustion , whereas liquid nitrogen inhibits combustion .
USES Section::::Uses .
The versatility of fog machines make them appropriate for a wide variety of applications :
Fog readily assists in creating a specific mood or feeling for a theatrical moment , and is often used in plays , such as Dracula , A Christmas Carol and Macbeth .
Fog machines are also frequently used in Halloween displays such as haunted houses or forests .
Because of greater availability and reductions in prices between 2003 and 2005 , fog machines have become widely used for domestic Halloween presentations .
Fog machines are also useful for industrial applications including visualizing the flow of air , such highlighting drag over a surface in a wind tunnel or testing for leaks or filter effectiveness in air conditioning installations .
Emergency and military services also use fog machines in their training regimens .
Because of the reflective and refractive qualities of the smoke created by fog machines , they are often used in nightclubs and other entertainment venues to enhance the effects of lighting and laser arrangements , although they are being superseded by haze machines ( see also light beam ) .
Several companies in Europe and Canada have developed rapid deployment fog machines for use as intrusion and hold - up security systems , intended to disorient an intruder by filling a room with fog when triggered by a panic button or other security device .
These Security Smoke devices can produce between 300 and 1,000 cubic meters of smoke in 30 seconds and have been utilized in a wide variety of industries , including buildings requiring a high level of security , such as banks and jewelers , but also warehouses , offices , retail premises and in cash - handling chains .
Concerns have been raised , that these devices may cause criminals to panic , causing them to become violent to customers or staff , however Security Smoke now has its own European Standard EN-8 which specifically states that it must not be installed in such a way as to create a mantrap .
INDUSTRIAL USES Section::::Industrial uses .
Ultra Low Volume ( UNLV ) fogging is used by pest control industry and cleaning companies .
UNLV refers to the droplet size ( between 20 - 30 micrometers ) generated by these fog machines .
This fine droplet size is known as the optimum size for pest control .
Traditional thermal fog machine technology has difficulty reaching crawling pests such as roaches , flea and rodents due to the droplet size being too fine ( less than 10 micrometers ) .
It is often found that small droplets are blocked by the " air - curtain " of insects and rodents .
Cold Fogging , in contrast , is heavy enough to penetrate these " air - curtains " as well as light enough to be evenly distributed within a room .
ADVERSE HEALTH EFFECTS Section::::Adverse health effects .
Atmospheric effects generated using water and dry ice or liquid nitrogen can present asphyxiation or breathing hazards .
Both carbon dioxide and nitrogen displace ordinary air and the oxygen it contains , creating a risk of subtle anoxia ( lack of oxygenation ) for people working in these atmospheres .
Adequate ventilation is essential to ensure that artists and technicians are surrounded by breathable air .
Carbon dioxide has the added hazard of interfering with the normal breathing reflex , which is sensitive to carbon dioxide levels in the air .
Nitrogen has no effect on the breathing reflex , but this creates its own hazard in that a person breathing pure nitrogen can lose consciousness from lack of oxygen without any warning signs .
Fog produced with liquid air does not present the hazards of carbon dioxide or liquid nitrogen because the liquid air has the same composition as ordinary atmospheric air ( including the same level of breathable oxygen ) .
Fog machines which generate their effects solely using water , such as ultrasonic or pressurized technology , pose no special health risks , however it should be noted that " water based " fog fluid does contain glycol .
A number of studies have been published on the potential health effects presented by exposure to glycol based theatrical fogs and artificial mists .
Two studies , a Health Hazard Evaluation completed in 1994 by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health , and another one in 2000 by the Department of Community and Preventative Medicine at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and ENVIRON ; both prepared for Actors Equity and the League of American Theaters and Producers , focused on the effects on actors and performers in Broadway musicals .
The conclusion of both studies was that there was irritation of mucous membranes such as the eyes and the respiratory tract associated with extended peak exposure to theatrical fog .
Exposure guidelines were outlined in the 2000 study that , it was determined , should prevent actors from suffering adverse impact to their health or vocal abilities .
Another study focused on the use of theatrical fog in the commercial aviation industry for emergency training of staff in simulated fire conditions .
This study also found eye and respiratory tract irritation .
In May 2005 , a study published in the American Journal of Industrial Medicine , conducted by the School of Environment and Health at the University of British Columbia , looked at adverse respiratory effects in crew members on a wide variety of entertainment venues ranging from live theaters , concerts , television and film productions to a video arcade .
This study determined that cumulative exposure to mineral oil and glycol - based fogs were associated with acute and chronic adverse effects on respiratory health .
This study found that short - term exposure to glycol fog was associated with coughing , dry throat , headaches , dizziness , drowsiness , and tiredness .
This study also found long - term exposure to smoke and fog was associated with both short - term and long - term respiratory problems such as chest tightness and wheezing .
Personnel working closest to the fog machines had reduced lung function results .
The Professional Lighting and Sound Association has compiled a standard for theatrical fogs or artificial mists compositions for use in entertainment venues that " are not likely to be harmful to otherwise healthy performers , technicians , or audience members of normal working age , which is 18 to 64 years of age , inclusive .
" This standard was based primarily ( though not exclusively ) upon the findings of a report commissioned for them by the Cohen Group and applies to only those fog fluid compositions that consist of a mixture of water and glycol ( so - called " water based " fog fluid ) .
Short term exposure to glycol fog can be associated with headaches , dizziness , drowsiness and tiredness .
Long term exposure to smoke and fog can be related to upper airway and voice symptoms .
Extended ( multi - year ) exposure to smoke and fog has been associated with both short - term and long - term respiratory health problems .
Efforts should be made to reduce exposure to theatrical smoke to as low a level as possible .
The use of digital effects in post production on film and television sets can be considered a safer practise than using theatrical smoke and fog during filming , although this is not always practical .
HAZE MACHINES
Section::::Haze machines .
Haze machines , also called haze generators or hazers , produce atmospheric effects ( haze ) which tend to be less dense than that of fog machines , allowing them to be used in creating more subtle looks .
Depending on a venue 's or location 's ventilation , this haze can stay in the air for hours .
Because of the small particle size of the output from hazers , under 5 micrometres , a hazer typically takes longer to fill the same volume of space with a visible effect relative to a fog machine .
SEE ALSO
* Dry ice
*
Haze machine * Theatrical smoke and fog REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* NIOSH 1994 report on theatrical smoke in Broadway Productions * tejan for household services * Article examining the pros and cons of Fog machines as security devices .
* Technical report from University of British Columbia School of Environment and Health on special effects smoke and fog ]
* Master 's thesis on Respiratory Health Impacts in the Entertainment Industry from Exposure to Theatrical Smokes and Fogs .