SON OF BEAST Son of Beast was a record - breaking wooden roller coaster located at Kings Island in Mason , Ohio .
Built and designed by the now defunct Roller Coaster Corporation of America , it opened to the public on May 26 , 2000 , and was themed as a sequel to one of the park 's other signature attractions , The Beast .
In addition to breaking the world record for speed , Son of Beast was the first wooden hypercoaster in the world with a drop and was the second wooden coaster to feature an inversion ; Flip Flap Railway was the first , but was long defunct before the ride 's opening .
Son of Beast is also known for two major , non - fatal accidents .
In 2006 , damage to the track caused one of the trains to stop abruptly .
Another setback occurred in 2009 , when a woman claimed to have suffered a head injury .
The ride was closed indefinitely , with the only reference of its existence appearing on a tombstone outside the new Banshee coaster ( showing a simple logo of the ride and the dates 2000 - 2009 ) .
On July 27 , 2012 , the closure was made permanent , as Kings Island announced that the roller coaster would be dismantled and removed from the park .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Roller Coaster Corporation of America discussed the idea of a building the world 's first wooden hypercoaster with Kings Island in 1997 .
The park announced plans to build Son of Beast on May 11 , 1999 .
As part of a marketing campaign for the ride before its debut , a box was placed next to a footpath in the park .
Beastly growling and snarling noises came from inside the box as it shook violently .
During the announcement , the box was revealed to the audience along with a model of the roller coaster and a list of seven world records that would be broken when it came into operation .
The sign at the ride 's entrance featured a large wooden box covered with chains , rope , and metal straps .
The front was ripped open with the name " Son of Beast " centered inside the box .
Problems plagued the ride from the start and as a result , Paramount Parks , the park 's then - owner , fired RCCA before construction was completed .
The park had to make several design corrections during Son of Beast 's initial year .
The ride originally operated with three trains designed by Premier Rides .
Each one consisted of six cars for a total capacity of thirty - six .
The trains were shortened to five cars before the 2006 season .
After the ride 's first major incident , the trains were replaced altogether with lighter models before the ride reopened the following season .
The loop was also removed during this time .
After another major incident occurred in 2009 , it was announced that Son of Beast would be closed indefinitely .
References to Son of Beast were removed from the park 's website and map in early 2010 .
All signage , including the box at the entrance , was also removed .
On March 15 , 2010 , the General Manager of Kings Island , Greg Scheid , stated that the park had spent nearly $ 30 million on the ride to date , and that it would not reopen for the 2010 season .
Another Kings Island spokesperson , Don Helbig , announced in 2011 that the ride would again be closed for the 2011 season , and that the ride 's future had not yet been decided .
" No decision has been made concerning the ride 's future , " spokesman Don Helbig said .
" It would be inappropriate to speculate on when a decision might be made .
There 's nothing else to talk about . "
Kings Island announced on April 24 , 2012 , that there are no plans to operate Son of Beast in 2012 , and they 're still evaluating options .
On July 27 , 2012 , following a thorough evaluation of the roller coaster , Kings Island announced that Son of Beast will be removed from the park to make room for future expansion .
Demolition began in mid - September 2012 .
On November 20 , one of the last remaining parts of the structure , the lift hill , was demolished .
A new roller coaster called Banshee was completed in April 2014 and is now in the same location previously occupied by Son of Beast .
A tombstone with a plaque honoring Son of Beast was placed in the mockup graveyard near the entrance of the new roller coaster .
In 2018 , Kings Island released posters that referenced Son of Beast 's station , Outpost 5 , leading some to speculate that a possible revival might be announced by the park .
However , these rumors were unsubstantiated , and no such announcement was made .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
After loading the train , riders left the station making a left - hand drop into a series of short hops before turning into the lift hill .
At the crest of the lift hill , the track made a left - hand turn over to the first drop , where it dropped to the ground followed by a 70-degree banked turn to the right .
Riders then descended down a second drop into a left - hand double helix .
Coming out of the helix , the train passed through a mid - course brake run dropping into a straight section of track ( where the vertical loop was prior to 2006 ) , before entering another helix , riding a series of short hills .
and ending at the final brake run .
One cycle of the ride lasted about 2 minutes and 20 seconds .
MATERIALS USED
* Main Structure : Southern Yellow Pine * Track Piles : Douglas Fir * Loop Structure : Steel ( removed December 2006 ) * Loop Track :
Wood
* Timber used : 2.5 million board feet
* Acres of land used : 12 * Footers : 2,414 footers , into the ground
* Bolts : 225,000 21 " steel bolts * Nails :
Over of nails WORLD RECORDS Section::::World records .
At the time of its introduction in 2000 , Son of Beast was the only wooden roller coaster nationally ranked in the top 10 for track height , track length , drop height , and speed .
It set several world records becoming the tallest and fastest wooden roller coaster in the world , as well as becoming the second longest following its predecessor , The Beast .
Son of Beast was also the only wooden roller coaster to feature a vertical loop .
The loop was removed prior to the 2007 season .
Prior to its removal , the vertical loop also made Son of Beast the longest roller coaster in the world to contain one .
Following its removal , California Screamin ' at Disney California Adventure acquired the title .
The seven world records held at its introduction were :
* Tallest wooden roller coaster
* * Longest wooden roller coaster drop
* * Fastest wooden roller coaster
* * Only looping wooden roller coaster ( 2000–2006 )
* * Longest looping roller coaster ( 2000–2006 )
*
* Most wooden coaster track at one park ( ) *
* First and only wooden hypercoaster in the world ( over high )
*
INCIDENTS 2006 Section::::Incidents .
Section::::2006 .
On July 9 , 2006 at 4:45 pm , a structural failure in the ' Rose Bowl ' section of the ride created a bump on the track that caused a train to come to an abrupt stop .
Twenty - seven injuries were reported in the accident and rescue units were required to evacuate the riders .
Most of the injuries were of the chest or neck .
Seventeen people were released from the hospital within five hours of the accident , and two were admitted .
None of the injuries were life - threatening .
After an inspection the following day , the park stated that the accident was caused by a crack or split in the wood .
The ride was shut down for an extended period of time , while the park worked with the State of Ohio to complete a full investigation .
The park completed repairs of the ride but the state asked for extensive testing to be done to ensure it would not happen again .
The park indicated that the ride would not reopen until the 2007 season .
Two trains designed by Gerstlauer from the demolished coaster at the Myrtle Beach Pavilion were purchased by Kings Island to serve as lighter replacements for original Son of Beast trains .
The lighter trains were used to reduce the overall load on the wooden structure .
The loop was also removed during this time to assist the lighter trains in completing the circuit .
The park also claimed that the changes helped make the ride more comfortable .
In late June 2007 , reports circulated that the park was testing the new Gerstlauer trains .
Eyewitnesses reported red and blue trains running on the track with test dummies in the seats .
On July 4 , 2007 , Son of Beast reopened for the first time since the accident the year before .
Despite the lack of the vertical loop , the coaster continued to hold the record as tallest and fastest wooden roller coaster in the world .
2009
Section::::2009 .
On June 16 , 2009 , a woman claimed to have suffered a head injury from riding Son of Beast during her visit to the park on May 31 , 2009 .
She did not report the incident to Kings Island officials prior to June 16 .
She claimed to have suffered from a burst blood vessel in her brain , after riding Son of Beast , that required admission to an intensive care unit at a nearby hospital .
" The first we heard of this was on June 16 .
Her visit was on May 31 and there 's no record of going to first aid for anything here at the park , " said Don Helbig , public relations manager for Kings Island .
Helbig also pointed out that there were no other reports of injuries on the ride that year .
The Son of Beast was shut down as a precaution , however , during the investigation .
" At this point it would be inappropriate to speculate on an exact date when the ride may reopen .
We 're going to do a thorough maintenance review .
We 're going to work with the state of Ohio on that , " said Helbig .
An investigation followed , and no irregularities were found with the ride .
A summary of that investigation was released later , on July 29 .
Despite the findings , the roller coaster remained closed and never reopened .
SEE ALSO
* List of former Kings Island attractions
* The Beast ( roller coaster )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Son of Beast Preview and Construction Photos of the construction on Ultimate Rollercoaster.com * Son of Beast news and pictures from Coastergallery.com * Kings Island Central information – Alternate source of details and stats
* Son Of Beast Video – Coasterimage.com