TRACFONE WIRELESS
TracFone Wireless , Inc. is a prepaid mobile virtual network operator in the United States , Puerto Rico , and the US Virgin Islands .
TracFone Wireless is a subsidiary of Mexico 's largest telecommunications company América Móvil , and offers products and services under multiple brands which include TracFone , NET10 Wireless , Total Wireless , Straight Talk , SafeLink Wireless , Telcel América , SIMPLE Mobile , Page Plus Cellular , GoSmart Mobile , and Walmart Family Mobile .
TracFone Wireless operates as a mobile virtual network operator ( MVNO ) , holding agreements with the United States ' largest wireless network operators to provide service using their networks , including Verizon Wireless , AT&T Mobility , T - Mobile US , Sprint Corporation , and U.S. Cellular .
TracFone Wireless had 25.668 million subscribers in 2015 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
TracFone was established in 1996 as Topp Telecom Inc. , a prepaid mobile phone company , in Miami , Florida .
In February 1999 , Topp received a major infusion of capital from Teléfonos de México ( )
, a.k.a .
TelMex , Mexico 's largest telephone company .
TelMex paid $ 57.5 million for a 55 percent controlling interest in the company .
In 2000 , TelMex spun off their mobile unit , creating América Móvil , of which Topp Telecom became a subsidiary .
In November 2000 , Topp Telecom Inc. changed its name to TracFone Wireless Inc.
In 2012 , América Móvil acquired rival network Simple Mobile .
In 2013 , TracFone unveiled a tweaked logo .
Later that year , TracFone also introduced four Android phones , all CDMA .
In May 2013 , América Móvil purchased Page Plus Cellular , which had 1.4 million subscribers .
On January 6 , 2014 , regulatory approval was received and Page Plus Cellular began operating as a subsidiary of América Móvil .
TRACFONE Section::::TracFone .
Originally , TracFone service was limited to TracFone - branded phones , which are locked to the TracFone service using an internal SIM card .
Other GSM phones , even those that were unlocked from another carrier , could not accept a TracFone SIM card , because these are bound to a specific handset .
However , in 2013 , TracFone unveiled Bring Your Own Phone , selling SIM cards that could be inserted into qualifying non - TracFone phones ( such as Verizon CDMA phones ) to register them with TracFone .
In 2015 , this program , restyled " Bring Your Own Device " , was extended to compatible unlocked GSM phones .
TracFone sells phones by many manufacturers .
Each phone contains a TracFone SIM card .
TracFone sells phones for several networks ; models using the Verizon or Sprint CDMA network have the letter C in the model name , while phones using the AT&T or T - Mobile GSM network have the letter
G.
The choice of phone thus determines the network used and the quality of service in specific locations .
A typical retail display includes a coverage map ( or several , one for each relevant network ) , indicating the parts of the U.S. where the phone can be used .
The customer must also buy a TracFone service card .
These are available where the phone is sold , and at many convenience stores and pharmacies .
A typical service card carries a specified number of service days and usage units ( minutes ) .
Each service card contains an " Airtime PIN " beneath a mask that the customer scratches off .
The customer can use a website , use TracFone Customer Service , or send a text , to redeem the card .
Redemption loads the phone with the resources specified on the card , and prevents the PIN from being reused .
The service card has a bar code that is scanned on purchase , so that PINs from stolen service cards never become valid .
Having bought a phone , the customer must register it with TracFone .
This process assigns a phone number to the phone , based on a ZIP code that the customer specifies , and loads the phone with service days and usage units from the initial service card .
The first phone call the customer makes diverts to an automated TracFone message , which asks the customer 's preferred language for any further dealings with TracFone .
The customer must buy and redeem another service card before the service days expire , or TracFone may give the phone number to a different customer .
Usage units roll over when the customer redeems a renewal card , but occasional use is required to keep the account active .
* Non - Android phones have a usage account denominated in units .
Each minute of a phone call ( initiated or received ) is 1.0 unit .
Sending or receiving a text is charged as some fraction of a minute ( typically 0.3 , but 0.5 on some models including the Motorola EX124 G ) .
A minute of Web access is 0.5 unit .
Earlier TracFone models charged double ( 2.0 units per minute ) for roaming outside the user 's home phone area , but all current phones operate independent of location in the U.S.
*
Android phones have separate accounts for phone minutes , texts , and megabytes of data exchanged .
Thus , a service card for 60 minutes adds 60 phone minutes , 60 texts , and 60 megabytes .
*
On specific phones with the " triple minutes for life " feature , the same 60-minute card instead adds 180 minutes , 180 texts , and 180 megabytes .
The days of service stated on the card do not triple .
Newer phones do not feature " triple minutes for life " , but TracFone honors the promise on any phone for which it was given .
Newer cards , providing only minutes , only texts , or only megabytes without augmenting other aspects of the service , do not triple on any phone .
TracFone occasionally discloses promo codes that will provide additional service units if the customer enters the code when redeeming a service card .
CALLING
OUTSIDE THE U.S.
Section::::Calling outside the U.S ..
TracFone provides several options to let customers communicate outside the U.S. :
*
Any customer can call a designated number in the 800 area code and follow recorded instructions to initiate calls to over fifty countries .
In some of these countries , cellphones can not be reached .
* By providing the phone number and serial number at TracFone.com , a customer can associate up to ten 800 numbers with designated phone numbers outside the U.S.
When the customer dials the 800 number , TracFone identifies the customer 's phone and places the call to the associated number .
The customer could place the 800 number in the Contact List as the " phone number " of the relevant person , but the contact could not be copied to another phone unless the customer registered with TracFone the same association for the other phone .
* By providing the phone number and serial number at TracFone.com , a customer can obtain up to three local telephone numbers in any of several Mexican cities .
Calls to these numbers are forwarded to the TracFone customer in the United States .
The only charge to the TracFone customer for these services is the deduction of actual connect time from the prepaid minutes on the customer 's phone .
There is no roaming program by which a TracFone phone can be used outside the U.S. OTHER BRANDS
Section::::Other brands .
In addition to its namesake product , TracFone Wireless offers products under the brands NET10 Wireless , Total Wireless , Safelink Wireless , Straight Talk , Telcel América , SIMPLE Mobile , Page Plus Cellular , GoSmart Mobile , and Walmart Family Mobile .
These brands differ not only in their logos and prepaid minute rates but their underlying network options : NET10
WIRELESS
Section::::NET10 Wireless .
NET10 Wireless is a related offering , using both GSM and CDMA phones which support voicemail and text messaging at a minimum .
Some models also offer Bluetooth , camera , handsfree speaker , qwerty keyboard , and wireless web .
The " 10 " in NET10 signifies that each voice minute costs ten cents ( five cents for text messages ) , with no additional fees .
NET10 's slogan is No Bills , No Contracts , No Evil .
Both airtime cards and auto - pay plans called " Easy Minutes " are available .
Time can be added using the phone itself ( " Rapid Refill " ) , at the company 's website , or using the Customer Care Center .
Minutes from one month carry over to the next , as long as service remains active .
NET10 Wireless offers business plans and international calling , and number portability is advertised on their site as being available .
A $ 50 a month unlimited use plan is also available , this service provides unlimited SMS , phone calls ( not including International Long Distance Calls , for this type of calls there is an Unlimited Monthly Plan or $ 65 )
unlimited MMS ( within the United States ) for only one month to the customer 's account .
The customer can add more than one Unlimited card and this / these plan(s ) are added to the " Phone 's Reserve " and is charged on the phone in a monthly basis ( when the cell phone has run out of service days ) automatically .
Android phones made by LG and Samsung are available through NET10 Wireless , and can be used with their $ 50 Unlimited plan .
NET10 Wireless also has the ' mini SIM cards ' for unlocked iPhones with the $ 50 Unlimited Monthly plan .
In December 2012 , NET10 Wireless began offering " Family Plans " , offering the first line for $ 50 / month , reducing each additional lines ( up to 4 ) with a discount of $ 5 .
They also entered into a title sponsorship agreement with the Arena Football League .
NET10 Wireless also allows customers to bring AT&T , T - Mobile , Sprint , Verizon , or unlocked GSM phones to NET10 by buying a SIM card or activation kit and air time from the company .
This program does not work with Blackberry and branded Straight Talk , SafeLink , TracFone , Total Wireless , and NET10 phones .
SAFELINK WIRELESS
Section::::SafeLink Wireless .
SafeLink Wireless provides a free cell phone and a limited number of voice minutes each month for eligible low - income families ( one per family ) who do not use Lifeline services offered by any other phone or wireless company .
It is funded through the Universal Service Fund , but is only operational in a limited number of states .
It is similar to the Lifeline and LinkUp government subsidized service for home telephones .
Applications for service may be done via their web page , or by having them fax or mail an application form .
No choice of phone handset is provided by the application process .
Additional minutes over the free monthly benefit may be purchased .
As of May 2011 , Safelink Wireless had almost 4,000,000 subscribers , the largest Lifeline cell phone provider in the United States .
The Safe Link Wireless provides two kind of services , according to the previous customer 's choice : * 350 MINUTES TALK and UNLIMITED TEXT
* 500 MB 4 G DATA
Note :
The 500 MB Monthly Plan does not Carry - over the MB on the next month , i.e. , if the SafeLink customer does not use all of his / her MB 's in first month , in the second month he / she will lose those remaining MB 's being renewed by the next 500 MB monthly data .
Safe Link does offer optional Tracfone Airtime Card Compatibility and Promotions for Free Bonus Minutes .
These options allow Safe Link users to add more minutes anytime and for use after their allotted plan expires for the month .
STRAIGHT TALK
Section::::Straight Talk .
Straight Talk is another operator , through a partnership between TracFone and Walmart , offering several different rate plans ; a $ 30 limited plan , $ 35 , $ 45 , and $ 55 30-day unlimited plans and a $ 60 unlimited international calling plan .
Discounts are available for purchasing multiple months of the unlimited plan .
Straight Talk is a Mobile Virtual Network operator ( MVNO ) offering both CDMA and GSM support .
The CDMA network uses Verizon 's or Sprint 's CDMA 1xRTT wireless networks and the GSM side makes use of either T - Mobile 's or AT&T 's GSM networks .
The $ 30 limited ( " All You Need " ) plan provides 1500 minutes , unlimited texts , free 411 calls , 100 MB of data for a service period of 30 days .
This plan is exclusive to basic phones , and is not compatible with 3 G or 4 G LTE smartphones .
The $ 35 unlimited plan provides unlimited talk , texts , 2 GB at 3 G or 4 G LTE speeds ; data beyond that is transmitted at 64 kbit / s speeds .
The $ 45 unlimited plan provides unlimited talk , texts , 10 GB at 3 G or 4 G LTE speeds ( LTE handset required ) ; data beyond that is transmitted at 64 kbit / s speeds .
The $ 55 unlimited plan provides unlimited talk , texts , and data at high speeds ( 3 G or 4 G LTE where available ) .
The plan does not include any tethering ( mobile hotspot ) , while video streams at a resolution of 480p or lower .
Also , Straight Talk customers ' speeds will be prioritized behind customers on the network it uses during times of congestion ( i.e. A Verizon Straight Talk will be slowed before a Verizon Post Paid Beyond Unlimited customer ) .
Straight Talk is currently exclusive to Walmart stores through of a joint - venture program between the two companies .
Phones and service can also be purchased directly from Straight Talk via its website , StraightTalk.com or by telephone , bypassing WalMart .
Straight Talk offers a variety of prepaid , no contract , phones on their website for use with their plans .
Straight Talk also allows customers to bring AT&T , T - Mobile , Sprint , Verizon , or unlocked GSM phones to Straight Talk by buying a SIM card or activation kit and air time from the company .
This program does not work with branded Straight Talk , SafeLink , TracFone , Total Wireless , and NET10 phones .
Straight Talk is now selling Straight Talk branded iPhones including the iPhone 4 , iPhone 4S , iPhone 5 , iPhone 5S , iPhone 5C , and iPhone 6
available online and at Walmart .
Other phone brands also include Alcatel , LG , Huawei , Samsung and ZTE .
TOTAL
WIRELESS Section::::Total Wireless .
Total Wireless is a Mobile Virtual Network operator ( MVNO ) that uses the Verizon network .
Originally , Total Wireless sold and supported only 3 G phones .
In May 2016 , Total Wireless offered phones for Verizon 's 4 G LTE network , on Walmart 's and its own websites .
These phones use CDMA for voice , not Verizon 's VoLTE ; they use LTE only for data exchange .
In early 2017 , Total Wireless products became available at additional outlets , such as Target , Dollar General , independent dealers , and TracFone Exclusive Retailers .
Service plans start at $ 25 / month .
All plans include unlimited talk minutes and texting ; a plan costing $ 35 / month adds 5 GB of data .
Multi - line " family " plans are available as well .
SIMPLE MOBILE Section::::SIMPLE Mobile .
America Movil , TracFone 's parent company , acquired SIMPLE Mobile in June 2012 and has since been incorporated with its operations alongside TracFone 's .
Simple Mobile ( stylized SIMPLE Mobile ) is a prepaid mobile network operator which was founded in November 2009 and is headquartered in Irvine , California , in the United States and functionning as T - Mobile US MVNO .
It became a subsidiary of America Móvil ( parent of TracFone Wireless Inc. ) after it was acquired in June 2012 .
On February 16 of 2011 SIMPLE Mobile celebrated their one millionth activation .
Simple Mobile has activated more than 2.5 million subscribers since they opened in November 2009 .
The initial plans offered prepaid month - to - month wireless services including unlimited texting , voice , and capped data .
In June 2010 the company began to advertise unlimited data on their prepaid monthly plans .
According to SIMPLE Mobile customer service representatives , they are unable to submit IMEI numbers to the global stolen phones database or comply with law enforcement subpoenas to track stolen phones or those belonging to abduction victims , missing persons at risk or dangerous fugitives .
Simple Mobile is an MVNO on T - Mobile 's Network .
This means that all information is stored on T - Mobile 's servers .
A law enforcement professional would need to give the subpoena / court order to the Law Enforcement Relations Group .
They will be able to process the subpoena .
This applies to all MVNOs since their hosted carrier supports all the network and backend .
Simple Mobile should refer the parties direct to their host entity T - Mobile US .
TELCEL AMÉRICA Section::::Telcel América .
Telcel América is a wireless service from TracFone that is mainly targeted for Hispanic consumers , primarily the Mexican community living in the United States .
Telcel América offers seven monthly plans , both including Unlimited nationwide - minutes , Unlimited SMS , MMS messaging , and Web browsing , Telcel América also offers an international calling plan for call to " over 1,000 destinations " .
Some plans offer roaming in Mexico at no extra charge .
Telcel América 's current GSM phones are compatible with Mexico 's Telcel wireless network and services .
Telcel America also permits customers that have an unlocked GSM or compatible T - mobile phone to use the Telcel America Network .
Telcel América is a brand of TracFone Inc. in the United States , while Telcel in Mexico is a fully owned subsidiary of TracFone 's parent company , América Móvil .
Both companies are owned by the Mexican businessman Carlos Slim .
PAGE PLUS
CELLULAR Section::::Page
Plus Cellular .
Page Plus Cellular was established in 1993 by Abdul Yassine , as Page Plus Communications , selling pager services in the Toledo , Ohio area .
In August 1998 the company was renamed Page Plus Cellular and launched services in Ohio and Michigan , followed by a nationwide launch in 2000 .
Page Plus was originally headquartered in Holland , Ohio , and owned by Abdul Yassine .
In May 2013 , Mexican telecommunications company América Móvil purchased Page Plus Cellular for an undisclosed amount .
As of January 6 , 2014 , regulatory approval was received and Page Plus Cellular has joined other América Móvil subsidiaries like TracFone .
At the time of sale , Page Plus Cellular had 1.4 million subscribers .
Page Plus Cellular offers both pay - as - you - go and no - contract monthly plans .
Both monthly and pay - as - you - go customers add voice minutes , data and text messages to their account by purchasing refill cards .
GOSMART MOBILE
Section::::GoSmart Mobile .
GoSmart Mobile was a T - Mobile US subsidiary service that launched in beta on December 7 , 2012 , and became officially available nationwide on February 19 , 2013 .
GoSmart offers no - contract SIM wireless services .
GoSmart Mobile sources its services to dealers who work as independent contractors under their own company name .
Such sellers are known as " Authorized Dealers " with either physical or online stores .
TracFone Wireless acquired GoSmart , along with Walmart Family Mobile , from T - Mobile US in September 2016 .
WALMART FAMILY MOBILE
Section::::Walmart Family Mobile .
Walmart Family Mobile offers no - contract prepaid plans .
GoSmart , along with Walmart Family Mobile , were purchased by TracFone from T - Mobile in September 2016 .
CLASS ACTIONS MISLEADING " UNLIMITED " PLAN CLAIMS BY STRAIGHT TALK
, NET10 WIRELESS , SIMPLE MOBILE , AND TELCEL AMERICA - 2015 Section::::Class actions .
Section::::Misleading " Unlimited " plan claims by Straight Talk , Net10 Wireless , Simple Mobile , And Telcel America - 2015 .
The Federal Trade Commission reported that " TracFone 's limits on ' unlimited ' data led to $ 40 million in consumer refunds " as result of a lawsuit the FTC brought .
ROAMING AND REPAIR ISSUES - 2007 Section::::Roaming and repair issues - 2007 .
On February 9 , 2007 , a preliminary settlement in a class - action lawsuit against TracFone was carried out by Jeanette Wagner , and approved in the Boone ( County ) Circuit Court in Kentucky .
The complainants alleged that Tracfone misled consumers by charging a roaming rate in their home calling area ( they were charged for 2 units per minute , not the usual 1 unit per minute ) , and that it refused to extend their prepaid service time during handset repairs .
Tracfone gave each of their customers an extra 20 units of airtime .
NETWORKS AND COVERAGE Section::::Networks and coverage .
TracFone Wireless uses the networks of major wireless providers to offer service , the coverage of which varies by the provider for each device .
Retail boxes indicate the network with a code printed in the lower right corner on the back of the box . !
Network ! !
Box code ! !
Technology ! !
LTE since
On TracFones with SIM cards , the carrier can be identified by interpreting the SIM number .
On T - Mobile phones , the first line of the SIM number ends in " SIMT5 " , on AT&T / Cingular , the first line ends in " SIMC4 " , on Claro phones , the first line ends in " SIMCL7 " .
SEE ALSO
* Prepaid mobile service operators in U.S. REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * TracFone Family Brands : * America Móvil
* NET10 Wireless * Page Plus Cellular * Safelink Wireless * SIMPLE Mobile * Straight Talk * Telcel América