NUTRITIONAL YEAST
Nutritional yeast is a deactivated yeast , often a strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , which is sold commercially as a food product .
It is sold in the form of flakes or as a yellow powder and can be found in the bulk aisle of most natural food stores .
It is popular with vegans and vegetarians and may be used as an ingredient in recipes or as a condiment .
It is a significant source of some B - complex vitamins and contains trace amounts of several other vitamins and minerals .
Sometimes nutritional yeast is fortified with vitamin B. Nutritional yeast
has a strong flavor that is described as nutty , cheesy , or creamy , which makes it popular as an ingredient in cheese substitutes .
It is often used by vegans in place of cheese , for example in mashed and fried potatoes , in scrambled tofu , or as a topping for popcorn .
In Australia , it is sometimes sold as " savoury yeast flakes .
"
In New Zealand , it has long been known as Brufax .
In the United States , it is sometimes referred to as " hippie dust " , " nooch " or " yeshi " , an Amharic name meaning " for a thousand " .
Though " nutritional yeast " usually refers to commercial products , inadequately fed
prisoners of war have used " home - grown " yeast to prevent vitamin deficiency .
Nutritional yeast is different from yeast extract , which has a very strong flavour and comes in the form of a dark brown paste .
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION Section::::Commercial production .
Nutritional yeast is produced by culturing a yeast in a nutrient medium for several days .
The primary ingredient in the growth medium is glucose , often from either sugarcane or beet molasses .
When the yeast is ready , it is deactivated with heat and then harvested , washed , dried and packaged .
The species of yeast used is often a strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
The strains are cultured and selected for desirable characteristics and often exhibit a different phenotype from strains of S. cerevisiae used in baking and brewing .
Acetaldehyde is the hazardous air pollutant emitted in the largest quantities from the manufacturing of nutritional yeast .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
Nutritional values for nutritional yeast vary from one manufacturer to another .
On average , two tablespoons ( about 30 ml ) provides 60 calories with 5 g of carbohydrates ( four grams of which is fiber ) .
A serving also provides 9 g of protein and is a complete protein , providing all nine amino acids the human body can not produce .
While fortified and unfortified nutritional yeast both provide iron , the fortified yeast provides 20 percent of the recommended daily value , while unfortified yeast provides only 5 percent .
Unfortified nutritional yeast provides from 35 to 100 percent of vitamins B1 and B2 .
Because nutritional yeast is often used by vegans , who need to supplement their diets with vitamin B , there has been confusion about the source of the B in nutritional yeast .
Yeast can not produce B , which is only naturally produced by some bacteria .
Some brands of nutritional yeast , though not all , are fortified with vitamin B.
When fortified , the vitamin B ( commonly cyanocobalamin ) is produced separately and then added to the yeast .
Although some species of bacteria that can produce B could potentially grow along with S. cerevisiae in the wild , commercially produced nutritional yeast is grown in controlled conditions that would normally not allow those bacteria to grow .
Therefore , nutritional yeast is not a reliable source of B unless it is fortified .
GLUTAMIC ACID Section::::Glutamic acid .
All inactive yeast contains a certain amount of glutamic acid because when the yeast cells are killed , the proteins that compose the cell walls begin to degrade , breaking down into the amino acids that originally formed the proteins .
Glutamic acid is a naturally occurring amino acid in all yeast cells , as well as in vegetables , fungi , and animals , and is commonly used as a flavor enhancer in cooking in its sodium salt form , monosodium glutamate .
SEE ALSO
*
Vegemite * Marmite * Vegan cheese
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Environmental rules for the manufacture of nutritional yeast