TEELA Teela is a fictional character from the Masters of the Universe franchise .
She is the Captain of the Royal Guard at the palace of Eternos and thus responsible for training and protecting Prince Adam of Eternia .
While Adam is He - Man , Teela often assists him in his battles , but she is unaware of his alternate identity .
Teela is one of the first characters developed for Masters of the Universe , although her figure was released in the second half of the first wave .
Writer Donald F. Glut named her after Gunga Ram 's elephant from the Andy 's Gang television show .
MINICOMICS Section::::Minicomics .
Teela is presented in the earliest media as a heroic " warrior goddess , " a capable female fighter — one imbued with the spirits of great warriors of the past — who roams the deserted landscapes of Eternia atop a unicorn .
In a fashion typical of 1980 's cartoons , she was portrayed in a leotard .
The second - wave minicomic The Tale of Teela explains that , twenty years earlier , Skeletor captured the Goddess ( a.k.a . Sorceress , also named " Teela " ) and made a clone of her using an ancient artifact .
His plan was to raise the child as an evil version of the Goddess .
However , the clone was rescued by Man - At - Arms and grew up to become the warrior Teela .
After the second wave of mini - comics , the concept of Teela being a clone was abandoned , with her instead becoming an abandoned child who was adopted by Man - At - Arms , highlighted in the 1983 animated Filmation series .
Only in the Masters of the Universe Classics toyline that launched in 2008 , were elements of the clone storyline concept reintroduced , albeit on a much reduced basis .
HE - MAN AND THE MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ( 1983 SERIES ) Section::::He - Man and the Masters of the Universe ( 1983 series ) .
In the Filmation animated series He - Man and the Masters of the Universe , Teela is the biological daughter of the Sorceress .
Man - At - Arms discovers that the Sorceress , in the form of the falcon Zoar , has been caring for the infant Teela in a large bird 's nest on the side of a cliff .
After a failed kidnap attempt by Mer - Man , the Sorceress willingly gives Teela to Man - At - Arms to be raised as his own daughter .
In Teela 's Quest , Teela discovers the truth about her mother from Eternia 's Oracle of the Crystal Sea , but an emotionally distraught Sorceress erases the revelation from Teela 's memory for her own protection , even though the Sorceress desperately wishes she could tell Teela the truth .
Teela 's Quest also specifies that Mer - Man 's attempt at abducting the infant Teela took place exactly 20 years earlier ; thus , it implies that she is just over 20 years old .
In the second season episode , The Great Books Mystery , Adam celebrates his 19th birthday , so they are approximately the same age .
Teela 's biological father is never revealed ; Man - At - Arms says he was one of Eternia 's greatest men .
However , the Oracle , the Sorceress , and Man - At - Arms all agree that he died in battle .
Teela 's ties to Grayskull are revisited in the episode Teela 's Triumph when Skeletor sends the Sorceress to another dimension , leaving Teela to take the Sorceress ' place as guardian of Grayskull .
Despite her excellent fighting skills and generally being sensible and level - headed , Teela has a reckless streak like that of a wild tomboy , a far cry from her mother 's soft - spoken temperament .
In the Filmation series , Teela 's recklessness and quick temper in situations that she does not agree with often lead to poor judgment , which results in dangerous situations .
Unaware of Adam 's dual - identity and duties that go with it , Teela often reprimands him for being lazy , cowardly and inattentive to his training , though there are hints of some romantic tension between her and He - Man .
MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ( 1987 )
Section::::Masters of the Universe ( 1987 ) .
In the 1987 film Masters of the Universe , she is portrayed by Solid Gold dancer - turned - actress Chelsea Field as a mostly - serious fighter who rarely allows her dark sense of humor to show through .
Nothing is said of her being the daughter of the Sorceress ( who is portrayed here by Christina Pickles of
St. Elsewhere fame ) .
Teela 's costume in the film is quite different from its animated depictions .
It is more of a gray colored jump suit .
Field portrays Teela as having a curly brown mane rather than her usual red / auburn hair .
The movie also hints that Teela is vegetarian , given her reaction in a scene where she and Man - At - Arms are eating barbecued ribs .
This version of Teela also seems more adept at handling a laser gun over the staff - wielding , aerobic Teela seen in other incarnations .
THE NEW ADVENTURES OF HE - MAN ( 1990 )
Section::::The New Adventures of He - Man ( 1990 ) .
In the series The New Adventures of He - Man , which ran from 1990 - 1991 , Teela makes one appearance in the episode Once Upon a Time , a rare reference to the vintage Filmation series .
However , she bears no resemblance to her Filmation counterpart , being portrayed with long blond hair instead of red hair .
This was how she was featured in the very first mini - comic , though some fans have theorized she was redesigned to resemble She - Ra .
She wears a pink leotard , rather than the usual white one .
She is voiced by Cathy Weseluck .
HE - MAN AND THE MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ( 2002 SERIES ) Section::::He - Man and the Masters of the Universe ( 2002 series ) .
The basic outline of her character remains the same in the 2002 series , but is taken to a greater extreme due to a difference in censors and restrictions .
She still teases or reprimands Adam for his apparent lack of courage and gumption while harboring an unspoken and unconsummated crush on his alter - ego , He - Man , and is still a very durable fighter in her own right .
However , Teela appears to be much younger and leaner in the 2002 series than she is in the 1980s series .
She also wears her hair in a long ponytail , as opposed to the 1980s figure and cartoon character who is represented with her hair up .
Although the Filmation version of Teela has a short temper , the new version of Teela is portrayed as brasher and slightly more aggressive .
In the episode Out of the Past , Teela says that she is 16 years old .
She also briefly displays limited telepathic powers after a blood transfusion from her mother the Sorceress ; the power fades as the Sorceress 's blood fades away within Teela 's blood .
As with the previous versions of the story , Teela was adopted by Man - At - Arms , or rather was entrusted to him by her mother the Sorceress , because her birth father , an amnesiac Eternian soldier whom the Sorceress had nursed back to health , had disappeared , having presumably died in battle .
There are hints in both the episode " Out of the Past " as well as the 3rd season episode guide of the series DVD , that Man - At - Arms is actually her biological father as well .
Another possibility could be Fisto as he was the person who was with the Sorceress at the time Teela 's father went missing .
It was intended that Teela would learn the truth of her heritage in the third season , but the series was canceled before it could be resolved .
Despite her young age , Teela is the Captain of the Palace Guard as in the original series and seen in several episodes commanding the palace soldiers .
In the MOTU comic produced at the same time , a greater emphasis is placed on Teela and Adam 's friendship .
Teela admits in the original mini - series that she would rather play with him , as they did as children within the palace walls , than be a soldier trained to expect war .
Adam reassures her that what she does will bring that day closer , holding her hand .
In the regular comic series , she becomes jealous of the attention Adam lavishes on a weak , critically injured Evil - Lyn .
This version of the character was voiced by Lisa Ann Beley .
MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE CLASSICS ( 2008 - 2015 )
Section::::Masters of the Universe Classics ( 2008 - 2015 ) .
In their storyline for the latest Mattel toyline , which combines previous plot elements with newly written material , Teela is a clone of the current Sorceress Teela Na , and was raised by Man - At - Arms as his daughter .
After becoming the new Sorceress , Teela would eventually marry King He - Man , and give birth to a son named Dare .
HE - MAN AND THE MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ( 2012 ) Section::::He - Man and the Masters of the Universe ( 2012 ) .
In the new incarnation Teela assumes the mantle of the Sorceress of Castle Grayskull from her mother .
LIVE
ACTION HE - MAN MOVIE Section::::Live Action He - Man movie .
Teela will appear in the Live Action He - Man movie .
In the film , she will serve in the military and will serve as the love interest to Adam .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In mid - December 2010 , Teela was voted by UGO.com 28th
Our Favorite Ladies from Other Planets .
In July 2016 , Blastr ranked Teela No.12 in Every He - Man and the Masters of the Universe action figure , ranked .
REFERENCES