DISNEYLAND MONORAIL SYSTEM
The Disneyland Monorail System ( originally named the Disneyland ALWEG Monorail System ) is an attraction and transportation system at the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim , California , United States .
It was the first daily operating monorail in the Western Hemisphere , and the first in the United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Walt Disney originally envisioned the monorail as a practical form of public transport for the future .
However , the monorail came about during a time when America's — and particularly Los Angeles'—obsession with the automobile was increasing , and monorails in the United States were mostly only located in Disney 's theme parks , with the exception of the Seattle Center Monorail .
The job of building the monorail was originally assigned to the Standard Carriage Works of East Los Angeles , but in late 1958 , Walt Disney , pressured for time , moved it to his Burbank studios .
Disney designer Bob Gurr then headed a Disney team that designed and manufactured the cars , chassis , suspension and propulsion systems , thus completing the Red Mk 1 just in time for the re - dedication of Tomorrowland .
The Disneyland ALWEG Monorail opened on June 14 , 1959 , as a sightseeing attraction in Tomorrowland in Disneyland , along with the Disneyland Expansion with the Matterhorn Bobsleds , the Submarine Voyage , the expanded version of Autopia , and the Motor Boat Cruise .
The Mark I trains ( Red and Blue ) consisted of three cars each .
In 1961 it became a true transportation system when Tomorrowland station was lengthened to accommodate the debut of the four - car Mark II and the additional new Yellow train ; the track was extended 2½ miles outside the park and a second platform was constructed — the Disneyland Hotel station .
In 1968 Mark III Monorail Green joined the fleet , and both platforms were lengthened for the arrival of the more streamlined and efficient five - car Mark III monorail train conversions .
From Hotel Station there were two trips above Disneyland available aboard the monorail — a quick tour and general admission .
Guests wishing to embark upon a vista - dome view of the park , including a leisurely layover in Tomorrowland within the tail - cone could purchase an exclusive round - trip tour ticket at Hotel Station and save the expense of general admission to Disneyland .
Nose and tailcone door latches were independent from the main door release button .
A simple dial indicator above the tail - cone compartment door could be turned to one of three positions — General admission guests , round - trip only guests , and mixed .
Hostess attendants at Tomorrowland Station would check the dial position and open the door for general admission guests .
If general admission guests boarded the tail - cone in Tomorrowland , the dial would be set to mixed , then all mixed tail - cone guests disembarked at the hotel .
By the early 1980s , the Mark III trains were showing their age and the wear of years .
In 1985 , Disneyland began phasing out the Mark III trains one by one .
The older trains were stripped to the chassis and rebuilt as Mark V trains .
The Mark III Green went first , to become the Mark V Purple followed by the Mark III Yellow becoming the Mark V Orange .
The Mark III Blue remained blue ( albeit a lighter shade ) and the last was Red , remaining Red .
The notable difference was the loss of the bubble - top driver 's area in favor of a streamlined " Learjet " look similar to the Mark IV trains at the Walt Disney World Resort .
The new trains also sported closed passenger compartments ( with windows that could be opened ) and pneumatic doors .
Following the 1985 Disney World monorail fire , a safety handrail was added along the spine of the train , as well as emergency fire exit hatches leading to the roof .
The attraction 's name remained the " Disneyland Monorail System " , as it had been painted on the Mark III trains ' skirts .
The Mark V trains were built by Ride & Show Engineering , Inc. , incorporating bodies that were produced by Messerschmitt - Bolkow - Blohm of Germany .
Purple first made its appearance for testing in Autumn of 1986 and began regular operations a few months later .
Orange was delivered in late Summer of 1987 , followed by Blue in early 1988 .
The oldest train , Red , was also the last to be removed from the line for refurbishment in the Spring of 1988 .
The system resumed limited shuttle operations in 2000 , when the Downtown Disney Station became operational , but a significant portion of the beamway was still unusable due to construction .
In 2001 the monorail resumed full capacity forward direction circuit operations , passing through Disney 's Grand Californian Hotel & Spa , as well as showcasing the new park .
In 2004 , Monorail Orange was removed from the line and taken to Walt Disney Imagineering in Glendale to be reverse engineered .
Monorail Blue was removed in September 2006 for rebuilding .
The Finding Nemo Submarine Voyage show building was extended into the lagoon beneath the monorail , which closed from August 21 through late December 2006 to prepare for the 2007 opening of Nemo .
The refurbishment from Mark V to Mark VII was done one train at a time .
There was no Mark VI at Disneyland , as Mark VI are used on the Walt Disney World Monorail System .
The first Mark VII train , Monorail Red , arrived at Disneyland on December 20 , 2007 .
It was originally expected to be in service by the end of February 2008 , but due to design change issues , it did not begin serving park guests until July 3 , 2008 .
Mark VII Blue arrived on - site on April 10 , 2008 , began daytime riderless testing on August 1 , 2008 , and began guest service on September 16 , 2008 .
Monorail Mark VII Orange arrived on - site on August 14 , 2008 , began riderless testing in March 2009 , and began guest service on April 7 , 2009 .
The entire Mark VII Monorail fleet consists of three trains — Red , Blue , and Orange .
In May 2012 , the monorails received new decals , depicting eyes and a mouth covering and below the front windows , to tie in with the opening of the Cars Land section of Disney California Adventure .
Each train was given a new name and unique narration , depicting the trains as if they were in the Cars film universe .
Monorail Red became Manny Monorail , Monorail Blue became Mandy Monorail , and Monorail Orange became Mona Monorail .
By the end of January 2013 , the decals had been removed and the trains were running with standard narration .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
The Disneyland Monorail has two stations : one in Tomorrowland , and another in the Downtown Disney district .
The original Monorail was a round trip ride with no stops .
In 1961 , the track was expanded to connect to a station at the Disneyland Hotel , making it an actual transportation system .
The original Hotel station was torn down in 1999 and a new station , now called the Downtown Disney Station , was built in the same place .
All riders must disembark at Tomorrowland Station , and during peak traffic periods , the monorail offers only one - way trips where all passengers must also disembark at the Downtown Disney Station and re - board for the return trip to Tomorrowland .
Admission to Disneyland Park must be purchased to ride the monorail .
In the fall of 2006 , the Tomorrowland Station was remodeled due to the Finding Nemo Submarine Voyage construction .
The original speed ramps were removed , and a new concrete ramp was added on the east end of the station to handle the queue and access to the station , with concrete stairs on the west end to handle the exiting Monorail passengers .
The monorail travels in one direction only .
All passengers board at a single platform .
Leaving Tomorrowland station , the monorail crosses the Disneyland Railroad and continues along Harbor Boulevard on the eastern edge of the park .
Turning to enter Disney California Adventure , it passes Monsters ,
Inc. Mike & Sulley to the Rescue ! and the Sunset Showcase Theater .
The track then crosses through the gateway to the Disney California Adventure park .
Passengers can see Disneyland Park on the right and Disney California Adventure Park on the left .
The monorail then passes through Disney 's Grand Californian Hotel & Spa then makes a sharp curve to the right and enters the Downtown Disney station , which has a rainforest theme , covered with several jungle - themed canopies , to complement the adjacent Rainforest Cafe .
Downtown Disney station has one platform .
After a five - minute loading , the train leaves Downtown Disney and makes a short loop around the district before crossing above the esplanade between the two parks and heads back to Disneyland .
Once inside the park , the monorail crosses the railroad again and goes into a series of sharp bends and curves around Tomorrowland .
The track travels above the Submarine Lagoon and Autopia .
The track actually crosses the lagoon four times .
The track then curves around the Matterhorn Bobsleds , giving a view of Fantasyland , then turns left to reenter the Tomorrowland Station .
All monorails are equipped with Grover 1056 2-chime air horns .
The horn must be sounded twice when departing a station , at one point where the track parallels the currently unused PeopleMover / Rocket Rod track , and when approaching the Matterhorn .
They are also sounded when a bird lands on the track , and as a greeting to passing Disneyland Railroad trains near the switch to the barn .
The original monorails were equipped with horns that sounded more like real ground - level trains .
MAINTENANCE Section::::Maintenance .
" Monorail Shop " , as it is officially known ( " Shop " for short ) , is Disney 's monorail maintenance facility located behind " it 's a small world " at Disneyland and provides space for four monorails on its upper level ( the bottom level houses the five steam locomotives that circle Disneyland ) .
Monorails access this yard by stopping at the switch near the road crossing
and then the switch will switch to the facility spur .
Then the monorail travels slowly into the yard where another switch leads it into the designated track .
No train will ever be left outside the facility because routine maintenance is performed nightly .
TRACTOR Section::::Tractor .
The Diesel / hydraulic powered " work tractors " are primarily used each morning for beam inspection and maintenance - of - way which includes trimming vegetation beyond the reach of guests , cleaning and repairing the electrical commutator rails as well as periodically scheduled servicing and painting of the concrete beam guideway .
They are powerful enough to return a fully loaded train fitted with tow - bars to a station platform , then to the Monorail Shop , independent of 600V track power .
INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL Section::::Installation and removal .
In order to remove old monorail trains and replace them with new ones , they are shunted to maintenance shop beam " D " where each car segment is prepared individually for removal by supporting the remaining segment and disconnecting the bellows , cables and articulated motor truck .
The car is then rolled outside along the beam to a position where a custom crane - hoist harness is fitted to it and the car is hoisted off the beam and transferred to a truck trailer on which a transport beam is bolted .
The Diesel / hydraulic tractor ( pictured ) is used as a switcher to carefully tow each car into and out of the maintenance shop .
The procedure is reversed for fitting new segments of monorail train cars to the beam while testing each system and connection .
Each fully assembled train is then slowly and methodically tested thoroughly over many months before it can be placed into revenue service for guests .
It was determined after delivery of Mark VII Monorail Red that platform clearance was too tight for the new , elongated end - compartments , so Monorail Blue was modified at the manufacturer and entered service before Red .
SAFETY EMERGENCY EVACUATION Section::::Safety .
Section::::Emergency evacuation .
Emergencies requiring train evacuation will be handled differently depending upon the location of the train and the nature of the emergency .
If a train is stopped at a station platform or at the work platform , guests can exit the train onto the platform .
Exiting a train is possible even when the doors of the train cars are closed .
A cast member outside the car can also forcibly open the rightmost door panel of the car by releasing the air pressure holding that panel closed .
The air pressure release is a handle beneath the rectangular center window that is similar in appearance to a car door handle .
If a train is stopped on open beam , then guests evacuate through emergency exits located in the roof of the train .
Guests open roof hatches by first removing decorative plastic from the ceiling above a bulkhead footstool and then by lifting open a hinged hatch that will flip across the bulkhead dividing two train cars .
Guests evacuate to the roof by climbing through the open hatch onto the top of the train .
The bulkheads separating cars are designed as firewalls that will contain a fire within a car to just that car .
The open hatch allows guests in the affected car to transfer to an adjacent car where they can safely wait for evacuation by fire response crews .
If the emergency affects the entire train , then guests are evacuated to the surface of the beam .
Guests again open the emergency roof hatches , but do not simply move to the adjacent car .
Instead , they use a small handrail present along the top of each train car to move all the way to the front of the train .
The Disneyland Fire Department assists in the safe evacuation of the disabled train .
PLATFORM SAFETY Section::::Platform safety .
Platform gates are operated manually and remain closed until the next train arrives and cast members determine that it is safe to board .
The trains are powered by over 600V DC , drawn from a small rail ( bus bar ) running along the right side of the beam .
This bus bar is similar to the electrified or " third " rail of a subway train .
FACTS AND FIGURES *
Grand opening : June 14 , 1959
* Designer : WED Enterprises
* Trains : 3 - Mark VII Red , Mark VII Blue and Mark VII Orange * Max Trains on Beam : 3 * Track length :
* Ride duration :
10:30 * Coupon required ( originally ) :
" E " ( the coupon system has since been replaced with passports which include all attractions . )
* Ride system : Each train is propelled by six DC electric motors each mounted in articulated powered trucks shared between cars , not just the lead car .
* 1959 construction costs of the entire system averaged over a million dollars per mile(>$620,000 / kilometer . )
* Oversized ceremonial scissors failed to cut the ribbon during the televised opening ceremony , so Walt simply tore it .
DISNEYLAND MONORAIL TRAINS
BUILT
BY DISNEY ENGINEERS Section::::Disneyland Monorail trains .
Section::::Built by Disney Engineers .
Built at Disney Studios .
Based on Alweg monorail systems and concepts .
* Mark I : 1959 - 1961
* 3-car trains * Colors :
red and blue * Mark II : 1961 - 1969 ( Added with track expansion to Disneyland Hotel ) * Same physical hardware as Mark I , with minor upgrades and improvements * 4-car trains ( 1 new car for Red and Blue trains ,
yellow was all new train )
* Bigger dome on top of front car
* Colors : red , blue and yellow BUILT BY
WALT DISNEY IMAGINEERING / WED ENTERPRISES
* Mark III : 1969 - 1987 * Entirely new design and physical hardware .
No re - use from Mark I & II .
* 5-car trains
* long * colors : red , blue , yellow and green .
* Mark V : 1987 - 2008
* 5-car trains * Designed by Walt Disney
Imagineering
* Car bodies built by Messerschmitt - Bölkow - Blohm of Germany
* Seats 24 passengers in each of the five cars , plus 7 passengers in the tail cone , and 5 passengers with 1 driver in the nose cone .
* Total number of passengers per train : 132 * Utilizes Mk III chassis as re - engineered by Ride & Show Engineering , Inc. of San Dimas , CA .
*
The Mk V was designed to resemble the appearance of the Mark IV series monorails which were operating in the Walt Disney World Resort .
* colors : red , blue , orange and purple BUILT BY DYNAMIC STRUCTURES
* Mark VII : 2008–Present
* Sleek / Retro design accomplished by installing a Mark III style nose on the existing Mark V trains .
* New island seating configuration , with one row of inward - facing seating at the front and rear ends of each car .
* The main cabins have a capacity of 22 passengers *
The tailcone has a capacity of six passengers while the nosecone has a capacity of four passengers and a pilot .
* Designed and engineered in - house by Walt Disney Imagineering and TPI Composites
* Colors : Red , Blue , and Orange .
*
The first Mark VII monorail , Red , was delivered to Disneyland on December 20 , 2007 .
It began service on July 3 , 2008 .
*
The second Mark VII , Blue , was delivered to Disneyland on April 10 , 2008 .
It began service September 16 , 2008 .
*
The Third Mark VII , Orange , was delivered to Disneyland on August 14 , 2008 .
It began service on April 7 , 2009 .
SEE ALSO
* List of incidents at Disneyland Resort
* List of Disneyland attractions * Rail transport in Walt Disney Parks and Resorts
* Walt Disney World Monorail System
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Disneyland Monorail - Article on how the monorail works
*
The Monorail Society - Profile of the Disneyland Monorail System
* The Monorail Society Mark VII Photo Essay - Nine pages of Mark VII photos * WDW and Disneyland Monorail pictures
* " Disney Pix " - Monorail History -
A complete history of all the Disney monorail car designs in pictures .
* Video footage of the Disneyland Monorail from riders ' POV