WALT DISNEY WORLD
MONORAIL SYSTEM
The Walt Disney World Monorail System is a public transit monorail system in operation at the Walt Disney World Resort in Bay Lake , Florida , near Orlando .
The Walt Disney World Resort currently operates twelve Mark VI monorail trains on three lines of service .
The monorail system opened in 1971 with two routes ( Magic Kingdom : Resort and Express ) and with Mark IV monorail trains .
It was expanded to three lines ( Magic Kingdom : Resort and Express , plus Epcot ) in 1982 , and the rolling stock was updated to Mark VI trains in 1989 .
, the system is one of the most heavily used monorail systems in the world , with over 150,000 daily riders .
It is surpassed by the Tokyo Monorail in Tokyo , Japan , which has over 300,000 daily riders ; and by the monorail system run by Chongqing Rail Transit in Chongqing , China , which has over 900,000 daily riders on Line 2 and Line 3 combined .
LINES , STATIONS , AND INFRASTRUCTURE Section::::Lines , stations , and infrastructure .
The Walt Disney World Monorail spans , with around 50 million Disney guests traveling on the monorail each year .
The system opened with the rest of the Walt Disney World Resort on October 1 , 1971 .
It initially featured four stations : the Transportation and Ticket Center , Disney 's Polynesian Resort , the Magic Kingdom and Disney 's Contemporary Resort .
The Epcot line and station were added during that park 's construction , opening on October 1 , 1982 .
The most recent addition was the Grand Floridian station , which was opened in 1988 along with the resort hotel .
The three services on two distinct routes on the Walt Disney World Monorail are : The Express and Resort services on the dual - beam Magic Kingdom route :
* Express :
Express service between the Magic Kingdom and the Transportation and Ticket Center ( TTC ) .
Express service runs on the outer loop of this route and travels counter - clockwise .
* Resort : Round - trip local service on the inner loop , running clockwise , making stops in order at the Magic Kingdom , Disney 's Contemporary Resort , the Transportation and Ticket Center , Disney 's Polynesian Village Resort , and Disney 's Grand Floridian Resort and Spa .
The single beam Epcot route : * Epcot : Service between the Transportation and Ticket Center and Epcot .
Service on this route is a single beam running clockwise on the loop .
A spur track at Magic Kingdom station connects the Express and Resort lines to the maintenance shop .
Another spur connects the Epcot and Express lines and is located northeast of the Transportation and Ticket Center .
The monorail beams , which are made of concrete with a special polystyrene core to lighten their weight , came by train from the state of Washington .
ROLLING STOCK SPECIFICATIONS Section::::Rolling stock .
Section::::Specifications .
The trains in use since 1989 are each long ( consisting of six cars ) and can carry 360 passengers .
The trains are driven by eight motors which are powered by a 600-volt electrical system running through a busbar mounted on each side of the concrete beam .
Each train also has seven inverters on board that convert the 600 V DC to 230 V AC for use by the air conditioners and air compressor , and additionally has a battery - backed 37 V DC low - voltage supply that provides power for the train 's electronics .
The trains are also equipped with a towing knuckle at each end to allow it to be pushed or pulled by a special diesel - powered tractor if need be .
Maximum speed during normal operations is , with several speed zones throughout the system with limits ranging from .
These speed limits are strictly enforced by the train 's computer and can not be overridden without the operator engaging a special lockout .
Attempting to drive the train too quickly in a given speed zone will result in an " overspeed stop . "
Train spacing is maintained by the Moving Blocklight System ( MBS ) , also known as the MAPO system ( for " Mary Poppins , " ) , which establishes a number of " holdpoints " throughout the system .
At any given time , there must be at least two holdpoints between a given train and the train ahead of it .
When the train detects that there are fewer than two holdpoints between itself and the preceding train , the emergency brakes are immediately applied and can not be released until sufficient spacing becomes available or the operator overrides the system .
Failure to maintain adequate spacing is known as an " overrun , " and is treated as an extremely serious offense .
AUTOMATION
Section::::Automation .
Starting June 22 , 2014 , the monorail began operating on a different timetable in order to accommodate work to automate the system .
Disney stated that the system would provide a more efficient service with enhanced safety , as well as more frequent dispatch of the trains , faster switching times , and monorail arrival information .
Pilots are still seated in the front cab , but only supervise the monorail in case of an emergency .
Platform attendants operate a control panel to dispatch and operate the monorail system .
IDENTIFICATION Section::::Identification .
Each train is identified by a colored stripe , and given a name according to that color .
The complete list of colors used is below .
To help visually identify Green from Lime , Pink from Coral and Blue from Teal , the Lime , Teal , and Coral stripes have a white delta painted on each car .
Originally , Monorail Lime 's deltas ( and those of the older Mark IV Lime ) were painted a dark blue in homage to the original Walt Disney World monorail cast 's costume colors ( lime and blue ) , but the colors were changed when the entire monorail fleet was repainted in the early 2000s .
In early December 2018 , Monorail Teal 's white delta was repainted to the original dark blue scheme .
In November 2009 , Disney put Monorail Teal into service .
Monorail Teal was built using the undamaged portions of the two trains involved in the July 5 , 2009 crash .
The colors of the two trains involved , Pink and Purple , were retired from service .
The twelfth train , Peach , was placed into service in September 2011 to restore the resort 's fleet back to twelve trains .
It was assembled using the undamaged center cars from the Purple train , but with new end cabs replacing the damaged sections from the Pink and Purple trains .
On March 19 , 2010 , Disney debuted Monorail TRON on the Epcot line as part of a marketing plan for .
A repainted Monorail Coral , it was removed from rotation in July 2011 and has returned to its normal route and colors .
As of October 7 , 2011 , the newest monorail in Peach color entered service .
Since the Tron paint scheme in 2010 , there have been several other monorail wraps .
On March 31 , 2012 , Monorail Red was converted into a special scheme commemorating the release of The Avengers , similar to the previous promotion for Tron : Legacy .
The monorail runs on the Magic Kingdom line and sometimes on the Resort line as the Epcot line loops through the park itself , since Disney is not able to feature specified Marvel characters inside its Florida parks due to Marvel Entertainment 's license agreement with Universal Parks & Resorts that was in place prior to the purchase of Marvel in 2009 .
In March 2013 , Monorail Black was given a similar conversion to promote the release of Iron Man 3 .
In April 2013 , Monorail Teal was converted into a special scheme commemorating the release of Monsters University .
In December 2015 , Monorail Black was decorated in Star Wars designs commemorating the release of .
In 2016 , Monorail Orange was decorated in Zootopia designs and was named the Zootopia Monorail System to reflect the Zootopia Transit Authority , commemorating the release of Zootopia .
In 2018 Monorail Orange was decorated in Incredibles designs to promote the release of Incredibles 2 .
The current train identification colors include : *
Red * Coral * Orange * Gold * Yellow * Teal * Lime * Green * Blue * Silver * Black * Peach Retired identification colors include : *
Pink * Purple
These colors were retired after the July 2009 incident .
FRONT - CAB RIDING Section::::Front - cab riding .
There is seating for up to four guests in the front cab of the train with the pilot who manually drives each train .
These were offered on a first - come , first - served basis , and a pilot gave out " co - pilot licenses " at the end of the journey .
Front cab riding was suspended permanently after the July 5 , 2009 crash .
PRE - RECORDED ANNOUNCEMENTS Section::::Pre - recorded announcements .
The monorail system uses a set of pre - recorded announcements to instruct and entertain passengers .
Prior to departure when the pilot closes the doors , an announcement asks guests to " Please stand clear of the doors .
Por favor manténganse alejado de las puertas . "
One of the most well - known phrases within the resort , it was recorded by Jack Wagner , who was known as " the Voice of Disneyland . "
In 1988 following the construction of the Grand Floridian Resort stop , Kevin Miles replaced Jack Wagner as the voiceover .
Wagner can still be heard today as the " Please stand clear of the doors ...
" phrase remains with his voice , partly because it is installed on a separate system .
Miles worked in Epcot as part of the ' Voices of Liberty ' in the American Adventure pavilion at World Showcase .
Sometime before 1998 , Disney employee Matt Hanson replaced Kevin Miles , and in 2004 Hanson was replaced by Joe Hursh .
Hanson is still with the Walt Disney Company .
During the system 's early years , the trains featured Wagner 's narration of the sights and scenery along the way , as well as information on special events , the resort , and the monorail system itself .
On April 13 , 2012 at around 5:00 EST , Disney activated a newer version of the spiel on the monorails that features Tom Kane as its new narrator .
MAINTENANCE Section::::Maintenance .
Monorail Shop ( " Shop " for short ) is Disney 's monorail maintenance facility located a short distance northeast of the Magic Kingdom , and provides space for up to ten of the twelve Mark VI trains on its upper level ( the bottom level houses the four steam locomotives and trains of the Walt Disney World Railroad in the Magic Kingdom on its west side , and a road vehicle maintenance facility on the east side ) .
On any given night , two monorail trains are parked at various stations on the system .
On nights where the temperature drops below freezing , the trains will be parked inside the Contemporary Resort ; but in practice , trains can be left in any station ( even on the express side of a resort station ) .
No train will ever be left outside two nights in a row because routine maintenance is performed nightly .
The Monorail Shop also has a painting room located on Beam 10 that is elevated off the ground and has a lift mounted on the wall for the painters .
It takes three weeks to paint a monorail train .
To access the wheels and underside of the monorail , a portion of Beam 1 inside Shop is removable , primarily used to change load tires .
TOWING Section::::Towing .
The diesel - powered " work tractors " are the tow trucks of the system , and can tow a train to Monorail Shop , located around the bend from Space Mountain .
Monorail Operations at the Walt Disney World resort has three separate tractors ( Red , tagged ' 1 ' , Blue , tagged ' 2 ' , and Green , tagged ' 3 ' )
that allow for the simultaneous towing of three different monorails .
In the event of a power failure on one of the monorail lines , the tractors are still operational , as they are powered by on - board diesel engines .
SAFETY
TRAIN SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Section::::Train safety .
Safe train spacing is maintained via a moving blocklight system , referred to as MAPO , installed in the cab of each train .
MAPO appears in the top center of the pilot 's console and looks similar to a horizontal stop light .
There are three lights — green , amber , and red — and a push - button labeled " Override " .
The term " MAPO " itself comes directly from Walt Disney , who formed a new company to deal with Disneyland 's transportation system directly from the profits made by Mary Poppins .
Each monorail beam is divided into blocks based upon pylon numbering .
The currently illuminated MAPO color indicates how far ahead the leading train is currently located .
A green MAPO shows that the leading train is 3 or more blocks ahead , amber means 2 blocks ahead , and red indicates that the next train is in the very next block .
A block is roughly between 500 and 1000 feet ( about 150 and 300 m )
long , although this varies .
The start of each block is called a " hold point " , as pilots may need to hold their trains at that location until the train ahead moves away .
Guests riding in the front cab of a monorail can identify hold points by the yellow reflective tape around a pylon 's number and by two yellow reflectors attached to the top outside edges of the monorail beam at that pylon .
For safety , trains must be kept at least two blocks apart during normal operation .
A red MAPO indicates that train spacing has become unsafe .
When a red MAPO occurs , the train 's on - board computer locks out the pilot 's propulsion control and applies emergency brakes .
The pilot can not resume control of the train until either the MAPO clears or the pilot presses and holds the MAPO override button .
It is the pilot 's responsibility to avoid a red MAPO during normal operation .
When the MAPO switches from green to amber , this indicates that the monorail is approaching the train ahead .
The pilot must stop the train before crossing into the next block of beam way and hence before the MAPO switches to red .
Should a pilot cross the hold point and receive a red MAPO , this counts as a safety demerit against the pilot .
If a pilot accumulates three demerits on his / her record within a two - year period , then he / she will be transferred out of the monorails department and into a different role at Walt Disney World .
Safety tests are performed daily to ensure that the MAPO system is working properly on each train .
At the direction of the monorail station conducting the test , each train will intentionally overrun a hold point to verify that a red MAPO occurs and that the emergency brakes activate .
Pilots perform tests in forward and reverse when bringing a train onto the system for the first time that day .
The indications are called into Monorail Central with the emergency brake pressures .
A red MAPO will also occur when the pilot approaches a section of un - powered beam , a spur line , or a switch beam thrown in the direction of a spur line .
Pilots must engage the MAPO override when moving trains through a switch to the spur line .
Red MAPOs occurring due to safety tests , switching , or beam power loss do not count as demerits against the pilot .
EMERGENCY EVACUATION Section::::Emergency evacuation .
Emergencies requiring train evacuation will be handled differently depending upon the location of the train and the nature of the emergency .
If a train is stopped at a station platform or at the work platform along the Epcot beam , guests can exit the train onto the platform .
Exiting a train is possible even when the doors of the train cars are closed .
The large rectangular window in the middle of each car is an emergency exit and can be removed from the interior of the car .
A cast member outside the car can also manually open the rightmost door panel of the car by releasing the air pressure holding that panel closed .
The air pressure release is a handle beneath the rectangular center window that is similar in appearance to a car door handle .
If a train is stopped on an open beam , then guests evacuate through emergency exits located in the roof of the train .
Guests open roof hatches by first removing decorative plastic from the ceiling above a bulkhead footstool and then by lifting open a hinged hatch that will flip across the bulkhead dividing two train cars .
Guests evacuate to the roof by climbing through the open hatch onto the top of the train .
The bulkheads separating cars are designed as firewalls that will contain a fire within a car to just that car .
The open hatch allows guests in the affected car to transfer to an adjacent car where they can safely wait for evacuation by fire response crews .
If the emergency affects the entire train , then guests are evacuated to the surface of the beam .
Guests again open the emergency roof hatches , but do not simply move to the adjacent car .
Instead , they use a small handrail present along the top of each train car to move all the way to the front of the train .
The train 's pilot can attach a knotted rope to both the top and the base of the windscreen , and guests use the rope to shimmy down the windscreen to the surface of the beam .
They finally start walking along the beam away from the train .
Reedy Creek Emergency Services provides fire response and rescue for the Walt Disney World Monorail System and maintains an all - wheel - drive fire truck specially designed for monorail rescue .
PLATFORM SAFETY Section::::Platform safety .
The Express station at the Transportation and Ticket Center , and both stations at the Magic Kingdom have remotely opened or automated gates that bar riders from approaching the guideway ( and , thus , any approaching or departing train ) until the operators have determined that it is safe to allow people to board the train .
The cast member at the station gives the riders instructions on how to board .
The other stations have manually operated gates to serve this function .
All platforms are ADA - accessible .
Because the train level is higher than the platform level , a portable ramp must be used to load and unload disabled guests at all stations .
For many years , the Contemporary Resort station did not have ADA access , but an elevator has since been added to the platform .
INCIDENTS Section::::Incidents .
Several accidents and injuries have occurred on the monorails since Walt Disney World opened , as well as one death .
On July 5 , 2009 , a driver was killed after the Pink and Purple monorails collided on the Epcot line at the Transportation and ticket Center .
This was the only deadly incident on the Walt Disney World Monorail System in its history .
TRAINS BUILT
BY MARTIN MARIETTA Mark IV Monorail Period of Service
Length :
Width : Height :
Weight : 5 cars gross : 6 cars empty : 6 cars gross : Passenger Capacity : 5 cars : 40 per car + 4 in the nose =
204 seated 6 cars : 40 per car + 4 in the nose =
244 seated BUILT BY BOMBARDIER TRANSPORTATION Mark VI Monorail Period of Service
Length :
Width :
Headroom : Height ( from bottom of skirt to top of shell ) :
Weight :
Passenger capacity : SEE ALSO
* Disney Transport * Disney Resort Line ( monorail system at Tokyo Disney Resort ) * Disneyland Monorail System ( monorail system at Disneyland )
* Disneyland Resort Line ( mass transit rail system at Hong Kong Disneyland Resort )
* Incidents at Walt Disney World
* List of monorail systems
* Rail transport in Walt Disney Parks and Resorts
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Walt Disney World Monorail System - WDWMagic.com ( Unofficial WDW Site )