ZERO ( MEGA MAN ) First developed by Keiji Inafune when he was attempting to create a new design for Mega Man for the X series , Zero was instead used as a secondary character .
In the Zero series , which was developed by Inti Creates , Zero is the protagonist and had a change in his design , which was meant to create a more " human feel " to him .
Zero has since played a minor role in the ZX series as Model Z.
His inclusion in the Mega Man X series has generally received positive critical response from video games reviewers .
CONCEPTION AND CREATION Section::::Conception and creation .
Zero was created by designer Keiji Inafune when he was told to recreate Mega Man for a new series on the Super Nintendo , Mega Man X.
He wanted to design a Mega Man different from the original one .
However , Inafune realized afterwards that the character he created was too different from Mega Man 's old appearance to be viewed positively by fans .
Deciding to let another designer work on the character that eventually became Mega Man X while he developed Zero , Inafune created the character intending him to be " the ' other main character ' that would " steal all the good scenes " .
He further described Zero as representing the idea that " nothing is absolute " , and circumstances can change anything .
When asked if Zero had killed the cast of the original Mega Man titles , suspected due to their absence in the X series , he replied no , adding that given how he had designed the character , " Zero is not such a person -- it is not in his profile . "
The concept of Zero starring in his own series was proposed by Inafune .
Inafune proposed that Zero star in his own series , and planned to go forward with the idea at the end of Mega Man X5 .
However , he was unable to after Capcom announced another Mega Man title without his involvement .
Designed by Toru Nakayama of Inti Creates , Zero was meant to have a more " human feel " rather than the complete " mechanical feel " of the X series .
Nakayama wanted the public to recognize that this series was different from the X series .
Since Capcom wanted Zero 's general structure to be the same , Inti - Creates concentrated on how different they could make him , rather than how similar .
Zero 's depiction in the series was intended to be morally ambiguous and depend on the perspective , appearing as a hero from one point of view and a terrorist from another .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Designed to be " harder and wilder " than the original Mega Man , Zero 's design ultimately resembled Mega Man X in several ways due to his initial character concept ,
Inafune 's insistence on drawing the character , and input from other project artists .
In the X series , Zero has red and white armor with twin " horns " on his helmet .
Zero also has his signature long blonde hair .
His main weapon is the Z - saber , an energy - based sword that introduced melee combat to the Mega Man games .
His secondary weapon is the Z - buster , a cannon mounted at the end of his right arm , similar to Mega Man X 's primary weapon .
A tertiary weapon that would orbit around Zero was also considered , but left uncompleted .
Unlike the original Mega Man , who had a full head of hair under his helmet , Zero has a smooth secondary helmet , intended to imply the characters were older .
In Mega Man X4 , Zero was going to receive his own enhanced armor in the same way X does , but the development team decided not to finish it .
In the Zero series , Zero sported a much more humanized and sleeker redesign .
His mecha - inspired armor was eschewed for a red uniform consisting of a vest , gloves , and boots , while his arms and legs were more anatomically detailed .
His Z - buster was no longer fused inside his hand , instead it was a handgun that fired energy bullets .
The Z - saber also became a triangular holographic blade , rather than a lightsaber - like weapon .
Early concept art featured Zero with solid - black , pupil - less eyes , though this changed to a normal set of eyes as development progressed .
APPEARANCES
IN MEGA MAN VIDEO GAME SERIES Section::::Appearances .
Section::::In
Mega Man video game series .
Zero made his debut appearance in Mega Man X in 1993 , and a cameo appearance in .
In the latter , Zero was revealed to have been originally created by Dr. Wily sometime during the Mega Man series .
Zero works as a Maverick Hunter , a soldier in charge of defeating Mavericks , robots who turned against humanity .
He plays the role as X 's comrade and best friend in the X series .
The two , later accompanied by Axl , fight Sigma , Vile , and other enemies throughout the series .
While in the first two titles he only assists X during gameplay , he becomes an optional character in X3 .
In Mega Man X4 , Zero is one of two playable characters , along with X.
In his scenario , Zero is haunted by nightmares of a shadowy figure ( implied to be Wily ) awakening him and giving him orders to destroy an unknown individual , and visions of ensuing carnage .
Additionally , during his scenario , Sigma reminds him of the time that he led the Maverick Hunters , and the encounter between the two that led to a vicious battle that led to Sigma punching out the crystal on Zero 's helmet , leading to Sigma later becoming infected with the Maverick Virus .
Depending on the story development , Zero can be fought as a boss character in Mega Man X5 .
In Mega Man X6 , Zero is not initially present in the game since he went missing in the end of Mega Man X5 during a fight against Sigma , and he becomes an optional character depending on how the story develops throughout the game .
In the spin - off title Mega Man Xtreme , he is an assistant character but becomes playable in the sequel , Mega Man Xtreme 2 .
He is also playable during the prologue and the last chapters from the role - playing video game .
The Mega Man Zero series features Zero as the title character and protagonist .
Set around 100 years after the X series , Zero helps a scientist named Ciel fight the human city of Neo Arcadia , during which he destroys Omega - his original body , Dr. Weil , and Copy X , leader of Neo Arcadia , twice .
Zero makes an appearance in the ZX series as Model Z , who plays a minor supporting role in the plot in the first ZX game .
In ZX Advent , Zero plays an even smaller role , only having a few lines throughout the game .
Zero 's Mega Man Battle Network counterpart , Zero .
EXE makes an appearance in Mega Man Network Transmission as the antagonist of the first half of the game .
He later aids Mega Man against the true villain , The " Professor " .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
The Mega Man Zero version of Zero 's character appears as a sub - boss in Playmore 's crossover fighting game and as a hidden character in Onimusha Blade Warriors .
The Mega Man X version of Zero appears as a hidden character in and as a playable character in , Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 and .
and in Project X Zone and its sequel Project X Zone 2 .
In the latter titles , Zero was chosen to represent the " Mega Man " franchise over Mega Man himself , as director Ryota Niitsuma thought he had more variation in his moves .
Zero also appears as a collectable trophy and costume for the Mii Fighters in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U , and as an Assist Trophy in
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate .
Zero 's appearances in the two manga series based on the Mega Man X series resemble his video games one .
However , in the Mega Man Zero manga , Zero is depicted as a Reploid having two personalities depending on his usage of a helmet : without his helmet he is portrayed as cowardly whereas the other one resembles his video games counterpart .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Zero 's character was met with positive critical response by publications for video games .
Game Revolution called him " mysterious , androgynous " and compared him to Proto Man " with a ponytail " .
Jeese Scheeden from IGN named him one of his ten favorite sword - wielding characters in the video games , describing him as an answer to the question of how Mega Man would fight if armed with a sword , and noted his fighting style as popular with gamers .
GameZone writer Michael Knutson praised the inclusion of Zero in the Mega Man X series , citing his playability as popular amongst series fan as it expanded the gameplay .
Jeremy Parish from 1UP.com stated that his appearance as a playable character with his own story in Mega Man X4 by itself made it the best game in the X series .
GameSpot noted the contrast in his gameplay to that of Mega Man X in Mega Man X4 increased the difficulty of using him in the title .
Additionally , Brett Elston from GamesRadar credited Zero as one of the reasons the X series became so popular and that his own popularity within gamers earned him his own video game series .
IGN repeated their positive sentiments about Zero in their list of characters they wished to see appear in a future Marvel vs. Capcom title , describing him as " arguably cooler than Mega Man " , regardless of version in comparison .
praised the character as well , stating " [ he ] might wear some funky shoes , but that does n't stop him from kicking some robot butt " .
While reviewing , 1UP.com criticized that his English voice acting makes him " sound like a surfer " .
GamesRadar also cited Zero 's actors across the X series , finding the first from X4 , Wayne Doster , unappealing due to his infamous scene where he yells in front of the dead Iris .
On the other hand , the site praised Yong Bosch 's take on the character , believing it was likable .
FOOTNOTES REFERENCES