DRIVER LICENSE COMPACT
The Driver License Compact is an agreement between states in the United States of America .
The compact is used to exchange data between motorist 's home state and a state where the motorist incurred a vehicular infraction .
Not all states are members , and states respond to the data differently .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Under the Driver License Compact , which is a series of laws within the adopting states in the United States and adopting provinces of Canada , in order for a driver 's state to penalize him / her for an out - of - state offense , the driver 's state must have the equivalent statute .
If the driver 's state does not have the statute , no action can be taken .
For example , the state of Indiana does not have a careless driving offense whereas Colorado does .
If an Indiana licensed driver gets convicted of careless driving in Colorado , the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles takes no action .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Driver License Compact came into existence with Nevada becoming the first member in 1960 .
Organizations in the Western States such as governors came together to cooperate on traffic safety .
Under the Beamer Resolution ( " Interstate Compacts for Highway Safety Resolution " ) , Public Law 85 - 684 , enacted on August 20 , 1958 , 72 Stat .
635 ( named for Rep. John V. Beamer , R - Indiana )
, states were automatically given permission to form compacts in the areas of traffic safety .
Originally , the Driver License Compact dealt with dangerous driving violations such as drunk driving , reckless driving , commission of a felony involving a motor vehicle and others .
Later on , minor violations were included as well .
Quite a few states joined in the 1960s but it languished in the 1970s and part of the 1980s .
In the late 1980s , there was a push by the AAMVA to get states to join and in the early to mid 1990s , quite a few states joined .
The Driver License Compact is no longer being pushed by the AAMVA as it is being superseded by the Driver License Agreement ( DLA ) , which also replaces the Non - Resident Violator Compact .
However , , there were only three member states to the DLA : Arkansas , Connecticut , and Massachusetts .
STATES THAT ARE NOT MEMBERS Section::::States that are not members .
Georgia , Wisconsin , Massachusetts , Michigan , and Tennessee are not members .
American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators : Nevada repealed the authorizing legislation in 2007 , although it still generally conforms to the agreement through regulations .
EXCEPTIONS *
Some states , such as Colorado , Maryland , Nevada , New York , and Pennsylvania , do not assess points for minor offenses and apply the DLC for only major violations .
* States that are members are free to take action on violations reported from a non - member state as well .
* Pennsylvania transfers points from another state within the agreement only if it meets certain conditions .
* New Jersey assigns two points for all out - of - state minor violations regardless of whether the point values are higher if committed in the home state .
AGREEMENTS BETWEEN US STATES AND CANADIAN PROVINCES Section::::Agreements between US states and Canadian provinces .
Some US states share information and act on driving violations in certain Canadian provinces , in a similar way to the compact :
* New York does assess points for minor violations received in Ontario and Quebec .
* Michigan and Ontario exchange information and take adverse action .
* Maine and Quebec exchange information and take adverse action .
* Florida and Quebec exchange information and take adverse action .
NATIONAL DRIVER REGISTER Section::::National Driver Register .
The National Driver Register ( NDR ) is a computerized database of information about drivers who have had their licenses revoked or suspended , or who have been convicted of serious traffic violations such as driving while impaired by alcohol or other drugs .
State motor vehicle agencies provide NDR with the names of individuals who have lost their privilege or who have been convicted of a serious traffic violation .
When a person applies for a driver 's license the state checks to see if the name is on the NDR file .
If a person has been reported to the NDR as a problem driver , the license may be denied .
NOTES