ONTARIO HIGHWAY 69
King 's Highway 69 , commonly referred to as Highway 69 , is a major north – south highway in the central portion of the Canadian province of Ontario , linking Highway 400 north of Parry Sound with the city of Greater Sudbury at Highway 17 .
It is part of the Trans - Canada Highway and the National Highway System .
From its northerly terminus at Sudbury , the highway follows a wide urban arterial route for several kilometres before widening into a full freeway south of Crown Ridge .
As of July 2016 this freeway segment extends south 49 km to a point 5 km north of the French River .
From there , the route narrows to a two - lane highway to its southerly terminus , located three kilometres north of Highway 559 at Carling .
At this terminus , the roadway widens back into a freeway and changes its designation to Highway 400 .
South of this point , various former alignments of Highway 69 remain in use as parts of Highway 400 or as county or local roads .
The highway forms part of the Georgian Bay Route of the Trans - Canada Highway , which continues south along Highway 400 .
Highway 69 was first designated in 1936 when the Department of Highways ( DHO ) assumed the Rama Road between Atherley and Washago .
This short route was expanded the following year when the DHO merged with the Department of Northern Development and expanded the King 's Highway network north of the Severn River .
By the beginning of World War II , the route reached as far north as Britt ; a separate segment connected the town of Burwash with Sudbury .
However , the rationing of labour and materials due to the war effort resulted in these two sections remaining separated until the mid-1950s .
In 1976 , several reroutings and renumbering took place in the Muskoka area .
As a result , the portion of Highway 69 between Brechin and Foot 's Bay was renumbered as Highway 169 , while the entirety of Highway 103 between Coldwater and Foot 's Bay was renumbered as Highway 69 .
Until the 1980s , the highway extended through Sudbury to Capreol , but was then truncated at a junction with Highway 17 's route through Sudbury along what is now Municipal Road 55 ; this portion was subsequently truncated again in 1995 upon the completion of the Southwest and Southeast Bypasses , onto which Highway 17 was rerouted .
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s , Highway 400 was gradually pushed north to its current terminus by twinning Highway 69 , gradually truncating the southern end of the Highway 69 route .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
Highway 69 is a major highway serving the recreational areas surrounding Georgian Bay and the Thirty - Thousand Islands , as well as providing the westernmost fixed connection between southern and northern Ontario ; Highway 6 is located further west but requires the use of a ferry service between the Bruce Peninsula and Manitoulin Island .
The highway occupies the northern portion of a corridor that connects Toronto to Sudbury , with Highway 400 occupying the southern portion .
The route forms part of the Georgian Bay Route of the Trans - Canada Highway .
As of 2012 , the highway begins just north of Exit 241 ( Highway 559 ) on Highway 400 .
From here the route travels generally northward .
Between Nobel and Sudbury , there are no large communities , although numerous small communities lie adjacent to the route , including Shawanaga , Pointe au Baril , Byng Inlet , Britt , Bigwood , Delamere and Estaire .
South of Highway 64 , the highway widens into a four - lane freeway extending most of the remaining distance to Sudbury , where the divided highway ends just south of Crown Ridge ; from this point until the highway 's final terminus in Sudbury , it becomes a four - lane undivided highway with a narrow paved median .
The highway ends at an interchange with Highway 17 in Sudbury .
North of the interchange , the roadway continues north into the urban core of Sudbury as Regent Street / Municipal Road 46 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Highway 69 has undergone several major changes during its existence , so much so that the first section designated has not been a King 's Highway for 60 years and lay approximately from the current highway .
In other places , a minor two lane gravel highway has gradually been upgraded to a four lane paved freeway .
On August 5 , 1936 , the DHO assumed the Rama Road , connecting Highway 12 at Atherley with Highway 11 at Washago .
On March 31 , 1937 , the Department of Northern Development ( DND ) was merged into the DHO , allowing the latter to extend the provincial highway network north of the Severn River .
Subsequently , through August 1937 , Highway 69 was extended north to the Naiscoot River , midway between Pointe au Baril and Britt .
This extension followed DND trunk routes to Nobel , where a munitions and aircraft factory would soon provide an instrumental role in the war effort .
In the north , the road connecting Sudbury and Burwash was also assumed as Highway 69 on August 11 .
It was intended to connect these two segments over the next several years ; however , the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 halted all non - essential construction due to the short supply of labour and materials .
Work resumed during the 1950s to bridge the gap between the two sections of highway .
In 1954 , a further of roadway north of Britt was assumed as Highway 69 .
That same year also saw the rerouting of the southern end of the highway ; the southern end was moved east from Atherley to Brechin and the Rama Road decommissioned as a King 's Highway .
The new routing was longer , but gave the southern end of the highway a more significant purpose than as a bypass of Highway 11 .
The Rama Road has since been known as Simcoe County Road 44 .
Once the war ended , construction resumed on Highway 69 .
Paving and extending the road continued , with the first gap ( between Britt and Burwash ) being closed in 1951 .
French River would be linked to the provincial roadway network in 1952 .
This allowed motorists to take a far more direct route between Severn River and Sudbury , by taking advantage of a detour ( via Highway 535 and Highway 64 , through the small communities of Hagar and Noëlville ) .
The biggest gap that remained on Highway 69 was between Alban and Burwash , but this was eventually eliminated from 1952 to 1955 , when the road was finally completed to provide a third link from Southern Ontario to Northern Ontario ( the other two being Highways 11 and 17 ) .
Until Highway 69 between Parry Sound and Sudbury was completed , drivers from Southern Ontario who wanted to reach Sudbury or Sault Ste .
Marie had to travel along a rather out - of - the - way routing on Highway 11 to North Bay , and then take Highway 17 westbound into Sudbury and Sault Ste .
Marie .
The year 1976 saw big changes for Highway 69 .
The portion of highway south of MacTier was shifted onto the routing of former Highway 103 , completely absorbing that roadway into its length .
The former routing was renamed Highway 169 .
It was at this time that Highway 69 was at its longest , from Highways 12 and 400 near Port Severn to Sudbury .
Until the early 1980s , Highway 69 continued through Sudbury and into the suburban towns of Valley East and Capreol .
Although this route is no longer part of the provincial highway , and is officially designated as a series of Sudbury Municipal Roads , it is still often referred to locally as " Highway 69 North " .
Since 1989 , Highway 400 has been extended gradually northward ( at first as a freeway conversion of Highway 69 's southernmost portion prior to renumbering ) towards Sudbury , and now reaches Nobel .
From 2008 to 2012 , however , the Highway 69 designation continued to a southerly terminus at MacTier , rather than Nobel — the two highways shared a routing for 32 kilometres between Nobel and Rankin Lake Road , and then followed separate routes between Rankin Lake Road and Highway 69 's southern terminus near MacTier .
Signs were posted along this route announcing that the segment from Rankin Lake Road to Mactier would be decommissioned as part of Highway 69 in summer 2012 .
The route 's posted name is now Lake Joseph Road , although it remains part of the provincial highway system under an unsigned 7000-series designation .
FOUR - LANING Section::::Four - laning .
Although early planning for an eventual four - lane highway started in 1969 , the commitment to expand Highway 69 to a full freeway was originally made in 1991 by the New Democrat government of Bob Rae .
Although construction did commence northward from Waubaushene at the highway 's southern end , and planning studies were underway on the first 65 kilometres southward from Sudbury , the project was curtailed by the Progressive Conservative government of Mike Harris shortly after the 1995 provincial election , with construction ending at kilometre 225 in Parry Sound .
The city of Sudbury continued to lobby for the highway 's expansion , calling attention especially to an ongoing series of fatal car accidents at the intersection of Highway 637 , where a sharp S - curve in Highway 69 's route rendered the approaching intersection effectively invisible to northbound traffic .
Assisted by Rick Bartolucci , the Liberal MPP for Sudbury , the CRASH 69
( Community Rallying Against Substandard
Highway 69 ) committee of Sudbury residents campaigned throughout the late 1990s and early 2000s to have the project reinstated .
The revived construction to Sudbury was announced in 2002 by Harris ' successor ( and former MPP for Parry Sound — Muskoka ) , Ernie Eves .
In 2004 , construction began on the segment from Sudbury southwards to Estaire , and route planning studies were completed for the Estaire to Parry Sound branch .
Although the timetable has been subject to change , the four - laned route was scheduled to be completed in its entirety by 2017 .
Portions of the route will be opened to traffic as construction is completed — the 20 kilometre section south of Sudbury from Crown Ridge to Estaire was opened for traffic on November 12 , 2009 , and the segment from Highway 559 to Parry Sound opened to traffic on October 26 , 2010 .
The former alignment in Sudbury now has the street name Estaire Road , while the former route through Nobel now has the street name Nobel Road .
Work has also now been completed on a realignment of the controversial S - curve at Highway 637 .
Construction began on the new four - lane route at this location in 2008 .
Two lanes opened to traffic on July 27 , 2010 , and the completed four - lane route with a full highway interchange at Highway 637 opened to traffic on August 8 , 2012 .
The former S - curve alignment now has the name Murdock River Road , and is accessible only from Highway 637 as a local road .
Concurrently with the final stages of construction on Highway 69 , the Highway 17 freeway in Sudbury will be extended eastward to the Coniston neighbourhood along the city 's Southwest and Southeast Bypasses .
In preparation for this latter project , an interchange opened in 2008 at the intersection of Highway 17 and Sudbury 's Long Lake Road .
As the Highway 69 route passes through significant tracts of wilderness and forest land , the route has also historically seen a rate of animal collisions well above the provincial norm .
Several segments of the four - laned freeway route will include special grade - separated wildlife crossings , the first of which was completed in March 2012 .
SCHEDULE Section::::Schedule .
Although the original plan called for the four - laning of the highway to be complete by 2017 , delays in environmental assessment and land negotiations with First Nations bands impacted by the construction have led to the timeline being pushed back .
In the early 2010s , a widespread perception that the project appeared to be falling behind schedule was frequently discussed in the city 's media and by candidates in municipal and provincial elections , but the Ministry of Transportation continued to assert that the project was on track for completion in 2017 .
In March 2015 , the ministry officially acknowledged for the first time that the 2017 timeline will not be met , and indicated that the new target date was now between 2019 and 2021 .
In 2017 , however , although the ministry made no formal announcement , its annual Northern Highways Report listed a completion date within that period only for the section already under construction between the French River and Ontario Highway 522 at Grundy Lake Provincial Park , with all of the remaining route between Grundy Lake and Carling listed as " beyond 2021 " .
Once the four - lane expansion project is complete , the highway will be fully renumbered as Highway 400 .
Northern sections will retain the 69 designation until the freeway is fully connected .
As of July 3 , 2011 , the federal government delayed further work from being done on this highway while it completed a screening under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act ; although environmental assessments were already completed on individual portions of the route , a Supreme Court of Canada decision in an unrelated case , MiningWatch v. Minister of Fisheries and Oceans , created a precedent which effectively forced the federal government to rescind these approvals and reassess the project as a whole .
As of November 1 , 2011 , Transport Canada addressed a letter to the Greater Sudbury Chamber of Commerce advising that the reassessment was nearly complete .
The provincial government tendered new contracts in March 2012 for the next phase of construction , from the southern limit of the construction project near Highway 637 to just north of the French River ; this segment of the highway opened to traffic in 2016 , and the next phase to Grundy Lake is now under construction .
As of February 2018 , the MTO still has not concluded a deal with any of the three First Nations along the Highway 69 corridor .
In November 2016 , the chief of Shawanaga First Nation claimed it had a " trump card " in Highway 69 negotiations and that it would demand a casino for Parry Sound .
The February 2018 newsletter for Magnetawan First Nation contained a letter from the First Nation to the Premier of Ontario requesting a " special representative " of the Crown to negotiate .
Construction of remaining sections , in addition , could be cancelled again
should a new government be elected in Ontario ; before the 2014 provincial election , Ontario Progressive Conservative Party leader Tim Hudak expressed inconsistent views about the project , suggesting at some times that his party was committed to completing it but at other times that the project may have to be cancelled depending on provincial finances .
The two - laned segment remains unsafe and vulnerable to closure ; most recently , a collision between an SUV and a heavy truck at Shawanaga killed several people and closed the highway for several hours on February 6 , 2018 .
On August 29 , 2018 , it was reported that the new Progressive Conservative government has formally included the funding for the construction of the remaining section of Highway 69 in its line - by - line audit of the spending commenced under the previous Liberal government , rendering the future of the entire project in doubt .
As of September 2018 , construction of a 14-kilometre section between Alban , Ontario and the CN rail line at Highway 522 is still ongoing as its funding was already spent under the previous Liberal government .
The PC government , however , has not yet committed to the funding for construction of the remaining 68-kilometre section , which was estimated to be $ 200 million under previous studies .
STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
* Completed since 2011 : * Currently under construction :
* Engineering and property acquisition : FORMER SEGMENTS Section::::Former segments .
Due to the many realignments and modifications that have taken place throughout Highway 69 's history , numerous roads which were formerly part of the route of Highway 69 are now in use as parts of other highways or as county or local roads .
Some of these routes remain as part of the provincial highway system under unsigned 7000-series designations .
This includes much of the routing of Highway 400 between Waubaushene and Nobel , Highway 529 , the former Highway 169 and the following local roads : * Lone Pine Road , White Falls Road and Joe King 's Road in Georgian Bay * Lake Joseph Road in Georgian Bay and Seguin * Oastler Park Drive , Louisa Street and Parry Sound Drive in Parry Sound * Nobel Road in Nobel * Murdock River Road , Burwash Road , Estaire Road and Secord Road in Sudbury District * Estaire Road ( unsigned Highway 7279 ) , Secord Road , Old Wanup Road ( unsigned highway 7042 ) , Bentley Avenue , Old Burwash Road , Algonquin Road and Municipal Roads 46 , 80 and 84 in Sudbury MAJOR INTERSECTIONS
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Highway 69 at OntHighways.com * Highway 69 Four - Laning Detail Design * Highway 69 Expansion - engineering and design projects