EFREN RAMIREZ
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Ramírez was born in Los Angeles , California , to Mexican and Salvadoran parents .
He has four brothers , one of whom is his identical twin Carlos .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Ramirez has starred in a number of films , including Napoleon Dynamite as Pedro Sánchez , Employee of the Month with Dane Cook , Jessica Simpson , and Dax Shepard , Crank and with Jason Statham , Searching for Mickey Fish with Daniel Baldwin , All You 've Got with Ciara , and HBO 's Walkout and made cameos in Nacho Libre and Mr. & Mrs. Smith .
In 2009 , Efren starred in the comedy American Summer with Matthew Lillard as well as appearing as a contestant on MTV 's Celebrity Rap Superstar .
On July 14 , 2008 Sierra Mist released a series of commercials aimed at multicultural consumers in which Efren stars .
The first being named " Wedding Girl " followed by " Mannequin Man " and an online spot , " The Whiner , " which will be posted at the Sierra Mist dedicated site , RefreshYourMind.com Soon after the success of Napoleon Dynamite , the music group G. Love and Special Sauce asked Efren to appear in their music video " Booty Call " .
He also played Ashlee Simpson 's boyfriend in the music video for her 2005 song " Boyfriend " .
Ramírez made a cameo appearance in a 2005 episode of ABC 's George López wearing a T - shirt similar to the shirt Jon Heder wears in Napoleon Dynamite that reads , " Vote For Pedro " .
In 2007 Ramírez appeared as the judge for an acting challenge on Cycle 8 of America 's Next Top Model .
Ramírez made several cameos throughout his career .
In King Cobra , he portrayed a teenager playing a game of hide - and - seek with his girlfriend ( portrayed by Ramirez 's wife Iyari Limon ) .
They later end up as prey for the title antagonist .
In the music video for Sleazy , Pedro appears as a cameo and lip syncs André 3000 's verse .
He co - founded Powerhouse Pictures Entertainment , LLC with Chris Barrett , and they co - authored the book Direct Your Own Life : How To Be A Star in Any Field You Choose being published on June 10 , 2008 through Kaplan Publishing .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
In 1998 , Efren married actress Iyari Limon .
The marriage was later annulled .
Ramírez is also a popular DJ , who has performed worldwide and toured in over 50 cities across 5 continents .
His sets include a variety of music , from hip hop , funk , disco , to hard house .
His production company " Nocturnal Rampage " throws a recurring rave event every summer in Austin .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Film !
Role !
Other notes 2012 2014 2015 TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes Eastbound & Down
Catuey Season 2 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS