IRT THIRD AVENUE LINE
The IRT Third Avenue Line , commonly known as the Third Avenue El and the Bronx El , was an elevated railway in Manhattan and the Bronx , New York City .
Originally operated by the New York Elevated Railway , an independent railway company , it was acquired by the Interborough Rapid Transit Company ( IRT ) and eventually became part of the New York City Subway system .
The first segment of the line , with service at most stations , opened from South Ferry to Grand Central Depot on August 26 , 1878 .
Service was extended to Harlem in Manhattan on December 30 .
Service in Manhattan was phased out in the early 1950s and closed completely on May 12 , 1955
The remaining service in the Bronx was designated as part of the 8 route until it was discontinued on April 29 , 1973 .
The Third Avenue El was the last elevated line to operate in Manhattan , other than the on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line ( which has elevated sections between 122nd and 135th Streets and north of Dyckman Street ) , and was a frequent backdrop for movies .
Service on the Second , Sixth and Ninth Avenue elevated lines were terminated in 1942 , 1938 , and 1940 , respectively .
HISTORY OPERATION Section::::History .
Section::::Operation .
In 1875 , the Rapid Transit Commission granted the New York Elevated Railway Company the right to construct the railway from Battery Park to the Harlem River along the Bowery and Third Avenue .
At that time the company already operated the Ninth Avenue Elevated , which it acquired in 1871 after the bankruptcy of the West Side and Yonkers Patent Railway .
The Third Avenue El opened in 1878 , running from South Ferry to 129th Street .
The Manhattan Railway Company took control of the New York Elevated Railroad in 1879 .
In 1886 , the Suburban Rapid Transit Company commenced operations with a railway line over the Harlem River ( via a double - decked swing bridge located between the Third Avenue Bridge and Willis Avenue Bridge with the upper deck carrying the express tracks , the lower one the local tracks , and a pedestrian walkway ) from the Manhattan Railway 's northern terminal at 129th Street to 133rd Street in the southern Bronx , known then as the " Annexed District " .
The Manhattan Railway assumed operations of the Suburban in 1891 as an extension of the Third Avenue Line , and through service between the Bronx and Manhattan began in 1896 .
A 999-year lease of the Manhattan Railway was brokered by the Interborough Rapid Transit Company in 1902 , for which rapid transit services in the Bronx , of which the Third Avenue Line was a part , would eventually be coordinated alongside the new subway .
Around this time , the line was electrified .
As part of the Dual Contracts , this line was triple - tracked .
The project , which caused minimal disruption to the line itself while works were ongoing , allowed for weekday peak direction express service and increased train capacity on the line .
For New York City 's transportation system , the project was " a more important engineering feat than the building of the Panama Canal " according to the IRT .
The center track of the Bronx portion opened on January 17 , 1916 ; in Manhattan it was opened on July 9 , 1917 .
As of 1934 , the following services were being operated : * 3rd Avenue Local - South Ferry to 129th Street weekdays and Saturdays day and evenings , South Ferry to Bronx Park Sundays day and evenings , also between City Hall and Bronx Park
weekdays AM and PM peak , also Saturdays AM peak .
During late nights , a shuttle was operated between South Ferry and Canal Street connecting with trains from City Hall to Bronx Park .
* 3rd Avenue Thru - Express - City Hall to 241st St via White Plains Road Line weekday and Saturday AM peak northbound and weekday PM peak southbound , using the center express track south of Tremont Avenue .
All other hours a shuttle operated between 241st Street and Fordham Road .
* 3rd Avenue Local - Express - City Hall to Bronx Park - weekdays and Saturdays day and evening , using the center express track south of 129th Street southbound until noon and northbound afternoon thru evening .
train running in the opposite direction made all local stops .
In December 1937 , some weekday midday and evening , Saturday midday thru evening local - expresses , and all Sunday and late - night locals were extended to 241st Street , replacing shuttles except northbound in the AM peak and southbound in the PM peak .
In 1943 , Sunday evening local trains were rerouted to City Hall , with shuttles from Canal Street running to South Ferry .
On November 5 , 1946 , service to Freeman Street was stopped , and all weekday and Saturday morning peak locals were routed to South Ferry .
In 1947 , Saturday service was further reduced .
129th Street local trains were eliminated , as were morning peak thru - expresses , which were changed to local - expresses .
Saturday midday and evening local - expresses ran from South Ferry or City Hall to Tremont Avenue–177th Street , and locals from South Ferry or City Hall to Bronx Park .
On April 22 , 1950 , Saturday morning local - expresses were converted to locals .
On April 30 , 1950 , all Sunday locals were routed to South Ferry , with a shuttle connection from Canal Street to City Hall .
However , on December 22 , the line from Chatham square to South Ferry was closed , with all trains running to City Hall except weekday peak locals that ended at Chatham Square .
In addition , weekday peak service north of Gun Hill Road was eliminated , as were weekday locals to 129th Street .
On March 14 , 1952 , service south of 149th Street was reduced to weekday daytime only , with Gun Hill Road to 149th Street locals at other times .
On May 29 , 1952 , weekday midday local - expresses were eliminated .
On June 26 , 1952 , thru - expresses were cut back to Gun Hill Road .
On November 21 , 1952 , morning peak locals were cut back from Chatham Square to Canal Street , and PM peak locals were cut back from Fordham Road to 129th Street .
However , this resulted in severe overcrowding , so local service to Fordham Road in the PM peak direction was resumed on December 3 , 1952 .
On December 31 , 1953 , the Chatham Square to City Hall portion of the line was closed .
Service then consisted of local trains from Tremont Avenue or 129th Street and Canal Street in the weekday morning peak , Gun Hill Road and Chatham Square midday , and Chatham Square and 129th Street or Tremont Avenue in the PM peak .
Local - expresses and thru - expresses operated between Gun Hill Road and Chatham Square southbound in the AM and northbound in the PM peak hours .
Evening , all - night , and weekend service was Gun Hill Road to 149th Street locals .
When the El was closed in Manhattan in 1955 , the East Side was left with the overcrowded IRT Lexington Avenue Line as the only subway east of Fifth Avenue .
CLOSURES Section::::Closures .
In the 1930s and 1940s , as part of the integration of the different subway companies in New York City — the IRT along with Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit ( BMT ) and Independent Subway System ( IND)—the Third Avenue elevated and its counterparts on Second , Sixth , and Ninth Avenues came under criticism from New York mayor Fiorello La Guardia and his successors .
The elevateds were regarded as blights on their communities and obsolete , since the subways were being built or were planned to replace them .
The IND Sixth Avenue Line and the IND Eighth Avenue Line rendered the Sixth and Ninth Avenue elevateds obsolete , except for a small shuttle that served the Polo Grounds on the Ninth Avenue Line .
They were closed by 1940 and demolished by 1941 .
The Second Avenue elevated was also gradually demolished from 1940 to 1942 .
When the Second Avenue elevated was closed on June 13 , 1942 ,
the weekday and Saturday Chatham Square to Freeman Street via the West Farms line service was rerouted via the Third Avenue Line , running express south of 129th Street .
The Third Avenue elevated was kept open because it was intended to stay in use until the Second Avenue Subway was built to replace it .
Pressure against the elevated from real estate interests soon began , with the creation in 1941 of the Third Avenue Elevated Noise Abatement Committee , which consisted of what The New York Times described as " men in the real estate business .
"
The committee initially sought a decrease in train service , saying the noise from the elevated " constitutes a menace to health , comfort and peaceable home life . "
The system was closed in sections from 1950 to 1973 .
First , the South Ferry spur , which connected South Ferry to Chatham Square , was closed on December 22 , 1950 .
This permanently closed the South Ferry elevated station , which had previously served all four IRT elevated lines that originally ran in Manhattan .
The Bronx Park terminal station was closed on November 14 , 1951 , with morning peak and midday locals thenceforth running to Gun Hill Road , and afternoon peak locals running to Fordham Road .
Morning peak local - express trains started at Fordham Road , while PM peak local - express trains were extended to Gun Hill Road .
Next to close was the City Hall spur in 1953 , which started at Park Row in Manhattan and then connected with the South Ferry spur at Chatham Square .
On May 12 , 1955 , the main portion of the line closed from Chatham Square to East 149th Street in the Bronx , ending the operation of elevated service in Manhattan .
The removal was a catalyst in a wave of new construction adding property values on the East Side , while bringing increased isolation and hastened decline throughout much of The Bronx .
The head of the Real Estate Board of New York suggested that Third Avenue be renamed " The Bouwerie " to symbolize the transformation .
In 1967 , the remaining service in the Bronx was formally given the 8 route designation .
However , the 8 bullet was only marked on maps and station signs ; cars always displayed SHUTTLE and the terminal destination .
Under the MTA 's 1968 Program for Action , plans were made for demolition of the remaining line as part of the city 's effort to remove " obsolete elevated railway structures " , which also saw the razing of portions of the BMT Jamaica elevated in Queens .
It was to be replaced with a parallel line along the Metro - North Harlem Line 's right - of - way , part of the Second Avenue Subway plan .
Local residents and business owners also sought similar revival seen following the closure of the line 's sections in Manhattan .
The remaining portion in the Bronx from East 149th Street to Gun Hill Road finally closed on April 29 , 1973 and demolition started on March 9 , 1977 .
Demolition was completed by the end of 1977 , along with the condemned portion of the Jamaica Line .
Work on the planned Second Avenue Subway was suspended , due to the 1970s fiscal crisis .
In the Bronx , the Third Avenue el was replaced by the Bx55 bus making only the stops the train made .
This bus route was one of the first to have free transfers to and from the subway , with the two transfer points at the Third Avenue–149th Street and Gun Hill Road White Plains Road IRT stations , and was one of three .
The other two bus - subway transfers were from the B35 and B42 in Brooklyn , which replaced the BMT Culver Line and BMT Canarsie Line , respectively .
With the introduction of free bus to subway transfers systemwide in the 1990s , the three routes lost their special status , although the B42 terminates in a loop inside fare control at Rockaway Parkway .
In 2013 , the Bx55 was eliminated .
It was partially replaced by the Bx15 Limited , which runs to West Harlem via 125th Street , but does not extend past Fordham Plaza to Gun Hill Road .
STATION LISTING Section::::Station listing . ! width=20
% Station !
width=10 % Tracks ! width=15
% Opened ! width=15
% Closed ! width=40
% Notes !
colspan=5 merges with IRT White Plains Road Line !
colspan=5 split for Botanical Garden Spur North !
colspan=5 split for 179th Street Yard !
colspan=5 split for IRT White Plains Road Line from local tracks !
colspan=5 split for IRT White Plains Road Line from express tracks ( also called the Bergen Avenue By - pass ) !
colspan=5 split for Willis Avenue Spur !
colspan=5 merge with IRT Second Avenue Line !
colspan=5 split for 98th Street Yard !
colspan=5 split for 42nd Street Spur !
colspan=5 merge from 34th Street Spur !
colspan=5 merge from City Hall Spur !
colspan=5 split for IRT Second Avenue Line !
colspan=5 merge from IRT Ninth Avenue Line NOTES AND REFERENCES NOTES
REFERENCES
* " Crossings on Elevated Roads " , The New York Times , March 14 , 1879 , page 8 .
FURTHER READING
* Stelter , Lawrence , and Lother Stelter ( 1995 ) .
By the El :
Third Avenue and Its El at Mid - Century .
Flushing , NY :
H&M Productions . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Remembering the Third Avenue El , MTA.info * archive.org - The Third Avenue El ( ca.1950s )
* - Bronx 3rd Avenue El ( 1900 - 1973 )
* Gotham Center - The Rise and Decline of New York City 's Third Avenue Elevated Train Line * 1953 Vivian Maier photo by 59th St station , view southwards towards Chrysler Building