PLAYBOY RADIO Playboy Radio is an Internet radio station .
Playboy Radio was originally launched on XM Satellite Radio in September 2002 .
Included were programs such as Night Calls Radio originally hosted by adult film star Juli Ashton and Playboy TV star Tiffany Granath and Playboy 's Sexcetera with reporter Kira Reed .
Hall of Fame porn star Christy Canyon was brought in as a replacement when Ashton left to pursue other ventures in April / May 2005 .
The channel also featured programs such as Playboy TV 's Sex Court , The Weekend Flash and Sexy Stories .
It was XM 's first premium station — offered à la carte on top of the base XM subscription price .
Playboy Radio gained a healthy following , including a dedicated group of Night Calls fans that established a strong online presence , although many complained the station offered too little content for the monthly price .
On August 20 , 2005 , the XM Radio website informed customers that as of September 1 , 2005 , XM would no longer offer the Playboy Radio channel .
The removal of Playboy Radio brought the end of XM 's premium stations as High Voltage was made available free of charge to all subscribers earlier in the year .
In January 2006 , XM 's competitor Sirius Satellite Radio announced they were picking up Playboy Radio and would be offering more content than the XM days .
Playboy Radio debuted on Sirius Satellite Radio in March 2006 on channel 198 .
Unlike on XM , Playboy Radio was free of charge on Sirius , though subscribers could " opt - in " to receive the stream of the channel .
It moved to channel 102 on both services on May 4 , 2011 .
Following the Sirius / XM merger , Playboy Radio returned to XM on September 30 , 2008 as part of its " Best of Sirius " package and broadcast on channel 99 .
In 2010 , the Playmate Club radio show launched , featuring Patrice Hollis and DJ Colleen Shannon .
On March 9 , 2013 , Kevin Klein and Andrea Lowell announced on the Playboy Morning Show that Playboy will no longer be featured on SiriusXM and instead will become available via an online site , http://www.playboyradio.com .
Five days later , on March 14 , 2013 , SiriusXM discontinued the channel .
Since leaving the satellite radio networks , Playboy Radio has expanded its content to add over a dozen new shows .
It remains advertising free and broadcasts 24 hours a day via their web site .
CURRENT AND FORMER SHOWS Section::::Current and Former Shows .
Currently , Playboy radio offers many shows , among them : * The Playboy Morning Show , billed as " an audio version of Playboy and featuring segments by the magazine 's founder and editor - in - chief Hugh Hefner
* Swing with Holli and Michael and " Swing - Full Swap " ,
reality based shows on the swinger lifestyle
*
" The Karlie Redd Show " , featuring reality show star , Karlie Redd , of .
Karlie Redd 's popularity with television has garnered the station a legion of new listeners , making her show one of the radio station 's flagship shows in its program content lineup .
Redd 's ability to show such strength in numbers and listeners in comparison to the length of time her show has aired shows her to be a power broker at the network .
* Mansion Mayhem , with Brian Olea ( of The Girls Next Door fame ) and Playboy Playmate of the Year 2013 Raquel Pomplun .
Former hosts include Pilar Lastra .
* Sexy Beast with Andrea Lowell , dedicated to health , fitness , and sexiness *
The Panic Switch , a show on extreme sports hosted by Playboy Playmate Charis B.
* The Playboy Radio Interview , a digital version of the interview found in the magazine hosted by Playboy Radio General Manager Josh Cooperman
* Playboy 's Playbook , a show on gear and gadgets * Playboy Radio en Espanol , an old - school spicy radio show in Spanish * Just For The Articles , a dark humor sketch comedy show hosted by Joel Dovev * Funny Bunny , a show hosted by Playboy playmates and comics from Sideshow Network
* Ask The Doc Show , hosted by Chad and Sunny from Doc Johnson .
The first show ever recorded from the dildo factory .
* Head Games , hosted by Maya Jordan and comedian Allan Finn .
The show gives men advice on how to get the woman of their dreams .
PAST SHOWS * Night Calls , hosted by Nicki Hunter *
The Morning After hosted by Jessica Hall * The Playmate Hour , featuring current and past Playboy Playmate centerfolds
* Afternoon Advice , an afternoon call - in show hosted by Tiffany Granath and a rotating panel of " sex experts . "
* Playmate Club , hosted by Patrice Hollis and DJ Colleen Shannon
* Dave Navarro 's Dark Matter
*
In Bed , hosted by Jessica Drake
* Hooking Up , hosted by Simone Bienne and Kevin Klein
* Miller and Mailhouse
*
The Real Ally Show , a dark humor show on lesbians
* Sexperts , a show about sex research
*
Under Cover , hosted by Suzy McCoppin
* ForPlay , a video game industry news and review podcast hosted by YouTube personality AngelikMayhem REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Playboy Official Website * Playboy Radio on Sirius * 2011 Show Lineup