ALPHA DOG Alpha Dog is a 2006 American crime drama film written and directed by Nick Cassavetes , first screened at the Sundance Film Festival on January 27 , 2006 , with a wide release the following year on January 12 , 2007 .
Starring Emile Hirsch , Justin Timberlake , Ben Foster , Shawn Hatosy , Anton Yelchin , Olivia Wilde , Amanda Seyfried with Harry Dean Stanton , Sharon Stone , and Bruce Willis ,
the film is based on the true story of the kidnapping and murder of Nicholas Markowitz in 2000 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1999 , Johnny Truelove is a young drug dealer living in the San Gabriel Valley , in Southern California .
His father , Sonny , supplies him with marijuana , which Johnny distributes to his gang of friends , which include Frankie Ballenbacher , Johnny 's right - hand man ; Tiko Martinez , the muscle of the group ; Elvis Schmidt , a ridiculed member of the group who is indebted to Johnny ; and Jake Mazursky , a short - tempered skin head who is also in debt with Johnny .
Jake goes to his parents ' home in Claremont and makes a failed attempt at borrowing money from his father Butch and stepmother Olivia , who themselves are dealing with their other rebellious son :
Zack Mazursky , Jake 's younger half - brother who looks up to him .
That night , a fight breaks out between Jake and Johnny when the former tries to pay Johnny only part of his debt .
After back and forth escalating retaliation , Johnny brings Frankie and Tiko to go and confront Jake in person , but when they arrive at his apartment he is nowhere to be found .
At the Mazursky home , Olivia and Butch find drugs in Zack 's possession and confront him , but Zack decides to sneak out and run away from home .
Driving by , Johnny spots him on the side of the road and impulsively orders the gang to kidnap him with the intent of holding on to him until Jake pays his debt .
Wanting a break from his home life , Zack makes no effort to escape .
The group drives down to Palm Springs with plans to party for the next few days .
Johnny leaves Frankie to watch Zack and he offers Zack a chance to leave , but Zack declines , not wanting to cause any problems for his brother .
Zack stays with Frankie at his father 's house and the two develop a friendship over drinking , smoking , and doing chores around Frankie 's house .
The next day , Zack ingratiates himself with Frankie 's friends Keith , Julie , Sabrina , and Susan ; although the latter is the only one who seems concerned .
Frankie meets with Johnny and grows nervous when Johnny tells him that they could get in serious trouble for the kidnapping .
Frankie suggests they pay Zack to keep quiet about the kidnapping upon returning home ; Johnny agrees .
However , the next day after a threatening phone call from Jake , and a phone conversation from his lawyer who tells him he could face life in prison for the kidnapping , he decides the risk of ending up dead or in jail is too great to let Zack go .
Johnny calls Elvis and offers to erase his debt if he kills Zack , giving him a submachine gun .
Frankie and his friends still believe Zack will be returning home that night and throw a raucous going away party at a hotel .
Zack has a good time at the party , and later goes skinny dipping with Julie and her friend Alma , which leads to Zack hooking up with them in the pool .
The party soon ends and everybody happily says good - bye to Zack and leave Zack , Frankie , and Keith at the hotel .
Elvis arrives at the hotel and he and Frankie begin to argue when he reveals Johnny sent him there to kill Zack .
While Frankie runs off , Elvis goes inside and introduces himself to Zack .
Elvis then takes Keith out to help him dig a grave in a secluded part of the nearby mountains .
Frankie returns to the hotel and offers Zack a final opportunity to escape , but believing that he will be returning home soon , Zack prefers to wait for Elvis .
When Elvis and Keith return to the hotel , Elvis and Frankie go outside to talk .
Frankie , reluctant because of the friendship he has formed with Zack , finally relents when Elvis tells him they could face life in prison , in addition to problems with Jake and Johnny , if Zack goes free .
Meanwhile , Sonny , Cosmo ( Johnny 's godfather ) , and their lawyer confront Johnny , who stubbornly refuses to call off the hit , even when they present him the offer to spend a minimal amount of jail time with a plea deal .
Zack and the others arrive at the grave site .
Zack is not aware of what 's going on but grows suspicious when a saddened Keith tells Frankie he ca n't go through with it .
When Zack sees the grave , he begins to break down , and begs them to let him go .
Frankie tells Elvis one last time that they should n't do it , but Elvis insists on following through .
Frankie calms Zack down and proceeds to tie Zack up with duct tape .
Elvis then knocks Zack into the grave with the shovel and shoots him to death .
Despite the seclusion of the spot , Zack 's body is eventually found days later .
Certain parts of the film are intercut with scenes from interviews , conducted by detective Tom Finnegan , of people connected to Johnny and his group .
The film also makes note of the multiple witnesses — ranging from onlookers , partygoers , friends , and family members — that saw Zack in between his initial kidnapping and eventual murder , which total up to 32 .
The epilogue shows the aftermath of the crime .
Olivia , now suffering from obesity and depression , talks candidly to Finnegan about her suicide attempts and the loss that she has experienced from her son 's death .
Susan angrily confronts Frankie over Zack 's death and goes to the authorities .
Elvis is caught while trying to secure a ride out of town .
Johnny flees the city as far as Albuquerque and arrives at the house of an old classmate , who drives him to Cosmo 's house , where he enters and is not seen again .
Tiko , Keith , and Frankie are all arrested and serve their respective sentences — Tiko is convicted of kidnapping and sentenced to nine years in prison ; Keith is convicted of second degree murder for digging Zack 's grave and remains at the California Youth Authority until the age of 25 ; Frankie is convicted of aggravated kidnapping of special circumstances and receives a life sentence with the possibility of parole after 7 years ; Elvis is convicted of kidnapping and first degree murder , and is currently on Death Row in San Quentin State Prison .
Finnegan interviews Sonny and Cosmo , asking Sonny how his son was able to escape authorities for four years without help , but Sonny assures him he does n't know where his son is .
On screen text reveals that in 2005 , after over five years of being on America 's most wanted list , Johnny is finally found and arrested in Paraguay .
Johnny is in California awaiting trial , and , if proven guilty , faces the death penalty .
CAST
* Emile Hirsch as Johnny Truelove :
* Justin Timberlake as Frankie " Nuts " Ballenbacher : * Ben Foster as Jake Mazursky : * Shawn Hatosy as Elvis Schmidt :
* Anton Yelchin as Zack Mazursky :
* Sharon Stone as Olivia Mazursky :
* Bruce Willis as Sonny Truelove : * Chris Marquette as Keith Stratten : * Dominique Swain as Susan Hartunian :
* Alex Solowitz
as Bobby " 911 " Kaye : * Fernando Vargas as Tiko " TKO " Martinez : *
Olivia Wilde as Angela Holden :
*
Amanda Seyfried as Julie Beckley :
* Vincent Kartheiser as Pick Giaimo :
* Lukas Haas as Buzz Fecske :
* Heather Wahlquist as Wanda Haynes : * Harry Dean Stanton as Cosmo Gadabeeti :
* David Thornton as Butch Mazursky :
* Charity Shea as Sabrina Pope :
* Holt McCallany as Detective Tom Finnegan :
* Amber Heard as Alma : LEGAL ISSUES Section::::Legal issues .
During filming , Santa Barbara County Deputy District Attorney Ronald J. Zonen provided copies of many documents on the case and served as an unpaid consultant to the film , citing his desire to have Hollywood captured .
Zonen prosecuted Hollywood 's co - defendants and was poised to prosecute Hollywood .
After Hollywood was captured in Saquarema , Brazil , and subsequently returned to the United States , his defense lawyer claimed Zonen had a conflict of interest ; the California Court of Appeal for the Second District ruled on October 5 , 2006 , that Zonen should be recused from further involvement in prosecuting Hollywood because of his disclosure of the files and work on the film .
The California Supreme Court subsequently reversed that holding , but Zonen was replaced as lead prosecution attorney by Deputy District Attorney Joshua Lynn .
Hollywood 's attorney , James Blatt , tried to block the release of the film .
After the delay , Hollywood 's trial started May 15 , 2009 , with the defense 's opening statements saying Hollywood was not involved with the murder .
In his opening statement , Lynn described Hollywood as " a ruthless coward . "
On July 8 , 2009 , Hollywood was convicted of simple kidnapping and first - degree murder with special circumstances and was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
During its opening weekend , Alpha Dog grossed $ 6,412,775 and was # 7 at the box office .
The film closed on February 22 , 2007 after grossing $ 15,309,602 domestically , and totaled $ 32,145,115 worldwide over its six - week release .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mixed reviews ; out of 143 critics , 55 % of them were positive with the consensus being , " a glossy yet unflinching portrait of violent , hedonistic teenagers .
Bruce Willis and Sharon Stone chew the scenery , while Justin Timberlake gives a noteworthy performance . "
Yelchin was praised as " able to bring all of the conflicting emotions of Zack , " and conveying all of it beautifully .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B- " on an A+ to F scale .
MARKOWITZ FAMILY
REACTION Section::::Markowitz family reaction .
Susan Markowitz attempted suicide three times .
Jeff Markowitz elaborated , " She is so tortured by what happened that she has tried to take her own life .
The last thing that either of us want is to see this picture .
How would any loving parent feel about a Hollywood movie that glamorizes their son 's death and allows celebrities to cash in on a brutal , evil murder ? "
Nonetheless , both Susan and Jeff attended the film 's premiere , and Susan stated she was moved by Anton Yelchin 's portrayal of Zack ( Nick ) .
After the screening , she embraced Sharon Stone , who played Olivia ( Susan ) .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Boston Society of Film Critics
Awards 2007 { class="awards
" Section::::Awards and nominations .
rowspan="1 " 2nd place BSFC Award Best Supporting Actor Ben Foster
For 3:10 to Yuma MTV Movie Awards 2007 { class="awards " MTV Movie Award Breakthrough Performance Justin Timberlake Teen Choice Awards 2007 { class="awards
" Teen Choice Award Choice Movie :
Breakout Male Justin Timberlake For Black Snake Moan Young Hollywood Awards 2006 { class="awards "
Young Hollywood Award Breakthrough Performance - Male Ben Foster
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Alpha Dog was released on DVD on May 1 , 2007 .
It includes a DVD / HD DVD combo package where both forms are included in one box .
DVD sales gathered $ 12,324,535 in revenue from 743,036 units sold .
It was released on the Blu - ray format on July 13 , 2010 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack was released by Milan Records on January 9 , 2007 .
*
" Over the Rainbow " ( Eva Cassidy )
* * " Enemy and I " ( Lazarus )
* * " Bullet & a Target " ( Citizen Cope )
* * " Jake Breaks
In " ( Paul Bushnell )
* * " Caribou Lou " ( Tech N9ne )
* * " Revolving " ( Paul Bushnell )
* * " Slither " ( Tech N9ne )
* * " Liar " ( Miredys Peguero & Paul Graham )
* * " Winner " ( Paul Bushnell )
*
* " Let 's Chill " ( Mic Holden , Maya & Reneé Rogers )
* * " Dragonfly " ( Miredys Peguero & Paul Bushnell )
* * " LA LA Land " ( Tech N9ne feat .
Gina Cassavetes )
* * " Pool Party " ( Mic Holden )
* * " Never Give Up " ( Mic Holden )
* *
" At the Site / Driving to the Site "
* * " We Are The Lost " ( Lawrence Faljean )
* * " Basketball " ( Lowd ) * * " Cookie Monster " ( Paul Graham & Paul Bushnell )
*
* " Elvis Arrested "
* * " Weightlifting " ( Lowd ) * * " Marco Polo " ( Lowd & Cassie Simone )
* * " Night and Day " ( Tech N9ne )
*
*
" Say Goodbye Hollywood " ( Eminem ) * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS