BARNEY
FIFE Bernard " Barney " P. Milton Oliver Fife is a fictional character in the American television program
The Andy Griffith Show , portrayed by comic actor Don Knotts .
Barney Fife is a deputy sheriff in the slow - paced , sleepy southern community of Mayberry , North Carolina .
He appeared in the first five seasons ( 1960–65 ) as a main character , and , after leaving the show at the end of season five , made a few guest appearances in the following three color seasons ( 1965–68 ) .
He also appeared in the first episode of the spin - off series Mayberry R.F.D. ( 1968–1971 ) , and in the 1986 reunion telemovie Return to Mayberry .
Additionally , Barney appeared in the Joey Bishop Show episode , " Joey 's Hideaway Cabin " and , unnamed , in the first episode of The New Andy Griffith Show .
In 1999 , TV Guide ranked him Ninth on its 50 Greatest TV Characters of All Time list .
PRODUCTION HISTORY Section::::Production history .
Before joining Griffith 's show , Don Knotts was a regular on The Steve Allen Show , in which he played several parts .
most notably " Mr. Morrison , " a nervous man on the street character , upon which Knotts ' based the personality of Barney Fife , who himself was a hyperkinetic but comically inept counterpart to Mayberry 's practical and composed Sheriff Andy Taylor .
According to Andy Griffith , the character of Barney Fife was suggested by Don Knotts himself .
At the same time that The Steve Allen Show was ending , Knotts was looking for work .
When he saw the episode of The Danny Thomas Show featuring Andy Taylor , he called Griffith suggesting that his sheriff character might reasonably need a deputy .
Griffith liked the idea and suggested that he call Executive Producer Sheldon Leonard .
Griffith later recalled that Don Knotts ' contribution was the show 's saving grace because he was uncomfortable with the original concept to have Andy Taylor being the comic lead .
In an interview with The Archive of American Television , Griffith admitted : " The second episode was called ' Manhunt ' and I knew by that episode that Don should be the comic and I should play straight for him .
That made all the difference . "
Fife appeared on The Andy Griffith Show from the show 's beginning in 1960 until 1965 , when Knotts left the show to pursue a career in feature films .
It is explained that Fife had left Mayberry to take a job as a detective in Raleigh .
Knotts reprised the character in guest appearances each season until The Andy Griffith Show left the air in 1968 .
Barney also appeared in the inaugural Mayberry R.F.D. episode , in which Andy and Helen Crump marry .
In 1971 , the character , whose name is not explicitly mentioned , appears in the premiere episode of The New Andy Griffith Show , visiting the mid - sized city of Greenwood to catch up with Mayor Andy Sawyer , who looks exactly like Andy Taylor and shares some of Taylor 's earlier mannerisms and friendships with Fife , Goober Pyle and Emmett Clark .
Fifteen years would pass before the character was again reprised in the reunion film Return to Mayberry in 1986 .
By then , Fife had moved back and become the town 's acting sheriff .
CHARACTER OVERVIEW Section::::Character overview .
Sometimes considered a blowhard with delusions of grandeur , he fancies himself an expert on firearms , women , singing , and just about any other topic of conversation brought up while he is around .
Conversely , Andy knows that Barney 's false bravado is a smokescreen for his insecurities and low self - confidence .
In one episode , Barney brags that he knows about the Emancipation Proclamation .
When Andy calls Barney 's bluff and asks him to elaborate it to Opie for his history class , Barney becomes upset and defensive and blurts out that it was a proclamation for emancipation and leaves , irritated .
Barney is often overly analytical and alarmist about benign situations , such as the modest Mayberry crime scene .
He takes a minor infraction , blows it out of proportion , and then concocts an elaborate solution ( sometimes involving inept civilians , like Otis Campbell or Gomer Pyle ) to resolve it .
In one early episode , where Andy was briefly summoned away , acting sheriff Barney proceeds to book and lock up nearly everyone in town .
Despite his shortcomings , Barney is zealous about law enforcement , regularly spouting off penal codes and ordinances to thugs and jaywalkers alike .
An emotional powderkeg , Barney often overreacts with panic , despair or bug - eyed fear .
Barney is smug and self - confident , and is known for engaging in gossip and revealing both personal and police secrets , often with dire consequences .
Outwardly " a man of the world , " Barney is truly naïve and easily duped .
Though constantly warned by Andy , Barney falls for countless scams .
This gullibility is evident in many episodes , including " Barney 's First Car " , where he is conned into buying a lemon from a crafty old widow .
Andy mentions in the episode
" Andy on Trial " that Barney likes to smoke a cigar when he 's feeling " sporty " .
Like Andy , who was stationed in France , Barney served in World War II , although he was a file clerk who never left the United States
( he stated that " me and this other fella ran the PX library " on Staten Island ) .
Barney was nevertheless proud of his war record : " I did my part to lick the dreaded Hun , " he boasted in the " Quiet Sam " episode .
Nonetheless , Barney still has his rare moments of courage and loyalty .
Perhaps the greatest example of Barney 's courage is in the episode " Jailbreak " :
Barney , with help from Andy in tracking them down , saves a member of the state police who has been captured , apprehends the criminal and his partner by driving off with the crooks and their hostage attached in their trailer , and drives them to jail with Andy close behind with his siren wailing .
It 's one of the rare occasions when Barney actually catches the crooks intentionally and not by accident .
One major comedic source is Barney 's lack of ability with a firearm .
After numerous misfires ( usually a Colt .38 caliber revolver ) , Andy restricts Barney to carrying only one bullet in his shirt pocket , " in case of an emergency . "
However , the bullet always seems to find its way back into the gun , where Barney accidentally shoots it , usually into the floor , the ceiling , or his own gun holster .
The accidental discharge of Barney 's gun becomes a running gag .
Another gag has Barney locking himself or together with Andy in one of the jail cells , with the keys just out of reach .
Realizing that they ca n't get out , they shamelessly yell for help .
In the first season , Andy and Barney comment that they are cousins , and is also curtly mentioned several times in subsequent shows .
Genetics aside , Barney and " Ange " ( as he frequently addresses Andy , a derivation from Knotts ' real - life nickname for Griffith ) are best friends , having grown up together in Mayberry , even graduating from the same class at Mayberry High School in 1945 .
Barney maintains warm relations with Andy 's son Opie and his Aunt Bee .
In another episode , Andy finds a document indicating he issued Barney his gun in August , 1953 when he gave Barney his oath of office as his deputy .
When he 's not patrolling the streets of Mayberry , Barney spends his free time dating a local girl named Thelma Lou ( Betty Lynn ) ( whom he eventually marries in Return to Mayberry , a 1986 NBC movie ) .
Thelma Lou is Barney 's main girlfriend until his 1965 departure .
He had two other girlfriends ; the first Miss Rosemary followed by Hilda May. Barney also dates other women , in particular , an oft - mentioned but never seen Junction Cafe and Bluebird Diner waitress named Juanita .
She is first mentioned in the episode " Andy Forecloses " .
Not content to focus solely on his own love life , Barney quite often gets involved in Andy 's romantic interests .
Lydia Crosswaithe was one of the young ladies whom he and Thelma Lou tried to match with Mayberry 's sheriff .
Unfortunately , Lydia 's withdrawn , exceedingly odd personality doomed any hopes that Andy would actually date her .
Barney takes up residence in a few places including the Raleigh YMCA and Mrs. Mendelbright 's boarding house ( where she forbids him from owning either a hot plate or light bulb over 40 watts ) .
In " Sheriff Barney " we learn that Barney lives at 411 Elm Street , but it is unclear if this address refers to Barney 's own home or Mrs. Mendelbright 's boarding house address .
When not on duty , he is usually seen in a Panama straw hat and a tweed suit ( the " old salt and pepper . " )
Although the deputy fancies himself a singer , he has a tin ear , as highlighted by several episodes , most notably , " Barney and the Choir " and " The Song Festers . "
Some continuity slip - ups can be expected , as the series had several writers .
An illustration of this is with the various middle names given for both Barney and Andy .
In the episode " Class Reunion " , Barney 's middle name is Milton , though at other times he is called " Bernard P. Fife " .
In another episode , where he believes he is the descendant of Nathan Tibbs , a Mayberry Revolutionary hero , he says his name is " Barney ' Tibbs ' Fife " .
Andy jokingly says , " I thought your middle name was Oliver . "
A similar problem exists with Andy 's middle name , which was given as Jackson on his own show ( when his high school photo was shown ) , but his newborn son 's name was given as Andrew Samuel Taylor Jr. on Mayberry RFD ( during a christening ) .
ANDY GRIFFITH SHOW APPEARANCES
Section::::Andy Griffith Show appearances .
He is featured in these Andy Griffith Show
episodes : SEASON 1
* Episode 1 : "
The New Housekeeper " * Episode 2 : " The Manhunt " * Episode 3 : " The Guitar Player " * Episode 4 : " Ellie Comes to Town "
* Episode 5 : " Irresistible Andy " * Episode 6 : " Runaway Kid " * Episode 7 : " Andy the Matchmaker " * Episode 10 : " Ellie for Council " * Episode 11 : " Christmas Story " * Episode 12 : " Stranger in Town " * Episode 13 : " Mayberry Goes Hollywood " * Episode 14 : " The Horse Trader " * Episode 15 : " Those Gossipin ' Men " * Episode 17 : " Alcohol and Old Lace " * Episode 18 : " Andy the Marriage Counselor " * Episode 19 : " Mayberry on Record "
* Episode 20 : " Andy Saves Barney 's Morale " * Episode 21 : " Andy and the Gentleman Crook " * Episode 22 : " Cyrano Andy " * Episode 24 : " The New Doctor " * Episode 25 : " A Plaque for Mayberry " * Episode 26 : " The Inspector " * Episode 27 : " Ellie Saves a Female " * Episode 28 : " Andy Forecloses " * Episode 29 : " Quiet Sam " * Episode 30 : " Barney Gets His Man " * Episode 31 : " The Guitar Player Returns " * Episode 32 : " Bringing Up Opie " SEASON 2
* Episode 1 : " Opie and the Bully " * Episode 2 : " Barney 's Replacement " * Episode 3 : " Andy and the Woman Speeder " * Episode 5 : " Barney on the Rebound " * Episode 6 : " Opie 's Hobo Friend " * Episode 7 : " Crime - Free Mayberry " * Episode 8 : " The Perfect Female " * Episode 10 : " The Clubmen " * Episode 11 : " The Pickle Story " * Episode 12 : " Sheriff Barney " * Episode 13 : " The Farmer Takes a Wife " * Episode 14 : " Keeper of the Flame " * Episode 15 : " Bailey 's Bad Boy " * Episode 16 : " The Manicurist " * Episode 17 : " The Jinx " * Episode 18 : " Jailbreak " * Episode 19 : " A Medal for Opie " * Episode 20 : " Barney and the Choir "
* Episode 21 : " Guest of Honor " * Episode 22 : " The Merchant of Mayberry " * Episode 23 : " Aunt Bee the Warden " * Episode 24 : " The County Nurse " * Episode 25 : " Andy and Barney in the Big City " * Episode 27 : " Three 's a Crowd " * Episode 28 : " The Bookie Barber " * Episode 29 : " Andy on Trial "
* Episode 30 : " Cousin Virgil " * Episode 31 : " Deputy Otis " SEASON 3 * Episode 1 : " Mr. McBeevee " * Episode 2 :
" Andy 's Rich Girlfriend " * Episode 3 : " Andy and the New Mayor " * Episode 5 : " The Cow Thief " * Episode 6 : " Barney Mends a Broken Heart "
* Episode 7 : " Lawman Barney " * Episode 8 : " The Mayberry Band " * Episode 11 : " Convicts - at - Large " * Episode 13 : " The Bank Job " * Episode 14 : " One - Punch Opie " * Episode 15 : " Barney and the Governor " * Episode 16 : " Man in a Hurry " * Episode 17 : " High Noon in Mayberry " * Episode 18 : " The Loaded Goat " * Episode 19 : " Class Reunion " * Episode 20 : " Rafe Hollister Sings " * Episode 21 : " Opie and the Spoiled Kid "
* Episode 22 : " The Great Filling Station Robbery " * Episode 23 : " Andy Discovers America " * Episode 24 : " Aunt Bee 's Medicine Man " * Episode 26 :
" Andy 's English Valet " * Episode 27 : " Barney 's First Car " * Episode 28 : " The Rivals " * Episode 29 : " A Wife for Andy " * Episode 30 : " Dogs , Dogs , Dogs " * Episode 31 : " Mountain Wedding " * Episode 32 : " The Big House " SEASON 4 * Episode 1 : " Opie the Birdman " * Episode 2 : " The Haunted House " * Episode 3 : " Ernest T. Bass Joins the Army " * Episode 4 : " The Sermon for Today " * Episode 7 : " A Black Day for Mayberry " * Episode 8 : " Opie 's Ill - Gotten Gain " * Episode 9 : " A Date for Gomer " * Episode 10 : " Up in Barney 's Room " * Episode 11 : " Citizen 's Arrest " * Episode 12 : " Opie and His Merry Men " * Episode 13 : " Barney and the Cave Rescue " * Episode 14 : " Andy and Opie 's Pal " * Episode 15 : " Aunt Bee the Crusader " * Episode 16 : " Barney 's Sidecar " * Episode 17 : " My Fair Ernest T. Bass " * Episode 18 : " Prisoner of Love " * Episode 19 : " Hot Rod Otis " * Episode 20 : " The Song Festers " * Episode 21 : " The Shoplifters " * Episode 22 : " Andy 's Vacation "
* Episode 25 : " Divorce , Mountain Style " * Episode 26 : " A Deal is a Deal " * Episode 27 : " Fun Girls " * Episode 28 : " The Return of Malcolm Merriweather "
* Episode 29 : " The Rumor " * Episode 30 : " Barney and Thelma Lou , Phfftt " * Episode 31 : " Back to Nature " SEASON 5 * Episode 1 : " Opie Loves Helen " * Episode 2 : " Barney 's Physical " * Episode 4 : " The Education of Ernest T. Bass " * Episode 6 : " Barney 's Bloodhound " * Episode 7 : " Man in the Middle " * Episode 8 : " Barney 's Uniform " * Episode 9 : " Opie 's Fortune " * Episode 10 : " Goodbye , Sheriff Taylor " * Episode 11 : " The Pageant " * Episode 12 : " The Darling Baby " * Episode 13 : " Andy and Helen Have Their Day " * Episode 14 : " Three Wishes for Opie " * Episode 15 : " Otis Sues the County " * Episode 16 : " Barney Fife , Realtor " * Episode 18 : " The Rehabilitation of Otis "
* Episode 19 : " The Lucky Letter " * Episode 20 : " Goober and the Art of Love " * Episode 21 : " Barney Runs for Sheriff " * Episode 22 : " If I Had a Quarter - Million Dollars " * Episode 23 : " TV or Not TV " * Episode 25 : " The Case of the Punch in the Nose " * Episode 26 : " Opie 's Newspaper " * Episode 27 : " Aunt Bee 's Invisible Beau " * Episode 28 : " The Arrest of the Fun Girls " * Episode 29 : " The Luck of Newton Monroe "
* Episode 30 : " Opie Flunks Arithmetic " SEASON 6 * Episode 17 : " The Return of Barney Fife " * Episode 18 : " The Legend of Barney Fife " SEASON 7 * Episode 18 : " A Visit to Barney Fife "
* Episode 19 : " Barney Comes to Mayberry
" SEASON 8 * Episode 21 : " Barney Hosts a Summit Meeting " LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Calling a police officer or authority figure
" Barney Fife " has become an American slang term for gross ineptitude or overzealousness .
A notable example occurred during the Scott Peterson case , in which the defendant 's mother referred to the local police captain as " Barney Fife . "
During oral arguments for the Supreme Court case Herring v. United States regarding evidence exclusion by negligent law enforcement , Stanford law professor Pamela Karlan told the court , " There 's not a Barney Fife defense to the violation of the Fourth Amendment . " NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Remembering Mayberry *
BarneyFife.com
*
The Andy Griffith Show Rerun Watchers Club