TEST TRACK Test Track is a high speed giant slot car attraction at Epcot at the Walt Disney World Resort in Bay Lake , Florida .
The ride is a simulated excursion through the rigorous testing procedures that General Motors uses to evaluate its concept cars , culminating in a high - speed drive around the exterior of the attraction .
It closed for refurbishment on April 15 , 2012 and re - opened on December 6 , 2012 .
It is now sponsored by the Chevrolet brand instead of General Motors as a whole , which had sponsored the attraction since its opening in 1999 .
Test Track soft - opened to the public December 19 , 1998 after a long delay due to problems revealed during testing and to changes in design .
As a result , the attraction officially opened on March 17 , 1999 .
Test Track replaced the World of Motion ride .
Before the 2012 refurbishment , guests rode in " test vehicles " in a GM " testing facility " through a series of assessments to illustrate how automobile prototype evaluations were conducted .
The highlight of the attraction was ( and still is ) a speed trial on a track around the exterior of the building at a top speed of 64.9 miles per hour ( 104.4 km / h ) making it the fastest Disney theme park attraction ever built .
After the 2012 refurbishment , guests design their own car in the Chevrolet Design Studio .
Then they board a " Sim - Car " and are taken through the " digital " testing ground of the " SimTrack " .
Throughout the ride , guests see how their designs performed in each individual test .
After the ride , guests can see how their car did overall , film a commercial , race their designs , and have a picture taken with their own virtually designed vehicle with a chosen backdrop in the background .
HISTORY TEST TRACK PRESENTED BY GENERAL MOTORS ( MARCH 1999 – APRIL 2012 ) Section::::History .
Section::::Test Track Presented by General Motors ( March 1999 – April 2012 ) .
World of Motion was an attraction that was located in the current building of Test Track and was sponsored by General Motors .
When the sponsorship expired , GM was in the process of conducting lay - offs and cutbacks forcing the company to question whether or not to sign another sponsorship agreement .
Upon deciding to sign another agreement , GM wanted Disney to construct a new ride on the site of World of Motion .
The new ride would focus specifically around their automobiles , rather than the fanciful history of transportation from the pre - historic ( animal transportation ) to modern age ( automobiles , planes , etc . )
that was previously housed in the space .
In 1976 , Disney Imagineers had visited GM 's Milford Proving Ground ; the Imagineers later made a second trip to the facility as they designed Test Track .
After numerous problems encountered during the construction of the ride , Test Track soft - opened on December 19 , 1998 , but did not officially open until March 17 , 1999 , nearly two years later than planned .
After World of Motion closed on January 2 , 1996 , everything inside the ride building was removed .
Meanwhile , elevated track was already being constructed outside and behind the building , part of the high - speed test portion of the ride .
Work outside the building began in fall 1995 , while work inside the building began in spring 1996 .
The ride was scheduled to open 29 months after World of Motion 's closing , in May 1997 , but after numerous problems rose , the ride opening was delayed by nearly two years .
The cars used on the ride were designed to resemble the look of a test car that is used to go through multiple safety tests .
Over the course of the construction of Test Track , numerous problems occurred causing delays in the ride opening .
One problem that Imagineers had to overcome was that the wheels used on the ride vehicles could not stand up to the demand of the ride course and speed .
This problem was resolved but a second , more severe problem caused the ride to be delayed by over a year .
In order for Test Track to run with the highest hourly capacity possible , twenty - nine ride vehicles would be needed .
The ride programming system could only handle operating a maximum of six cars over the layout of the ride .
One by one , programmers were able to get the computer system able to run twenty - nine ride vehicles all at once .
After these problems were resolved , Test Track soft - opened to the public on December 19 , 1998 .
The ride was still prone to breakdowns and did not officially open until March 17 , 1999 .
Even after its grand opening , the ride still suffered from frequent down - time , although efficiency gradually improved .
Shortly after its opening , in an effort to improve capacity , Test Track was one of the first rides at the Disney parks to employ a dedicated single rider line .
The six - seated cars were often leaving with empty seats , as most riders arrived in parties of two or four .
The single rider line helped each car leave full and reduced wait times .
TEST TRACK PRESENTED BY CHEVROLET ( DECEMBER 2012 – PRESENT ) Section::::Test Track Presented by Chevrolet ( December 2012 – present ) .
On January 6 , 2012 , Disney Parks announced plans to renovate Test Track during the second and third quarters of the year and re - open the ride by fall 2012 .
As part of the update , Test Track 's sponsor became General Motors ' Chevrolet marque instead of GM as a whole .
The new additions include a pre - show area where guests " design " a new car for testing in the Chevrolet Design Center , then they board Test Track 's existing six - passenger ride vehicles , to be known as " SimCars " , to see how their design fares on the Center 's driving course .
The experience concludes in a renovated showroom featuring current and future Chevrolet products .
The ride vehicles were repainted and while the track was unchanged , the setting was overhauled .
On April 27 , 2012 , Walt Disney 's social media manager Jennifer Fickley - Baker released a set of concept design photos .
Within the photos , it was confirmed that the ride will have 4 main tests : capability , efficiency , responsiveness , and power .
The ride closed on April 15 , 2012 and soon later , barriers were placed along all walk - ways leading to either the entrance or exit of the ride .
Also , a musical show called " Test Track All Stars " was added in front of the former main entrance to Test Track , which closed on December 4 , 2012 .
The refurbished attraction first opened to guests during a soft opening on December 3 , 2012 .
The grand re - opening took place on December 6 , 2012 .
RIDE OVERVIEW 1999–2012 QUEUE Section::::Ride overview .
Section::::1999–2012 . Section::::Queue .
During the first part of the queue , guests viewed a sample repair and test shop .
As guests entered the queue in the welcome center they were shown tests performed on cars and parts before being released .
The queue wound by different tests for tires and car doors , an anechoic chamber for radio receivers , and an area for crash test dummies to be tested .
At the end of the queue a group of guests would be brought into a briefing room where they were shown automobile testing facilities and examples of tests being performed .
The host , Bill McKim ( John Michael Higgins ) told the guests that they would take part in some of these tests and also told the technician Sherrie what tests to set up .
Small videos of each test were shown as he spoke .
He finally told her to choose one final " surprise test , " and a video of a car crashing into a barrier was shown as a door opened for guests to enter the interior queue .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
Upon reaching the end of the second queue , guests were loaded into test cars .
Upon dispatching from the loading dock , the car was brought through an accelerated hill climb .
Next , the car 's suspension was tested over different types of road surfaces , including German and Belgian blocks & cobblestones .
Next , the car 's anti - lock braking system was turned off and the car tried to navigate a course of cones , knocking many over in the process .
The anti - lock brakes were then turned back on and a similar cone course was navigated easily .
Guests were shown a video overlay of the difference .
Then , the cars were brought through 3 environmental chambers : a heat chamber , a cold chamber , and a corrosion chamber .
The handling of the car was then tested .
It climbed a set of hills with blind turns while increasing its speed by 10 % each time .
At the top , the car almost crashes into an oncoming semi - truck before swerving out of the way .
The car was now brought to the final test shown in the briefing room : the barrier test .
The car lined up across from a barrier and began to accelerate towards it .
Just before hitting the barrier a series of flashes occurred , where a picture of the guests was taken , and the barrier opened to a track outside .
The car traveled along a straightaway into a boot - shaped turnaround over an employee parking lot , then took a lap around the building with banked turns and a max speed of 64.9 mph ( 104.6 km / h ) .
As the car returned to the loading dock , a thermal scan was taken of the guests and shown on a large screen .
Like many Disney attractions , Test Track exited into a themed gift shop featuring merchandise associated with the attraction .
Guests could also view and purchase photos taken of their vehicle on the ride or scan their Photopass to view or purchase the photos later .
There was also an area where there was a showroom of all new , prototype , or legendary GM vehicles .
POST SHOW :
THE ASSEMBLY EXPERIENCE
Section::::Post Show : The Assembly Experience .
Experience designer Bob Rogers and the design team BRC Imagination Arts , were commissioned to create the new post - show experience entitled " The Assembly Experience .
"
The Assembly Experience is a walk - through environment , giving guests the illusion that they are on the floor of a vast automotive assembly plant .
Automotive doors , seats and engines glide overhead on assembly line chainveyors , while simulated automotive die - press caused the floor to " rumble " as each automotive part was pressed .
Video monitors provided real GM workers a chance to tell EPCOT visitors how they felt about their products and their work .
2012–PRESENT
QUEUE Section::::2012–present .
Section::::Queue .
The first queue uses the same area as the old but is themed to Chevrolet 's Design Studio .
Riders pass by two concept cars , the Chevrolet Miray and the Chevrolet EN - V. After , the standby queue leads to a section where a small model car is drawn on through projections while one of Chevrolet 's employees discusses the design process for cars .
Then the standby queue goes by large touchscreens where riders can take tutorials on how to design a car .
Once at the front of the queue , riders use their MagicBand , park ticket , or receive a white RFID card called a " design key " and wait for a set of doors to open leading into one of the two design studios .
Once in the studio , riders have a set amount of time ( that depends on how busy the attraction is ) to design their own " Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle " that will be tested on the sim - track based on four criteria : Capability , Efficiency , Responsiveness or Power .
Once the time expires , riders move to the second queue which leads to the boarding area .
For Fastpass+ riders , the queue goes directly to the main design studios .
For single riders , guests use their MagicBand , ticket , or a design key to select a pre - designed vehicle from one of the four : Capability , Efficiency , Responsiveness or Power .
Once guests select their vehicle , they move to the same second queue .
While waiting to board the sim - cars , all guests must scan their MagicBand , ticket , or design key again at the gate to upload their Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle to the sim - car .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
After riders board the sim - cars and the seat belts are fastened , the car that they designed will undergo four different tests : capability , efficiency , responsiveness , and power .
In the capability test the car first connects to OnStar , then accelerates past a rain projection and skids out of control .
Next , the continuing path disappears and the sim - car turns around to speed up again .
A short time later , the sim - car makes a sharp left turn as a lightning bolt strikes .
The car then passes by a futuristic city .
Following the capability test , the results of which car designs scored the best in the test are displayed .
The sim - car then begins the efficiency test .
In the first part , the sim - cars are scanned for " optimum eco - efficiency " .
The second test performs an aero - dynamic test on the vehicle .
Finally , a " hyper - spectrum imaging " takes place .
Again , after the test is complete , the best scores are displayed .
The third test , responsiveness , is next .
The sim - car accelerates around hairpin turns with laser - projected trees .
It then enters a tunnel to encounter the 18-wheeler from the original version though it is now shown with lasers .
When the vehicle exits the tunnel , the results for the responsiveness test are displayed and all of the test icons are displayed .
The final test is power where the sim - car stops for a moment .
It then accelerates through flashing purple arches towards a wall with the ride 's logo on it .
Just as the reaches the wall , the doors split open and the car exits the building .
The sim - car accelerates along a straightaway until it crosses over Avenue of the Stars , at which point the track makes a 90 degree right turn , then a 270 degree left turn circling over an employee parking lot .
Exiting the turn , the sim car then travels back down another straightaway before making a complete counterclockwise circle around the ride building .
When the test is complete , the vehicle descends back to the loading station where the next riders board .
POST SHOW Section::::Post Show .
Guests can then use their MagicBand , ticket , or design key that has their Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle that they made in the Design Studio to see their scores from the ride , play games and make an ad in the " Chevrolet Showroom .
" In the showroom , guests can also check out some of the newest Chevrolet vehicles , take virtual photos with their custom designed cars and make Sim - Car cards with their cars using their MagicBand , ticket , or design key .
There is also a gift shop located at the exit like the original version of the ride .
Many World of Motion logos can be found throughout the attraction .
These logos are references to the old attraction , and can be found on trash bins , murals , and the attraction 's main sign .
SEE ALSO * 2012 in amusement parks * Epcot attraction and entertainment history * Journey to the Center of the Earth , the second generation of Test Track technology , located at Tokyo DisneySea , at Tokyo , Japan .
* Radiator Springs Racers , a similar attraction at Disney California Adventure themed after Disney·Pixar 's Cars .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Bibliography
* Florida , DK Eyewitness Travel Guides , 2004 ,
pg 150
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Walt Disney World Resort –
Test Track * Video ( POV ) of the new Test Track * Video ( POV ) of the old Test Track