AUTOMATIC
NUMBER - PLATE RECOGNITION Automatic number - plate recognition ( ANPR ; see also other names below ) is a technology that uses optical character recognition on images to read vehicle registration plates to create vehicle location data .
It can use existing closed - circuit television , road - rule enforcement cameras , or cameras specifically designed for the task .
ANPR is used by police forces around the world for law enforcement purposes , including to check if a vehicle is registered or licensed .
It is also used for electronic toll collection on pay - per - use roads and as a method of cataloguing the movements of traffic , for example by highways agencies .
Automatic number plate recognition can be used to store the images captured by the cameras as well as the text from the license plate , with some configurable to store a photograph of the driver .
Systems commonly use infrared lighting to allow the camera to take the picture at any time of day or night .
ANPR technology must take into account plate variations from place to place .
Concerns about these systems have centered on privacy fears of government tracking citizens ' movements , misidentification , high error rates , and increased government spending .
Critics have described it as a form of mass surveillance .
OTHER NAMES
Section::::Other names .
ANPR is sometimes known by various other terms :
* Automatic ( or automated ) license - plate recognition ( ALPR )
* Automatic ( or automated ) license - plate reader ( ALPR )
* Automatic vehicle identification ( AVI ) * Car - plate recognition ( CPR ) * License - plate recognition ( LPR ) *
Lecture automatique de plaques d'immatriculation ( LAPI )
* Mobile license - plate reader ( MLPR )
* Vehicle license - plate recognition ( VLPR ) * Vehicle recognition identification ( VRI ) DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
ANPR was invented in 1976 at the Police Scientific Development Branch in the United Kingdom .
Prototype systems were working by 1979 , and contracts were awarded to produce industrial systems , first at EMI Electronics , and then at Computer Recognition Systems ( CRS ) in Wokingham , UK .
Early trial systems were deployed on the A1 road and at the Dartford Tunnel .
The first arrest through detection of a stolen car was made in 1981 .
However , ANPR did not become widely used until new developments in cheaper and easier to use software were pioneered during the 1990s .
The collection of ANPR data for future use ( i.e. , in solving then - unidentified crimes ) was documented in the early 2000s .
The first documented case of ANPR being used to help solve a murder occurred in November 2005 , in Bradford , UK , where ANPR played a vital role in locating and subsequently convicting killers of Sharon Beshenivsky .
COMPONENTS Section::::Components .
The software aspect of the system runs on standard home computer hardware and can be linked to other applications or databases .
It first uses a series of image manipulation techniques to detect , normalize and enhance the image of the number plate , and then optical character recognition ( OCR ) to extract the alphanumerics of the license plate .
ANPR systems are generally deployed in one of two basic approaches : one allows for the entire process to be performed at the lane location in real - time , and the other transmits all the images from many lanes to a remote computer location and performs the OCR process there at some later point in time .
When done at the lane site , the information captured of the plate alphanumeric , date - time , lane identification , and any other information required is completed in approximately 250 milliseconds .
This information can easily be transmitted to a remote computer for further processing if necessary , or stored at the lane for later retrieval .
In the other arrangement , there are typically large numbers of PCs used in a server farm to handle high workloads , such as those found in the London congestion charge project .
Often in such systems , there is a requirement to forward images to the remote server , and this can require larger bandwidth transmission media .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
ANPR uses optical character recognition ( OCR ) on images taken by cameras .
When Dutch vehicle registration plates switched to a different style in 2002 , one of the changes made was to the font , introducing small gaps in some letters ( such as P and R ) to make them more distinct and therefore more legible to such systems .
Some license plate arrangements use variations in font sizes and positioning —
ANPR systems must be able to cope with such differences in order to be truly effective .
More complicated systems can cope with international variants , though many programs are individually tailored to each country .
The cameras used can be existing road - rule enforcement or closed - circuit television cameras , as well as mobile units , which are usually attached to vehicles .
Some systems use infrared cameras to take a clearer image of the plates .
IN MOBILE SYSTEMS Section::::In mobile systems .
During the 1990s , significant advances in technology took automatic number plate recognition ( ANPR ) systems from limited expensive , hard to set up , fixed based applications to simple " point and shoot " mobile ones .
This was made possible by the creation of software that ran on cheaper PC based , non - specialist hardware that also no longer needed to be given the pre - defined angles , direction , size and speed in which the plates would be passing the camera 's field of view .
Further scaled - down components at more cost - effective price points led to a record number of deployments by law enforcement agencies around the world .
Smaller cameras with the ability to read license plates at higher speeds , along with smaller , more durable processors that fit in the trunks of police vehicles , allowed law enforcement officers to patrol daily with the benefit of license plate reading in real time , when they can interdict immediately .
Despite their effectiveness , there are noteworthy challenges related with mobile ANPRs .
One of the biggest is that the processor and the cameras must work fast enough to accommodate relative speeds of more than 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , a likely scenario in the case of oncoming traffic .
This equipment must also be very efficient since the power source is the vehicle battery , and equipment must be small to minimize the space it requires .
Relative speed is only one issue that affects the camera 's ability to actually read a license plate .
Algorithms must be able to compensate for all the variables that can affect the ANPR 's ability to produce an accurate read , such as time of day , weather and angles between the cameras and the license plates .
A system 's illumination wavelengths can also have a direct impact on the resolution and accuracy of a read in these conditions .
Installing ANPR cameras on law enforcement vehicles requires careful consideration of the juxtaposition of the cameras to the license plates they are to read .
Using the right number of cameras and positioning them accurately for optimal results can prove challenging , given the various missions and environments at hand .
Highway patrol requires forward - looking cameras that span multiple lanes and are able to read license plates at very high speeds .
City patrol needs shorter range , lower focal length cameras for capturing plates on parked cars .
Parking lots with perpendicularly parked cars often require a specialized camera with a very short focal length .
Most technically advanced systems are flexible and can be configured with a number of cameras ranging from one to four which can easily be repositioned as needed .
States with rear - only license plates have an additional challenge since a forward - looking camera is ineffective with oncoming traffic .
In this case one camera may be turned backwards .
ALGORITHMS Section::::Algorithms .
There are seven primary algorithms that the software requires for identifying a license plate : * Plate localization – responsible for finding and isolating the plate on the picture .
* * Plate orientation and sizing – compensates for the skew of the plate and adjusts the dimensions to the required size .
* * Normalization – adjusts the brightness and contrast of the image .
*
* Character segmentation – finds the individual characters on the plates .
* * Optical character recognition .
*
* Syntactical / Geometrical analysis –
check characters and positions against country - specific rules .
*
* The averaging of the recognised value over multiple fields / images to produce a more reliable or confident result .
Especially since any single image may contain a reflected light flare , be partially obscured or other temporary effect .
*
The complexity of each of these subsections of the program determines the accuracy of the system .
During the third phase ( normalization ) , some systems use edge detection techniques to increase the picture difference between the letters and the plate backing .
A median filter may also be used to reduce the visual noise on the image .
DIFFICULTIES Section::::Difficulties .
There are a number of possible difficulties that the software must be able to cope with .
These include : * Poor file resolution , usually because the plate is too far away but sometimes resulting from the use of a low - quality camera .
*
Blurry images , particularly motion blur .
* Poor lighting and low contrast due to overexposure , reflection or shadows .
*
An object obscuring ( part of ) the plate , quite often a tow bar , or dirt on the plate .
* Read license plates that are different at the front and the back because of towed trailers , campers , etc .
* Vehicle lane change in the camera 's angle of view during license plate reading .
* A different font , popular for vanity plates ( some countries do not allow such plates , eliminating the problem ) .
* Circumvention techniques .
* Lack of coordination between countries or states .
Two cars from different countries or states can have the same number but different design of the plate .
While some of these problems can be corrected within the software , it is primarily left to the hardware side of the system to work out solutions to these difficulties .
Increasing the height of the camera may avoid problems with objects ( such as other vehicles ) obscuring the plate but introduces and increases other problems , such as the adjusting for the increased skew of the plate .
On some cars , tow bars may obscure one or two characters of the license plate .
Bikes on bike racks can also obscure the number plate , though in some countries and jurisdictions , such as Victoria , Australia , " bike plates " are supposed to be fitted .
Some small - scale systems allow for some errors in the license plate .
When used for giving specific vehicles access to a barricaded area , the decision may be made to have an acceptable error rate of one character .
This is because the likelihood of an unauthorized car having such a similar license plate is seen as quite small .
However , this level of inaccuracy would not be acceptable in most applications of an ANPR system .
IMAGING HARDWARE
Section::::Imaging hardware .
At the front end of any ANPR system is the imaging hardware which captures the image of the license plates .
The initial image capture forms a critically important part of the ANPR system which , in accordance to the garbage in , garbage out principle of computing , will often determine the overall performance .
License plate capture is typically performed by specialized cameras designed specifically for the task , although new software techniques are being implemented that support any I.P.-based surveillance camera and increase the utility of ANPR for perimeter security applications .
Factors which pose difficulty for license plate imaging cameras include the speed of the vehicles being recorded , varying level of ambient light , headlight glare and harsh environmental conditions .
Most dedicated license plate capture cameras will incorporate infrared illumination in order to solve the problems of lighting and plate reflectivity .
Many countries now use license plates that are retroreflective .
This returns the light back to the source and thus improves the contrast of the image .
In some countries , the characters on the plate are not reflective , giving a high level of contrast with the reflective background in any lighting conditions .
A camera that makes use of active infrared imaging ( with a normal colour filter over the lens and an infrared illuminator next to it ) benefits greatly from this as the infrared waves are reflected back from the plate .
This is only possible on dedicated ANPR cameras , however , and so cameras used for other purposes must rely more heavily on the software capabilities .
Further , when a full - colour image is required as well as use of the ANPR - retrieved details , it is necessary to have one infrared - enabled camera and one normal ( colour ) camera working together .
To avoid blurring it is ideal to have the shutter speed of a dedicated camera set to 1/1000 of a second .
It is also important that the camera uses a global shutter , as opposed to rolling shutter , to assure that the taken images are distortion - free .
Because the car is moving , slower shutter speeds could result in an image which is too blurred to read using the OCR software , especially if the camera is much higher up than the vehicle .
In slow - moving traffic , or when the camera is at a lower level and the vehicle is at an angle approaching the camera , the shutter speed does not need to be so fast .
Shutter speeds of 1/500 of a second can cope with traffic moving up to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) and 1/250 of a second up to 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) .
License plate capture cameras can produce usable images from vehicles traveling at .
To maximize the chances of effective license plate capture , installers should carefully consider the positioning of the camera relative to the target capture area .
Exceeding threshold angles of incidence between camera lens and license plate will greatly reduce the probability of obtaining usable images due to distortion .
Manufacturers have developed tools to help eliminate errors from the physical installation of license plate capture cameras .
USAGE LAW ENFORCEMENT AUSTRALIA Section::::Usage .
Section::::Law enforcement .
Section::::Australia .
Several State Police Forces , and the Department of Justice ( Victoria ) use both fixed and mobile ANPR systems .
The New South Wales Police Force Highway Patrol were the first to trial and use a fixed ANPR camera system in Australia in 2005 .
In 2009 they began a roll - out of a mobile ANPR system ( known officially as MANPR ) with three infrared cameras fitted to its Highway Patrol fleet .
The system identifies unregistered and stolen vehicles as well as disqualified or suspended drivers as well as other ' persons of interest ' such as persons having outstanding warrants .
BELGIUM Section::::Belgium .
The city of Mechelen uses an ANPR system since September 2011 to scan all cars crossing the city limits ( inbound and outbound ) .
Cars listed on ' black lists ' ( no insurance , stolen , etc . ) generate an alarm in the dispatching room , so they can be intercepted by a patrol .
As of early 2012 , 1 million cars per week are automatically checked in this way .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
The police service in Ontario uses automatic licence plate recognition software to nab drivers behind the wheels of vehicles with Ontario number plates .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
The technique is tested by the Danish police .
It will be in permanent use from the end of 2015 .
FRANCE Section::::France .
180 gantries over major roads have been built throughout the country .
These together with a further 250 fixed cameras is to enable a levy of an eco tax on lorries over 3.5 tonnes .
The system is currently being opposed and whilst they may be collecting data on vehicles passing the cameras , no eco tax is being charged .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
On 11 March 2008 , the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany ruled that some areas of the laws permitting the use of automated number plate recognition systems in Germany violated the right to privacy .
More specifically , the court found that the retention of any sort of information ( i.e. , number plate data ) which was not for any pre - destined use ( e.g. , for use tracking suspected terrorists or for enforcement of speeding laws ) was in violation of German law .
These systems were provided by Jenoptik Robot GmbH , and called TraffiCapture .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
In 2012 a state consortium was formed among the Hungarian Ministry of Interior , the National Police Headquarters and the Central Commission of Public Administration and Electronic Services with the aim to install and operate a unified intelligent transportation system ( ITS ) with nationwide coverage by the end of 2015 .
Within the system , 160 portable traffic enforcement and data - gathering units and 365 permanent gantry installations were brought online with ANPR , speed detection , imaging and statistical capabilities .
Since all the data points are connected to a centrally located ITS , each member of the consortium is able to separately utilize its range of administrative and enforcement activities , such as remote vehicle registration and insurance verification , speed , lane and traffic light enforcement and wanted or stolen vehicle interception among others .
Several Hungarian auxiliary police units also use a system called Matrix Police in cooperation with the police .
It consists of a portable computer equipped with a web camera that scans the stolen car database using automatic number plate recognition .
The system is installed on the dashboard of selected patrol vehicles ( PDA - based hand - held versions also exist ) and is mainly used to control the license plate of parking cars .
As the Auxiliary Police do not have the authority to order moving vehicles to stop , if a stolen car is found , the formal police is informed .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
The technique is proposed by Lahore Police ; if approved it will be functional by 2018 .
SAUDI ARABIA Section::::Saudi Arabia . Vehicle registration plates in Saudi Arabia use white background , but several vehicle types may have a different background .
United States diplomatic plates have the letters ' USD ' , which in Arabic reads ' DSU ' when read from right to left in the direction of Arabic script .
There are only 17 Arabic letters used on the registration plates .
A Challenge for plates recognition in Saudi Arabia is the size of the digits .
Some plates use both Eastern Arabic numerals and the ' Western Arabic ' equivalents .
A research with source code is available for APNR Arabic digits .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
The technique is tested by the Swedish Police Authority at nine different locations in Sweden .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
Several cities have tested — and some have put into service — the KGYS ( Kent Guvenlik Yonetim Sistemi , City Security Administration System ) , , i.e. , capital Ankara , has debuted KGYS- which consists of a registration plate number recognition system on the main arteries and city exits .
The system has been used with two cameras per lane , one for plate recognition , one for speed detection .
Now the system has been widened to network all the registration number cameras together , and enforcing average speed over preset distances .
Some arteries have limit , and some , and photo evidence with date - time details are posted to registration address if speed violation is detected .
As of 2012 , the fine for exceeding the speed limit for more than 30 % is approximately US$ 175 .
UKRAINE Section::::Ukraine .
The project of system integration « OLLI Technology » and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine Department of State Traffic Inspection ( STI ) experiments on the introduction of a modern technical complex which is capable to locate stolen cars , drivers deprived of driving licenses and other problem cars in real time .
The Ukrainian complex " Video control " working by a principle of video fixing of the car with recognition of license plates with check under data base .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The Home Office states the purpose of automatic number plate recognition in the United Kingdom is to help detect , deter and disrupt criminality including tackling organised crime groups and terrorists .
Vehicle movements are recorded by a network of nearly 8000 cameras capturing between 25 and 30 million ANPR ' read ' records daily .
These records are stored for up to two years in the National ANPR Data Center , which can be accessed , analysed and used as evidence as part of investigations by UK law enforcement agencies .
In 2012 , the UK Parliament enacted the Protection of Freedoms Act which includes several provisions related to controlling and restricting the collection , storage , retention , and use of information about individuals .
Under this Act , the Home Office published a code of practice in 2013 for the use of surveillance cameras , including ANPR , by government and law enforcement agencies .
The aim of the code is to help ensure their use is " characterised as surveillance by consent , and such consent on the part of the community must be informed consent and not assumed by a system operator .
Surveillance by consent should be regarded as analogous to policing by consent .
"
In addition , a set of standards were introduced in 2014 for data , infrastructure , and data access and management .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , ANPR systems are more commonly referred to as ALPR ( Automatic License Plate Reader / Recognition ) technology , due to differences in language ( i.e. , " number plates " are referred to as " license plates " in American English )
Mobile ANPR use is widespread among US law enforcement agencies at the city , county , state and federal level .
According to a 2012 report by the Police Executive Research Forum , approximately 71 % of all US police departments use some form of ANPR .
Mobile ANPR is becoming a significant component of municipal predictive policing strategies and intelligence gathering , as well as for recovery of stolen vehicles , identification of wanted felons , and revenue collection from individuals who are delinquent on city or state taxes or fines , or monitoring for " Amber Alerts " .
With the widespread implementation of this technology , many U.S. states now issue misdemeanor citations of up to $ 500 when a license plate is identified as expired or on the incorrect vehicle .
Successfully recognized plates may be matched against databases including " wanted person " , " protection order " , missing person , gang member , known and suspected terrorist , supervised release , immigration violator , and National Sex Offender lists .
In addition to the real - time processing of license plate numbers , ANPR systems in the US collect ( and can indefinitely store ) data from each license plate capture .
Images , dates , times and GPS coordinates can be stockpiled and can help place a suspect at a scene , aid in witness identification , pattern recognition or the tracking of individuals .
The Department of Homeland Security has proposed a federal database to combine all monitoring systems , which was cancelled after privacy complaints .
In 1998 , a Washington , D.C. police lieutenant pleaded guilty to extortion after blackmailing the owners of vehicles parked near a gay bar .
In 2015 , the Los Angeles Police Department proposed sending letters to the home addresses of all vehicles that enter areas of high prostitution .
Early private sector mobile ANPR applications have been for vehicle repossession and recovery ) , although the application of ANPR by private companies to collect information from privately owned vehicles or collected from private property ( for example , driveways ) has become an issue of sensitivity and public debate .
Other ANPR uses include parking enforcement , and revenue collection from individuals who are delinquent on city or state taxes or fines .
The technology is often featured in the reality TV show Parking Wars featured on A&E Network .
In the show , tow truck drivers and booting teams use the ANPR to find delinquent vehicles with high amounts of unpaid parking fines .
LAWS Section::::Laws .
Laws vary among the states regarding collection and retention of license plate information .
, 14 states have limits on how long the data may be retained , with the lowest being New Hampshire ( 3 minutes ) and Colorado ( 3 years ) .
The Supreme Court of Virginia ruled in 2018 that data collected from ALPRs can constitute personal information .
AVERAGE - SPEED CAMERAS Section::::Average - speed cameras .
ANPR is used for speed limit enforcement in Australia , Austria , Belgium , Dubai ( UAE ) , France , Italy , The Netherlands , Spain , South Africa , the UK , and Kuwait .
This works by tracking vehicles ' travel time between two fixed points , and calculating the average speed .
These cameras are claimed to have an advantage over traditional speed cameras in maintaining steady legal speeds over extended distances , rather than encouraging heavy braking on approach to specific camera locations and subsequent acceleration back to illegal speeds .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
In has developed a monitoring system named covering more than 2500 km ( 2012 ) .
The Tutor system is also able to intercept cars while changing lanes .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Average speed cameras ( trajectcontrole ) are in place in the Netherlands since 2002 .
As of July 2009 , 12 cameras were operational , mostly in the west of the country and along the A12 .
Some of these are divided in several " sections " to allow for cars leaving and entering the motorway .
A first experimental system was tested on a short stretch of the A2 in 1997 and was deemed a big success by the police , reducing overspeeding to 0.66 % , compared to 5 to 6 % when regular speed cameras were used at the same location .
The first permanent average speed cameras were installed on the A13 in 2002 , shortly after the speed limit was reduced to 80 km / h to limit noise and air pollution in the area .
In 2007 , average speed cameras resulted in 1.7 million fines for overspeeding out of a total of 9.7 millions .
According to the Dutch Attorney General , the average number of violation of the speed limits on motorway sections equipped with average speed cameras is between 1 and 2 % , compared to 10 to 15 % elsewhere .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
One of the most notable stretches of average speed cameras in the UK is found on the A77 road in Scotland , with being monitored between Kilmarnock and Girvan .
In 2006 it was confirmed that speeding tickets could potentially be avoided from the ' SPECS ' cameras by changing lanes and the RAC Foundation feared that people may play " Russian Roulette " changing from one lane to another to lessen their odds of being caught .
However , in 2007 the system was upgraded for multi - lane use and in 2008 the manufacturer described the " myth " as " categorically untrue " .
There exists evidence that implementation of systems such as SPECS has a considerable effect on the volume of drivers travelling at excessive speeds ; on the stretch of road mentioned above ( A77 Between Glasgow and Ayr ) there has been noted a " huge drop " in speeding violations since the introduction of a SPECS system .
CRIME DETERRENT Section::::Crime deterrent .
Recent innovations have contributed to the adoption of ANPR for perimeter security and access control applications at government facilities .
Within the US , " homeland security " efforts to protect against alleged " acts of terrorism " have resulted in adoption of ANPR for sensitive facilities such as embassies , schools , airports , maritime ports , military and federal buildings , law enforcement and government facilities , and transportation centers .
ANPR is marketed as able to be implemented through networks of IP
based surveillance cameras that perform " double duty " alongside facial recognition , object tracking , and recording systems for the purpose of monitoring suspicious or anomalous behavior , improving access control , and matching against watch lists .
ANPR systems are most commonly installed at points of significant sensitivity , ingress or egress .
Major US agencies such as the Department of Homeland Security , the Department of Justice , the Department of Transportation and the Department of Defense have purchased ANPR for perimeter security applications .
Large networks of ANPR systems are being installed by cities such as Boston , London and New York City to provide citywide protection against acts of terrorism , and to provide support for public gatherings and public spaces .
The Center For Evidence - Based Crime Policy in George Mason University identifies the following randomized controlled trials of automatic number plate recognition technology as very rigorous .
ENTERPRISE SECURITY AND SERVICES
Section::::Enterprise security and services .
In addition to government facilities , many private sector industries with facility security concerns are beginning to implement ANPR solutions .
Examples include casinos , hospitals , museums , parking facilities , and resorts .
In the US , private facilities typically can not access government or police watch lists , but may develop and match against their own databases for customers , VIPs , critical personnel or " banned person " lists .
In addition to providing perimeter security , private ANPR has service applications for valet / recognized customer and VIP recognition , logistics and key personnel tracking , sales and advertising , parking management , and logistics ( vendor and support vehicle tracking ) .
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section::::Traffic control .
Many cities and districts have developed traffic control systems to help monitor the movement and flow of vehicles around the road network .
This had typically involved looking at historical data , estimates , observations and statistics , such as : * Car park usage
* Pedestrian crossing usage
* Number of vehicles along a road * Areas of low and high congestion
* Frequency , location and cause of road works
CCTV cameras can be used to help traffic control centres by giving them live data , allowing for traffic management decisions to be made in real - time .
By using ANPR on this footage it is possible to monitor the travel of individual vehicles , automatically providing information about the speed and flow of various routes .
These details can highlight problem areas as and when they occur and help the centre to make informed incident management decisions .
Some counties of the United Kingdom have worked with Siemens Traffic to develop traffic monitoring systems for their own control centres and for the public .
Projects such as Hampshire County Council 's ROMANSE provide an interactive and real - time website showing details about traffic in the city .
The site shows information about car parks , ongoing road works , special events and footage taken from CCTV cameras .
ANPR systems can be used to provide average point - to - point journey times along particular routes , which can be displayed on a variable - message sign(VMS ) giving drivers the ability to plan their route .
ROMANSE also allows travellers to see the current situation using a mobile device with an Internet connection ( such as WAP , GPRS or 3 G ) , allowing them to view mobile device CCTV images within the Hampshire road network .
The UK company Trafficmaster has used ANPR since 1998 to estimate average traffic speeds on non - motorway roads without the results being skewed by local fluctuations caused by traffic lights and similar .
The company now operates a network of over 4000 ANPR cameras , but claims that only the four most central digits are identified , and no numberplate data is retained .
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society published some papers on the plate number recognition technologies and applications .
ELECTRONIC TOLL
COLLECTION TOLL ROADS Section::::Electronic toll collection .
Section::::Toll roads .
Ontario 's 407 ETR highway uses a combination of ANPR and radio transponders to toll vehicles entering and exiting the road .
Radio antennas are located at each junction and detect the transponders , logging the unique identity of each vehicle in much the same way as the ANPR system does .
Without ANPR as a second system it would not be possible to monitor all the traffic .
Drivers who opt to rent a transponder for C$ 2.55 per month are not charged the " Video Toll Charge " of C$ 3.60 for using the road , with heavy vehicles ( those with a gross weight of over 5,000 kg ) being required to use one .
Using either system , users of the highway are notified of the usage charges by post .
There are numerous other electronic toll collection networks which use this combination of Radio frequency identification and ANPR .
These include : * The Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco , California , began using an all - electronic tolling system combining Fastrak and ANPR on March 27 , 2013 .
* NC Quick Pass for the Interstate 540 ( North Carolina )
Triangle Expressway in Wake County , North Carolina
* Bridge Pass for the Saint John Harbour Bridge in Saint John , New Brunswick
* Quickpass at the Golden Ears Bridge , crossing the Fraser River between Langley and Maple Ridge * e - TAG , Australia
* FasTrak in California , United States
* Highway 6 in Israel
* Tunnels in Hong Kong
* Autopista Central in Santiago , Chile ( site in Spanish )
* E - ZPass in New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Massachusetts
( as Fast Lane until 2012 ) , Virginia ( formerly Smart Tag ) , and other states .
Maryland Route 200 uses a combination of E - ZPass and ANPR .
* TollTag in North Texas and EZ - Tag in Houston , Texas .
* I - Pass in Illinois * Pike Pass in Oklahoma
* Peach Pass I-85 Atlanta , GA Gwinnett County
* OGS ( Otomatik Geçiş Sistemi ) used at Bosphorus Bridge , Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge , and Trans European Motorway entry points in İstanbul , Turkey * M50 Westlink Toll in Dublin , Ireland * Hi - pass in South Korea
* Northern Gateway , SH 1 , Auckland , New Zealand
* Evergreen Point Floating Bridge , Seattle , and Washington State Route 167 HOT - lanes in western Washington
* ETC in Taiwan *
SunPass
In Florida PORTUGAL Section::::Portugal .
Portuguese roads have old highways with toll stations where drivers can pay with cards and also lanes where there are electronic collection systems .
However most new highways only have the option of electronic toll collection system .
The electronic toll collection system comprises three different structures :
* ANPR which works with infrared cameras and reads license plates from every vehicle * Lasers for volumetric measurement of the vehicle to confirm whether it is a regular car or an SUV or truck , as charges differ according to the type of vehicle * RFID - like to read on - board smart tags .
When the smart tag is installed in the vehicle , the car is quickly identified and owner 's bank account is automatically deducted .
This process is realized at any speed up to over 250 km per hour .
If the car does not have the smart tag , the driver is required to go to a pay station to pay the tolls between 3rd and 5th day after with a surplus charge .
If he fails to do so , the owner is sent a letter home with a heavy fine .
If this is not paid , it increases five - fold and after that , the car is inserted into a police database for vehicle impounding .
This system is also used in some limited access areas of main cities to allow only entry from pre - registered residents .
It is planned to be implemented both in more roads and in city entrance toll collection / access restriction .
The efficacy of the system is considered to be so high that it is almost impossible for the driver to complain .
LONDON CONGESTION CHARGE Section::::London congestion charge .
The London congestion charge is an example of a system that charges motorists entering a payment area .
Transport for London ( TfL ) uses ANPR systems and charges motorists a daily fee of £ 11.50 if they enter , leave or move around within the congestion charge zone between 7 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. , Monday to Friday .
A reduced fee of £ 10.50 is paid by vehicle owners who sign up for the automatic deduction scheme .
Fines for traveling within the zone without paying the charge are £ 65 per infraction if paid before the deadline , doubling to £ 130 per infraction thereafter .
There are currently 1,500 cameras which use automatic number plate recognition ( ANPR ) technology .
There are also a number of mobile camera units which may be deployed anywhere in the zone .
It is estimated that around 98 % of vehicles moving within the zone are caught on camera .
The video streams are transmitted to a data centre located in central London where the ANPR software deduces the registration plate of the vehicle .
A second data centre provides a backup location for image data .
Both front and back number plates are being captured , on vehicles going both in and out – this gives up to four chances to capture the number plates of a vehicle entering and exiting the zone .
This list is then compared with a list of cars whose owners / operators have paid to enter the zone – those that have not paid are fined .
The registered owner of such a vehicle is looked up in a database provided by the DVLA .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
In Stockholm , Sweden , ANPR is used for the Stockholm congestion tax , owners of cars driving into or out of the inner city must pay a charge , depending on the time of the day .
From 2013 , also for the Gothenburg congestion tax , which also includes vehicles passing the city on the main highways .
PRIVATE USE Section::::Private use .
Several UK companies and agencies use ANPR systems .
These include Vehicle and Operator Services Agency ( VOSA ) , Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency ( DVLA ) and Transport for London .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
ANPR systems may also be used for / by : * Section control , to measure average vehicle speed over longer distances .
* Border crossings
* Automobile repossessions * Petrol stations to log when a motorist drives away without paying for their fuel .
* A marketing tool to log patterns of use
* Targeted advertising , a - la " Minority Report"-style billboards .
* Traffic management systems , which determine traffic flow using the time it takes vehicles to pass two ANPR sites * Analyses of travel behaviour ( route choice , origin - destination etc . ) for transport planning purposes
* Drive Through Customer Recognition , to automatically recognize customers based on their license plate and offer them the items they ordered the last time they used the service .
* To assist visitor management systems in recognizing guest vehicles .
* Police and Auxiliary Police
* Car parking companies
* Hotels
* Enforcing Move Over laws for emergency vehicles
* Automated emissions testing
CHALLENGES
CIRCUMVENTION
Section::::Challenges .
Section::::Circumvention .
Vehicle owners have used a variety of techniques in an attempt to evade ANPR systems and road - rule enforcement cameras in general .
One method increases the reflective properties of the lettering and makes it more likely that the system will be unable to locate the plate or produce a high enough level of contrast to be able to read it .
This is typically done by using a plate cover or a spray , though claims regarding the effectiveness of the latter are disputed .
In most jurisdictions , the covers are illegal and covered under existing laws , while in most countries there is no law to disallow the use of the sprays .
Other users have attempted to smear their license plate with dirt or utilize covers to mask the plate .
Novelty frames around Texas license plates were made illegal in Texas on 1 September 2003 by Texas Senate Bill 439 because they caused problems with ANPR devices .
That law made it a Class C misdemeanor ( punishable by a fine of up to US $ 200 ) , or Class B ( punishable by a fine of up to US $ 2,000 and 180 days in jail ) if it can be proven that the owner did it to deliberately obscure their plates .
The law was later clarified in 2007 to allow Novelty frames .
If an ANPR system can not read the plate , it can flag the image for attention , with the human operators looking to see if they are able to identify the alphanumerics .
In order to avoid surveillance or penalty charges , there has been an upsurge in car cloning .
This is usually achieved by copying registration plates from another car of a similar model and age .
This can be difficult to detect , especially as cloners may change the registration plates and travel behavior to hinder investigations .
In 2013 researchers at Sunflex Zone Ltd created a privacy license plate frame that uses near infrared light to make the license plate unreadable to license plate recognition systems .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The introduction of ANPR systems has led to fears of misidentification and the furthering of 1984-style surveillance .
In the United States , some such as Gregg Easterbrook oppose what they call " machines that issue speeding tickets and red - light tickets " as the beginning of a slippery slope towards an automated justice system : Similar criticisms have been raised in other countries .
Easterbrook also argues that this technology is employed to maximize revenue for the state , rather than to promote safety .
The electronic surveillance system produces tickets which in the US are often in excess of $ 100 , and are virtually impossible for a citizen to contest in court without the help of an attorney .
The revenues generated by these machines are shared generously with the private corporation that builds and operates them , creating a strong incentive to tweak the system to generate as many tickets as possible .
Older systems had been notably unreliable ; in the UK this has been known to lead to charges being made incorrectly with the vehicle owner having to pay £ 10 in order to be issued with proof ( or not ) of the offense .
Improvements in technology have drastically decreased error rates , but false accusations are still frequent enough to be a problem .
Perhaps the best known incident involving the abuse of an ANPR database in North America is the case of Edmonton Sun reporter Kerry Diotte in 2004 .
Diotte wrote an article critical of Edmonton police use of traffic cameras for revenue enhancement , and in retaliation was added to an ANPR database of " high - risk drivers " in an attempt to monitor his habits and create an opportunity to arrest him .
The police chief and several officers were fired as a result , and The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada expressed public concern over the " growing police use of technology to spy on motorists . "
Other concerns include the storage of information that could be used to identify people and store details about their driving habits and daily life , contravening the Data Protection Act along with similar legislation ( see personally identifiable information ) .
The laws in the UK are strict for any system that uses CCTV footage and can identify individuals .
Also of concern is the safety of the data once it is mined , following the discovery of police surveillance records lost in a gutter .
There is also a case in the UK for saying that use of ANPR cameras is unlawful under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 .
The breach exists , some say , in the fact that ANPR is used to monitor the activities of law - abiding citizens and treats everyone like the suspected criminals intended to be surveyed under the Act .
The police themselves have been known to refer to the system of ANPR as a " 24/7 traffic movement database " which is a diversion from its intended purpose of identifying vehicles involved in criminal activities .
The opposing viewpoint is that where the plates have been cloned , a ' read ' of an innocent motorist 's vehicle will allow the elimination of that vehicle from an investigation by visual examination of the images stored .
Likewise , stolen vehicles are read by ANPR systems between the time of theft and report to the Police , assisting in the investigation .
The Associated Press reported in August 2011 that New York Police Department cars and license plate tracking equipment purchased with federal HIDTA ( High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area ) funds were used to spy on Muslims at mosques , and to track the license plate numbers of worshipers .
Police in unmarked cars outfitted with electronic license plate readers would drive down the street and automatically catalog the plates of everyone parked near the mosque , amassing a covert database that would be distributed among officers and used to profile Muslims in public .
In 2013 the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) released 26,000 pages of data about ANPR systems obtained from local , state , and federal agencies through freedom of information laws .
" The documents paint a startling picture of a technology deployed with too few rules that is becoming a tool for mass routine location tracking and surveillance " wrote the ACLU .
The ACLU reported that in many locations the devices were being used to store location information on vehicles which were not suspected of any particular offense .
" Private companies are also using license plate readers and sharing the information they collect with police with little or no oversight or privacy protections .
A lack of regulation means that policies governing how long our location data is kept vary widely , " the ACLU said .
In 2012 the ACLU filed suit against the Department of Homeland Security , which funds many local and state ANPR programs through grants , after the agency failed to provide access to records the ACLU had requested under the Freedom of Information Act about the programs .
In mid - August 2015 , in Boston , it was discovered that the license plate records for a million people was online and unprotected .
PLATE INCONSISTENCY AND JURISDICTIONAL DIFFERENCES
Section::::Plate inconsistency and jurisdictional differences .
Many ANPR systems claim accuracy when trained to match plates from a single jurisdiction or region , but can fail when trying to recognize plates from other jurisdictions due to variations in format , font , color , layout , and other plate features .
Some jurisdictions offer vanity or affinity plates ( particularly in the US ) , which can create many variations within a single jurisdiction .
From time to time , US states will make significant changes in their license plate protocol that will affect OCR accuracy .
They may add a character or add a new license plate design .
ALPR systems must adapt to these changes quickly in order to be effective .
Another challenge with ALPR systems is that some states have the same license plate protocol .
For example , more than one state uses the standard three letters followed by four numbers .
So each time the ALPR systems alarms , it is the user 's responsibility to make sure that the plate which caused the alarm matches the state associated with the license plate listed on the in - car computer .
For maximum effectiveness , an ANPR system should be able to recognize plates from any jurisdiction , and the jurisdiction to which they are associated , but these many variables make such tasks difficult .
Currently at least one US ANPR provider ( PlateSmart ) claims their system has been independently reviewed as able to accurately recognize the US state jurisdiction of license plates , and one European ANPR provider claims their system can differentiate all EU plate jurisdictions .
ACCURACY AND MEASUREMENT OF ANPR
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE Section::::Accuracy and measurement of ANPR system performance .
A few ANPR software vendors publish accuracy results based on image benchmarks .
These results may vary depending on which images the vendor has chosen to include in their test .
In 2017 , Sighthound reported a 93.6 % accuracy on a private image benchmark .
In 2017 , OpenALPR reported accuracy rates for their commercial software in the range of 95 - 98 % on a public image benchmark .
April 2018 research from Brazil 's Federal University of Paraná and Federal University of Minas Gerais that compared both systems reported median recognition rate of 93.53 % and stated significant improvement from the 81.8 % rate obtained in previous works .
SEE ALSO
* AI effect
* Applications of artificial intelligence * Facial recognition system
* Road policing unit
* Vehicle location data
Lists
* List of emerging technologies
* Outline of artificial intelligence REFERENCES