BROWN RICE SYRUP
Brown rice ( malt ) syrup , also known as rice syrup or rice malt , is a sweetener which is rich in compounds categorized as sugars and is derived by culturing cooked rice starch with saccharifying enzymes to break down the starches , followed by straining off the liquid and reducing it by evaporative heating until the desired consistency is reached .
The enzymes used in the saccharification step are supplied by an addition of sprouted barley grains to the rice starch ( the traditional method ) or by adding bacterial- or fungal - derived purified enzyme isolates ( the modern , industrialized method ) .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In traditional practices , brown rice syrup is created by adding a small amount of sprouted barley grains ( barley malt ) to cooked , whole brown rice in a solution of heated water , similar to the production of beer wort .
The enzymes supplied by the barley malt digest the carbohydrates , proteins and lipids to produce a sweet solution rich in simple carbohydrates with minor amounts of amino acid , peptides and lipids .
The solution is strained off the grains and boiled to evaporate and concentrate the liquid to produce a low water syrup suitable for use as a sugar substitute .
Such syrups are high in the simple sugar maltose and low in glucose and fructose , due to the enzymatic action of beta- and alpha amylase on starch supplied by the sprouted barley .
These enzymes produce large amounts of maltose from starch digestion and generate very little glucose or fructose in the process .
Traditional brown rice syrups will contain protein ( up to 10 % , depends entirely on the protein content of the grain used ) and therefore may be unsuitable for gluten - free diets unless they are stated to have been clarified and had the protein fraction removed through processing .
The modern , commercial preparation of brown rice syrup differs slightly .
The ingredients consist of 100 % modified rice starch generated by processing brown rice to remove the protein , hemicellulose and lipid fractions .
The modification usually involves heat - assisted liquefaction of brown rice with enzyme isolates to produce a solution full of solubilised dextrins ( derived from the breakdown of starch ) and heat coagulated protein - hemicellulose - lipid complexes .
The undesirable components are easily separated and recovered as a separate food stuff or agro - residue , leaving a solution of nearly pure , rice dextrins .
A similar product to the rice - dextrin ( modified starch ) produced by this step is often sold under the name of malto - dextrin , but this commercial product often employs corn or wheat flour as the ingredient rather than rice .
The rice - dextrin solution then undergoes a further heat - assisted saccharification step involving the addition of further enzyme isolates , which convert the complex carbohydrates ( rice - dextrins ) into a solution rich in the simple carbohydrate maltose .
The solution is then partially evaporated by boiling , until the final desired water content of the syrup is achieved .
Brown rice syrup generated by this process is protein , fibre ( hemicellulose ) and lipid free and usually consists of 65–85 % maltose , 10–15 % maltotriose , 5–20 % dextrins and only 2–3 % glucose .
The final carbohydrate mix of brown rice syrups can be controlled and adjusted by the manufacturer .
The enzymes used in the liquefaction step are usually alpha - amylases derived from bacterial or fungal bioreactors ( Bacillus species or Aspergillus species are the most commonly used microbe engines in the bioreactors ) .
These convert starch into dextrins of various molecular sizes and the modified starch end product is usually given an appropriate DE ( dextrose equivalent ) rating to signify the degree of starch conversion and the amount of reducing sugars produced in the process .
The enzymes used in the saccharification step are the amylolytic enzyme , beta - amylase ( usually derived from Bacillus species ) and the debranching enzyme , pullulanase ( derived from Aerobacter species ) .
These convert the dextrinised starch into simple carbohydrates ( sugars ) and lower molecular weight dextrins .
The modern industrial production of brown rice syrup does not involve the use of synthetic chemicals in the modification of flour and starch .
The enzymes added in processing are naturally derived from organic bioreactors using methods similar to the creation of antibiotics .
Brown rice syrup is readily available in most western Chinese grocery stores as maltose or maltose syrup , in reference to the high maltose content of the sweetener .
This product is almost always produced by the industrialized method .
Rice syrup has a shelf life of about a year , and once opened , should be stored in a cool , dry place .
Brown rice syrup is the sweetener found in some drinks , such as rice milk .
Brown rice syrup is produced on a commercial scale by several companies in the United States , Europe , and Asia .
GLYCEMIC INDEX
Section::::Glycemic index .
Brown rice syrup ( BRS ) has a glycemic index ( GI ) of 98 which is higher than table sugar ( 65 ) and about the same as glucose ( 100 ) ,
the sugar used as the baseline to measure other foods against . IMPURITIES Section::::Impurities .
Brown rice syrup and products containing it were found in a 2012 study to contain significant levels of arsenic
( As ) , which is toxic to humans .
This is presumably due to the high prevalence of arsenic in rice .
The authors recommended that regulators establish legal limits for arsenic levels in food , particularly in infant and toddler formulas .
SEE ALSO * Amazake * Barley malt syrup * Corn syrup * Glucose syrup * Yeot REFERENCES * Human Nutrition Unit , School of Molecular Bioscience , University of Sydney .
EXTERNAL LINKS