NEXT OF KIN
A person 's next of kin ( NOK ) is that person 's closest living blood relative or relatives .
Some countries , such as the United States , have a legal definition of " next of kin " .
In other countries , such as the United Kingdom , " next of kin " may have no legal definition and may not necessarily refer to blood relatives at all .
In some legal systems , rights regarding inheritance ( which imply a decision - making capacity — for example , in a medical emergency — where no clear will or instructions have been given , and where the person has no spouse ) flow to the closest relative ( regardless of the age , with a representative appointed if a minor ) , usually a child , a parent or a sibling .
However , there are people without any close adult relatives and , in such a case , decision - making power often flows to a niece or nephew , first cousin , aunt or uncle , or grandparent .
For example , if a person dies intestate , the laws of some jurisdictions require distribution of the estate to the deceased 's spouse or children .
However , if there are none of these , the estate can often be distributed to the next closest group of living relatives , whether they be parents , grandparents , first cousins , aunts and uncles , or second cousins in extreme cases .
If a person dies intestate with no identifiable next of kin , the person 's estate generally escheats ( i.e. , legally reverts ) to the government .
In cases of medical emergency , where a person is incapable ( either legally because of age or mental infirmity , or because they are unconscious ) of making decisions for themselves and they have no spouse or children , the next of kin may participate in medical decisions made by medical personnel , subject to the specific laws of the jurisdiction .
The inability of persons who are not in a legal marriage to make decisions with respect to the care of a live - in partner has resulted in many jurisdictions giving live - in partners rights equivalent to a spouse in such situations , even though most jurisdictions still do not require non - spouses to be made beneficiaries of estates ( it is improper in most jurisdictions to disinherit a spouse ) .
The inability of same - sex partners to have rights with respect to a partner 's medical care or funeral arrangements over and above those of the next - of - kin is one of the main reasons behind litigation to require same - sex marriage or its equivalent .
For the purposes of next of kin , adopted children are treated as blood relatives .
However , relatives by marriage are never considered next of kin .
ORDER OF PRECEDENCE IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Order of precedence in the United States .
" American statutes typically provide that , in absence of issue and subject to the share of a surviving spouse , intestate property passes to the parents or to the surviving parent of the decedent " .
Under the civil law system of computation and its various modified forms that are widely adopted by statute in the United States , " a claimant 's degree of kinship is the total of ( 1 ) the number of the steps , counting one from each generation , from the decedent up to the nearest common ancestor of the decedent and the claimant , and ( 2 ) the number of steps from the common ancestor down to the claimant . "
" The claimant having the lowest degree count ( i.e. , the nearest or next of kin ) is entitled to the property . "
" If there are two or more claimants who stand in equal degree of kinship to the decedent , they share per capita . "
Thus , the following conditions determine the usual order of precedence :
*
In the absence of issue ( i.e. , children , grandchildren , and on down the line ) and in absence of your parents and their issue and grandparents and of their issue ( termed " inner circle " and are usually specifically mentioned in a statute ) , relatives who are closer in " degree " to the person in question always take precedence .
For the purposes of this point , " To determine any person 's degree of relation to the decedent , begin with the decedent and follow the line that connects the decedent with the other person .
Each person that must be passed through before reaching the final person adds one degree to the total , including the final person . "
*
" Of multiple relations with the same degree , those connecting through a nearer ancestor are more closely related to the decedent . " Under these rules , an order of precedence is established .
Here are the first few in the order ( specifically , those up to degree 6 ) :
* Spouse * * Children ( in no particular order )
* * Parents * * Siblings * * Grandchildren * * Grandparents * * Nieces / Nephews
* * Aunts / Uncles *
* Great Grandchildren
* * Great Grandparents *
* Great Nieces / Great Nephews
* * First Cousins * * Great Aunts / Great Uncles * * Great - Great Grandchildren *
* Great - Great Grandparents *
*
Great - Great Nieces /
Great - Great Nephews
* * First Cousins Once Removed ( the children of First Cousins and descendants of Grandparents )
*
* First Cousins Once Removed ( the descendants of Great - Grandparents )
* * Great - Great Aunts / Great - Great Uncles * * Great - Great - Great Grandchildren *
* Great - Great - Great Grandparents *
* Great - Great - Great Nieces /
Great - Great - Great Nephews
* * First Cousins
Twice Removed ( the descendants of Grandparents )
* * Second Cousins
* * First Cousins
Twice Removed ( the descendant of Great - Great Grandparents )
* * Great - Great - Great Aunts / Great - Great - Great Uncles * * Great - Great - Great - Great Grandchildren *
* Great - Great - Great - Great Grandparents
* UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The term has no legal definition in the United Kingdom .
An individual can nominate any other individual as their next - of - kin .
There is no requirement for the nominated person to be a blood relative or spouse , although it is normally the case .
Someone who has no close family ( or who has little or no contact with their surviving family members ) may decide to list someone outside their family as their next of kin , for instance a friend or a neighbour .
The nominated person must agree to the nomination , otherwise it is invalid .
The status of next - of - kin confers no legal rights and has no special responsibilities , except as referred to below in the specific context of the Mental Health Act .
The status of next - of - kin does not in any way imply that they stand to inherit any of the individual 's estate in the event of their death .
The intestacy rules stipulate who inherits automatically ( in the absence of a will ) ; an individual can make a will and nominate other persons .
If a minor inherits ( children inherit from parents even in the absence of a will ) , then , until the child is 18 years of age , there is a " trust " imposed , which means that the executors or trustees of the will remain responsible for the assets until the child is 18 .
The term " next of kin " should not be confused with parental responsibility .
In the context of health care , patients are often asked to nominate a next - of - kin when registering with their general practitioner , or alternatively on admission to hospital .
Hospitals will then notify the next - of - kin that the patient has been admitted or if there is any change in their condition .
If the patient is unconscious or otherwise unable to state their next - of - kin , hospitals will usually list their nearest blood relative , though there are no specific rules .
Doctors attempt to seek the views of the next - of - kin when considering decision making for unconscious patients or those who lack capacity .
The next - of - kin has no power to make any decisions regarding medical care , only to advise , and can neither override the previously stated wishes of the patient nor prevent the medical team acting in what they consider to be the best interests of the patient .
Traditionally , unmarried partners ( especially same sex ones ) were often excluded by certain institutions , but this has changed in recent years due to the increase in cohabitation in the UK , and in diverse families , such as those formed by unmarried partners with children ( 47.6 % of children were born outside marriage in 2012 ) .
As a result of these social changes , the policy in most NHS trusts is to ask a person on their admission to hospital to nominate their next of kin formally .
Powers similar to next - of - kin as defined in other jurisdictions can be explicitly delegated to another person using lasting power of attorney , under the provisions of the Mental Capacity Act 2005
( note that this Act does not relate specifically to mental health and is largely unrelated to the Mental Health Act ) .
The Mental Health Act 1983 , Section 26 replaced the traditional term next - of - kin with " nearest relative " .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
In Ireland , the term " next of kin " does have a meaning with regard to inheritance law .
If a person dies intestate , that is without leaving a will , then the rules of the Succession Act 1965 apply .
Part VI of the Act — Distribution on Intestacy ( sections 66–75 ) — explains the rules of intestacy ; this was amended by Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010 .
With regard to medical law , " next of kin " is a very vague concept which has no legally defined meaning .
If a patient is incapable of making a decision ( for instance due to unconsciousness ) , the present medical ethics in Ireland is to consult with the next of kin ( in order : spouse , children , parents , siblings ) .
However , the next of kin have no general right to make decisions on behalf of adult patients .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * American National Next of Kin Registry * 1983 Mental Health Act with amendments
* 2007 Amendments to the 1983 Mental Health Act * UK Office of the Public Guardian