VISA
DEBIT Visa Debit is a major brand of debit card issued by Visa in many countries around the world .
Numerous banks and financial institutions issue Visa Debit cards to their customers for access to their bank accounts .
In many countries the Visa Debit functionality is often incorporated on the same plastic card that allows access to ATM and any domestic networks like EFTPOS or Interac .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
In many countries the Visa Debit functionality has been added to existing ATM cards to allow customers to use the card for internet and point of sales transactions .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , virtually all domestic debit card transactions are processed over the Interac network , though several financial institutions have also permitted PIN - based ATM transactions internationally over the Visa - owned Plus network .
However , Interac 's dominance has left little room for alternative debit networks such as Visa or MasterCard to be used for domestic transactions .
Several Canadian financial institutions that primarily offer credit cards through the Visa network – including CIBC , RBC , Scotiabank , and TD – currently offer Visa Debit , either through a dual - network co - branded card which also works on Interac ( CIBC , Scotia and TD ) , or as a " virtual " card used alongside the customer 's existing Interac debit card ( RBC ) .
Both options ensure customers can perform point - of - sale transactions or ATM withdrawals as usual via Interac , but use the Visa network to process online , phone , and international transactions , none of which are well - supported by Interac .
( The latter does have its own online payment service , Interac Online , which co - branded Visa cards are not eligible for . )
For the dual - network cards , in - person transactions within Canada are processed on the Interac network , but international transactions , as well as online and phone orders through Canadian retailers , are processed through the Visa network .
( However , Canadian retailers must specifically allow for Visa Debit transactions , even if they already accept Visa credit cards . )
" Virtual Visa Debit " works similarly ; customers use their existing Interac debit cards for in - person transactions ( and Interac Online ) in Canada , but are also provided with a secondary " virtual " Visa card ( i.e. card number , expiry , and CVV2 ) which can be used for online and phone transactions ( but not point - of - sale , in Canada or internationally ) .
Although Visa floated the prospect of competing directly with Interac in regards to point - of - sale transactions in 2009 , there has been no indication since 2010 that it is continuing to pursue this option .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Germany 's banking industry strongly favours its proprietary Girocard technology that can be co - branded with Maestro or V - Pay , but not with the more powerful Debit MasterCard or Visa Debit .
However , over the course of the last years , certain financial institutions such as Consorsbank and ING - DiBa have started issuing cards that are linked to a checking account but use the Visa protocols .
These cards allow free cash withdrawals on ATMs owned by other banks ; the issuing banks absorb the fees of the Visa network .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
In Greece Piraeus Bank and Alpha Bank offer Visa Debit cards to their customers as an option , having updated from the Visa Electron cards that they used to offer .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Many Irish banks , such as Permanent TSB , are now issuing Visa Debit cards to their current account customers as the domestic Laser scheme , usually co - badged with Maestro , was abandoned in the early 2010s .
ISRAEL Section::::Israel .
In Israel , Visa Debit only launched in April 2015 , and is only offered to Bank Leumi costumers , via its subsidiary , .
The bank used to issue debit cards under the Visa Electron brand prior to losing its controlling interest at credit company on 2000 .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
In Italy the first Visa Debit branded card was issued by Fineco as their default option for debit cards , starting from 2016 .
All new customers cards ( and cards due to renewal ) will be replaced by a Visa Debit card co - branded with the national Bancomat network .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
In the Philippines , major banks like BDO , Unionbank , Landbank , Eastwest , and RCBC are the major issuers of Visa Debit .
The only major competitor of Visa Debit is the Debit MasterCard .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The first debit card in the United Kingdom was launched by Barclays in June 1987 under the " Connect " brand .
NatWest followed with the " Switch " debit card in October 1988 .
Connect was later merged into Visa .
The Visa Debit card was previously known as " Visa Delta " solely in the UK .
The Delta name began to be phased out in favour of the Visa Debit branding from September 1998 .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Numerous banks issue Visa - branded debit cards linked to accounts .
Some issuing banks call their cards " Visa check cards " , Cards allow for purchases at any merchant where any type of Visa card is accepted .
Transactions are processed one of three ways .
A signed transaction is processed through the regular Visa credit network .
PIN - based transactions , including ATM withdrawals , are processed through the Visa - owned Plus , Interlink networks or other regional networks such as STAR .
Many retailers allow cash back with PIN - based transactions .
Also , in line with other credit and debit purchases , transactions under $ 25 are exempt from requiring signatures or PINs .
MARKET COMPETITION Section::::Market competition .
The competitors to Visa Debit in the debit card market are Maestro and Debit Mastercard debit cards , as well as Visa 's V Pay cards in Europe , and also local domestic debit schemes , UnionPay , debit cards from JCB Co. , Ltd. and , in a few countries , American Express .
REFERENCES