CAESAR CREEK STATE PARK Caesar Creek State Park is located in southwestern Ohio , five miles ( 8 km ) east of Waynesville , in Warren , Clinton , and Greene counties .
The park is leased by the State from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , who in the 1970s erected a dam on Caesar Creek to impound a lake .
The total park area , including the lake , is .
The park has of hiking trails and of bridle trails .
The Army Corps site states : The dam is an earth and rock fill dam high and long .
The Army Corps site is an area of .
The watershed above the dam has an area of .
Construction started in 1971 and was finished in 1978 .
The site is in the Warren County townships of Massie and Wayne .
FLOODING OF NEW BURLINGTON
Section::::Flooding of New Burlington .
The construction of the Caesar Creek Lake flooded the small farming village of New Burlington , Ohio in 1973 .
The history of the community was collected through stories , letters , and journals in the book New Burlington : The Life and Death of an American Village by John Baskin .
AMENITIES
* Caesar 's Creek Pioneer Village - a collection of over 15 log cabins and other structures that are open during special events .
The village is maintained and operated by a private non - profit organization .
The buildings include a Quaker meetinghouse , a broom shed , a pioneer school house , blacksmith shop , carpenter shop , toll house and many family houses .
*
Caesar Creek Nature Center - Adjacent to the Pioneer Village , the nature center features exhibits on the area 's cultural and natural history .
Nature education programs are offered year round , including campouts , hikes and a maple syrup program .
SOURCES
* John Baskin .
New Burlington : The Life and Death of an American Village .
New York :
W. W. Norton , 1976 .
* Ohio .
Department of Natural Resources .
Division of Geological Survey .
Excursion to Caesar Creek State Park in Warren County , Ohio .
By Douglas L. Shrake .
Geological Survey Guidebook No . 12 .
Columbus , Ohio :
The Department , 1992
* United States Department of Agriculture .
Natural Resources Conservation Service .
Caesar Creek Watershed , Miami Valley Resource Conservation and Development Area : Clinton , Greene , and Warren Counties , Ohio .
Fort Worth , Texas :
The Service , 1995 .
* United States .
Department of the Army .
Corps of Engineers .
Louisville District .
Final Updated Environmental Impact Statement :
Caesar Creek Lake Project , Ohio .
Louisville , Kentucky :
The Corps , 1974 .
*
Art Weber .
Ohio State Parks .
Saginaw , Michigan : Glovebox Guidebooks , 1995 . .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Caesar Creek State Park Nature Center Association of Caesar Creek
* Caesar Creek State Park Ohio Department of Natural Resources *
Caesar Creek State Park Map Ohio Department of Natural Resources
*
Caesar Creek Lake ODNR Division of Wildlife
*
Caesar Creek Gorge State Nature Preserve ODNR Division of Natural Areas and Preserves
* Caesar Creek Lake Louisville District , U.S. Army Corps of Engineers