ANDREA GAIL F /
V Andrea Gail was a private fishing vessel that was lost at sea with all hands during the " Perfect Storm " of 1991 .
The vessel and her six - man crew had been fishing the North Atlantic Ocean out of Gloucester , Massachusetts .
Her last reported position was northeast of Sable Island on October 28 , 1991 .
The story of Andrea Gail and her crew was the basis of the 1997 book The Perfect Storm by Sebastian Junger , and a 2000 film adaptation of the same name .
F / V ANDREA GAIL Section::::F
/ V Andrea Gail .
Andrea Gail was a commercial fishing vessel constructed in Panama City , Florida in 1978 , and owned by Robert Brown .
Her home port was Marblehead , Massachusetts .
She also sailed from Gloucester , Massachusetts , where she would offload her catch and reload food and stores for her next run .
LOST AT
SEA
FINAL
VOYAGE
Section::::Lost at sea .
Section::::Final voyage .
Andrea Gail began her final voyage departing from Gloucester Harbor , Massachusetts , on September 20 , 1991 , bound for the Grand Banks of Newfoundland off the coast of eastern Canada .
After poor fishing , Captain Frank W. " Billy " Tyne Jr. headed east to the Flemish Cap where he believed they would have better luck .
Despite weather reports warning of dangerous conditions , Tyne set course for home on October 26–27 .
The ship 's ice machine was malfunctioning and would not have been able to maintain the catch for much longer .
DISAPPEARANCE Section::::Disappearance .
The last reported transmission from Andrea Gail was at about 6:00 p.m. on October 28 , 1991 .
Captain Tyne radioed Linda Greenlaw , Captain of the Hannah Boden , owned by the same company , and gave his coordinates as , or about east of Sable Island .
He also gave a weather report indicating seas and wind gusts up to 80 knots ( ) .
Tyne 's final recorded words were " She 's comin ' on , boys , and she 's comin ' on strong . "
Junger reported that the storm created waves in excess of in height , but ocean buoy monitors recorded a peak wave height of , and so waves of were deemed " unlikely " by Science Daily .
However , data from a series of weather buoys in the general vicinity of the vessel 's last known location recorded peak wave action exceeding in height from October 28 through 30 , 1991 .
SEARCH Section::::Search .
On October 30 , 1991 , the vessel was reported overdue .
An extensive air and land search was launched by the 106th Rescue Wing from the New York Air National Guard , United States Coast Guard and Canadian Coast Guard forces .
The search would eventually cover over .
On November 6 , 1991 , Andrea Gail 's emergency position - indicating radio beacon ( EPIRB ) was discovered washed up on the shore of Sable Island in Nova Scotia .
The EPIRB was designed to automatically send out a distress signal upon contact with sea water , but the Canadian Coast Guard personnel who found the beacon " did not conclusively verify whether the control switch was in the on or off position " .
Authorities called off the search for the missing vessel on November 9 , 1991 , due to the low probability of crew survival .
Fuel drums , a fuel tank , the EPIRB , an empty life raft , and some other flotsam were the only wreckage ever found .
The ship was presumed lost at sea somewhere along the continental shelf near Sable Island .
CREW Section::::Crew .
All six of the crew were lost at sea .
* Frank William " Billy " Tyne Jr. ( Captain ) , aged 37 Gloucester , Massachusetts
* Michael " Bugsy " Moran , aged 36 Bradenton Beach , Florida
* Dale R. " Murph " Murphy , aged 30 Bradenton Beach , Florida * Alfred Pierre , aged 32 New York City * Robert F. " Bobby " Shatford , aged 30 Gloucester , Massachusetts * David " Sully " Sullivan , aged 29 New York City IN THE MEDIA
* The story of Andrea Gail and her crew inspired Sebastian Junger 's 1997 book , The Perfect Storm , and a 2000 film of the same name .
A ship similar to Andrea Gail , Lady Grace , was used during the filming of the movie .
* An illustrated nonfiction book about the disaster for middle school - age youth , The Wreck of the Andrea Gail : Three Days of a Perfect Storm by Gillian Houghton , was published in 2003 .
* A model of Andrea Gail , built by Paul Gran , is on display at the Cape Ann Museum in Gloucester .
FOOTNOTES REFERENCES
* U.S. Investigation into the Disappearance of the Andrea Gail , U.S. Coast Guard * Junger , Sebastian .
The Perfect Storm : A True Story of Men Against the Sea .
HarperCollins , 1997 .
* Lost at sea report , City of Gloucester Government EXTERNAL LINKS * Andrea Gail MFV on the wrecksite
* Image of the pilot house
* Image of the refrigerated storage area *