TERMINAL VALUE ( FINANCE )
In finance , the terminal value ( continuing value or horizon value ) of a security is the present value at a future point in time of all future cash flows when we expect stable growth rate forever .
It is most often used in multi - stage discounted cash flow analysis , and allows for the limitation of cash flow projections to a several - year period .
Forecasting results beyond such a period is impractical and exposes such projections to a variety of risks limiting their validity , primarily the great uncertainty involved in predicting industry and macroeconomic conditions beyond a few years .
Thus , the terminal value allows for the inclusion of the value of future cash flows occurring beyond a several - year projection period while satisfactorily mitigating many of the problems of valuing such cash flows .
The terminal value is calculated in accordance with a stream of projected future free cash flows in discounted cash flow analysis .
For whole - company valuation purposes , there are two methodologies used to calculate the Terminal Value .
PERPETUITY GROWTH MODEL Section::::Perpetuity Growth Model .
The Perpetuity Growth Model accounts for the value of free cash flows that continue growing at an assumed constant rate in perpetuity .
Also , the projected free cash flow in the first year beyond the projection horizon ( N+1 ) is used .
This value is divided by the discount rate minus the assumed perpetuity growth rate :
* D = Cash flows at a future point in time which is immediately prior to N+1 , or at the end of period N , which is the final year in the projection period .
* k = Discount Rate .
* g = Growth Rate .
T is the value of future cash flows .
This equation is a perpetuity , which uses a geometric series to determine the value of a series of growing future cash flows .
To determine the present value of the terminal value , one must discount the Terminal Value at T by a factor equal to the number of years included in the initial projection period .
If N is the 5th and final year in this period , then the Terminal Value is divided by ( 1 + k ) .
The Present Value of the Terminal Value is then added to the PV of the free cash flows in the projection period to arrive at an implied enterprise value .
If the growth rate in perpetuity is not constant , a multiple - stage terminal value is calculated .
The terminal growth rate can be negative , if the company in question is assumed to disappear in the future .
EXIT MULTIPLE APPROACH Section::::Exit Multiple Approach .
The Exit or Terminal Multiple Approach assumes a business will be sold at the end of the projection period .
Valuation analytics are determined for various operating statistics using comparable acquisitions .
A frequently used terminal multiple is Enterprise Value / EBITDA or EV / EBITDA .
The analysis of comparable acquisitions will indicate an appropriate range of multiples to use .
The multiple is then applied to the projected EBITDA in Year N , which is the final year in the projection period .
This provides a future value at the end of Year N.
The terminal value is then discounted using a factor equal to the number of years in the projection period .
If N is the 5th and final year in this period , then the Terminal Value is divided by ( 1+k ) .
The Present Value of the Terminal Value is then added to the PV of the free cash flows in the projection period to arrive at an implied Enterprise Value .
Note that if publicly traded comparable company multiples must be used , the resulting implied enterprise value will not reflect a control premium .
Depending on the purposes of the valuation , this may not provide an appropriate reference range .
COMPARISON OF METHODOLOGIES Section::::Comparison of methodologies .
There are several important differences between the two approaches .
The Perpetuity Growth Model has several inherent characteristics that make it intellectually challenging .
Because both the discount rate and growth rate are assumptions , inaccuracies in one or both inputs can provide an improper value .
The difference between the two values in the denominator determines the terminal value , and even with appropriate values for both , the denominator may result in a multiplying effect that does not estimate an accurate terminal value .
Also , the perpetuity growth rate assumes that free cash flow will continue to grow at a constant rate into perpetuity .
Consider that a perpetuity growth rate exceeding the annualized growth of the S&P 500 and/or the U.S. GDP implies that the company 's cash flow will outpace and eventually absorb these rather large values .
Perhaps the greatest disadvantage to the Perpetuity Growth Model is that it lacks the market - driven analytics employed in the Exit Multiple Approach .
Such analytics result in a terminal value based on operating statistics present in a proven market for similar transactions .
This provides a certain level of confidence that the valuation accurately depicts how the market would value the company in reality .
On the other hand , the Exit Multiple approach must be used carefully , because multiples change over time .
Simply applying the current market multiple ignores the possibility that current multiples may be high or low by historical standards .
In addition , it is important to note that at a given discount rate , any exit multiple implies a terminal growth rate and conversely any terminal growth rate implies an exit multiple .
When using the Exit Multiple approach it is often helpful to calculate the implied terminal growth rate , because a multiple that may appear reasonable at first glance can actually imply a terminal growth rate that is unrealistic .
In practice , academics tend to use the Perpetuity Growth Model , while investment bankers favor the Exit Multiple approach .
Ultimately , these methods are two different ways of saying the same thing .
For both terminal value approaches , it is essential to use a range of appropriate discount rates , exit multiples and perpetuity growth rates in order to establish a functional valuation range .
SEE ALSO * Intrinsic Value * Asset retirement obligation
* Business valuation
* Cost of capital * Net present value * Terminal value ( accounting ) EXTERNAL LINKS AND REFERENCES * The comprehensive guide on How to Calculate Terminal Value
* Closure in Valuation :
Estimating Terminal Value , Prof. Aswath Damodaran , Stern School of Business
* Estimating Capital Expenditures and Depreciation Expense in the Direct Capitalization Method http://www.willamette.com/insights_journal/16/winter_2016_3.pdf