SIERRA MIST Sierra Mist is a lemon - lime flavored soft drink line .
Originally introduced by PepsiCo in 1999 , it was eventually made available in all United States markets by 2003 .
The drink was rebranded as Mist Twst in 2016 , although it reverted to Sierra Mist in 2018 .
The brand is aimed at competing with The Coca - Cola Company 's Sprite brand and Dr Pepper Snapple Group 's 7 Up .
HISTORY Section::::History .
PepsiCo began test - marketing potential lemon - lime sodas in 1998 , introducing a formulation known as Storm that never made it past the test - marketing stage .
Prior lemon - lime sodas from PepsiCo included Teem , which had been introduced in 1960 but discontinued in 1984 , when they introduced the Slice line of fruit - flavored sodas , which launched with a lemon - lime flavor .
The company introduced Sierra Mist in 1999 .
The selection of the name " Sierra Mist " was based on favorable market research involving 2,000 people from over 1,000 possible names .
" Sierra " had previously been a proposed name for what became the original ( 10 % juice - formula , lemon - lime ) Slice in 1984 .
Diet Sierra Mist was also introduced in 2000 , and sales of both diet and original Sierra Mist totaled $ 100 million in its first year of production .
Many PepsiCo bottlers continued to bottle 7 Up until existing agreements with Cadbury Schweppes expired in January 2003 , at which point its distribution was expanded nationwide in the U.S.
In 2004 the beverage had surpassed 7 Up on the basis of annual retail sales , placing it as the 2nd most - purchased lemon - lime soft drink in the U.S. ( Sprite being the 1st ) .
In 2005 , Diet Sierra Mist was renamed Sierra Mist Free , intended as a descriptor of the beverage being " free of " sugar , calories , carbohydrates and caffeine .
This name change was reverted to the original name , Diet Sierra Mist , in November 2008 .
In late 2006 , PepsiCo introduced Sierra Mist Cranberry Splash .
It was available only during the Winter holiday season .
Cranberry Splash returned in the fall and winter of 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 along with Diet Sierra Mist Cranberry Splash .
In May 2007 , Sierra Mist Lemon Squeeze was introduced .
This limited edition featured a higher concentration of lemon flavor and was only available through September 2007 .
Sierra Mist can and bottle labels were redesigned as a part of PepsiCo 's broader redesign of its core carbonated soft drink brands in 2008 , with Sierra Mist Free reverting to the Diet Sierra Mist name in the process .
The Sierra Mist logo was later redesigned again in March 2010 with a typeface similar to that of the current Pepsi design .
Sierra Mist underwent a more significant rebranding in August 2010 , in response to shifting consumer preferences towards products made with " natural " ingredients – according to beverage industry and general news media reporting at the time .
On August 29 , 2010 , Sierra Mist was replaced with Sierra Mist Natural , although the original Sierra Mist still remained stocked in markets until late 2010 .
Updated logos , bottle labeling and can designs were also implemented at the same time .
At this time , the Sierra Mist drink was reformulated , sweetened with sucrose instead of high - fructose corn syrup .
In Fall 2014 , Stevia was added as an adjunctive sweetener .
On December 18 , 2015 , Pepsi announced that the name of Sierra Mist would be changing to Mist Twst at an unknown point in spring 2016 , in line with Pepsico 's sponsorship agreement with the NBA , which replaced Coca - Cola 's previous sponsorship and its broad campaign with the league for Sprite .
The name change was officially made in late March 2016 .
In Summer 2018 , the Mist Twst brand reverted to Sierra Mist .
COMPOSITION
ORIGINAL FORMULA Section::::Composition .
Section::::Original formula .
From 2000 until 2010 Sierra Mist was sweetened with high - fructose corn syrup , and its other ingredients were listed as carbonated water , citric acid , natural flavors , potassium benzoate , potassium citrate , ascorbic acid and calcium disodium EDTA .
Diet Sierra Mist is sweetened with aspartame and acesulfame potassium .
SIERRA MIST NATURAL Section::::Sierra Mist Natural .
In August 2010 PepsiCo replaced the original Sierra Mist formula with Sierra Mist Natural , which is sweetened with sucrose ( table sugar ) instead of high fructose corn syrup .
The new formulation contains four other ingredients : carbonated water , citric acid , natural flavor , potassium citrate , and a preservative .
ADDITION OF STEVIA Section::::Addition of stevia .
By 2013 , Sierra Mist Natural reverted in name to simply Sierra Mist , and in 2014 the formulation was changed to use a combination of sucrose and stevia as sweeteners , in an effort to cut calories in drinks .
The change proved unpopular , with complaints of the stevia introducing an unpleasant aftertaste .
MIST TWST
Section::::Mist Twst .
In December 2015 , PepsiCo announced that they were changing the name of Sierra Mist to " Mist Twst " in Spring 2016 .
The change occurred in some areas in March 2016 .
The new Mist Twst has added high - fructose corn syrup back to the formula .
RETURN OF SIERRA
MIST
Section::::Return of Sierra Mist .
In July 2018 , Sierra Mist returned to its natural formula from 2010 , made with real sugar and no stevia .
PROMOTION AND SPONSORSHIP Section::::Promotion and sponsorship .
In 2005 , a series of improv - based Sierra Mist commercials titled " Mist Takes " began airing .
The commercials featured comedians Nicole Sullivan , Debra Wilson , Aries Spears , Jim Gaffigan and Michael Ian Black .
In 2006 , Kathy Griffin , Tracy Morgan and Guillermo Diaz joined the cast .
Diaz and other members of the cast of Otro Rollo starred in the Spanish - language versions of the commercials .
In 2007 , Nicole Randall Johnson and Eliza Coupe joined the cast , replacing Debra Wilson and Kathy Griffin .
In December 2007 , PepsiCo trademarked the names Sierra Mist : Undercover Orange and Sierra Mist
Free : Undercover Orange .
The two sodas launched under a limited - time release in the summer of 2008 ( with the faces of Steve Carell and Anne Hathaway on their labels ) , serving as a marketing tie - in with the release of the Warner Bros. film Get Smart on June 20 , 2008 .
Sierra Mist : Undercover Orange and Sierra Mist
Free : Undercover Orange were both clear sodas , like regular and Diet Sierra Mist , but had a mandarin orange flavor .
Sierra Mist was an official partner and sponsor of Major League Soccer and two franchises within the league , the New England Revolution and D.C. United .
The league deal ended in 2015 when Coca - Cola announced a partnership with MLS and the US Soccer Federation .
PRODUCT VARIANTS
CURRENT
DISCONTINUED
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website
* ' Pepsi release Sierra Mist and Mountain Dew in the UK as part of a 70 m makeover '