BROADCAST LICENSE
A broadcast license is a type of spectrum license granting the licensee permission to use a portion of the radio frequency spectrum in a given geographical area for broadcasting purposes .
The licenses generally include restrictions , which vary from band to band .
Spectrum may be divided according to use .
As indicated in a graph from the National Telecommunications and Information Administration ( NTIA ) , frequency allocations may be represented by different types of services which vary in size .
Many options exist when applying for a broadcast license ; the FCC determines how much spectrum to allot to licensees in a given band , according to what is needed for the service in question .
The determination of frequencies used by licensees is done through frequency allocation , which in the United States is specified by the FCC in a table of allotments .
The FCC is authorized to regulate spectrum access private and government uses ; however , the National Telecommunications and Information Administration of the Commerce Department allocates spectrum for use by the federal government ( including the military ) .
In some cases ( e.g. CB radio ) , the public may use spectrum without a license .
Commercial users ( such as television , AM / FM radio , and some types of two - way communications ) will receive an FCC assignment to a portion of spectrum , which may be a single frequency or a band of frequencies .
In issuing broadcast licenses the FCC relies on " comparative hearings " , whereby the most qualified user will be granted use of the spectrum to best serve the public interest ; researchers have pointed out that this procedure favors incumbents .
Violation of the terms of a license ( due to technical fault or illegal content ) may result in fines or revocation of the license .
Licenses have also been jeopardized by misrepresentation on the part of the holder or failure to keep a public file ( in the U.S. and Canada ) .
Unlicensed broadcasting refers to legal devices allowed to transmit at low power without a license and pirate stations , which violate the law .
ECONOMICS Section::::Economics .
In the U.S. broadcast licenses were issued for only a nominal payment , but economist Ronald Coase challenged the FCC 's approach .
Coase proposed that , as for other resources ( land , metal , etc . ) , the market should regulate the use of radio spectrum .
This proposition is based on the Coase theorem : with well - defined property rights , the free market will allocate resources to their most efficient use if transaction costs are low .
Coase 's theory indicated that broadcast licenses in a spectrum that was limited had high economic value , which should be paid on the open market .
Licenses are increasingly offered via spectrum auctions ; however , this fails to consider non - commercial educational users ( who are shut out of the process for economic reasons ) .
Licensing is conducted by a broadcasting authority ( a government agency ) to manage the radio - frequency spectrum and implement public policy , such as that regarding the concentration of media ownership .
In the U.S. the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) does not assign licenses to exclusive users , instead permitting qualified users to apply for a license .
The Radio Act of 1927 established the regulatory premise that the spectrum belongs to the public , and licensees have no property rights to use it .
Although the spectrum is licensed to bidders , its purchase does not entail ownership or rights but the privilege of using that portion of the spectrum .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
The process of obtaining a new broadcast license may be lengthy .
A broadcast engineer first determines an available frequency , which may be unavailable in a crowded media market ( such as a metropolitan area ) .
If a frequency is available , an engineering study is submitted with an application to the broadcasting authority , to demonstrate that the licensee will not cause RF interference to existing stations .
There is a limited term for the license , once acquired .
According to the United States Government Printing Office in 1997 , the term could exceed 8 years ; however , this has been shortened to five years or less ( depending on whether the FCC requires further evaluation ) .
A construction permit is first issued , with the license receiving approval when the station certifies that the permit has been executed ( after testing to ensure that all parameters are within allowable tolerances ) .
Once a facility is built and operational , it may be allowed to operate under program test authority until the license is issued ( or denied ) .
Where a station is close to an international border , a license may also need to be approved by the foreign country 's broadcasting authority for frequency coordination .
This is done even if the border is outside of a station 's predicted broadcast range , since radio propagation sometimes causes stations to be heard outside their service area .
Existing stations apply for permits and license amendments when making changes to their facilities ( such as relocation to another site , changing the radio antenna height , making changes to a directional antenna 's radiation pattern , or when adding — or converting to — digital broadcasting ) .
Other situations ( such as a change in the city of license ) are covered in rulemaking proceedings in the U.S. , which may be a prerequisite to moving a station a significant distance ( leaving its original community outside its new coverage area ) .
Temporary situations are covered by special temporary authority ( STA ) to operate at a variance from the license or permit or a Restricted Service Licence ( RSL ) to operate for a fixed period at reduced power .
While these are FCC and Ofcom terms , respectively , other countries have similar regulations .
In the U.S. , court cases can prolong the process when mutually exclusive applications are received .
The FCC opens application window periods of about a week .
Some applications have been pending for years ; others end up in administrative law courts or arbitration , sometimes with one applicant seeking a buyout of another .
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
Section::::Technical specifications .
Management of technical specifications ( such as those in broadcast television systems ) is normally undertaken as a part of broadcast licensing in each country .
Radio bands carry signals ( such as video and audio , digital and analog , narrowband , broadband and content ) , and are licensed differently .
The broadcast license typically specifies the following minimum information : * Geographic coordinates , with exact latitude and longitude * Carrier frequency and bandwidth * Modulation type[s ] * Effective radiated power ( ERP )
* Height above average terrain ( HAAT ) * Directional antenna radiation pattern , specified at several azimuths Additionally , it often specifies :
* Operating hours ( for mediumwave and shortwave )
* Transmitter power output ( TPO )
( before any attenuation or gain )
* Broadcast auxiliary services ( BAS ) linking studio and transmitter sites * Antenna brand and model
*
Height above mean sea level ( AMSL ) and above ground level ( AGL )
* Backup facilities ( which may have separate licenses )
* Additional service authorizations ( subcarriers , digital radio )
Some countries ( such as the Canadian Radio - television and Telecommunications Commission in Canada ) specify radio format or the genre of television programming , to ensure diversity .
Community stations ( such as class A television service and LPFM stations in the U.S. ) may be required to broadcast local content each week .
U.S. broadcast translator licenses prohibit local content on FM , while LPTV stations can choose , except those tied to a DTV station as a fill - in translator or booster to overcome the shortcomings of the ATSC system mandated by the FCC .
SHARING Section::::Sharing .
In some cases , two stations may share the same frequency in the same area , or even the same facility .
Time sharing has on occasion been used when two applicants have an equal number of points , mainly with LPFM stations .
In FCC auction 1000 for the 600MHz band , TV stations were paid to leave the air in crowded markets ( to facilitate repacking of stations on TV channels 38 to 51 into those already using 2 to 36 ) , but are allowed to move the license to another existing station , keeping their virtual channel numbers and must - carry rights .
Each licensee is responsible for the content on their own channels , while both are jointly responsible for the technical operation of the transmitter , antenna , and tower .
In the city of New York , 89.1 MHz is reserved for the United Nations ; however , it is used instead by WNYU - FM and WNYU - FM1 , unless the U.N. should ever apply to use it .
RENEWAL Section::::Renewal .
Licensing requirements differ for public radio and television and for community radio and television compared to commercial applicants .
Licensees must be aware of deadlines , from original application to renewal , which vary by state and include license expiration and dates for renewals .
The form for renewal of a broadcast license in the United States is FCC Form 303-S.
While the Form 303-S License Application consists of yes - or - no questions and certifications , the process of renewing the license is complex ; the FCC requires that licensees certify that they were in compliance with all rules and regulations during the prior license term .
If a license has been acquired in the middle of a term , the licensee will be evaluated from that point to the end of the license term .
Misrepresentation to the FCC may lead to the loss of a license .
SEE ALSO
* Broadcasting in the Soviet Union * Frequency assignment authority
* Public service broadcasting in the United Kingdom
* Spectrum management REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Australian Communications and Media Authority *
Industry Canada
* Radio Spectrum Management New Zealand
* Ofcom ( United Kingdom )
* Federal Communications Commission ( United States )