LETTER ( PAPER SIZE ) Letter or ANSI Letter is a paper size commonly used as home or office stationery in the United States , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Mexico , Panama , the Dominican Republic and the Philippines .
It measures .
US Letter - size paper is a standard defined by the American National Standards Institute ( ANSI , paper size A ) , in contrast to A4 paper used by most other countries , and adopted at varying dates , which is defined by the International Organization for Standardization , specifically in ISO 216 .
DETAILS Section::::Details .
The Reagan administration made Letter - size paper the norm for U.S. federal forms in the early 1980s ; previously , the smaller " official " Government Letter size , , was used in government , while paper was standard in most other offices .
In the U.S. , paper density is usually measured in " pounds per ream " ( of 500 sheets ) .
Typical Letter paper has a basis weight of paper of – the weight of 500 sheets ( a ream ) of paper at and at 50 % humidity .
One ream of 20-pound Letter - sized paper weighs , and a single Letter - sized sheet of 20-pound paper weighs , which is equivalent to 75.19 g / m .
Some metric information is typically included on American ream packaging .
For example , 20-pound paper is also labeled as 75 g / m .
The most common density of A4 paper is 80 g / m .
The precise origins of the dimensions of US letter - size paper ( 8.5 × 11 in ) are not known .
The American Forest & Paper Association says that the standard US dimensions have their origin in the days of manual paper making , the 11 " length of the standard paper being about a quarter of " the average maximum stretch of an experienced vatman 's arms " .
The letter size falls within the range of the historical quarto size , which since pre - modern times refers to page sizes of wide and high , and it is indeed almost exactly one quarter of the old Imperial ( British ) paper size known as Demy 4to - - allowing a for trimming .
The related paper size known as half letter , statement , or organizer L is exactly one half of the US Letter size : ( 8.5 × 5.5 in ) .
SEE ALSO * ANSI / ASME Y14.1
* ISO 216 ( definition of metric paper sizes , e.g. , A4 )
* Paper size : loose sizes NOTES