RETURN FROM WITCH MOUNTAIN Return from Witch Mountain is a 1978 American science fiction - adventure film and a sequel to Escape to Witch Mountain ( 1975 ) and the second film in the Witch Mountain franchise .
It was produced by Walt Disney Productions .
It was written by Malcolm Marmorstein and is based on the novel by Alexander Key .
Ike Eisenmann , Kim Richards , and Denver Pyle reprise their roles as Tony , Tia , and Uncle Bené — humanoid extraterrestrials with special powers including telepathy and telekinesis .
The two main villains are played by Bette Davis as Letha Wedge , a greedy woman using the last of her money to finance the scientific experiments of Dr. Victor Gannon , played by Christopher Lee .
In September 1978 , the film was re - released to theaters on a double bill with Escape to Witch Mountain .
A television film sequel called Beyond Witch Mountain was made in 1982 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Tony and his sister Tia are in need of a vacation .
Uncle Bené drops them off in their flying saucer at the Rose Bowl stadium in Los Angeles , California , after which the siblings quickly become separated from each other .
A man named Dr. Victor Gannon ( Lee ) and his assistant Letha Wedge ( Davis ) happen to see Tony using his powers to save Letha 's nephew Sickle from certain death .
Realizing that Tony has supernatural powers , Dr. Gannon drugs the boy with a tranquilizer shot and takes him back to their laboratory .
There , Dr. Gannon successfully tests a new mind - control technology on him .
Under its influence , Tony is completely hypnotized and does everything that his kidnappers want him to do , including stealing gold from a museum exhibit and stopping Tia from finding them .
With Tony at his robotic bidding , Dr. Gannon hopes to achieve recognition within the scientific community and worldwide power , while Letha merely wants a return on her investment .
A group of would - be tough boys whom Tia comes across , called the Earthquake Gang , are being chased by the Golden Goons , in which Tia then telepathically gets rid of them .
The gang of boys accept her into their gang and help look for her brother .
They let her sleep in their secret hideout where she often gets many visions of where her brother is ; first at the gold museum where Tony is controlled by a chip attached to his ear .
He unstacks the gold but is followed by Mr. Yokomoto the truant officer who thinks Tony has to go to school and chases the doctor , aunt , nephew , and Tony in his mini bus unsuccessfully .
As a result , Mr. Yokomoto destroyed public property and ends up losing his job .
Next Tia uses her telepathy to trace Tony 's hideout but is caught by Sickle and is put under the influence of chloroform .
She telepathically asks Alfred the goat who is in the house to find the Earthquake gang .
They chase the goat back to the hideout .
In the meantime Tony , Letha , Sickle and Victor drive to a Plutonium Plant as it is more expensive than gold .
Tia traces their location and describes it to be a " big round ball
" One of the members assume the location to be another place and Tia is upset .
They come across Mr. Yokomoto who tells them he lost his job and the only thing that works is the radio .
The news given about the plutonium plant stresses on the word " molecular flow . "
Tia then asks Mr. Yokomoto to drive them to the location after she magically repairs the mini bus .
After Victor and his gang reach the site , he shuts down the plant 's cooling system .
In exchange for turning it on , he requires 5 million dollars in cash .
The people working at the plant make arrangements for money as soon as possible , but Tia reaches the site in time where she and Tony battle to turn on the cooling system .
Tia manages to turn it on but Victor commands Tony to kill his sister .
In this course of time , she understands how he is been controlled and destroys the device .
Tia explains what had happened to him , in which Tony makes Victor , Sickle and Letha go up to the ceiling with no way of getting down .
Mr. Yokomoto drives the kids to the Rose Bowl Stadium and the Earthquake gang come along to say bye .
Tony and Tia bid farewell to the kids after they board the flying saucer back to Witch Mountain .
CAST
* Bette Davis as Letha Wedge * Christopher Lee as Dr. Victor Gannon
* Kim Richards as Tia Malone
* Ike Eisenmann as Tony Malone * Jack Soo as Mr. " Yo - Yo " Yokomoto * Anthony James as Sickle * Richard Bakalyan as Eddie * Ward Costello as Mr. Clearcole
* Christian Juttner as Dazzler * Brad Savage as Muscles * Poindexter Yothers as Crusher
* Jeffrey Jacquet as Rocky * Stu Gilliam as Dolan
* William Bassett as
Operations officer
* Tom Scott as Monitor * Helene Winston as Dowager
* Albert Able as Engineer * Denver Pyle as Uncle Bene * Brian Part , Pierre Daniel as Goons * Wally Brooks as Taxi fare
* Mel Gold as Security guard * Bob Yothers as Cop
* Casse Jaeger as School patrolman * Larry Mamorstein as Guard * Bob James as Gate guard * Ruth Warshawsky as Lady in car
* Adam Anderson as Man in museum
* Rosemary Lord as Woman in museum
* Ted Noose as Policeman * Wally Berns as Man in car Actors Kim Richards and Ike Eisenmann appear in at least four films together —
this one , the original 1975 Disney film Escape to Witch Mountain , and the television film .
Richards portrays the roadside waitress and Eisenmann portrays the Sheriff in a re - imagined remake of the original film Race to Witch Mountain , released in March 2009 .
Section::::Cast .
Jack Soo ( Mr. " Yo - Yo " Yokomoto ) was diagnosed with esophageal cancer in the autumn of 1978 , several months after the film 's release .
Return from Witch Mountain would be his final movie appearance , as he died the following January .
The emergency voice heard over Yokomoto 's van radio — announcing the problem at the plutonium plant — is that of Gary Owens .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
Filming started on April 11 , 1977 .
The otherwise vacant lot , upon which the children 's dilapidated hideout mansion stands , was at the Alameda Street railroad yard in California , where the Rochester House ( a relic from 1880s ) was waiting for restoration and relocation .
The house was never restored and was ultimately demolished in 1979 .
Scenes of Dr. Victor Gannon 's mansion , the location of his laboratory , were filmed at Moby Castle on Durand Drive , Hollywood Hills , Los Angeles .
The tunnel scenes were filmed at the Fillmore & Western Railway in Fillmore , California constructing a faux tunnel structure .
The faux tunnel still stands and can be seen from CA-126 / Telegraph Road .
The gold - bar robbery sequence was filmed at the Natural History Museum in Exposition Park , Los Angeles .
The building facing the Park 's Rose Garden was used for exterior shots of the museum .
The scene in which Yokomoto 's van is overturned and breaks a fire - hydrant was filmed near the Sunset Boulevard bridge and Glendale Boulevard underpass intersection , in the Echo Park district .
MEDIA RELEASES
Section::::Media releases .
Return from Witch Mountain was released on VHS on June 25 , 1986 .
It was first released as a Special Edition DVD in Region 1 on September 2 , 2003 , re - released on DVD in a two - movie collection along with Escape to Witch Mountain on September 5 , 2006 , and re - released as part of the Walt Disney Family Classics line on March 10 , 2009 .
On October 13 , 2015 , Return from Witch Mountain was released on Blu - ray Disc as a Disney Movie Club exclusive title .
NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS