ROOT HAIR
A root hair , or absorbent hair , the rhizoid of a vascular plant , is a tubular outgrowth of a trichoblast , a hair - forming cell on the epidermis of a plant root .
As they are lateral extensions of a single cell and only rarely branched , they are visible to the naked eye and light microscope .
They are found only in the region of maturation of the root .
Just prior to , and during , root hair cell development , there is elevated phosphorylase activity .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The root hairs are where most water absorption happens .
They are long
and so they can penetrate between soil particles , and prevent harmful bacterial organisms from entering the plant through the xylem vessels .
They have a large surface area for absorption of water .
Increasing root surface area aids plants to be more efficient in absorbing nutrients and establishing relationships with microbes .
Cross - section of root hair cell : a roughly rectangular shape with a long , thin tail extending to the right and a nucleus at the top left .
Water passes from the soil water to the root hair cell 's cytoplasm by osmosis .
This happens because the soil water has a higher water potential than the root hair cell cytoplasm .
The function of root hairs is to collect water and mineral nutrients present in the soil and take this solution up through the roots to the rest of the plant .
As root hair cells do not carry out photosynthesis they do not contain chloroplasts .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
Root hair cells are outgrowths at a tip of the plant 's roots .
Root hair cells vary between 15 and 17 micrometres in diameter , and 80 to 1,500 micrometres in length .
They are found only in the zone of maturation , and not the zone of elongation , possibly because any root hairs that arise are sheared off as the root elongates and moves through the soil .
Root hairs grow quickly , at least 1μm / min , making them particularly useful for research on cell expansion .
IMPORTANCE Section::::Importance .
Root hairs form an important surface as they are needed to absorb most of the water and nutrients needed for the plant .
They are also directly involved in the formation of root nodules in legume plants .
The root hairs curl around the bacteria which allows for the formation of an infection thread through into the dividing cortical cells to form the nodule .
Having a large surface area , the active uptake of water and minerals through root hairs is highly efficient .
Root hair cells also secrete acid ( H from malic acid ) which exchanges and helps solubilize the minerals into ionic form , making the ions easier to absorb .
SURVIVAL
Section::::Survival .
Root hair cells can survive for 2 to 3 weeks and then die off , at the same time new root hair cells are continually being formed at the tip of the root .
This way , the root hair coverage stays the same .
When a new root hair cell grows , it excretes a poison so that the other cells in close proximity to it are unable to grow one of these hairs .
This ensures equal and efficient distribution of the actual hairs on these cells .
The act of re - potting or transplanting a plant can result in root hair cells being pulled off , perhaps to a significant extent , and such plants may therefore wilt for some time as a result .
SEE ALSO
*
Mycorrhizae * Trichome REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Esau , K. 1965 .
Plant Anatomy , 2nd Edition .
John Wiley & Sons .
767 pp .