DONNA PINCIOTTI
Donna Marie Pinciotti is a fictional character and one of the two female leads in the Fox sitcom
That ' 70s Show , appearing in all eight seasons .
Portrayed by Laura Prepon , Donna is the love interest to Eric Forman .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Donna 's relationship with next - door neighbor Eric Forman is often the main focus of the series .
However , it is tumultuous at times , having suffered two break - ups during the show 's run .
Despite this , Eric and Donna often act as the " parents " of the group , being mature and responsible when their friends are not , for example in episodes like " Dine and Dash " .
Another episode that illustrates their parenthood of the group is when they have just broken up and Eric takes them all out and returns late .
He and Donna engage in an argument because Eric gives Fez ice cream and Donna is angry because he would n't be hungry for dinner .
When Fez is going to be deported , she and Eric become upset because " their " Fez is leaving .
Eric is sometimes threatened by his feeling inferior to her , especially during the third season , when she gets a job as a disc jockey .
Donna and Eric lose their virginity to each other in the beginning of season two , after many failed attempts to " do it " .
Their sexual activity is revealed in a very humiliating manner , when a policeman catches them having sex in the back of Eric 's car and takes them back to his parents home , where Red forces Donna to tell her parents or else he would tell them .
In the beginning of the series , Hyde is also interested in Donna along with Eric .
Donna makes her choice clear , however , when she blows off her " study date " with Hyde to hang out with Eric .
Even after the relationship between Eric and Donna is established , for a short time Donna usually goes to Hyde when she feels unsure about her relationship and needs to talk about it .
In such circumstances , Hyde usually refers to her as the " hot neighbor girl " and Eric as the " scrawny little neighbor boy " , or some variation of these .
Though a romantic relationship between Donna and Hyde is never established , Hyde initially likes Donna and would have been interested in her if Eric had not kissed her first ( as stated in the episode
" It 's a Wonderful Life " ) .
Hyde still tries to win Donna in the beginning when she and Eric are n't together .
There are even some comments by Fez during that season that mock Hyde over these failed attempts .
When the group goes to Jackie 's father 's cabin for a ski trip , Hyde decides to kiss Donna and is slapped for his efforts , ending his infatuation but not their close friendship .
Hyde never shows any significant interest in Donna again .
Toward the end of season three , Donna 's job as a disc jockey is taking priority over her relationship with Eric , causing her to cancel their dates .
While Donna genuinely feels that she is right to do this and is simply following her goals through to their logical conclusion with wanting to be a writer and a newswoman , her actions provoke a bad response in the normally even - keeled Eric , who feels that Donna is not taking him and/or their relationship seriously .
Unable to resolve the conflict , Eric breaks up with her in the third season finale " The Promise Ring " .
Throughout season four , much awkwardness ensues over rights to the basement and trying to find new relationships .
Donna is a bit annoyed at just how many girls are interested in Eric and happily mocks him when his attempts at finding a new girlfriend backfires .
When she finds out he dated another while they were apart
( he kept it a secret ) , she is absolutely furious , believing he cheated on her .
During the fourth season , Donna begins dating Casey Kelso ( Luke Wilson ) , Michael Kelso 's older brother .
Even though he is flaky , a few years older than she is and against Donna 's feminist beliefs , Donna thinks Casey is the perfect boyfriend , since he seems to be sensitive , good - natured , laid - back and easy - going .
Eric sees Casey for what he is : an oversexed frat boy who just wants to sleep with Donna and move on to the next girl .
Eric tries to warn Donna
but she ignores him
and he then threatens to hurt Casey if he hurts Donna .
Donna ends up skipping school to get drunk with Casey .
When Eric and Kitty witness this , they ( along with Red and Bob ) decide to intervene .
In an animated discussion in the Formans ' living room , Casey dumps Donna , deciding that his relationship with her is not worth the hassle , and admitting that he never loved her .
The realization of her own overconfidence , poor judgment and being dumped in front of the people who meant the most to her come as a shock to Donna , who regards herself as an ideal feminist , since she had fallen for the type of man she always swore
she would never be with .
Hurt , humiliated and heartbroken , Donna turns to Eric , who offers his sympathy .
When a shaken - up , crying Donna tells him she wants to be with him again , he refuses , believing that she does not really want him for who he is , but simply wants a way to feel better about herself and would most likely dump him when someone better came along .
A tearful Donna pleads with him to take her back
but he refuses to be her " second choice " .
Eric is unwavering in his decision , until his father and mother point out to him that he is being an idiot .
Even Kitty , who normally dotes on him , calls him a " dumbass " .
Unable to handle being rejected by her first love , an emotionally wrecked Donna flees Point Place for California , where she lives with her mother and tries to sort out her feelings .
She decides she truly does love Eric and tries to call him but ca n't get hold of him ; she suspects he no longer wants her and has moved on to another girl , leaving her rather depressed .
But then , to her delight , Eric shows up in California looking for her , and the two very romantically reunite and return to Point Place .
When Donna comes home from California , the normally easy - going Bob sends her to a Catholic school as punishment , an act that Donna deeply resents and hates for the remainder of the school year .
This occasion also gave the writers / creators an opportunity to change Donna 's common " lumberjack " attire as she now wore , for a few episodes , the school 's uniform consisting of a plaid skirt , a white shirt and long white knee - high socks .
Her new looks also provide openings for jokes from the boys about Donna 's sexiness , which underlies their views of her throughout the series , no matter what type of attire she is wearing .
In season five , Eric ignores the objections of their friends and proposes to her at the water tower , which Donna accepts .
Once Red and Kitty find out about the engagement , they are shocked .
Kitty in particular , reacts badly , claiming that Donna is trying to snatch her " baby " away from her .
Despite enduring a great deal of flak ( mostly from Red ) , Eric stays loyal to Donna and their marriage plans .
Because of this , Red accepts that his son has become a man and gives them his blessing .
Donna and Eric prepare to leave Point Place together and go to college in Madison .
However , just as they are packing their stuff in the Vista Cruiser , Fez and Laurie announce their marriage so Fez can stay in the country after graduation .
Red is so shocked at this , he has a heart attack .
As a result , Eric decides to stay in Point Place and help support the family .
Donna ends up putting off going to college in Madison so that she can stay with Eric .
Eventually , their wedding plans fall through at the end of season six when Eric , worried that marrying Donna would hold her back , fails to show up for their rehearsal .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
After Eric 's departure from the show between seasons seven and eight , it is assumed that they still keep the relationship intact .
However , Donna tells her friends that Eric has broken up with her in the eighth - season episode " Long Away " , when Fez and Jackie suspect that she is cheating on Eric with the new cast character , Randy ( Josh Meyers ) .
Donna tells them that Eric did this three weeks earlier .
There were hints leading up to the breakup when Eric calls Kitty but not Donna , even though she is awake at 4AM waiting for him to call her .
Also , when Donna is at the Foremans ' for Red and Kitty 's 25th anniversary , Eric calls his parents and Kitty gives the phone to Donna , but Eric speaks to her only briefly before hanging up , claiming he has to " go to class " .
Donna then begins dating Randy , seemingly without regard for her long - standing relationship with Eric .
However , she ends the relationship when she realizes that things with Randy are moving too fast , and that she is using him as a substitute for Eric .
This is further evidenced when Kitty catches Randy and Donna kissing in Eric 's bedroom , and she accuses Donna of replacing Eric with Randy , departing from her usual rivalry with Donna over being the main woman in Eric 's life .
In the final episode , Eric returns to Point Place for the New Year and he and Donna kiss .
It is presumed that they end up together again at the end of the series and the end of the 1970s .
CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY Section::::Character and personality .
Donna resides in the fictional Wisconsin town of Point Place , where she lives with her parents , Midge and Bob Pinciotti .
Early in the series , her younger sister , 14-year - old Tina ( played by Amanda Fuller ) , appears in the episode " Eric 's Burger Job " but is never seen again , nor do other characters mention her after the first season .
At the end of the season 2 episode " Vanstock " , this is made fun of when a narrator asks " Whatever happened to Midge 's other daughter , Tina ? "
Donna also has an older sister , Valerie Pinciotti ( " Eric 's Birthday " ) .
She is apparently in college as revealed by Midge .
As Eric is turning 17 , Midge shows Kitty a book of poems that helped her " when Valerie went off to school " .
These are examples of " Chuck Cunningham Syndrome " ( see Happy Days ) .
An intelligent , witty teenager with feminist ideals , Donna is outwardly confident and strong , at times to the point of coming across as arrogant , self - righteous , and overconfident .
She calls upon these personal qualities to deal with her personal issues , such as her parents ' shaky relationship and the revelation that they conceived her while in high school .
She believes that she 's had it the hardest out of the group until Hyde is revealed to have faced most of these problems and not once complained .
The characteristics and physical appearance of Donna Pinciotti were actually based on a girl who grew up in the same neighborhood as Mark Brazil in Dunkirk , NY .
Donna actually dated Hyde and never was with Eric , AKA Mark Brazil .
Though despite her overly confident attitude , she herself has her own insecurities such as her big feet , her parents ' screwed up marriage and her trust in her relationship with Eric .
A prime example of this is in the episode " Eric 's Panties " .
Eric has an attractive girl as his lab partner who has a reputation of being a slut .
At first , Donna does n't really care
but she finds panties in his car and genuinely believes that Eric cheated on her .
She shows a completely insecure side of herself and is more than prepared to hurt him .
They are later revealed to be Midge 's panties from when she and Bob had sex in Eric 's car .
She has some difficulty expressing her feminine side , because she views traditional feminine traits as restraining and outdated .
She dislikes skirts , makeup , and dresses , and insists on wearing jeans at all times , but she will dress nice for special occasions and tried " being pretty " for her prom and for a trip to a nightclub , where the bouncer judged her " foxy " .
As another exception , after her wedding with Eric was called off , she decides to change her looks and dyes her hair blonde .
Jackie Burkhart repeatedly calls Donna a " lumberjack " and a " giant " , due to her penchant for plaid shirts and her tall stature .
She even described Donna by saying " She 's nice and all , but she kinda dresses like a trucker " .
She also teases Donna for her gargantuan feet , calling her " bigfoot " and saying things like Donna 's shoes are big enough for Jackie to fit her own shoes into .
Nonetheless , Donna still considers herself feminine , at times becoming insulted when people overlook it .
When Kitty Forman needed two people with a " feminine touch " to decorate for Hyde 's birthday party , she chose Jackie and Fez .
An angry Donna wanted to " kick her ass " for that , insisting " What the hell ?
I 'm feminine !
Damn it , why ca n't anybody freakin ' see that ? !
"
This suggests that while Donna takes pride in her feminist beliefs , she still considers herself feminine , and simply does n't want to restrict herself to " girly " activities .
In several episodes , she is flattered at being perceived as an object of desire , especially when she becomes " Hot Donna " at a radio station .
Jackie appoints herself as Donna 's best friend in the early seasons , often giving her advice that sounds superficial and useless , but often turns out to be unnervingly true .
For example , in the " Battle of the Sexists " episode , Jackie states to Donna that , " Eric would never want her ( Donna ) to be his girlfriend if she kept beating him at everything , especially sports " .
Jackie genuinely thinks that she 's better looking than Donna , ever since their first meeting in junior high and that Donna is generally not attractive or interesting , yet still thinks Donna could do better than Eric .
When angry or annoyed at Donna , Jackie will often refer to her as a " giant " or " Amazon " ; when Donna goes blonde , she calls her " blonde tardo " .
Despite their differences , Donna eventually accepts Jackie and decides to keep an eye on her and keep her out of trouble , since Jackie does n't always show the best common sense , and on more than one occasion , Donna has ridiculed Jackie for her stupidity and small stature , calling her a " midget " or " mosquito " .
All five of the boys have harbored sexual feelings toward Donna .
In addition to Eric , three of the others attempted to sleep with her ( Kelso attempts to seduce her after going to roller disco , Hyde at Jackie 's ski cabin and Fez impersonating Eric in a Storm Trooper outfit ; none of these attempts are successful ) and four have romantic interest in her ( Eric , Hyde , Casey and Randy ) .
Despite many of the guys ' obvious attraction to her , she only dated two of the main characters , with Jackie having the most boyfriends within the main cast .
Donna is with Eric for six seasons , and she is hoping they could have been together , but as she says herself : " It was all Eric 's fault for taking that stupid job . "
In Season 1 , Episode 2 it is revealed that Donna is one month older than Eric .
In the episode " Good Company " , it is revealed through context that Donna 's birthday is sometime in January .
OTHER APPEARANCES
* Actress Rosie Marcel portrayed the character in the British version Days Like These .
REFERENCES