KIRBY COMPANY
The Kirby Company is a manufacturer of vacuum cleaners and home cleaning accessories , based in Cleveland , Ohio , United States .
It is a division of The Scott Fetzer Company ( also known as Scott & Fetzer ) which in turn is part of Berkshire Hathaway .
Dealers are located in over 50 countries throughout the world .
Kirby 's products are only sold via in - home door - to - door demonstrations and the company is a member of the Direct Selling Association .
All of the vacuum cleaners are built in either Ohio or Texas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first Kirby vacuums were designed by James B. Kirby ( 1885–1971 ) for George Scott and Carl Fetzer after World War I , although the Kirby name was not used on a vacuum cleaner until the 1930s .
James Kirby invented the " vacuette " circa 1920 , and their primary competitors were The Hoover Company and The Eureka Company which both began operations in 1909 , and Bissell who originally built carpet sweepers beginning in 1876 .
Their primary European competitor was Electrolux in 1924 , while Dyson , Miele and Sebo followed in the 1980s .
The Vacuette Electric , introduced in 1925 with its removable floor nozzle and handle , became the forerunner of today 's multi - attachment Kirby vacuum models .
In 1935 , the company introduced the Kirby Model C , the first product to carry Jim Kirby 's name .
The Vacuette was also briefly offered as a manual vacuum cleaner , utilizing a spring - loaded worm gear driven by pulling the vacuum cleaner backwards , then when pushing the machine forward , the worm gear would power a turbine that provided the suction needed .
As long as the cleaner was consistently pulled backwards , tension in the spring would remain constant and the turbine would continue spinning .
It was designed for rural areas that did n't have electricity , and was very similar to the carpet sweeper .
While competitors have changed the orientation of the motor , their products ' appearance , materials used in construction and other features over the years , Kirby has remained with the original design , materials and functionality with enhancements added to aid in its operation and durability .
The company changes the appearance with revised color schemes and introduces new model names while keeping the core technology intact .
Used machines are widely available for sale internationally , and because the attachments , and appearance items are interchangeable within the generations , some machines can be found consisting of parts from multiple models .
Machines built in the 1930s , 40s , 50s and 60s are still in operation worldwide and can be completely repaired or rebuilt with widely available parts from the factory .
In the 1930s and the 1940s , Kirby decided to offer their products in retail environments , and introduced the " R " series .
They are essentially identical to their " C " series , with the only difference being the power switch installed on the handle .
The first model was the R , followed by the 2R , 3R and 4R.
In 1970 , input from Kirby distributors , dealers , management and customers guided Kirby engineers in developing the Kirby Classic .
This ushered in the second generation models , and was an instant success , with soaring sales , allowing the company to expand its manufacturing facilities outside of Cleveland for the first time , which coincided with the rising popularity of wall - to - wall custom installed carpet .
In 1972 , Kirby West began operations in Andrews , Texas at 1345 NW 101 Street ( also known as North Seminole Highway ) , which doubled the company 's manufacturing capacity .
The company did maintain a presence in Canada at 1009 Burns Street East in Whitby which is no longer staffed .
Berkshire Hathaway bought Kirby parent Scott Fetzer in 1986 for $ 315 million .
Two years prior , Ivan Boesky had offered to buy Scott Fetzer for $ 60 a share , or $ 420 million .
Warren Buffett has singled out Scott Fetzer to Berkshire 's shareholders as the " prototype " for the " kind of company — and acquisition — he was interested in . "
According to Berkshire managers , " absolutely no changes were made to the existing Scott Fetzer business or management , and the entire business ( and its jet ) was preserved . "
As of 2003 , Kirby is the largest source of revenue and profit for Scott Fetzer , with approximately 500,000 sales per year , about a third of which are outside the United States .
In 2003 , Scott Fetzer sold the vacuums to about 835 factory distributors , who in turn sell the vacuums door - to - door .
As an incentive to new customers , Kirby offers the Service Center Vacuum Rebuild Program for original owners who have been registered with the company .
As long as the customer owns the machine as the registered owner , if the cleaner needs repair , they can send it back to the Rebuild Department and have it restored to " like new " condition .
The company will completely disassemble it , repair or replace any worn Kirby parts , and sandblast , polish and buff metal parts back to a shiny " new " appearance .
Internal components are also thoroughly inspected and repaired with Kirby replacement parts so that it will perform as originally designed .
This is an advantage to the company as they can evaluate their products durability from actual use and make revisions on future models .
KIRBY UNIT MODELS Section::::Kirby unit models .
The Kirby Company generally produces only one model at a time .
Kirby 's vacuums made until 1919 were made by Frantz Premier .
Those made from 1919 to 1934 are branded and made by The Scott & Fetzer Company .
After 1934 all machines have been made by Scott & Fetzer , though branded as Kirby .
From 1935 through today , continuous improvements and refinements are made to the Kirby home care system .
One of the popular selling points is that it can be easily configured into a canister vacuum , hand portable vacuum , air compressor , floor buffer , and more .
It can also be converted into a shampoo system for carpets and a sweeping , dusting , and mopping system for bare floors .
The characteristic chrome appearance is due to the bulk of the machine is assembled from aluminum , a tradition going back to the very early days of manufacture when plastic was a novelty and aluminum was more plentiful .
One of the key procedures for using a Kirby Vacuum is the correct way to adjust the carpet nozzle for the best possible results .
Starting with the 1939 Model 2C to the most current machine , the instruction manual states that the carpet nozzle should be gradually lowered into position with the Toe - Touch latch , incrementally adjusting the rug nozzle until the rotating brush bar establishes contact , and the sound of the motor changes indicating suction has been achieved .
Starting with the 1945 Model 505 , adjusting the carpet nozzle employs what Kirby calls " Triple Cushioned Vibration Rug Cleaning Action " .
This characteristic which is still implemented on current models , involves briefly lifting the carpet up off the floor with the significant suction created by the motor , thereby elevating and cushioning the area to be cleaned , while the rotating brush bar separates and grooms the carpet fibers , removing the embedded dirt and rejuvenating the carpet pile .
One of the most common complaints about Kirbys is that they 're heavy .
The image of the machine made from metal adds to that reputation .
The difficulty to push the machine is largely due to the suction created that makes it difficult to maneuver , especially in deep pile carpets and not necessarily the materials used in manufacture .
Beginning in the 1990s , the Generation series ushered in a new platform for the cleaner .
The addition of TechDrive variable power assist eliminated 90 % of the effort required to move the unit back and forth .
The current model , the Kirby Avilir 2 ™ continues the tradition that converts the vacuum into several different units beginning with the Model 508 in 1948 .
With the introduction of the 1945 Model 505 , the handle could be removed and the machine converted to a portable unit with a shoulder strap so that cleaning in difficult areas could be performed , and the machine converted into a canister - type cleaner with a long hose attached to the front for dusting tasks .
With most vacuum cleaner models , the rubber drive belt that powers the brush bar , an integral component with most modern machines , remains in place and is only examined when it breaks .
Vacuum attachments are available on other machines but do n't require the drive belt to be disconnected and the carpet nozzle with the rotating brush bar removed .
Kirby attachments are connected to the power unit in place of the carpet nozzle , and disconnecting the drive belt is involved in the process that adds to its flexibility .
Earlier methods instructed that the carpet nozzle must maintain contact with the surface of the carpet , utilizing the suction , while later instruction manuals recommended the nozzle be slightly above with only the brush establishing contact and improving airflow around the surface being cleaned .
For delicate surfaces , the drive belt that spins the brush bar can be detached so that only suction is used .
In 1970 with the introduction of the Classic , a small plastic window was installed in the belt lifter handle so the belt could be visually inspected as being intact and installed on the turbine driveshaft .
When the Heritage II also called the Legend ™ was introduced in 1987 , Kirby revised the carpet nozzle by making it slimmer , and the new Brush Performance Indicator Light was installed in the top of the carpet nozzle .
This device consisted of a coiled copper wire wrapped around a magnet , with additional magnets installed in the rotating vibrating brush that created an electrical charge .
A small LED bulb would then light up when the brush bar was spinning ; if the light appeared to blink or was n't illuminated , it meant the brush bar was n't rotating at the desired speed , and that the nozzle needed to be adjusted up or signifying that an inspection of the drive belt was needed .
This feature replaced the earlier plastic window on the belt lifter handle .
In 1989 with the He model , the Toe - Touch latch was modified with a custom adjustment feature called " Micro Matic " , which facilitated the ability to incrementally adjust the preset height positions , allowing for the carpet nozzle to clean glued down , minimal pile carpets .
The feature was no longer offered with the 1990 Generation 3 model introduction .
Collection and disposal of the dirt has also changed over the years , but one component has remained , called the " Sani - Em - Tor " .
This is a component attached to the discharge tube leading away from the vacuum turbine chamber where the suction is created , where dirt collected and heavier objects were deposited , and a lid could be removed from the bottom and the dirt disposed .
A cloth bag that allowed airflow to pass through and clean the air was attached at the top of the " Sani - Em - Tor " .
Earlier versions of the cloth bag used a dense duvetyne , and later corduroy cotton and wool fabric bags where fine grit , dander and other foreign contaminants collected .
The cotton bag also has an integrated cleaning pocket within , called the Sani - Pocket introduced in 1964 with the Sanitronic , where embedded dirt could be dislodged from the interior surface of the bag while keeping the dirt contained inside .
Starting in the 1960s , the cloth or wool fabric bag was impregnated with a fungus controlling substance Kirby called " KGF-40 " , which consisted of small amounts of zinc dimethyldithiocarbamate , and zinc 2-mercaptobenzothiazole , with most of the substance being " inert ingredients " .
Later the chemical was offered in a 12 oz bottle called " Germicide Deodorant " which could be sprayed on various surfaces with the Suds - O - Gun as a fungicide .
The owners manual for the cloth bag equipped machines recommended that the cloth bag be emptied after cleaning had been finished , to avoid dirt , fungus and bacteria from setting deep in the fibers of the bag , and preparing the machine for the next time .
The cloth bag can be laundered periodically , if necessary .
Starting with the Tradition model , an internal , disposable paper bag was introduced optionally in addition to the cotton cloth bag , so that customers could decide which method they preferred .
The disposable paper bag provided a protective barrier against the interior surface of the cloth bag , and offered the convenience of storing the cleaner when finished , and not requiring that the bag be emptied every time .
When the Legend ll ™ from 1989 was replaced by the Generation 3 in 1990 , the only method of dirt collection was the disposable paper bag , and the " Sani - Em - Tor " became the " Mini - Em - Tor " which no longer used a removable lid on the bottom but still trapped larger , heavier objects .
In 1993 , the disposable paper bags filtration effectiveness was upgraded , and was labeled " Micron Magic " with the Model G4 , which can trap particles larger than three microns , while the cotton cloth bag traps any remaining particles that pass through .
Starting with the G6 H10 HEPA multi layered paper bags were introduced , then in early 2003 the revised version of the Ultimate G introduced as the Ultimate G Diamond Edition , the disposable paper bag was upgraded once more to H11 HEPA standards .
Versatility and convenience has been a longstanding tradition with the company , that being the ability to configure the machine for various tasks .
The attachments available have come and gone over the years , but some of the more popular ones remain available today .
A floor buffer attachment and bare floor dusting pad were introduced with the Model 2C , along with a hand - held , paint spray gun and upholstery shampoo dispenser called the Suds - O - Gun , powered by attaching the hose to the turbine discharge tube have remained .
A carpet shampoo attachment , called the Rug Renovator appeared with the Dual Sanitronic 50 in 1965 , which uses a dry foam method to scrub the shampoo into the carpet .
With the introduction of the Avalir , the Rug Renovator was modified to function as a floor scrubber , cleaning hard floors , scrubbing tile and grout , or polishing hard surfaces , using specialized brushes for each task .
One of its earliest available tasks is being able to vacuum mattresses , couches and carpeted stairs by replacing the elongated handle and converting the machine to a portable , hand - held cleaner while still using the carpet nozzle .
With the introduction of the Classic in 1970 the handle was installed with an unusual feature ; a small object depository integrated into the back of the handle as a precaution to keep the cleaner from unnecessarily picking up coins , paperclips and other metallic items that could damage the turbine fan , which was no longer offered when the Sentria was introduced in 2006 .
The plastic backing could be easily detached and items placed inside could be removed .
It was n't mentioned in the owners manual from 1970 until the feature was discontinued in 2007 .
Another unusual attachment , called the Handi - Butler introduced with the 1950 Model 510 , used the turbine shaft at the front to power several devices , offered as convenience features that could sharpen knives , a cable could also be attached to a wire brush to remove rust from various surfaces , along with a lambs wool polishing disk , and a flannel buffing pad for more delicate tasks .
The Handi - Butler was last offered with the Tradition model , and was replaced by the Turbo Sander with the Legend model .
The Turbo Sander was equipped with a small turbine inside the device , powered by the suction through the attachment hose , which can accommodate various grades of sand paper , scrubbing pads , and a soft , vinyl pad to be used as a massage unit that is still currently available .
During the mid-1970s , with the popularity of deep shag carpeting , a rake attachment called the Shag King , was attached in front of the carpet nozzle to lift and align the nap while cleaning the carpet , offered only on the Classic III , and the Tradition models .
Another original attachment offered with the Model 2C , called the Crystalator , could be used to fumigate closets for insects and moths using mothballs , which was no longer available with the Legend model in the late 1980s .
In 1982 , with the introduction of the Heritage model , the Turbo Brush was introduced , which consisted of a smaller version of the Rug Nozzle and a belt - driven rotating brush bar , but it had a small turbine within powered by the suction of the power unit to spin the brush , designed to make vacuuming carpeted stairs easier and removing embedded hair from upholstery and automobile interiors .
This was replaced two years later with the Heritage II in 1984 called the ZipBrush , utilizing a rotary brush attached to the turbine in a more compact housing , which is still being offered .
FIRST GENERATION ( 1935 - 1970 )
* Model Names start with the 1C , followed by the 2C , 3C , 4C , 505 ( introduction of Magic Finger Belt Lifter for Carpet Nozzle removal ) , 508 , 509 , 510 , 511 , 512 , 514 , 516 , 517 , 518 , 519 , 560 , 561 , 562 , Sanitronic VII , Dual Sanitronic 50 ( first introduction of two - speed motor for hose attachment and the Carpet Nozzle / Rug Renovator shampoo system ) , ending with the Dual Sanitronic 80 ( Kirby DS 80 or D80 ) .
SECOND GENERATION ( 1970 - 1990 )
* Model Names start with the Classic ( such as the Classic 1CR ) , followed with the Classic Omega , Classic III , Tradition ( first introduction of disposable dust bag ) , Heritage ( Including the Heritage 84 model ) , Heritage II ( first introduction of the " Mini - Em - Tor " Bag boot assembly ) , Heritage II Legend Edition , last made that had optional cloth only
bag option * c.
* ending with the Legend II .
THIRD GENERATION
( 1990-PRESENT ) * Model Names start with the Generation 3 ( first introduction of TechDrive Power Assist ) , followed with the G4 ( first introduction of Micron Magic Filtration ) , G5 ( first introduction of the newer / more modern styling ) , Gsix ( first introduction of Micron Magic HEPA Filtration ) , G2000 , G2001 , Ultimate G , Ultimate G Diamond Edition ( introduction of the two - speed switch for delicate vacuuming , with further H11 class HEPA inner disposable bags ) , Sentria ( 2-Speed switch disappeared from unit , LED headlight , even newer / more modern styling ) , Sentria II , Avalir , and the currently available Avalir II
( Avalir 2 ) .
OTHER UNITS Section::::Other units .
Kirby ventured into small , portable , handheld units by reviving the Vacuette in the 1970s , then later producing the battery powered Split Second for small or light duty cleaning , which are powered by a 12V DC plug that runs in automobile cigarette lighters .
In 1968 , parent company Scott & Fetzer acquired American - Lincoln , which also manufactured vacuum cleaners for commercial purposes called the Super Sweep with a brush roll .
After the purchase , Kirby marketed the Janitronic , which was the Sanitronic without a removable carpet nozzle .
In the 1980s , they also briefly offered a commercial model called the ComVac in three sizes , called the 1300 , 1800 and the 2800 .
The commercial models were very basic and did n't come with the additional attachments or the shiny chrome appearance .
When Scott & Fetzer sold American - Lincoln to McGraw - Edison in 1984 , the commercial models were discontinued .
In the 1920s , Kirby introduced their only canister vacuum cleaner , called the Aer - Rotor .
It was unsuccessful and was pulled from the market a few months later , but the ability to convert the Kirby into a canister is currently available due to its flexibility .
SALES PRACTICE Section::::Sales practice .
Since 1920 , new Kirby home care systems have only been sold through ( door - to - door ) in - home demonstrations by independent , authorized Kirby distributors .
The Kirby Company manufactures the unit and sells it to a group of authorized distributors .
Each distributor is an independent business , and as such sets their own price for the unit and conducts their own business operations .
Independent distributors recruit dealers who are also independent contractors .
The dealers sell the unit door - to - door and are generally compensated only through commission .
CRITICISM OF MARKETING AND SALES PRACTICES Section::::Criticism of marketing and sales practices .
The practices of some of Kirby 's independent distributors have been subject to criticism .
The Kirby is included by Lon L. Fuller and Melvin A. Eisenberg , Professors of Contract Law at Harvard Law School and UC Berkeley School of Law / Columbia Law School , as a textbook example of unconscionability .
Kirby has been subject to relentless criticism by consumer protection agencies .
As of 1999 , of the 22 state consumer protection agencies , 15 had received a total of more than 600 complaints in just a few years .
Between 1996 and 1999 , the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture , Trade , and Consumer Protection received 50 complaints regarding Kirby dealers , and concluded from its investigation that Kirby , through its distributors , engaged in a " statewide pattern of trade practices " violation of state consumer - protection laws .
Many of the complaints involve " older customers who lack the will to stand up to grueling sales pitches . "
The Wall Street Journal records examples where an elderly couple was unable to remove three Kirby salesmen from their home for over five hours ; in another example , a disabled woman who had been living alone in a mobile home on $ 1000 / month in Social Security payments and suffering from Alzheimer 's disease was discovered to own two Kirby vacuum cleaners , having paid $ 1,700 for the second one .
In 2002 , the Florida Agriculture and Consumer Services Commissioner obtained $ 13,000 in refunds for 13 senior citizens .
According to the Wall Street Journal , the device " costs more than four times what other top - of - the - line vacuum cleaners do . "
Kirby compares the price difference to that between luxury and economy cars , yet " luxury - car dealers do n't make house calls in trailer parks .
But Kirby dealers do .
" The Kirby vacuum cleaner is " marketed exclusively door - to - door — often to people who can ill afford a $ 1,500 gadget , but succumb to the sales pitch nonetheless . "
In 2001 , the West Virginia Attorney General obtained more than $ 26,000 in refunds and credits for dissatisfied Kirby buyers .
In 2002 , ABC 's Primetime conducted a hidden - camera investigation in response to more than a thousand complaints regarding Kirby 's salespeople .
In June 2004 , the Arizona Attorney General filed suit against Kirby distributors for violations of the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act , seeking an injunction against any other home sales .
Public authorities flooded with complaints about Kirby vacuum cleaners is not a recent phenomenon ; even in the 1960s and 1970s , Kirby had been " cited by various agencies a number of times " and the Detroit Better Business Bureau had received so many complaints that it decided to turn the matter over to the Wayne County prosecutor .
Kirby asserts it is not liable from actions of its sales force , whom it describes as independent contractors .
Its " Distributor Code of Ethics " enumerates 12 principles , including " observe the highest standards of character , honesty and integrity in dealings with my customers , fellow Distributors and other members of the Kirby profession . "
Kirby also teaches its distributors direct - sales laws , and requires them to resolve complaints within 24 hours under threat of termination .
LITIGATION Section::::Litigation .
Between 1998 and 2001 , in Alabama alone , more than 100 lawsuits were filed against Kirby and its affiliates and subsidiaries , resulting in nearly $ 2 million in judgements and settlements .
Twelve distributors of Kirby vacuums in Massachusetts were cited for violations of the Commonwealth 's wage and hour laws by the Massachusetts Attorney General 's Office in July 2010 .
The 12 distributors were cited for a variety of different wage and hour violations including nonpayment of wage , nonpayment of minimum wage , misclassification , child labor , retaliation and record - keeping violations .
The distributors were fined a total of $ 199,300 for the violations and also ordered to pay restitution .
SEXUAL ASSAULT
Section::::Sexual assault .
The Supreme Court of Texas held Kirby liable for a rape committed by one of its door - to - door salesmen , finding that the manufacturer maintained control of its distributors and their salespeople , by requiring its distributors to make sales via in - home visits , and that the risk was foreseeable .
In that case , the court found that — had the employee 's references been checked — Kirby would have discovered complaints of inappropriate sexual behavior at his previous employer and an arrest and deferred adjudication for indecency with a child .
The North Dakota Supreme Court also held Kirby liable in a similar rape incident , where the salesman was hired after being convicted of assault and with charges of criminal sexual misconduct in the third degree pending against him .
FRAUD AND RICO Section::::Fraud and RICO .
A federal class - action lawsuit is pending against Kirby under the civil action provisions of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) , for allegedly selling used vacuums as new ; the complaint alleges that " Not only is Kirby aware of this practice , it ' participates in the scheme by , among other things , selling to its distributors duplicate or replacement " Original Purchaser 's Registration " cards to be given to secondhand purchasers . '
"
The complaint also alleges that " Kirby commonly sells distributors new empty boxes and packaging material for the obvious purpose of repackaging units that the distributor previously sold to a prior customer . "
Kirby 's motion to dismiss was rejected .
After Kirby refused discovery requests for its sales contracts and other documents , Judge Clay D. Land compelled Kirby to disclose the requested documents .
A class - action lawsuit was also filed against Kirby in Bullock County Court in Alabama over its sales practices , specifically its use of credit cards issued expressly to fund Kirby purchases , under Truth in Lending laws .
Kirby succeeded in persuading a trial judge to recuse himself .
ACTIONS AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED DEALERS Section::::Actions against unauthorized dealers .
Kirby has sued unauthorized Kirby vacuum dealers for United States trademark infringement where the vacuums are identified by the Kirby name and logo .
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit has held that such use does not constitute trademark infringement .
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit vacated an injunction granted in Kirby 's favor by a lower court in that Circuit based on similar trademark claims against an unauthorized distributor .
Kirby also did not prevail in a similar action against an unauthorized dealer in Minnesota , where it asserted trademark infringement , false and unfair competition , and trade disparagement ; the authorized dealer prevailed on a $ 90,000 counterclaim against Kirby for defamation and then in a suit against an insurer who refused to defend the suit when the dealer refused Kirby 's settlement offer .
Kirby 's parent lost another such suit in Minnesota based on trademark infringement and other related state law claims .
Nor did Kirby prevail in a tortious interference with contractual relations claim in Washington against an unauthorized retailer ; the Washington Supreme Court awarded attorney 's fees to the retailer .
However , Kirby has prevailed in cases where unauthorized retailers went farther than using the name and logo to identify the vacuum cleaner , misrepresenting themselves as the manufacturer and claiming the existence of factory warranty .
NOTES REFERENCES
* Kirby Instruction and Owner 's
Manual
* The Vintage Vacuum
* Introduction years of Vintage Kirby Models
* Miles , Robert P. 2003 .
The Warren Buffett CEO : Secrets from the Berkshire Hathaway Managers .