ROOSEVELT ROADS NAVAL STATION
Roosevelt Roads Naval Station is a former United States Navy base in the town of Ceiba , Puerto Rico .
The site is run today as José Aponte de la Torre Airport , a public use airport .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1919 , the future U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt , then Assistant Secretary of the Navy , toured Puerto Rico , visiting Ceiba .
When he returned to Washington , D.C. , he expressed a liking for the terrain where the base now is .
This was during the World War
I era , and the United States could benefit from an air field in Ceiba .
While Puerto Rico is a commonwealth , its territorial rights belong to the United States , which made it perfectly feasible , and ideal , for the American government to build an airplane base in Ceiba .
It took many years for the United States Government to become convinced of the need for an air base in Ceiba .
When Adolf Hitler and Nazi - led Germany began to invade other European countries , the US , led by then President Roosevelt , entertained the idea of a Naval air station in Ceiba .
With war in the European and Pacific theatres , they saw an airbase in the Caribbean as necessary .
The base had been inaugurated , but scaled down to maintenance status with a public works office in 1944 .
From then until 1957 , the base went through many shifts , being opened seven times and closed eight times .
Meanwhile , it continued as a source of employment for the citizens of Ceiba .
In 1957 , it was upgraded to Naval Station status .
Fort Bundy was located there , but it crossed over to parts of Vieques , a fact which would become important in the future .
An American military mission , the M3 , was located there .
It was part of the " Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station , Puerto Rico Base Communication Department " .
M3 had a fleet center , a technical control facility and a Tactical support communications department , among other things .
The M3 was designated to help Puerto Rico , the United States and other Caribbean and Latin American countries to deal with drug trafficking , illegal immigration and other problems .
The main purpose of the base was tactical support for land / sea / air maneuvers on Vieques island .
For the next 47 years the base was utilized for flight practice , as well as other missions and control of the area 's air space .
In August 2002 , a MC-130H airplane carrying seven airmen crashed in the town of Caguas , while en route from Roosevelt Roads to Rafael Hernández Airport in Aguadilla .
All seven perished , in the largest air tragedy in Caguas 's history .
In 2017 Roosevelt Roads military personnel arrived at Roosevelt Roads after Hurricane Maria to assist in rescue efforts .
Units such as the United States Air Force 821st Contingency Response Support Squadron , 821st Contingency Response Group , the United States Army 1st Armored Division Aviation Brigade and the 101st Airborne Division " Dustoff " unit arrived at Roosevelt Roads .
Marines and sailors also set up a supply staging base receiving around - the - clock airlifts at Roosevelt Roads .
This was the first major military activity at Roosevelt Roads since 2004 .
U.S NAVAL FORCES SOUTHERN COMMAND Section::::U.S Naval Forces Southern Command .
COMUSNAVSO U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command ( NAVSO ) directs naval forces and interacts with partner nations to shape the maritime environment within United States Southern Command 's Area of Focus ( AOF ) .
With a focus on Theater Security Cooperation , NAVSO works to strengthen and build effective alliance and friendships , develop partner nation capabilities , and maintain U.S. operational access to defend the United States .
U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command ( COMUSNAVSO ) , headquartered at Naval Station Roosevelt Roads , Puerto Rico , was the Naval Component Commander to the U.S. Southern Command , based in Miami , Florida .
It provides strategic and operational command and control for U.S. Naval Forces in South America , Central America and the Caribbean .
On 10 December 1999
the U.S. Navy established Commander , U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command , also known as NAVSOUTH , in a ceremony aboard USS Vicksburg ( CG 69 ) inport Roosevelt Roads .
The new organization is responsible for Navy operational forces in the United States Southern Command 's area of responsibility ( AOR ) , including Naval Special Warfare Unit Four , a training detachment for SEAL teams from the SOCOM operational area .
It oversees U.S. naval forces participating in drug enforcement operations and interaction with South American naval forces , including the annual UNITAS operations around South America .
As the Navy 's senior representative , Commander , United States Naval Forces , Southern Command ( COMUSNAVSO ) serves as the principal liaison with the government of Puerto Rico .
In January 2004 The Navy decided to relocate U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command ( USNAVSO ) from Naval Station Roosevelt Roads , Puerto Rico , to Naval Station Mayport , Florida .
Since the Navy had to close Naval Station Roosevelt Roads by 31 March 2004 , relocation of USNAVSO was a high priority .
LIFE ON ROOSEVELT ROADS Section::::Life on Roosevelt Roads .
Roosevelt Roads Naval Station , or Roosey ( pronounced " Rosy " ) as it was frequently called , was home to hundreds of military personnel and dependents .
Education for children of those based at the Station was initially provided by teachers who were DOD contractors from the U.S.
Later , more local teachers were hired .
Radio and television entertainment on the base during the mid-1970s was somewhat limited .
News and information broadcasts were provided by Navy and Marine Corps journalists from the studios of The American Forces Caribbean Network ( AFCN ) .
Families could also tune into the on - base AFRTS radio and television station 's family - oriented shows , or rig up an antenna for signals from St. Thomas or San Juan .
At one time , the AFCN operated repeater transmitters broadcasting radio and TV to San Juan , and Ramey Air Force Base , which was located on the west coast of Puerto Rico .
At the El Coqui Theater , in the Bundy area of the base , movie goers watched films as swifts , a small batlike bird , flitted across the screen .
Bats were abundant on the island as well but the brightly - lit screen attracted these small birds whose stiff - winged flight was easily distinguishable from the flutter of a bat .
Birds hunt using superior eyesight and the projector provided welcome light for them in the darkened theater while bats who depend on echo - location do not need it and were seen only incidentally .
But both served as first - class controls on the persistent infestation of mosquitoes ( and Mimis , an almost invisible biting midge with a most painful bite ) encountered everywhere on the island .
The base equestrian stables were across from the golf course aka : Lake Bundy .
Most of the ' horses ' were technically ponies , although several thoroughbreds , washouts from race tracks , found a home on base occasionally .
The base flying club had many members , and met regularly to plan trips and activities .
Flight instruction was available to all members .
THE VIEQUES EFFECT Section::::The Vieques effect .
In 1999 , David Sanes , a civilian employed as a gate security guard by the US Navy , died from a stray bomb while observing a routine exercise .
As a consequence of this and the high rate of cancer ( correlation unconfirmed ) among residents of Vieques many Vieques citizens and Puerto Rican activists from other towns ( Ruben Berrios , Tito Kayak , etc . ) began activism against the military presence in Vieques , which included illegally entering the live -fire areas at the military reservation .
Other important activists included Jesse Jackson , Robert Kennedy Jr. , Al Sharpton , U.S. Representative Luis Gutiérrez D - IL , Rigoberta Menchú and Edward James Olmos
( the last was jailed in Puerto Rico for trespassing on federal property ) .
An agreement between the Clinton Administration and the Government of Puerto Rico ( then Gov. Rosello ) agreed to cease all live bombing on Vieques by March 2003 .
Ft .
Bundy was affected by the protests , because part of it was in Vieques .
After Sanes ' death , there was a struggle between the autonomous Government of Puerto Rico and the American Government .
This was over after President George W. Bush granted Puerto Rico the rights to operate the former military possessions in Vieques , including Ft .
Bundy , a portion of which was aboard Roosevelt Roads Naval Station .
As a consequence of President Bush 's decision , the Roosevelt Roads Naval Station became NAPR ( Naval Activity Puerto Rico ) , where DoD Police provides security , but still is considered a military installation .
On 31 March 2004 , the station again became inoperative .
THE FUTURE Section::::The future .
After the military left the station , Puerto Rican Governor Sila María Calderón announced that her party , the PPD , had political goals to turn the base into an international airport .
This was backed in 2005 by the then - new Governor , Aníbal Acevedo Vilá , who asserted that the area might be converted to an airport .
He also stated that Ceiba as a town would serve as an economic and tourist center for eastern Puerto Rico , and that converting the former military base into a civil airport would be part of a plan to open seven or eight large airports in Puerto Rico .
As of January 2009 , approximately of the former Naval Station was being marketed to the public by the Los Angeles group of Colliers International , on behalf of the Navy 's Base Realignment and Closure Program Management Office , as a public auction to commence in the near future .
The remaining portion is also in the process of being conveyed to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and other Federal agencies in various stages .
Since November 2008 , Puerto Rico Ports Authority operates the José Aponte de la Torre Airport .
In 2012 , the former Roosevelt Roads Naval Station was under consideration as a possible location for the SpaceX private launch site , but was not selected .
The CBP Air and Marine Operations began marine operations at Roosevelt Roads Naval Station on August 30 , 2018 .
Marine Environmental Remediation ( MER ) Group signed an agreement with the LRA to rent Pier 3 as a ship recycling facility in April 2016 .
MER Group is the first true GREEN recycling facility within the United States .
There are currently three ( 3 ) ships , Seven Polaris , Lone Star and the Atlantic VII , at the pier for recycling .
The company will bring over 700 jobs to the local area .
As of October 2018 , Ricardo Rosselló 's administration made it the launching port to Vieques and Culebra U.S. ARMY RESERVE , ARMY NATIONAL GUARD AND REMAINING MILITARY ACTIVITIES
Section::::U.S. Army Reserve , Army National Guard and remaining military activities .
The United States Armed Forces keep some portions of the former Roosevelt Roads Naval Base for the Reserve Component of the United States Army .
It consist of the existing Roosevelt Roads U.S. Army Reserve Center and an Armed Forces Reserve Center ( AFRC ) .
The Roosevelt Roads Armed Forces Reserve Center was opened 10 September 2011 .
This facility with can serve 600 personnel on a rotating basis 345 service members per weekend .
This AFRC includes a vehicle maintenance shop , storage building , weapons simulator , learning center , wash bay and parking .
The Armed Forces Reserve Center at Roosevelt Roads will accommodate the United States Army Reserve the 973rd Quartermaster Company and 346th Transportation Battalion .
The Puerto Rico Army National Guard 7 FT Landing Craft Detachment , 380th Engineer Platoon , 232nd Engineering Dive Team and a Recruiting / Retention Office .
This facility will serve about 600 service members on a rotating basis with the maximum expected use of the facility being about 245 Reserve and Army Guard members per weekend .
The Roosevelt Roads U.S. Army Reserve Center is home for the 346th Transportation Battalion , the 390th Seaport Operations Company , the 273rd Transportation Detachment and the 756th Engineering Company .
The U.S. Army Reserve Boat Maintenance Facility located at Ensenada Honda bay was transferred to the Puerto Rico National Guard Landing Craft Detachment , 191st Regional Support Group .
Cabras Island ones the Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Facility ( AFWTF )
Drone Launch Facility was transferred to the United States Coast Guard .
SEE ALSO * Military history of Puerto Rico REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* GlobalSecurity.org profile *
http://www.rooseveltroads.pr.gov
* http://www.defensecommunities.org/