JOHN CARPENTER ( GAME SHOW CONTESTANT ) John Carpenter ( born c. 1968 ) is an American game show contestant and IRS agent .
He is best known for becoming the first top prize winner on the United States version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire .
He held the record for the largest single win in United States game show history , until it was broken by Rahim Oberholtzer who won $ 1.12 million on another U.S. quiz show , Twenty One .
Carpenter was also the first top prize winner among all international versions of the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ?
series .
On the November 19 , 1999 episode of Millionaire , Carpenter proceeded to advance to the million - dollar question without using any lifelines .
He then used his Phone - A - Friend to call his father not for help , but rather to tell him he was going to win the game .
Carpenter answered the question correctly and became the show 's first millionaire .
His win gave him national recognition and led to multiple talk show appearances , as well as reappearances on Millionaire himself .
CAREER AND FAMILY Section::::Career and family .
Carpenter is from Northampton , Massachusetts .
His father , Tom , worked as a computer program analyst for the Department of Veterans Affairs , while his mother , Gail , served as an administrative assistant for the Massachusetts Audubon Society .
In 1986 , he enrolled at Rutgers University and graduated in 1990 with a degree in economics .
In January 1991 , he joined the Internal Revenue Service after completing government exams and tests .
In November 1996 , Carpenter met his future wife , Deborah , who was studying for a master 's degree at Southern Connecticut State University and worked as a manager of a Fleet Bank branch in New Haven .
They married in August 1998 .
At the time of his appearance on Millionaire , he was 31 years old .
When he revealed his profession as an IRS officer on Millionaire , Carpenter was playfully booed by the audience .
WHO WANTS TO BE A MILLIONAIRE Section::::Who Wants to Be a Millionaire .
Carpenter was originally uninterested in Millionaire but eventually tuned in one night after dinner while having friends over at his house .
When he found the show 's higher - tier questions to not be , in his words , " any more difficult " than the lower - tier ones , he decided to call in to the show 's hotline for a chance to become a contestant .
Carpenter answered all of the hotline questions correctly and was on the show within two days .
Host Regis Philbin described Carpenter as having " cruised right through those first fourteen questions , " he had proceeded to reach the final question without using any of his lifelines .
The $ 1 million question was , " Which of these U.S. Presidents appeared on the television series ' Laugh - In ' ?
" , with the choices being A ) Lyndon Johnson , B )
Richard Nixon , C ) Jimmy Carter , and D )
Gerald Ford .
Carpenter used his Phone - A - Friend lifeline to call his father not for help , but rather to inform him that he knew the answer .
Carpenter later explained , " I thought I 'd look so cocky if I did n't use any lifelines , so I faked it . "
With his win , Carpenter became the first contestant in the worldwide Millionaire franchise to win the show 's top prize .
He said that the only question that had flustered him was one which asked for the location of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral .
Carpenter eventually remembered that the film Tombstone included the gunfight , and he replied correctly with the answer ' Tombstone , Arizona ' .
While taking a vacation after his win , Carpenter considered quitting his job with the IRS , but eventually decided against it .
He explained to Kiplinger 's Personal Finance that " after the taxes , it 's not change - your - life kind of money if you want to eat every day .
"
Carpenter also described the fame as having a bigger impact on his life than the money , later stating : " The money does n't change your life .
What happens afterwards might . "
LATER WORK Section::::Later work .
Shortly after winning on Millionaire , Carpenter played himself in a Saturday Night Live skit .
Donald Trump , played by Darrell Hammond , announced that Carpenter would be his running - mate in the presidential election .
Afterward , Carpenter pretended to call his father , then shouted , " Live from New York , it 's Saturday Night ! "
Carpenter also appeared on Good Morning America , Oprah Winfrey Show and Live with Regis and Kathie Lee .
Carpenter appeared as himself in the second half of the fourth season of Oz .
He plays a contestant in a fictional TV game show called Up Your Ante that the prisoners in Em City are watching .
The show within the show is hosted by Gordon Elliott , with Eartha Kitt and Didi Conn appearing as celebrity participants .
With Rod L. Evans , Carpenter co - authored a trivia book titled Matching Wits With the Million - Dollar Mind : The World 's Hardest Trivia Quizzes From America 's First Quiz Show Millionaire .
The book was published by Berkley Books in 2002 .
OTHER GAME SHOW APPEARANCES
Section::::Other game show appearances .
In 2000 , Carpenter appeared in the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire Champions Edition , in which previous contestants who won $ 250,000–$1,000,000 played again , with half of their additional winnings from the Champions Edition going to a charity of their choice .
Carpenter won $ 250,000 , bringing his total Millionaire winnings to $ 1,250,000 .
In 2004 , Carpenter participated in Super Millionaire , as one of the " Three Wise Men " on the episode during which Robert " Bob - O " Essig won $ 1,000,000 .
He later participated as part of the Mob on NBC 's 1 vs. 100 on October 27 , 2006 , and as a contestant on the Game Show Network game show Grand Slam .
Carpenter appeared on the August 16 , 2009 episode of Millionaire in prime time for its tenth anniversary .
In the audience with him were his father , his wife , and his son .
Additionally , he was also the first expert in the " Ask the Expert " lifeline for the eighth season of the syndicated series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS