DANIEL ( ELTON JOHN SONG )
" Daniel " is a song and ballad by Elton John .
It appeared on the 1973 album Do n't Shoot Me
I 'm Only the Piano Player .
It was written by John and his lyricist Bernie Taupin .
In the United Kingdom , the song reached no . 4 in the official chart .
In the US the song reached No . 2 on the pop charts ( only held from number one by " My Love " by Paul McCartney & Wings ) and No . 1 on the adult contemporary charts for two weeks in the spring of 1973 .
In the United States , it was certified Gold in September 1995 and Platinum in May 2018 by the RIAA .
In Canada , it became his second No . 1 single , following " Crocodile Rock " earlier in the year , holding the position for two weeks in the RPM 100 national singles chart .
Writers John and Taupin received the 1973 Ivor Novello award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically .
Donatella Versace named her son after this song .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Bernie Taupin wrote " Daniel " after reading an article in either Time or Newsweek about a Vietnam War veteran who had been wounded , and wanted to get away from the attention he was receiving when he went back home .
The last verse in the original draft was cut from the final version , which has led to some speculation on the contents .
" ' Daniel ' had been the most misinterpreted song that we 'd ever written , " explained Taupin , in the Two Rooms tribute project .
" The story was about a guy that went back to a small town in Texas , returning from the Vietnam War .
They 'd lauded him when he came home and treated him like a hero .
But , he just wanted to go home , go back to the farm , and try to get back to the life that he 'd led before .
I wanted to write something that was sympathetic to the people that came home . "
PERSONNEL * Elton John – Fender Rhodes electric piano , " flute " Mellotron , vocals * Davey Johnstone – acoustic guitar , banjo * Dee Murray – bass * Nigel Olsson – drums , maracas * Ken Scott –
ARP synthesizer CHART PERFORMANCE WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1973 ) !
Peakposition Canada RPM 100
Top Singles Canada RPM Adult Contemporary Dutch Top 40 Dutch Single Top 100 align="left"German
Singles Chart align="left"Irish Singles Chart align="left"New Zealand Singles Chart align="left"Norwegian Singles Chart align="left"South African Singles Chart align="left"Swiss
Singles Chart
align="left"UK Singles Chart align="left"US Billboard Hot 100 align="left"US Billboard Easy Listening
align="left"US Cash Box Top 100 align="left"Zimbabwean
Singles Chart YEAR - END CHARTS ACCOLADES Grammy Awards 1974 rowspan="2 " " Daniel " Best Pop Vocal Performance – Male NOTABLE COVERS Section::::Notable covers .
" Daniel " was covered on the 1991 album by Wilson Phillips .
It reached number seven on the US Adult Contemporary chart as an album cut .
Sam Smith covered the song for the 2018 tribute album .
The band Fuel ( band ) covered " Daniel " on the bonus version of their year 2000 "
Something Like Human ' album .
USE AS FILM MUSIC Section::::Use as film music .
" Daniel " can be heard in the film Alice Does n't Live Here Anymore by Martin Scorsese .
SEE ALSO
* List of RPM number - one singles of 1973
( Canada ) * List of number - one adult contemporary singles of 1973 ( U.S. ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS