NATASHA ROSTOVA Countess Natalya " Natasha " Ilyinichna Rostova ( , named Natasha Rostov in the Rosemary Edmonds version ;
born 1792 , according to the book ) is a central fictional character in Leo Tolstoy 's novel War and Peace .
She is the daughter of Ilya Rostov , a loving and generous nobleman .
Natasha is based on both Tanya Behrs , Tolstoy 's sister - in - law , and Sophia Tolstaya , the wife of Tolstoy .
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Biography .
At the start of the novel in 1805 , Natasha is a 13-year - old girl , the daughter of Count Ilya Rostov and Countess Natalya Rostova .
She has fallen in love with young Prince Boris Drubetskoy , who lives with his mother in the Rostov estate .
She becomes close friends with Count Pierre Bezukhov , who frequently visits the Rostovs .
When Boris leaves to pursue a career in the staff of General Mikhail Kutuzov , their friendship evaporates .
At her first ball , Pierre introduces her to Prince Andrei Bolkonsky .
They fall in love and become engaged , but Andrei 's father objects to the match .
He forces Andrei to postpone the marriage for a year , during which he serves as a staff officer on the Polish border .
A visit to Andrei 's father ends in a falling - out between Natasha and Princess Marya , Andrei 's sister .
During Andrei 's absence , Prince Anatole Kuragin takes advantage of the situation by courting Natasha , even though he is already married .
She succumbs to his charms , and tries to elope with Kuragin .
Although this is thwarted by Natasha 's cousin Sonya , Natasha hastily writes to Princess Marya , breaking off the engagement .
After her plan to elope is ruined , Natasha attempts suicide .
She is rescued by the doctor before she dies .
As Napoleon advances into Russia , the Rostovs are forced to evacuate their estate and retreat to their Moscow residence .
When the Rostovs plan to evacuate Moscow , her parents use the carts for transportation of the wounded soldiers , and Natasha discovers that Andrei is among the wounded soldiers .
She devotes all her time to nursing him .
After the French forces depart Moscow , Natasha again meets Andrei 's sister Marya and together they nurse Andrei until he dies .
They are reunited with Pierre , whose estranged wife Helene has died .
Natasha and Pierre fall in love .
Eventually , they marry and have four children .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The character of Natasha Rostova is difficult to portray on film or television , because she ages from a 13-year - old girl in book one to a 28-year - old mother of four at the end of the novel .
Several actresses have portrayed Natasha Rostova to critical acclaim .
In 1956 , Audrey Hepburn was cast as Natasha in King Vidor 's War and Peace .
She was nominated for a BAFTA Award for best British actress and for a Golden Globe Award for best actress in a drama production .
Moreover , Harlow Robinson writes that Hepburn " makes a visually compelling Natasha ... " .
Other performances include those of Morag Hood in the 1972 BBC miniseries with Anthony Hopkins as Pierre , Lyudmila Savelyeva in Sergei Bondarchuk 's adaptation , Clémence Poésy in the 2007 miniseries and Phillipa Soo ( and later Denée Benton ) in the New York musical adaptation , Natasha , Pierre and the Great Comet of 1812 , which received numerous Tony nominations in 2017 .
In 2016 BBC One 's six - part drama based on the novel cast the 25-year - old English actress Lily James as Natasha Rostova , best known for her roles in Downton Abbey and Disney 's live action Cinderella .
SCHOLARLY RECEPTION
Section::::Scholarly reception .
The Encyclopedia of Literature remarks that Natasha " is undoubtedly Tolstoy 's ideal woman , " while the Academic American Encyclopedia describes her as " the embodiment of impulsiveness and spontaneity ... " .
On the other hand , the transformation of her character towards the end of the novel from a joyous , spirited ' waif - like ' beauty into a plump , rather slatternly woman , who is only interested in her husband and children though realistic , has been criticized .
Dorothea Barrett compares this to the description of a matronly Dinah Morris at the end of Adam Bede , which she calls ' inappropriate , almost humiliating ' .
SEE ALSO
* List of characters in War and Peace REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Daniel Lattin , " Natasha Rostova vs. Anna Karenina : A Comparison of Falls from Grace "
* Andrew Kaufman , Oprah 's Book Club , " Finding Inspiration in Tolstoy 's War and Peace " .
* Valeria Sobol , Columbia University , " Reading the Invisible :
The Mind , the Body and the Medical Examiner in Lev Tolstoy 's Anna Karenina " EXTERNAL LINKS *
" Natasha Rostova ( Character ) from Voyna
i mir ( 1967 ) , " The Internet Movie Database