GREEN ANACONDA
The green anaconda ( Eunectes murinus ) , also known as common anaconda and water boa , is a non - venomous boa species found in South America .
It is the heaviest and one of the longest known extant snake species .
The term anaconda often refers to this species , though the term could also apply to other members of the genus Eunectes .
The green anaconda 's scientific name is derived from the Greek , meaning " good swimmer " , and the Latin , meaning " of mice " , for being thought to prey on mice .
" The name first was probably from the Sinhala language of Sri Lanka , formerly Ceylon , and that in 1869 , the Englishman John Ray wrote of " anacandaia of the Ceylonese , i.e. , he that crushes the limbs of the buffaloes and yoke beasts . " For more than one hundred years the name was applied to a ( python ) snake from Ceylon , but in the nineteenth century experts began to use it for a snake residing in the Amazon basin .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The green anaconda is the world 's heaviest and one of the world 's longest snakes , reaching long .
More typical mature specimens reportedly can range up to , with the females , at around a mean length of , being generally much larger in adulthood than the male , which averages around .
Weights are less well studied , though will reportedly range from in an average - range adult .
It is the largest snake native to the Americas .
Although it is slightly shorter than the reticulated python , it is far more robust : the bulk of a 4.5 m green anaconda would be comparable to a 7.4 m reticulated python .
Eunectes murinus is probably the heaviest extant species of snake or squamate in the world , perhaps only rivaled by the Komodo dragon .
Reports of anacondas 35–40 feet or even longer also exist , but such claims need to be regarded with caution , as no specimens of such lengths have ever been deposited in a museum and hard evidence is lacking .
A $ 50,000 cash reward is offered for anyone who can catch an anaconda or longer , but the prize has not been claimed yet .
The longest ( and heaviest ) verified specimen encountered by Dr. Jesús Antonio Rivas , who had examined thousands of anacondas , was a female measuring long and weighing .
The color pattern consists of olive green background overlaid with black blotches along the length of the body .
The head is narrow compared to the body , usually with distinctive orange - yellow striping on either side .
The eyes are set high on the head , allowing the snake to see out of the water while swimming without exposing its body .
DIFFICULTIES IN DETERMINING
MAXIMUM SIZE Section::::Difficulties in determining maximum size .
The remote location of the snake 's habitat has historically made locating , capturing , and returning specimens difficult .
Transporting very large specimens to museums , especially before substantial decay , is difficult ( though this has not prevented the return of much larger and more cumbersome crocodilian specimens ) .
Skins can stretch substantially , increasing the snake 's size by more than 50 % if stretched during the tanning process .
Reports without physical proof are considered dubious if from nonscientists , as such individuals may at worst be more interested in promoting themselves or telling a good tale , or at the least may not be sufficiently trained in proper measurement methods .
Observational reports of animals which were not captured are even more dubious , as even trained scientists often substantially overestimate the size of anacondas prior to capture .
According to the Guinness Book of World Records , this species has been perhaps subject to the most extreme size exaggerations of any living animal .
At the same time , it is difficult to argue a maximum possible or plausible size , because anacondas are known to continue to grow throughout their lives .
Older reports in particular could include individuals which , in times of less pressure from humans , lived longer lives and thus reached greater sizes .
HISTORICAL RECORDS Section::::Historical records .
Numerous historical accounts of green anacondas are reported , often of improbable sizes .
Several zoologists ( notably Henry Walter Bates and Alfred Russel Wallace , among others ) note rumors of snakes beyond 30 or 40 feet long , but in each case , their direct observations were limited to snakes of approximately 20 feet in length .
Numerous estimates and second - hand accounts abound , but are generally considered unreliable .
To prove the point of overestimating , in Guyana in 1937 , zoologist Alpheus Hyatt Verrill asked the expedition team he was with to estimate the length of a large , curled - up anaconda on a rock .
The team 's guesses ran from ; when measured , this specimen was found to be .
Almost all specimens in excess of , including a much publicized specimen of in length , have no voucher specimens , including skins or bones .
The skin of one specimen , stretched to , has been preserved in the Instituto Butantan in São Paulo and is reported to have come from an anaconda of in length .
In one of the most reliable accounts , a geologist killed a large anaconda and measured it using a four - meter rod , reporting it as three rods long ( ) ; however , the information was not published until many years later , and the geologist later suggested he may have misremembered and the anaconda could have been only two rods long ( ) .
While in Colombia in 1978 , herpetologist William W. Lamar had an encounter with a large female specimen which measured and was estimated to weigh between .
In 1962 , W.L. Schurz claimed to have measured a snake in Brazil of with a maximum girth of .
One female , reportedly measuring in length , shot in 1963 in Nariva Swamp , Trinidad , contained a 1.5-m caiman .
A specimen of , reportedly with a weight of , was caught at the mouth of the Kassikaityu River in Guyana , having been restrained by 13 local men , and was later air - lifted for a zoo collection in the United States , but died in ill health shortly thereafter .
The largest size verified for E. murinus in captivity was for a specimen kept in Pittsburgh Zoo and PPG Aquarium , which grew to a length of by the time she died on July 20 , 1960 .
When this specimen was long , she weighed .
The estimated weight for an anaconda in the range of is at least .
National Geographic has published a weight of up to for E. murinus , but this is almost certainly a mere estimation .
Weight can vary considerably in large specimens depending on environmental conditions and recent feedings , with Verrill 's aforementioned specimen , having been extremely bulky , scaled at , whereas another specimen considered large at , weighed only .
CURRENT ESTIMATES OF MAXIMAL SIZE
Section::::Current estimates of maximal size .
Size presents challenges to attain breeding condition in larger female anacondas and while larger sizes provide the benefit of larger number of offspring per clutch , the breeding frequency of the individuals reduces with size , indicating that there 's a point in which the advantage of larger clutch size is negated by the female no longer being able to breed , for the anaconda , this limit was estimated at approximately in total length .
This is consistent with the results of a revision of the size at maturity and maximum size of several snakes from North America , which found that the maximum size is between 1.5 and 2.5 the size at maturity .
The minimum size of breeding anacondas in a survey of 780 individuals was in snout - vent length , indicating that maximum size attained by anacondas following this pattern would be in snout - vent length .
However , most anacondas are captured from the llanos , which is more accessible to humans and has smaller prey available , while the rainforest , which is much less explored and has more plentiful large prey , may be home to larger snakes .
SCIENTIFIC AND
COMMON NAMES Section::::Scientific and common names .
In the famous 10th edition of Systema Naturae of 1758 , Carl Linnaeus cited descriptions by Albertus Seba and by Laurens Theodorus Gronovius to erect the distinct species murina of his new genus Boa , which contained eight other species , including Boa constrictor .
The generic name Boa came from an ancient Latin word for a type of large snake .
The first specimens of Boa murina were of immature individuals from 2.5 to 3.0 feet ( 75 to 90 cm ) in length .
In 1830 , Johann Georg Wagler erected the separate genus Eunectes ( " good swimmer " in Greek ) for Linnaeus 's Boa murina after more and larger specimens were known and described .
Because of the masculine gender of Eunectes , the feminine Latin specific name murina was changed to murinus .
Linnaeus almost certainly chose the scientific name
Boa murina based on the original Latin description given by A. Seba in 1735 : " Serpens testudinacea americana , murium insidiator "
[ tortoise - patterned ( spotted ) American snake , a predator that lies in wait for mice ( and rats ) ] .
The Latin adjective murinus ( murina ) in this case would mean " of mice " or " connected with mice , " understood in context as " preying on mice " , and not as " mouse - gray - colored " ( another possible meaning of Latin murinus ) as now often wrongly indicated for E. murinus .
Early English - language sources , such as George Shaw , referred to the Boa murina as the " rat boa " and the Penny Cyclopaedia ( Vol . 5 ) entry for boa explained : " The trivial name murina was given to it from being said to lie in wait for mice . "
Linnaeus described the appearance of the Boa murina in Latin as rufus maculis supra rotundatis [ reddish - brown with rounded spots on upper parts ] and made no reference to a gray coloration .
Early descriptions of the green anaconda by different authors variously referred to the general color as brown , glaucous , green , or gray .
Common names for E. murinus include green anaconda , anaconda , common anaconda , and water boa .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Eunectes murinus is found in South America east of the Andes , in countries including Colombia , Venezuela , the Guianas , Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia , Brazil , the island of Trinidad , and as far south as northern Paraguay .
The type locality given is " America " .
Anacondas live in swamps , marshes , and slow - moving streams , mainly in the tropical rainforests of the Amazon and Orinoco basins .
They are cumbersome on land , but stealthy and sleek in the water .
Their eyes and nasal openings are on top of their heads , allowing them to lie in wait for prey while remaining nearly completely submerged .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
The primarily nocturnal anaconda species tend to spend most of its life in or around water .
Anacondas are also sometimes known as the water boa ; they spend more time in water than any of the boas .
They seem rather slow and sluggish when traveling on land due to their size , although they have the potential to reach high speeds in the water .
They tend to float beneath the surface of the water with their snouts above the surface .
When prey passes by or stops to drink , the anaconda will strike ( without eating or swallowing it ) and coil around it with its body .
The snake will then constrict until it has suffocated the prey .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
Primarily aquatic , they eat a wide variety of prey , almost anything they can manage to overpower , including fish , birds , a variety of mammals , and other reptiles .
Particularly large anacondas may consume large prey such as tapirs , deer , capybaras , caimans , and even jaguars , but such large meals are not regularly consumed .
The green anaconda 's eyes and nose are located on the top of the head , allowing the snake to breathe and watch for prey while the vast majority of the body is hidden underwater .
Many local stories and legends report the anaconda as a man - eater , but little evidence supports any such activity .
They employ constriction to subdue their prey .
Cannibalism among green anacondas is also known , most recorded cases involving a larger female consuming a smaller male .
While the exact reason for this is not understood , scientists cite several possibilities , including the dramatic sexual dimorphism in the species , and the possibility that a female anaconda requires additional food intake after breeding to sustain the long period of gestation .
The nearby male simply provides the opportunistic female a ready source of nutrition .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
This species is solitary until the mating season , which occurs during the rainy season , and can last for several months , usually from April to May.
During this time , males must find females .
Typically , female snakes will lay down a trail of pheromones for the males to follow , but it is still unclear how the males of this species track a female 's scent .
Another possibility is that the female releases an airborne stimulant .
This theory is supported by the observation of females that remain motionless while many males move towards them from all directions .
Male anacondas also frequently flick their tongues to sense chemicals that signal the presence of the female .
Many males can often find the same female .
Although it may not be necessary for there to be more than one male , this results in odd clusters referred to as " breeding balls " , in which up to 12 males wrap around the same female and attempt to copulate .
The group could stay in this position from two to four weeks .
This ball acts as a slow - motion wrestling match between the males , each one fighting for the opportunity to mate with the female .
During mating , males make use of their spurs to arouse the female .
They aggressively press their cloacal regions hard against the female body , while continuously scratching her with their spurs .
This can produce a scratching sound .
Mating approaches its climax when the stimulus of the males ' spurs induces the female snake to raise her cloacal region , allowing the cloacae of the two snakes to move together .
The male then coils his tail , surrounding the female and they copulate .
The strongest and largest male is often the victor .
However , females are physically much larger and stronger and may decide to choose from among the males .
Courtship and mating occur almost exclusively in water .
Mating is followed by a gestation period that lasts about six to seven months .
The species is ovoviviparous , with females giving birth to live young .
Litters usually consists of 20 to 40 offspring , although as many as 100 may be produced .
After giving birth , females may lose up to half their weight .
Neonates ( babies ) are around 70–80 cm long and receive no parental care .
Because of their small size , they often fall prey to other animals .
Should they survive , they grow rapidly until they reach sexual maturity in their first few years , after which their rate of growth continues at a slower pace .
However , when no male anacondas are available to provide offspring facultative parthenogenesis is possible .
In August 2014 West Midlands Safari Park announced that on 12 August 2014 a female Green anaconda , which was being kept with another female anaconda , through parthenogenesis had given birth to three young .
CAPTIVITY Section::::Captivity .
One may reasonably maintain an average and acceptable temperature for the snake by the use of a heating element or infrared light bulbs .
A gradient must be offered within the enclosure to allow the snake to bask in the heat or go to cooler areas in the tank .
Optimum humidity can be difficult to maintain and research must be done on the snake to determine the correct level .
More than 80 % humidity must be maintained for caging an anaconda species from the tropical region , while a slightly less than 30 % humidity must be maintained for a species of a desert region .
Photoperiods are often used with most species of snake ; natural light is best for this , but low UV percentage bulbs can also be used .
Captive anacondas have a reputation for unpredictability and aggression due to the temperaments of wild - caught specimens first collected for captive breeding , but with proper care , green anacondas can and do make for calm , relatively sedate pets .
Due to their immense size and power however , proper respect and caution should always be maintained , and they are best left to experienced adult owners who can provide them with the proper requirements .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Anacondas have been portrayed in horror literature and film , often with the ability to swallow adult humans ; these traits are occasionally also attributed to other species , such as the Burmese python and the boa constrictor ( though the latter does not grow to a large enough size to kill and swallow a human ) .
Among the most popular such films are the 1997 film , Anaconda , and its three sequels .
This species is also the main antagonist in Mathias Bradley 's novel , Anacondas : The Terror of the Amazon Rainforest , in which multiple hybrid anacondas escape from a research facility in the Amazon Rainforest and come into contact with a toxic chemical that causes them to rapidly mutate into gigantic snakes .
A more positive depiction of the anaconda exists in the short stories ' and ' ( " The Return of Anaconda " ) by Horacio Quiroga , which are told from the anaconda 's point of view .
SEE ALSO
* List of boine species and subspecies REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Dirksen L , Böhme W. 1998 .
Studien an Anakondas 2 :
Zum taxonomischen Status von Eunectes murinus gigas ( Latreille , 1801 )
( Serpentes : Boidae ) , mit neuen Ergebnissen zur Gattung Eunectes Wagler , 1830.- Salamandra 34(4 ) : 359 - 374 .
* Dirksen L. 2002 .
Anakondas .
Monographische Revision der Gattung Eunectes ( Wagler , 1830).- Natur und Tier - Verlag Münster . .
187 pp .
* Rivas , J. A. , M. d. C. Muñoz , J. B. Thorbjarnarson , G. M. Burghardt , W. Holmstrom , and P. Calle .
2007 .
Natural History of the green anacondas in the Venezuelan llanos .
Pages 128 - 138 in R. W. Henderson , and R. Powell , editors .
Biology of Boas , Pythons , and Related Taxa .
Eagle Mountain Publishing Company , Eagle Mountain .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Anacondas.org .
Accessed 30 April 2012 .
* Giant Anaconda - Hunting .
National Geographic - Check123 .