PUNTA CANA
Punta Cana is a resort town within the Punta Cana - Bávaro - Veron - Macao municipal district , in the municipality of Higüey , in La Altagracia Province , the easternmost province of the Dominican Republic .
The area has beaches and balnearios which face both the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean , and it has been a popular tourist destination .
The weather is very hot and humid .
GEOGRAPHY AND CLIMATE Section::::Geography and climate .
The Punta Cana area has an estimated population of 50,000 , with an annual growth rate of 6 % .
To the north , it borders the village and beach of Cabeza de Toro , and the Bávaro and El Cortecito beaches .
The nearest city , the 500-year - old Higüey , is away , which takes about an hour to reach by car .
European entrepreneurs , particularly Spanish hotel chains , own all but two of the over 50 megaresorts at the Punta Cana tourism destination .
The province 's coastline tends to be mildly windy .
The ocean waters are mainly shallows , with several natural marine pools in which visitors can bathe without danger .
From north to south , the main beaches are Uvero Alto , Macao , Arena Gorda , Bávaro , El Cortecito , Las Corales , and Cabeza de Toro , all north of the cape ; and Cabo Engaño , Punta Cana , and Juanillo south of the cape .
Bávaro is the area starting from Cabeza de Toro until Macao Beach .
As the hotels started to rise along the East coast , Bavaro itself became a center of services with shopping malls , fast - food stores , drug stores , fine restaurants , banks , clinics , workshops , supermarkets , and schools .
The major town in the district is Veron , now bigger than Higüey in territory , a spontaneous – and poor – urban development running along the original road from the west .
Verón , last name of the French proprietor of a timberline business in the early 1930s , is now the base - city for hotel workers and related .
It has , besides Bávaro , one of only four gas stations in Punta Cana .
The next one is located west in Higüey , at the Fruisa crossroads , with a new Texaco gas station opened April 2010 , south of Macao beach , and the new Shell gas station close to the airport ( on the highway Coral ) opened at the end of 2010 .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Punta Cana features a tropical wet and dry climate under the Köppen climate classification .
The weather is fairly consistent all year , with an average temperature of .
The hot and humid season lasts from May to October , and during the day temperatures might reach .
From November to March , temperatures during the evening are around .
Very little rain falls around the area , primarily because of the mostly flat landscape , a combination of savanna and mountains .
ACTIVITIES AND LANDMARKS Section::::Activities and landmarks .
Punta Cana is a popular tourist destination .
The area is a key contributor to the tourism industry in the Dominican Republic .
As a beach destination , many of the popular excursions in Punta Cana are near the water .
These activities include snorkeling , windsurfing , banana boat rides , speedboats , scuba diving , catamaran cruises , party boats , deep sea fishing , as well as swimming with dolphins and sharks and stingrays snorkeling .
Visitors that prefer to see more of the Dominican country side
, there are land based excursions such as safari tours , horse back riding and dune buggy .
The land based excursions offer some of the most beautiful views that Punta Cana has to offer .
Visiting the Dominican Republic 's smaller Caribbean Island of Saona and Catalina , is a day trip from Punta Cana .
The capital city Santo Domingo , and Los Haitises National Park , Samaná , are within a couple of hours .
The Basilica Catholic Monument , built in 1962 and designed by two French architects , is in nearby Higüey , the 500-year - old capital of the Province .
INFRASTRUCTURE
Section::::Infrastructure .
The electricity is powered by Consorcio Energetico Punta Cana Macao ( CEPM ) , a wind and solar energy producer led by US - based Argentine businessman Rolando Gonzalez - Bunster .
TOURISM
TRANSPORTATION Section::::Tourism .
Section::::Transportation .
The Punta Cana International Airport is the primary airport .
In 2014 , Punta Cana received over 2.4 million passengers , making it the second busiest airport in the Caribbean .
Grupo Puntacana built the Punta Cana International Airport in 1984 to facilitate tourism in the area .
It was the western hemisphere 's first privately owned international airport .
HOTELS AND RESORTS Section::::Hotels and resorts .
Punta Cana is known for many luxury resorts .
Because they are spaced far and few between , most of them are the all - inclusive types .
DIVING Section::::Diving .
Due to its popularity as a tourist destination and its location at the Caribbean Sea , diving is one of the tourist activities .
The marine area surrounding Punta Cana was declared a marine reserve in 2012 .
MARINE BIODIVERSITY Section::::Marine biodiversity .
The following species have been registered in the waters around Punta Cana : !
Group ! !
Common name ! !
Scientific name ! !
Image ! !
class = unsortable Notes SEE ALSO * Puntacana Resort and Club
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS