LORELAI GILMORE
Lorelai Victoria Gilmore is a fictional character in the comedy - drama television series Gilmore Girls , and its 2016 revival .
Portrayed by actress Lauren Graham , she appeared in every episode from the pilot in October 2000 to the series finale in May 2007 .
Lorelai is introduced as a young single mother of a teenage daughter , Rory .
Lorelai has a strained relationship with her wealthy parents , Richard and Emily , after running away as a teen to raise her daughter on her own .
Lorelai remains estranged from her parents for many years , until the events of the pilot episode , where she asks her parents for help with paying Rory 's tuition .
Her parents agree , on the condition that she visits them for dinner every Friday .
Besides an on - again , off - again relationship with Rory 's father , Christopher Hayden , Lorelai had a few romantic relationships that included Max Medina ( Scott Cohen ) , a teacher at Chilton to whom she was briefly engaged ; Alex Lesman ( Billy Burke ) , an outdoorsy coffee house entrepreneur ; Jason Stiles ( Chris Eigeman ) , a childhood acquaintance , and Luke Danes ( Scott Patterson ) , the owner of Luke 's Diner in Stars Hollow , who she bonded with throughout the run of the show .
As she frequented Luke 's Diner , they grew to be close friends and eventually fell in love .
Luke and Lorelai marry in the " Fall " episode of the revival series A Year in the Life .
Lorelai is often included on lists of " top TV moms " .
Graham received widespread critical acclaim for her performance as Lorelai , and has been nominated for several awards .
She was nominated for two Screen Actors Guild Awards in 2000 and 2001 , and a Golden Globe Award in 2001 .
Graham also won two Teen Choice Awards for her role .
ARC BACKGROUND Section::::Arc .
Section::::Background .
Lorelai Victoria Gilmore was born to Richard and Emily Gilmore on April 25 , 1968 .
Lorelai was raised in Hartford , Connecticut by wealthy parents who attempted to bring her up to be a proper young lady of society , go to an Ivy League college , marry a man with wealth and good - breeding .
Her life growing up was complicated due to an overbearing , neurotic mother and a workaholic father , who both expected Lorelai to live in their world of privilege .
As a teenager ( portrayed in flashbacks by Chelsea Brummet ) , she discovered she was pregnant with Christopher 's baby at the age of 16 .
This greatly embarrassed and disappointed her parents as well as the parents of Christopher , Straub and Francine Hayden .
Straub Hayden initially suggested for Lorelai to have an abortion , however Emily would not allow this , and Richard suggested that Lorelai and Christopher should marry instead .
Christopher agreed , but Lorelai refused , convinced that marrying so young simply would n't work out .
When Lorelai realized she was in labor , she left a note for her parents and drove alone to the hospital .
After her daughter , Rory , was born on October 8 , 1984 , Lorelai briefly lived with her parents then ran away to Stars Hollow , a small town in rural Connecticut , to find her own life .
The owner of the Independence Inn , Mia , gave her a job as a maid , and let her and Rory live in the back in a renovated potting shed .
The Independence Inn is where she met her best friend , Sookie St. James ( Melissa McCarthy ) , who was executive chef at the Independence Inn .
Lorelai worked her way up over the years , and was eventually promoted to executive manager , which is her job as the show opens .
For many years after running away from home , Lorelai had almost no contact with her parents , except for visits during major holidays .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
When the series starts , Rory gets accepted into Chilton Preparatory School , a private and expensive high school .
In order to pay the attendance fees , Lorelai goes as a last choice to Emily and Richard who agree to loan the money .
In exchange for paying for Rory 's tutition at Chilton , Emily and Richard instate mandatory " Friday night dinners " to which Lorelai reluctantly agrees , which allows them to get to know their granddaughter .
Lorelai meets Rory 's teacher Max Medina ( Scott Cohen ) at Rory 's first parent - teacher meeting in Chilton .
They both become interested in one another and soon start seeing each other .
When Lorelai wants to split as it becomes too serious , she kisses Max in Chilton , which provokes a scandal in the school and puts an end to their relationship .
While they are separate , Lorelai has a one - night stand with Christopher ( David Sutcliffe ) after a heated argument with her parents .
Christopher proposes to her , but she rejects him telling him he is not ready to take care of Rory and her .
Lorelai later rekindles her relationship with Max and they become engaged .
As their wedding is approaching , Lorelai has second thoughts and calls Christopher during her bachelorette party .
Suddenly , Lorelai decides to go on a road - trip with Rory during which they will visit Harvard University and calls off the wedding .
Christopher comes back to town for Rory 's debutante ball .
During the evening , Lorelai and Christopher share a kiss as she finds him changed , but he tells her he is now in a serious relationship with a woman named Sherrie .
Afterward , Lorelai and Sookie make plans about opening their Inn , but the building they want , Fran Weston 's inn ' the Dragonfly ' , is not for sale .
When Luke Danes ( Scott Patterson ) 's nephew Jess Mariano ( Milo Ventimiglia ) and Rory get into a car accident , Lorelai blames Jess which leads to a serious argument between Luke and Lorelai .
They reconcile only months later .
Christopher returns to Stars Hollow and after he tells Lorelai he has problems in his relationship with Sherrie , they spend the night together before Sookie 's wedding .
They are both now ready to commit , but when Christopher learns Sherrie is pregnant , he leaves Lorelai and returns to Sherrie .
In the third season , Lorelai then meets Alex Lesman ( Billy Burke ) at a lecture about inns and they begin dating .
While she is on her way to the Friday night dinner , Lorelai comes across Max and they catch up .
They again run into each other at Chilton 's bicentennial and share a kiss .
After several days , the two meet at a Chilton 's parent committee evening and Max makes it clear he does not want them to reunite .
On Lorelai 's birthday , Richard gives her payout from an investment he had made at her birth , however she decides to repay her parents for the loan , which shocks Emily .
Fran dies which gives the possibility to Lorelai and Sookie to buy the Dragonfly .
The Independence Inn closes and Lorelai plans on using the money aimed for the Dragonfly to pay for Yale University 's fees .
However , Rory asks her grandparents for their financial help , reinstating in return the Friday night dinners .
Lorelai and Sookie decide to buy the Dragonfly on Rory 's graduation day .
In the fourth season , Luke gets married to lawyer Nicole on a cruise
but they soon divorce and Lorelai and Sookie begin the renovations of the inn .
Richard forms a new partnership with his former associate 's son , Jason Stiles ( Chris Eigeman ) who happens to be an old camp friend of Lorelai .
After he has a disagreement with Emily about Richard 's new business launch party , Lorelai furious goes to talk to him and at the end of their discussion he invites her to dinner
but she refuses .
Later on , Jason succeeds into getting invited by Emily to a Friday night dinner and he and Lorelai get closer .
She eventually accepts his invitation to dinner and start seeing each other without telling her parents .
As she is running out of money to renovate the inn , Lorelai asks Luke 's help who offers her a loan .
When Emily organizes a dinner with Jason 's parents , Jason 's father Floyd announces he is going to sue his son and Richard because they have taken his clients .
Floyd also tells Lorelai 's parents about her relationship with his son , which shocks Emily .
In the fallout of Floyd 's announcement , Richard decides to associate with Floyd jeopardizing Jason 's career .
When the former tells her he will sue her father , Lorelai breaks up with him .
Luke whose marriage to lawyer Nicole failed , finally realizes the woman he truly loves is Lorelai .
She serves as a date for his sister 's wedding and sees him under a new light .
At the end of the evening he tells her they should spend more time together .
Lorelai and Sookie open their inn and after a misunderstanding about Jason , Luke and Lorelai finally kiss for the first time .
In the fifth season , Lorelai embarks on a relationship with Luke and
after she discovers Rory has lost her virginity to married Dean , who was her first love and former boyfriend .
Dean had married another girl , after breaking up with Rory .
This entanglement with a married man strains Rory and Lorelai 's mother - daughter relationship .
Eventually Rory apologizes .
Christopher panicking over Sherrie 's departure to Paris , leaving him alone with their baby , calls Lorelai for help .
Rory later tells Christopher to leave her mother alone .
After no news following her visit to his house , she invites Christopher to the inn with Rory and notices the tension between them .
Luke also worries when he learns about the dinner .
When Christopher 's father dies , Lorelai and Rory go at his house to support him .
However , Lorelai does not mention her visit to Luke .
Emily tells Christopher that the relationship between Lorelai and Luke is getting serious and that he should do something if he wants to end up with Lorelai .
At Richard and Emily 's wedding renewal ceremony , Lorelai finally admits to Luke her visit to Christopher when she notices his presence .
Christopher tells Luke that his relationship with Lorelai wo n't last because he is destined to be with Lorelai .
This leads to Luke breaking up with Lorelai but they later reunite .
Lorelai , however , remains furious at Emily for some time and eventually forgives her .
Lorelai is worried about Rory 's relationship with Logan Huntzberger ( Matt Czuchry ) and his family 's influence on her .
At the conclusion of the season , they steal a yacht and end up at the police station .
Rory decides to take a year off from Yale which upsets Lorelai and when her parents , who initially agreed to help , change their mind and permit Rory to move in with them , prompts Lorelai to propose to Luke .
In the sixth season , Lorelai and Rory do not talk for months while Luke agrees to marry Lorelai and they renovate her house .
When Luke reveals he can not trust Lorelai after she has received a message from Christopher , the two fight .
Lorelai and Rory finally reconcile and she decides to return to Yale .
Luke learns he has a daughter but does not tell Lorelai .
Lorelai later finds out about Luke 's daughter and they decide to postpone the wedding .
When Christopher receives an inheritance , he starts to pay for Yale and the Friday night dinners are n't so mandatory anymore .
After posing an ultimatum to Luke which leads to their break - up , Lorelai finds comfort in Christopher and they start dating again .
In the final season of the original series , Lorelai and Christopher jet off to Paris , where they impulsively get married .
When Lorelai returns home and informs Rory and the rest of Stars Hollow , including Luke that she and Christopher are married she gets mixed reactions .
Rory is upset at first , but comes around since she all she really wants is her mom ( and for that matter her dad ) to be happy .
Throughout the season , Christopher and Lorelai face some significant issues , the biggest one is when Lorelai needs to write a character reference for Luke so he can partial custody of his daughter , April .
Christopher finds a draft of the letter and when reading it , he realizes that Lorelai still loves Luke .
Lorelai tries to deny it , but the both soon realize that they 're better off as friends .
In the end , Lorelai reunites with Luke .
She realizes how much she loves Luke when she finds out that he was the one who planned Rory 's goodbye party for the entire town .
Lorelai realizes that Luke has been there for her from the beginning and loves her and her daughter .
In one of the final scenes of the show , Lorelai and Luke share a passionate kiss .
In 2016 Netflix revival of the show , Lorelai is still with Luke .
They are living together in her home , he still runs the diner and she still owns her inn , but they have not married ( at this point ) .
Throughout the four episodes , Lorelai goes through a lot , especially with her relationship with her mother .
Lorelai and Emily always had a strained relationship yet over the years it had gotten better .
In the revival , the two go to family therapy .
Lorelai also goes on her own version of " Wild " where she tries to find herself .
When she returns , she realizes her life is with Luke in Stars Hollow
and she 's happy .
The show ends with Lorelai and Luke 's wedding in the center of Stars Hollow at dawn with some of her closest friends , Michel , Lane , Kirk and Rory .
In the very last scene of the show , Lorelai is sitting with Rory and they 're reflecting on ' it all ' .
Rory then turns to her mother and tells her she 's pregnant .
The show ends never revealing who the father is .
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
CASTING Section::::Character development .
Section::::Casting .
Three other actresses , including Nina Garbiras , were initially considered to play Lorelai , but the network rejected them and instead mentioned the name of Lauren Graham .
Before landing the role of Lorelai in Gilmore Girls , Graham starred in many short - lived TV shows , guest appeared in a number of top 10 prime - time comedies and did commercial work .
She obtained the role in Gilmore Girls because she had all the characteristics producer Amy Sherman - Palladino was looking for .
" The fact that you had someone that talented running around Hollywood , not found yet , was the biggest coup in the world " , she said " Because Lorelai 's a hard part .
You 've got to be funny , you 've got to talk really fast , you 've got to be able to act , you 've got to be sexy , but not scary sexy .
You 've got to be strong , but
not like ' I hate men . '
It 's a lot that goes into this character , and it was really a tough find .
And to find it and be able to feel like you broke somebody fresh , even though everybody in town knew Lauren , like everybody here was like , ' When is Lauren going to get something great . '
But America did n't know Lauren , and that was a real coup for us . "
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Virginia Heffernan of The New York Times described Lorelai and Rory as " unsentimental brainiacs " who , if they could see Gilmore Girls , would hate its sentimentality of the last and final season .
Also , the character talks fast and uses words to keep her " loneliness at bay " which , while opinion , seems to be a relatively insightful view of her .
Lorelai feels that to " swoon , even once , " would make her lose her verbal power and her " reason for being . "
On the characteristic of talking fast , Sherman - Palladino noted : " Just by listening to Lorelai 's vocal patterns , it says volumes about this woman :
First of all , that she 's bright enough to put that many words together that quickly ... and it says a lot about her emotionally , that she 's got a deflection shield that 's sort of the way she gets through the world , which says survivor .
" She also said of the character : " Lorelai 's humor was her guard and her deflection and what kept her strong .
It was her Wonder Woman cuffs . "
Margaret Lyons of Vulture.com wrote an analysis on Lorelai pointing out her flaws : " Both Gilmores have an exaggerated sense of their own wonderfulness , though I suppose , in their defense , those around them seem to play along .
[ ... ] Lorelai 's downfall is her intense , overwhelming self - absorption .
She 's chronically rude to people in the service industry , and she is always in the market for special treatment .
She is not a good friend to Sookie , even though she thinks she is ; she kinda , sorta takes advantage of Sookie 's pleaser tendencies and frequently ignores , minimizes , or dismisses Sookie 's ideas and problems .
Her self - absorption erodes any opportunity for self - awareness .
She likes to refer to her " emotional baggage , " but she assiduously avoids doing anything about it .
Lorelai knows how to push Emily and Richard 's buttons , and she never hesitates to do so . "
In the fifth season , Lorelai started a relationship with Luke Danes ; Sherman - Palladino commented : " I thought we had enough time invested in the relationship that people would care .
We had a good four years , and in those four years , we saw Luke go through relationships , and we saw Lorelai go through three relationships .
I felt like it was time . "
Lorelai is witty and quirky .
A coffee addict , she spends a lot of time in Luke 's diner and chatting with the locals of Stars Hollow .
She makes many pop culture references , many from the 80s .
Lorelai speaks very fast , especially when upset .
A smart businesswoman , she forms strong relationships with her employees making her business run smoothly .
Her best friend is Sookie St. James .
Much to her parents horror , she is a Democrat .
She drives a Jeep Wrangler .
Her favorite band is The Bangles .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
E !
Online 's Lia Harberman summarized Lorelai as " a woman we 're dying to call Mom .
[ ... ] Finally , the ultratalented actress gets a chance to shine in a show that looks like it just might stick around . "
Willa Paskin of PopMatters wrote Lorelai is " perhaps the most fully developed female character on television .
"
The New York Times TV columnist Virginia Heffernan said the character was " painful and surprising and exciting to watch — a marvelous high - wire act . "
According to Michael Ausiello , fans were reluctant to let Luke and Lorelai go .
In 2005 , in honor of Mother 's Day , Inside TV , a newly published weekly magazine for television fans , chose its picks for Top 10 All - Time Greatest TV Moms .
Gilmore Girls Lorelai Gilmore ranked 5th ahead of classic television mothers Marion Cunningham of Happy Days , Caroline Ingalls from Little House on the Prairie and Carol Brady .
of The Brady Bunch .
On May 11 , 2008 , TiVo released the results of a survey conducted by eRewards Market Research on Television 's Top Moms .
Lorelai ranked 14th , with 20 percent of respondents selecting her among their top 20 TV moms .
In the 1000th issue of Entertainment Weekly , Lorelai Gilmore was selected as the Mom for The Perfect TV Family .
In 2009 , she was voted the " Best Mom " in Zap2it first poll of the best television characters in the 2000s .
She was listed in the Top 5 Modern TV Moms by Film.com .
In February 2012 , Zap2it held a poll to determine TV 's Most Crushworthy .
Lorelai was elected TV 's Most Crushworthy Mom over Gloria Delgado - Pritchett of Modern Family .
In May 2012 , Lorelai was one of the 13 moms chosen by users of iVillage on their list of " Mommy Dearest : The TV Moms You Love " .
Lauren Graham was selected twice for her portrayal of Lorelai by the Teen Choice Awards , winning " Choice TV Parental Unit " in 2005 and 2006 .
In June 2010 , Lorelai was named one of the 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years along with her daughter Rory by Entertainment Weekly .
She was also listed in AfterEllen.com 's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters .
AOL TV ranked her the 57th Most Memorable Female TV Character .
Lorelai and Rory were listed in Paste 35 Greatest TV Duos of All Time .
Her relationship with Luke was included in TV Guides list of the best TV couples of all time .
They were also part of Entertainment Weekly " 30 Best ' Will They /
Won't They ? '
TV Couples " .
AOL TV placed their kisses among the " 10 Best Smooches in Television " .
For her portrayal of Lorelai , Graham received a nomination for the award of Best Actress in a Drama Series at the 2002 Golden Globe Awards , but lost to Jennifer Garner from Alias .
She was also nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series in 2000 and in 2001 .
Several critics felt Graham 's performance deserved an Emmy Award nomination ; however she never received any , leading Megan Friedman of Time magazine to list her in her " Top 10 Emmy Snubs " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS