MAKE - A - WISH FOUNDATION
The Make - A - Wish Foundation is a 501(c)(3 ) non - profit organization founded in the United States that arranges experiences described as " wishes " to children diagnosed with critical illnesses .
In order to qualify for a wish , the child must be between the ages of 2 and 17 years at the time of the application submitted , although it is the child 's physician that ultimately decides if a child is eligible .
The national headquarters and founding chapter of the Make - A - Wish Foundation is in Phoenix .
The organization grants wishes through its 62 chapters located throughout the United States .
Make - A - Wish also operates in 45 other countries around the world through 38 other affiliate offices .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the spring of 1980 , 7-year - old Christopher James Greicius ( August 13 , 1972 – May 3 , 1980 ) was being treated for leukemia .
He aspired to be a police officer .
U.S. Customs Officer Tommy Austin befriended Chris and worked with officers at the Arizona Department of Public Safety to plan an experience to lift Greicius ' spirits .
Chris spent the day as a police officer , rode in a police helicopter , received a custom - tailored police uniform , and was sworn in as the first honorary Public Safety patrolman in state history .
Greicius died soon after , but his wish became the inspiration for the Make - A - Wish organization .
Professional wrestler John Cena holds the title for the most wishes granted by a single individual , with over 500 wishes .
Singer Justin Bieber has volunteered in over 250 wishes .
National women 's collegiate sorority Chi Omega has raised over $ 20 million and has volunteered over 1 million hours of service for Make - A - Wish .
Because of this commitment , Make - A - Wish recognizes Chi Omega as one of their Cause Champion sponsors .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
Children who may be eligible to receive a wish can be referred by one of the following three sources : * Medical professionals treating the child * * A parent or legal guardian
* * The potential wish child * To refer a child , the appropriate referral source can use Make - A - Wish 's online inquiry form or contact the Make - A - Wish chapter closest to them .
All medical information is considered confidential and is not discussed with outside parties unless it is required for the wish and the child 's parent(s ) or guardian(s )
have given their consent .
A child with a life - threatening medical condition who has reached the age of 3 and is under the age of 17 at the time of referral , is potentially eligible for a wish .
After a child is referred , the child 's treating physician must determine whether the child is medically eligible for a wish , based on the medical criteria established by Make - A - Wish .
In addition , a child can not have received a wish from another wish - granting organization .
Each Make - A - Wish chapter follows specific policies and guidelines for granting a child 's wish .
Make - A - Wish works closely with the wish child 's physician and family to determine the most appropriate time to grant the wish , keeping in mind the child 's treatment protocol or other concerns .
Most wish requests fall into five categories : I wish to go , I wish to be , I wish to meet , I wish to have , or I wish to give .
GOVERNANCE
Section::::Governance .
The national board of directors helps chart Make - A - Wish 's course .
The board has a vast array of experience and skills that help maintain Make - A - Wish 's status as the largest wish - granting organization in the U.S.
The board determines the mission and vision , evaluates and supports the president and chief executive officer , and protects Make - A - Wish 's assets .
The board enhances Make - A - Wish 's public standing , ensures accountability , maintains legal integrity , and assesses its own performance .
The senior leadership team is composed of Make - A - Wish 's top - level management .
Each member is a national office leader in disciplines that include wish - granting , fundraising , legal , brand advancement , and operational activities .
The president and CEO guides the strategic plan in areas such as board development , talent development , fundraising , and corporate relations .
HUNTING AND FISHING Section::::Hunting and fishing .
Make - A - Wish stopped granting wishes involving hunting - related activities , including fishing , use of firearms or other weapons that are designed to cause animal injury in 1996 .
This was largely due to concerns over child safety , the pressure from animal - sensitive donors , and criticisms from animal rights groups .
In response , three organizations were formed : Hunt of a Lifetime , which arranges hunting trips for terminally ill children ; Catch - a - Dream , which was conceived by Mississippi outdoorsman Bruce Brady and formed by his loved ones following Brady 's death from cancer to grant hunting experiences to ill children ; and Life Hunts , founded by the Buckmasters American Deer Foundation .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In the 1997 made - for - TV movie A Child 's Wish , Missy 's wish is to go to the White House to meet the president who was responsible for signing the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 into law , which her father lobbied to pass after being fired for visiting Missy in the cancer ward .
Make - A - Wish is not sure she will get to meet the president or be allowed to see the Oval Office , but in the end , President Bill Clinton , playing himself in a cameo appearance , meets her to make her wish come true .
*
In the South Park episode " Kenny Dies " , the Make - A - Wish Foundation is heavily satirized when they visit Kenny in the hospital and ask what his one wish is .
*
In the Family Guy episode " If I 'm Dyin ' , I 'm Lyin ' " , a parody of the Make - A - Wish Foundation called the Grant - a - Dream Foundation was presented .
*
In January 2008 , the satirical news site The Onion produced a parody video claiming that the Make - A - Wish Foundation was bankrupted due to a child 's wish for " infinite wishes " .
The video was apparently so convincing that some people believed it to be real , and it had to be debunked by the urban legends website Snopes .
The Mansion and The Chaser 's War on Everything did similar sketches about the Make - A - Wish Foundation , the latter causing an unprecedented amount of controversy .
* Four children were guest - stars on the show Cake Boss , in which Buddy Valastro helped four children make one - of - a - kind cakes before making a hot air balloon cake for a reception for the Make - A - Wish Foundation .
* Make - a - Wish made headlines in 2013 with an elaborate Batman - themed wish , turning a young child into " Batkid " .
This wish was heavily publicized , and was chronicled in a documentary entitled Batkid Begins .
In 2018 Batkid was considered to be cancer - free .
*
In The Fault in Our Stars , a 2014 American romantic drama film , the character Augustus suggests that Hazel should use the " cancer wish " she received from Make - A - Wish Foundation to travel to Amsterdam to visit her favorite author .
*
In Zac and Mia , a 2017 an American romance teen drama web television series based on the novel of the same name , the titular character Zac uses the wish he received from Make - A - Wish Foundation to recreate prom for Mia after she initially forgoes her own due to her embarrassment over her current medical condition .
SEE ALSO
* Disney Worldwide Outreach Program , a partner of the Make - A - Wish Foundation * Make A Film Foundation REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Make - A - Wish Foundation of America * Make - A - Wish Foundation International