PERSONAL PUBLIC SERVICE NUMBER
The Personal Public Service Number ( PPS No )
( , or ) is an identifier issued by the Client Identity Services section of the Department of Social Protection , on behalf of the Minister for Social Protection in Ireland .
The PPSN was known as the Revenue and Social Insurance Number ( RSI No ) until 1998 .
RSI Numbers were first issued in April 1979 as a replacement for the separate PAYE Number and Social Welfare Insurance Number which had been used for income tax and social welfare purposes respectively until then .
The PAYE Number was issued by the Revenue Commissioners and these numbers were transferred to the RSI No system as a basis for the unified system .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
The format of the number is a unique alphanumeric in the general form 8765432A /
A. The number is assigned at the registration of birth of the child and is issued on a " Public Services Card " often when a child reaches the legal age of employment , currently 16 , otherwise a " Letter of Entitlement " is issued .
The same format was used by the Department of Education and Skills as the " Pupil Number " since 1994 and this caused some concern and confusion as it was in the same format and used the same check character formula , but more often different from the PPS
No .
In August 2000 the department instigated a programme to remove the Pupil Number and replace it with the PPS No in future on records .
By September 2001 , the Pupil Number was fully withdrawn .
The format is seven numeric characters ( including leading zeros ) , a check character and sometimes a second letter , which if it exists , will normally be an A ( for individuals ) or an H ( for non - individuals , e.g. , limited companies , trusts , etc . )
In some cases , this second letter may be a W , which was used for women - " W " from " wife " – who married and automatically adopted the same number as their husband , though this practice stopped in 1999 chiefly due to equal rights concerns .
The present policy is that these W numbers are eliminated when the bearer 's husband dies , or when they become separated or divorced .
The Social Services Card , no longer in use , contained a number called the " Primary Account Number " ( PAN ) , this is the long main sequence embossed near the centre of the card .
This consists of the issuer number of the International Organization for Standardization , the PPS number and a card issue number ; any letters are converted to numbers using the standard convention of A=1 , B=2 and so forth .
Basic personal information is encoded on the magnetic stripe on the rear of the card such as date of birth and sex .
The Social Services Card was completely withdrawn by January 2014 .
Since 2012 , a new Public Services ( National Identity ) Card has been rolled out thus replacing the Social Services Card used to collect social welfare payments .
It displays a passport - size photo , your PPS No , your date of birth and a Card Number .
The Passport Service of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has announced that as of 29 March 2016 , all first - time passport applicants aged 18 and above who are resident in Ireland will need to have a Public Services Card ( PSC ) for identification purposes .
Separately , the old paper Free Travel Pass was replaced by the Public Services Card Free Travel ( PSCFT ) since 9 December 2013 , with the paper version being completely phased out by 1 January 2016 .
CHECK CHARACTER Section::::Check character .
The format of the PPS number was defined as being nine characters in length , consisting of 7 digits in positions 1 to 7 , followed by a check character in position 8 , with either a space or the letter " W " in position 9 .
However , from 1 January 2013 a new range of PPS numbers were introduced by including an additional alphabetic character , other than " W " , in position 9 .
The character in position 8 still operates as the check character for all existing and new numbers , but the calculation used to decide this character has been revised to avoid any confusion between an " old " number and a " new " number using the same 7 numeric values in the first 7 positions .
The check character is calculated using a weighted addition of all the numbers and modulus calculation ( known as Modulus 23 ) .
It therefore checks for incorrectly entered digits and for digit transposition ( digits in the wrong order will alter the sum due to weightings ) .
CALCULATION Section::::Calculation .
The modulus 23 calculation has been revised to take account of the extra character as follows :
* A numeric value is assigned to the alphabetic character in position 9 , with " A " = 1 , " B " = 2 , " C " = 3 , etc .
Where a " W " or a blank already exists ( in numbers assigned before 1 January 2013 )
the assigned numeric value will be zero .
*
* Each digit is multiplied by a weight , with a weighting of 9 assigned to the numeric equivalent of the alphabetic character in position 9 .
See the table for a sample calculation on the PPSN " 1234567_A " .
* ! Digit ! !
Weighting ! !
Result
The results are added together , and divided by 23 .
The remainder ( modulus 23 ) indicate the check character position in the alphabet .
In the example above , 121 divided by 23 leaves a remainder of 6 , and " F " is the sixth character in the alphabet .
The correct PPS number is therefore 1234567FA .
Where the remainder is zero , the check letter is W. CHECK DIGIT CALCULATION IN SOFTWARE Section::::Check digit calculation in software .
The following are examples of software that provide checksum verification :
PHP :
The Pear class Validate_IE contains a checksum algorithm .
Thesaurus Software Thesaurus Payroll Manager payroll software .
Sage QuickPay payroll software .
EXPANSION Section::::Expansion .
As the system allows for a maximum of ten million numbers to be issued , and with numbers having been issued to both the Irish and the legal immigrant population , expatriates , and many people who are now deceased , the current system will be in need of expansion in the not distant future .
Since January 2013 , the format uses a letter after the current check character .
This has the advantage that all current PPS numbers remain valid .
The letter after the check character would have a weighting of nine .
The letter value would be assigned the same as the check character 's .
A=1 , B=2 ...
W=0 .
Examples of valid new PPSN 1234567TW 1234567FA
USAGE Section::::Usage .
The number is currently used for a number of public services including education , health , housing , social welfare and tax however the net is widening raising concern about functionality creep .
The number is underpinned in legislation by the Social Welfare ( Consolidation ) Act , 2005 ( Section 262 ) and a number of amendments , including data protection , have expanded its legal use as well as defining improper usage .
The number has already been issued automatically to everyone born in the Republic of Ireland since January 1971 and those who commenced or were in employment since April 1979 – the primary trigger today for the numbers ' issue is birth registration .
A PPS number can be applied for at a PPS Number allocation centre .
Applicants should show the reason for requiring a PPS Number , and provide Photographic ID and proof of address .
SEE ALSO * NHI Number ( a similar number in New Zealand )
* National Insurance number ( a similar number in the United Kingdom )
* Social Insurance Number ( a similar number in Canada )
* Tax file number ( a similar number in Australia )
* Social Security number ( a similar number in the United States )
* CPF ( a similar number in Brazil )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Personal Public Service Number * Personal Public Service Number Algorithim