ARKANSAS NUCLEAR ONE
Arkansas Nuclear One ( ANO ) is a two - unit pressurized water reactor nuclear power plant located on Lake Dardanelle just outside Russellville , Arkansas .
It is the only nuclear power plant in Arkansas .
It is owned by Entergy Arkansas and operated by Entergy Nuclear .
UNITS UNIT ONE
Section::::Units .
Section::::Unit One .
Unit One has a generating capacity of 846 MW of electricity , and came online on May 21 , 1974 .
It is licensed to operate through May 20 , 2034 .
Its nuclear reactor was supplied by Babcock & Wilcox .
UNIT TWO
Section::::Unit
Two .
Unit Two has a generating capacity of 930 MW of electricity , and came online on September 1 , 1978 .
It is licensed to operate through July 18 , 2038 .
Its nuclear reactor was supplied by Combustion Engineering .
Unit two is the only one that uses a cooling tower ; Unit One releases heat into Lake Dardanelle .
SURROUNDING POPULATION
Section::::Surrounding population .
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission defines two emergency planning zones around nuclear power plants : a plume exposure pathway zone with a radius of , concerned primarily with exposure to , and inhalation of , airborne radioactive contamination , and an ingestion pathway zone of about , concerned primarily with ingestion of food and liquid contaminated by radioactivity .
The 2010 U.S. population within of Arkansas Nuclear was 44,139 , an increase of 17.2 percent in a decade , according to an analysis of U.S. Census data for msnbc.com .
The 2010 U.S. population within was 308,219 , an increase of 13.3 percent since 2000 .
Cities within 50 miles include Russellville ( 6 miles to city center ) .
SEISMIC RISK Section::::Seismic risk .
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission 's estimate of the risk each year of an earthquake intense enough to cause core damage to the reactor at Arkansas Nuclear was 1 in 243,902 , according to an NRC study published in August 2010 .
MARCH 2013
INCIDENT Section::::March 2013 incident .
On March 31 , 2013 , an industrial accident at the facility killed one person and injured eight other workers , including four seriously .
The accident took place " in a non - radiation area , and there was no risk to public health and safety . "
According to Entergy , the old stator of Unit One 's generator fell during an operation to replace it .
The falling component ruptured a water pipe , causing water infiltration into the plant 's switchgear , which knocked out power to all of Unit One and one train of Unit Two 's electrical system , which was online at the time .
The electrical failure caused an automatic shutdown of Unit Two .
The plant 's emergency generators started and restored power to the emergency systems of both units .
Unit One was in a refueling outage .
Emergency diesel generators , water pumps and feed water were functioning following a loss of all off - site power on Unit One , according to the NRC event notification .
The plant was placed under an " unusual event classification " , which is the lowest of four emergency classification levels for abnormal events designated by the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission , which regulates American civil nuclear installations .
One plant worker died , and ten other injuries required offsite medical treatment .
The company released an official statement of condolence .
Entergy announced that they would immediately commence repairs to Unit Two and hope to have the unit back online within several weeks .
Entergy also acknowledged that Unit One would be offline for an extended time while the company surveyed the damage and established a timeline for repairs .
The cost of the repairs was estimated at $ 95–120 M , not counting additional costs to replace lost electricity from the reactors being down for four months .
Both units were repaired , and started up on August 7 , 2013 capable of returning to full power .
During the recovery from the incident a specialist engineering company named Lowther - Rolton assisted with the recovery of the existing Stator and performed a " Technical Audit " of the engineering for lifting and installation of the new Stator to ensure safety of operations .
Lowther - Rolton were the original developers of the Technical Audit system for load movement operations during the 1980s .
DECEMBER 2013
INCIDENT Section::::December 2013 incident .
On December 9 , 2013 , Unit Two was taken offline due to a transformer fire in the site switchyard .
The fire was contained without injuries or threats to safety .
REFERENCES SEE ALSO * List of power stations in Arkansas EXTERNAL LINKS *
Entergy Nuclear - Arkansas Nuclear One * Arkansas Nuclear One , United States of America
* NukeWorker
* History