TJX COMPANIES
The TJX Companies ,
Inc. ( ) is an American multinational off - price department store corporation , headquartered in Framingham , Massachusetts .
It remained from the original Zayre Corp. that was established in 1956 .
Of its banners , HomeGoods , TJ Maxx , and Sierra Trading Post operate in the United States ; Winners operates in Canada ; and HomeSense , Marshalls , and TK Maxx operate in multiple countries .
The corporate headquarters are in Framingham , Massachusetts .
There are over 3,300 discount stores in the TJX portfolio located in more than six countries .
TJX ranked No . 85 in the 2018 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue .
STORE FORMATS
Current * HomeGoods ( United States )
* HomeSense ( United States , Canada , Ireland , United Kingdom ) * Marshalls ( United States , Canada ) * TJ Maxx ( United States ) * TK Maxx ( Australia , Austria , United Kingdom , Germany , Ireland , Netherlands , Poland , Mexico )
* Sierra Trading Post ( United States )
* Winners ( Canada ) Former * Zayre ( Acquired by Ames ) * BJ 's Wholesale Club ( Waban ( BJ 's & HomeClub ) spun BJ 's off to make it independent )
* Home Club ( Liquidation ) * Bob 's Stores ( Sold to Versa Capital Management and Crystal Capital )
* The Maxx * AJWright ( stores either liquidated or converted to other TJX banners )
* StyleSense HISTORY Section::::History .
Stanley Feldberg was one of the 1956 founders of
Zayre Corp. He served as president of the company until 1978 , and afterwards remained on the Board of Directors , until he retired in 1989 .
Once the company had sold off the " Zayre " name , the company consisted of its one core remaining store brand , T.J.Maxx .
The next year , in 1990 , TJX expanded into an additional store brand division , and at the same time it first went international , as it entered the Canadian market by acquiring the five - store Winners chain .
Two years later , it launched its third brand , HomeGoods , in the United States .
TJX 's expansion beyond North America came in 1994 , when the fourth brand division , T.K. Maxx , was founded in the United Kingdom , and then expanded into Ireland .
In 1995 , TJX doubled in size when it acquired Marshalls , its fifth brand .
T.J.Maxx and Marshalls later became consolidated as two brands under a single division , The Marmaxx Group .
The following year , TJX Companies Inc. was added to the Standard & Poor 's S&P 500 Composite Index , which consists of 500 of the largest companies in the United States .
TJX launched a sixth brand ,
A.J. Wright , in 1998 in the eastern U.S.
The brand went national in 2004 when it opened its first stores in California on the west coast .
The company 's seventh brand division , HomeSense , formed in 2001 , was a Canadian brand modeled after the existing US brand , HomeGoods .
In 2002 , TJX revenue reached almost $ 12 billion .
In mid-2003 , TJX acquired an eighth brand division , Bob 's Stores , concentrated in New England .
In Canada , TJX began to configure some Winners and HomeSense stores side - by - side as superstores .
The superstores feature open passageways between them , with dual branding .
TJX 's revenue in 2003 reached over $ 13 billion .
TJX began to test the side - by - side superstore model in the United States in 2004 , combining some of each of the two Marmaxx brand stores with HomeGoods .
The company reached 141st position in the 2004 Fortune 500 rankings , with almost $ 15 billion in revenue .
That year was also marked by the death of retired Zayre founder Stanley Feldberg .
In April 2008 , TJX launched the HomeSense brand in the UK , with six stores opening throughout May.
The brand is more upmarket than its Canadian namesake .
Later that year , in August , TJX sold Bob 's Stores to Versa Capital Management and Crystal Capital .
In December 2010 , TJX announced that the A.J. Wright stores would be closed , cutting about 4,400 jobs , and that more than half of them would reopen under other company brands .
In July 2015 , TJX acquired the Trade Secret and Home Secret off - price retail businesses from Australian company Gazal Corporation Limited .
The deal will be completed December 2015 .
COMPUTER SYSTEMS
INTRUSION Section::::Computer systems intrusion .
On January 17 , 2007 , TJX announced that it was the victim of an unauthorized computer systems intrusion .
It discovered in mid - December 2006 that its computer systems were compromised and customer data was stolen .
The hackers accessed a system that stores data on credit card , debit card , check , and merchandise return transactions .
The intrusion was kept confidential as requested by law enforcement .
TJX said that it is working with General Dynamics , IBM and Deloitte to upgrade computer security .
By the end of March 2007 , the number of affected customers had reached 45.7 million and has prompted credit bureaus to seek legislation requiring retailers to be responsible for compromised customer information saved in their systems .
In addition to credit card numbers , personal information such as social security numbers and driver 's license numbers from 451,000 customers were downloaded by the intruders .
The breach was possible due to a non - secure wireless network in one of the stores .
Eleven men have been charged in the theft , and one ( Damon Patrick Toey ) has pleaded guilty to numerous charges related to the breach .
One man , Jonathan James , professed his innocence and later committed suicide , apparently out of the belief that he was going to be indicted .
The alleged ringleader Albert Gonzalez was indicted in August 2009 with attacking Heartland Payment Systems in which 130 million records were compromised .
NOTES SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS