CASTLE DOCTRINE
A castle doctrine , also known as a castle law or a defense of habitation law , is a legal doctrine that designates a person 's abode or any legally occupied place ( for example , a vehicle or home ) as a place in which that person has protections and immunities permitting one , in certain circumstances , to use force ( up to and including deadly force ) to defend oneself against an intruder , free from legal prosecution for the consequences of the force used .
The term is most commonly used in the United States , though many other countries invoke comparable principles in their laws .
A person may have a duty to retreat to avoid violence if one can reasonably do so .
Castle doctrines lessen the duty to retreat when an individual is assaulted within one 's own home .
Deadly force may either be justified , the burdens of production and proof for charges impeded , or an affirmative defense against criminal homicide applicable , in cases " when the actor reasonably fears imminent peril of death or serious bodily harm to him or herself or another " .
The castle doctrine is not a defined law that can be invoked , but a set of principles which may be incorporated in some form in many jurisdictions .
Castle doctrines may not provide civil immunity , such as from wrongful death suits , which have a much lower burden of proof .
Justifiable homicide in self - defense which happens to occur inside one 's home is distinct , as a matter of law , from castle doctrine because the mere occurrence of trespassing — and occasionally a subjective requirement of fear — is sufficient to invoke the castle doctrine , the burden of proof of fact is much less challenging than that of justifying a homicide in self - defense .
With justifiable homicide in self - defense , one generally must objectively prove to a trier of fact , against all reasonable doubt , the intent in the intruder 's mind to commit violence or a felony .
It would be a misconception of law to infer that because a state has a justifiable homicide in self - defense provision pertaining to one 's domicile , it has a castle doctrine protecting the estate and exonerating any duty whatsoever to retreat therefrom .
The doctrine can be misused as a pretext for extrajudicial punishment in private spaces .
The use of this legal principle in the United States has been controversial in relation to a number of cases in which it has been invoked , including the deaths of Japanese exchange student Yoshihiro Hattori and Scottish businessman Andrew de Vries .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The legal concept of the inviolability of the home has been known in Western civilization since the age of the Roman Republic .
In English common law the term is derived from the dictum that " an Englishman 's home is his castle " ( see Semayne 's case ) .
This concept was established as English law by the 17th century jurist Sir Edward Coke , in his The Institutes of the Laws of England , 1628 : English common law came with colonists to the New World , where it has become known as the castle doctrine .
The term has been used in England to imply a person 's absolute right to exclude anyone from their home , although this has always had restrictions , such as bailiffs having increasing powers of entry since the late-20th century .
According to 18th - century Presbyterian minister and biblical commentator Matthew Henry , the prohibition of murder found in the Old Testament contains an exception for legitimate self - defense .
A home defender who struck and killed a thief caught in the act of breaking in at night was not guilty of bloodshed .
" If a thief is caught breaking in and is struck so that he dies , the thief owes no blood - debt to the home - defender ; but if the thief lives , he owes a blood - debt to the home - defender and must make restitution . " IN THE EARLY UNITED STATES Section::::In the early United States .
By the 18th century , many US state legal systems began by importing English common law such as Acts of Parliament of 2 Ed . III ( Statute of Northampton ) , and 5 Rich .
II
( Forcible Entry Act 1381 ) in law since 1381—which imposed criminal sanctions intending to discourage the resort to self - help .
This required a threatened party to retreat , whenever property was " involved " and resolve the issue by civil means .
Then as now , there were English politicians who were for or against the use of self - help over state - help .
William Blackstone , in Book 4 , Chapter 16 of his Commentaries on the Laws of England , proclaims that the laws " leave him ( the inhabitant ) the natural right of killing the aggressor ( the burglar ) " and goes on to generalize in the following words :
Not only was the doctrine considered to justify defense against neighbors and criminals , but any of the Crown 's agents who attempted to enter without a proper warrant as well .
It should be noted that prohibitions of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution share a common background with current castle doctrine laws .
In 1841 , The Preemption Act was passed to " appropriate the proceeds of the sales of public lands ... and to grant ' pre - emption rights ' to individuals " who were already living on federal lands ( commonly referred to as " squatters " ) .
During this same period , claim clubs sprung up all over the US advocating vigilance and the castle doctrine .
This was in concurrence with the culture of manifest destiny which led to westward expansion and the American Indian Wars , the last of which ended by the 1920s .
ON THE AMERICAN FRONTIER Section::::On
the American frontier .
On the American frontier , the doctrine of no duty to retreat extended outside a residence .
It asserted that a man in an altercation that he did not provoke was not obliged to flee from his attacker , but was free to stand his ground and defend himself .
A state Supreme Court justice wrote in 1877 ,
American West historian Richard M. Brown wrote that under the circumstances , for a man in the American West to flee under such circumstances would be cowardly and un - American .
Legendary dentist and gambler Doc Holliday successfully used this defense when he shot Billy Allen as he entered a saloon .
Holliday owed Allen $ 5 which Allen wanted paid and had threatened Holliday .
Although Allen was unarmed at the time , Holliday had received reports that Allen had been armed and looking for him earlier in the day .
During the subsequent trial , Holliday asserted he was within his rights and the jury agreed .
He was acquitted on March 28 , 1885 .
CURRENT POSITION
Section::::Current position .
Today , the penal and civil forcible - entry laws of most American states forbid the use of force in the recovery of possession of land .
At most the Castle Doctrine is an affirmative defense for individuals inevitably charged with criminal homicide , not a permission or pretext to commit homicide — which is generally unlawful .
A minority of states , permit individuals who have the right of immediate possession of land to use reasonable force to regain possession of that land .
The term " make my day law " came to be used in the United States in 1985 when Colorado passed a law that shielded people from any criminal or civil liability for using force against a home invader , including deadly force .
( The law 's nickname is a reference to the line " Go ahead , make my day " ( meaning ' do something
so I have an excuse to kill you ' )
uttered by actor Clint Eastwood 's character " Dirty Harry " Callahan in the 1983 police film Sudden Impact . )
CONDITIONS OF USE Section::::Conditions of use .
Each jurisdiction incorporates the castle doctrine into its laws in different ways .
The circumstance in which it may be invoked include the premises covered ( abode only , or other places too ) , the degree of retreat or non - deadly resistance required before deadly force can be used , etc .
Typical conditions that apply to some castle doctrine laws include : *
An intruder must be making ( or have made ) an attempt to unlawfully or forcibly enter an occupied residence , business , or vehicle .
*
The intruder must be acting unlawfully ( the castle doctrine does not allow a right to use force against officers of the law , acting in the course of their legal duties ) .
*
The occupant(s ) of the home must reasonably believe the intruder intends to inflict serious bodily harm or death upon an occupant of the home .
Some states apply the Castle Doctrine if the occupant(s ) of the home reasonably believe the intruder intends to commit a lesser felony such as arson or burglary .
*
The occupant(s ) of the home must not have provoked or instigated an intrusion ; or , provoked / instigated an intruder 's threat or use of deadly force .
In all cases , the occupant(s ) of the home : must be there legally ; must not be fugitives from the law , themselves , or aiding / abetting other fugitives ; and must not use force upon an officer of the law performing a legal duty .
In Colorado , the make - my - day statute provides the occupant with immunity from prosecution only for force used against a person who has made an unlawful entry into the dwelling , but not against a person who remains unlawfully in the dwelling .
IMMUNITY FROM CIVIL LAWSUIT Section::::Immunity from civil lawsuit .
In addition to providing a valid defense in criminal law , many laws implementing the castle doctrine , particularly those with a " stand - your - ground clause , " also have a clause which provides immunity from any civil lawsuits filed on behalf of the assailant ( for damages / injuries resulting from the force used to stop them ) .
Without this clause , an assailant could sue for medical bills , property damage , disability , and pain & suffering as a result of the injuries inflicted by the defender ; or , if the force results in the assailant 's death , his / her next - of - kin or estate could launch a wrongful death suit .
Even if successfully rebutted , the defendant ( the homeowner / defender ) may still have to pay high legal costs leading up to the suit 's dismissal .
Without criminal / civil immunity , such civil action could be used as revenge against a lawfully acting defender ( who was , originally , the assailant 's victim ) .
Use of force in self - defense which causes damage or injuries to other , non - criminally - acting parties , may not be shielded from criminal or civil prosecution , however .
DUTY TO RETREAT Section::::Duty to retreat .
In US jurisdictions where the castle doctrine applies , there is no duty to retreat before deadly force is used against an intruder by a person in their home or , in some jurisdictions , just simply where the person can legally be .
STAND - YOUR - GROUND Section::::Stand - your - ground .
Most states in the United States have stand - your - ground laws where individuals can use deadly force in any location one is legally allowed to be without first attempting to retreat .
CULPABILITY OF INTRUDER Section::::Culpability of intruder .
In Colorado , the make - my - day statute " was not intended to justify use of physical force against persons who enter a dwelling accidentally or in good faith .
"
In other words , " the unlawful entry element requires a culpable mental state of ' knowingly ' on the part of the intruder . "
STATE - BY - STATE POSITIONS IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::State - by - state positions in the United States .
A list of states and their most applicable body of law to justifying homicide in protection of the abode is listed below .
Because not all states truly invoke castle doctrine , justifiable homicide in defense of life — which is nearly universal in adoption , but with narrower application — is often what is invoked as a pretext to protect the home .
However , the mere fact that one is trespassing is an inappropriate or inadequate defense per se to justifying homicide in many states .
STATES INCORPORATING CASTLE DOCTRINE PRINCIPLES Section::::States incorporating castle doctrine principles .
The castle doctrine in its traditional absolute and extrajudicial form is antiquated in most states .
However , its vestige saliently remains as a set of principles which are incorporated to a variegated extent through both statutory and case law .
It is commonly manifested as an affirmative defense to criminal homicide that occurred within a home ; in some states though it slightly enhances the conditions for justifiable homicide in self - defense by laying down no duty to retreat or avert a violent encounter , or by even granting a blanket rebuttable presumption of required killing in defense of life .
Where principles are statutized in a penal code , a homicide may be excused criminally , but be a wrongful death civilly .
In a strict sense , simple justifiable homicide in self - defense which happens to occur inside one 's home is actually distinct as a matter of law from castle doctrine 's no duty to retreat in defense of one 's domicile .
Self - defense protects life while castle doctrine defends estate .
While most American states forbid the use of force in the recovery of possession of land , a minority of jurisdictions do invoke pure castle doctrine which unconditionally authorizes violent self - help in protection of one 's domicile .
States still espousing the archaic form tend to be conservative , or have unique issues such as a primarily rural population in a harsh or adverse environment which critically demands high broad skill in self - reliance .
It is invoked in areas often associated with small local governments and very long response times from law enforcement .
Dense urban jurisdictions repeatedly find that injustices , mistakes , and avoidable escalation from violent self - help often outweigh any benefit , especially when potential occurrences are frequent , initial police response is usually less than 7–15 minutes away , and legal remedies are local . !
State ! !
Law ! !
Notes ( a )
A person is justified in using physical force upon another person in order to defend himself or herself or a third person from what he or she reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of unlawful physical force by that other person , and he or she may use a degree of force which he or she reasonably believes to be necessary for the purpose .
A person may use deadly physical force , and is legally presumed to be justified in using deadly physical force in self - defense or the defense of another person pursuant to subdivision ( 4 ) , if the person reasonably believes that another person is : ( 1 ) Using or about to use unlawful deadly physical force .
( 2 ) Using or about to use physical force against an occupant of a dwelling while committing or attempting to commit a burglary of such dwelling .
( 3 ) Committing or about to commit a kidnapping in any degree , assault in the first or second degree , burglary in any degree , robbery in any degree , forcible rape , or forcible sodomy .
( 4 )
In the process of unlawfully and forcefully entering , or has unlawfully and forcefully entered , a dwelling , residence , or occupied vehicle , or federally licensed nuclear power facility , or is in the process of sabotaging or attempting to sabotage a federally licensed nuclear power facility , or is attempting to remove , or has forcefully removed , a person against his or her will from any dwelling , residence , or occupied vehicle when the person has a legal right to be there , and provided that the person using the deadly physical force knows or has reason to believe that an unlawful and forcible entry or unlawful and forcible act is occurring ...
"
http://www.usacarry.com/alabama_stand_your_ground_castle_doctrine_law.html
Delaware
No duty to retreat in home .
Duty to retreat in public .
( 4 )
A person who is not the initial aggressor and is not engaged in unlawful activity shall have no duty to retreat before using deadly force under subsection ( 1 ) ( e ) or ( f ) of this section if the person is in a place where the person has a right to be , and no finder of fact shall be permitted to consider the person 's failure to retreat as evidence that the person 's use of force was unnecessary , excessive or unreasonable .
( 5 ) ( a )
The presumptions contained in subsection ( 3 ) of this section shall apply in civil cases in which self - defense or defense of another is claimed as a defense .
( 1 )
A person is justified in the use of force or threat to use force against another when and to the extent that the person reasonably believes that the use of force is necessary to prevent or terminate the other person 's unlawful entry into or attack upon an occupied structure .
( 2 )
A person justified in the use of force pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) is justified in the use of force likely to cause death or serious bodily harm only if : ( a ) the entry is made or attempted and the person reasonably believes that the force is necessary to prevent an assault upon the person or another then in the occupied structure ; or ( b )
the person reasonably believes that the force is necessary to prevent the commission of a forcible felony in the occupied structure .
Nebraska
No duty to retreat in home .
Duty to retreat in public .
1 .
Justifiable homicide is the killing of a human being in necessary self - defense , or in defense of habitation , property or person , against one who manifestly intends or endeavors , by violence or surprise , to commit a felony , or against any person or persons who manifestly intend and endeavor , in a violent , riotous , tumultuous or surreptitious manner , to enter the habitation of another for the purpose of assaulting or offering personal violence to any person dwelling or being therein .
2 .
A person is not required to retreat before using deadly force as provided in subsection 1
if the person : ( a ) Is not the original aggressor ; ( b ) Has a right to be present at the location where deadly force is used ; and ( c ) Is not actively engaged in conduct in furtherance of criminal activity at the time deadly force is used .
( a ) A person is justified in using force , except deadly force , against another when and to the extent that the person reasonably believes that the conduct is necessary to defend himself or herself or another against the other 's imminent use of unlawful force .
However , a person is justified in the use of deadly force and does not have a duty to retreat in any place he
or she has the lawful right to be if either of the following applies :
( 1 ) He or she reasonably believes that such force is necessary to prevent imminent death or great bodily harm to himself or herself or another .
( 2 )
Under the circumstances permitted pursuant to G.S. 14‑51.2 .
( 1 ) if the actor would be justified in using force against the other under Section 9.31 ; and ( 2 ) when and to the degree the actor reasonably believes the deadly force is immediately necessary : ( A ) to protect the actor against the other 's use or attempted use of unlawful deadly force ; or ( B ) to prevent the other 's imminent commission of aggravated kidnapping , murder , sexual assault , aggravated sexual assault , robbery , or aggravated robbery .
( b )
The actor 's belief under Subsection ( a)(2 ) that the deadly force was immediately necessary as described by that subdivision is presumed to be reasonable if the actor : ( 1 ) knew or had reason to believe that the person against whom the deadly force was used : ( A ) unlawfully and with force entered , or was attempting to enter unlawfully and with force , the actor 's occupied habitation , vehicle , or place of business or employment ; ( B ) unlawfully and with force removed , or was attempting to remove unlawfully and with force , the actor from the actor 's habitation , vehicle , or place of business or employment ; or ( C ) was committing or attempting to commit an offense described by Subsection ( a)(2)(B ) ; ( 2 ) did not provoke the person against whom the force was used ; and ( 3 ) was not otherwise engaged in criminal activity , other than a Class C misdemeanor that is a violation of a law or ordinance regulating traffic at the time the force was used .
( c )
A person who has a right to be present at the location where the deadly force is used , who has not provoked the person against whom the deadly force is used , and who is not engaged in criminal activity at the time the deadly force is used is not required to retreat before using deadly force as described by this section .
( d )
For purposes of Subsection ( a)(2 ) , in determining whether an actor described by Subsection ( c ) reasonably believed that the use of deadly force was necessary , a finder of fact may not consider whether the actor failed to retreat .
( 1 )
A person is justified in using force against another when and to the extent that he reasonably believes that the force is necessary to prevent or terminate the other 's unlawful entry into or attack upon his habitation ; however , he is justified in the use of force which is intended or likely to cause death or serious bodily injury
only if : ( a ) the entry is made or attempted in a violent and tumultuous manner , surreptitiously , or by stealth , and he reasonably believes that the entry is attempted or made for the purpose of assaulting or offering personal violence to any person , dwelling , or being in the habitation and he reasonably believes that the force is necessary to prevent the assault or offer of personal violence ; or ( b ) he reasonably believes that the entry is made or attempted for the purpose of committing a felony in the habitation and that the force is necessary to prevent the commission of the felony .
( 2 )
The person using force or deadly force in defense of habitation is presumed for the purpose of both civil and criminal cases to have acted reasonably and had a reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or serious bodily injury if the entry or attempted entry is unlawful and is made or attempted by use of force , or in a violent and tumultuous manner , or surreptitiously or by stealth , or for the purpose of committing a felony .
( a ) A lawful occupant within a home or other place of residence is justified in using reasonable and proportionate force , including deadly force , against an intruder or attacker to prevent a forcible entry into the home or residence or to terminate the intruder 's or attacker 's unlawful entry if the occupant reasonably apprehends that the intruder or attacker may kill or inflict serious bodily harm upon the occupant or others in the home or residence or if the occupant reasonably believes that the intruder or attacker intends to commit a felony in the home or residence and the occupant reasonably believes deadly force is necessary .
( b )
A lawful occupant within a home or other place of residence does not have a duty to retreat from an intruder or attacker in the circumstances described in subsection ( a ) of this section .
In addition to the states listed above , the U.S. Territory of Guam has the Castle doctrine as law . !
U.S. Territory ! !
Statute ! !
Notes Legitimate Defense .
A person does not incur criminal liability when defending his person , his home , his property or rights , or person , dwelling , property or rights of others when the person reasonably believes that imminent damage is to be expected , provided that there is a rational need for the means of impeding or repelling the damage , and it can be shown that there is n't sufficient evidence that the person exercising the defense provoked the aggressor , and that the means of exercising the defense did not exceed the means necessary to repel or avoid the damage .
When self - defense is claimed to justify killing a human being , it is necessary to have founded grounds to believe that by killing the aggressor , the victim of the aggression or the person being defended from the aggressor was in imminent or immediate danger of death or serious bodily harm .
To justify the defense of the abode , the circumstances must indicate an illegal entry or that the person in the dwelling had a reasonable belief that a crime will be committed .
To justify the defense of property or rights , the circumstances must indicate an attack on them which results in a criminal offense or puts them in serious danger of imminent deterioration or loss .
A new law passed in April 2018 expanded castle doctrine protections .
STATES WITH WEAK OR NO SPECIFIC CASTLE LAW Section::::States with weak or no specific castle law .
These states uphold castle doctrine in general , but may rely on case law instead of specific legislation , may enforce a duty to retreat , and may impose specific restrictions on the use of deadly force :
* District of Columbia * Nebraska - a bill was introduced in January 2012 that allowed deadly force against a person who broke into a house or occupied vehicle or who tried to kidnap someone from a house or vehicle ; however , the bill was revised to include only an affirmative defense from lawsuits pertaining to justifiable use of force .
* New Mexico - Limited Castle Doctrine for self - defense inside one 's home established by court precedence in State v. Couch ( 1946 ) .
No civil immunity from potential lawsuits by the aggressor or surviving relatives .
In 2011 , two bills ( House Bill 228 and Senate Bill 29 ) would have granted civil immunity to individuals who lawfully use lethal force in self - defense , both bills died in their respective chambers of the New Mexico Legislature .
* South Dakota -
" Homicide is justifiable if committed by any person while resisting any attempt to murder such person , or to commit any felony upon him or her , or upon or in any dwelling house in which such person is . "
See South Dakota Codified Laws 22 - 16 - 34 ( 2005 ) .
* Vermont OUTSIDE THE US AUSTRALIA Section::::Outside the US .
Section::::Australia .
Australian states have differing self - defence laws .
Under South Australian law , the general defence appears in s15(1 )
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935 ( SA ) for defending a person 's life , and s15A(1 ) for defending property , subject to a hybrid test , i.e. the defendant honestly believed the threat to be imminent and made an objectively reasonable and proportionate response to the circumstances as the accused subjectively perceived them .
In July 2003 , the Rann Government ( SA ) introduced laws allowing householders to use " whatever force they deem necessary " when confronted with a home invader .
Householders who kill or injure a home invader escape prosecution provided they can prove they had a genuine belief that it was necessary to do so to protect themselves or their family .
The law was strongly opposed by then - Director of Public Prosecutions Paul Rofe , QC , and lawyer Marie Shaw , who is now a District Court Judge .
BRAZIL ( SELF - DEFENCE OF POSSESSION )
Section::::Brazil ( self - defence of possession ) .
Since 1917 , with the enacting of the first Brazilian Civil Code , a possessor of a thing , moveable or immoveable , is allowed , in case of disturbance ( " turbação " ) or expulsion ( " esbulho " ) , to " maintain or to reintegrate himself [ at the possession of a thing ] using its own force , as well as he does it soon " .
The acts of force employed by the possessor shall not exceed the necessary ones for eliminating the disturbance or for reintegration ( Article 502 of the former Civil Code ; Federal Ordinary Law 3.071/1917 ) .
This possibility remained untouched on the Brazilian Civil Code of 2002
( Federal Ordinary Law 10.406/2002 ) , in its Article 1.210 .
Self - defence of possession is not allowed for the cases of threat ( " ameaça " ) .
It is needed for the possessor to be effectively and physically disturbed in its possession ( " turbação " ) or completely severed from it ( " esbulho " ) .
A possessor acting under the prescriptions of the Article 1.210 of the Civil Code shall be exempt of any civil or criminal responsibility .
In terms of Tort Law , Article 188 , inc .
I , of the Civil Code states that is not an unlawful act " the regular exercise of a right recognized by the law " . CANADA Section::::Canada .
According to the Criminal Code of Canada Sections 34 and 35 , ( which were updated in 2012 with the passage of bill C-26 ) force , up to and including lethal force may be used in defence of one 's life or " peaceably " possessed property or the defence of another 's life or " peaceably " possessed property , and is not considered an offence so long as the person believes that force is being used against them in the case of self - defence , that someone is about to or has broken into or damaged property in the case of defence of property , that they are acting in defence of themselves , someone else or " peaceably " possessed property , and that the act is reasonable in the circumstances .
The criminal code also lays out the factors in either case that will be used to determine what constitutes " reasonable given the circumstances " .
The changes made by the government were to clarify the laws involving self - defence and defence of property , and to help legal professionals to apply the law as believed to reflect the values Canadians hold to be acceptable .
ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::England and Wales .
In English common law a defendant may seek to avoid criminal or civil liability by claiming that he acted in self - defence .
This requires the jury to determine whether the defendant believed that force was necessary to defend him or herself , his or her property , or to prevent a crime , and that the force used was reasonable .
While there is no duty to retreat from an attacker and failure to do so is not conclusive evidence that a person did not act in self - defence , it may still be considered by the jury as a relevant factor when assessing the merits of a self - defence claim .
The common law duty to retreat was repealed by the Criminal Law Act 1967 .
This duty never existed when a person is somewhere he has a lawful right to be , but due to the repeal , now extends to public places , etc .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
German law allows self - defense against an unlawful attack , without any duty to retreat .
Courts have interpreted this law as applicable to home invasion , including the use of lethal force against law enforcement in cases where the home owner was of the mistaken belief that the intrusion was an unlawful attack on his life .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Under the terms of the Defence and the Dwelling Act enacted in 2011 , property owners or residents are entitled to defend themselves with force , up to and including lethal force .
Any individual who uses force against a trespasser is not guilty of an offense if he or she honestly believes they were there to commit a criminal act and a threat to life .
However , there is a further provision which requires that the reaction to the intruder is such that another reasonable person in the same circumstances would likely employ .
This provision acts as a safeguard against grossly disproportionate use of force , while still allowing a person to use force in nearly all circumstances .
The law was introduced in response to DPP v. Padraig Nally .
The Act largely places previous Irish common law jurisprudence regarding self - defense on a statutory footing .
ISRAEL Section::::Israel .
Israeli law allows property owners to defend themselves with force .
This law was introduced in response to the trial of Shai Dromi , an Israeli farmer who shot Arab intruders on his farm late at night in 2007 .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
Italy passed a law in 2005 that would allow property owners to defend themselves with force .
The law 's practical application is however highly controversial : Italian judiciary system is rather complex and using force is , more often than not , not recommended at all , since the property owner might get sued for disproportionate use of force .
SEE ALSO
* Duty to retreat , obligation to withdraw rather than attack , overridden by castle doctrine
* Justifiable homicide , the blameless killing of a person , such as in self - defense .
* Stand - your - ground law , which applies the castle doctrine to any place .
* Self - defence ( Australia )
* Semayne 's case , 1604 case establishing the " knock - and - announce " rule in English common law , and where the " castle doctrine " phrasing comes from
* Squatting in the United States
* Trespasser HISTORY
* Claim club RELATED
SAYINGS
* a man 's home is his castle * an Englishman 's home is his castle NOTES