MAHONING RIVER
The Mahoning River is a river located in eastern Ohio and western Pennsylvania .
Flowing primarily through several Ohio counties , it joins the Shenango River to form the Beaver River and is part of the Ohio River watershed .
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Physical properties .
The river is formed near Winona in Columbiana County , Ohio , and extends for a length of approximately 113 miles ( 182 km ) , with a watershed area of approximately 1,132 square miles ( 2,932 km² ) .
It joins the Shenango River near New Castle , Pennsylvania to form the Beaver River .
The river traverses five Ohio counties , Columbiana , Stark , Portage , Trumbull , and Mahoning , as well as Lawrence County , Pennsylvania .
The watershed area also includes parts of Ashtabula and Geauga counties in Ohio .
The three main tributaries are Mosquito Creek , West Branch , and Eagle Creek , all in Ohio .
There are 15 dams on the river course .
The river has a course of 97.1 miles ( 156.3 km ) in Ohio , with the remainder in Pennsylvania .
The river supports more than 72 species of fish and 15 species of freshwater mussels .
The river is roughly divided into two sections .
The " upper elevation " extends roughly from Winona to Leavittsburg and is generally rural in nature .
The mainstem ( lower elevation ) extends roughly from Leavittsburg to the river 's mouth near New Castle , Pennsylvania ; it is heavily populated and is heavily industrialized .
The mainstem area has a population of over 500,000 and has a long history of steel making , coke production , and other industries .
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
Section::::Environmental concerns .
The industrial nature of the mainstem area has caused considerable pollution in the river .
Much of the pollution has left the ecosystem via the natural river flow .
But analysts estimate that 750,000 cubic yards ( 573,416 m³ ) of river bed and shoreline sediment , over a 30 mile ( 48.2 km ) stretch of the mainstem from Leavittsburg to the Pennsylvania border , is so heavily polluted that it will need to be remediated .
Approximately 45 % of this material is located in the vicinity of the Girard Dam near Girard , Ohio , which has acted as a trap for much of the contaminated sediment .
Petroleum hydrocarbons , benzo(a)pyrene ( polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ) , and mercury have all been found in quantities several times the maximum safe levels .
Since 1988 , the Ohio Department of Health has maintained an advisory against swimming or wading in the river between Leavittsburg and the Pennsylvania border , and also advises against eating fish caught there .
The Corps of Engineers estimates that the remediation will take up to 15 years to complete and cost in excess of US$ 100 million .
If approved , the dredging project will probably begin in the late 2010s .
Cities and towns along its course include : *
Winona , Ohio
* Alliance , Ohio
* Sebring , Ohio * Newton Falls , Ohio
* Leavittsburg , Ohio * Warren , Ohio
* Niles , Ohio
* McDonald , Ohio * Girard , Ohio
* Youngstown , Ohio
* Campbell , Ohio * Struthers , Ohio * Lowellville , Ohio * Poland , Ohio * New Castle , Pennsylvania FLOODS Section::::Floods .
The Mahoning river is susceptible to frequent flooding during high rain events .
One such event started when 3 days of torrential rain fell in July 2003 , resulting in such high volume that the river changed its course in Leavittsburg , Ohio , flooding and destroying nearly 100 homes .
The gallery of photos below shows some of the flooded areas in Leavittsburg .
SEE ALSO
* List of rivers of Ohio
* List of rivers of Pennsylvania
* Mahoning Valley REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Mahoning River Watershed Project
* Mahoning River Consortium