MORRIS BROWN
COLLEGE Morris Brown College ( MBC ) is a private , coed , liberal arts college in the Vine City community of Atlanta , Georgia , United States .
It is a historically black college affiliated with the African Methodist Episcopal Church .
Although Morris Brown College is no longer a member of the Atlanta University Center Consortium , it is located within the Atlanta University Center ( a district designated by the Atlanta City Council ) .
In 2002 it lost its accreditation and federal funding due to a financial mismanagement scandal during the 1998–2002 tenure of Dolores Cross as school president .
The United Negro College Fund also terminated its support for the college .
Ten years later , the college filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in an attempt to prevent foreclosure and sale of the school at auction .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
Morris Brown offers baccalaureate degrees in Management , Entrepreneurship , and Technology ( for traditional students ) and Organizational Management and Leadership ( for Adult Degree matriculants ) .
ACCREDITATION Section::::Accreditation .
Morris Brown is unaccredited .
Until 2003 , Morris Brown was accredited by a regional accreditor , the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools ( SACS ) .
Morris Brown was more than $ 23 million in debt and was on probation in 2001 with SACS for shoddy bookkeeping and a shortage of professors with advanced degrees .
In December 2002 , SACS revoked Morris Brown 's accreditation .
Almost eight years later , the college settled its nearly $ 10 million debt with the Department of Education .
An April 2017 Atlanta Magazine article indicated that the college intends to reapply to SACS for reaccreditation .
HISTORY ESTABLISHMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Establishment .
The Morris Brown Colored College ( its original name ) was founded in 1881 by African Americans affiliated with the African Methodist Episcopal Church and named to honor the denomination 's second bishop , Morris Brown .
The AME Church sent missionaries to the South following the American Civil War , and they founded numerous new AME churches in Georgia and other states , as hundreds of thousands of freedmen joining new congregations .
On January 5 , 1881 , the North Georgia Annual Conference of the AME Church passed a resolution to establish an educational institution in Atlanta for the moral , spiritual , and intellectual growth of Negro boys and girls .
The school formally opened its doors on October 15 , 1885 , with 107 students and nine teachers .
Morris Brown was the first educational institution in Georgia to be owned and operated independently by African Americans .
For more than a century , the college enrolled many students from poor backgrounds , large numbers of whom returned to their hometowns as teachers , as education was a mission of high priority .
Fountain Hall , originally known as Stone Hall when occupied by Atlanta University , was completed in 1882 .
It is closely associated with the history of the college and has been designated a National Historic Landmark .
After Atlanta University consolidated its facilities , it leased the building to Morris Brown College , which renamed it Fountain Hall .
EMBEZZLEMENT PROSECUTION Section::::Embezzlement prosecution .
Eighty percent of the school 's 2,500 students received financial aid from the federal government , totaling $ 8 million annually in the early 2000s .
Under the Federal Government 's grant - in - aid , college student financial aid program , accredited ( by a recognized collegiate accreditation body ) universities ' request of the Department of Education reimbursing grants in aid ; for each semester / quarter hour enrolled of ( financially ) qualifying students ; who , the university 's Registrar ; and , accountable fiscal officer , jointly certify ( to the grant - in - aid Administrator of the Department of Education ) as being enrolled as full and/or part - time graduate or undergraduate students .
The university also has further certified to its accreditation body that it is conducting an academic semester ( or quarter ) as approved for it , by its accreditor , as to overall semester / quarter length , and actual number of in - classroom clock - hours per semester ( or quarter ) hour to be awarded , in each classroom course offered .
A federal criminal case was filed against the former president , Dolores Cross , and the financial aid director ( the accountable fiscal officer ) , Parvesh Singh , alleging that they had , on behalf of the university , submitted to the Department of Education ( the grant administrator )
false declarations of enrollment of students for semesters when , in the specified semesters , the students identified in the declarations had not , in fact , been enrolled .
Since the grant - in - aid program 's structure required the federal funds received to be applied to each individual enrolled student 's account , the two school officers committed their second offense of embezzlement when they unlawfully applied these funds directly to ineligible college costs , such as for paying of personal staff , instead of applying the funds to offset individual students ' enrollment expenses .
In 2002 , the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools revoked the college 's accreditation because of its financial problems .
Cross and Singh were charged in December 2004 in a 34-count indictment that accused them of defrauding the school , the U.S. Department of Education , and hundreds of students .
The pair , who had first worked together at a college in Chicago , Illinois , were convicted of using the names of hundreds of students , ex - students , and people who were never enrolled to obtain financial aid for the school .
During the time Cross held the college presidency , from November 1998 through February 2002 , Singh obtained about 1,800 payments from federally insured loans and Pell grants for these students , who had no idea they would be responsible for paying off the loans , the indictment said .
Singh pleaded guilty to one count of embezzlement .
Singh , 64 , also received five years of probation but 18 months of home confinement .
At the time of the 2004 indictment , Cross was teaching at DePaul University in Chicago .
On May 1 , 2006 , Cross pleaded guilty to fraud by embezzlement .
She agreed to pay $ 11,000 to the Department of Education in restitution .
Morris Brown College 's Herndon Stadium was the site of the field hockey competitions during the 1996 Summer Olympics .
The stadium is designed to seat 15,000 spectators .
On January 3 , 2007 , Cross was sentenced to five years of probation and one year of home confinement for the fraud .
Cross , 70 years old , suffers from sleep apnea and has had a series of small strokes , factors the judge took into consideration .
An additional factor the judge considered for each person was that they did not use the embezzled funds for personal profit , but to prop up the school 's poor finances .
The initial indictment said Cross had used the funds to finance personal trips for herself , her family , and friends .
The prosecutor , U.S. Attorney David Nahmias , said at the sentencing : " When the defendants arrived at Morris Brown , the college was already in serious financial condition .
Thereafter , these defendants misappropriated ... money in fairly complicated ways in what appears to have been a misguided and ultimately criminal attempt to keep Morris Brown afloat . "
UNCERTAIN FUTURE Section::::Uncertain future .
The school has $ 22 million in long - term debt and $ 5 million in short - term debt .
Both the alumni association and the African Methodist Episcopal Church have pledged to keep the school from closing .
At its peak , the college had approximately 2,500 students enrolled .
Morris Brown College , at one point reduced to an enrollment of just 44 students , continues to operate as a scaled - down version of its former self .
In 2004 , Dr. Samuel D. Jolley , who had been the school 's president from 1993 to 1997 , agreed to return to the presidency to help the college 's attempts to recover .
" Morris Brown " , a song by Atlanta
hip hop duo
OutKast off their 2006 release Idlewild , features a performance from the Morris Brown College Marching Wolverines .
The school hoped to have 107 students in fall 2006 , the same number when the school opened in 1881 , but failed to meet that goal .
Tuition in the fall semester of 2006 was $ 3,500 , but without accreditation , students can not obtain federal or state financial aid for their tuition and other school expenses .
By February 2007 , MBC had 54 students in two degree programs , supported by 7 faculty and staff employees .
Despite this , after the sentencing of two former administrators , the chair of the college 's board of trustees , Bishop William Phillips DeVeaux , issued a press release stating the college would move forward and that " This sad chapter in the college 's history is now closed . "
In addition to civil lawsuits filed by former and current students , Morris Brown faces a civil suit for defaulting on a $ 13 million property bond , a case that eventually could lead to foreclosure on some of the college 's most historic buildings , including its administration building , attorneys involved in the case say .
The complaint asks for $ 10.7 million in principal owed on the loan agreement , $ 1.5 million in interest and a per diem of $ 2,100 for each day Morris Brown does not pay .
In December 2008 , the City of Atlanta disconnected water service to the college because of an overdue water bill .
The debt has since been paid and the service restored .
The 2002 film Drumline and the 2007 film Stomp the Yard were partly filmed on the campus of Morris Brown .
In 2006 Warner Brothers filmed We Are Marshall in the football stadium .
} Radio personality Tom Joyner made several offers to buy the troubled college from 2002 through 2004 , during the worst of the accreditation and fraud crises .
In 2003 , his charitable foundation gave the school $ 1 million to assist with its immediate needs .
The school faced foreclosure in September 2012 .
In June 2013 , Morris Brown 's board of trustees rejected a $ 9.7 million offer from the city of Atlanta .
However , negotiations continued and mid - year in 2014 Morris Brown reached an agreement with Invest Atlanta , Atlanta 's economic development agency .
The offer eliminated the school 's $ 35 million debt by purchasing the 37 acres on which the college sits , paying the school 's creditors , and paying $ 480,000 in back pay owed to professors and staff .
The college will be able to retain use of several historic buildings for educational purposes .
The city 's administration wishes to revitalize the area around Morris Brown ; the site of the new Atlanta Falcons stadium is just east of the campus .
Mayor Kasim Reed said that the city has no interest in operating the school , and that it would be illegal for them to do so .
Several of Morris Brown 's buildings are in an extreme state of disrepair and have been heavily damaged , including Herndon Stadium , the Middleton Twin Towers dorm , Gaines Hall and Furber Cottage .
Gaines Hall was heavily damaged by a two - alarm fire in August 2015 .
Mayor Reed indicated in August 2015 that he would like to see the city help preserve the building .
As of 2018 , the college has less than 50 students enrolled .
The college receives approximately 2,000 applications annually but usually interest drops significantly once applicants are notified they can not receive financial aid due to absent accreditations .
The college is actively trying to increase enrollment and regain important accreditations so the institution is thriving again .
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
In the early 2000s , the college briefly had an independent NCAA Division I athletics program .
Prior to the Division I transition , the college was a founding and active member of the NCAA Division II Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference between 1913 and 2000 .
The Morris Brown Wolverines football program played at Herndon Stadium on campus until the athletic program was discontinued .
THE MARCHING WOLVERINES Section::::The Marching Wolverines .
Morris Brown College was well - known for its popular and sizable marching band " The Marching Wolverines " and its dance auxiliary " Bubblin Brown Suga .
" Both were heavily featured in the 2002 box office hit Drumline and invited to perform at the first Honda Battle of the Bands event in 2003 .
In 2006 , OutKast released a song named " Morris Brown " that featured the marching band .
The band program was discontinued at the height of its popularity in 2003 .
NOTABLE ALUMNI Section::::Notable alumni .
This is a list of notable alumni which includes graduates , non - graduate former students , and current students of Morris Brown College .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS