BUNDLE BRANCH BLOCK
A bundle branch block is a defect of the bundle branches or fascicles in the electrical conduction system of the heart .
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY Section::::Anatomy and physiology .
The heart 's electrical activity begins in the sinoatrial node ( the heart 's natural pacemaker ) , which is situated on the upper right atrium .
The impulse travels next through the left and right atria and summates at the atrioventricular node .
From the AV node the electrical impulse travels down the bundle of His and divides into the right and left bundle branches .
The right bundle branch contains one fascicle .
The left bundle branch subdivides into two fascicles : the left anterior fascicle and the left posterior fascicle .
Other sources divide the left bundle branch into three fascicles : the left anterior , the left posterior , and the left septal fascicle .
The thicker left posterior fascicle bifurcates , with one fascicle being in the septal aspect .
Ultimately , the fascicles divide into millions of Purkinje fibres , which in turn interdigitise with individual cardiac myocytes , allowing for rapid , coordinated , and synchronous physiologic depolarization of the ventricles .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
When a bundle branch or fascicle becomes injured ( by underlying heart disease , myocardial infarction , or cardiac surgery ) , it may cease to conduct electrical impulses appropriately .
This results in altered pathways for ventricular depolarization .
Since the electrical impulse can no longer use the preferred pathway across the bundle branch , it may move instead through muscle fibers in a way that both slows the electrical movement and changes the directional propagation of the impulses .
As a result , there is a loss of ventricular synchrony , ventricular depolarization is prolonged , and there may be a corresponding drop in cardiac output .
When heart failure is present , a specialized pacemaker may be used to resynchronize the ventricles .
In theory a pacemaker like this will shorten the QRS interval , thus bringing the timing of contraction of the left and right ventricles closer together and slightly increasing the ejection fraction .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A bundle branch block can be diagnosed when the duration of the QRS complex on the ECG exceeds 120 ms .
A right bundle branch block typically causes prolongation of the last part of the QRS complex , and may shift the heart 's electrical axis slightly to the right .
The ECG will show a terminal R wave in lead V1 and a slurred S wave in lead I. Left bundle branch block widens the entire QRS , and in most cases shifts the heart 's electrical axis to the left .
The ECG will show a QS or rS complex in lead V1 and a monophasic R wave in lead I. Another normal finding with bundle branch block is appropriate T wave discordance .
In other words , the T wave will be deflected opposite the terminal deflection of the QRS complex .
Bundle branch block , especially left bundle branch block , can lead to cardiac dyssynchrony .
The simultaneous occurrence of left and right bundle branch block leads to total AV block .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Depending on the anatomical location of the defect which leads to a bundle branch block , the blocks are further classified into :
* Right bundle branch block *
Left bundle branch block
The left bundle branch block can be further sub classified into : * Left anterior fascicular block .
In this case only the anterior half of the left bundle branch ( fascicle ) is involved
* Left posterior fascicular block .
Only the posterior part of the left bundle branch is involved Other classifications of bundle branch blocks are ; * Bifascicular block .
This is a combination of right bundle branch block ( RBBB ) and either left anterior fascicular block ( LAFB ) or left posterior fascicular block ( LPFB )
* Trifascicular block .
This is a combination of right bundle branch block with either left anterior fascicular block or left posterior fascicular block together with a first degree AV block * Tachycardia - dependent bundle branch block TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Some people with bundle branch blocks are born with this condition .
Many others acquire it as a consequence of heart disease .
People with bundle branch blocks may still be quite active , and may have nothing more remarkable than an abnormal appearance to their ECG .
However , when bundle blocks are complex and diffuse in the bundle systems , or are associated with additional and significant ventricular muscle damage , they may be a sign of serious underlying heart disease .
In more severe cases , a pacemaker may be required to restore an optimal electrical supply to the heart muscle .
SEE ALSO
* Cardiac pacemaker *
Heart block
* First degree AV block * Second degree AV block * Third degree
AV block
REFERENCES
* Cecil Textbook of Medicine .
W.B. Sanders .
2004 .
Chapters 50 ; 58 . * Rakel : Textbook of Family Practice , 6th ed . , 2002 .
W.B. Saunders Company .
pp .
699–732 .
EXTERNAL LINKS