SWEENEY TODD :
THE DEMON BARBER OF FLEET STREET
Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street is a 1979 musical thriller with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Hugh Wheeler .
The musical is based on the 1973 play Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street by Christopher Bond .
Sweeney Todd opened on Broadway in 1979 and in the West End in 1980 .
It won the Tony Award for Best Musical and Olivier Award for Best New Musical .
It has since had numerous revivals as well as a . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The character of Sweeney Todd had its origins in serialized Victorian popular fiction , known as " penny dreadfuls " .
A story called The String of Pearls was published in a weekly magazine during the winter of 1846 - 47 .
Set in 1785 , the story featured as its principal villain a certain Sweeney Todd and included all the plot elements that were used by Sondheim and others ever since .
The murderous barber 's story proved instantly popular – it was turned into a play before the ending had even been revealed in print .
An expanded edition appeared in 1850 , an American version in 1852 , a new play in 1865 .
By the 1870s , Sweeney Todd was a familiar character to most Victorians .
Sondheim 's musical was , in fact , based on Christopher Bond 's 1973 spooky melodrama , which introduced a psychological background to Todd 's crimes .
In Bond 's reincarnation of the character , Todd was the victim of a ruthless judge who raped his young wife and exiled him to Australia .
Sondheim first conceived of a musical version of the story in 1973 , after he went to see Bond 's ghoulish take on the story at Theatre Royal Stratford East .
Bond 's sophisticated plot and language significantly elevated the lurid nature of the tale .
Sondheim once noted , " It had a weight to it . . .
because [ Bond ] wrote certain characters in blank verse .
He also infused into it plot elements from Jacobean tragedy and The Count of Monte Cristo .
He was able to take all these disparate elements that had been in existence rather dully for a hundred and some - odd years and make them into a first - rate play . "
Sondheim felt that the addition of music would greatly increase the size of the drama , transforming it into a different theatrical experience , saying later : " What I did to Chris ' play is more than enhance it .
I had a feeling it would be a new animal .
The effect it had at Stratford East in London and the effect it had at the Uris Theater in New York are two entirely different effects , even though it 's the same play .
It was essentially charming over there because they do n't take Sweeney Todd seriously .
Our production was larger in scope .
Hal Prince gave it an epic sense , a sense that this was a man of some size instead of just a nut case .
The music helps to give it that dimension . "
Music proved to be a key element behind the impact of Sweeney Todd on audiences .
Over eighty percent of the production is set to music , either sung or orchestrated underneath dialogue .
The score is one vast structure , each individual part meshing with others for the good of the entire musical machine .
Never before or since in his work has Sondheim utilized music in such an exhaustive capacity to further the purposes of the drama .
Sondheim decided to pair one of the most nightmarish songs ( Sweeney Todd 's " Epiphany " ) with the comic - relief of " A Little Priest " .
This pair of songs at the end of Act
I was the most significant musical addition which Sondheim made to Bond 's version of the story .
In the play , Sweeney Todd 's mental collapse and the subsequent plan for Lovett 's meat pies take place in less than half a page of dialogue , much too quickly to convey the full psychological impact , in the view of scholar Larry A. Brown .
Sondheim 's version more carefully reveals the developing ideas in Sweeney Todd and Mrs. Lovett 's demented minds .
Sondheim has often said that his Sweeney Todd was about obsession – and close friends seemed to instinctually agree .
When Sondheim first played songs from an early version of the show for Judy Prince ( wife of the show 's director ) , she told him : "
Oh God – I did n't know
this was what [ Sweeney Todd ] was about .
It 's nothing to do with Grand Guignol .
It 's the story of your [ own ] life . "
What Sondheim thought of as " a small horror piece " eventually became a colossal portrait of the Industrial Revolution in the hands of director Hal Prince .
At first , Prince was not interested in directing the show ; to him it was just another melodrama , not very experimental structurally .
Then he discovered a metaphor which expanded the story into an essay on the human condition .
On the stage of the Uris Theater in New York , this tale of horrors was transformed into a mountain of steel in motion .
Prince 's scenic metaphor for Sweeney Todd was a 19th - century iron foundry moved from Rhode Island and reassembled on the stage , which critic Jack Kroll aptly described as " part cathedral , part factory , part prison , that dwarfed and degraded the swarming denizens of the lower orders . "
The massive scope of Prince 's setting went beyond even Sondheim 's intentions .
Sondheim admits that his conception of the show differed from that of Prince : " Hal 's metaphor is that the factory turns out Sweeney Todds .
It turns out soulless , defeated , hopeless people .
That 's what the play 's about to him ; Sweeney Todd is a product of that age .
I think it 's not .
Sweeney Todd is a man bent on personal revenge , the way we all are in one way or another , and it has nothing whatsoever to do with the time he lived in , as far as I 'm concerned . "
When it came to casting , Sondheim thought stage veteran Angela Lansbury would add some needed comedy to the grim tale as the lunatic Cockney shopkeeper , but Lansbury needed to be convinced .
She was a star by the late 1970s , and , as she pointed out to Sondheim , " Your show is not called ' Nellie Lovett ' , it 's called ' Sweeney Todd ' .
And I 'm the second banana .
" To convince her , Sondheim " auditioned , " writing a couple of songs for her , including the macabre patter song , " A Little Priest . " And he gave her the key to the character , saying " I want Mrs. Lovett to have a music hall character . " Lansbury , who had grown up in British music hall , immediately got it .
" Not just music hall ...
but dotty music hall " , as she put it .
After she was formally confirmed in the role , she relished the opportunity , saying that she loved " the extraordinary wit and intelligence of [ Sondheim 's ] lyrics . "
Canadian actor and singer Len Cariou was Sondheim 's personal choice to play the tortured barber .
In preparation for the role , Cariou ( who was studying with a voice teacher at the time ) asked Sondheim what kind of range he needed to have in the role .
Cariou told him he was prepared to give Sondheim a couple of octaves to deal with , and Sondheim immediately replied , " That would be more than sufficient . "
With Prince absorbed in staging the mammoth production , Lansbury and Cariou were left largely to their own when it came to developing their characters .
They worked together on all their scenes , both of them creative actors who were experienced in giving intense performances .
" That cuckoo style of playing Mrs. Lovett , that was pretty much Angela ...
She invented that character " , Cariou said .
She recalled , " I just ran with it .
The wide - openness of my portrayal had to do with my sink or swim attitude toward it .
I just figured hell
, I 've done everything else on Broadway , I might as well go with Mrs. Lovett .
"
It is said that on opening night Harold Clurman , the doyen of American theatre critics , rushed up to Schuyler Chapin , former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera , demanding to know why he had not put it on at the Met .
To which Chapin replied : " I would have put it on like a shot if I 'd had the opportunity .
There would have been screams and yells
but I would n't have given a damn .
Because it is an opera .
A modern American opera . "
SYNOPSIS Section::::Synopsis .
The citizens of London , who act as a Greek chorus throughout the play , drop a body bag into a shallow grave .
Sweeney Todd rises forth ( " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " ) , and introduces the drama .
ACT
I
Section::::Act I.
In 1846 , young sailor Anthony Hope and the mysterious Sweeney Todd , whom Anthony has recently rescued at sea and befriended , dock in London .
A beggar woman sexually solicits them , appearing to recognize Todd for a moment
( " No Place Like London " ) , and Todd shoos her away .
Todd relates some of his troubled past to Anthony : he was a naive barber , banished by a crooked judge who lusted after Todd 's wife ( " The Barber and His Wife " ) .
Leaving Anthony , Todd enters a meat pie shop on Fleet Street , where the owner , the slatternly widow , Mrs. Lovett , laments the scarcity of meat and customers ( " Worst Pies in London " ) .
When Todd asks after her empty upstairs apartment , she reveals that its former tenant , Benjamin Barker , was transported on false charges by Judge Turpin , who , along with his servant , Beadle Bamford , then lured Barker 's wife Lucy to the Judge 's home and raped her ( " Poor Thing " ) .
Todd 's reaction reveals that he is himself Benjamin Barker .
Promising to keep his secret , Lovett explains that Lucy poisoned herself and that their then - infant daughter , Johanna , became a ward of the Judge .
Todd swears revenge on the Judge and Beadle , and Mrs. Lovett presents Todd with his old collection of sterling silver straight razors , which persuades Todd to take up his old profession ( " My Friends " and " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd – Reprise " ) .
Elsewhere , Anthony spies a beautiful girl singing at her window ( " Green Finch and Linnet Bird " ) , and the beggar woman tells him that her name is Johanna .
Unaware that Johanna is his friend Todd 's daughter , Anthony is immediately enamored ( " Ah , Miss " ) and he pledges to return for her , even after the judge and Beadle chase him away ( " Johanna " ) .
In the crowded London marketplace , flamboyant Italian barber Adolfo Pirelli and his simple - minded young assistant Tobias Ragg , pitch a dramatic cure - all for hair loss ( " Pirelli 's Miracle Elixir " ) .
Todd and Lovett soon arrive ; Todd exposes the elixir as a sham , challenges Pirelli to a shaving competition , and easily wins ( " The Contest " ) , inviting the impressed Beadle for a free shave ( " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd – Reprise 2 " ) .
Several days later , Judge Turpin flagellates himself in a frenzy over a growing lust for Johanna , but instead resolves to marry her himself .
( " Johanna – Mea Culpa " ) .
Todd awaits the Beadle 's arrival with mounting impatience , but Mrs. Lovett tries to soothe him ( " Wait " ) .
When Anthony tells Todd of his plan to ask Johanna to elope with him , Todd , eager to reunite with his daughter , agrees to let them use his barbershop as a safehouse .
As Anthony leaves , Pirelli and Tobias enter , and Mrs. Lovett takes Toby downstairs for a pie .
Alone with Todd , Pirelli drops his Italian accent and persona and reveals that he is Daniel O'Higgins , Benjamin Barker 's former assistant , and knows Todd 's true identity .
When O'Higgins attempts to blackmail his former employer , however , Todd injures and hides him , later slitting his throat ( " Pirelli 's Death " and " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd – Reprise 3 " ) .
Meanwhile , Johanna and Anthony plan their elopement ( " Kiss Me " ) , while the Beadle recommends Todd 's services to the Judge , so that he can better win Johanna 's affections ( " Ladies in Their Sensitivities " ) .
Panicked at first on learning of Pirelli 's murder , Mrs. Lovett swipes his leftover coin purse and then asks Todd how he plans to dispose of the body .
Suddenly , the judge enters ; Todd quickly seats him and lulls him with a relaxing conversation ( " Pretty Women " ) .
Before Todd can kill the judge , however , Anthony re - enters and blurts his elopement plan to Todd , accidentally informing the judge , who storms out and vows never to return .
Todd drives Anthony away in a fit of fury , resolving that he will murder his future customers , since all people deserve to die : the rich to be punished for their corruption , and the poor to be relieved of their misery ( " Epiphany " ) .
Mrs. Lovett suggests that they use the bodies of Todd 's victims in her meat pies , and Todd happily agrees ( " A Little Priest " ) . ACT II Section::::Act II .
Several weeks later , Mrs. Lovett 's pie shop has become a successful business , and Toby is now working there as a waiter ( " God , That 's Good ! " ) .
Todd and Mrs. Lovett acquire a specially - designed mechanical barber 's chair that allows Todd to kill his clients and then send their bodies directly through a chute into the pie shop 's basement bakehouse .
Casually slitting his customers ' necks , Todd despairs of ever seeing Johanna , while Anthony discovers that Johanna is missing ( " Johanna – Quartet " ) , locked away in a madhouse by the Judge .
After a day of hard work , Mrs. Lovett envisions a seaside retirement ( " By the Sea " ) , but Todd remains fixated on his revenge .
Anthony arrives to beg Todd for help to free Johanna , and Todd , revitalized , devises a plan to rescue her by having Anthony pose as a wigmaker intent on purchasing inmates ' hair ( " Wigmaker Sequence " and " The Ballad ... – Reprise 4 " ) .
Todd later sends a secret letter to notify the Judge of Anthony 's plot , hoping to lure the Judge back to his shop ( " The Letter " ) .
In the pie shop , Toby tells Mrs. Lovett of his skepticism about Todd and his own desire to protect her ( " Not While I 'm Around " ) .
When he recognizes Pirelli 's coin purse in Mrs. Lovett 's hands , she distracts him by showing him the bakehouse , instructing him how to work the meat grinder and the oven , before locking him in .
Upstairs , she encounters the Beadle at her harmonium .
He has been asked by Lovett 's neighbors to investigate the strange smoke and stench from the pie shop 's chimney .
Mrs. Lovett stalls the Beadle with " Parlor Songs " until Todd returns to offer the Beadle his promised " free shave " ; Mrs. Lovett loudly plays her harmonium to cover the Beadle 's screams above , as Todd dispatches him .
In the basement , Toby discovers human remains in a pie , just as the Beadle 's fresh corpse comes tumbling through the chute .
Maddened , he descends into the sewers of London .
Mrs. Lovett then informs Todd that Toby has found out about their secret , and Todd decides to kill Toby .
Anthony arrives at the asylum to rescue Johanna , but can not bring himself to shoot Jonas Fogg , the asylum owner ; Johanna grabs
Anthony 's pistol and murders him herself .
The asylum 's freed inmates pour out into the streets , prophesying the end of the world , while Todd and Mrs. Lovett hunt for Toby and the Beggar Woman fears what has become of the Beadle ( " City on Fire / Searching " ) .
Anthony and Johanna ( now disguised as a sailor ) arrive to find Todd 's shop empty .
Anthony leaves to seek a coach after he and Johanna reaffirm their love ( " Ah Miss – Reprise " ) .
Left alone , Johanna hears the Beggar Woman enter and hides in the barbershop .
The Beggar Woman seems to recognize the room , singing a lullaby , but the frantic Todd lethally cuts her , sending her down the chute just a moment before the Judge bursts in ( " Beggar Woman 's Lullaby " ) .
Todd assures the Judge that Johanna is repentant and the Judge asks for a quick splash of cologne .
Once he has the Judge in his chair , Todd soothes him with another conversation on women , but this time he alludes to their " fellow tastes , in women at least " .
The Judge recognizes him as " Benjamin Barker ! " just before Todd slashes his throat and sends him hurtling down the chute ( " The Judge 's Return " ) .
The disguised Johanna finally rises , horrified , from her hiding place , surprising Todd .
Todd next decides to kill her too , before Mrs. Lovett shrieks from the bakehouse below , providing a distraction for Johanna to escape .
Downstairs , Mrs. Lovett is struggling with the dying Judge , who claws at her .
She then attempts to drag the Beggar Woman 's body into the oven , but Todd arrives and sees the lifeless face clearly for the first time : the Beggar Woman is his wife Lucy .
Todd is shocked , accusing Lovett of lying to him .
Lovett frantically explains that indeed , Lucy did poison herself – but she lived , though the attempt left her insane .
Lovett confesses she loves Todd .
Todd then feigns forgiveness , dancing manically with Lovett until pushing her into the raging fires of the oven , burning her alive .
Full of despair , Todd embraces the dead Lucy .
Toby , now quite mad and white - haired from shock , crawls up from the sewer babbling nursery rhymes to himself .
He picks up Todd 's fallen razor , and slits Todd 's throat .
As Anthony , Johanna and some constables break into the bakehouse , Todd falls dead and Toby drops the razor , heedless of the others , while absentmindedly turning the meat grinder ( " Final Scene " ) .
EPILOGUE Section::::Epilogue .
The citizens , soon joined by the risen Todd , Mrs. Lovett , and the others , sing a reprise of " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " warning against revenge ( though admitting that " everyone does it " ) .
The company exits .
Todd scowls at the audience for a moment and vanishes , ending the play .
MUSICAL NUMBERS
Prologue : * " Organ Prelude " - Instrumental *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " - Chorus , Todd Act
I : * " No Place Like London " - Anthony ,
Todd , Beggar Woman *
" The Barber and His Wife " -
Todd * " The Worst Pies in London " - Mrs. Lovett * " The Barber and His Wife ( Reprise)/Poor Thing " - Mrs. Lovett
* " My Friends " -
Todd and Mrs. Lovett *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 1 ) " - Chorus * " Green Finch and Linnet Bird " - Johanna * " Ah , Miss / Green Finch and Linnet Bird ( Reprise ) " - Anthony , Johanna , Beggar Woman
* " Johanna " - Anthony * " Pirelli 's Miracle Elixir " -
Tobias , Todd , Mrs. Lovett , Chorus * " The Contest " -
Pirelli * " Tooth - Pulling Scene " -
Pirelli *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 2 ) " - Chorus * " Johanna ( Mea Culpa ) " - Judge Turpin *
" Wait " -
Mrs. Lovett * " Pirelli 's Death " - Pirelli *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 3 ) " - Tenor Trio * " Kiss Me " - Johanna , Anthony * " Ladies in their Sensitivities " - Beadle , Judge Turpin * " Kiss Me ( Quartet ) " - Johanna , Anthony , Beadle , Judge Turpin
* " Pretty Women " -
Todd and Judge Turpin
* " Epiphany " -
Todd *
" A Little Priest " - Mrs. Lovett and Todd Act II : * " God , that 's Good ! "
- Tobias , Mrs. Lovett , Todd , and Chorus * " Johanna ( Quartet ) " - Anthony , Todd , Beggar Woman , Johanna *
" By the Sea " - Mrs. Lovett and Todd * " Wigmaker Sequence "
- Todd and Anthony *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 4 ) " - Chorus * " The Letter " - Quintet and Todd * " Not While I 'm Around "
- Tobias and Mrs. Lovett
* " Parlor Songs " : * " Sweet Polly Plunkett " -
Beadle *
" The Tower of Bray " - Beadle , Mrs. Lovett , Tobias * " Sweet Polly Plunkett ( Reprise ) " - Mrs. Lovett * " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 5 ) " - Chorus , Lunatics * " Final Sequence " : * " City on Fire " / " Searching " - Lunatics , Johanna , and Beggar Woman / Mrs. Lovett and Todd *
" Ah , Miss ( Reprise ) " - Anthony and Johanna *
" Beggar Woman 's Lullaby " - Beggar Woman * " Pretty Women ( Reprise ) " - Todd and Judge Turpin * " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 6 ) " - Chorus * " Final Scene " - Mrs. Lovett and Todd Epilogue : *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd
( Reprise 7 - Finale ) "
- Company Notes on the songs :
* †
Despite being cut in previews for reasons of length , these numbers were included on the Original Cast Recording .
They have been restored in subsequent productions .
* ‡ This song was moved to after " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " in the 2000 and 2014 New York Philharmonic concert performances , and on the Original Broadway Cast Album .
* § This number was written for the original London production and first recorded for the 2000 New York Philharmonic concert performance .
*
The song " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " and its multiple reprises are titled in some productions by their first lyrics to differentiate them from one another : * " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd : Attend the Tale of Sweeney Todd " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise ) : Lift Your Razor High , Sweeney " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 2 ) : Sweeney Pondered and Sweeney Planned " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 3 ) :
His Hands Were Quick , His Fingers Strong " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 4 ) :
Sweeney'd Waited Too Long Before " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 5 ) :
The Engine Roared , The Motor Hissed " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 6 ) : Lift Your Razor High , Sweeney " *
" The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Reprise 7 ) : Attend the Tale of Sweeney Todd " * Sources : SondheimGuide.com & InternetBroadwayDatabase PRINCIPAL ROLES Contralto or Mezzo - soprano valign="top " valign="top " valign="top " valign="top " Tobias Ragg valign="top " valign="top " valign="top " valign="top "
CASTS
Lisa Vroman !
Judge Turpin !
Tobias Ragg !
Beadle Bamford !
Beggar Woman !
Adolfo Pirelli PRODUCTIONS ORIGINAL BROADWAY PRODUCTION AND TOUR
Section::::Productions .
Section::::Original Broadway production and tour .
The original production premiered on Broadway at the Uris Theatre on March 1 , 1979 and closed on June 29 , 1980 after 557 performances and 19 previews .
Directed by Hal Prince and choreographed by Larry Fuller , the scenic design was by Eugene Lee , costumes by Franne Lee and lighting by Ken Billington .
The cast included Angela Lansbury as Mrs. Lovett , Len Cariou as Todd , Victor Garber as Anthony , Sarah Rice as Johanna , Merle Louise as the Beggar Woman , Ken Jennings as Tobias , Edmund Lyndeck as Judge Turpin , Joaquin Romaguera as Pirelli , and Jack Eric Williams as Beadle Bamford .
The production was nominated for nine Tony Awards , winning eight including Best Musical .
Dorothy Loudon and George Hearn replaced Lansbury and Cariou on March 4 , 1980 .
The first national U.S. tour started on October 24 , 1980 , in Washington , D.C. and ended in August 1981 in Los Angeles , California .
Lansbury was joined by Hearn and this version was taped during the Los Angeles engagement and broadcast on The Entertainment Channel ( one of the predecessors of today 's A&E ) on September 12 , 1982 .
This performance would later be repeated on Showtime and PBS ( the latter as part of its Great Performances series ) ; it was later released on home video through Turner Home Entertainment , and on DVD from Warner Home Video .
A North American tour started on February 23 , 1982 , in Wilmington , Delaware , and ended on July 17 , 1982 , in Toronto , Ontario .
June Havoc and Ross Petty starred .
ORIGINAL LONDON PRODUCTION Section::::Original London production .
The first London production opened on July 2 , 1980 , at the West End 's Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , starring Denis Quilley and Sheila Hancock along with Andrew C. Wadsworth as Anthony , Mandy More as Johanna , Michael Staniforth as Tobias , Austin Kent as Judge Turpin , Dilys Watling as the Beggar Woman , David Wheldon - Williams as Beadle Bamford , Oz Clarke as Jonas Fogg , and John Aron as Pirelli .
The show ran for 157 performances .
Despite receiving mixed reviews , the production won the Olivier Award for Best New Musical in 1980 .
The production closed on November 14 , 1980 .
1989 BROADWAY
REVIVAL Section::::1989 Broadway revival .
The first Broadway revival opened on September 14 , 1989 at the Circle in the Square Theatre , and closed on February 25 , 1990 after 189 performances and 46 previews .
It was produced by Theodore Mann , directed by Susan H. Schulman , with choreography by Michael Lichtefeld .
The cast featured Bob Gunton ( Sweeney Todd ) , Beth Fowler ( Mrs. Lovett ) , Eddie Korbich ( Tobias Ragg ) , Jim Walton ( Anthony Hope ) and David Barron ( Judge Turpin ) .
In contrast to the Broadway version , the production was designed on a relatively intimate scale and was affectionately referred to as " Teeny Todd .
" It was originally produced Off - Broadway by the York Theatre Company at the Church of the Heavenly Rest from March 31 , 1989 to April 29 , 1989 .
This production received four Tony Award nominations : for Best Revival of a Musical , Best Actor in a Musical , Best Actress in a Musical and Best Direction of a Musical , but failed to win any .
1993
LONDON REVIVAL Section::::1993
London revival .
In 1993 , the show received its first London revival at the Royal National Theatre .
The production opened originally at the Cottesloe Theatre on June 2 , 1993 , and later transferred to the Lyttleton Theatre on December 16 , 1993 , playing in repertory and closing on June 1 , 1994 .
The show 's design was slightly altered to fit a proscenium arch theatre space for the Lyttleton Theatre .
The director was Declan Donnellan and the Cottesloe Theatre production starred Alun Armstrong as Todd and Julia McKenzie as Mrs. Lovett , with Adrian Lester as Anthony , Barry James as Beadle Bamford and Denis Quilley ( who had originated the title role in the original London production in 1980 ) as Judge Turpin .
When the show transferred , Quilley replaced Armstrong in the title role .
Sondheim praised Donnellan for the " small ' chamber ' approach to the show , which was the composer 's original vision for the piece .
" This production received Olivier Awards for Best Musical Revival , Best Actor in a Musical ( Armstrong ) and Best Actress in a Musical ( McKenzie ) , as well as nominations for Best Director and two for Best Supporting Performance in a musical .
1995
BARCELONA PRODUCTION Section::::1995
Barcelona production .
On April 5 , 1995 it premiered in Catalan at the theater Poliorama of Barcelona ( later moving to the Apollo ) , in a production of the Drama Centre of the Government of Catalonia .
The libretto was adapted by Roser Batalla Roger Pena , and was directed by Mario Gas .
The cast consisted of Constantino Romero as Todd , Vicky Peña as Mrs .
Lovett , Ma .
Josep Peris as Johanna , Muntsa Rius as Tobias , Pep Molina as Anthony and Xavier Ribera - Vall as Judge Turpin , with critical acclaim and audience applause
( Sondheim himself traveled to Barcelona after hearing the success it was having and was delighted with the production ) .
Later it moved to Madrid .
The show received over fifteen awards . 2004
LONDON REVIVAL Section::::2004
London revival .
In 2004 , John Doyle directed a revival of the musical at the Watermill Theatre in Newbury , England , running from July 27 , 2004 until October 9 , 2004 .
This production subsequently transferred to the West End 's Trafalgar Studios and then the Ambassadors Theatre .
This production was notable for having no orchestra , with the 10-person cast playing the score themselves on musical instruments that they carried onstage .
This marked the first time in nearly ten years that a Sondheim show had been presented in the commercial West End .
It starred Paul Hegarty as Todd , Karen Mann as Mrs. Lovett , Rebecca Jackson as The Beggar Woman , Sam Kenyon as Tobias , Rebecca Jenkins as Johanna , David Ricardo - Pearce as Anthony and Colin Wakefield as Judge Turpin .
This production closed February 5 , 2005 .
In spring 2006 , the production toured the UK with Jason Donovan as Todd and Harriet Thorpe as Mrs. Lovett .
2005
BROADWAY REVIVAL Section::::2005 Broadway revival .
A version of the John Doyle West End production transferred to Broadway , opening on November 3 , 2005 at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre with a new cast , all of whom played their own instruments , as had been done in London .
The cast consisted of : Patti LuPone ( Mrs. Lovett / Tuba / Percussion ) , Michael Cerveris ( Todd / Guitar ) , Manoel Felciano ( Tobias / Violin / Clarinet / Piano ) , Alexander Gemignani ( Beadle / Piano / Trumpet ) , Lauren Molina ( Johanna / Cello ) , Benjamin Magnuson ( Anthony / Cello / Piano ) , Mark Jacoby ( Turpin / Trumpet / Percussion ) , Donna Lynne Champlin ( Pirelli / Accordion / Flute / Piano ) , Diana DiMarzio ( Beggar Woman / Clarinet ) and John Arbo ( Fogg / Double bass ) .
The production ran for 349 performances and 35 previews , and was nominated for six Tony Awards , winning two : Best Direction of a Musical for Doyle and Best Orchestrations for Sarah Travis who had reconstructed Jonathan Tunick 's original arrangements to suit the ten - person cast and orchestra .
Because of the small scale of the musical , it cost $ 3.5 million to make , a sum small in comparison to many Broadway musicals and recouped in nineteen weeks .
A national tour based on Doyle 's Broadway production began on August 30 , 2007 with Judy Kaye ( who had temporarily replaced LuPone in the Broadway run ) as Mrs. Lovett and David Hess as Todd .
Alexander Gemignani also played the title role for the Toronto run of the tour in November 2007 .
2012 WEST END
REVIVAL
Section::::2012 West End revival .
Michael Ball and Imelda Staunton starred in a new production of the show that played at The Chichester Festival Theatre , running from September 24 to November 5 , 2011 .
Directed by Jonathan Kent , the cast included Ball as Todd , Staunton as Mrs. Lovett , James McConville as Tobias , John Bowe as Judge Turpin , Robert Burt as Pirelli , Luke Brady as Anthony , Gillian Kirkpatrick as Lucy Barker , Lucy May Barker as Johanna and Peter Polycarpou as Beadle Bamford .
It was notably set in the 1930s instead of 1846 and restored the oft - cut song " Johanna ( Mea Culpa ) " .
The production received positive reviews from both critics and audience members and transferred to the Adelphi Theatre in the West End in 2012 for a limited run from March 10 to September 22 , 2012 .
Comedian Jason Manford made his musical debut as Pirelli from July 2 to 28 and August 15 , 18 and 24 , 2012 while Robert Burt appeared at Glyndebourne Festival Opera .
The West End transfer received six Laurence Olivier Award nominations of which it won the three ; Best Musical Revival , Best Actor in a Musical for Ball and Best Actress in a Musical for Staunton .
2015
LONDON REVIVAL Section::::2015
London revival .
Cameron Mackintosh produced the West End transfer of the Tooting Arts Club production the show which ran at Harrington 's Pie Shop in Tooting , London in October and November 2014 .
This production takes place in a pie shop that has been recreated for the occasion in Shaftesbury Avenue and ran from March 19 to May 16 , 2015 .
The cast included Jeremy Secomb as Sweeney Todd , Siobhan McCarthy as Mrs. Lovett , Nadim Naaman as Anthony , Ian Mowat as the Beadle , Duncan Smith as the Judge , Kiara Jay as Pirelli and the Beggar Woman , Joseph Taylor as Tobias and Zoe Doano as Johanna .
2015
SOUTH AFRICAN
REVIVAL Section::::2015
South African revival .
Pieter Toerien and KickstArt produced a production at the Pieter Toerien Monte Casino Theatre in Johannesburg , which ran from October 10 – December 13 , 2015 before transferring to the Theatre on the Bay in Cape Town from February 19 – April 9 , 2016 .
Directed by Steven Stead and designed by Greg King , the production starred Jonathan Roxmouth ( Sweeney Todd ) , Charon Williams - Ros ( Mrs Lovett ) , Michael Richard ( Judge Turpin ) , Jaco van Rensburg ( Tobias ) , Anne Marie Clulow ( Beggar Woman ) , Adam Pelkowitz ( Beadle Bamford ) , Cameron Botha ( Anthony ) , Sanli Jooste ( Johanna ) , Germandt Geldenhuys ( Adolfo Pirelli ) and Weslee Swain Lauder ( Jonas Fogg ) , with an ensemble comprising Candice van Litsenborgh , Luciano Zuppa , Pauline du Plessis , Claire Simonis , Megan Rigby , Schoeman Smit and Earl Gregory .
The musical director for the show was Rowan Bakker , with costume designs by Neil Stuart Harris and lighting by Tina le Roux .
2017
OFF - BROADWAY REVIVAL Section::::2017 Off - Broadway revival .
The Tooting Arts Club production transferred to Off - Broadway , transforming the Barrow Street Theatre into a working re - creation of Harrington 's pie shop .
Previews began February 14 , 2017 before officially opening night on March 1 .
Like the London production , the transfer was directed by Bill Buckhurst , designed by Simon Kenny and produced by Rachel Edwards , Jenny Gersten , Seaview Productions , and Nate Koch , executive producer , in association with Barrow Street Theatre .
The opening night cast featured four members of the London cast : Jeremy Secomb as Sweeney Todd , Siobhan McCarthy as Mrs. Lovett , Duncan Smith as the Judge and , Joseph Taylor as Tobias , alongside Brad Oscar as the Beadle , Betsy Morgan as Pirelli and the Beggar Woman , Matt Doyle as Anthony and Alex Finke as Johanna .
In April 2017 , five of the cast members left the show , replaced by Norm Lewis as Sweeney Todd , Carolee Carmello as Mrs. Lovett , John - Michael Lyles as Tobias , Stacie Bono as The Beggar Woman and Pirelli , and Jamie Jackson as Judge Turpin .
After Norm Lewis left , he was replaced by Hugh Panaro in the titular role .
Other changes include Michael James Leslie as Judge Turpin .
The production has been extended through August 2018 .
OTHER NOTABLE PRODUCTIONS 1987
AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTIONS Section::::Other notable productions .
Section::::1987
Australian productions .
The State Opera of South Australia presented Australia 's first professional production in Adelaide in September 1987 .
Directed by Gale Edwards , it featured Lyndon Terracini as Todd , Nancye Hayes as Mrs. Lovett and Peter Cousens as Anthony .
The following month , Melbourne Theatre Company 's version opened at the Playhouse in Melbourne , directed by Roger Hodgman with Peter Carroll as Todd , Geraldine Turner as Mrs. Lovett and Jon Ewing as Judge Turpin .
The Melbourne production toured to Sydney and Brisbane in 1988 .
1994
Los Angeles revival
In 1994 , East West Players in Los Angeles staged a revival of the show directed by Tim Dang , featuring a largely Asian Pacific American cast .
It was also the first time the show had been presented in an intimate house ( Equity 99-seat ) .
The production received 5 Ovation Awards including the Franklin Levy Award for Best Musical ( Smaller Theatre ) and Best Director ( Musical ) for Dang .
1997
Finnish National Opera , Helsinki
The 1997 Finnish National Opera production premiered on September 19 , 1997 .
Directed by Staffan Aspegren and starting Sauli Tiilikainen ( Sweeney todd ) and Ritva Auvinen ( Mrs. Lovett ) .
Translated by Juice Leskinen 2002
Kennedy Center production
As part of the Kennedy Center Sondheim Celebration , Sweeney Todd ran from May 10 , 2002 through June 30 , 2002 at the Eisenhower Theatre , starring Brian Stokes Mitchell as Todd , Christine Baranski as Mrs. Lovett , Hugh Panaro as Anthony , Walter Charles ( a member of the original cast ) , as Judge Turpin and Celia Keenan - Bolger as Johanna .
It was directed by Christopher Ashley with choreography by Daniel Pelzig .
2007
Dublin production Irish tenor David Shannon starred as Todd in a highly successful Dublin production of the show at the Gate Theatre , which ran from April 2007 through June 2007 .
The production employed a minimalistic approach : the cast consisted of a small ensemble of 14 performers , and the orchestra was a seven - piece band .
The look of the production was quite abstract .
The Sunday Times wrote that " The black backdrop of David Farley 's rough hewn set and the stark minimalism of Rick Fisher 's lighting suggest a self - conscious edginess , with Shannon 's stylised make - up , long leather coat and brooding countenance only adding to the feeling . " When a character died , flour was poured over them .
2008
Gothenburg production
The 2008 Gothenburg production premiered on May 15 , 2008 at The Göteborg Opera .
The show was a collaboration with
West End International Ltd. The cast featured Michael McCarthy as Sweeney Todd and Rosemary Ashe as Mrs Lovett and David Shannon this time as Anthony .
The show did a four - week run and ended on June 8 , 2008 .
2010
National Youth Music Theatre , London
In 2010 , fifty members of the National Youth Music Theatre staged a production at the Village Underground as part of Stephen Sondheim 's 80th birthday celebrations in London .
NYMT took the show , directed by Martin Constantine , out of a conventional theatre space and staged it within a converted Victorian warehouse in the city 's East End .
The company revived the show in 2011 for the International Youth Arts Festival at the Rose Theatre in Kingston upon Thames .
2011
Paris production
A major new production opened in April 2011 at the Théâtre du Châtelet ( Paris ) , which first gave Sondheim a place on the French stage with their production of A Little Night Music .
The director was Lee Blakeley with choreography by Lorena Randi and designs by Tanya McAllin .
The cast featured Rod Gilfry and Franco Pomponi ( Sweeney Todd ) and Caroline O'Connor ( Mrs Lovett ) .
2013 DUCTAC , Centrepoint Theatre ,
Dubai Directed by Joseph Fowler with staging by Cressida Carre and designs by Jamie Todd .
The cast featured Simeon Truby as ( Sweeney Todd ) and Natacza Boon ( Mrs Lovett )
2014 Boston production
The Lyric Stage Company of Boston produced a run in September and October 2014 with the company 's Artistic Director Spiro Veloudos staging and directing the show .
The cast included Christopher Chew as Sweeney Todd and Amelia Broome as Mrs. Lovett .
2014
Quebec City production Quebec City - based Théâtre Décibel produced the French - speaking world - premiere of the show .
Translated by Joëlle Bond and directed by Louis Morin , the show played from October 28 to November 8 , 2014 at the Capitole de Québec .
The cast includes Renaud Paradis as Sweeney Todd , Katee Julien as Mrs. Lovett , Jean Petitclerc as Judge Turpin , Sabrina Ferland as the Beggar Woman , Pierre - Olivier Grondin as Anthony Hope , Andréane Bouladier as Johanna , David Noël as Tobias , Jonathan Gagnon as Beadle and Mathieu Samson as Pirelli .
2014 prog metal version , Landless Theatre Company , Washington ,
D.C. Sondheim grants DC 's Landless Theatre Company permission to orchestrate a " prog metal version " of Sweeney Todd , the first rock orchestration of the score .
The production plays at DC 's Warehouse Theatre in August 2014 .
Directed by Melissa Baughman .
Music Direction by Charles W. Johnson .
Prog Metal Orchestration by The Fleet Street Collective ( Andrew Lloyd Baughman , Spencer Blevins , Charles Johnson , Lance LaRue , Ray Shaw , Alex Vallejo , Andrew Siddle ) .
The cast features metal band front singers Nina Osegueda ( A Sound of Thunder ) as Mrs. Lovett , Andrew Lloyd Baughman ( Diamond Dead ) as Sweeney Todd , Rob Bradley ( Aries and Thrillkiller ) as Pirelli , and Irene Jericho ( Cassandra Syndrome ) as Beggar Woman .
The show receives three 2015 Helen Hayes Awards nominations for Best Musical , Outstanding Director of a Musical ( Melissa Baughman ) , and Outstanding Music Director ( Charles W. Johnson ) . 2015 Welsh National Opera production
In autumn 2015 the Welsh National Opera and Wales Millennium Centre produced a co - production with West Yorkshire Playhouse and the Royal Exchange Manchester as part of the WNO 's " Madness " season .
Directed by James Brining and designed by Colin Richmond , the production was set in the 1970/80s , and was performed in Cardiff before touring to Southampton , Bristol , Llandudno , Oxford , Liverpool , Birmingham before returning to Cardiff .
It was based on Brining 's previous smaller productions from Dundee Rep in 2010 , West Yorkshire Playhouse and Royal Exchange Manchester in 2013 .
The cast included David Arnsperger as Sweeney Todd and Janis Kelly as Mrs. Lovett . 2015 - 2016
Australasia Productions
In 2015 , the Victorian Opera company in Australia mounted an operatic production of the musical for a 10-day run at the Melbourne Arts Centre .
The production later transferred to New Zealand the following year for a limited tour , visiting the country 's major cities , Auckland , Wellington and Christchurch .
The production starred Teddy Tahu Rhodes as Sweeney Todd , Antoinette Halloran as Mrs. Lovett , Phillip Rhodes as Judge Turpin , Kanen Breen as Beadle Bamford ( later replaced by Andrew Glover during the New Zealand tour ) , David Rogers - Smith as Adolfo Pirelli ( replaced by Robert Tucker in New Zealand ) , Ross Hannaford as Tobias Ragg ( replaced by Joel Grainger in New Zealand ) , Blake Bowden as Anthony Hope ( replaced James Benjamin Rodgers in New Zealand ) , Amelia Berry as Johanna , Dimity Shepherd as the Beggar Woman ( replaced by Helen Medlyn in New Zealand ) , and Jeremy Kleeman as Jonas Fogg .
OPERA HOUSE
PRODUCTIONS Section::::Opera house productions .
The first opera company to mount Sweeney Todd was the Houston Grand Opera in a production directed by Hal Prince , which ran from June 14 , 1984 through June 24 , 1984 for a total of 10 performances .
Conducted by John DeMain , the production used scenic designs by Eugene Lee , costume designs by Franne Lee , and lighting designs by Ken Billington .
The cast included Timothy Nolen in the title role , Joyce Castle as Mrs. Lovett , Cris Groenendaal as Anthony , Lee Merrill as Johanna , Will Roy as Judge Turpin , and Barry Busse as The Beadle .
In 1984 the show was presented by the New York City Opera .
Hal Prince recreated the staging using the simplified set of the 2nd national tour .
It was well received and most performances sold out .
It was brought back for limited runs in 1986 and 2004 .
Notably the 2004 production starred Elaine Paige as Mrs Lovett .
The show was also performed by Opera North in 1998 in the UK starring Steven Page and Beverley Klein , directed by David McVicar and conducted by James Holmes .
In the early 2000s , Sweeney Todd gained acceptance with opera companies throughout the United States , Canada , Japan , Germany , Israel , Spain , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom and Australia .
Bryn Terfel , the popular Welsh bass - baritone , performed the title role at Lyric Opera of Chicago in 2002 , with Judith Christian , David Cangelosi , Timothy Nolen , Bonaventura Bottone , Celena Shaffer and Nathan Gunn .
It was performed at the Royal Opera House in London as part of the Royal Opera season ( December 2003-January 2004 )
starring Sir Thomas Allen as Todd , Felicity Palmer as Mrs. Lovett and a supporting cast that included Rosalind Plowright , Robert Tear and Jonathan Veira as Judge Turpin .
The Finnish National Opera performed Sweeney Todd in 1997 - 98 .
The Israeli National Opera has performed Sweeney Todd twice .
The Icelandic Opera performed Sweeney Todd in the fall of 2004 , the first time in Iceland .
On September 12 , 2015 , Sweeney Todd opened at the San Francisco Opera with Brian Mulligan as Todd , Stephanie Blythe as Mrs. Lovett , Matthew Grills as Tobias , Heidi Stober as Johanna , Elliot Madore as Anthony and Elizabeth Futral as the Beggar Woman / Lucy .
CONCERT PRODUCTIONS Section::::Concert productions .
A " Reprise ! "
Concert version was performed at Los Angeles ' Ahmanson Theatre on March 12–14 , 1999 with Kelsey Grammer as Todd , Christine Baranski as Mrs. Lovett , Davis Gaines as Anthony , Neil Patrick Harris as Tobias , Melissa Manchester as The Beggar Woman , Roland Rusinek as The Beadle , Dale Kristien as Johanna and Ken Howard as Judge Turpin .
London 's Royal Festival Hall hosted two performances on February 13 , 2000 , starring Len Cariou as Todd , Judy Kaye as Mrs. Lovett , and Davis Gaines as Anthony .
A 4-day concert took place in July 2007 at the same venue with Bryn Terfel , Maria Friedman , Daniel Boys and Philip Quast .
Director Lonny Price directed a semi - staged concert production of " Sweeney Todd " on May 4–6 , 2000 at Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center , New York with the New York Philharmonic .
The cast included George Hearn ( a last - minute substitute for Bryn Terfel ) , Patti LuPone , Neil Patrick Harris , Davis Gaines , John Aler , Paul Plishka , Heidi Grant Murphy , Stanford Olsen and Audra McDonald .
This concert also played in San Francisco , from July 19 , 2001 to July 21 , with the San Francisco Symphony .
Hearn and LuPone were joined once again by Harris , Aler , and Olsen as well as new additions Victoria Clark , Lisa Vroman and Timothy Nolen .
This production was taped for PBS broadcast .
The same production played at the Ravinia Festival in Chicago on August 24 , 2001 , with most of the cast from the preceding concerts , except for Plishka and Clark , who were replaced by Sherrill Milnes and Hollis Resnik .
In 2014 , Price directed a new concert production , returning to Avery Fisher Hall with the New York Philharmonic on March 5–8 with Bryn Terfel as Todd , Emma Thompson as Mrs. Lovett , Philip Quast as Judge Turpin , Jeff Blumenkrantz as The Beadle , Christian Borle as Pirelli , Kyle Brenn as Tobias , Jay Armstrong Johnson as Anthony , Erin Mackey as Johanna and Audra McDonald and Bryonha Marie Parham sharing the role of The Beggar Woman .
McDonald was not announced as the Beggar Woman : she was a surprise , her name only being revealed at the time of the first performance .
On the Saturday performances , Bryonha Marie Parham played the role of the Beggar Woman , while McDonald played it at the other performances .
The concert was again filmed for broadcast on PBS as part of their Live from Lincoln Center series and was first aired on September 26 , 2014 .
This production transferred to London Coliseum Theatre for 13 performances from March 30 through April 12 , 2015 .
The cast included original members like Terfel , Thompson and Quast , as well as new actors like John Owen - Jones and Rosalie Craig .
FIRST MEXICAN PRODUCTION Section::::First Mexican production .
David Cuevas produced the first Mexican production of Sweeney Todd .
Opened on July 7 , 2018 , at the Foro Cultural Coyoacanense 's starring Lupita Sandoval and Beto Torres along with José Andrés Mojica , Mario Beller , Eduardo Ibarra , Alejandra Desiderio , Sonia Monroy , Daniel Paéz and Adrian Mejia .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
A of Sweeney Todd , jointly produced by DreamWorks and Warner Bros. , was released on December 21 , 2007 .
Tim Burton directed from a screenplay by John Logan .
It stars Johnny Depp as Todd ( Depp received an Oscar nomination and a Golden Globe Award for his performance ) ,
Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Lovett , Alan Rickman as Judge Turpin , Sacha Baron Cohen as Signor Pirelli , Jamie Campbell Bower as Anthony Hope , Laura Michelle Kelly as The Beggar Woman , Jayne Wisener as Johanna , Ed Sanders as Toby , and Timothy Spall as Beadle Bamford .
The film was well - received by critics and theatregoers and also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
Stephen Sondheim believes that Sweeney Todd is a story of revenge and how it consumes a vengeful person .
He has asserted , " … what the show is really about is obsession . "
Unlike most previous representations of the story , the musical avoids a simplistic view of devilish crimes .
Instead , the characters ' " emotional and psychological depths " are examined , so that Sweeney Todd is understood as a victim as well as a perpetrator in the ' great black pit ' of humanity .
MUSICAL ANALYSIS
Section::::Musical analysis .
Sondheim 's score is one of his most complex , with orchestrations by his long - time collaborator Jonathan Tunick .
Relying heavily on counterpoint and angular harmonies , its compositional style has been compared to Maurice Ravel , Sergei Prokofiev , and Bernard Herrmann .
Sondheim also utilizes the ancient Dies Irae in the ballad that runs throughout the score , later heard in a melodic inversion , and in the accompaniment to " Epiphany " .
According to Raymond Knapp , " Most scene changes bring back ' The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ' , which includes both fast and slow versions of the ' Dies Irae ' " .
He also relies heavily on leitmotif - at least twenty distinct ones can be identified throughout the score .
Depending on how and where the show is presented , it is sometimes considered an opera .
Sondheim himself has described the piece as a " black operetta " , and indeed , only about 20 % of the show is spoken ; the rest is sung - through .
In his essay for the 2005 cast album , Jeremy Sams finds it most relevant to compare Sondheim 's work with operas that similarly explore the psyche of a mad murderer or social outcast , such as Alban Berg 's Wozzeck ( based on the play by Georg Büchner ) and Benjamin Britten 's Peter Grimes ( 1945 ) .
On the other hand , it can be seen as a precursor to the later trend of musicals based on horror themes , such as The Phantom of the Opera ( 1986 ) , Jekyll & Hyde ( 1997 ) , Little Shop of Horrors ( 1982 ) and Dance of the Vampires ( 1997 ) , which used the description of the trend , " grusical " , as its commercial label .
Theatre critic and author Martin Gottfried wrote on this subject : " Does so much singing make it an opera ?
Opera is not just a matter of everything being sung .
There is an operatic kind of music , of singing , of staging .
There are opera audiences , and there is an opera sensibility .
There are opera houses .
Sweeney Todd has its occasional operatic moments , but its music overall has the chest notes , the harmonic language , the muscularity , and the edge of Broadway theater . "
Donal Henahan wrote an essay in The New York Times concerning the 1984 New York City Opera production : " The difficulty with Sweeney was not that the opera singers were weaklings incapable of filling the State Theater with sound – Miss Elias , who was making her City Opera debut , has sung for many years at the Metropolitan , a far larger house .
The other voices in the cast also were known quantities .
Rather , it seemed to me that the attempt to actually sing the Sondheim score , which relies heavily on a dramatic parlando or speaking style , mainly showed how far from the operatic vocal tradition the work lies .
The score , effective enough in its own way , demanded things of the opera singers that opera singers as a class are reluctant to produce . "
ORCHESTRATION
Section::::Orchestration .
The original Broadway pit consisted of a 26 piece orchestra .
( The number of percussionists may vary for different shows , though the percussion book is written for two players ) .
* Strings : 6 Violins , 2 Violas , 2 Celli , 1 Double Bass , 1 Harp
* Brass : 2 Trumpets , 1 French Horn , 2 Trombones , 1 Bass Trombone
* Keyboards : 1
Organ / Celesta
* Woodwinds : Reed 1 : Flute , Piccolo .
* Reed 2 :
Bb and Eb Clarinet , Flute , Piccolo .
* Reed 3 : Bass Clarinet , Bb Clarinet .
* Reed 4 : Oboe , English Horn .
* Reed 5 : Bassoon .
* Percussion : ( 2 Players )
3 Timpani , Bass Drum , Xylophone , Vibraphone , Snare Drum , Tom Toms , Bass Drum with Pedal , Orchestra Bells , Tam - Tam , Chimes , 4 Suspended Cymbals , Wood Block , Crash Cymbals , Bell Tree , Tambourine , Washtub
An alternate orchestration is available from Music Theatre International for a 9 piece orchestra .
It was written by Jonathan Tunick for the 1993 London Production .
* Strings : 1 Violin , 1 Cello , 1 Double Bass
* Brass : 1 Trumpet in Bb , 1 French Horn
* Woodwinds : Reed 1 : Clarinet ; Reed 2 :
Bassoon * Keyboard * Percussion : Bass Drum , Bell Tree , Bells , Chimes , Crotales , Rachet , Side Drum , Snare Drum , Swiss Bell , Tam - Tam , Tambourine , Temple Blocks , Triangle , Tympani , Vibraphone , Whistle , Wood Block , Xylophone Original orchestrator Jonathan Tunick revised his large orchestration for the 1993 London revival , adding a dirtier , grittier texture to the score 's arrangements .
2012
London Revival : 15 piece orchestra .
* Strings : 2 Violins , 1 Viola , 1 Cello , 1 Double Bass
* Brass : 1 French Horn , 2 Trumpets ,
1 Trombone
* Woodwinds : * Reed 1 : Flute , Clarinet .
* Reed 2 : Oboe , Cor Anglais .
* Reed 3 : Clarinet .
* Reed 4 : Bassoon .
* Keyboard * Percussion AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS ORIGINAL BROADWAY
PRODUCTION Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Original Broadway production . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result ORIGINAL LONDON PRODUCTION Section::::Original London production . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result 1989 BROADWAY REVIVAL Section::::1989 Broadway revival . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % "
Result 1993 LONDON REVIVAL Section::::1993
London revival . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result 2005
LONDON REVIVAL
Section::::2005 London revival . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result 2005 BROADWAY REVIVAL Section::::2005 Broadway revival . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % "
Result 2012 LONDON REVIVAL Section::::2012
London revival . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="20 % "
Award Ceremony !
width="45
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result RECORDINGS AND BROADCASTS Section::::Recordings and broadcasts .
An original Broadway cast recording was released by RCA Red Seal in 1979 .
It included the Judge 's " Johanna " and the tooth - pulling contest from Act I , which had been cut in previews .
It was selected by the National Recording Registry for preservation in 2013 .
A performance of the 1980 touring company was taped before an audience in 1981 at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles during the first national tour , with additional taping done in an empty theatre for a television special .
The resulting program was televised on September 12 , 1982 , on The Entertainment Channel .
It was later released on both VHS and DVD .
In July 1994 , the Royal National Theatre revival production starring Denis Quilley and Julia McKenzie was broadcast by the BBC .
Opera North 's production was also broadcast by the BBC on March 30 , 1998 as was the Royal Opera House production in 2003 .
In 1995 , the Barcelona cast recorded a cast album sung in Catalan .
This production was also broadcast on Spanish television .
The 2000 New York City Concert was recorded and released in a deluxe 2-CD set .
This recording was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album .
In 2001 , the same concert was held in San Francisco with the same leads and minor cast changes .
It was also videotaped and broadcast on PBS , and then was released to VHS and DVD in 2001 .
The 2005 Broadway revival also was recorded .
The producers originally planned only a single - disk " highlights " version ; however , they soon realized that they had recorded more music than could fit on one disk and it was not financially feasible to bring the performers back in to re - record .
The followings songs were cut : " Wigmaker Sequence " , " The Letter " , " Parlor Songs " , " City on Fire " , and half of the final sequence ( which includes " The Judge 's Return " ) .
This recording was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album .
The 2012 London revival was recorded and released on April 2 , 2012 in the UK and April 10 , 2012 in the United States .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Sweeney Todd the Musical , London 's Adelphi Theatre
* Sweeney Todd on the Internet Broadway Database
* Sweeney Todd on The Stephen Sondheim Reference Guide
* Sweeney Todd at Sondheim.com
* Sweeney Todd at the Music Theatre International website
*
Sweeney Todd : School Edition at the Music Theatre International website
*
Sweeney Todd Music Theatre Warwick 's 2008 production * Stephen Sondheim
" The Story So Far " podcast series produced by Sony BMG Masterworks