PLASTIC WRAP Plastic wrap , cling film , shrink wrap , Saran wrap , cling wrap , food wrap , or pliofilm is a thin plastic film typically used for sealing food items in containers to keep them fresh over a longer period of time .
Plastic wrap , typically sold on rolls in boxes with a cutting edge , clings to many smooth surfaces and can thus remain tight over the opening of a container without adhesive .
Common plastic wrap is roughly 0.0005 inches ( 12.7 μm ) thick .
The trend has been to produce thinner plastic wrap , particularly for household use ( where very little stretch is needed ) , so now the majority of brands on shelves around the world are 8 , 9 or 10 μm thick .
MATERIALS USED Section::::Materials used .
Plastic wrap was initially created from polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) , which remains the most common component globally .
PVC allows permeability to water vapor and oxygen transmission , which can add to the duration of peak freshness of the food products wrapped .
There are concerns about the transfer of plasticizers from PVC into food .
A common , cheaper alternative to PVC is low - density polyethylene ( LDPE ) .
It is less adhesive than PVC , but this can be remedied by adding linear low - density polyethylene ( LLDPE ) , which also increases the film 's tensile strength .
In the US and Japan , plastic wrap is sometimes produced using polyvinylidene chloride ( PVdC ) , though some brands , such as Saran wrap , have switched to other formulations due to environmental concerns .
FOOD USE Section::::Food use .
Plastic wrap is often used to wrap food to preserve its freshness and to prevent contact with insects and any other potential contaminants .
MEDICAL USE
* Wrapping premature babies in plastic wrap immediately after birth helps prevent low temperature before arrival to the neonatal intensive care unit .
*
Plastic wrap is used to contain the external organs of babies with rare medical conditions prior to surgery .
SEE ALSO * Stretch wrap , plastic wrap used in large - scale industrial / commercial packaging * Overwrap
* Wax paper *
Aluminium foil * Harold J. Osterhof - inventor of pliofilm REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS