CABLE TIE
A cable tie ( also known as a wire tie , hose tie , steggel tie , zap strap or zip tie , and by the brand names Ty - Rap and Panduit strap ) is a type of fastener , for holding items together , primarily electrical cables or wires .
Because of their low cost and ease of use , cable ties are ubiquitous , finding use in a wide range of other applications .
Stainless steel versions , either naked or coated with a rugged plastic , cater for exterior applications and hazardous environments .
The common cable tie , normally made of nylon , has a flexible tape section with teeth that engage with a pawl in the head to form a ratchet so that as the free end of the tape section is pulled the cable tie tightens and does not come undone .
Some ties include a tab that can be depressed to release the ratchet so that the tie can be loosened or removed , and possibly reused .
DESIGN AND USE Section::::Design and use .
The most common cable tie consists of a flexible nylon tape with an integrated gear rack , and on one end a ratchet within a small open case .
Once the pointed tip of the cable tie has been pulled through the case and past the ratchet , it is prevented from being pulled back ; the resulting loop may only be pulled tighter .
This allows several cables to be bound together into a cable bundle and/or to form a cable tree .
A cable tie tensioning device or tool may be used to apply a cable tie with a specific degree of tension .
The tool may cut off the extra tail flush with the head in order to avoid a sharp edge which might otherwise cause injury .
In order to increase resistance to ultraviolet light in outdoor applications nylon containing a minimum of 2 % carbon black is used to protect the polymer chains and extend the cable tie 's service life .
Blue cable ties are supplied to the food industry and contain a metal additive so they can be detected by industrial metal detectors .
Cable ties made of ETFE ( Tefzel ) are used in radiation - rich environments .
Red cable ties made of ECTFE ( Halar ) are used for plenum cabling .
There are self - locking loops , based on the construction of the traditional cable tie , designed for surgery .
The device is intended for ligation purposes and enabled a shortened duration of surgery .
By compressing tissue hemorrhage is prevented .
The same material is used as in surgical suture ( resorbable polymers ) , therefore the implant can be left in the body where after the material is resorbed by the tissue .
Traditional cable ties , due to their non - resorbable material , may not be left in the body permanently due to the risk of development of chronic granulomas .
Stainless steel cable ties are also available for flameproof applications —
coated stainless ties are available to prevent galvanic attack from dissimilar metals ( e.g. zinc - coated cable tray ) .
PlastiCuffs are handcuffs based on the cable tie design and are used by law enforcement to restrain prisoners .
Cable ties are also sometimes used to prevent hubcaps ( also known as wheel trims ) from falling off a moving vehicle , and some are sold specifically for this purpose .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Cable ties were first invented by Thomas & Betts , an electrical company , in 1958 under the brand name Ty - Rap .
Initially they were designed for airplane wire harnesses .
The original design used a metal tooth , and these can still be obtained .
Manufacturers later changed to the nylon / plastic design .
The design has over the years been extended and developed into numerous spin - off products .
One example was a self - locking loop developed as an alternative to purse - string suture in colon anastomosis .
Ty - Rap cable tie inventor , Maurus C. Logan , worked for Thomas & Betts and finished his career with the company as Vice President of Research and Development .
During his tenure at Thomas & Betts , he contributed to the development and marketing of many successful Thomas & Betts products .
Logan died on 12 November 2007 , at the age of 86 .
The idea of the cable tie came to Logan while touring a Boeing aircraft manufacturing facility in 1956 .
Aircraft wiring was a cumbersome and detailed undertaking , involving thousands of feet of wire organized on sheets of 50-foot long plywood and held in place with knotted , waxcoated , braided nylon cord .
Each knot had to be pulled tight by wrapping the cord around one 's finger which sometimes cut the operator 's fingers until they developed thick calluses or " hamburger hands .
" Logan was convinced there had to be an easier , more forgiving , way to accomplish this critical task .
For the next couple of years , Logan experimented with various tools and materials .
On June 24 , 1958 , a patent for the Ty - Rap cable tie was submitted .
REUSE Section::::Reuse .
Cable ties are generally viewed as single - use devices ; they are typically cut off rather than loosened and reused .
However , if a closed loop needs to be opened again , rather than destroying the cable tie by cutting , it may be possible to release the ratchet from the rack .
While some cable ties are designed for reuse with a tab that releases the ratchet , in most cases a sewing needle or similar object ( for example a small screwdriver ) will need to be interposed between the ratchet and the rack .
Ties reused in this way will be weaker than new ones .
To open without cutting , the ratchet box can be crushed vertically using pliers .
TYPES OF SPECIALTY CABLE TIES
* Beaded cable ties : Unique beaded design allows them to be releasable and reusable * Releasable cable ties : Easy to apply and remove , reusable * Ladder style cable ties : For intermediate bundling and retail applications * Identification cable ties : Built - in flags for written or printed identification
* Parallel entry cable ties : Tamper - proof , low profile heads
* Tear - off cable ties : Quick release design requires no cutting tools
* Pull - tight seals : Tamper - evident seals *
Steggel ties : Heavy duty , multipurpose ties ALTERNATIVES Section::::Alternatives .
Other methods of bundling cable together securely and semi - permanently include cable lacing , strapping , binding knots such as the surgeon 's knot or constrictor knot , Velcro brand hook - and - loop strips , conveyor belt hooks , twist ties , Rapstrap fasteners , metal buckle clips or Cablox cable management .
SEE ALSO
* Cable dressing
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of Cable Tie ( archived ) * Cable ties patents