I WILL ALWAYS LOVE YOU
" I Will Always Love
You " is a song originally written and recorded in 1973 by American singer - songwriter Dolly Parton .
Her country version of the track was released in 1974 as a single and was written as a farewell to her one - time partner and mentor of seven years , Porter Wagoner , following Parton 's decision to pursue a solo career .
Parton 's version of " I Will Always Love You " was a commercial success .
It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart twice .
It first reached number one in June 1974 , and then in October 1982 , with her re - recording on the soundtrack of the movie version of The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas .
Thus , she achieved the number one position twice with the same song , a rare feat that Chubby Checker had done previously with " The Twist " becoming number one in 1960 and again in 1962 .
Whitney Houston recorded her version of the song for the 1992 film The Bodyguard .
Her single spent 14 weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart making it one of the best - selling singles of all time .
It also holds the record for being the best - selling single by a woman in music history .
Houston 's version of " I Will Always Love You " re - entered the charts in 2012 after her death , making it the second single ever to reach the top three on the Billboard Hot 100 in separate chart runs .
The song has been recorded by many other significant artists including Linda Ronstadt and John Doe .
BACKGROUND AND COMPOSITION Section::::Background and composition .
Country music singer - songwriter Dolly Parton wrote the song in 1973 for her one - time partner and mentor Porter Wagoner , from whom she was separating professionally after a seven - year partnership .
She recorded it in RCA 's Studio B in Nashville on June 13 , 1973 .
" I Will Always Love You " was issued on June 6 , 1974 , as the second single from Parton 's thirteenth solo studio album , Jolene ( 1974 ) .
In 1982 , Parton re - recorded the song , when it was included on the soundtrack to the film The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas .
In addition to the 1982 re - recording for the soundtrack album , Parton 's original 1974 recording of the song also appeared in
Martin Scorsese 's film Alice Does n't Live Here Anymore , and the 1996 film
It 's My Party .
The song also won Parton Female Vocalist of the Year at the 1975 CMA Awards .
Author Curtis W. Ellison stated that the song " speaks about the breakup of a relationship between a man and a woman that does not descend into unremitting domestic turmoil , but instead envisions parting with respect – because of the initiative of the woman " .
According to sheet music published at musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , the country love track is set in a time signature of common time with a tempo of 66 beats per minute .
( Larghetto / Adagio )
Although Parton found much success with the song , many people are unaware of its origin ; during an interview , Parton 's manager Danny Nozel said that " one thing we found out from American Idol is that most people do n't know that Dolly Parton wrote [ the track ] " .
Several times ( long before Whitney Houston recorded the song ) , Dolly Parton suggested to singer Patti Labelle that she record " I Will Always Love You " because she felt Patti could have sung it so well .
However , Patti admitted she kept putting off the opportunity to do so and later deeply regretted it after she heard Whitney Houston 's rendition .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
During its original release in 1974 , " I Will Always Love You " reached number four in Canada on the Canadian RPM Country Tracks chart and peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart , becoming one of the best selling singles of 1974 .
When Parton re - recorded the song in 1982 for the soundtrack of the film The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas , the track was issued as a single and once again charted at number one on Hot Country Songs — making her the first artist ever to earn a number one record twice with the same song .
, the 1982 version also reached # 53 on Billboard 's Hot 100 and # 17 on its adult contemporary charts .
After recording a duet with Vince Gill in 1995 for the album
Something Special , the duet version of " I Will Always Love You " made the Billboard country chart and peaked at number 15 .
Parton and Gill were awarded the CMA 's " Vocal Event of the Year " award in 1996 for their recording of the song .
Another duet version of the song was released in 2017 with Michael Bolton from his album Songs of Cinema .
When the 1974 recording of the song was reaching number one on the country charts , Elvis Presley indicated that he wanted to cover the song .
Parton was interested until Presley 's manager , Colonel Tom Parker , told her that it was standard procedure for the songwriter to sign over half of the publishing rights to any song Elvis recorded .
Parton refused .
She recalls : I said , ' I 'm really sorry , ' and I cried all night .
I mean , it was like the worst thing .
You know , it 's like , Oh , my God … Elvis Presley . '
And other people were saying , ' You 're nuts .
It 's Elvis Presley . ' ...
I said , ' I ca n't do that .
Something in my heart says , ' Do n't do that .
And I just did n't do it ...
He would have killed it .
But anyway , so he did n't .
Then when Whitney [ Houston 's version ] came out , I made enough money to buy Graceland .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
In Curtis W. Ellison 's book , Country Music Culture : From Hard Times to Heaven ( 1995 ) , he stated : " In the early 1990s , when ambiguity in romantic relationships accompanies changing expectations for both men and women , this song demonstrates Dolly Parton 's appeal as a songwriter in the pop music market . "
Ken Knight , author of The Midnight Show : Late Night Cable - TV " Guy - Flicks " of the ' 80s
( 2008 ) , commented that Parton is the only singer who can sing " I Will Always Love You " and " make it memorable " .
Writer Paul Simpson criticized the singer , stating that the track was only written to " soften the blow " of Parton and Wagoner 's split .
TRACK LISTING
* 7 " vinyl *
" I Will Always Love You " –
2:53 * * " Lonely Comin ' Down " – 3:09 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL * Dolly Parton – vocals , guitar * Jimmy Colvard – guitar * Chip Young –
guitar
* Stu Basore –
pedal steel guitar *
Bobby Dyson – bass * Larrie Londin – drums * Ralph Gallant – drums * Buck Trent – banjo * Bobby Thompson – banjo * Mack Magaha – fiddle
* Johnny Gimble – fiddle * Hargus " Pig " Robbins – piano * Dolores Edgin – background vocals
* Hershel Winginton – background vocals
* Joe Babcock – background vocals * June Page –
background vocals CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Weekly chart ( 1974 ) !
Peakposition align="left"Canada Country Tracks ( RPM )
align="left"US Hot Country Songs ( BillboardKent Music Report ) align="left"Canada
Top Singles ( RPM ) Canada Adult Contemporary ( RPM ) align="left"Canada Country Tracks ( RPM ) align="left"US Hot Country Songs ( BillboardRPM ) align="left"US Hot Country Songs ( Billboard )
WHITNEY HOUSTON
VERSION
BACKGROUND
Section::::Whitney Houston version .
Section::::Background .
In 1992 , R&B singer Whitney Houston recorded a new arrangement of " I Will Always Love You " for the soundtrack to , her film debut .
The song has a saxophone solo by Kirk Whalum .
She was originally to record Jimmy Ruffin 's "
What Becomes of the Brokenhearted " as the lead single from The Bodyguard .
However , when it was discovered the song was to be used for Fried Green Tomatoes , Houston requested a different song .
It was her co - star Kevin Costner who suggested " I Will Always Love You " , playing her Linda Ronstadt 's 1975 version from her album Prisoner in Disguise .
Producer David Foster re - arranged the song as a soul ballad .
Her record company did not feel a song with an a cappella introduction would be as successful ; however , Houston and Costner insisted on retaining it .
When Parton heard that Houston was using Ronstadt 's recording as a template , she called Foster to give him the final verse , which was missing from the Ronstadt recording , as she felt it was important to the song .
The tenor saxophone solo was played by Kirk Whalum .
Whitney Houston 's recording is not the only version of the song featured in the movie .
In a scene where she dances with Kevin Costner , a version by John Doe can be heard playing on a jukebox .
Houston 's version appears at No . 9 on NME 's Greatest No 1 Singles in History list .
In 2004 , Houston 's version of " I Will Always Love You " finished at # 65 on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs survey of top tunes in American cinema .
It was also ranked at number 22 on The Guardian 's list of Britain 's favorite 100 songs , published in May 2002 .
In February 2014 , the song was placed at number six on Billboard list of the Top 50 ' Love ' Songs of All Time .
A live performance was included on the 1999 release Divas Live ' 99 , and on the 2014 CD / DVD release of , a 1994 performance of the song was included as well .
RECEPTION
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Chart performance .
The single spent 14 weeks at the top of the US Billboard Hot 100 , which at the time was a record .
It became Houston 's longest run at number one , surpassing her previous record of three weeks with the " Greatest Love of All " in 1986 .
It is also the longest running number one single from a soundtrack album .
It debuted at number 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and became Houston 's tenth number one entry two weeks later .
It also dominated other Billboard charts , spending 14 weeks at the top of Billboard Hot 100 Single Sales chart , and 11 weeks at number one on its Hot 100 Airplay chart .
The song also remained at number one for five weeks on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks , and for 11 weeks on the Hot R&B Singles chart becoming the longest running number one on the R&B charts at the time ; it remained in the top 40 for 24 weeks .
It became Arista Records ' biggest hit .
The song was number one on the Hot 100 , Adult Contemporary , and R&B chart simultaneously for a record - equaling five weeks ; Ray Charles ' " I Ca n't Stop Loving You " in 1962 achieved the same feat on the same charts .
The song stayed at number one in the United States throughout January and February 1993 , making it the first time Billboard did not rank a new number one single until March of the new year .
Houston 's " I Will Always Love
You " was also the year - end single of 1993 in the US .
Similarly , in the UK , Houston 's version was ranked the number one single of 1992 , and then made the countdown again in 1993 where it was ranked number nine , marking the first time any artist or group had the same single ranked in the top 10 of the year - end review two years in a row .
In Australia , it was the number 17 single of 1992 and the number two song of 1993 .
Houston 's single was also an international success , peaking at number one of the singles charts in almost all countries , including the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles , where it spent 13 weeks at the top .
The single ruled the summit position for ten weeks in Australia , five weeks in Austria , seven weeks for Belgium , eight weeks in France , six weeks in Germany , eight weeks in Ireland , two weeks in Italy , six weeks in Netherlands , 14 weeks in New Zealand , nine weeks in Norway , one week in Spain , six weeks in Sweden , eight weeks in Switzerland , and ten weeks in the United Kingdom .
Houston 's 10-week reign in the UK set the record for the longest run at the top by a solo female artist in the history of the British singles chart .
It is the only single to have topped the United States , the United Kingdom , and Australian singles charts for at least ten weeks .
Only a few hours after Houston 's death on February 11 , 2012 , " I Will Always Love You " topped the US iTunes charts .
Also , in the week following her death , the single returned to the Billboard Hot 100 after almost 20 years , debuting at number 7 , and becoming a posthumous top - ten single for Houston , the first one since 2001 .
The song eventually peaked at No . 3 , two spots shy of becoming the first song to return to the No . 1 position after falling off the chart since " The Twist " by Chubby Checker .
It debuted on the Billboard Hot Digital Singles Chart at number 3 on the chart dated February 25 , 2012 , with over 195,000 copies downloaded .
In the United Kingdom , the song charted at number 10 the week of Houston 's death .
Houston 's single sold approximately 400,000 copies in its second week at the top of the charts , making it the best - selling song in a single week surpassing Bryan Adams ' " ( Everything I Do )
I Do It for You " .
It broke its own record in the following three weeks , peaking at 632,000 copies in the week ending December 27 , 1992 .
The January 9 , 1993 issue of Billboard reported it had broken its own record for most copies sold in a single week for any song in the Nielsen SoundsScan era .
This record was broken by Elton John 's " Candle in the Wind 1997 /
Something About the Way You Look Tonight " , which sold 3.4 million in the final week of September 1997 .
" I Will Always Love You " was certified four times Platinum in the US for shipments of over 4 million copies by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 12 , 1993 , making Houston the first female artist with a single to reach that level in RIAA history .
According to Nielsen SoundScan , as of 2009 , the single had sold 4,591,000 copies , and had become the second best - selling physical single in US alone , only behind Elton John 's single in 1997 .
In the United Kingdom , the single sold over 1,550,000 copies , becoming the tenth best - selling single of the 1990s , and was certified two times Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on January 1 , 1993 .
It was certified Platinum for shipments of over 500,000 copies by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) in Germany .
In Japan , " I Will Always Love You " sold over 810,000 copies , staying for 27 weeks on the chart , and became the best - selling single by a foreign female artist at the time , despite not topping the charts .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Houston 's version was later called her " signature song " .
Stephen Holden of The New York Times said it was a " magnificent rendition " , commentingHouston transforms a plaintive country ballad into a towering pop - gospel assertion of lasting devotion to a departing lover .
Her voice breaking and tensing , she treats the song as a series of emotional bursts in a steady climb toward a final full - out declamation .
Along the way , her virtuosic gospel embellishments enhance the emotion and never seem merely ornamental .
Writing for USA Today on November 17 , 1992 ,
James T. Jones IV called it a " tour - de - force " , and added " [ Houston ] gives a 3-star [ out of four ] performance .
Where Dolly Parton 's original ' I Will Always Love You ' was plaintive and tear- stained , Houston 's is gospel - infused and dramatic . "
Chris Willman of the Los Angeles Times stated : " Houston has the goods to deliver on the tune 's haunting beauty and resists overpowering it – until the finale , when the key change and stratospheric notes drain all the heart - rending sadness out of the song and make it sound like just another anthem of survival . "
Amy Linden of Entertainment Weekly wrote Houston 's version " is artistically satisfying and uncharacteristically hip for the MOR songbird . "
Stewart Mason of AllMusic found Houston 's cover " repulsively overwrought ... so boomingly bombastic and glutinous with self - approbation that the tenderness of Dolly Parton 's song is lost in the mire " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
" I Will Always Love You " won the 1994 Grammy Award for Record of the Year , and Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance , her third award for this category after earlier awards in 1986 and 1988 .
During the Grammy Award telecast , the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Performance , Female was presented to Houston by composer Dolly Parton and David Foster .
The single topped the 1993 Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R&B Singles year - end charts simultaneously , becoming the first single by a female artist and the second overall to achieve that feat behind Prince 's " When Doves Cry " in 1984 .
In addition , it received Favorite Pop / Rock Single and Favorite Soul / R&B Single awards at the 21st American Music Awards , which was the first record by a solo female artist to win both categories , and the third overall in AMA history behind " Endless Love " by Lionel Richie & Diana Ross in 1982 and " Beat It " by Michael JacksonBest Pop Vocal Performance , Female CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
After Whitney Houston 's recording of the song became a hit in 1992 , the tabloid press began reporting on a ' feud ' between the two performers , stemming from Dolly Parton allegedly reneging on an agreement that she would not perform the song for a number of months while Houston 's version was on the charts , so as not to compete with Houston 's recording .
However , both Parton and Houston dispelled any rumors , speaking glowingly of one another in interviews .
Houston praised Parton for writing a beautiful song .
In return , Parton thanked Houston for bringing her song to a wider audience and increasing the amount of royalties for her song in the process .
Dolly Parton also gave a live interview , confirming this .
When Houston won the Record of the Year award at the 1994 Grammy Awards for the recording , Parton ( along with David Foster ) presented her with the award .
In a statement to Billboard on the day of Houston 's death in February 2012 , Parton said : Mine is only one of the millions of hearts broken over the death of Whitney Houston .
I will always be grateful and in awe of the wonderful performance she did on my song
and I can truly say from the bottom of my heart , ' Whitney , I will always love you .
You will be missed . '
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The single 's music video , is credited to Alan Smithee ( Nick Brandt removed his name due to the way Clive Davis re - edited the video ) , and produced by Rob Newman .
It begins with the performance of the song Houston gives at the end of The Bodyguard .
The video then cuts to Houston in a dark blue suit sitting in an empty theater with the spotlight shining on her , singing of her love , and at the end of the video , Houston 's theater changes into open camp circled by snow .
The video is inter - cut with scenes from The Bodyguard and gives the viewer the experience of reliving the moments with the singer .
At the time of the video 's shooting Houston was pregnant with her daughter Bobbi Kristina so is shown only sitting in the theater scenes .
FORMATS AND TRACK LISTINGS Section::::Formats and track listings .
' UK / Europe 12
" vinyl single *
A " I Will Always Love You " –
4:31 * B1 "
Jesus Loves Me " –
5:11 * B2
" Do You Hear What I Hear ? " – 3:31 UK / Europe / US 7 "
vinyl single
*
A " I Will Always Love You " –
4:31 * B
" Jesus Loves Me " –
5:11 US / Europe Maxi - CD single
* " I Will Always Love You " – 4:31
* * " Jesus Loves Me " – 5:11
* * " Do You Hear What I Hear ? " – 3:31 * Maxi - CD singles ( 1999 Remixes )
* " I Will Always Love You " ( Hex Hector Radio Edit ) – 4:50
*
* " I Will Always Love You " ( Hex Hector 12
" Club Mix ) – 9:51
* * " I Will Always Love You "
( Hex Hector Anthem Dub Mix ) –
5:44 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL * Performed by Whitney Houston * Produced and arranged by David Foster * Vocal arrangement –
Whitney Houston * Directed by Rickey Minor
* Keyboards – David Foster
* Sax solo – Kirk Whalum
* Drums – Ricky Lawson * Guitars – Dean Parks , Michael Landau
* Bass – Neil Stubenhaus * Synth programmers – Tony Smith , Claude Gaudette
* String arrangements –
Ronn Huff
* Recording engineers – Bill Schnee , Dave Reitzas , Peter J. Yianilos
* Mixing engineer –
Dave Reitzas CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Weekly chart ( 1992–93 ) !
Peakposition !
Weekly chart ( 2012 ) !
Peakposition Israel ( Media Forest )
Luxembourg ( BillboardBillboardGaon ) !
Weekly chart ( 2013 ) !
Peakposition !
Weekly chart ( 2014 ) !
Peakposition !
Weekly chart ( 2015 ) !
Weekly chart ( 2016 ) !
Position !
Year - end chart ( 1992 ) !
Position Australian Singles Chart Dutch Top 40 Italian Singles Chart
UK
Singles Chart !
Year - end chart ( 1993 ) !
Position Australian Singles Chart Austrian Singles Chart Belgian Singles Chart ( Flanders ) Canadian Singles Chart Canadian Adult Contemporary Singles
Dutch Top 40 Dutch Single Top 100
Finnish Singles Chart Japanese Singles Chart
New Zealand Singles Chart Swiss Singles Chart UK Singles Chart US
Billboard Hot
100 US Adult Contemporary US Hot Pop Singles
US Hot R&B Singles !
Year - end chart ( 2012 ) !
Position Spanish Singles Chart !
Decade - end chart ( 1990–1999 ) !
Position align="left"Dutch Top
40 ALL - TIME CHARTS Section::::All - time charts . !
Chart !
Rank !
As of Year BILLBOARD MAGAZINE HOT 100 ANNIVERSARY CHARTS CERTIFICATIONS Section::::Certifications . !
scope="col " colspan="3 " Digital TRIBUTES Section::::Tributes .
Jennifer Hudson performed the song in front of Houston , who received The BET Honors Award for Entertainer Lifetime Achievement spanning over 25 years in the industry .
The 2010 BET Honors Awards was held at the Warner Theatre in Washington , D.C. and aired on February 1 , 2010 .
Since Houston 's death in 2012 , many other artists have performed tributes to the late singer 's version of the song , including on February 12 , 2012 , when Hudson performed the song as a tribute during the 54th Grammy Awards , the day after Houston 's death , alongside images of musicians who had died in 2011 and 2012 , including Amy Winehouse and Etta James .
The song was played at Houston 's funeral as her casket was brought out of the church .
Parton complimented Hudson on her performance , saying , I was brought to tears again last night , as I 'm sure many were ,
when Jennifer Hudson sang " I Will Always Love You " on the Grammys in memory of Whitney .
Like everybody else , I am still in shock .
But I know that Whitney will live forever in all the great music that she left behind .
I will always have a very special piece of her in the song we shared together and had the good fortune to share with the world .
Rest in peace , Whitney .
Again , we will always love you .
In 2012 , following Whitney Houston 's death , American singer Beyoncé performed a tribute to Houston during her revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey at the Revel resort .
She began the performance of her song " Halo " singing the first verse of " I Will Always Love You " a cappella .
Later , in 2013 , during her The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour , Beyoncé also sang the opening lines of " I Will Always Love You " prior to the performance of " Halo " as the final song of the tour .
At the 2017 Commencement of the University of Southern California , Will Ferrell sang " I Will Always Love You " to the graduating class .
See Washington Post commentary : OTHER VERSIONS
*
In 1994 LeAnn Rimes covered the song on her independently released album All That .
Three years later in 1997 " I Will Always Love
You " was included on her first compilation album .
*
In 1997 Kenny Rogers recorded a version of the song on his best selling TV - advertised collection of love songs , via QVC .
Prior to this , in 1983 , Rogers released an album called Eyes That See in the Dark , which features a song called " I Will Always Love You " ; however , this is a different song of the same name .
The album also featured " Islands In The Stream " , a hit duet between Rogers & Parton .
*
In 2002 , English pop singer Rik Waller took his own version of " I Will Always Love You " into the Top Ten in the UK
Singles Chart , peaking at number 6 .
It was the first single released from his debut studio album From Now ... following him taking part in the Pop Idol series .
* The 2013 German edition of the TV series
The Voice Kids featured a version of the song performed by Laura Kamhuber , a teen Austrian singer .
As of 2018 , her performance is the most watched YouTube video by an Austrian artist .
*
Beyoncé included the song on the set list for her 2013 The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour .
* Melinda Schneider and Beccy Cole included the song on their album Great Women of Country ( 2014 ) .
*
" Forever Country " , released in September 2016 , is a medley of the song along with " Take Me Home , Country Roads " and " On the Road Again " .
SEE ALSO
* List of Australian number - one hits of 1993
* List of Austrian number - one hits of 1993
* List of number - one hits of 1993 ( Belgium Flanders )
* List of RPM number - one singles of 1992 * List of RPM number - one singles of 1993 * Dutch Top 40 number - one hits of 1992
* Dutch Top 40 number - one hits of 1993
* List of European number - one hits of 1992
* List of European number - one hits of 1993
* List of French number - one hits of 1993
* Number - one hits of 1993
( Germany ) * List of number - one singles of 1992
( Ireland ) * List of number - one singles of 1993
( Ireland ) * List of number - one hits of 1992
( Italy ) * List of number - one singles in 1992 ( New Zealand )
* List of number - one singles in 1993 ( New Zealand )
* List of number - one songs in Norway
* List of number - one singles of 1993 ( Spain ) * List of number - one singles and albums in Sweden
* List of number - one hits of 1993
( Switzerland ) * List of UK Singles Chart number ones of the 1990s
* List of number - one adult contemporary singles of 1992 ( U.S. )
* List of number - one adult contemporary singles of 1993
( U.S. ) * List of Hot 100 Airplay number - one singles of the 1990s
* List of Billboard Mainstream Top 40 number - one songs of the 1990s
* List of Billboard Rhythmic number - one songs of the 1990s
* List of number - one R&B singles of 1992 ( U.S. )
* R&B number - one hits of 1993 ( USA )
* List of million - selling singles in the United Kingdom * List of best - selling singles of the 1990s in the United Kingdom * List of best - selling singles by year ( UK )
* List of UK Singles Chart Christmas number ones
* List of UK top 10 singles in 1992 * List of best - selling singles in Australia
* List of Top 25 singles for 1992 in Australia
* List of Top 25 singles for 1993 in Australia
* Billboard Year - End Hot 100 singles of 1993
* List of Hot 100 number - one singles of the 1990s ( U.S. ) * List of Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles in 2012
* List of top 10 singles in 2012 ( France ) * List of best - selling singles in Japan
* List of best - selling singles REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* I Will Always Love You at Discogs