PEACE BOND
In Canadian law , a peace bond is an order from a criminal court that requires a person to keep the peace and be on good behaviour for a period of time .
This essentially means that the person who signs a peace bond must not be charged with any additional criminal offences during its duration .
Peace bonds often have other conditions as well , such as not having any weapons or staying away from a particular person or place .
Peace bonds are similar to a civil court restraining order , and are also based on the lesser burden of proof of civil law .
A peace bond can be issued by a criminal court judge or a Justice of the Peace .
A peace bond is usually issued when the Crown Prosecutor is convinced that a strong case does not exist against the accused .
A person does not plead guilty when they enter into a peace bond .
Thus , there is no finding of guilt or conviction registered if a person agrees to sign a peace bond .
One of the reasons why a person may agree to enter into a peace bond is to avoid a criminal trial , and ultimately the possibility of being convicted in a court of law of the offence for which they were charged .
Being convicted in a court of law would entail receiving a criminal record .
The peace bond itself is usually set for twelve months .
If a peace bond is signed , then the charges are withdrawn , and the prosecution of those charges is considered to be complete , and those same charges can never be re - instated .
However , if one or more of the conditions of a peace bond are broken , either by not obeying one of the conditions , or by getting charged with a subsequent criminal offence within the 12-month period of time in which it was signed , there could be very serious repercussions , as this may result in the person being charged with a separate criminal offence of " breach of recognizance " or " disobeying a court order " .
The defendant may also be required to forfeit the entire cash surety that they pledged to pay to the court ( usually $ 500 or $ 1000 ) when they entered into the peace bond .
Breaching any condition of a peace bond is considered a criminal offence .
Moreover , as of July 19 , 2015 , a conviction for breaching a condition of a peace bond carries a maximum sentence of up to four years imprisonment .
The use of peace bonds is rather uncommon in the U.S. justice system , but a deferred prosecution has a similar effect .
Since there is no conviction or admission of any guilt , signing a peace bond in Canada does not usually result in U.S. inadmissibility under INA § 212 ( a ) ( 2 ) .
Upon expiry of the peace bond , the person who was subject to the bond should write to the arresting police agency and request that the bond be purged , along with their fingerprints and photographs ( if applicable ) .
Otherwise , details of the bond will remain in the investigative section of the Canadian Police Information Centre ( CPIC ) indefinitely , which may affect future travel and employment .
Applications to request a file destruction of fingerprints , photographs , and record of disposition are available on all Canadian police websites .
While in effect , the peace bond used to appear on a basic criminal record check , but since the year 2011 it is no longer the case .
Since a peace bond is a public record , it may also be visible in provincial online court records , but is clearly identified as a court order and not a finding of guilt or criminal conviction .
An expired peace bond that has been purged should not affect future employment or travel .
In exceptional cases , an expired peace bond may still be disclosed by the police if the person once subject to the bond is seeking a very detailed criminal history check ( vulnerable sector search ) in order to work or volunteer directly without supervision with children , seniors , or disabled individuals .
Although there are no uniform standards across the country , after a five - year period has elapsed from the date that the peace bond was issued , and if the person subject to the peace bond has not since transgressed the law , it should no longer appear even in the most detailed type of criminal record check .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Peace bonds , or " sureties for good behavior " , appear to have been in common use in the early history of the United States .
Many states still retain statutes that provide for the issuance of peace bonds , but they are infrequently invoked .
The constitutionality of existing peace bond statutes is questionable .
SEE ALSO
* Binding over * Bail ( Canada )
* Probation * Parole * Anti - Social Behaviour Order ( UK ) * Deferred prosecution ( USA )
* Restraining order ( USA )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Applying for a Peace Bond and Filing Assault Charges " – from the Canadian Bar Association , British Columbia Branch * Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada – Section 810 peace bonds