IMPEACHMENT IN THE UNITED STATES Impeachment in the United States is the process by which the lower house of a legislature brings charges against a civil officer of government for crimes alleged to have been committed , analogous to the bringing of an indictment by a grand jury .
At the federal level , this is at the discretion of the House of Representatives .
Most impeachments have concerned alleged crimes committed while in office , though there have been a few cases in which officials have been impeached and subsequently convicted for crimes committed prior to taking office .
The impeached official remains in office until a trial is held .
That trial , and their removal from office if convicted , is separate from the act of impeachment itself .
Analogous to a trial before a judge and jury , these proceedings are ( where the legislature is bicameral ) conducted by upper house of the legislature , which at the federal level is the Senate .
At the federal level , of the Constitution grants to the House of Representatives " the sole power of impeachment " , and grants to the Senate " the sole Power to try all Impeachments " .
In considering articles of impeachment , the House is obligated to base any charges on the constitutional standards specified in : " The President , Vice President , and all civil Officers of the United States shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for , and conviction of , Treason , Bribery , or other High Crimes and Misdemeanors " .
( ) Impeachment can also occur at the state level .
Each state 's legislature can impeach state officials , including the governor , in accordance with their respective state constitution .
FEDERAL IMPEACHMENT Section::::Federal impeachment .
The number of federal officials impeached by the House of Representatives includes two presidents : Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton ; both were later acquitted by the Senate .
Additionally , an impeachment process against Richard Nixon was commenced , but not completed , as he resigned from office before the full House voted on the articles of impeachment .
To date , no president has been removed from office by impeachment and conviction .
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Section::::House of Representatives .
Impeachment proceedings may be commenced by a member of the House of Representatives on his or her own initiative , either by presenting a list of the charges under oath or by asking for referral to the appropriate committee .
The impeachment process may be initiated by non - members .
For example , when the Judicial Conference of the United States suggests a federal judge be impeached , a charge of actions constituting grounds for impeachment may come from a special prosecutor , the President , or state or territorial legislature , grand jury , or by petition .
The type of impeachment resolution determines the committee to which it is referred .
A resolution impeaching a particular individual is typically referred to the House Committee on the Judiciary .
A resolution to authorize an investigation regarding impeachable conduct is referred to the House Committee on Rules , and then to the Judiciary Committee .
The House Committee on the Judiciary , by majority vote , will determine whether grounds for impeachment exist .
If the Committee finds grounds for impeachment , it will set forth specific allegations of misconduct in one or more articles of impeachment .
The Impeachment Resolution , or Articles of Impeachment , are then reported to the full House with the committee 's recommendations .
The House debates the resolution and may at the conclusion consider the resolution as a whole or vote on each article of impeachment individually .
A simple majority of those present and voting is required for each article for the resolution as a whole to pass .
If the House votes to impeach , managers ( typically referred to as " House managers " , with a " lead House manager " ) are selected to present the case to the Senate .
Recently , managers have been selected by resolution , while historically the House would occasionally elect the managers or pass a resolution allowing the appointment of managers at the discretion of the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives .
These managers are roughly the equivalent of the prosecution or district attorney in a standard criminal trial .
Also , the House will adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action .
After receiving the notice , the Senate will adopt an order notifying the House that it is ready to receive the managers .
The House managers then appear before the bar of the Senate and exhibit the articles of impeachment .
After the reading of the charges , the managers return and make a verbal report to the House .
SENATE Section::::Senate .
The proceedings unfold in the form of a trial , with each side having the right to call witnesses and perform cross - examinations .
The House members , who are given the collective title of managers during the course of the trial , present the prosecution case , and the impeached official has the right to mount a defense with his or her own attorneys as well .
Senators must also take an oath or affirmation that they will perform their duties honestly and with due diligence .
After hearing the charges , the Senate usually deliberates in private .
The Constitution requires a two - thirds super majority to convict a person being impeached .
The Senate enters judgment on its decision , whether that be to convict or acquit , and a copy of the judgment is filed with the Secretary of State .
Upon conviction in the Senate , the official is automatically removed from office and may also be barred from holding future office .
The trial is not an actual criminal proceeding and more closely resembles a civil service termination appeal in terms of the contemplated deprivation .
Therefore , the removed official may still be liable to criminal prosecution under a subsequent criminal proceeding .
The President may not grant a pardon in the impeachment case , but may in any resulting Federal criminal case .
Beginning in the 1980s with Harry E. Claiborne , the Senate began using " Impeachment Trial Committees " pursuant to Senate Rule XI .
These committees presided over the evidentiary phase of the trials , hearing the evidence and supervising the examination and cross - examination of witnesses .
The committees would then compile the evidentiary record and present it to the Senate ; all senators would then have the opportunity to review the evidence before the chamber voted to convict or acquit .
The purpose of the committees was to streamline impeachment trials , which otherwise would have taken up a great deal of the chamber 's time .
Defendants challenged the use of these committees , claiming them to be a violation of their fair trial rights as this did not meet the constitutional requirement for their cases to be " tried by the Senate " .
Several impeached judges , including District Court Judge Walter Nixon , sought court intervention in their impeachment proceedings on these grounds .
In Nixon v. United States ( 1993 ) , the Supreme Court determined that the federal judiciary could not review such proceedings , as matters related to impeachment trials are political questions and could not be resolved in the courts .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the United Kingdom , impeachment was a procedure whereby a member of the House of Commons could accuse someone of a crime .
If the Commons voted for the impeachment , a trial would then be held in the House of Lords .
Unlike a bill of attainder , a law declaring a person guilty of a crime , impeachments did not require royal assent , so they could be used to remove troublesome officers of the Crown even if the monarch was trying to protect them .
The monarch , however , was above the law and could not be impeached , or indeed judged guilty of any crime .
When King Charles I was tried before the Rump Parliament of the New Model Army in 1649 he denied that they had any right to legally indict him , their king , whose power was given by God and the laws of the country , saying : " no earthly power can justly call me ( who is your King ) in question as a delinquent ...
no learned lawyer will affirm that an impeachment can lie against the King . "
While the House of Commons pronounced him guilty and ordered his execution anyway , the jurisdictional issue tainted the proceedings .
With this example in mind , the delegates to the 1787 Constitutional Convention chose to include an impeachment procedure in Article II , Section 4 of the Constitution which could be applied to any government official ; they explicitly mentioned the President to ensure there would be no ambiguity .
Opinions differed , however , as to the reasons Congress should be able to initiate an impeachment .
Initial drafts listed only treason and bribery , but George Mason favored impeachment for " maladministration " ( incompetence ) .
James Madison argued that impeachment should only be for criminal behavior , arguing that a maladministration standard would effectively mean that the President would serve at the pleasure of the Senate .
Thus the delegates adopted a compromise version allowing impeachment for " treason , bribery and other high crimes and misdemeanors " .
The precise meaning of the phrase " high crimes and misdemeanors " is somewhat ambiguous ; some scholars , such as Kevin Gutzman , argue that it can encompass even non - criminal abuses of power .
Whatever its theoretical scope , however , Congress traditionally regards impeachment as a power to use only in extreme cases .
The House of Representatives has actually initiated impeachment proceedings 62 times since 1789 .
Two cases did not come to trial because the individuals had left office .
Actual impeachments of 19 federal officers have taken place .
Of these , 15 were federal judges :
thirteen district court judges , one court of appeals judge ( who also sat on the Commerce Court ) , and one Supreme Court Associate Justice .
Of the other four , two were Presidents , one was a Cabinet secretary , and one was a U.S. Senator .
Of the 19 impeached officials , eight were convicted .
One , former judge Alcee Hastings , was elected as a member of the United States House of Representatives after being removed from office .
The 1797 impeachment of Senator William Blount of Tennessee stalled on the grounds that the Senate lacked jurisdiction over him .
No other member of Congress has ever been impeached .
The Constitution does give authority to the Senate and House , so that each body may expel its own members .
( see List of United States senators expelled or censured and List of United States Representatives expelled , censured , or reprimanded ) .
Expulsion removes the individual from functioning as a representative or senator because of their misbehavior , but unlike impeachment , expulsion can not result in barring an individual from holding future office .
FEDERAL OFFICIALS IMPEACHED Section::::Federal officials impeached . !
# !
Date of Impeachment !
colspan=2 Accused !
Office !
Accusations !
Result !
Refer­ences DEMANDS FOR IMPEACHMENT Section::::Demands for impeachment .
While the actual impeachment of a federal public official is a rare event , demands for impeachment , especially of presidents , are common , going back to the administration of George Washington in the mid-1790s .
While almost all of them were for the most part frivolous and were buried as soon as they were introduced , several did have their intended effect .
Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon and Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas both resigned in response to the threat of impeachment hearings , and , most famously , President Richard Nixon resigned from office after the House Judiciary Committee had already reported articles of impeachment to the floor .
IMPEACHMENT IN THE STATES Section::::Impeachment in the states .
State legislatures can impeach state officials , including governors , in every State except Oregon .
The court for the trial of impeachments may differ somewhat from the federal model — in New York , for instance , the Assembly ( lower house ) impeaches , and the State Senate tries the case , but the members of the seven - judge New York State Court of Appeals ( the state 's highest , constitutional court ) sit with the senators as jurors as well .
Impeachment and removal of governors has happened occasionally throughout the history of the United States , usually for corruption charges .
A total of at least eleven U.S. state governors have faced an impeachment trial ; a twelfth , Governor Lee Cruce of Oklahoma , escaped impeachment conviction by a single vote in 1912 .
Several others , most recently Missouri 's Eric Greitens , have resigned rather than face impeachment , when events seemed to make it inevitable .
The most recent impeachment of a state governor occurred on January 14 , 2009 , when the Illinois House of Representatives voted 117–1 to impeach Rod Blagojevich on corruption charges ; he was subsequently removed from office and barred from holding future office by the Illinois Senate on January 29 .
He was the eighth U.S. state governor to be removed from office .
The procedure for impeachment , or removal , of local officials varies widely .
For instance , in New York a mayor is removed directly by the governor " upon being heard " on charges — the law makes no further specification of what charges are necessary or what the governor must find in order to remove a mayor .
In 2018 , the entire Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia was impeached , something that has been often threatened , but had never happened before .
STATE AND TERRITORIAL OFFICIALS IMPEACHED Section::::State and territorial officials impeached . !
Date !
colspan=2 Accused !
Office !
Result
Removed Associate Justice , Pennsylvania Supreme Court
SEE ALSO
* Censure in the United States
* Efforts to impeach George W. Bush * Impeachment investigations of United States federal officials * Impeachment investigations of United States federal judges
* Jefferson 's Manual * List of federal political scandals in the United States
* Recall election
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* An Overview of the Impeachment Process