RUMMIKUB Rummikub is a tile - based game for two to four players , combining elements of the card game rummy and mahjong .
There are 104 number tiles in the game ( valued 1 to 13 in four different colors , two copies of each ) and two jokers .
Players have 14 or 16 tiles initially and take turns putting down tiles from their racks into sets ( groups or runs ) of at least three , drawing a tile if they can not play .
In the Sabra version ( the most common and popular ) , the first player to use all their tiles scores a positive score based on the total of the other players ' hands , while the losers get negative scores .
An important feature of the game is that players can work with the tiles that have already been played .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Rummikub was invented by Ephraim Hertzano , a Romanian - born Jew , who immigrated to Israel in the 1940s .
He hand - made the first sets with his family in the backyard of his home .
Hertzano sold these sets door - to - door and on a consignment basis at small shops .
Over the years , the family licensed it to other countries and it became Israel 's # 1 export game .
In 1977 , it became a bestselling game in the United States .
The game was marketed as " Rummikid " during part of the 1970s .
Hertzano 's Official Rummikub Book , published in 1978 , describes three different versions of the game : American , Sabra and International .
Modern Rummikub sets include only the Sabra version rules , with no mention of the others , and there are variations in the rules between publishers .
The game was first made by Lemada Light Industries Ltd , founded by Hertzano in 1978 .
Rummikub is similar to several central European card games which are played with two decks of playing cards , including Machiavelli and Vatikan .
Vatikan is played with two decks of cards and one joker per player , thus making 106 cards for two players .
GAME PIECES Section::::Game pieces .
Rummikub 's main component is a pool of tiles , consisting of 104 number tiles and two joker tiles .
The number tiles range in value from one to thirteen in four colors ( black , orange , blue and red ) .
Each combination of color and number is represented twice .
Players each have a rack to store tiles without revealing the face of the tiles to the other players .
RULES Section::::Rules .
The following explanation is based on the rules in the 1998 Pressman American edition : SETUP Section::::Setup .
Tiles are shuffled together and either placed into a bag or spread out face down across the table .
Each player draws and reveals one tile .
The player whose tile has the highest number value will start the game .
Tiles are returned to the pool , and players collect 14 random tiles and arrange them on their racks .
Play begins with the starting player and proceeds in a clockwise ( for modern variants ) direction .
PLAY Section::::Play .
For a player 's first move , they must play a set ( or sets in some versions ) with a value of at least 30 points .
Point values are taken from the face value of each tile played , with the joker ( if played ) assuming the value of the tile it is being used in place of .
A player may not use other players ' tiles to make the " initial meld " .
If a player can not make an initial meld , they must pick up a single tile from the pool and add it to their rack .
Play then proceeds to the next player .
Once a player has made their initial meld , they can , on each turn , play one or more tiles from their rack , making or adding to groups and/or runs .
If the player can not ( or chooses not to ) play any tiles , they must pick a tile randomly from the pool and add it to their rack .
Players may play tiles by amending sets already in play .
The only limit to the length of a run is the extremes of the tile values .
Groups are limited to four because colors may not repeat within a group .
SETS Section::::Sets .
All tiles in play must be arranged in sets of at least three tiles .
The two valid set types are called runs and groups .
A run is composed of three or more , same - colored tiles , in consecutive number order .
( A 1 may not follow a 13 . )
A group is made from three or four same - value tiles in distinct colors .
For example : red 3 , blue 3 , black 3 and orange 3 . EXAMPLES OF INVALID SETS EXAMPLE OF PLAY MANIPULATING EXISTING TILES
Section::::Manipulating existing tiles .
During a player 's turn , sets of tiles that have already been played may be manipulated to allow more tiles to be played .
At the end of the turn , all played tiles must be in valid sets .
Shifting a run : Players may add the appropriate tile to either end of a run and remove a tile from the other end for use elsewhere .
If red 3 , 4 , and 5 have already been played , a player may add the red 6 to the end and remove the 3 for use elsewhere .
Splitting a run : Players may split long runs and insert the corresponding tiles in the middle .
Thus , if blue 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 10 are already a run , the player may insert his own 8 to make two runs : 6 , 7 , 8 and 8 , 9 , 10 .
Substituting in a group : Players may replace any of the tiles in a three - tile group with a tile of the fourth color and the same value .
If blue 6 , red 6 , and orange 6 are already a group , the player may add the black 6 and remove any one of the other three for use elsewhere .
Removing tiles : So long as the remaining tiles form a valid run , tiles can be removed from the ends of runs .
Any one tile may be removed from a four - tile group .
Joker substitution : A joker may not be retrieved before the initial meld .
A joker can be retrieved from a set by replacing it with a tile of the same numerical value and colour it represents .
The tile used to replace the joker can come from the player 's rack or from the table .
In the case of a group of 3 , the joker can be replaced by the tile of either of the missing colours .
A joker that has been replaced must be used in the player 's same turn as part of a new set .
A set containing a joker can have tiles added to it , be split apart or have tiles removed from it .
The joker has a penalty value of 30 points if it remains on a player 's rack at the end of the game Harvested tiles : In the course of a turn , a tile that is " harvested " from an existing set must be played during the turn ; it can not be kept for later use .
Example : if there is a 3 , 4 , 5 run on the table , the 3 can be harvested by putting down the appropriately colored 6 , but the 3 must be used during that turn , not kept in the player 's hand for later use .
ERRORS Section::::Errors .
At the end of each turn , all sets on the table must be valid , but during the course of a turn , utterly arbitrary temporary re - arrangements are allowed .
These can get very involved , requiring several steps .
Sometimes , what had been imagined in the mind to be possible , turns out not to be , leaving the table in an illegal state .
When this happens ( and the choice of when to invoke this rule depends on how formal or " friendly " the game is ) , the offending player must return all sets on the table to their original state , and pick up three tiles as a penalty .
SCORING
Section::::Scoring .
Once a winner has been declared , the losing players must add up the values of the tiles remaining in their racks ( their score for the game ) .
The joker has a penalty value of 30 .
A player 's score for the game is subtracted from his current cumulative score .
Once calculated , each of the losing players ' scores for the game is added to the winners current cumulative score .
For example- suppose in a game player A wins , player B has a score of 5 , player C has a score of 10 and player D a score of 3 .
Player A will now have a cumulative score of 18 , player B will be -5 , player C will be -10 and player D will be -3 .
Should the game result in no winner , the player with the lowest number of tiles in their rack is the winner .
Scoring is then carried out in the normal manner .
WINNING
Section::::Winning .
Game play continues until a player has used all of the tiles in the rack , at which point they should call out " Rummikub , " and are declared the winner .
If the pool runs out of tiles , play continues until there is a winner or no player can make a valid play .
AWARDS
* 1980 Spiel des Jahres ( German Game of the Year )
* 1983 Spel van het Jaar ( Dutch Game of the Year ) .
* 1993 ( Polish Game of the Year )
SEE ALSO
* Israeli inventions and discoveries REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * Official App on AppStore
* Official App on Google Play Store
*
Official Facebook App