CAPE TO CAIRO RAILWAY
The Cape to Cairo Railway is an uncompleted project to cross Africa from south to north by rail .
This plan was initiated at the end of the 19th century , during the time of Western colonial rule , largely under the vision of Cecil Rhodes , in the attempt to connect adjacent African possessions of the British Empire through a continuous line from Cape Town , South Africa to Cairo , Egypt .
While most sections of the Cape to Cairo railway are in operation , a major part is missing between northern Sudan and Uganda .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
The original proposal for a Cape to Cairo railway was made in 1874 by Edwin Arnold , then the editor of the Daily Telegraph , which was joint sponsor of the expedition by H.M. Stanley to Africa to discover the course of the Congo River .
The proposed route involved a mixture of railway and river transport between Elizabethville , now Lubumbashi in the Belgian Congo and Sennar in the Sudan rather than a completely rail one .
Imperialist and entrepreneur Cecil Rhodes was instrumental in securing the southern states of the continent for the British Empire and envisioned a continuous " red line " of British dominions from north to south .
A railway would be a critical element in this scheme to unify the possessions , facilitate governance , enable the military to move quickly to hot spots or conduct war , help settlement and enable intra- and extra - continental goods trade .
The construction of this project presented a major technological challenge .
France had a somewhat rival strategy in the late 1890s to link its western and eastern African colonies , namely Senegal to Djibouti .
Southern Sudan and Ethiopia were in the way , but France sent expeditions in 1897 to establish a protectorate in southern Sudan and to find a route across Ethiopia .
The scheme foundered when a British flotilla on the River Nile confronted the French expedition at the point of intersection between the French and British routes , leading to the Fashoda Incident and eventual French retreat .
The Portuguese considered an Angola to Mozambique railway to link west with east and produced the " Pink Map " representing their claims to sovereignty in Africa ( to link Angola and Mozambique ) .
Opposition to British rule in South Africa was settled after the First and Second Boer Wars ( ended 1902 but only incorporating its two states into a union Republic in 1910 ) .
MISSED COMPLETION Section::::Missed completion .
British interests had to overcome obstacles of geography and climate , and the competing imperial schemes of the French and Portuguese mentioned above and of the Germans .
In 1891 , Germany secured the strategically critical territory of German East Africa , which along with the mountainous rainforest of the Belgian Congo precluded the building of a Cape - to - Cairo railway .
In 1916 during World War I British and British Indian soldiers won the Tanganyika Territory from the Germans and after the war the British continued to rule the territory , which was a League of Nations mandate from 1922 .
The continuous line of colonies was complete .
The British Empire possessed the political power to complete the Cape to Cairo Railway , but economics , including the Great Depression of the 1930s , prevented its completion before World War II .
After World War II , the decolonisation of Africa and the establishment of independent countries removed the colonial rationale for the project and increased the project 's difficulty , effectively ending the project .
CURRENT LINKS NORTHERN SECTION Section::::Current links .
Section::::Northern section .
Egypt has a rail system that as early as 1854 connected Alexandria and Cairo , and that currently goes as far south as Aswan .
In Egypt the railway is .
After a ferry link up on the Nile , the railway continues in Sudan from Wadi Halfa to Khartoum at the narrow gauge ; see Northern Africa Railroad Development .
This part of the system was started by Lord Kitchener in 1897 when he subjugated the Mahdist uprising .
Further railway links go south , the most southern point being Wau .
A large part of the Sudanese railway network is currently in disrepair due to political turmoil .
UGANDA RAILWAY Section::::Uganda railway .
East Africa has a network of narrow gauge railways that historically grew from ports on the Indian Ocean and went westward , built in parallel under British and German colonial rule .
The furthest string north was the Uganda Railway .
Eventually these networks were linked , so that today there is a continuous rail connection between Kampala , Uganda , on Lake Victoria to the coastal cities of Mombasa in Kenya and Dar es Salaam in Tanzania .
Up to the break - up of the East African Community in 1977 , these companies operated as East African Railways , but operate today as different national companies : the Uganda Railways Corporation Uganda railways corporation 's assets were sold over 13 years ago when government failed to run the corporation , as the cost of running it was greater than the returns .
Today , railway business in Uganda is run by Rift Valley Railways of Kenya , the Kenya Railways Corporation , and the Tanzania Railways Corporation .
TAZARA LINK Section::::TAZARA link .
From Dar es Salaam , a 1,860 km link to Kapiri Mposhi in Zambia was completed after six years by workers and with main funding by China in 1976 .
This Tanzania - Zambia - Railway ( TAZARA ) was built to connect landlocked Zambia and its mineral wealth to a port on the Indian Ocean , independent from port connections in South Africa , a frequent rival economic competitor in the mining sectors or Mozambique , at that time Portuguese - controlled territory .
Not intended in the grand picture of the Cape to Cairo Railway , the TAZARA fills a critical link .
This connection is the gauge of the southern part of Africa .
KIDATU CONNECTION
Section::::Kidatu connection .
In 1998 , a transshipment hub was built at Kidatu in southern Tanzania to connect the metre gauge Central Line ( Tanzania ) with the Cape gauge TAZARA line .
This also shortened the distance .
SOUTHERN SECTION Section::::Southern section .
The southern section was completed during British rule before the First World War and has an interconnecting system of national railways using the Cape - gauge of .
Construction started from Cape Town and went parallel to the Great North Road to Kimberley , through a part of Botswana to Bulawayo .
From this junction the link proceeds further north , today operated by the National Railways of Zimbabwe , to the Zambezi crossing .
The Victoria Falls Bridge was completed in 1905 .
The connection is picked up by Zambia Railways and continues to Kapiri Mposhi which is the transition point to the TAZARA link to Tanzania .
ROAD Section::::Road .
The Court Treatt expedition , an attempt to travel from Cape to Cairo by road , was made in 1924 using two cars .
The Cape to Cairo Road was planned to roughly connect the same countries .
That plan was updated with the Cairo – Cape Town Highway plan , large sections of which are paved and passable .
SEE ALSO
* Cape to Cairo ( disambiguation )
* Cape to Cairo Red Line
* Cairo –
Cape Town Highway * Northern Africa Railroad Development
* Scramble for Africa
* Fashoda Incident * East African Railway Master Plan * Lamu Port and Lamu - Southern Sudan - Ethiopia Transport Corridor – 2012
REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Tabor , George , The Cape to Cairo Railway & River Routes ( 2003 ) , London : Genta . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The trip from Cairo to Kenya in 1935
* Rovos Rail luxury tours from Cape Town to Cairo
* Lamu Nadapal map – 2012