ALL I WANT FOR CHRISTMAS IS YOU
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " is a Christmas song performed by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey .
She wrote and produced the song alongside Walter Afanasieff .
Columbia Records released it on November 1 , 1994 , as the lead single from her fourth studio album and first holiday album , Merry Christmas ( 1994 ) .
The track is an uptempo love song that includes bell chimes , heavy back - up vocals , and synthesizers .
It is also considered the best - selling modern day Christmas song .
Two music videos were commissioned for the song : the song 's primary music video features grainy home - movie - style footage of Carey , her dogs and family during the holiday season , as well as Carey dressed in a Santa suit frolicking on a snowy mountainside .
Carey 's then - husband Tommy Mottola makes a cameo appearance as Santa Claus , bringing Carey a gift and leaving on a red sleigh .
The second video was filmed in black and white , and features Carey dressed in 1960s style in homage to The Ronettes , alongside back up singers and female dancers .
Carey has performed " All I Want for Christmas Is You " during numerous live television appearances and tours throughout her career .
In 2010 , Carey re - recorded the song for her second holiday album , Merry Christmas II
You , titled " All I Want for Christmas Is You ( Extra Festive ) " .
Carey also re - recorded the song as a duet with Canadian singer Justin Bieber for his 2011 album Under the Mistletoe , titled " All I Want for Christmas for You ( SuperFestive ! ) " .
The song has also been covered by many artists over the years .
In the years since its original release , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " has been critically acclaimed ; it was once called " one of the few worthy modern additions to the holiday canon " in The New Yorker .
It has become established as a Christmas standard and continues to surge in popularity each holiday season .
The song was commercially successful , topping the charts in the Czech Republic , Denmark , Hungary , the Netherlands , Norway , Slovenia and Sweden while reaching number two in Australia , Austria , Japan , and the United Kingdom , and the top 10 in several other countries .
With global sales of over 16 million copies , the song remains Carey 's biggest international success and is the 11th best - selling single of all time .
As of 2017 , the song was reported to have earned $ 60 million in royalties .
BACKGROUND AND WRITING Section::::Background and writing .
Following the success of the singer 's 1993 career best - selling album Music Box , Carey and her management at Columbia Records began devising ideas and strategies for subsequent projects .
Carey 's then - husband , Tommy Mottola , head of Columbia 's parent label Sony Music Entertainment , began mapping out possible follow ups for the singer during the pinnacle years of her career .
During initial discussions regarding the thought of doing a Christmas - themed album with Carey and her writing partner of over four years , Walter Afanasieff , fear arose that it was not commercially expedient or wise to release holiday music at the peak of one 's career , as it was more often equated with a release towards the end of a musician 's waning career .
Afanasieff recalled his sentiments during initial discussions for a holiday record : "
Back then , you did n't have a lot of artists with Christmas albums .
It was n't a known science at all back then , and there was nobody who did new , big Christmas songs .
So we were going to release it as kind of an everyday , ' Hey , you know , we 're putting out a Christmas album .
No big deal . '
"
Ultimately , with Mottola 's persistence , Carey and Afanasieff began writing songs for its parent album Merry Christmas during the summer of 1994 .
"
All I Want for Christmas Is You " was recorded that August and took 15 minutes to compose .
Often referencing herself a festive person and demonstrating a usual penchant for her love of all things Christmas , Carey began decorating the home she shared with Mottola in upstate New York ( which also came equipped with a personal recording studio ) with Christmas ornaments and other holiday - inspired trinkets .
In doing so , Carey felt she could capture the essence and spirit of what she was singing and make her vocal performance and delivery more emotive and authentic .
The songwriting pair carved out the chords , structure and melody for the song in just a quarter of an hour :
" It 's definitely not ' Swan Lake , ' admits Afanasieff . '
But that 's why it 's so popular — because it 's so simple and palatable ! ' " .
At first , Afanasieff admitted that he was puzzled and " blanched " as to where Carey wanted to take the melody and vocal scales , though she was " adamant " in her direction for the song .
In an interview with Billboard , Afanasieff described the type of relationship he and Carey shared in the studio and as songwriters for the song and in general :
It was always the same sort of system with us .
We would write the nucleus of the song , the melody primary music , and then some of the words were there as we finished writing it .
I started playing some rock ' n ' roll piano and started boogie woogie - ing my left hand , and that inspired Mariah to come up with the melodic [ Sings . ]
' I do n't want a lot for Christmas . '
And then we started singing and playing around with this rock ' n ' roll boogie song , which immediately came out to be the nucleus of what would end up being ' All I Want For Christmas Is You . '
That one went very quickly : It was an easier song to write than some of the other ones .
It was very formulaic , not a lot of chord changes .
I tried to make it a little more unique , putting in some special chords that you really do n't hear a lot of , which made it unique and special .
Then for the next week or two Mariah would call me and say , ' What do you think about this bit ? '
We would talk a little bit until she got the lyrics all nicely coordinated and done .
And then we just waited until the sessions began , which were in the summer of ' 94 where we got together in New York and started recording .
And that 's when we first hear her at the microphone singing , and the rest is history .
Afanasieff flew back to California where he finished the song 's programming and production .
Originally , he had a live band play the drums and other instruments with the thought of giving it a more raw and affective sound .
He was unhappy with the results of the recording and subsequently scrapped the effort and used his original , personal arrangement and programmed all the instruments heard on the song ( with the exception of the background vocals ) including the piano , effects , drums and triangle .
While Carey continued writing material in her rented home in The Hamptons , Afanasieff completed the song 's programming and awaited to rendezvous with her a final time in order to layer and harmonize the background vocals .
In touching on several aspects of what excited her to record and release her Christmas album , Carey went into detail on what writing and recording the song and album meant for her : " I 'm a very festive person and I love the holidays .
I 've sung Christmas songs since I was a little girl .
I used to go Christmas caroling .
When it came to the album , we had to have a nice balance between standard Christian hymns and fun songs .
It was definitely a priority for me to write at least a few new songs , but for the most part people really want to hear the standards at Christmas time , no matter how good a new song is . "
COMPOSITION AND LYRICS Section::::Composition and lyrics .
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " is an uptempo song , composed with pop , soul , R&B , gospel , dance - pop and rhythmic adult contemporary influences and stylings .
By early August , Carey already had two original songs written alongside Afanasieff : the " sad and ballad - y "
" Miss You Most
( At Christmas Time ) " and the " Gospel - tinged and religious " " Jesus Born on This Day " .
The third and final original song the pair planned to write was to be centered and inspired and in the vein of a " Phil Spector , old rock ' n roll , sixties - sounding Christmas song " .
The song begins with a " sparking " bit of percussion " that resembles an antique music box or a whimsical snow globe . "
After Carey 's a cappella style vocal introduction , the song introduces other seasonal percussive signifiers including ; celebratory church - like bells , cheerful sleigh bells , and " an underlying rhythmic beat that sounds like the loping pace of a horse or reindeer .
These sounds echo religious and secular musical touchstones , without veering blatantly too much in either direction , and give the song an upbeat , joyous tone . "
In an interview in 1994 , Carey described the song as " fun " , and continued : " It 's very traditional , old - fashioned Christmas .
It 's very retro , kind of ' 60s .
" Afanasieff went further in breaking down the song 's musical elements : " A lush bed of keyboards , reminiscent of a small - scale Wall of Sound , cushions the song 's cheery rhythms , while a soulful vocal chorus adds robust oohs , tension - creating counter - melodies , and festive harmonies .
Most notably , however , the song 's jaunty piano chords and melody keep the song merrily bouncing along . "
Lyrically , the song describes the yearning desire to be with a loved one for Christmas , regardless of whether they have to forgo the usual commercial aspect of the holiday season such as ornamental lights , trees , snow and presents .
The song incorporates various instruments , including piano , drums , violin , oboe , flute , bell chimes , bass effect , and cowbells .
The song layers background vocals throughout the chorus and sections of the bridge .
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " is played at an original tempo of 150.162 beats per minute .
According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time and in the key of G major .
Carey 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of G to the high note of A. Carey wrote the song 's lyrics and melody , while Afanasieff arranged and produced the piece with synthetically created computerized equipment .
Slates Ragusea counts " at least 13 distinct chords at work , resulting in a sumptuously chromatic melody .
The song also includes what I consider the most Christmassy chord of all — a minor subdominant , or ' iv , ' chord with an added 6 , under the words ' underneath the Christmas tree , ' among other places .
( You might also analyze it as a half - diminished ' ii ' 7th chord , but either interpretation seems accurate ) . "
According to Roch Parisien from AllMusic , the song contains " The Beach Boys - style harmonies , jangling bells , and a sleigh - ride pace , injecting one of the few bits of exuberant fun in this otherwise vanilla set . "
Critics have noted the song 's 1940s , 1950s , and 1960s influences which , in conjunction with Carey 's voice and its simple melody , heralded its recipe for success .
In discussing the song 's chord progression and stylistic approaches , Slates Adam Ragusea hailed the song as " the only Christmas song written in the last half - century worthy of inclusion in the Great American Songbook . "
The A.V. Clubs Annie Zaleski attributes the song 's enduring appeal to its ambiguity in being able to pin it down as belonging to a specific era .
Critics also noted the song a tad reminiscent of the works of Judy Garland and Nat King Cole , while also describing it as hearkening back to " ' 60s and ' 70s Motown covers of prewar Christmas classics , such as The Jackson 5 's [ and ] Stevie Wonder " .
Slates Ragusea conceded that " All I Want For Christmas Is You " " sounds like it could have been written in the ' 40s and locked in a Brill Building safe . "
In a piece on the song in Vogue , a writer felt the song 's lyrics helped solidify its status over two decades later : " those lyrics could have been sung by Frank Sinatra — well , maybe not Frank , but another singer back then .
I think that 's what gives it that timeless , classic quality . "
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " received critical acclaim from music critics .
Parisien called the song " a year - long banger " , complimenting its instrumentation and melody .
Steve Morse , editor of The Boston Globe , wrote that Carey sang with a lot of soul .
According to Barry Schwartz from Stylus Magazine , " to say this song is an instant classic somehow does n't capture its amazingicity ; it 's a modern standard : joyous , exhilarating , loud , with even a hint of longing .
"
Schwartz praised the song 's lyrics as well , describing them as " beautifully phrased , " and calling Carey 's voice " gorgeous " and " sincere . "
Kyle Anderson from MTV labeled the track " a majestic anthem full of chimes , sleigh bells , doo - wop flourishes , sweeping strings and one of the most dynamic and clean vocal performances of Carey 's career " .
While reviewing the 2009 remix version , Becky Bain from Idolator called the song a " timeless classic " and wrote , " We love the original song to pieces — we blast it while decorating our Christmas tree and lighting our Menorah . "
Shona Craven of Scotland 's The Herald , said , " [ it 's ] a song of optimism and joy that maybe , just maybe , hints at the real meaning of Christmas . "
Additionally , she felt the main reason it was so successful is the subject " you " in the lyrics , explaining , " Perhaps what makes the song such a huge hit is the fact that it 's for absolutely everyone . "
Craven opened her review with a bold statement : " Bing Crosby may well be turning in his grave , but no child of the 1980s will be surprised to see Mariah Carey 's sublime
All I Want For Christmas
Is You bounding up the charts after being named the nation 's top festive song . "
In his review for Carey 's Merry Christmas II
You , Thomas Connor from the Chicago Sun - Times called the song " a simple , well - crafted chestnut and one of the last great additions to the Christmas pop canon " .
In a 2006 retrospective look at Carey 's career , Sasha Frere - Jones of The New Yorker said , the " charming " song was one of Carey 's biggest accomplishments , calling it " one of the few worthy modern additions to the holiday canon " .
Dan Hancox , editor of The National , quoted and agreed with Jones ' statement , calling the song " perfection " .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
In the United States , in the first week of January 1995 , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary and at No . 12 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart .
The song placed on these two charts again in December 1995 and in December 1996 .
The song was ineligible for inclusion on the Billboard Hot 100 during its original release , because it was not released commercially as a single .
This rule lapsed in 1998 , however , allowing the song to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 ( peaking at No . 83 in January 2000 ) .
The song topped the Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart in December 2005 , but it was unable to attain a new peak on the Billboard Hot 100 chart because it was considered a recurrent single and was thus ineligible for chart re - entry .
Every December from 2005 to 2008 , the song topped the Billboard Hot 100 Re - currents chart .
In 2012 , after the recurrent rule was revised to allow all songs in the top 50 onto the Billboard Hot 100 chart , the single re - entered the chart at No . 29 and peaked at number 21 for the week ending January 5 , 2013 .
In December 2017 , the song reached number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it its highest peak since its original release .
It subsequently rose to peak position in December 2018 , thus becoming Mariah 's 19th number one hit on the chart .
As of December 16 , 2017 , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " topped the Billboard Holiday 100 chart for a record - extending 27th cumulative week .
No other song has spent more than two weeks at No . 1 on the Holiday 100 since the chart 's launch in 2011 .
It has become the first holiday ringtone to be certified double - platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) .
Additionally , of songs recorded before the year 2000 , it is the best - selling digital single by a woman , as well as the overall best - selling holiday digital single .
As of December 2017 , Nielsen SoundScan estimated total sales of the digital track at 3,415,000 downloads .
In the United Kingdom , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 5 during the week of December 10 , 1994 .
The following week , the song peaked at number 2 , staying there for the final three weeks of December ( held out of the coveted " Christmas No . 1 " honor by East 17 's
" Stay Another Day " ) .
As of January 27 , 2017 , it had spent seventy - eight weeks on the UK Singles Chart .
As of December 19 , 2013 , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " has sold one million copies in the UK .
On September 28 , 2018 , it was certified triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry for shipment of 1.8 million units ( including streams ) and remains Carey 's best - selling single in the UK .
In 2010 , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " was named the No . 1 holiday song of the decade in the United Kingdom .
The song peaked at number 2 in the United Kingdom for a second time in December 2017 due to strong downloads and streaming .
The song peaked at No . 2 on the Australian Singles Chart and was certified triple - platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 210,000 units .
In Denmark , it peaked at No . 4 , staying in the chart for sixteen weeks and being certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) .
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " became Carey 's best - selling single in Japan .
It was used as the theme song to the popular drama { { nihongo29-sai no Christmas29才のクリスマスlit .
" Christmas in 29 Years , 29th Christmas " } } , and was titled { { nihongoKoibito - tachi no Christmas恋人たちのクリスマスlit .
" Lovers ' Christmas " } } .
The single peaked at No . 2 for two weeks , blocked from the top spot by " Tomorrow Never Knows " and " Everybody Goes " , both released by rock band Mr. Children .
It sold in excess of 1.1 million units in Japan .
Due to strong sales and airplay , the song re - charted in Japan in 2010 , peaking at No . 6 on the Japan Hot 100 .
The single has been certified the Million award by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) on two different formats ( compact disc and ringtone ) , in 1994 and 2008 , respectively .
REMIXES AND RE - RELEASES Section::::Remixes and re - releases .
When the song was first released as a single in 1994 , no remixes were commissioned .
Carey re - released the song commercially in Japan in 2000 , with a new remix known as the
So
So Def remix .
The remix contains new vocals and is played over a harder , more urban beat that contains a sample of Afrika Bambaataa & the Soulsonic Force 's " Planet Rock ; " it features guest vocals by Jermaine Dupri and Bow
Wow .
The remix appears on Carey 's compilation album Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) as a bonus track .
In 2009 , a remix produced by Carey and Low Sunday , called " Mariah 's New Dance Mix " , was released .
The mix laid the original 1994 vocals over new electronic instrumentation .
The remix garnered a positive response .
MTV 's Kyle Anderson wrote that " it 's difficult to improve perfection , " but that the remix " does dress up the song in a disco thump that should make your office Christmas party 28 percent funkier than it was last year .
"
Idolator 's Becky Bain praised the song 's catchiness .
In 2010 , Carey re - recorded the song for her thirteenth studio and second holiday album , Merry Christmas II
You .
Titled " All I Want for Christmas Is You ( Extra Festive ) " , the new version featured re - recorded vocals , softer bell ringing and stronger drumming , and an orchestral introduction that replaced the slow vocal introduction .
Steven J. Horowitz from Rap - Up wrote that the new version " sound[ed ] just as enjoyable as it did in 1994 . "
While the song was praised , it drew criticism for being too similar to the original .
Thomas Connor from the Chicago Sun - Times wrote that the new version " just seems to add a few brassy backup singers to the exact same arrangement . "
Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone agreed , writing that it was " hard to figure out what 's ' extra festive ' " about the new version .
Dan Hancox , editor of The National , also felt the new version was unnecessary .
In 2011 , Justin Bieber also recorded a version of the song as a duet with Carey on his holiday album , Under the Mistletoe .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
Carey has performed the song during concerts as well as live televised performances .
*
It was part of the set - list during the Japanese shows of Carey 's Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) , Butterfly World Tour ( 1998 ) , ( 2002–03 ) , and The Adventures of Mimi Tour ( 2006 ) .
*
Additionally , Carey performed the song at the 2004 Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade , which aired on ABC .
*
Carey sang the
So
So Def remix version at the opening night of her Angels Advocate Tour on New Year 's Eve .
*
On November 9 , 2010 , Carey taped a live Christmas Special featuring the song , which aired on December 13 , 2010 on ABC .
*
Additionally , Carey performed the song alongside " Oh Santa ! "
airing on ESPN and ABC throughout the day on Christmas Day of 2010 .
*
On December 3 , she performed both songs at the Walt Disney World Resort theme park , Magic Kingdom , in a performance that was taped and aired part of the Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade on ABC .
She performed them again in a music video promoting the day 's NBA games that aired on both networks .
* Carey also included the track as the encore to her sold out , first annual Christmas concert series at the Beacon Theater in New York City .
The show was entitled All I Want For Christmas Is You , A Night of Joy & Festivity .
*
During The Late Late Show with James Corden on December 15 , 2016 , Mariah Carey sung this song on the popular feature Carpool Karaoke .
Fellow singers Adele , Lady Gaga , Demi Lovato , Nick Jonas , Elton John , Selena Gomez , Gwen Stefani , Chris Martin and the band Red Hot Chili Peppers were featured in the video .
It quickly went viral , achieving over 2 million views in less than 24 hours , and 25 million views in less than three weeks .
MUSIC VIDEOS Section::::Music videos .
There are three music videos for " All I Want for Christmas
Is You " .
The first , primary video was shot in the style of a home movie using Super-8 mm film ; it was directed and filmed by Carey during the Christmas season of 1993 .
The video begins with Carey placing holiday ornaments on a Christmas tree and frolicking through the snowy mountainside .
Outdoor scenes were shot at the Fairy Tale Forest in New Jersey , where Carey 's then - husband Tommy Mottola made a cameo appearance as Santa Claus .
It continues with scenes of Carey getting ready for her album cover photo shoot and spending time with her dog Jack .
It concludes with Santa Claus leaving Carey with a bag of presents and waving goodbye .
It has more than 450 million views on YouTube as of December 2018 .
In the song 's alternate video , inspired by The Ronettes , Carey dances in a 1960s - influenced studio surrounded by go – go dancers .
For a 1960s look , the video was filmed in black and white , with Carey in white boots and teased up hair .
This video was also directed by Carey .
There are two edits to this version of the video .
Another video was created for the So
So Def remix , but it does not feature Carey or the hip - hop musicians that perform in the song .
Instead , the video is animated and based on a scene in the video from Carey 's " Heartbreaker " ( 1999 ) .
It features cartoon cameo appearances by Carey , Jermaine Dupri , Bow Wow , Luis Miguel ( Carey 's boyfriend at the time ) , Carey 's dog Jack , and Santa Claus .
Kris Kringle is credited with directing the music video .
Since 2009 , the song has been included in a music video accompanying ESPN 's ( and their sister station , ABC ) Christmas Day coverage of the NBA .
The music video for the duet featuring Bieber was filmed in Macy 's department store in New York City , and features Bieber shopping with his friends whilst Carey is seen singing in the background .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
" All I Want for Christmas Is You " charts every holiday season since its original release .
In December 2017 , the song peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it the first holiday song to enter Hot 100 's top ten since Kenny G 's cover of " Auld Lang Syne " in January 2000 .
It became Carey 's 28th top ten single in the Hot 100 .
With global sales of over 16 million copies , the song remains Carey 's biggest international success and the 11th best selling single of all time .
As of 2017 , the song was reported to have earned $ 60 million in royalties .
The Daily Telegraph hailed " All I Want for Christmas Is You " as the most popular and most played Christmas song of the decade in the United Kingdom .
Rolling Stone ranked it fourth on its Greatest Rock and Roll Christmas Songs list , calling it a " holiday standard .
" Due to the song 's lasting impact , Carey was dubbed the " Queen of Christmas " , a title she is hesitant to accept .
" I do n't accept that name because I feel like it 's [ too much ] , " she said .
" I humbly thank them and I do have an extraordinary love for the holiday season , and it is the best time of the year . "
Carey released a children 's book based on " All I Want for Christmas Is You " on November 10 , 2015 , which went on to sell over 750,000 copies .
She later released an animated family film based on the book and song on November 14 , 2017 .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 1994–2018 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition !
scope="row " Denmark ( Tracklisten ) align="center"1 !
scope="row"Europe ( European Hot 100 Singles )
align="center"4 !
scope="row"Greece Digital Songs ( Billboard )
align="center"3 !
scope="row"Iceland
( Íslenski Listinn Topp 40 )
align="center"14 !
scope="row"Japan ( Oricon Singles Chart )
align="center"2 !
scope="row"Japan ( Japan Hot 100 )
align="center"6 !
scope="row"Japan
Hot Overseas
( Billboard )
align="center"1 !
scope="row " Norway ( VG - lista )
align="center"1 !
scope="row"Portugal Digital Songs ( Billboard )
align="center"1 ! scope="row
" Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) align="center"1 !
scope="row
" Sweden ( Sverigetopplistan )
align="center"1 ! scope="row"US
Holiday 100
( Billboard )
align="center"1 YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1994 ) !
Position !
scope="row " Netherlands ( Dutch Top 40 ) align="center"204 ! scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company )
align="center"14 !
Chart ( 1995 ) !
Position !
scope="row " Netherlands ( Dutch Top 40 ) align="center"202 !
Chart ( 2016 ) !
Position ! scope="row " Hungary ( Single Top 40 ) ! scope="row " South Korean International Singles ( Gaon ) !
Chart ( 2017 ) !
Position ! scope="row " Hungary ( Single Top 40 ) DECADE - END CHARTS Section::::Decade - end charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2000–2009 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row"UK
Holiday Songs
align="center"1 ALL - TIME CHARTS Section::::All - time charts .
! scope="col " Chart ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row"UK
Singles ( Official Charts Company )
align="center"19 MARIAH CAREY AND JUSTIN
BIEBER VERSION Section::::Mariah Carey and Justin Bieber version . !
scope =
" col " Chart ( 2011–2012 ) !
scope =
" col " Peakposition ! scope="row"UK
Singles ( Official Charts Company ) align="center"148 ! scope="row"US
Holiday Songs ( Billboard )
align="center"20 CERTIFICATIONS AND SALES LIST OF COVER VERSIONS
* Shania Twain ( live performance , 1998 )
* Samantha Mumba ( Samantha Sings Christmas EP , 2001 )
* Olivia Olson ( Love Actually : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , 2003 )
*
My Chemical Romance ( " Kevin and Bean 's Christmastime in the 909 " , 2004 )
*
The Cheetah Girls ( Cheetah - licious Christmas , 2005 )
* Agnes Carlsson and Måns Zelmerlöw ( 2007 )
* Miley Cyrus ( live performance , 2007 )
* Same Difference ( live performance , 2007 )
* John Mayer ( live performance , 2008 )
* Suemitsu & the Suemith ( Best Angle for the Pianist : Suemitsu & the Suemith 05–08 , 2008 )
* Whitney Duncan ( 2008 )
* Alexandra Burke ( live performance , 2009 )
* Dave Barnes ( Very Merry Christmas , 2010 )
* Big Time Rush and Miranda Cosgrove ( Holiday Bundle , 2010 )
* Lady Antebellum ( A Merry Little Christmas , 2010 )
* US Billboard Hot Country Songs – No . 57
* Jessica Mauboy ( All I Want for Christmas , 2010 )
* May J. ( Believin ' ... , 2010 )
* Nota ( Nota{{'}}s A Capella Christmas , 2010 )
* Bowling for Soup
( Merry Flippin ' Christmas , Vol . 1 and 2 , 2011 )
* Michael Bublé ( Christmas , 2011 )
* US Billboard Hot 100 – No . 99 * US Billboard Adult Contemporary –
No . 1
* Amber Riley ( , 2011 )
* Demi Lovato ( live performance , 2012 )
* Ariana Grande - ( live performance , 2012 )
*
Cee Lo Green ( Cee Lo 's Magic Moment , 2012 )
* Atomic Tom ( 2013 )
* Ayahi Takagaki ( melodia 2 , 2013 ) * Park Bom & Lee Hi ( 2013 )
* The Electrical Fire ( 2013 )
* Jim Brickman ( 2014 )
* Fifth Harmony ( I 'll Be Home for Christmas , 2014 )
* The McClymonts ( 2014 )
* Idina Menzel ( Holiday Wishes , 2014 )
* Ten Second Songs ( Anthony Vincent ) ( " All I Want for Christmas Is You " in 20 Different Styles , 2014 )
* Batfoot !
( Punk Rock Christmas , 2015 )
* Paula Arenas ( 2013 )
* Steve Grand ( Music video , 2015 )
* Kylie Minogue and Mumford & Sons ( live performance , 2015 )
* Giselle Tavera ( 2015 )
* Saara Aalto ( The X Factor , 2016 )
* Cosmic Girls ( JUSE TV , 2016 )
*
The Darcys ( 2016 )
* The Dollyrots ( 2016 )
* Ingrid Michaelson ( Songs for the Season , 2018 ) { { div col end } } SEE ALSO * Christmas music * List of best - selling singles in Japan
* List of best - selling singles
* List of Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles in 2017
* List of Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles in 2018
* List of number - one songs in Norway ( 2017 )
* List of number - one singles of 2016
( Slovenia ) * List of number - one singles of the 2018 ( Sweden ) REFERENCES Section::::References .
Works cited * { { citation last =
Nickson EXTERNAL LINKS * { { MetroLyrics songmariah - careyall - i - want - for - christmas - is - you } }