ACETONE
Acetone ( propanone ) is the organic compound with the formula ( CH)CO .
It is a colorless , volatile , flammable liquid , and is the simplest and smallest ketone .
Acetone is miscible with water and serves as an important solvent in its own right , typically for cleaning purposes in laboratories .
About 6.7 million tonnes were produced worldwide in 2010 , mainly for use as a solvent and production of methyl methacrylate and bisphenol A.
It is a common building block in organic chemistry .
Familiar household uses of acetone are as the active ingredient in nail polish remover , and as paint thinner .
Acetone is produced and disposed of in the human body through normal metabolic processes .
It is normally present in blood and urine .
People with diabetes produce it in larger amounts .
Reproductive toxicity tests show that it has low potential to cause reproductive problems .
Ketogenic diets that increase ketones ( acetone , β - hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid ) in the blood are used to counter epileptic attacks in infants and children who suffer from recalcitrant refractory epilepsy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Acetone was first produced by alchemists during the late Middle Ages via the dry distillation of metal acetates ( e.g. , lead acetate , which produced " spirit of Saturn " ( since the alchemical symbol for lead was also the astrological symbol for the planet Saturn ) ) .
In 1832 , French chemist Jean - Baptiste Dumas and German chemist Justus von Liebig determined the empirical formula for acetone .
In 1833 , the French chemist Antoine Bussy named acetone by adding the suffix -one to the stem of the corresponding acid ( viz , acetic acid ) .
By 1852 , English chemist Alexander William Williamson realized that acetone was methyl acetyl ; the following year , the French chemist Charles Frédéric Gerhardt concurred .
In 1865 , the German chemist August Kekulé published the modern structural formula for acetone .
Johann Josef Loschmidt had presented the structure of acetone in 1861 , but his privately published booklet received little attention .
During World War I , Chaim Weizmann developed the process for industrial production of acetone ( Weizmann Process ) .
METABOLISM BIOSYNTHESIS Section::::Metabolism .
Section::::Biosynthesis .
Small amounts of acetone are produced in the body by the decarboxylation of ketone bodies .
Certain dietary patterns , including prolonged fasting and high - fat low - carbohydrate dieting , can produce ketosis , in which acetone is formed in body tissue .
Certain health conditions , such as alcoholism and diabetes , can produce ketoacidosis , uncontrollable ketosis that leads to a sharp , and potentially fatal , increase in the acidity of the blood .
Since it is a byproduct of fermentation , acetone is a byproduct of the distillery industry .
METABOLIC USE Section::::Metabolic use .
Although some biochemistry textbooks and current research publications indicate that acetone can not be metabolized , there is evidence to the contrary , some dating back thirty years .
Acetone can be produced from the oxidation of ingested isopropanol , or from the spontaneous / enzymatic breakdown of acetoacetate ( a ketone body ) in ketotic individuals .
It can then be metabolized either by CYP2E1 via methylglyoxal to -lactate and pyruvate , and ultimately glucose / energy , or by a different pathway via propylene glycol to pyruvate , lactate , acetate ( usable for energy ) and propionaldehyde .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2010 , the worldwide production capacity for acetone was estimated at 6.7 million tonnes per year .
With 1.56 million tonnes per year , the United States had the highest production capacity , followed by Taiwan and mainland China .
The largest producer of acetone is INEOS Phenol , owning 17 % of the world 's capacity , with also significant capacity ( 7–8 % ) by Mitsui , Sunoco and Shell in 2010 .
INEOS Phenol also owns the world 's largest production site ( 420,000 tonnes / annum ) in Beveren ( Belgium ) .
Spot price of acetone in summer 2011 was 1100–1250 USD / tonne in the United States .
CURRENT METHOD
Section::::Current method .
Acetone is produced directly or indirectly from propylene .
Approximately 83 % of acetone is produced via the cumene process ; as a result , acetone production is tied to phenol production .
In the cumene process , benzene is alkylated with propylene to produce cumene , which is oxidized by air to produce phenol and acetone :
Other processes involve the direct oxidation of propylene ( Wacker - Hoechst process ) , or the hydration of propylene to give 2-propanol , which is oxidized to acetone .
OLDER METHODS Section::::Older methods .
Previously , acetone was produced by the dry distillation of acetates , for example calcium acetate in ketonic decarboxylation .
After that time , during World War I , acetone was produced using acetone - butanol - ethanol fermentation with Clostridium acetobutylicum bacteria , which was developed by Chaim Weizmann ( later the first president of Israel ) in order to help the British war effort , in the preparation of Cordite .
This acetone - butanol - ethanol fermentation was eventually abandoned when newer methods with better yields were found .
USES Section::::Uses .
About a third of the world 's acetone is used as a solvent , and a quarter is consumed as acetone cyanohydrin , a precursor to methyl methacrylate .
SOLVENT Section::::Solvent .
Acetone is a good solvent for many plastics and some synthetic fibers .
It is used for thinning polyester resin , cleaning tools used with it , and dissolving two - part epoxies and superglue before they harden .
It is used as one of the volatile components of some paints and varnishes .
As a heavy - duty degreaser , it is useful in the preparation of metal prior to painting .
It is also useful for high reliability soldering applications to remove rosin flux after soldering is complete ; this helps to prevent the rusty bolt effect .
Acetone is used as a solvent by the pharmaceutical industry and as a denaturant in denatured alcohol .
Acetone is also present as an excipient in some pharmaceutical drugs .
Although itself flammable , acetone is used extensively as a solvent for the safe transportation and storage of acetylene , which can not be safely pressurized as a pure compound .
Vessels containing a porous material are first filled with acetone followed by acetylene , which dissolves into the acetone .
One liter of acetone can dissolve around 250 liters of acetylene at a pressure of 10 bar .
CHEMICAL INTERMEDIATE
Section::::Chemical intermediate .
Acetone is used to synthesize methyl methacrylate .
It begins with the initial conversion of acetone to acetone cyanohydrin :
In a subsequent step , the nitrile is hydrolyzed to the unsaturated amide , which is esterified : The third major use of acetone ( about 20 % ) is synthesizing bisphenol A. Bisphenol A is a component of many polymers such as polycarbonates , polyurethanes , and epoxy resins .
The synthesis involves the condensation of acetone with phenol : Many millions of kilograms of acetone are consumed in the production of the solvents methyl isobutyl alcohol and methyl isobutyl ketone .
These products arise via an initial aldol condensation to give diacetone alcohol .
Condensation with acetylene gives 2-methylbut-3-yn-2-ol , precursor to synthetic terpenes and terpenoids .
LABORATORY Section::::Laboratory .
In the laboratory , acetone is used as a polar , aprotic solvent in a variety of organic reactions , such as S2 reactions .
The use of acetone solvent is critical for the Jones oxidation .
It does not form an azeotrope with water ( see azeotrope ( data ) ) .
It is a common solvent for rinsing laboratory glassware because of its low cost and volatility .
Despite its common use as a supposed drying agent , it is not effective except by bulk displacement and dilution .
Acetone can be cooled with dry ice to −78 ° C without freezing ; acetone / dry ice baths are commonly used to conduct reactions at low temperatures .
Acetone is fluorescent under ultraviolet light , and its vapor can be used as a fluorescent tracer in fluid flow experiments .
Acetone is used to precipitate proteins .
Alternatives for protein precipitation is trichloroacetic acid and ethanol .
MEDICAL AND COSMETIC USES Section::::Medical and cosmetic uses .
Acetone is used in a variety of general medical and cosmetic applications and is also listed as a component in food additives and food packaging and also in nail polish remover .
Dermatologists use acetone with alcohol for acne treatments to peel dry skin .
Acetone is commonly used in chemical peeling .
Common agents used today for chemical peels are salicylic acid , glycolic acid , 30 % salicylic acid in ethanol , and trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) .
Prior to chemexfoliation , the skin is cleaned and excess fat removed in a process called defatting .
Acetone , Septisol , or a combination of these agents is commonly used in this process .
DOMESTIC AND OTHER NICHE USES
Section::::Domestic and other niche uses .
Acetone is often the primary component in cleaning agents such as nail polish remover .
Acetone is a component of superglue remover and easily removes residues from glass and porcelain .
Make - up artists use acetone to remove skin adhesive from the netting of wigs and mustaches by immersing the item in an acetone bath , then removing the softened glue residue with a stiff brush .
Acetone is often used for vapor polishing of printing artifacts on 3D - printed models printed with ABS plastic .
The technique , called acetone vapor bath smoothing , involves placing the printed part in a sealed chamber containing a small amount of acetone , and heating to around 80 degrees Celsius for 10 minutes .
This creates a vapor of acetone in the container .
The acetone condenses evenly all over the part , causing the surface to soften and liquefy .
Surface tension then smooths the semi - liquid plastic .
When the part is removed from the chamber , the acetone component evaporates leaving a glassy - smooth part free of striation , patterning , and visible layer edges , common features in untreated 3D printed parts .
Low - grade acetone is also commonly used in academic laboratory settings as a glassware rinsing agent for removing residue and solids before a final wash .
SAFETY FLAMMABILITY Section::::Safety .
Section::::Flammability .
The most hazardous property of acetone is its extreme flammability .
At temperatures greater than acetone 's flash point of , air mixtures of between 2.5 % and 12.8 % acetone , by volume , may explode or cause a flash fire .
Vapors can flow along surfaces to distant ignition sources and flash back .
Static discharge may also ignite acetone vapors , though acetone has a very high ignition initiation energy point and therefore accidental ignition is rare .
Even pouring or spraying acetone over red - glowing coal will not ignite it , due to the high concentration of vapour and the cooling effect of evaporation of the liquid .
It auto - ignites at .
Auto - ignition temperature is also dependent upon the exposure time , thus at some tests it is quoted as 525 ° C .
Also , industrial acetone is likely to contain a small amount of water which also inhibits ignition .
ACETONE PEROXIDE
Section::::Acetone peroxide .
When oxidized , acetone forms acetone peroxide as a byproduct , which is a highly unstable , primary high explosive compound .
It may be formed accidentally , e.g. when waste hydrogen peroxide is poured into waste solvent containing acetone .
Due to its instability , it is rarely used , despite its simple chemical synthesis .
HEALTH INFORMATION
Section::::Health information .
Acetone has been studied extensively and is generally recognized to have low acute and chronic toxicity if ingested and/or inhaled .
Acetone is not currently regarded as a carcinogen , a mutagenic chemical nor a concern for chronic neurotoxicity effects .
Acetone can be found as an ingredient in a variety of consumer products ranging from cosmetics to processed and unprocessed foods .
Acetone has been rated as a generally recognized as safe ( GRAS ) substance when present in beverages , baked foods , desserts , and preserves at concentrations ranging from 5 to 8 mg / L. Acetone has been shown to have anticonvulsant effects in animal models of epilepsy , in the absence of toxicity , when administered in millimolar concentrations .
It has been hypothesized that the high - fat low - carbohydrate ketogenic diet used clinically to control drug - resistant epilepsy in children works by elevating acetone in the brain .
Because of their higher energy requirements , children have higher acetone production than most adults – and the younger the child , the higher the expected production .
This indicates that children are not uniquely susceptible to acetone exposure .
External exposures are small compared to the exposures associated with the ketogenic diet .
TOXICOLOGY Section::::Toxicology .
Acetone is believed to exhibit only slight toxicity in normal use , and there is no strong evidence of chronic health effects if basic precautions are followed .
Acetone is an irritant causing mild skin irritation and moderate to severe eye irritation .
At high vapor concentrations , it may depress the central nervous system like many other solvents .
In one documented case , ingestion of a substantial amount of acetone led to systemic toxicity , although the patient eventually fully recovered .
Some sources estimate LD for human ingestion at 0.621 g / kg ; Acute toxicity for mice by ingestation ( LD ) is 3 g / kg and by inhalation LC ) is 44 g / m over 4 hours .
* EPA EPCRA Delisting ( 1995 ) .
EPA removed acetone from the list of " toxic chemicals " maintained under Section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act ( EPCRA ) .
In making that decision , EPA conducted an extensive review of the available toxicity data on acetone and found that acetone " exhibits acute toxicity only at levels that greatly exceed releases and resultant exposures " , and further that acetone " exhibits low toxicity in chronic studies " .
* Genotoxicity .
Acetone has been tested in more than two dozen in vitro and in vivo assays .
These studies indicate that acetone is not genotoxic .
* Carcinogenicity .
EPA in 1995 concluded , " There is currently no evidence to suggest a concern for carcinogenicity " .
( EPCRA Review , described in Section 3.3 ) .
NTP scientists have recommended against chronic toxicity / carcinogenicity testing of acetone because " the prechronic studies only demonstrated a very mild toxic response at very high doses in rodents " .
* Neurotoxicity and Developmental Neurotoxicity .
The neurotoxic potential of both acetone and isopropanol , the metabolic precursor of acetone , have been extensively studied .
These studies demonstrate that although exposure to high doses of acetone may cause transient central nervous system effects , acetone is not a neurotoxicant .
A guideline developmental neurotoxicity study has been conducted with isopropanol , and no developmental neurotoxic effects were identified , even at the highest dose tested .
( SIAR , pp .
1 , 25 , 31 ) .
* Environmental .
When the EPA exempted acetone from regulation as a volatile organic compound ( VOC ) in 1995 , EPA stated that this exemption would " contribute to the achievement of several important environmental goals and would support EPA 's pollution prevention efforts " .
60 Fed .
Reg .
31,634 ( June 16 , 1995 ) .
60 Fed .
Reg .
31,634 ( June 16 , 1995 ) .
EPA noted that acetone could be used as a substitute for several compounds that are listed as hazardous air pollutants ( HAP ) under section 112 of the Clean Air Act .
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS
Section::::Environmental effects .
Although acetone occurs naturally in the environment in plants , trees , volcanic gases , forest fires , and as a product of the breakdown of body fat , the majority of the acetone released into the environment is of industrial origin .
Acetone evaporates rapidly , even from water and soil .
Once in the atmosphere , it has a 22-day half - life and is degraded by UV light via photolysis ( primarily into methane and ethane . )
Consumption by microorganisms contributes to the dissipation of acetone in soil , animals , or waterways .
The LD of acetone for fish is 8.3 g / L of water ( or about 1 % ) over 96 hours , and its environmental half - life in water is about 1 to 10 days .
Acetone may pose a significant risk of oxygen depletion in aquatic systems due to the microbial consumption .
EXTRATERRESTRIAL OCCURRENCE Section::::Extraterrestrial occurrence .
On 30 July 2015 , scientists reported that upon the first touchdown of the Philae lander on comet 67P surface , measurements by the COSAC and Ptolemy instruments revealed sixteen organic compounds , four of which were seen for the first time on a comet , including acetamide , acetone , methyl isocyanate , and propionaldehyde .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* Acetone Safety Data Sheet ( SDS ) * Hazardous substances databank entry at the national library of medicine
* Calculation of vapor pressure , liquid density , dynamic liquid viscosity , surface tension of acetone