CELLOPHANE NOODLES Cellophane noodles , also known as glass noodles , are a type of transparent noodle made from starch ( such as mung bean starch , potato starch , sweet potato starch , tapioca , or canna starch ) and water .
They are generally sold in dried form , soaked to reconstitute , then used in soups , stir fried dishes , or spring rolls .
They are called " cellophane noodles " or " glass noodles " because of their appearance when cooked , resembling cellophane , a clear material of a translucent light gray or brownish - gray color .
Cellophane noodles should not be confused with rice vermicelli , which are made from rice and are white in color rather than clear ( after cooking in water ) .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Cellophane noodles are made from different starch .
In China , cellophane noodles are usually made of mung bean starch .
Chinese varieties made from mung bean starch are called Chinese vermicelli , bean threads , bean thread noodles .
Thicker Korean varieties made with sweet potato starch are called sweet potato noodles or dangmyeon .
Cellophane noodles are available in various thicknesses .
Wide , flat cellophane noodle sheets called mung bean sheets are also produced in China .
In Korea , napjak - dangmyeon ( literally " flat dangmyeon ) refers to flat sweet potato noodles .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In China , the primary site of production of cellophane noodles is the town of Zhangxing , in Zhaoyuan , Shandong province .
However , historically the noodles were shipped through the port of Longkou , and thus the noodles are known and marketed as Longkou fensi ( ) .
USE CHINA Section::::Use .
Section::::China .
In Chinese , the most commonly used names are fěnsī ( , literally " noodle thread " ) and dōngfěn ( , literally " winter noodle " ) .
They are also marketed under the name saifun , the Cantonese pronunciation of the Mandarin xìfěn (; literally " slender noodle " ) , though the name fánsī ( 粉絲 ) is the term most often used in Cantonese .
In China , cellophane noodles are a popular ingredient used in stir fries , soups , and particularly hot pots .
They can also be used as an ingredient in fillings for a variety of Chinese jiaozi ( dumplings ) and bing ( flatbreads ) , especially in vegetarian versions of these dishes .
Thicker cellophane noodles are also commonly used to imitate the appearance and texture of shark 's fin in vegetarian soups .
Thicker varieties , most popular in China 's northeast , are used in stir fries as well as cold salad - like dishes .
A popular soup using the ingredient is fried tofu with thin noodles (; Pinyin : yóu dòu fu - xiàn fěn tāng ) .
A popular Sichuan dish called ants climbing a tree consists of stewed cellophane noodles with a spicy ground pork meat sauce .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India and Pakistan , glass noodles are called falooda ( see Falooda , the dessert dish ) , and are served on top of kulfi ( a traditional ice cream ) .
They are usually made from arrowroot starch using a traditional technique .
The noodles are flavorless so they provide a nice contrast with the sweet kulfi .
Kulfi and falooda can be bought from numerous food stalls throughout Pakistan and northern parts of India .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
In Indonesian cuisine , they are called soun or suun .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Japanese cuisine , they are called harusame ( ) , literally " spring rain " .
Unlike Chinese glass noodles , they are usually made from potato starch .
They are commonly used to make salads , or as an ingredient in hot pot dishes .
They are also often used to make Japanese adaptations of Chinese and Korean dishes .
Shirataki noodles are translucent , traditional Japanese noodles made from the konjac yam .
KOREA
Section::::Korea .
In Korean cuisine , glass noodles are usually made from sweet potato starch and are called dangmyeon ( Hangul : ;
Hanja : ; literally " Tang noodles " ; also spelled dang myun , dangmyun , tang myun , or tangmyun ) .
They are commonly stir - fried in sesame oil with beef and vegetables , and flavoured with soy and sugar , in a popular dish called japchae ( hangul : 잡채 ) .
They are usually thick , and are a brownish - gray color when in their uncooked form .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
In Malaysia and Taiwan they are known as tanghoon ( 冬粉 ) .
People sometimes confuse them with bihun ( 米粉 ) which are rice vermicelli .
Sometimes also known as suhun or suhoon .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
In Filipino cuisine , the noodles are called a similar name : sotanghon because of the popular dish of the same name made from them using chicken and wood ears .
They are also confused with rice vermicelli , which are called bihon in the Philippines .
SAMOA
Section::::Samoa .
Glass noodles were introduced to Samoa by Cantonese agricultural workers in the early 1900s where they became known as " lialia " , a Samoan word meaning " to twirl " , after the method of twirling the noodles around chopsticks when eating .
A popular dish called sapasui ( transliteration of the Cantonese chop suey ) is common fare at social gatherings .
Sapasui , a soupy dish of boiled glass noodles mixed with braised pork , beef , or chicken and chopped vegetables , is akin to Hawaiian " long rice " .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
In Thai cuisine , glass noodles are called wun sen ( ) .
They are commonly mixed with pork and shrimp in a spicy salad called yam wun sen ( ) , or stir - fried as phat wun sen ( ) .
TIBET Section::::Tibet .
In Tibetan cuisine , glass noodles are called phing or fing and are used in soup , pork curry or with mushrooms .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In Hawaii , where cuisine is heavily influenced by Asian cultures , cellophane noodles are known locally as long rice , supposedly because the process of making the noodles involves extruding the starch through a potato ricer .
They are used most often in chicken long rice , a dish of cellophane noodles in chicken broth that is often served at luaus .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
In Vietnamese cuisine , there are two varieties of cellophane noodles .
The first , called bún tàu or bún tào , are made from mung bean starch , and were introduced by Chinese immigrants .
The second , called miến or miến dong , are made from canna ( ) , and were developed in Vietnam .
These cellophane noodles are a main ingredient in the dishes : miến gà , miến lươn , miến măng vịt , and miến cua .
These cellophane noodles are sometimes confused with rice vermicelli ( Vietnamese : bún ) and arrowroot starch noodles ( Vietnamese :
arrowroot :
củ dong , arrowroot starch : bột dong / bột hoàng tinh / bột mì tinh ) .
HEALTH CONCERNS
Section::::Health concerns .
In 2004 , testing by Chinese authorities determined that some brands of cellophane noodles produced in Yantai , Shandong were contaminated with lead .
It emerged that several unscrupulous companies were making their noodles from cornstarch instead of mung beans in order to reduce costs , and , to make the cornstarch transparent , were adding lead - based whiteners to their noodles .
In December 2006 , Beijing authorities again inspected cellophane noodles produced by the Yantai Deshengda Longkou Vermicelli Co. Ltd. in Siduitou village , Zhangxing town , Zhaoyuan city , Yantai , this time determining that sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate , a toxic and possibly carcinogenic industrial bleach that is an illegal food additive in China , had been used in the production of the noodles .
The company , which formerly sold its noodles both in China as well as overseas , was ordered to cease production and distribution .
In December 2010 , Czech food inspection authorities ( SZPI ) again inspected Chinese cellophane noodles , this time determining that 142.00 mg / kg of aluminium had been used in the production of the noodles .
Above 10 mg / kg is an illegal amount for noodles in Czech ( and EU ) markets , see Annex I to Regulation ( EC )
No 669/2009 and its amendments ( EU )
No 187/2011 , 618/2013 annex I. SEE
ALSO
*
Rice
vermicelli
* Shirataki noodles
* List of noodles
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cook 's Thesaurus : Other Asian Noodles