POVIDONE - IODINE Povidone - iodine ( PVP - I ) , also known as iodopovidone , is an antiseptic used for skin disinfection before and after surgery .
It may be used both to disinfect the skin of the patient and the hands of the healthcare providers .
It may also be used for minor wounds .
It may be applied to the skin as a liquid or a powder .
Side effects include skin irritation .
If used on large wounds kidney problems , high blood sodium , and metabolic acidosis may occur .
It is not recommended in people who are less than 32 weeks pregnant or are taking lithium .
Frequent use is not recommended in people with thyroid problems .
Povidone - iodine is a chemical complex of povidone , hydrogen iodide , and elemental iodine .
It contains from 9 % to 12 % available iodine .
It works by releasing iodine which results in the death of a range of microorganisms .
Povidone - iodine came into commercial use in 1955 .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
Povidone - iodine is available over the counter .
The wholesale cost in the developing world is about 3.30 to 11.40 per liter of 10 % solution .
This amount in the United Kingdom cost the NHS about £ 10.86 .
It is sold under a number of brand names including Betadine .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Povidone - iodine is a broad spectrum antiseptic for topical application in the treatment and prevention of wound infection .
It may be used in first aid for minor cuts , grazes , burns , abrasions and blisters .
Povidone - iodine exhibits longer lasting antiseptic effects than tincture of iodine , due to its slow absorption via soft tissue , making it the choice for longer surgeries .
Chlorhexidine provides similar results , but with equal toxicity concerns .
Bacteria do not develop resistance to PVP - I. Consequently , PVP - I has found broad application in medicine as a surgical scrub ; for pre- and post - operative skin cleansing ; for the treatment and prevention of infections in wounds , ulcers , cuts and burns ; for the treatment of infections in decubitus ulcers and stasis ulcers ; in gynecology for vaginitis associated with candidal , trichomonal or mixed infections .
For these purposes PVP - I has been formulated at concentrations of 7.5–10.0 % in solution , spray , surgical scrub , ointment , and swab dosage forms .
Because of these critical indications , only sterile povidone - iodine should be used in most cases .
Non - sterile product can be appropriate in limited circumstances in which patients have intact , healthy skin that will not be compromised or cut .
It should be noted that the non - sterile form of Povidone iodine has a long history of intrinsic contamination with Burkholderia cepacia , and other opportunistic pathogens .
Its ability to harbor such microbes further underscores the importance of using sterile products in any clinical setting .
EYES Section::::Eyes .
A buffered PVP - I solution of 2.5 % concentration can be used for prevention of neonatal conjunctivitis , especially if it is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae , or Chlamydia trachomatis .
It is currently unclear whether PVP - I is more effective in reducing the incidence of conjunctivitis in neonates over other methods .
PVP - I appears to be very suitable for this purpose because , unlike other substances , it is also efficient against fungi and viruses ( including HIV and Herpes simplex ) .
PLEURODESIS Section::::Pleurodesis .
It is used in pleurodesis ( fusion of the pleura because of incessant pleural effusions ) .
For this purpose , povidone - iodine is equally effective and safe as talc , and may be preferred because of easy availability and low cost .
ALTERNATIVES Section::::Alternatives .
There is tentative evidence that chlorhexidine and denatured alcohol used to clean skin prior to surgery is better than povidone - iodine with alcohol ; however , the evidence is not strong enough as of 2015 to determine routine practice .
CONTRAINDICATIONS Section::::Contraindications .
PVP - I is contraindicated in patients with hyperthyroidism ( overactive thyroid gland ) and other diseases of the thyroid , after treatment with radioiodine , and in patients with dermatitis herpetiformis ( Duhring 's disease ) .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
The sensitization rate to the product is 0.7 % .
INTERACTIONS
Section::::Interactions .
The iodine in PVP - I reacts with hydrogen peroxide , silver , taurolidine and proteins such as enzymes , rendering them ( and itself ) ineffective .
It also reacts with many mercury compounds , giving the corrosive compound mercury iodide , as well as with many metals , making it unsuitable for disinfecting metal piercings .
Iodine is absorbed into the body to various degrees , depending on application area and condition of the skin .
As such , it interacts with diagnostic tests of the thyroid gland such as radioiodine diagnostics , as well as with various diagnostic agents used on the urine and stool , for example Guaiacum resin .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Povidone - iodine is a chemical complex of povidone , hydrogen iodide , and elemental iodine .
It is completely soluble in cold and mild - warm water , ethyl alcohol , isopropyl alcohol , polyethylene glycol , and glycerol .
Its stability in solution is much greater than that of tincture of iodine or Lugol 's solution .
Free iodine , slowly liberated from the povidone - iodine ( PVP - I )
complex in solution , kills eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells through iodination of lipids and oxidation of cytoplasmic and membrane compounds .
This agent exhibits a broad range of microbicidal activity against bacteria , fungi , protozoa , and viruses .
Slow release of iodine from the PVP - I complex in solution minimizes iodine toxicity towards mammalian cells .
PVP - I can be loaded into hydrogels , which can be based on carboxymethyl cellulose ( CMC ) , poly(vinyl alcohol ) ( PVA ) , and gelatin , or on crosslinked polyacrylamide .
These hydrogels can be used for wound dressing .
The rate of release of the iodine in the PVP - I is heavily dependent on the hydrogel composition : it increases with more CMC / PVA and decreases with more gelatin .
HISTORY Section::::History .
PVP - I was discovered in 1955 at the Industrial Toxicology Laboratories in Philadelphia by H. A. Shelanski and M. V. Shelanski .
They carried out tests in vitro to demonstrate anti - bacterial activity , and found that the complex was less toxic in mice than tincture of iodine .
Human clinical trials showed the product to be superior to other iodine formulations .
Following the discovery of iodine by Bernard Courtois in 1811 , it has been broadly used for the prevention and treatment of skin infections , as well as the treatment of wounds .
Iodine has been recognized as an effective broad - spectrum bactericide , and is also effective against yeasts , molds , fungi , viruses , and protozoans .
Drawbacks to its use in the form of aqueous solutions include irritation at the site of application , toxicity , and the staining of surrounding tissues .
These deficiencies were overcome by the discovery and use of PVP - I , in which the iodine is carried in a complexed form and the concentration of free iodine is very low .
The product thus serves as an iodophor .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Povidone - iodine has found application in the field of nanomaterials .
A wound - healing application has been developed which employs a mat of single wall carbon nanotubes ( SWNTs ) coated in a monolayer of povidone - iodine .
Research has previously found that the polymer polyvinylpyrrolidone ( PVP , povidone ) can coil around individual carbon nanotubes to make them water - soluble .
SEE ALSO
* Cadexomer iodine
* Iodophor
*
Inadine
* Lugol 's iodine
*
Tincture of iodine REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS