EURO SIGN
The euro sign ( € ) is the currency sign used for the euro , the official currency of the European Union ( EU ) and other non - EU countries ( Kosovo and Montenegro ) .
The design was presented to the public by the European Commission on 12 December 1996 .
The international three - letter code ( according to ISO standard ISO 4217 ) for the euro is EUR .
In Unicode it is encoded at .
In English , the sign precedes the value ( for instance , € 10 , not 10 € , unlike most other European languages ) .
In some style guides , but not others , the euro sign is unspaced .
The first letter of the word Europe is crossed by two parallel lines .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The euro currency sign was designed to be similar in structure to the old sign for the European Currency Unit ( Encoded as ) .
There were originally 32 proposals ; these were reduced to ten candidates .
These ten were put to a public survey .
After the survey had narrowed the original ten proposals down to two , it was up to the European Commission to choose the final design .
The other designs that were considered are not available for the public to view , nor is any information regarding the designers available for public query .
The European Commission considers the process of designing to have been internal and keeps these records secret .
The eventual winner was a design created by a team of four experts whose identities have not been revealed .
It is assumed that the Belgian graphic designer Alain Billiet was the winner and thus the designer of the euro sign .
The official story of the design history of the euro sign is disputed by Arthur Eisenmenger , a former chief graphic designer for the European Economic Community , who claims he had the idea prior to the European Commission .
The European Commission specified a euro logo with exact proportions and colours (
PMS Yellow foreground , PMS Reflex Blue background ) , for use in public - relations material related to the euro introduction .
While the Commission intended the logo to be a prescribed glyph shape , type designers made it clear that they intended to design their own variants instead .
USE ON COMPUTERS Section::::Use on computers .
Generating the euro sign using a computer depends on the operating system and national conventions .
Some mobile phone companies issued an interim software update for their special SMS character set , replacing the less - frequent Japanese yen sign with the euro sign .
Later mobile phones have both currency signs .
The euro is represented in the Unicode character set with the character name EURO SIGN and the code position U+20AC ( decimal 8364 ) as well as in updated versions of the traditional Latin character set encodings .
In HTML , the € entity can also be used .
An implicit character encoding , along with the fact that the code position of the euro sign is different in common encoding schemes , led to many problems displaying the euro sign in computer applications .
While displaying the euro sign is no problem as long as only one system is used ( provided an up - to - date font with the proper glyph is available ) , mixed setups often produced errors .
One example is a content management system where articles are stored in a database using a different character set than the editor 's computer .
Another is legacy software which could only handle older encodings such as ISO 8859 - 1 that contained no euro sign at all .
In such situations , character set conversions had to be made , often introducing conversion errors such as a question mark ( ? ) being displayed instead of a euro sign .
Care has been taken to avoid replacing an existing obsolete currency sign with the euro sign .
That could create different currency signs for sender and receiver in e - mails or web sites , with confusions about business agreements as a result .
ENTRY METHODS Section::::Entry methods .
Depending on keyboard layout and the operating system , the symbol can be entered as : * ( UK / IRL ) * ( US INTL / ESP ) * ( BEL / ESP / FRA / GER / ITA / POR / CZE / EST / SWE ) *
( HU / PL )
* ( UK / IRL ) * ( US INTL / ESP )
* in Microsoft Word in United States layout
* + in Microsoft Windows ( depends on system locale setting ) * followed by in Chrome OS , and in other operating systems using IBus .
* followed by in the Vim text editor On the macOS operating system , a variety of key combinations are used depending on the keyboard layout , for example : * in British layout * in United States layout * in Slovenian layout * in French layout * in German , Spanish and Italian layout * in Swedish layout
The Compose key sequence for the euro sign is = E. USE Section::::Use .
Placement of the sign also varies .
Partly since there are no official standards on placement , countries have generated varying conventions or sustained those of their former currencies .
For example , in Ireland and the Netherlands , where previous currency signs ( £ and ƒ , respectively ) were placed before the figure , the euro sign is universally placed in the same position .
In many other countries , including France , Belgium , Germany , Italy , Spain , Latvia and Lithuania , an amount such as € 3.50 is usually written as 3,50 € instead , largely in accordance with conventions for previous currencies .
The European Union did indeed usher a guideline on the use of the euro sign , stating it should be placed in front of the amount without any space in English , but after the amount in most other languages .
In English , the euro sign — like the dollar sign ( $ ) and the pound sign ( £ ) — is placed before the figure , unspaced , as used by publications such as the Financial Times and The Economist .
When written out , " euro " is placed after the value in lower case ; the plural is used for two or more units , and euro cents are indicated with a point , not a comma , e.g. , 1.50 euro , 14 euros .
No official recommendation is made with regard to the use of a cent sign , and usage differs between and within member states .
Sums are often expressed as decimals of the euro ( for example € 0.05 , € – .05 , or 0,05 € , rather than 5c ) .
The most common abbreviation is " c " , but the cent sign " ¢ " also appears .
Other abbreviations include " ct " ( particularly in Germany and Lithuania ) , " cent . "
in Spain and Italy , " snt " ( Finland ) and Λ ( the capital letter lambda for λεπτό , " lepto " , in Greece ) .
SEE ALSO
* Spanish dollar * Cifrão * Dollar sign * Indian rupee sign * Pound sign * Ruble sign * Turkish lira sign * Yen sign
* Yuan sign
* Won sign
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Euro name and symbol , Directorate - General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission
* Communication from the Commission : The use of the Euro symbol , July 1997 , Directorate - General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission * Typing a Euro symbol on a non - European QWERTY keyboard .
Several methods are shown for and others special characters .