FOAMCORE Foamcore , foam board , or paper - faced foam board is a lightweight and easily cut material used for mounting of photographic prints , as backing for picture framing , for making scale models , and in painting .
It consists of a board of polystyrene foam clad with an outer facing of paper on either side , typically white clay - coated paper or brown kraft paper .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The original white foamcore board was made in 1/8 inch ( 3 mm ) and 3/16 inch ( 5 mm ) thicknesses for the graphic arts industry by Monsanto Company under the trade name "
Fome - Cor ® " starting in 1957 .
Monsanto sold the business to International Paper in 1993 , and the business is currently operated by 3A Composites .
It is now widely used as backing in art and document mounting and picture framing , with archival - quality variants now available from several companies .
It ranges in thickness from 1/16"–1/2 " .
It is not recyclable or biodegradable in normal situations .
CONSTRUCTION , VARIANTS AND COMPOSITION Section::::Construction , variants and composition .
The surface of the regular board , like many other types of paper , is slightly acidic .
However , for modern archival picture framing and art mounting purposes it can be produced in a neutral , acid - free version with a buffered surface paper , in a wide range of sizes and thicknesses .
Foam - cored materials are also now available with a cladding of solid ( non - foamed ) polystyrene and other rigid plastic sheeting , some with a textured finish .
Foamcore does not adhere well to some glues , such as superglue , and certain types of paint .
The foam tends to melt away and dissolve .
Some glue works well in casual settings , however , the water in the glue can warp the fibers in the outer layers .
Best results are typically obtained from higher - end spray adhesives .
A hot glue gun can be used as a substitute , although the high viscosity of hot glues can affect finished projects in the form of board warping , bubbles , or other unsightly blemishes .
Self - adhesive foam boards , intended for art and document mounting are also available , though these can be very tricky to use properly ; this is because the glue sets very fast .
It is considered cheaper to buy plain foam board and use re - positionable spray mount adhesive .
USES Section::::Uses .
Foamcore is commonly used to produce architectural models , prototype small objects and to produce patterns for casting .
Scenery for scale model displays , dioramas , and computer games are often produced by hobbyists from foamcore .
Foamcore is also often used by photographers as a reflector to bounce light , in the design industry to mount presentations of new products , and in picture framing as a backing material ; the latter use includes some archival picture framing methods , which utilize the acid - free versions of the material .
Another use is with aero - modellers for building radio - controlled aircraft .
SEE ALSO
* Corrugated fiberboard ( Cardboard ) * Closed - cell PVC foamboard
* Arts and crafts
* Mat ( picture framing ) REFERENCES