ROOKIE OF THE YEAR ( FILM )
Rookie of the Year is a 1993 American sports comedy film starring Thomas Ian Nicholas and Gary Busey as players for the Chicago Cubs baseball team .
The cast also includes Albert Hall , Dan Hedaya , Eddie Bracken , Amy Morton , Bruce Altman , John Gegenhuber , Neil Flynn , Daniel Stern ( who also directed ) and John Candy in an uncredited role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Henry Rowengartner , an unskilled Little Leaguer , dreams of playing in the major leagues .
Henry breaks his arm catching a fly ball .
When the doctor removes his cast , he discovers Henry 's tendons have healed " a little too tight " , enabling Henry to pitch with incredible force .
At Wrigley Field during a Chicago Cubs game , Henry 's friends get a home run ball hit by the visiting team , the Montreal Expos .
When they give it to Henry to throw back onto the field , he throws the ball so hard that it reaches home plate on the fly over 400 or 500 ft where Henry and his friends are sitting .
Looking for a miracle to save the club , which is suffering slumping attendance , general manager Larry Fisher looks to recuit Henry .
Manager Sal Martinella visits Henry at home to scout him , bringing a radar gun , and discovers that Henry can pitch at over .
For the remainder of the season , Henry has to juggle the culture shock of playing in the major leagues alongside one of his heroes , aging pitcher Chet " Rocket " Steadman , and socializing .
His mother , Mary , tries to keep him grounded while resisting attempts by Fisher and her boyfriend , Jack , to exploit him .
Henry 's first game is a relief appearance against the New York Mets , in which he gives up a home run to the Mets ' feared slugger Heddo , an arrogant player .
Despite wanting to quit , he shows marked improvement under the tutoring of Steadman , and records a second consecutive save against the San Francisco Giants capped off with his first MLB strikeout .
Continuing to impress leading into and during a road game against the Los Angeles Dodgers , Henry bats for the first time , and his small stature frustrates the pitcher to the point where he walks on four straight pitches .
He subsequently scores a run , followed by an adult player who scores behind him , limited by Henry 's speed .
Over the season , the Cubs are winning and Henry is becoming more successful pitching .
His relationships become strained , as Henry 's friends grow jealous of fame , and Mary breaks up with Jack when he tricks her into signing a contract to join the New York Yankees .
Eventually , Henry resolves the conflict with his friends , and when he asks team owner Bob Carson about the contract with the Yankees , Carson explains that he never authorized a deal and wants to retain Henry .
Henry tells Carson that he will retire at the end of the season .
Carson is initially disappointed but respects Henry 's decision .
Carson demotes Fisher to Hot Dog Salesman after finding out that Fisher tried to set up the deal .
On the last day of the season , the Cubs face the Mets once again at Wrigley Field , with Steadman starting .
If the Cubs win the game , they win the division title and can move on to the World Series .
Steadman pitches well but injures his arm while tagging a runner out at home .
Steadman turns the ball over to Henry .
Henry easily strikes out the side in the seventh and eighth innings , but in the top of the ninth , he slips on a baseball and lands on his side , reversing the effects of his first fall and reducing his arm strength to normal .
Henry frustrates the Cubs and their fans by intentionally walking the other team .
He brings in the disappointed Cubs players , explaining why he can no longer throw fastballs , and sends them back to their positions with a plan .
With their cooperation , Henry sneaks the ball to the first baseman , who tags the runner out .
Henry walks the next batter , with whom he trades insults .
When the runner dares him to throw the ball high , Henry does so but stops as the runner takes off for second .
He is tagged out , setting up a final showdown with Heddo .
Henry throws a changeup , which Heddo misses .
Heddo 's next hit is ruled a foul ball .
Henry opens his glove to find not his father 's name , but Mary 's .
In the stands , she signals him to throw a floater .
He does so and strikes out a shocked Heddo , winning the division title for the Cubs .
Everyone cheers in celebration while Heddo throws a tantrum .
The next spring , Henry is playing Little League baseball again with Mary and Steadman as his team 's coaches .
After catching a home run ball that ensures his team 's victory , Henry raises his fist to reveal a Cubs World Series championship ring he is wearing , signifying his role on securing the Cubs ' victory in the World Series ( despite neither he nor Steadman taking part in ) .
CAST
* Thomas Ian Nicholas as Henry Rowengartner * Gary Busey as
Chet " Rocket " Steadman * Amy Morton as Mary Rowengartner * Patrick LaBrecque as George * Robert Hy Gorman as Clark * Bruce Altman as Jack Bradfield * Dan Hedaya as Larry " Fish " Fisher * Albert Hall as Sal Martinella * Eddie Bracken as Bob Carson * Daniel Stern as Phil Brickma
* Tom Milanovich as Heddo * Neil Flynn as Stan Okie * W. Earl Brown as Billy Frick
* Ian Gomez as Odd Bellman * Andy Berman as Ernie * Colombe Jacobsen as Becky Fraker * John Candy as Cliff Murdoch ( uncredited ) * Barry Bonds as himself
* Bobby Bonilla as himself * Pedro Guerrero as himself FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
Filming took place on location at , among other venues , Wrigley Field ( including in between games of a doubleheader between the Cubs and the rival St. Louis Cardinals ) and O'Hare Airport .
However , the road game against the Dodgers was filmed at Comiskey Park RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film has received a 35 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 20 critics .
The film was a box office success .
Following the film 's release , Nicholas threw out the first pitch at Cubs games and was invited to sing Take Me Out To The Ballgame multiple times during the customary 7th - inning stretch .
During the 2015 National League Championship Series where the Cubs faced the Mets as they did in the movie , he attended Game 4 in a Rowengartner # 1 jersey similar to what he wore during the film .
Following the Cubs ' win over the Cleveland Indians in Game 7 of the 2016 World Series to win their first championship since 1908 , Nicholas , in celebration , tweeted the final shot from the movie of Henry showing his Cubs World Series ring .
Furthermore , director Daniel Stern briefly reprised his role of Brickma following the win .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS