JESSICA JONES Jessica Campbell Jones is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics .
The character was created by writer Brian Michael Bendis and artist Michael Gaydos , and first appeared in Alias # 1 ( November 2001 ) , as part of Marvel 's Max , an imprint for more mature content .
Within the context of Marvel 's shared universe , Jones is a former superhero who becomes the owner and sole employee of Alias Private Investigations .
Bendis originally envisioned the series centered on Jessica Drew and only decided to create Jones once he noticed that the main character had a distinct voice and background that differentiated her from Drew .
Jones has since starred in three ongoing series , Alias , The Pulse and Jessica Jones .
Alias ran for 28 issues before ending in 2004 , while The Pulse ran for 14 issues from April 2004 to May 2006 .
Jessica Jones debuted in October 2016 .
She became a member of the New Avengers , alongside her husband , Luke Cage , during Marvel 's 2010 Heroic Age campaign .
She has used various aliases throughout her history , including Jewel , Knightress , and Power Woman .
The character is portrayed by actress Krysten Ritter in the various TV series of the Marvel Cinematic Universe , including Marvel 's Jessica Jones , and The Defenders .
She has also been featured in various video games , in which she has been voiced by actors including Michelle Phan , Mary Elizabeth McGlynn and Tara Strong .
CREATION Section::::Creation .
Jessica Jones debuted in the Marvel MAX imprint series Alias in November 2001 .
The character and series were created by writer Brian Michael Bendis and artist Michael Gaydos .
Alias ran for 28 issues from 2001 to 2004 , with most covers drawn by David W. Mack .
After the end of the series , Jones and other characters from the series moved to Bendis ' subsequent series , The Pulse .
In a 2005 interview , Bendis claimed : " Originally , Alias was going to star Jessica Drew , but it became something else entirely .
Which is good , because had we used Jessica , it would have been off continuity and bad storytelling . "
Previously , Bendis commented , " I was at one time toying with doing Jessica Drew [ in Alias ] because she has the best hair of any superhero in comics , but this book is entirely different than what that idea was to be . "
By the time Bendis was actively developing the title , Jones was his central character , one with a distinct background and voice from Drew 's .
Jessica Jones appeared as a regular character throughout the 2010–2013 New Avengers series , from issue # 1 ( August 2010 ) through its final issue # 34 ( January 2013 ) .
In a Marvel Comics podcast , Bendis expressed his desire to incorporate Jones into the parallel universe Ultimate Marvel imprint .
In Ultimate Spider - Man # 106 , she appears as a senior at Peter Parker 's school .
Her adoptive surname Jones is of Welsh origin .
FICTIONAL CHARACTER BIOGRAPHY
ORIGIN Section::::Fictional character biography .
Section::::Origin .
Midtown High student Jessica Campbell goes to school with Peter Parker , on whom she has a crush and is present when he is bitten by the irradiated spider which gives him his spider powers .
Jessica 's father receives tickets for Disney World from his boss Tony Stark .
On the way home , their car collides with a military convoy carrying radioactive chemicals .
Her family is killed , and she spends several months in a coma .
Upon waking , she is placed in an orphanage and adopted by the Jones family .
Jessica later discovers that her radiation exposure granted her super strength , limited invulnerability , and flight .
Jessica 's adoptive parents re - enroll her at Midtown High , where she is ostracized by her classmates , especially Flash Thompson .
Peter Parker ( who has since become Spider - Man ) senses in Jessica a kindred spirit — someone who has also lost her family due to a tragic circumstance .
Jessica mistakes his kind attention for pity and lashes out at him .
She later witnesses a fight between Spider - Man and the villain Sandman in her school .
This inspires her to use her abilities for positive ends .
EARLY YEARS
Section::::Early years .
As Jewel , Jones has a fairly uneventful superhero career until she intervenes in a disturbance at a restaurant involving Zebediah Killgrave , the Purple Man .
Killgrave uses his power of mind control to place Jones under his command , psychologically torturing her and forcing her to aid his criminal schemes .
After Killgrave sends her to kill Daredevil at the Avengers Mansion , Jones is rescued by Carol Danvers , the only Avenger who actually knows her .
Jones undergoes psychic therapy with Jean Grey of the X - Men , who places a special mental command in Jones 's subconscious to protect her from further mind control .
During this time , Jones develops a brief romantic relationship with S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Clay Quartermain .
Due to the traumatic violation of her mind by Killgrave and the fact that she was barely noticed missing for eight months , a demoralized and depressed Jones gives up her costumed superhero life .
She briefly adopts a darker identity as the Knightress and interrupts a crime meeting between the Owl and a mafioso , through which she meets up with fellow superhero Luke Cage .
After defeating the Owl , she and Cage develop a lasting friendship .
No longer a superhero , Jones opens a private detective agency .
Longtime friend Carol Danvers sets Jones up with Scott Lang ( the second Ant - Man ) , and the two date for several months .
She also has an off - and - on affair with Cage .
Killgrave , still obsessed with Jones , escapes from high - security incarceration , but with the mental defenses Grey gave her , Jones breaks his control and knocks him out .
Later , Cage and Jones admit their feelings for each other , and after she becomes pregnant with their child , they begin a committed relationship .
THE PULSE AND YOUNG AVENGERS Section::::The
Pulse and Young Avengers .
Jones takes a leave from the detective business and joins the staff of the Daily Bugle as a superhero correspondent and consultant , becoming a main character of the comic book The Pulse , and a contributor to the same - name fictional newspaper supplement within .
A pregnant Jones is attacked by the Green Goblin after the Bugle reported that he was secretly industrialist Norman Osborn .
In response , Cage retaliates and Osborn is irrevocably exposed as the Goblin upon his defeat and incarceration .
Jones quits her job with the Bugle after publisher J. Jonah Jameson uses the paper to smear the New Avengers .
Jones and Cage are living together when she gives birth to their child , whom they name Danielle after Luke 's best friend , Danny Rand .
Cage and Jones marry in New Avengers Annual # 1 .
Jones appears as a supporting character in Young Avengers until the series ended .
She returns in Avengers : The Children 's Crusade # 6 in which she , Beast and Hawkeye attempted to defuse the situation between the Avengers and X - Men who were fighting over who was to punish the Scarlet Witch .
She helps fight Doctor Doom and is present when Stature and the Vision are killed .
She is seen hugging Hulkling in the final panel when the team is declared full - fledged Avengers by Captain America .
" CIVIL WAR " , " SECRET INVASION " AND " DARK REIGN " Section::::"Civil War " , " Secret Invasion " and " Dark Reign " .
In Marvel 's 2006–2007 crossover storyline " Civil War " , Jones and Cage reject Iron Man and Ms. Marvel 's offer to join the Superhuman Registration Act .
As part of the New Avengers , Jones moved into Doctor Strange 's Sanctum Sanctorum , but after an attack involving the demonic villain the Hood , Jones , shaken by the experience and desperate to protect her child , left the New Avengers and registered for the Superhuman Registration Act , ending her relationship with Luke Cage for the time being .
Jones is among the heroes who emerge from the crashed Skrull ship wearing her Jewel costume , although it is later revealed this Jones was a Skrull .
The real Jessica Jones appears in Secret Invasion # 7 , in which she joins in the heroes ' fight against the Skrulls and was able to be reunited with her husband .
After the Skrull surrender , the Skrull impersonating Jarvis disappears with their daughter , leaving Jessica desperate .
Jessica is unaware that Luke has asked Norman Osborn for help in their search for Danielle .
Osborn helped Luke recover Danielle , and Luke gave the baby back to Jessica .
Spider - Man revealed himself as Peter Parker to the New Avengers , leaving Jones shocked to see that her former classmate is Spider - Man .
She then tells Peter of her former crush on him , only to find out that he did not recognize her all this time , let alone remember her name , only remembering her as " Coma Girl " , upsetting her .
She later assists the Avengers in rescuing Clint after being captured by Norman Osborn .
Jessica reveals that she was inspired to become a superheroine after witnessing an early battle between Spider - Man and the Sandman .
Peter then tries to convince Jessica to return to the life of a superhero , suggesting that she could provide a better example for her daughter by going into action as a hero rather than simply telling her daughter about her old career .
2010–PRESENT
Section::::2010–present .
During the storylines of Marvel 's 2010 " Heroic Age " branding campaign , Jessica returned to her costumed identity of Jewel and became a member of the New Avengers when the title relaunched in June 2010 .
She and Luke began searching for a nanny , interviewing characters featured from other comics set in the Marvel Universe .
Ultimately , Squirrel Girl was chosen as Danielle 's nanny .
In New Avengers # 8 , Jessica took the name Power Woman to both honor her husband , Power Man ( Luke Cage ) , and to be a role model for their daughter .
However following several incidents revolving around Thule Society attacking Avengers Mansion , and Norman Osborn 's threat , Jessica quit the team and went into hiding , realizing that it was too dangerous for Danielle to remain in Avengers Mansion due to the numerous potential threats .
Jessica later appeared as an ally to the Mighty Avengers team formed by Luke Cage .
Jessica and Danielle lived in the apartment of the Gem Theater , which was serving as the Mighty Avenger 's base of operations .
She and Luke would later be confronted by the Superior Spider - Man and his Spider Robots , who offered her a place on a different type of Avengers team that was to be run by him .
Jessica swiftly found a babysitter for her child and refused before delivering a powerful punch to Spider - Man 's face for his threat .
The group was later backed up by She - Hulk and she and Jessica decided to go out for coffee .
Jessica and Luke would later switch apartments with an old friend of Luke 's named David Griffiths .
While moving in , Jessica spoke to the Blue Marvel about what it 's like to raise a child of superheroes and expressed both her support and annoyance at her husband 's choice to start another team of Avengers .
During the " Secret Empire " storyline , Jessica Jones became a member of the Defenders alongside Daredevil , Iron Fist , and Luke Cage .
They alongside Cloak and Dagger , Doctor Strange , and Spider - Woman fought the Army of Evil during Hydra 's rise to power where they were defeated by Nitro .
Jessica Jones and those with him were trapped in the Darkforce dome by Blackout when his powers were enhanced by Baron Helmut Zemo using the Darkhold .
In October 2016 , a new ongoing series featuring the character , titled Jessica Jones , began .
In 2017 , a new ongoing Defenders series was launched , featuring Jessica as one of the main characters .
During the " Hunt for Wolverine " storyline , Jessica Jones and Luke Cage assist Iron Man and Spider - Man in searching for Wolverine when his body has gone missing from his unmarked grave where they attend an underworld auction and fight Mister Sinister .
After the mission was over , Jessica and Luke learn from Tony Stark what he found on Mister Sinister 's database as he informs them that one of the X - Men members is not a mutant and is a genetically - altered sleeper agent .
POWERS AND ABILITIES Section::::Powers and abilities .
After coming into contact with experimental chemicals and spending some time in a coma , Jessica emerged with superhuman abilities .
She possesses superhuman strength , as well as flight , and can block mind control .
She shows the capacity to lift a two - ton police car with little effort .
Her strength allowed her to lift up a giant - sized Goliath by the nostrils and toss him a short distance , break Atlas ' nose , and render her fellow superheroine Jessica Drew unconscious with a single punch to the face .
She later withstood being punched by a human on Mutant - Growth Hormone and sustained only mild bruising and a bloody nose and was able to recover in moments after being shocked by Jessica Drew 's venom blasts .
Despite this resistance to harm , Jessica sustained severe injuries , including a damaged spine and neck , a detached retina , and a broken nose after being attacked by both the Vision and Iron Man .
Jessica is also able to fly , and while she was able to fly quite well during her early years as a heroine , she has admitted that her flying ability degenerated while she was no longer an active hero .
She has since displayed improved flying ability after joining the New Avengers .
After her ordeal at the hands of the Purple Man , Jessica was given a degree of psionic protection by Jean Grey of the X - Men .
This psionic protection was sufficient to protect Jessica against a second attack by the Purple Man , though she had to " trigger " this resistance on her own .
In addition to her superhuman powers , Jessica is a skilled detective and investigative journalist .
OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
Multiple versions of Jessica Jones have appeared in Marvel 's multiverse .
In the 2005 " House of M " storyline , Jessica was apparently dating Scott Lang .
In What If , Jones accepted Captain America 's offer to work for The Avengers .
Perceiving that something was amiss with Wanda Maximoff ( the Scarlet Witch ) , she alerted the other Avengers , ensuring that the catastrophic events depicted in " Avengers Disassembled " and " House of M " would never occur .
Jessica married Captain America .
In Ultimate Spider - Man , Jones appeared as a senior student in the school Peter Parker attended .
She was the executive producer of the school 's television network .
She later became jealous of Mary Jane Watson 's superior film skills .
She attempted to deduce Spider - Man 's secret identity for the school newspaper and may have been suspicious about Peter Parker .
Later on after the events of Ultimatum , she claimed to have abandoned her attempts to figure out who Spider - Man was and instead wanted to focus on his heroics .
In Spider - Man Loves Mary Jane , Jessica was a student at Mary Jane 's high school and was a former friend of Mary Jane until she became a goth .
Mary Jane spent more time with Jessica after her breakup with Ned Leeds and became more goth - like until Jessica told Mary Jane it was n't her .
IN OTHER MEDIA
TELEVISION Section::::In other media .
Section::::Television .
On November 20 , 2015 , Jessica Jones was released on Netflix , with the title character portrayed by Krysten Ritter as an adult and by Elizabeth Cappuccino as a teenager .
As a child , she was in a car accident that killed her parents and put her in a coma .
After she regained consciousness , Jessica was legally adopted by talent agent Dorothy Walker , therefore becoming the adopted sister of Trish Walker .
As an adult , Jessica crosses paths with Kilgrave and spends a year under his control , snapping out of it after she kills Luke Cage 's wife Reva Connors on Kilgrave 's orders .
She experiences post - traumatic stress disorder as a result of what Kilgrave did to her , and drinks to excess to numb her pain and guilt .
Her Jewel costume from the comics appears briefly in the fifth episode of season 1 , "
AKA :
The Sandwich Saved Me " , although she refuses to wear it and rejects Trish 's suggestion of Jewel as an alias , saying " Jewel is a stripper 's name , a really slutty stripper .
And if I wear that thing you 're going to have to call me Camel Toe .
"
In the eighth episode of Iron Fist , Joy Meachum indirectly mentions to her brother Ward that she hired Jessica in the past to take compromising pictures of members on the Rand Enterprises board of directors .
Ritter reprised her role in The Defenders , a 2017 crossover miniseries .
A second season of Jessica Jones was released on Netflix on March 8 , 2018 , on International Women 's Day .
The second season of Jessica Jones , follows Jones as she takes on a new case after the events surrounding her encounter with Kilgrave .
It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise .
The season was produced by Marvel Television in association with ABC Studios and Tall Girls Productions , with Melissa Rosenberg serving as showrunner .
VIDEO GAMES
* Jessica Jones appears in a series of Marvel mobile and video games , such as Marvel :
War of Heroes , and .
Her appearance in all of them is based on the Netflix version .
* A teenage version of Jones appears in Marvel Avengers Academy , where she is voiced by Michelle Phan .
She initially resembles her Netflix counterpart but gains the Jewel costume once she is upgraded .
* Jones appears in Marvel Heroes , where she is voiced by Mary Elizabeth McGlynn and Tara Strong .
* Jones a playable character in Lego Marvel 's Avengers , voiced by Tara Strong .
This version is based on her Jewel variant .
Her mission requires the player to find Mantis , She - Hulk , Squirrel Girl , and Echo , who have applied to be a potential nanny for Danielle .
*
She appears as a playable character in .
* Jessica Jones appears as a playable character in Marvel Puzzle Quest .
* Jessica Jones 's detective agency
Alias Investigations is seen in the PlayStation 4 video game Spider - Man .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Jessica Jones at Marvel.com
* Bendis Interview at Comic Book Resources ( August 2005 )
* Comic Book Urban Legends Revealed : Which Jessica for Alias ?