BLOCK ( BASKETBALL )
In basketball , a block or blocked shot occurs when a defensive player legally deflects a field goal attempt from an offensive player to prevent a score .
The defender is not allowed to make contact with the offensive player 's hand ( unless the defender is also in contact with the ball ) or a foul is called .
In order to be legal , the block must occur while the shot is traveling upward or at its apex .
A deflected field goal that is made does not count as a blocked shot and simply counts as a successful field goal attempt for shooter plus the points awarded to the shooting team .
For the shooter , a blocked shot is counted as a missed field goal attempt .
Also , on a shooting foul , a blocked shot can not be awarded or counted , even if the player who deflected the field goal attempt is different from the player who committed the foul .
If the ball is heading downward when the defender hits it , it is ruled as goaltending and counts as a made basket .
Goaltending is also called if the block is made after the ball bounces on the backboard ( NFHS excepted ; the NCAA also used this rule until the 2009–10 season ) .
Nicknames for blocked shots include " rejections , " " stuffs , " " bushed " , " fudged " , or notably " double - fudged " ( two - handed blocks ) , " facials , " " swats , " " denials , " and " packs . "
Blocked shots were first officially recorded in the NBA during the 1973–74 season .
Largely due to their height and position near the basket , centers and power forwards tend to record the most blocks , but shorter players with good jumping ability can also be blockers , an example being Dwyane Wade , the shortest player , at 6'4 " , to record 100 blocked shots in a single season .
A player with the ability to block shots can be a positive asset to a team 's defense , as they can make it difficult for opposing players to shoot near the basket and by keeping the basketball in play , as opposed to swatting it out of bounds , a blocked shot can lead to a fast break , a skill Bill Russell was notable for .
To be a good shot - blocker , a player needs great court sense and timing , and good height or jumping ability .
One tactic is that a shot - blocker can intimidate opponents to alter their shots , resulting in a miss .
CHASE - DOWN BLOCK Section::::Chase - down block .
A chase - down block occurs when a player pursues an opposing player who had run ahead of the defense ( as in a fast break ) , and then blocks their shot attempt .
Often , the block involves hitting the ball into the backboard as the opponent tries to complete a lay - up .
One of the most recognized chase - down blocks was then - Detroit Pistons ' Tayshaun Prince 's game - saving block on Reggie Miller in Game 2 of the 2004 NBA Eastern Conference Finals against the Indiana Pacers .
Pistons announcer Fred McLeod , who first witnessed this style of blocks from Prince , created the chase - down term later with the Cleveland Cavaliers .
During the 2008–09 NBA season , the Cavaliers began tracking chase - down blocks , crediting LeBron James with 23 that season and 20 the following season .
Another landmark chase - down block occurred in the 2016 NBA Finals when Lebron James , in the closing minutes of the 4th quarter delivered what became known as " The Block " on a lay - up attempt by Andre Iguodala with the score tied at 89 and 01:50 remaining in the game .
SHOT BLOCKING RECORDS IN THE NBA
* Most blocks in a single game : Elmore Smith ( 17 ) *
Most blocks in a single half :
Elmore Smith , George T. Johnson , Manute Bol ( 11 each )
* Most blocks per game in a season : Mark Eaton ( 5.56 ) * Most career blocks :
Hakeem Olajuwon ( 3,830 ) *
Most blocks per game in a career : Mark Eaton ( 3.50 ) * Most blocks in NBA Finals game : Dwight Howard ( 9 ) *
Most blocks in a non - NBA Finals playoff game :
Andrew Bynum , Hakeem Olajuwon , Mark Eaton ( 10 each ) SHOT BLOCKING RECORDS IN NCAA DIVISION
I MEN *
Most career blocks : Jarvis Varnado –
Mississippi State ( 564 )
( 2006–10 )
* Most blocks single season , player : David Robinson – Navy ( 207 )
( 1985–86 )
*
Most blocks per game
single season , player : Shawn James – Northeastern ( 6.53 )
( 2005–06 )
* Most blocks single season , team : Kentucky ( 344 ) ( 2011–12 )
WOMEN
*
Most career blocks :
Brittney Griner – Baylor ( 736 )
( 2009–13 )
* Most blocks single season , player : Brittney Griner – Baylor ( 223 )
( 2009–10 ) * Most blocks per game
single season , player : Brittney Griner – Baylor ( 6.4 )
( 2009–10 )
* Most blocks single season , team : Baylor ( 310 )
( 2011–12 )
SEE ALSO
* List of National Basketball Association career blocks leaders
* List of National Basketball Association season blocks leaders
* List of National Basketball Association players with most blocks in a game
* List of NCAA Division I men 's basketball career blocks leaders
* List of NCAA Division I men 's basketball season blocks leaders
* List of NCAA Division I men 's basketball players with 13 or more blocks in a game FOOTNOTES * Brittney Griner 's 736 career blocks is recognized as the all - time NCAA record , men 's or women 's .
Hall of Famer Anne Donovan , who played for Old Dominion from 1979 to 1983 , recorded 801 blocks while playing in the AIAW , therefore her total is not recognized as an NCAA achievement .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Career block leaders on Basketball - Reference.com