STARS HOLLOW Stars Hollow is a fictional town in Connecticut featured on the television show Gilmore Girls .
It is a close - knit community with many quirky characteristics , located roughly thirty minutes from Hartford .
ESTABLISHMENTS Section::::Establishments .
In the center of the town is a town square , complete with a gazebo and a statue of Casimir Pulaski .
According to Luke , Stars Hollow has " twelve stores ... devoted entirely to peddling porcelain unicorns . "
Other establishments mentioned : Nancy 's Cottage of Calico , a post office , Stars Hollow Bank , travel agency , vintage clothing store , law firm , gas station , a knitting store that Mrs. Kim frequents , a stationery store , a real estate office , a pharmacy , and a shoe store .
The town is also mentioned to have fast food chain restaurants such as Burger King , McDonald 's , and Taco Bell to name a few as well as a Walmart on the outskirts of town near the Highway .
TOWN HISTORY FOUNDING Section::::Town history .
Section::::Founding .
Stars Hollow was founded in 1779 with conflicting legends regarding how it got its name .
Although some within the town doubt the theory , the traditionally accepted legend involves two star - crossed lovers who seemed destined never to be together , until separate cosmological phenomena involving stars led them to each other at the spot where the town now exists .
This is celebrated annually at the Firelight Festival , shown in 1st season episode " Star - Crossed Lovers and Other Strangers " and 4th season episode "
Nag Hammadi is Where They Found the Gnostic Gospels . "
Another story of Stars Hollow 's founding was presented in Season 5 , episode 18 , " To Die and Let Diorama . "
A talking display built in the new Stars Hollow Museum explained that a Puritan family first discovered the area while looking for a place to settle .
They named it as such because of " the stars , so bright ; this forest , so hollow ! "
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR Section::::The Revolutionary War .
There was also a " battle " fought in Stars Hollow where 12 men stood and waited for the Redcoats who never came .
This battle is re - enacted annually , shown in first season episode " Love and War and Snow " and in 5th season episode " Women of Questionable Morals .
" This second occurrence marked the beginning of the addition of the town prostitute , who slept with the British general to delay the troops .
On the town square 's gazebo is the town 's Liberty Bell sign , which reads : THIRD STREET Section::::Third Street .
According to the Stars Hollow Historical Society , Third Street is among the town 's worst historical landmarks to take your children .
In the 18th century , it was known as " Sores and Boils Alley , " where sick and suffering people throughout the region came to have sores and boils lanced .
A small leper colony is said to have existed there as well .
On modern - day Third Street , one will find the newly restored Dragonfly Inn .
Throughout its history , Third Street has also held various other names , aside from the aforementioned " Sores and Boils Alley , " including " Constabulary Road , " " Crusty Bulge , " and a Nipmuc Indian name , " Chargogagogmanchogagogcharbunagunggamog .
" The Nipmuc Indian name is said to mean , " You fish on your side of the lake , I 'll fish on my side and no one will fish in the middle . "
According to Kirk , it could also mean " Buffalo . "
This place name is actually based on the local name for a lake in Webster , Massachusetts , which is more formally known as Webster Lake .
TOWN SET Section::::Town set .
The town square is located on the Warner Bros. studio back lot .
It is just around the corner from the exterior set for the hospital from ER .
The town square and gazebo can be seen during the robbery scene of the Seinfeld series finale in 1998 .
Many of the sets for Stars Hollow were also used in The Music Man , The Dukes of Hazzard , and The Waltons .
The Dragonfly Inn was the Waltons ' home .
The town 's high school was the Hazzard County Courthouse .
The set was subsequently used by Warner Bros. for Supernatural , , Pushing Daisies , Eastwick , and was also the setting for the town square in 2007 's Norbit .
It was also used for the drama Ghost Whisperer after a fire at the Universal Studios backlot ( Courthouse Square ) in June 2008 .
It was also Walter and Gary 's hometown Smalltown in the 2011 movie The Muppets Unionville , Ontario 's Main Street was used as a stand - in for Stars Hollow in the show 's pilot which became the first episode .
Since 2010 , the Gilmore Girls set is used for the ABC Family show Pretty Little Liars .
Luke 's Diner is now used as Rosewood Cafe .
Hart of Dixie 's fictional Bluebell also uses the square .
The Stars Hollow High School is used as Rosewood High School .
It was also used in the 2012 TV series Go On season 1 episode 6 ' Big League Chew ' in a dream - like sequence of the character Ryan King .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
Stars Hollow was inspired by and is loosely based on the actual villages of Washington Depot , Connecticut , West Hartford , Connecticut , and the town of New Milford , Connecticut while the shows writer spent 3 weeks at the Mayflower Grace in Washington , Connecticut .
Sherman - Palladino later said , " Now , I 've never been there in winter , when you 're snowed in and you ca n't go anywhere , and you and your husband want to kill each other because you ca n't go to a movie .
But at the time I was there
, it was beautiful , it was magical , and it was feeling of warmth and small - town camaraderie .
. . . There was a longing for that in my own life , and I thought – that 's something that I would really love to put out there . "
In the liner notes for the show 's soundtrack , Music from Gilmore Girls , a postcard sent by Lane from South Korea is pictured , and is addressed to Rory 's home address of 37 Maple Street in Stars Hollow .
The town 's ZIP code is shown as 06492 , the same as Wallingford .
It does not have a Maple Street , however they do have a Maple Avenue .
Washington Depot , and Kent , the villages Amy Sherman - Palladino mentioned as inspiring Stars Hollow , also use a town meeting - style government .
Washington Depot was founded in 1779 , while Kent was founded in 1739 .
The homes and buildings in these villages all match the style of that in Stars Hollow and the archetype New England town .
In all , plenty of small Connecticut towns have village greens , gazebos or small quaint shops and give a feel much like Stars Hollow to a visitor .
Rory began attending Chilton at the start of the series .
Chilton is a prep school that seems to be located in Hartford ( in season 2
, episode 5 Lane mentions a record store called Record Breaker , Inc. on 2453 Berlin Turnpike , " ten minutes from your school " , which narrows it down to Newington , CT ) .
It is based on Wallingford 's Choate Rosemary Hall .
Stars Hollow also is on a Connecticut Transit route , as Rory commutes to and from the school using a bus from Stars Hollow 's town square .
However , there is no Connecticut Transit route that would take Rory directly to Hartford in a reasonable time via bus .
Greg Morago of the Hartford Courant writes , " Unlike the Hartford depicted on Judging Amy , the Stars Hollow of The Gilmore Girls rings true .
The town 's antiques shops , small businesses , schools , government and infrastructure look the part .
But where Sherman - Palladino has truly excelled , despite her Clueless origins , is in her drawing of colorful Connecticut characters .
The populace of Stars Hollow , from the town busybody to the town troubadour , is familiar to any Nutmegger who ever attended a town meeting . "
During Season 1 Episode 2 , when Rory is on her way to her first day at school they drive past the Gelston House , ( located in East Haddam , CT ) a restaurant next to the Goodspeed Opera House and East Haddam Swing Bridge .
In Season 6 , Richard and Emily offer to buy Luke and Lorelai a house in Beacon Falls , just over the border from Stars Hollow and a short drive to Luke 's Diner and the Dragonfly Inn .
In the same season , Luke 's young daughter April regularly rides her bicycle to Luke 's Diner from Woodbridge .
During Season 7 when Lorelei 's Jeep breaks down they mention being within feasible walking distance of Naugatuck ; later on , Luke takes Lorelai car shopping to a dealer that is noted to be located in Watertown .
Taylor Doose mentions that Woodbridge is on the other side of the railroad tracks during the Pickle Spill in Season 7 and frequently speaks of Woodbridge as a " sister " town .
This position between Beacon Falls , Naugatuck , and Woodbridge would place it in the southwestern portion of the town of Bethany , although that would be closer to New Haven and further from Hartford than the distances to Chilton and Yale used in the show .
REFERENCES