DRAGONS ' DEN Dragons ' Den is a reality television program format in which entrepreneurs pitch their business ideas to a panel of venture capitalists in the hope of securing investment finance from them .
The program originated in Japan , where it is known as The Tigers of Money ( マネーの虎 manē no tora ) , a pun on " The Tiger of Malaya " ( マレーの虎 marē no tora ) , the nickname of WWII general Tomoyuki Yamashita ) .
The format was created and is owned by Nippon TV and is distributed by Sony Pictures Television .
Local versions of the show have been produced in nearly 30 countries , as well as one for the Arab world ; in some countries , more than one version has been aired .
The most popular name for the show is Dragons ' Den or variations thereof , a name that originated in the United Kingdom .
The show has also been titled Shark Tank ( a name that originated in the United States ) and Lions ' Den , and variations on those names , among others .
In versions where the name of the show contains a creature 's name , the investors are referred to by that name .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
The contestants are usually product designers or service operators who have what they consider to be a viable and potentially very profitable business idea , but who lack funding and direction .
They pitch their idea to five rich entrepreneurial businesspeople , who in most iterations of the show are referred to as " dragons " , " tigers " ( in the original Japanese show ) , " lions " or " sharks " .
Before the show , the contestants have named a specific amount of money that they wish to get ( along with a percentage in the business that the contestant is offering to sell to the investors ) , and the rules stipulate that if they do not raise at least this amount from the dragons , they get nothing .
In return , the contestant gives the dragons a percentage of the company 's stock , which is the chief point of negotiation .
The program does not show the entire pitch as scenes are selected and edited from the episode due to time constraints .
The dragons probe the idea further once the contestant has made the presentation .
This will either reveal a sound business proposition that the investor may become interested in investing capital in return for equity , or an embarrassing lack of preparation on the part of the contestant ( such as the contestant 's lack of knowledge of the business ' profits or margins ) , the uncovering of troubling facts ( such as insufficient sales or manufacturing margins ) or other reasons which may play a factor in the investors consequently rejecting the investment ( such as the investor asking for a larger equity stake in the business than the contestant wants to give up , the contestant 's valuation on the business being too high compared to its overall profits , the product not having any proprietary value or the investor 's belief that they can not add value to the business ) .
A contestant may give a counteroffer to the investors , if they feel their offer is not sufficient compared to the contestant 's initial offer , which may also be subject to rejection if the investor feels the contestant asking for too high a monetary amount and/or an insufficiently low equity .
VERSIONS Section::::Versions .
Dragons ' Den series have been produced in numerous different countries .
Apart from Japan ( where the show debuted ) the show names , structures , and styles are based upon the UK version .
AFGHANISTAN Section::::Afghanistan .
In Afghanistan , the show is called Fikr wa Talash .
The show was produced by with the help of the Moby Group 's strategic communications arm , Lapis Ltd , and aired on the Group 's most popular channel in Afghanistan , TOLO TV , reaching an estimated 7 million viewers in 2010 .
ARAB WORLD Section::::Arab world .
In the Arab world , Dragons ' Den was known as Dragons ' Den :
Al Aareen العرين ( The Den ) .
It was broadcast on the Lebanese channel Future Television and was hosted by Ibrahim Abu Jawdeh .
The show received contestants from various Arab countries .
The panel of Dragons for the 2007 series consisted of : * Omar El - Quqa
* Ahmad Tantash * Nassif Karam
* Roger Azar
EGYPT
Section::::Egypt .
The Egyptian version of Dragons ' Den is El Mashrou3 ( " The Project " ) .
The show was created in 2013 by Anna Elliot , the founder of the NGO Bamyan Media .
It was broadcast on the national channel Alnahar and followed by approximately 4 million people .
The program also created the biggest community of entrepreneurs through a digital platform connected to the show with 1 million participants .
The panel of Dragons consisted of : * Hala Hattab * Hisham Al Jamal AUSTRALIA DRAGONS ' DEN ( 2005 VERSION ) Section::::Australia .
Section::::Dragons ' Den ( 2005 Version ) .
The Australian version of Dragons ' Den was broadcast on the Seven Network and hosted by Andrew O'Keefe .
Unlike in other versions , here the host ran through the outline of the business with the contestant before the contestant began negotiating with the Dragons for a deal .
The show was produced by Michael Horrock .
The Australian Dragons were : * Peter Higgins * Sarina Russo * Darryn Lyons
* Suzi Dafnis
* Siimon Reynolds
The Seven Network announced in December 2005 that the show would not be back for a second season after poor ratings .
SHARK TANK ( 2015 VERSION )
Section::::Shark Tank ( 2015 Version ) .
The format was revived by Network Ten , under the American Shark Tank name , for a show that premiered February 2015 .
The Sharks for this edition are Janine Allis ( founder of Boost Juice ) , Andrew Banks ( founder of Talent2 ) , Steve Baxter ( entrepreneur , investor , internet pioneer ) , John McGrath ( founder of McGrath Estate Agents ) and Naomi Simson ( founder of RedBalloon ) .
The show is hosted by Sarah Harris .
Unlike 7 's previous edition , the show was successful and returned for a second season in 2016 .
AUSTRIA Section::::Austria .
The Austrian version is called , which means " 2 Minutes 2 Million " .
It debuted on .
BELGIUM Section::::Belgium .
The Belgian ( Flemish version ) is called LEEUWENKUIL - meaning Lion 's pit .
CANADA ENGLISH VERSION FRENCH VERSION Section::::French version .
The French - language version , ( In the Dragon 's Eye ) , began airing in 2012 , hosted by .
Past and present dragons include : * — co - founder of Impera Advisory Inc , PVG Partners LLC and Fusion
Immunovative / NVNC * — president and founder of Danièle Henkel Inc * — co - founder of Aheeva and Atelka * — executive chairman of Publipage * ( Canadian Grand Prix , Just for Laughs ) * ( Stingray Digital , Téo Taxi , Voir , L'Actualité , etc )
CHINA Section::::China .
The Chinese version of " Dragons ' Den " ( 合伙中国人)started airing in May 2016 on Shenzhen Satellite TV .
The Chinese format is produced by Shanghai - based IPCN ( International Programme International Network ) .
Past and present Chinese Dragons include : * Bob Xu , co - founder of New Oriental Education and ZhenFund ( Season 1 - 2 )
*
Annabelle Long Yu , CEO of Bertelsmann China ( Season 1 - 2 )
* Li Guoqing , co - founder & CEO of Dang Dang ( Season 1 - 2 )
* Yao Jinbo , Founder & CEO of 58.com ( Season 1 - 2 )
* Hugo Shong , chairman of IDG Greater China ( Season 1 )
*
Zhou Hongyi , co - founder and CEO of Qihoo 360 ( Season 1 )
* Jerry Huang , founder and CEO of Gaudi Capital ( Season 2 ) COLOMBIA Section::::Colombia .
The Colombian version of " Shark Tank " called " Shark Tank Colombia " began airing on February 23 , 2018 by Canal Sony .
Colombian sharks include : * Alexander Torrenegra ( Season 1 - 2 ) * Leonardo Wehe ( Season 1 - 2 ) * Ricardo Leyva Gutiérrez ( Season 1 - 2 ) * Juliana Barreto ( Season 1 - 2 ) * Frank Kanayet ( Season 1 - 2 )
* Mauricio Hoyos ( Season 1 - 2 )
* Leonardo Wehe ( Season 2 ) CROATIA Section::::Croatia .
The Croatian version of Dragons ' Den called ( Dragon 's Nest ) was scheduled to be broadcast in May 2007 on Croatian Radiotelevision and produced by Ocean Film , a local production company .
Contracted Croatian Dragons were : * — owner of Generalturist , the leading and oldest travel agency in Croatia .
* — owner of Smee d.o.o , bamboo flooring company .
* — owner of Trade Consulting d.o.o . , business consulting company .
* — co - owner of Blue Line International , the international maritime company .
* — owner of Orbico , one of the leading importers and distributors of various consumer goods and toys in Croatia .
A few shows were filmed but never broadcast for undisclosed reasons .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
In the Czech Republic , the show is called Den D ( The D - Day ) .
It first aired on 31 March 2009 on Czech TV ( CT1 channel ) , in a very similar set up to the British version of BBC .
The show is hosted by radio host Jan Pokorny , and the dragon investors are : * Ivan Pilny - former GM of Microsoft in Czech Republic , Chairman of the Board of Czech Telecom and entrepreneur
( 1st & 3rd series )
* Marta Novakova - founder and CEO of U&SLUNO software company ( 1st , 2nd & 3rd series )
* Ondrej Bartos - serial entrepreneur , consultant and venture capitalist , Partner with Credo Ventures ( 1st & 2nd series )
* Dana Berova - former minister of informatics , entrepreneur and Business Development Director of Gartner ( 1st , 2nd & 3rd series )
*
Tomio Okamura - Czech - Japanese entrepreneur in travel and retail , he brings Japanese tourists to the Czech Republic and sells Japanese products to Czechs ( 1st , 2nd & 3rd series ) * Michael Rostock - investment banker and advisor with Venture Investors Corporate Finance ( 2nd & 3rd series )
The Dragons are / were : Seat Series 1 Series 2 Series 3 Series 4
DENMARK
Section::::Denmark .
A Danish version of the show , ( " Lions ' Den " ) , began airing in April 2015 .
The five " lions " are Christian Stadil , Birgit Aaby , Tommy Ahlers , Ilse Jacobsen and Jesper Buch .
FINLAND LION 'S MOUTH ( 2007 ) Section::::Finland .
Section::::Lion 's Mouth ( 2007 ) .
In Finland , the first version of the show was ' , which means the jaws or the mouth of a lion .
The show began running on 27 September 2007 on the MTV3 channel , and aired for one season .
It was hosted by Anna Sorainen .
The local ' ( lions ) were Kyösti Kakkonen , Eero Lehti , Toivo Sukari , Lisa Sounio and Kaija Ward .
LION 'S DEN ( 2013 ) Section::::Lion 's Den ( 2013 ) .
In February 2013 the show re - emerged on the Nelonen channel , this time named ( " Lion 's Den " ) .
The show was hosted by Kirsi Salo , and the new lions were Riku Asikainen , Jorma Terentjeff , Ari Lahti , Anne Berner and Oskari Lehtonen .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
The German version is called , which means The Lions ' Cave .
It debuted on 19 August 2014 on VOX .
The German " lions " are : *
( Season 1 - 2 ) — Travel entrepreneur * ( Season 1 - 3 ) — Pioneer of bungee jumping in Germany , founder of a German web portal for adventure gifts
*
( Season 1 - 2 ) — Chairwoman of German Federal Association of Young Entrepreneurs ( BJU ) , Bremen head of the Free Democratic Party
*
( Season 1 - 5 ) —
Managing director of a venture capital & private equity company * Judith Williams ( Season 1 - 5 ) —
Shopping channel presenter and businesswoman with own fashion and jewellery lines
* Carsten Maschmeyer ( Season 3 - 5 ) — Founder of financial services company AWD Holding and investor in technology and health care companies
* Ralf Dümmel ( Season 3 - 5 ) — Head of consumer goods company DS Produkte
* Dagmar Wöhrl ( Season 4 - 5 ) - Lawyer , entrepreneur and politician
The first episode of the second season aired on 18 August 2015 .
The third season launched on 23 August 2016 , introducing two new presenters .
A fourth season was announced for 2017 .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
An Irish version of the show began in 2009 on RTÉ One , the state broadcaster .
It is presented by Richard Curran , Deputy Editor of The Sunday Business Post .
The Irish Dragons are / were : !
Seat order !
Season 1 !
Season 2 !
Season 3 !
Season 4 !
Season 5 !
Season 6 !
Season 7 !
Season 8
The Dragons have appeared on television in Ireland , in promotion of the series , on Tubridy Tonight , on RTÉ One .
RTÉ started broadcasting show promos after Christmas 2008 as part of their winter line - up .
The first episode was broadcast on 19 February 2009 .
A third season of Dragons ' Den began airing on RTÉ One , on Thursday , 20 February 2011 .
Norah Casey was the new Dragon for the third season .
Episodes at the end of the third season , for the first time on Dragons ' Den in Ireland , showed the Dragons on tour visiting their past investments .
A fourth season of Dragons ' Den was commissioned .
Sean O'Sullivan replaced Seán Gallagher .
Sean is co - founder at Avego Ltd , based in Kinsale .
For the fourth series of Dragons ' Den , a live , interactive " Sixth Dragon Game " was developed to be played whilst watching the show , in which viewers are able to decide in real time if they 're IN or OUT as the pitches unfold .
The " Sixth Dragon Game " is the first live , interactive game for a TV show in Ireland .
ISRAEL Section::::Israel .
In Israel , Dragons ' Den is entitled , Hebrew for " The Sharks " .
It is produced by Gil Productions and is broadcast on Channel 10 .
It is hosted by Guy Zohar .
In the Israeli version , there are six dragons who rotate their appearance weekly .
The first season was broadcast during the summer and fall of 2006 .
The dragons in season 1 were : Ze'ev Holtzman , Israela Shtier , Aviv Tzidon , Oded Dessau , Jacky Ben - Zaken , and Nir Sharatzki .
The second season began being broadcast on Channel 10 on 24 May 2007 .
As in the first season , the dragons rotate their appearance weekly .
Aviv
Tzidon and Jacky Ben - Zaken returned from the first season and were joined by the following new dragons : * Yossi Moldavsky * Nir Barkat * Amir Eyal * Roni Ross * Amos Luzon
In 2018 the show was renewed by Gil Productions and is now being broadcast on Keshet 12 .
The show welcomed an entirely new cast : * Dovi Frances
* Einav Adiv - Berar * Zohar Levkovitz
*
Stav Shacham * Hadar Goldman JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Titled , this is the original version .
It was created by and broadcast on Nippon Television from 2001 to 2004 .
It was the first entertainment programme in the history of Japanese television that dealt with the concept of business investment .
During its three - year run , as many as 16 business executives appeared in the programme as Tigers .
KENYA Section::::Kenya .
The premier of Lion 's Den was in October 2016 on NTV .
The show was sponsored by KCB Group , the largest commercial bank in East Africa .
The format was introduced to Kenya by Quite Bright Films Kenya Ltd ( QBF ) who produce the show in Nairobi .
The Kenyan Lions are : * Darshan Chandaria , director and Group CEO of Chandaria group
* Kris Senanu , venture capitalist * Myke Rabar , entertainment Guru * Olive Gachara , businesswoman in fashion and image consultancy
* Wandia Gichuru , businesswoman with own fashion lines and stores MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
In Mexico the series is called Shark Tank México :
Negociando con tiburones or just simply , Spanish for " Negotiating with Sharks " .
The sharks were : * Ana Victoria García ( Season 1 ) * Arturo Elías Ayub ( Season main 1 - 2 , 3 guest )
* Carlos Bremer ( Season 1 - 3 ) * Jorge Vergara ( Season 1 - 2 ) * Rodrigo Herrera Aspra (
Season 1 - 3 )
* Patricia Armendáriz ( Season 2 - 3 )
* Marcus Dantus ( Seanson 3 )
* Luis Harvey ( Season 3 ) NETHERLANDS Section::::Netherlands .
In the Netherlands the show ran on Nederland 3 for two seasons .
The first season was broadcast in May 2007 , every Friday at 20:25 .
The second season was broadcast in May 2008 , every Monday at 21:25 .
Both seasons were hosted by .
The dragons were : * Henk Keilman * Annemarie van Gaal * Jan Pieter Melchior ( 2007 ) * Willem Sijthoff * Arjen de Koning
* George Banken ( 2008 )
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Initially , the UK and Australian series of Dragons ' Den were broadcast in New Zealand before a local version was produced by Eyeworks Television .
It broadcast on TV One in 2006 and was hosted by Rawdon Christie .
The dragons were : *
Julie Christie * Bob Jones
* Annette Presley
*
Paul Webb * Barry Colman NIGERIA Section::::Nigeria .
Nigeria 's adaptation of Dragons ' Den was broadcast weekly in 2008 on the AIT Network and produced by Storm Vision .
The Nigerian Dragons were : *
Prince Femi Tejuoso *
Ibukun Awosika * Chris Parkes *
Alexander Amosu * John Momoh * Tokunboh Ishmael PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
In Pakistan , the program airs as Idea Croron Ka and is broadcast on Neo News .
It is a joint venture between Chaudhry Muhammad Akram Centre for Entrepreneurship Development ( CMACED ) at Superior University and Neo News .
The first episode premiered on 18 March 2017 .
The main lead and driving force of this show is Nabeel A. Qadeer who was the Director Entrepreneurship at Punjab Information Technology Board ( PITB ) .
The judges include : * Salim Ghauri , Founder and CEO of Netsol technologies ( Pvt . )
Ltd * Naeem Zamindar , Pakistan Country Director and CEO of Acumen
* Humayun Mazhar , Founder , CEO and Chairman at CresVentures POLAND Section::::Poland .
In Poland , the program is called Dragons ' Den – jak zostać milionerem ( " How to be a millionaire " ) and has been broadcast on TV4 since 2011 .
The largest investment ever secured on the program was 15,000,000 PLN ( 5,500,000 U.S. dollars ) , on 24 April 2011 .
The Polish Dragons in 2011 were : * Maciej Kaczmarski , founder , " Kaczmarski Inkasso companies " , " National Debt Register " and " Reliable Company " , called the king of Polish recovery * Anna Garwolińska , head of " Glaubicz Garwolińska Consultants "
* Grzegorz Hajdarowicz , owner of the " Group Gremi " * Marian Owerko , CEO Bakalland * Krzysztof Golonka , president of an investment fund " Xevin " PORTUGAL Section::::Portugal .
The Portuguese version of Dragons ' Den has the American name Shark Tank .
It is broadcast on the SIC Network .
It began in 2015 , and a second season is planned .
The Portuguese Sharks are : * Mário Ferreira *
João Rafael Koehler * Susana Sequeira
*
Tim Vieira * Miguel Ribeiro Ferreira ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
There is a Romanian version of the format called ( Lions ' Arena ) .
The Romanian Lions are : * Marius Ghenea * Dragos Anastasiu * Florin Talpes * Mircea Tudor *
Mihaela Nicola * Cristina Batlan * Orlando Szasz
The show started in 2007 .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
There was a Russian version of the show called KAPITAL .
SAUDI ARABIA Section::::Saudi Arabia .
Saudi Arabian broadcaster STV1 showed the BBC version of Dragons ' Den in 2010 , then broadcast a local version in 2011 .
It was called التجار , or " Traders " .
The dragons were : * Saleh Kamel * Ahmed Fitihy
* Nashwa Altahir
* Altaiar
* Alhalafy SLOVENIA Section::::Slovenia .
The Slovenian version of the show was called ( " Good Deal " ) .
It was aired by then - new Slovenian broadcaster Planet TV , owned by Telekom Slovenije .
The show was announced in May 2012 , and premiered on November 11 , 2012 .
The Slovenian investors were : * Branko Drobnak , Procurator at Alta Skupina d.d . , a asset management , non - discretional brokerage services , corporate finance services , accounting and audit services company .
He is part of The Business Angels Club of Slovenia and non - executive Chairman of Acies
bio d.o.o , a biotechnology contract research organization .
* Borut Rismal General Manager , CHS d.o.o . , a computer peripherals distribution company * Daniela Bervar Country Manager for Slovenia at Cotrugli Business School and co - owner of MEDIA LAB d.o.o . deal of the day business company .
* Jure Mikuž founder of RSG Capital , a venture - capital management company * Matjaž Krč , a business angel and Managing Director at Ideus d.o.o . , business consulting services for small and mid - sized companies .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
Dragon 's Den South Africa premiered on 23 September 2014 on Mzansi Magic .
In a 2014 episode , Vusi Thembekwayo , one of the Dragons , signed his biggest deal , when he invested ZAR2 million in a Halaal abattoir owned by contestant Johan Jacobs and received a 40 % stake in the business .
There were two seasons of the show .
The South African " dragons " were : * Lebo Gunguluza , runs Gunguluza Enterprises & Media which boasts 12 print publications , stakes in numerous hotels and a car - hire business .
* Vusi Thembekwayo , a motivational speaker and CEO of Watermark Pan - African Capital Ltd , with over ZAR4,32 billion in capital .
* Polo Leteka Radebe , CEO of Identity Partners , a small and medium enterprises advisory and fund management services firm founded in 2007
* Vinny Lingham , a serial internet entrepreneur from Cape Town with ties to Silicon Valley .
* Gil Oved , founder and co - CEO of The Creative Counsel , an advertising agency with over ZAR600 million in turnover per year .
In October 2016 the show was renamed to Shark Tank South Africa and premiered on M - Net .
The " sharks " are : *
Dawn Nathan - Jones * Vinny Lingham * Romeo Kumalo
* Marnus Broodryk
* Gil Oved
The show made news when Vinny Lingham invested in an augmented reality startup using bitcoin instead of dollars .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
The title of the Spanish version is ( Your Opportunity ) and went to air on October 30 , 2013 by TVE .
SRI LANKA Section::::Sri Lanka .
The Sri Lankan version is called " Ath Pavura " ( ඇත් පවුර ) , which means " Wall of Tuskers " .
It debuted on Independent Television Network on September 24 , 2017 .
Unlike the other versions , the Sri Lankan version focuses on social entrepreneurs and impact investors .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
The British version was on air in Sweden for several years on TV8 and BBC Prime .
A Swedish version called ( " The Dragons ' Nest " ) was broadcast in 2009 on Sveriges Television .
A second season started in March 2010 .
The Swedish Dragons 2010 are : * Mats Gabrielsson , who sold his IT firm in the late 1980s for over $ 100 million * Douglas Roos founder and chairman of nyheter24.se
* Susanna Falkengren cofounder and member of Exipos Invest * Sven Hagströmer founder of HQ , Avanza , Investment AB Öresund and also in the board for the public companies
Bilia , Eworks and Insplanet * Richard Båge , founder of Insplanet IPO in 2006 , founder and chairman of Mediaplanet Previous Dragons 2009 :
* Gunilla von Platen CEO and founder of Xzakt Kundrelation , a telemarketing company located in Sweden
* Ljubo Mrnjavac sold his fast food company Pölsemannen 2002 .
Today active in real estate TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
The Turkish version of Dragons ' Den is on BloombergHT .
Baybars Altuntaş is one of the dragons .
UKRAINE Section::::Ukraine .
In Ukraine , the series was called ' ( ' , " Business Sharks " ) and featured Dragons such as future presidential candidate Serhiy Tihipko .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the UK , Dragons ' Den is broadcast on BBC Two , which has exclusive rights to the show 's format from its Japanese producers .
The Executive Producer is Dominic Bird and it is hosted by BBC Newsnight presenter Evan Davis .
The Dragons are / were : Series 1 Series 2 Series 3 Series 4 Series 5 Series 6 Series 7 Series 8 Series 9 Series 10 Series 11 Series 12 Series 13 Series 14 Series 15 Series 16 UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In 2008 , television producer Mark Burnett signed a deal with format holder Sony to produce an American version of the series .
The series on U.S. television is titled Shark Tank .
The U.S. network ABC ordered a pilot episode which was produced by Sony Pictures TV .
On October 9 , 2008 , a casting producer announced that The Shark Tank was accepting applications for a pilot , giving entrepreneurs two weeks to submit their ideas .
The pilot was filmed from January 6 to January 9 , 2009 in Los Angeles .
On September 23 , 2016 , Shark Tank began its eighth season .
The current " sharks " are : * Robert Herjavec , who sold his IT security firm at the height of the dot - com bubble for over $ 100 million .
Previously appeared on the Canadian version of Dragon 's Den .
* Lori Greiner , President and CEO of For Your Ease Only , as well as host of a monthly show on the QVC Network .
* Kevin O'Leary , former co - host of The Lang and O'Leary Exchange on CBC News Network , formerly president of The Learning Company , which was sold to Mattel for $ 3.7 billion in 1999 .
Previously appeared on the Canadian version of Dragon 's Den .
* Barbara Corcoran , self - made real estate millionaire who sold her company The Corcoran Group for $ 66 million in 2001 .
* Daymond John , founder of FUBU .
* Mark Cuban , owner of the National Basketball Association 's Dallas Mavericks and billionaire entrepreneur .
For the first two seasons of the series , Kevin Harrington was a regular shark .
He was replaced in the third season by Mark Cuban .
Unlike versions of the show in other countries , the U.S. version uses a rotating cast of sharks every season , of which five usually appear in each episode , although all six sharks have occasionally appeared on a single episode .
Also on occasion , guest investors fill in for a regular shark on the panel .
Past guest investors include : * Jeff Foxworthy , comedian and television personality .
* Steve Tisch , Chairman and Executive Vice President of the New York Giants .
*
John Paul DeJoria , founder of John Paul Mitchell Systems haircare line and The Patron Spirits Company .
* Nick Woodman , the founder and CEO of GoPro .
* Chris Sacca , Proprietor of Lowercase Capital which has early investments in companies like , Uber , Twitter , Kickstarter and Instagram .
* Ashton Kutcher , American actor and investor .
* Troy Carter , Founder , chairman and CEO of Atom Factory VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
A Vietnamese version of the show , to be titled Shark Tank Việt Nam , is set to air on Vietnam Television in 2017 .
The " cá mập " ( sharks ) that have been announced so far are Trương Gia Bình , Vũ Văn Tiền and Trần Bá Dương .
SEE ALSO
* American Inventor
* MoneyHunt * Redemption Inc. * Shark Tank * The Big Idea
* The Profit * Win in China REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official " Money no Tora " site ( WebArchive ) * ( official UK website )
* Den D ( official Czech Republic website )
* Dragons ' Den ( official Polish website )
* Dragons ' Den ( RTÉ 's official Irish website )