I CAN'T
BELIEVE
IT 'S NOT BUTTER !
I Ca n't Believe It 's Not Butter !
is a spread brand produced by Upfield .
As its name implies , it is marketed as a substitute to butter .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The J.H. Filbert company , based in Baltimore , Maryland , developed the product in 1979 as a low - cost alternative to butter for the food service industry .
The name originated from a comment by the husband of a company secretary as he sampled the product , and it was first marketed to retail consumers in 1981 .
The company was acquired by Unilever in 1986 .
Unilever expanded sales of the product , previously only available primarily in the Washington , DC / Baltimore area , throughout the entire United States in 1988 , and later to the United Kingdom , Canada and Mexico in 1991 .
The product was put on the market in Germany in 2011 and in Chile in 2012 .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
In addition to a regular and ' light ' spread , Unilever also uses the brand name to market a liquid butter substitute contained in a spray - bottle .
This product is an emulsion of vegetable oil in water formulated with a ' hint ' of butter flavor ( derived from buttermilk ) and is marketed as having zero calories and zero fat content .
In 2017 , Unilever announced two new varieties , " It 's Vegan " and " It 's Organic " .
CONSUMER
SALES
UNITED STATES Section::::Consumer sales .
Section::::United States .
It was reported in July 2005
( per research from the market research company Information Resources ) that the product at that time led in product sales for its category of margarines , butter blends and spreads at $ 244.7 million USD , summarized from 52 weeks up to July 10 , 2005 .
But by 2012 the situation had changed .
It was reported in 2012 by Euromonitor International that while sales of butter and spreadable oil fell , margarine sales increased by 1.1 percent but sales of I Ca n't Believe It 's Not Butter fell by 3.9 percent .
7 percent of sales at Unilever consists of spreads with a significant amount consisting of butter substitutes , the sales of these which are on the decline .
In 2016 , there have been $ 248.4 million in sales of I
Ca n't Believe It 's Not Butter and $ 47.7 million of I Ca n't Believe It 's Not Butter Light .
UK REBRAND Section::::UK rebrand .
In February 2017 , Unilever rebranded the product as " I Ca n't Believe It 's So Good ...
For Everything ! "
in the UK .
The stated objective was to increase awareness of the product 's versatility .
The rebrand was greeted with puzzlement and some derision by many media commentators .
Subsequently the branding was simplified to " I Ca n't Believe It 's So Good ... " .
SEE ALSO
* Margarine * Stork ( margarine )
REFERENCES
ADDITIONAL
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * USA Website
* UK Website