COMPARISON OF SCOTTISH GAELIC AND IRISH
Although Scottish Gaelic and Irish are closely related as Goidelic Celtic languages ( or Gaelic languages ) , they are different in many ways .
While most dialects are not immediately mutually comprehensible ( although many individual words and phrases are ) , speakers of the two languages can rapidly develop mutual intelligibility .
PHONETIC AND GRAMMATICAL DIFFERENCES Section::::Phonetic and grammatical differences .
Scottish Gaelic in Islay and Argyll is fairly similar to Irish .
The extinct dialects of northeast Ulster , particularly Rathlin Island , were also close to Scottish Gaelic .
In Scotland , dialects also existed in southern Kintyre and Galloway which were probably similar to Irish , sliabh ( mountain ) being fairly common as an element in Galloway and Irish placenames , but quite rare in the Highlands .
The dialects of these Scottish and Irish regions are also , in turn , the most similar to Manx .
While the dialects of northern Scotland and southern Ireland tend to differ the most from one another in terms of vocabulary , they do share some features which are absent in other dialect areas lying between them .
For example , in both Munster Irish and the Gaelic of the north of Scotland , historically short vowels have been diphthongised or lengthened before long sonants .
An example of this is the word clann meaning " children of the family " .
In Munster Irish and northern Scottish Gaelic it is pronounced whereas in Ulster and County Mayo it is and in Connemara ; the Manx form cloan is in the north and in the south .
Similarly , i m meaning " butter " is pronounced in Munster , Southern Connacht and northern Scotland ( and Manx ) , but in Ulster and Southern Scottish .
In addition , slender coronal stops ( and in Scottish Gaelic ; and in Irish , are affricated ( such as and ) in Mayo and Donegal , the southern Highlands and in Manx , but not in Munster or the northern Highlands .
In the verb tá of Standard Irish , northern Scotland and Central - Southern Munster agree in leniting the initial t , thus one hears thá in County Waterford and County Tipperary , and tha in northern Scotland .
West Munster also lenites the t , but only after the preverb a " that " ( an fear a thá ina sheasamh ag an ndoras " the man that 's standing at the door " , standard Irish an fear atá ina sheasamh ag an doras , Scottish Gaelic am fear a tha na sheasamh aig an doras ) .
The closest to Scottish Gaelic in modern Irish is the dialect currently spoken in County Donegal , as illustrated by the sentence
" How are you ? " .
Sibh is used in both Scottish Gaelic and Irish for the plural " you " , while Scottish Gaelic [ except for the far south ] also uses sibh as a formal version of " you " ( much like French uses vous ; see " T – V distinction " ) .
Modern Irish does not use this formal / informal distinction when addressing people .
The use of sibh as ' polite ' you is a retention from the Classical Irish usage of the plural personal pronouns to refer to the singular in polite communication , thus sinn " we " for mé " I , me " and sibh " you ( plural ) " for tú " you / thou " .
Thu is used in Scottish Gaelic when speaking to an individual friend , family member , or a younger person .
The negative particle in Scottish Gaelic , Manx and Northern Ulster Irish is cha / chan ( chan eil , cha bhfuil / chan fhuil = " is not " ; chan is from the Old Irish emphatic negative nichon ) .
In standard Irish the negative particle is ní ( níl = " is not " , a contraction of ní fhuil ) ; ní is a retention of the normal Old Irish negative ; these are illustrated by the sentence
" I have no money " :
Scottish Gaelic speakers may also sound as if they were using the Irish phrase , as Chan eil can frequently be shortened to ' n eil .
The Classical Irish digraph éu [ eːʷ ] is still used in Scottish Gaelic spelling but is now obsolete in Irish , except in southern dialect writing , as a means to distinguish the vowel é when followed by a broad consonant from the regular dialect development é to i in the same environment , thus éan
[ ian ] " bird " in comparison to d'éug [ dʲe : g ] " died ; passed on " ) .
Éa is now used instead of eu in Standard Irish .
Both éa and éu existed in Classical Irish , to a large extent showing nominal case differences ( with éu varying with éo in the dative of " éa"-words ) , however in both Scotland and Ireland , spelling reforms and standardisation ( which took place in Ireland under the auspices of the government of Ireland during the 20th century , and much earlier in Scotland ) independently went for different versions .
At times Scottish writers used the spelling eu to represent how the combination is pronounced in northern dialects , thus ia , writing ian instead of eun , before this sound change became the typical pronunciation .
Manx spelling , based mainly on English , shows that ia is also the underlying form in Manx , the word being spelled eean .
ECLIPSIS Section::::Eclipsis .
The most obvious phonological difference between Scottish Gaelic and Irish is that the phenomenon of eclipsis in Irish is diachronic ( i.e. the result of an historical word - final nasal that may or may not be present in modern Irish ) but fully synchronic in Scottish Gaelic ( i.e. it requires the actual presence of a word - final nasal except for a tiny set of frozen forms ) .
Eclipsis is shown in the Irish orthography but not in Scottish Gaelic as it is conditioned by the actual environment .
For example , this means that phrases like Standard Irish , standard Scottish Gaelic , Manx is pronounced as follows in different parts of the Gaelic speaking world :
* Southern Irish : * Western and Northern Irish : * Scottish Gaelic ( casual pronunciation , especially Lewis ) : , more often An example of diachronic - type eclipsis are the numbers :
* Irish :
" year " > " 8 years " * Scottish Gaelic : > One example of this is the Gaelic " joke " of non - native speakers confusing " the penis " with "
the meeting / get - together " ( similar in sentiment to the English speakers ' " joke " about non - native speakers confusing " shit " and " sheet " )
In conservative speech , Scottish Gaelic feminine nouns also slenderise in the dative ( prepositonal ) case , giving , and so a different final consonant .
This feature is uncommon today except in more formal registers and is ignored here .
ORTHOGRAPHIC DIFFERENCES Section::::Orthographic differences .
There are a number of distinctive orthographical ( written ) differences .
The spellings of both languages have been reformed in recent decades , which has led to further divergence , though conversely more recent spelling reforms in Scottish Gaelic have reduced the divergences to some extent .
One difference is that the accent is written as a grave accent ( , " heavy stroke / accent " ) in Scottish Gaelic , as opposed to the acute accent ( , " length accent " ; , " sharp stroke / accent " ) used in Irish ; hence the word for " welcome " is written as in Scottish Gaelic and in Irish as .
Irish has no grave accent , only acute accents , while until recently Scottish Gaelic had both grave and acute accents which were used to differentiate between open and closed vowel sounds .
However , recent spelling reform has meant that there are now only grave accents in Scottish Gaelic , the opposite of Irish .
Similarly , in Scottish Gaelic the prefix is always hyphenated , while in Irish it is attached to the beginning of the word , as illustrated by the languages ' respective names for each other :
Additionally , while the prefixes and are usually hyphenated in both languages , in Irish they are attached to the beginning of words whose first letter is capitalised ( in Scottish Gaelic they are always hyphenated ) .
A number of letter combinations are possible in written Irish which are not found in Scottish Gaelic e.g. " ae " , " bhf " .
Irish uses " cht " where Scottish Gaelic uses " chd " , although " chd " itself was once common in written Irish , as was " cht " in Scottish Gaelic – both being used in Classical Gaelic .
In the combinations " sc"/"sg " and " st"/"sd " , Irish now uses " sc " and " st " , while Scottish Gaelic uses " sg " and both " sd " and st .
Most obvious differences in spelling result from the deletion of silent lenited digraphs ( mainly dh , gh , and th ) in Irish in spelling reforms , which was only sometimes done in Scottish Gaelic .
Overall , Scottish Gaelic orthography is more conservative than that of Irish .
LIST OF SCOTTISH GAELIC AND IRISH COGNATES DIFFERENCES IN VOCABULARY Section::::Differences in vocabulary . !
English !
Irish !
Scottish Gaelic !
Notes !
Irish !
English !
Scottish Gaelic !
English !
Notes SEE
ALSO
* Irish language * Scottish Gaelic REFERENCES