HONOURS DEGREE
The term " honours degree " ( or " honors degree " ) has various meanings in the context of different degrees and education systems .
Most commonly it refers to a variant of the undergraduate bachelor 's degree containing a larger volume of material or a higher standard of study , or both , rather than an " ordinary " , " general " or " pass " bachelor 's degree .
Honours degrees are sometimes indicated by " Hons " after the degree abbreviation , with various punctuation according to local custom , e.g. " BA ( Hons ) " , " B.A. , Hons " , etc .
Examples of honours degree include the honors bachelor 's degree in the United States , the bachelor 's degree with honours in the United Kingdom , Hong Kong , Sri Lanka and India , the honours bachelor 's degree in Ireland , the bachelor with honours and bachelor honours degree in New Zealand , the bachelor with honours and honours bachelor 's degree in Canada , and the bachelor honours degree in Australia .
In South Africa the bachelor honours degree is a postgraduate degree that follows on from the completion of a bachelor 's degree .
The undergraduate master of arts degree awarded by the ancient universities of Scotland in place of the bachelor of arts may be awarded as an honours or non - honours degree ; these are at the same level as equivalent bachelor 's degrees .
At master 's level , the integrated master 's degrees in British universities , which students enter at the same level as bachelor 's degrees , are also honours degrees .
Honours degrees should not be confused with the Latin honors attached to degrees in the US and some other countries .
Many universities and colleges offer both honours and non - honours bachelor 's degrees .
In most countries where honours degrees are granted , they imply a higher level of achievement than a non - honours degree .
In some countries ( e.g. Canada or Australia ) , an honours degree may also involve a longer period of study than a non - honours degree .
Students who complete all the requirements for a non - honours bachelor 's degree but do not receive sufficient merit to be awarded the honours degree would normally be awarded the non - honours degree ( also known as a " pass " , " general " or " ordinary " degree ) .
In England , Northern Ireland and Wales , almost all bachelor 's degrees are awarded as honours degrees ; in contrast , honours degrees are rarely awarded in the United States .
The current British undergraduate degree classification system , with its division into first , upper and lower second , and third class honours , was developed in 1918 to distinguish between students on the basis of their academic achievement .
The concept of an " honours " degree goes back a lot further than this , however , with there being examinations for honours in the original regulations of the University of London in 1839 , and Nevil Maskelyne being recorded as taking a bachelor 's degree with honours at Cambridge in 1754 .
Other countries influenced by this system include Australia , Brunei , Canada , New Zealand , Malta , Singapore , South Africa and Hong Kong .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
The consecutive Australian with Honours degree is usually a one- to two - year research program , after the completion of a Bachelor 's degree in the same field .
It can also be started as a concurrent program in the fourth year of a four - year bachelor 's degree .
It is generally considered a postgraduate year because a bachelor 's degree can be completed without it .
Entry to an Honours degree generally requires proven abilities and a distinction ( 75 % or greater ) average in the relevant area or the final year units , and even then is quite competitive .
In the regular ( standalone ) Honours , the student will complete selected courses within a supervised program of research ( field , laboratory , or secondary ) , and produce a long , high - quality research thesis .
This is usually accompanied by a seminar or presentation of the findings to an academic board for marking .
In the case of a quality thesis being produced , it may be published in a peer - reviewed journal or similar publication .
Students receiving high marks in their Honours program have the option of continuing to candidature of a Doctoral program , such as Doctor of Philosophy , without having to complete a master 's degree .
At master 's level , Monash University has a Master of Business with Honours program in which students can be awarded an Honours classification upon completion .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , honours bachelor 's degrees take at least four years to complete , often therefore requiring an extra year of study beyond the general bachelor 's degree .
Honours degrees are normally required for admission to thesis - type master 's programs , and may sometimes allow direct access to doctoral programs .
Honours degrees are allocated a GPA grade , and are considered equivalent to UK honours degrees .
ENGLAND , WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND Section::::England , Wales and Northern Ireland .
In England , Wales and Northern Ireland , Bachelor 's degrees are normally awarded " with Honours " after three years of study .
The bachelor 's degree with Honours meets the requirements for a higher education qualification at level 6 of the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications in full , and is a first cycle , end - of - cycle award on the Qualifications Framework of the European Higher Education Area established by the Bologna process .
Students can be awarded an " Ordinary " degree if they achieve the required learning outcomes over a smaller volume of studies than is required for an honours degree , e.g. only passing 300 credits rather than the 360 usually required for an honours degree .
In addition to bachelor 's degrees , four year integrated master 's degrees , which combine study at bachelor 's and master 's level , are also awarded with honours .
The University of Oxford does not award honours with its standard BA degree , but considers students who gain a third class degree or better to have " achieved honours status " .
MALTA
Section::::Malta .
A number of Honours degrees are offered by the University of Malta , usually indicating an extra year of study with an undergraduate dissertation or a specialisation within a 3-year programme .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
The Bachelor honours degree is a separate level on the New Zealand Qualifications Framework from the bachelor 's degree without honours , as in Australia and Scotland .
It may either be a 4-year ( 480 credit ) course or a single year ( 120 credit ) course following on from a bachelor 's degree , and prepares students for postgraduate study .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
In Scotland , all undergraduate degrees with Honours must be of four - year duration .
Students can choose to do the Honours degree or the general ( or pass / ordinary ) degree .
The first two years of both types of degrees are the same ; however , after that , students who pursue the Honours route will complete more advanced subjects and a dissertation in their last year , while students who choose to do the general degree will complete their third year at a lower level of specialisation .
Entry into the Honours year in Scotland is generally not restricted and students are encouraged to take the Honours year as the general / ordinary / pass degree does not provide the same level of depth and specialisation .
Students enrolling in the Honours program but failing to achieve the required academic merit for Honours are awarded a pass / ordinary / general degree .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
In Ireland , undergraduate degrees fall under two levels in the National Framework of Qualifications ( NFQ ) of the Quality and Qualifications Ireland ( QQI ) .
Courses of study at level 7 take three years and are awarded an Ordinary Bachelor Degree ( 180 ECTS credits ) whereas a course of study at level 8 typically takes four years for an award of a Honours Bachelor Degree ( 180 - 240 ECTS credits ) .
There is also an equivalent award at level 8 of a Higher Diploma which follows a course of study of one year duration ( 60 ECTS credits ) , such Higher Diplomas are designed for holders of either Honours Bachelor Degree or Ordinary Bachelor Degree who wish to study in a different field of learning than their initial award .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa , non - professional bachelor 's degrees ( BA , BSc , BCom ) are three year degrees ( professional degrees such as engineering degrees or medicine are longer ) .
The honours degree is an optional fourth - year and is an additional one - year qualification .
Usually the honours degree specialises in one subject matter ( e.g. , mathematics , English ) .
Intake into the honours degree is often highly selective .
The bachelor 's degree is at level 7 and the honours degree at level 8 on the National Qualifications Framework of the South African Qualifications Authority .
Research components must comprise at least 25 % of the honours degree .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , an honours degree ( or honors degree in US spelling ) requires a thesis or project work beyond that needed for the normal bachelor 's program .
Honours programs in the US are taken alongside the rest of the degree and often have a minimum GPA requirement for entry , which can vary between institutions .
Some institutions do not have a separate honours program , but instead refer to bachelor 's degrees awarded with Latin honours , which may be based either on GPA or class position , as honours degrees .
SEE ALSO
* Bachelor 's degree
* Master 's degree * Doctorate * Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) REFERENCES