CRÈME
DE
MENTHE
Crème de menthe ( , French for " mint cream " ) is a sweet , mint - flavored alcoholic beverage .
Its flavor primarily derives from Corsican mint or dried peppermint .
It is available commercially in a colorless version ( called " white " ) and a green version ( colored by the mint leaves , or by added coloring if made from extract instead of leaves ) .
Both varieties have similar flavor and are interchangeable in recipes , except where color is important .
It has 25 % alcohol by volume .
Crème de menthe is an ingredient in several cocktails , such as the Grasshopper and the Stinger .
It is also served as a digestif and used in cooking as a flavoring ( see Mint chocolate ) .
It is also a primary component of the popular South African shooter known as the Springbokkie .
The traditional formula steeps dried peppermint or Corsican mint leaves in grain alcohol for several weeks ( creating a naturally green color ) , followed by filtration and addition of sugar .
MUSIC
* Sergei Rachmaninoff , although otherwise a teetotaler , found that a glass of crème de menthe steadied his nerves when playing the technically demanding piano score in the twenty - fourth variation of his Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini .
He nicknamed the twenty - fourth the " Crème de Menthe Variation . "
POPULAR CULTURE
*
In " The Visitors " sketch in a 1969 episode of Monty Python 's Flying Circus , Terry Gilliam plays an extremely effeminate , flamboyant , and stereotypically gay character , whose regular drink is a pint of crème de menth .
*
In British comedy Black Books titular character Bernard Black mistakenly serves Manny someone else 's crème de menthe during a drunken job interview .
*
On episode 22 of Season 2 the sitcom Friends " The One with The Two Parties " , character Phoebe Buffay offers a crème de menthe to Leonard Green to try and stall him from running into his wife .
*
On episode 7 of Season 3 on the Starz show Outlander , titled " Crème De Menthe " , character Jamie Fraser Sam Heughan , hides a murder victim in a cask of crème de menthe .
He assures his wife , Claire Caitriona Balfe , that no one will find him because he has never seen a Scotsman drink the said liquor before .
*
In the first season and twelfth episode of Mad Men , there is a shortage of booze during an office party for the presidential election .
In response , members of the party raid a supply closet and fill an entire water cooler with crème de menthe for the party to enjoy .
*
In the movie 28 Days Later , character Frank suggests that they offer glasses of crème de menthe to Jim and Phoebe in honor of their first meeting .
REFERENCES