WILLFUL BLINDNESS
Willful blindness ( sometimes called ignorance of law , willful ignorance or contrived ignorance or Nelsonian knowledge ) is a term used in law to describe a situation in which a person seeks to avoid civil or criminal liability for a wrongful act by intentionally keeping himself or herself unaware of facts that would render him or her liable .
In United States v. Jewell , the court held that proof of willful ignorance satisfied the requirement of knowledge as to criminal possession and importation of drugs .
Although the term was originally — and still is — used in legal contexts , the phrase " willful ignorance " has come to mean any situation in which people intentionally turn their attention away from an ethical problem that is believed to be important by those using the phrase ( for instance , because the problem is too disturbing for people to want it dominating their thoughts , or from the knowledge that solving the problem would require extensive effort ) .
PRECEDENT IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Precedent in the United States .
In United States v. Jewell , the court held that proof of willful ignorance satisfied the requirement of knowledge as to criminal possession and importation of drugs .
In a number of cases in the United States of America , persons transporting packages containing illegal drugs have asserted that they never asked what the contents of the packages were and so lacked the requisite intent to break the law .
Such defenses have not succeeded , as courts have been quick to determine that the defendant should have known what was in the package and exercised criminal recklessness by failing to find out the package 's contents .
Notably , this rule has only ever been applied to independent couriers , and has never been used to hold larger services that qualify as common carriers ( e.g. , FedEx , United Parcel Service , or the U.S. Postal Service ) liable for the contents of packages they deliver .
A famous example of such a defense being denied occurred in In re Aimster Copyright Litigation , in which the defendants argued that the file - swapping technology was designed in such a way that they had no way of monitoring the content of swapped files .
They suggested that their inability to monitor the activities of users meant that they could not be contributing to copyright infringement by the users .
The court held that this was willful blindness on the defendant 's part and would not constitute a defense to a claim of contributory infringement .
SEE ALSO
*
In re Aimster Copyright Litigation * Recklessness ( law )
* Vincible ignorance * Willful Blindness ( book ) * Willful violation * Plausible deniability
REFERENCES
* Luban , David .
Contrived Ignorance ( 1999 ) , Vol .
87 Georgetown Law Journal , 957 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Willful blindness per the IRS IRM Manual