JULIET Juliet Capulet is the female protagonist in William Shakespeare 's romantic tragedy Romeo and Juliet .
Juliet is the only daughter of the patriarch of the House of Capulet .
She falls in love with Romeo , a member of the House of Montague ( with which the Capulets have a blood feud ) .
The story has a long history that precedes Shakespeare himself .
JULIET 'S AGE Section::::Juliet 's age .
One aspect of the story which now seems problematic is Juliet 's age .
As the story occurs , Juliet is approaching her fourteenth birthday .
She was born on " Lammas Eve at night " ( 1 August ) , so Juliet 's birthday is 31 July ( 1.3.19 ) .
Her birthday is " a fortnight hence " , putting the action of the play in mid - July ( 1.3.17 ) .
Her father states that she " hath not seen the change of fourteen years " ( 1.2.9 ) .
In many cultures and time periods , women did and do marry and bear children at an early age .
Romeo and Juliet is a play about Italian families .
Lady Capulet had given birth to her first child by the time she had reached Juliet 's age :
" By my count , I was your mother much upon these years that you are now a maid . "
( 1.3.74–75 ) .
Even Capulet tries to encourage Paris to wait a little longer before even thinking of marrying his daughter , feeling that she is still too young ; " She hath not seen the change of fourteen years ,
Let two more summers wither in their pride , Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride " .
However , in the English poem the story is based on ( Romeus and Juliet by Arthur Brooke ) Juliet is approaching her sixteenth birthday and Romeo is the same age whereas in the Bandello novella she is nearly eighteen with Romeo about twenty .
The common English people of that age were very rarely in their teens when they married and even among the nobility and gentry of the age , brides thirteen years of age were rare , at about one in one thousand brides ; in that era , the vast majority of English brides were at least nineteen years of age when they first married , most commonly at about 23 years , and most English noblewomen were at least sixteen when they married .
That the parts of young women were played by pre - adolescent boys in Shakespeare 's day also can not be overlooked and it is possible that Shakespeare had the physique of a young boy in mind during composition , in addition to the fact that Romeo and Juliet are of wealthy families and would be more likely to marry earlier than commoners .
At the time , English noblewomen married on average at 19–21 years ( compared to 24–26 years for English noblemen ) while the average marriage age in England was 25–26 years for women and 27–28 for men ; Sir Thomas More wrote in his Utopia that , in Utopia , women must be at least 18 years of age when they marry and men at least 22 years .
The common belief in Elizabethan England was that motherhood before 16 was dangerous ; popular manuals of health , as well as observations of married life , led Elizabethans to believe that early marriage and its consummation permanently damaged a young woman 's health , impaired a young man 's physical and mental development , and produced sickly or stunted children .
Therefore , 18 came to be considered the earliest reasonable age for motherhood and 20 and 30 the ideal ages for women and men , respectively , to marry .
Shakespeare might also have reduced Juliet 's age from sixteen to thirteen to demonstrate the dangers of marriage at too young of an age ; that Shakespeare himself married Anne Hathaway when he was just eighteen might hold some significance .
IN TODAY 'S
VERONA CASA DI GIULIETTA
Section::::In
today 's Verona . Section::::Casa di Giulietta .
In Verona , an early 14th - century house at Via Cappello no . 23 , claiming to be the Capulets ' has been turned into a tourist attraction but it is mostly empty .
The real second name was in Italian Cappelletti , a noble family , and not Capuleti .
Cappelletti were in the past members of the light cavalry of the Republic of Venice .
They fought for it since the 13th century and they were originally from Dalmatia and Albania .
It features the balcony , and in the small courtyard , a bronze statue of Juliet .
It is one of the most visited sites in the town .
The metal of its chest is worn bare due to a legend that if a person strokes the right breast of the statue , that person will have good fortune and luck in love .
Many people write their names and the names of their beloved ones on the walls of the entrance , known as Juliet 's wall .
Many believe that writing on that place will make their love everlasting .
After a restoration and cleaning of the building , it was intended that further writing should be on replaceable panels or white sheets placed outside the wall .
It is also a tradition to put small love letters on the walls ( which is done by the thousands each year ) , which are regularly taken down by employees to keep the courtyard clean .
Another tradition that occurs in Juliet 's courtyard is writing your name and that of your loved one on a lock and attaching it to a large ornamental gate in the back left .
The gate is overwhelmed with locks that hold hope for lasting love .
This tradition is seen throughout Europe on bridges and gates all over cities .
CLUB DI GIULIETTA Section::::Club di Giulietta .
Since the 1930s , letters addressed to Juliet keep arriving in Verona .
As of 2010 , more than 5,000 letters were received annually , three - quarters of which were from women .
The largest single group of senders was American teenagers .
The letters are read and replied to by local volunteers , organised since the 1980s in the Club di Giulietta ( Juliet Club ) , which is financed by the City of Verona .
The club has been the subject of a book by Lise and Ceil Friedman and is the setting for a 2008 book by Suzanne Harper and a 2010 USA movie , Letters to Juliet .
PERFORMERS Section::::Performers .
A number of famous actresses and some actors have portrayed the role of Juliet :
* Mary Saunderson was the first woman to play Juliet professionally .
Previous actors had all been males .
* Eliza O'Neill won her fame with Juliet at Covent Garden , 1814 .
* Katharine Cornell had a notable Broadway success as Juliet opposite the Romeo of Basil Rathbone in 1934 , and revived the production with Maurice Evans as Romeo and Ralph Richardson as Mercutio the following year .
* Peggy Ashcroft was one of the great Juliets in history , most famously in the 1935 London production directed by John Gielgud , in which Gielgud and Laurence Olivier alternated the roles of Romeo and Mercutio .
* Norma Shearer in George Cukor 's Romeo and Juliet ( 1936 ) .
Leslie Howard was her Romeo .
* Judi Dench had a great success as Juliet in Franco Zeffirelli 's 1960 London production .
*
Olivia Hussey portrayed Juliet in Zeffirelli 's 1968 film , Romeo and Juliet , ; Leonard Whiting was her Romeo .
* Niamh Cusack portrayed Juliet in 1986 with The Royal Shakespeare Company .
Sean Bean was her Romeo .
* Claire Danes was Juliet in Baz Luhrmann 's modernised 1996 version , Romeo + Juliet , alongside Leonardo DiCaprio as Romeo .
* Gugu Mbatha - Raw portrayed Juliet at the Royal Exchange Theatre 's 2005 production .
* James Patrick Davis portrayed Juliet in an all - male 2008 production with Shakespeare Theatre Company , opposite actor Finn Wittrock as Romeo .
* Hailee Steinfeld portrayed Juliet in Carlo Carlei 's film adaptation , opposite actor Douglas Booth as Romeo .
* Deepika Padukone portrayed Juliet in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's 2013 Hindi adaptation of Romeo and Juliet , Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram - Leela ( translated as " A Play of Bullets : Ram - Leela " ) , opposite actor Ranveer Singh .
*
Teresa Palmer portrayed Julie Grigio , Juliet 's analogue in the 2013 zombie movie adaptation Warm Bodies , opposite Nicholas Hoult as R , the film 's zombiefied Romeo analogue
ANIMATION
*
In , Juliet is portrayed as a white seal and is voiced by Patricia Trippett while her brother Daniel did the voicing of the brown seal Romeo .
* Fumie Mizusawa voices Juliet in the heroic fantasy adaptation
Romeo x Juliet by the Japanese animation studio GONZO , with Takahiro Mizushima voicing Romeo
; Brina Palencia and Chris Burnett portrayed the characters in the English - language dub .
* Kristin Fairlie voices Juliet in the children 's TV series
Peg + Cat .
*
In Gnomeo & Juliet , Juliet is a Lawn gnome voiced by Emily Blunt .
She reprises the role for the film 's sequel Sherlock Gnomes .
* The Sea Prince and the Fire Child is a loosely - based Japanese animation film adaptation , with Mami Koyama voicing Malta the Fire Child and Tōru Furuya as Sirius the Sea Prince ;
Tony Oliver and an uncredited voice actress portrayed the characters in the English adaptation .
FICTIONAL PERFORMERS
* The Academy Award - winning film Shakespeare in Love depicts history 's first Juliet as being illegally played by Viola de Lesseps , a woman ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) .
*
In her music video Love Story , American singer - songwriter Taylor Swift played the part of Juliet .
The plot was transformed to a happy ending , instead of tragic .
*
In the credits of Toy Story 3 , one of the Squeeze Toy Aliens / LGMs play the role of Juliet dressed up in a dress , a wig and a princess hat .
*
In the climax of " Casting Call " from The Mysteries of Alfred Hedgehog , after Camille Wallaby who is beautifully dressed solves the mystery with Alfred and Milo , she is chosen to be the perfect Juliet by saying her famous words .
*
In The Sims 2 Juliet reappears as Juliette Capp .
*
In the episode " Chem Gems " from Danger Rangers , during the song called " Do n't Touch That " , the pink cat Kitty portrays Juliet .
*
In the sitcom Wizards of Waverly Place , actress Bridgit Mendler portrays Juliet ( Juliet was a vampire and the Romeo of the show was Justin Russo , portrayed by actor David Henrie .
In this episode , their families ' feud was a result of rival submarine sandwich shops ) .
However , after her disappearance in the episodes , she later reappears at various times in the series .
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Bevington , David , Ed .
Romeo and Juliet , The Bantam Shakespeare ( New York , 1988 )
* Levenson , Jill L. , Ed .
Romeo and Juliet , The Oxford Shakespeare ( Oxford , 2000 )
FURTHER READING
* " Juliet 's Taming of Romeo " Carolyn E. Brown ; Studies in English Literature , 1500–1900 , Vol .
36 , 1996
* " A Psychological Profile of Shakespeare 's Juliet : Or Was It Merely Hormones ? "
Nancy Compton
Warmbrod
The English Journal , Vol .
69 , No . 9 ( Dec. 1980 ) ,
p. 29 EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Juliet club in Verona *
The fanlisting for Juliet * Juliet Character Analysis