CHEWING GUM BAN IN SINGAPORE
The Singapore chewing gum ban has been in place since 1992 .
Since 2004 , an exception has existed for therapeutic , dental , or nicotine chewing gum , which can be bought from a doctor or registered pharmacist .
It is currently not illegal to chew gum in Singapore , merely to import it and sell it , apart from the aforementioned exceptions .
Tourists visiting Singapore are allowed to bring in up to two packs of chewing gum per person .
ORIGINS LEE KUAN YEW Section::::Origins .
Section::::Lee Kuan Yew .
In his memoirs , Lee Kuan Yew said that in 1983 , when he was Prime Minister of Singapore , a proposal for the ban was brought to him by the then Minister for National Development .
Chewing gum was causing maintenance problems in high - rise public - housing apartments , with vandals disposing of spent gum in mailboxes , inside keyholes , and on lift buttons .
Chewing gum left on the ground , stairways , and pavements in public areas increased the cost of cleaning and damaged cleaning equipment .
Gum stuck on the seats of public buses was also considered a problem .
However , Lee thought that a ban would be " too drastic " .
MASS RAPID TRANSPORT AND IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Mass rapid transport and implementation .
In 1987 , the $ 5 billion local railway system , the Mass Rapid Transit ( MRT ) , started running .
It was then the largest public project ever implemented in Singapore .
It was reported that vandals had begun sticking chewing gum on the door sensors of MRT trains , preventing doors from functioning properly and causing disruption to train services .
Such incidents were rare but costly and culprits were difficult to apprehend .
In January 1992 , Goh Chok Tong , who had just taken over as Prime Minister , decided on a ban .
The restriction on the distribution of chewing gum was enacted in Singapore Statute Chapter 57 , the Control of Manufacture Act , which also governs the restriction of certain alcohol and tobacco products .
RESULTS Section::::Results .
After the ban was announced , the import of chewing gum was immediately halted .
After a transition period allowing shops to clear existing stock , the sale of chewing gum was completely banned .
When first introduced , the ban caused much controversy and some open defiance .
Some people took the trouble of travelling to neighbouring Johor Bahru , Malaysia , to purchase chewing gum .
Offenders were publicly " named and shamed " by the government , to serve as a deterrent to other would - be smugglers .
No black market for chewing gum in Singapore ever emerged , though some Singaporeans occasionally still manage to smuggle some chewing gum from Johor Bahru for their own consumption .
The ban has been partially lifted , as some types of gum are allowable , such as gum chewed for dental health .
However , the government refuses to completely lift the ban due to the risk of gum littering again .
INTERNATIONAL ATTENTION
Section::::International attention .
In the mid 1990s , Singapore 's laws began to receive international press coverage .
US media paid great attention to the case of Michael P. Fay , an American teenager sentenced in 1994 to caning in Singapore for vandalism ( using spray paint , not chewing gum ) .
They also drew attention to some of Singapore 's other laws , including the " mandatory flushing of public toilets " rule .
Confused reporting about these issues led to the myth that the use or importation of chewing gum is itself punishable with caning .
In fact , the only penalties provided under Chapter 57 are fines and imprisonment .
When a BBC reporter suggested that such draconian laws would stifle the people 's creativity , Lee Kuan Yew said : " If you ca n't think because you ca n't chew , try a banana . "
" REVISION Section::::Revision .
In 1999 , United States President Bill Clinton and Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong agreed to initiate talks between the two countries for a bilateral free trade agreement ( USS - FTA ) .
The talks later continued under the new administration of President George W. Bush .
By the final phase of negotiations in early 2003 , there remained two unresolved issues : the War in Iraq and chewing gum .
The Chicago - based Wm .
Wrigley Jr. Company enlisted the help of a Washington , D.C lobbyist and of Illinois Congressman Phil Crane , then - chairman of the United States House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Trade , to get chewing gum on the agenda of the United States - Singapore Free Trade Agreement .
This caused a dilemma for the Singapore Government .
It recognised the health benefits of certain gums , such as a brand of sugar - free gum that contains calcium lactate to strengthen tooth enamel .
Sale of this newly categorised medicinal gum was allowed , provided it was sold by a dentist or pharmacist , who must take down the names of buyers .
In May 2003 , the USS - FTA was signed and the ban was revised .
" They were tough , " Crane said of the talks .
Some found it surprising that Wrigley had fought hard on this battle , given the small size of Singapore 's chewing market .
But the company said it was worth it .
" There 's many examples in our history of things that may have not made short - term financial sense but was the right thing to do in a philosophical or long - term sense , " said Christopher Perille , Wrigley 's senior director of corporate communications .
REFERENCES
* Ho Khai Leong ( 2003 )
Shared Responsibilities , Unshared Power :
The Politics of Policy - Making in Singapore , .
*