HAMILTON BURGER Hamilton Burger is the fictional Los Angeles County District Attorney ( D.A. ) in the long - running series of novels , films , and radio and television programs featuring Perry Mason , the fictional defense attorney created by Erle Stanley Gardner .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
Hamilton Burger first appears in chapter 10 of Gardner 's 1935 novel , The Case of the Counterfeit Eye , in which he is described as " a broad - shouldered , thick - necked individual with a close - cropped moustache " .
Gardner describes Burger in the cast of characters of that novel as an " honest but stubborn " D.A.
In chapter 15 of The Case of the Caretaker 's Cat ( 1935 ) , Burger 's residential address is given as 3297 West Lakeside , and his phone number is EXposition 9 - 6949 .
Burger is one of literature 's least successful district attorneys , and critics have suggested that he must have been the most incompetent lawyer in history , although his record against defense attorneys other than Mason is unknown .
Burger 's cases inevitably involved prosecuting the wrong person , who was defended by Mason , who in the end , revealed the true criminal through a series of tactics that Burger characterized as courtroom tricks .
Burger 's bag of tricks was comparatively empty , chiefly comprising indignant exclamations of , " Incompetent , irrelevant , and immaterial ! "
Once Mason had exposed the true perpetrator , Burger often joined in Mason 's motion to the judge to dismiss the charges against Mason 's client so that Burger could then charge the actual wrongdoer .
A scene from the television series in which Mason consoles Burger after such a dismissal effort was claimed by Sonia Sotomayor to have inspired her to become a prosecutor .
IN FILM Section::::In film .
Hamilton Burger appeared in the fifth installment of the Warner Bros . Perry Mason movie series of the 1930s , The Case of the Black Cat .
He was portrayed by Guy Usher .
The character , now portrayed by Charles C. Wilson , played a larger role in the sixth and final film in the series , " The Case of the Stuttering Bishop .
TELEVISION PORTRAYAL
PERRY MASON Section::::Television portrayal .
Section::::Perry Mason .
Burger was portrayed by William Talman in the long - running CBS - TV series Perry Mason ( 1957–66 ) .
Asked about how he felt about Burger losing to Mason week after week , Talman said , " Burger does n't lose .
How can a district attorney lose when he fails to convict an innocent person ?
Unlike a fist or gun fight , in court you can have a winner without having a loser .
As a matter of fact Burger in a good many instances has joined Mason in action against unethical attorneys , lying witnesses , or any one else obstructing justice .
Like any real - life district attorney , justice is Burger 's main interest . "
Burger did defeat Mason twice on the television series : in " The Case of the Terrified Typist " ( episode 1 - 38 ) , and in " The Case of the Deadly Verdict " ( episode 7 - 4 ) , a much - publicized episode that begins with Mason 's client being sentenced to death .
The character of Hamilton Burger temporarily disappeared from the TV series during the series ' third season .
Talman was fired by CBS March 18 , 1960 , hours after he entered a not - guilty plea to misdemeanor charges related to his presence at a party that was raided by police .
The schedule was immediately juggled to minimize Talman 's presence on the show .
"
The Case of the Crying Cherub " ( episode 3 - 20 ) debuts a pared - down title sequence that omits Talman ; he is credited only in the four episodes he filmed before he was fired .
Talman was defended by the show 's executive producer Gail Patrick Jackson , Raymond Burr and others , but even dismissal of the charges in June did not soften the network 's position .
Patrick said that the role of Burger would not be recast , but that various actors would play assistant district attorneys .
CBS reinstated Talman only after Gardner himself spoke out , together with millions of viewers .
Talman went back to work in December 1960 , and Burger returned in " The Case of the Fickle Fortune " ( episode 4 - 15 ) .
THE NEW PERRY MASON Section::::The New Perry Mason .
In the short - lived CBS - TV series , The New Perry Mason ( 1973–74 ) , Burger was played by Harry Guardino .
PERRY MASON
TELEVISION FILMS Section::::Perry Mason television films .
Talman had passed away by the time of the Perry Mason television movies of the 1980s and 1990s , but his character was referenced in the first of the series , Perry Mason Returns .
In it , a cocky young deputy prosecutor describes her case against Mason 's client as a " dead - bang winner , " to which the District Attorney replies , " You know how many times Hamilton Burger said that ? "
INFLUENCE Section::::Influence .
In her confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee in July 2009 , Supreme Court nominee Sonia Sotomayor prefaced her remarks on the role of the prosecutor by claiming that she was inspired by watching Perry Mason as a child .
" I was influenced so greatly by a television show in igniting the passion that I had as being a prosecutor , and it was Perry Mason " , Sotomayor said .
Her critics cast doubt on her sincerity .
In her 2013 memoir the Supreme Court justice wrote of the show 's influence on her while she was growing up in a Bronx housing project .
Sotomayor granted that the defense attorney was the show 's hero , " but my sympathies were not entirely monopolized by Perry Mason .
I was fond of Burger , the prosecutor , too .
I liked that he was a good loser , that he was more committed to finding the truth than to winning his case .
If the defendant was truly innocent , he once explained , and the case was dismissed , then he had done his job because justice had been served . " NOTES REFERENCES