SPILE
A spile is a small wooden or metal peg used to control the flow of air into , and carbon dioxide out of , a cask of ale .
Spiles can also be used to broach water from trees .
ALE USE Section::::Ale use .
Cask ale is dispensed without the addition of externally supplied gas .
It is not served " flat " with no bubbles at all , though , is a misconception .
Properly conditioned cask ale will have enough dissolved carbon dioxide to produce bubbles of carbon dioxide .
This has been generated by the natural action of the yeast living in the beer while it is stored and transported .
In fact , the yeast can produce more carbon dioxide than is required , and it is for this reason that the cask is vented through the hole in the shive .
When it is first delivered to the place where beer will be poured from it or where it will be connected to the beer engine , the cask is sealed .
It has a keystone ( where the tap will be driven in ) and a shive ( through which it was it was filled ) .
Once it has been laid down in the location where the beer is going to be dispensed from it , a venting punch is used to pierce the shive , which is either partially pre - drilled or has a hardwood tutt sealing the completely drilled hole .
This breaks the seal , and the tap can then be driven into the keystone – if it is hammered in when there is still a high internal pressure , it can be blown out again , with embarrassing consequences .
To allow the loss of excess gas , soft spiles , made of open - grained softwood , bamboo , or harder wood with cuts in , are used .
Once the cellarman judges this process to be complete , a hard spile is inserted which does not allow any more gas out .
These are made of harder wood ( usually still technically " softwood " , but denser and more solid than soft spiles ) .
When beer is being drawn from the cast this is removed and can be replaced by a soft spile , or left open .
When no beer is being dispensed a hard spile is put back in .
Plastic spiles are also available .. Once the spile is reinserted , enough gas will be generated by the yeast to replace the volume of gas that will have come out of solution .
But the amount of carbon dioxide that can be produced is limited , so a hard spile is kept in as much as possible .
This is one of the reasons for real ale 's short shelf - life once a cask is opened – if too much carbon dioxide is lost , the beer will become flat .
Typically , the beer will be good only for two to four days ; this short shelf life is why it is important that a pub serving real ale have sufficient turnover for casks to be emptied while still at their best .
OTHER USES FOR SPILES
Section::::Other uses for spiles .
Like many such older terms , the word spile has other local meanings .
For example : * Tapper , an implement used to tap any sort of tree , e.g. for birch sap , maple syrup , rubber tapping , palm wine from a toddy palm
* The iron or wood spigot driven into a sugar maple to produce maple syrup .
*
At Indian Harbour in Nova Scotia , the shores on which fish processing " stores " were located were called spiles .
*
A Spile is also a term used in boatbuilding to describe the means / actions which a builder uses to determine the shape of any curved piece needing to be fitted to a curved surface .
* A wooden stake or fence post .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
A spile is utilized to obtain water in the novel Catching Fire and subsequent film .
The spile consists of tube with one end sharpened and the other split .
When pounded into a tree , a stream of fresh water flows from the tube .
Most of the year , this is not consistent with the nature of trees , as water diffuses upward through very tiny capillary passages .
When a tree is cut down , water does not flow out of the cut surface .
The technique used in the movie would only work in early spring or late winter , when the watery sap runs high in the trees .
The taps that are placed in maple trees are placed into drilled holes and the resultant fluid is sap , not water .
SEE ALSO
* keystone * spigot
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Cellarmanship - Caring for Real Ale , 2nd Edition , 1992 .
Published by CAMRA .