GUN LAWS IN SWITZERLAND Firearms legislation in Switzerland allows the free purchase of semi - automatic , but not fully automatic firearms by Swiss citizens and foreigners with permanent residence .
Permits for concealed carrying in public are issued sparingly .
The acquisition of fully automatic weapons , suppressors and target lasers likewise requires special permits issued by the cantonal firearms office .
Use of hollow - point and soft - point ammunition is limited to hunting .
The applicable federal legislations are SR 514.54 Federal Law on Weapons , Weapon Equipment and Ammunition ( , , ) of 20 June 1997 ( current edition of 1 .
July 2016 , revised 01.01.1999 ) , and SR 514.541 Ordinance on Weapons , Armament Accessories and Ammunition ( , , ) of 2 July 2008 ( current edition of 1 .
July 2016 , revised 12.12.2008 ) .
The Weapons Law recognises a qualified " right to acquire , possess and carry arms " .
Swiss gun culture has emerged from a long tradition of shooting ( tirs ) , which served as a formative element of national identity in the post - Napoleonic Restoration of the Confederacy , and the long - standing practice of a militia organization of the Swiss Army in which soldiers ' service rifles are stored privately at their homes .
In addition to this , many cantons ( notably the alpine cantons of Grisons and Valais ) have strong traditions of hunting , accounting for a large but unknown number of privately held hunting rifles .
NUMBER OF GUNS IN CIRCULATION
Section::::Number of guns in circulation .
Switzerland thus has a relatively high gun ownership rate .
There are no official statistics , and estimates vary considerably .
The 2017 report from Small Arms Survey has estimated that the number of civilian - held firearms in Switzerland is of 2.332 million , which given a population of 8.4 million corresponds to a gun ownership of around 27.6 guns per 100 residents .
When Switzerland joined the Schengen Information System in 2008 , it was forced to introduce a central registry for firearms .
Only firearms which changed hands since 2008 are registered .
The number of registered firearms in this database was reported as 876,000 as of August 2017 .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
Switzerland 's Weapons Law ( WG , LArm ) and Weapons Act ( WV , OArm ) has been revised to accede to the Schengen Treaty effective 12 December 2008 .
The Act on Personal Military Equipment ( VPAA , OEPM ) governs the handling of military equipment , and in particular the handling of personal weapons by military personnel .
The law is applied to the following weapons :
* Firearms , such as pistols , revolvers , rifles , pump guns ( ) , lever - action rifles , self - loading guns ( shotguns and rifles ) .
* Air and CO2 guns with a muzzle energy of at least 7.5 joules , or if there is risk of confusion with a firearm .
* Imitation , blank firing guns ( ) and air - soft guns when there is risk of confusion with a firearm .
* Butterfly knives , throwing knives , switchblade or automatic knives with total length greater than 12 cm and blade length greater than 5 cm .
* Daggers with a symmetrical blade less than 30 cm .
* Devices that are intended to hurt people such as batons ( ) , throwing star , brass knuckles , slings with armrest .
* Electric shock devices and spray products with irritants in Annex 2 weapons ordinance ( WV / OArm ) , except for pepper spray .
Generally prohibited arms are : *
Automatic firearms such as machine guns .
* Automatic knives when the blade more than 5 cm and total length of more than 12 cm .
* Butterfly knives when the blade more than 5 cm and total length of more than 12 cm .
* Throwing knives ; regardless of the shape and size .
* Symmetrical daggers where blade length is less than 30 cm .
* Brass knuckles .
* Shock rods or stun guns .
* Throwing Stars .
* Buttstock - equipped slingshots ( ) .
* Tasers .
* Hidden firearms that imitate an object of utility , such as shooting phones .
ACQUISITION BUYING GUNS Section::::Acquisition .
Section::::Buying guns .
In order to purchase most weapons , the purchaser must obtain a weapon acquisition permit ( art .
8 WG / LArm ) .
Swiss citizens and foreigners with a C permit over the age of 18 who are not psychiatrically disqualified nor identified as posing security problems , and who have a clean criminal record can request such a permit .
Foreigners with citizenship to the following countries are explicitly excluded from the right to possess weapons :
Serbia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Kosovo , Macedonia , Turkey , Sri Lanka , Algeria and Albania .
The following information must be provided to the cantonal weapon bureau together with the weapon application form : * valid official identification or passport copy .
* residence address .
* criminal record copy not older than 3 months .
For each transfer of a weapon or an essential weapon component without weapons acquisition permit ( art .
10 WG / LArm ) , a written contract must be concluded .
Each Party shall keep them at least ten years .
The contract must include the following information ( art .
11 WG / LArm ) :
* Family name , first name , birth date , residence address and signature of the person who sells the weapon or essential weapon component .
* Family name , first name , birth date , residence address and signature of the person who purchases the weapon or an essential weapon component .
* Kind of weapon , manufacturer or producer , label , caliber , weapon number , and date and place of transfer .
* Type and number of the official identification of the person who acquires the weapon or the essential weapon component .
* and an indication of the processing of personal data in connection with the contract in accordance with the privacy policy of the Federation or the cantons , if firearms are transmitted .
This information must be sent within 30 days to the cantonal weapon registration bureau , where the weapon holders are registered ( art .
9 WG / LArm ) .
Some weapons do not need a weapon acquisition permit ( art .
10 WG / LArm ) :
* Single - shot and multi - barreled hunting rifles and replicas of single - shot muzzle loaders .
* Hand bolt - action rifles , which are commonly used in off - duty and sporting gunnery recognized by the military law of 3 February 1952 and shooting clubs for hunting purposes in Switzerland .
* Single - shot rabbit slayer .
* Compressed air and CO2 weapons that develop a muzzle energy of at least 7.5 joules , or their appearance may be mistaken for real firearms .
BUYING AMMUNITION
Section::::Buying ammunition .
In order to purchase ammunition , the buyer must follow the same legal rules that apply when buying guns .
The buyer must provide the following information to the seller ( art .
15 , 16 WG / LArm ; art .
24 WV / OArm ) : * a passport or other valid official identification ( the holder must be over 18 years of age and not psychiatrically disqualified nor identified as posing security problems .
Further , they must not be a citizen of the following countries ( art .
12 WV / OArm ) : Serbia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Kosovo , Macedonia , Turkey , Sri Lanka , Algeria and Albania ) .
* their residential address .
* a copy of their criminal record or police check , not older than 3 months .
The possession of the following ammunition is generally prohibited : * Armor - piercing bullets .
* Ammunition with projectile containing an explosive or incendiary device .
* Ammunition with one or more projectiles releasing substances which damage the health of people in the long run , particularly those mentioned in annex 2 of the WV / OArm .
* Ammunition , missiles and missile launchers for military explosive .
* Ammunition with projectiles for transmitting electric shocks .
* Ammunition for handguns which may cause deformations .
CARRYING GUNS Section::::Carrying guns .
To carry a firearm in public or outdoors ( and for a militia member to carry a firearm other than his issued weapons while off - duty ) , a person must have a gun carrying permit ( , , ; art .
27 WG / LArm ) , which in most cases is issued only to private citizens working in occupations such as security .
It is , however , quite common to see a person in military service to be en route with his rifle , albeit unloaded .
The issue of such exceptional permits are extremely selective ( see # Conditions_for_obtaining_a_Carrying_Permit ) .
However , it is permissible to carry firearms in public or outdoors if the holder ( art .
27 § 4 WG / LArm ) :
* Has a valid hunting license and is carrying the firearm for hunting .
* Is participating in a demonstration and is carrying the firearm in reference to a historical event .
* Is participating in a shooting competition for air - soft guns , provided that the competition has a secure perimeter .
* Is an airport security officer for an authorized country , a border patrol officer , or a game warden , who is carrying the firearm in the course of their employment .
Furthermore , any licensed holder of a gun may transport an unloaded firearm for special situations ( see # Transporting guns ) .
CONDITIONS FOR OBTAINING A CARRYING PERMIT Section::::Conditions for obtaining a Carrying Permit .
There are three conditions ( art .
27 § 2 WG / LArm ) :
* fulfilling the conditions for a buying permit ( see section above ) .
* stating plausibly the need to carry firearms to protect oneself , other people , or real property from a specified danger .
* passing an examination proving both weapon handling skills and knowledge regarding lawful use of the weapon .
The carrying permit remains valid for a term of five years ( unless otherwise surrendered or revoked ) , and applies only to the type of firearm for which the permit was issued .
Additional constraints may be invoked to modify any specific permit .
( art .
27 § 3 WG / LArm ) .
TRANSPORTING GUNS
Section::::Transporting guns .
Guns may be transported in public as long as an appropriate justification is present .
This means to transport a gun in public , the following requirements apply ( art .
28 WG / LArm ) :
* The gun must be unloaded and transported separately from any ammunition , with no ammunition being transported in a magazine .
*
The transport must be by the shortest reasonable route and requires a valid purpose : * To or from courses or exercises in marksmanship , hunting or for military purposes .
* To or from an army warehouse .
* To show the gun to a possible buyer .
* To or from a holder of a valid arms trade permit .
* To or from a specific event , e.g. gun shows .
*
During change of residence .
EU GUN BAN Section::::EU Gun Ban .
A 2017 amendment to the EU Firearms Directive , known as the " EU Gun Ban " , introduces new restrictions on firearms possession and acquisition , especially on semi - automatic firearms , personal defense weapons , magazine capacity , blank firing guns and historical firearms .
The restrictions must be introduced into the Swiss legal system by August 2018 due to its membership of the Schengen area .
The Directive also includes an exemption covering a specific Swiss issue – it allows possession to a target shooter of one firearm used during the mandatory military period after leaving the army , provided it was converted to semi - automatic only ( art .
6(6 ) of the Amendment Directive ) .
This part of the Directive specifically was however challenged by the Czech Republic before the European Court of Justice due to its discriminatory nature .
The Czech Republic seeks nullification of the " Swiss exemption " as well as of other parts of the Directive .
Civil rights organizations plan to hold a referendum to reject the recent EU directive .
According to Swiss People 's Party vice - president Christoph Blocher , Switzerland should consider abandoning EU 's borderless Schengen Area if the Swiss people reject the proposed measures in a referendum .
ARMY - ISSUED ARMS AND AMMUNITION COLLECTION Section::::Army - issued arms and ammunition collection .
The Swiss army has long been a militia trained and structured to rapidly respond against foreign aggression .
Swiss males grow up expecting to undergo basic military training , usually at age 20 in the recruit school , the basic - training camp , after which Swiss men remain part of the " militia " in reserve capacity until age 30 ( age 34 for officers ) .
Prior to 2007 , members of the Swiss Militia were supplied with 50 rounds of ammunition for their military weapon in a sealed ammo box that was regularly audited by the government .
This was so that , in the case of an emergency , the militia could respond quickly .
In December 2007 , the Swiss Federal Council decided that the distribution of ammunition to soldiers would stop and that previously issued ammo would be returned .
By March 2011 , more than 99 % of the ammo has been received .
Only 2,000 specialist militia members ( who protect airports and other sites of particular sensitivity ) are permitted to keep their military - issued ammunition at home .
The rest of the militia get their ammunition from their military armory in the event of an emergency .
When their period of service has ended , militia men have the choice of keeping their personal weapon and other selected items of their equipment .
However , keeping the weapon after end of service requires a weapon acquisition permit ( art .
11 - 15 VPAA / OEPM ) .
The government sponsors training with rifles and shooting in competitions for interested adolescents , both male and female .
The sale of military - issued ammunitionincluding Gw Pat.90 rounds for army - issued assault riflesis subsidized by the Swiss government and made available at the many Federal Council licensed shooting ranges .
That ammunition sold at ranges must be immediately used there under supervision ( art .
16 WG / LArm ) .
The Swiss Army maintains tightened adherence to high standards of lawful military conduct .
In 2005 , for example , when the Swiss prosecuted recruits who had reenacted the torture scenes of Abu Ghraib , one of the charges was improper use of service weapons .
RECREATIONAL SHOOTING
Section::::Recreational shooting .
Recreational shooting is widespread in Switzerland .
Practice with guns is a popular form of recreation , and is encouraged by the government , particularly for the members of the militia .
Prior to the turn of the century , about 200,000 people used to attend the annual Eidgenössisches Feldschiessen , which is the largest rifle shooting competition in the world .
In 2012 they counted 130,000 participants .
For the 2015 Federal Shooting ( Eidg .
Schützenfest )
37,000 shooters are registered .
In addition , there are several private shooting ranges which rent guns .
GUN CULTURE IN SWITZERLAND Section::::Gun culture in Switzerland .
Switzerland has a strong gun culture compared to other countries in the world .
Groups like ProTell lobby for the preservation of Switzerland 's gun rights .
Additionally , the Schweizerischer Schützenverein , a Swiss shooting association , organizes the Eidgenössische Schützenfeste , every five years and the Eidgenössisches Feldschiessen is held annually .
Every person with a swiss citizenship , aged 10 years or older , can take part at any federal ranges and will be able to shoot for free with the ordinance rifle .
Another possibility for the kids to shoot is the Young Shooters : the SAT ( lit .
shooting and off - duty activities ) oversees lessons in which Swiss children can learn how to shoot using the SIG SG 550 .
This activity is free and the Young Shooters are able to take home the rifle in - between the lessons if they are 17 .
For security reasons however , the breech has to stay at the range in which they attend the lesson .
This training takes place over a span of 6 years within a 3 - 4 month period each year and , if wanted , they can become instructors for the new generation of Young Shooters .
Traditionally liberal Swiss gun legislation has , however , been somewhat tightened in 2008 , when Switzerland has complied with European Firearms Directive .
Throughout the modern political history of Switzerland , there have been advocates for tighter gun control .
The most recent suggestion for tighter gun control was rejected in a popular referendum in February 2011 .
FIREARM - RELATED DEATHS Section::::Firearm - related deaths .
The vast majority of firearm - related deaths in Switzerland are suicides .
The suicide method of shooting oneself with a firearm accounted for 21.5 % of suicides in Switzerland in the period of 2001–2012 ( with significant gender imbalance : 29.7 % of male suicides vs. 3.0 % of female suicides ) .
By contrast , gun crime is comparatively limited .
In 2016 , there were 187 attempted and 45 completed homicides , for a homicide rate of 0.50 per 100,000 population .
Of the recorded homicides ( attempted or completed ) , 20.3 % were committed with a gun ( 47 cases , compared to an average of 41 cases in the period of 2009–2015 ) .
In addition , there were 7 cases of bodily harm and 233 cases of robbery committed with firearms .
There were 16 completed homicides with a firearm in 2016 .
Of these , 14 were committed with a handgun , one with a long gun and one case marked " other / unspecified " .
None of the involved weapons were ordinance weapons issued by the Swiss Armed Forces .
Similarly , out of 31 attempted homicides with firearms , 25 were committed with handguns , two with long guns and four " other / unspecified " , with no use of ordinance weapons on record .
For the period of 2009–2016 , on average 16.5 out of 49.4 completed homicides were committed with a firearm , 13.8 with handguns , 1.9 with long guns and 0.9 " other / unspecified " ; an average 0.75 cases per year ( 6 cases in eight years ) involved ordinance weapons .
SEE ALSO
* Number of guns per capita by country
* Gun politics NOTES AND REFERENCES NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ordonnance fédérale sur les armes , les accessoires d'armes et les munitions
Swiss federal application law on weapons , weapon accessories and ammunition .
* Swiss Portal for hunting and fishing * proTELL website * Firearms Training Company with Swiss Protell membership
* A well organized pro - army and pro - gun rights association in Southern Switzerland