SANSEVIERIA TRIFASCIATA Sansevieria trifasciata is a species of flowering plant in the family Asparagaceae , native to tropical West Africa from Nigeria east to the Congo .
It is most commonly known as the snake plant , mother - in - law 's tongue , and viper 's bowstring hemp , among other names .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
It is an evergreen perennial plant forming dense stands , spreading by way of its creeping rhizome , which is sometimes above ground , sometimes underground .
Its stiff leaves grow vertically from a basal rosette .
Mature leaves are dark green with light gray - green cross - banding and usually range from long and wide , though it can reach heights above in optimal conditions .
The specific epithet trifasciata means " three bundles " .
The plant exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide using the crassulacean acid metabolism process , which is only present in a small number of plant species .
It allows them to withstand drought .
The microscopic pores on the plant 's leaves , called the stomata and used to exchange gases , are only opened at night to prevent water from escaping via evaporation in the hot sun .
As a result , stored oxygen is released at the opening of the stomata at night , unlike most plants which continuously exchange gases during the day .
COMMON NAMES
Section::::Common names .
Sansevieria trifasciata is commonly called " mother - in - law 's tongue " or " snake plant " , because of the shape and sharp margins of its leaves .
It is also known as the " viper 's bowstring hemp " , because it is one of the sources for plant fibers used to make bowstrings .
It is known as hǔwěilán ( 虎尾兰 or 虎尾蘭 , " tiger 's tail orchid " ) in China ; tora no
o
( とらのお , " tiger 's tail " ) in Japan ; and paşa kılıcı ( " pasha 's sword " ) in Turkey .
In Portugal and Brazil , it is known as espada de São Jorge ( " sword of Saint George " ) .
In the Netherlands and Flanders ( Belgium ) , the plant is also known as " vrouwentong " ( women 's tongue ) .
In Russia it is known as " тёщин язык " ( " mother - in - law 's tongue " ) and " щучий хвост " ( " pike 's tail " ) .
CULTIVATION AND USES Section::::Cultivation and uses .
Like some other members of its genus , S. trifasciata yields bowstring hemp , a strong plant fiber once used to make bowstrings .
It is now used predominantly as an ornamental plant , outdoors in warmer climates , and indoors as a houseplant in cooler climates .
It is popular as a houseplant because it is tolerant of low light levels and irregular watering ; during winter it needs only one watering every couple of months .
It will rot easily if overwatered .
The NASA Clean Air Study found S. trifasciata has potential indoor air filtration qualities , removing 4 of the 5 main toxins involved in the effects of sick building syndrome .
It can be propagated by cuttings or by dividing the rhizome .
The first method has the disadvantage that the variegation will be lost .
S. trifasciata is considered by some authorities as a potential weed in Australia , although widely used as an ornamental , in both the tropics outdoors in both pots and garden beds and as an indoor plant in temperate areas .
The plant contains saponins which are mildly toxic to dogs and cats and can lead to gastrointestinal upset if consumed .
VARIETIES AND CULTIVARS Section::::Varieties and cultivars .
Numerous cultivars have been selected , many of them for variegated foliage with yellow or silvery - white stripes on the leaf margins .
Popular cultivars include ' Compacta ' , ' Goldiana ' , ' Hahnii ' , ' Laurentii ' , ' Silbersee ' , and ' Silver Hahnii ' . '
Hahnii ' was discovered in 1939 by William W. Smith , Jr. in the Crescent Nursery Company , New Orleans , Louisiana .
The 1941 patent was assigned to Sylvan Frank Hahn , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania .
The variety S. trifasciata var .
laurentii and the cultivar ' Bantel 's Sensation ' have both gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit .
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Cultural significance .
In its native range in Africa , a yellow - tipped cultivar is associated with Oya , the female orisha of storms .
In Nigeria it is commonly linked with Ogun , the Orisha of war , and is used in rituals to remove the evil eye .
In Brazil its common name espada de São Jorge links it to Saint George , who by syncretism is also associated with Ogun .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS