BASKETBALL POSITIONS
The five basketball positions normally employed by organized basketball teams are the point guard ( PG ) , the shooting guard ( SG ) , the small forward ( SF ) , the power forward ( PF ) , and the center ( C ) .
Typically , the point guard is the leader of the team when on the court .
This position requires substantial ball handling skills and the ability to facilitate the team during a play .
The shooting guard , as the name implies , is often the best shooter and is probably capable of shooting accurately from longer distances .
Generally , they also have good ball - handling skills .
The small forward often has an aggressive approach to the basket when handling the ball .
The power forward and the center are usually called " low post " players to the basket , often acting as their team 's primary rebounders or shot blockers , or receiving passes to take inside shots .
The center is typically the larger of the two .
Historically , only three positions were recognized ( two guards , two forwards , and one center ) based on where they played on the court : Guards generally played outside and away from the hoop and forwards played outside and near the baseline , with the center usually positioned in the key .
During the 1980s , as team strategy evolved after the three - point field goal and the three - point arc were added to the basketball court , more specialized roles developed , resulting in the five position designations used today .
Team strategy and available personnel , however , still dictate the positions used by a particular team .
For example , the dribble drive motion offense and the Princeton offense use four interchangeable guards and one center .
Other combinations are also prevalent .
Besides the five basic positions , some teams use non - standard or hybrid positions , such as the point forward , a hybrid small forward / point guard ; the swingman , a hybrid small forward / shooting guard ; the big , a hybrid power forward / center ; and the stretch four , a power forward with the shooting range of typical shooting guards .
POINT
GUARD Section::::Point guard .
The point guard ( PG ) , also known as the one , is typically the team 's best ball handler and passer .
Therefore , they often lead their team in assists and steals .
They are often quick and are able to hit shots either outside the three - point line or " in the paint " , largely depending on the player 's skill level .
Point guards are looked upon as the " floor general " or the " coach on the floor " .
They should study the game and game film to be able to recognize the weaknesses of the defense , and the strengths of their own offense .
They are responsible for directing plays , making the position equivalent to that of quarterback in American football , playmaker in association football ( soccer ) , center in ice hockey , or setter in volleyball .
Good point guards increase team efficiency and generally have a high number of assists .
They are often referred to as dribblers or play - makers .
In the NBA , point guards are usually the shortest players on the team and are mostly or shorter .
SHOOTING GUARD
Section::::Shooting guard .
The shooting guard ( SG ) is also known as the two or the off guard .
Along with the small forward , a shooting guard is often referred to as a wing because of its use in common positioning tactics .
As the name suggests , most shooting guards are good shooters from three - point range .
Besides being able to shoot the ball , shooting guards tend to have good ball handling skills and the ability to drive the ball to the basket , often creating their own shots off the dribble .
A versatile shooting guard will have good passing skills , allowing them to assume point guard responsibilities known as combo guards .
Bigger shooting guards also tend to play as small forwards .
In the NBA , shooting guards usually range from to .
SMALL FORWARD Section::::Small forward .
The small forward ( SF ) , also known as the three , is considered to be the most versatile of the main five basketball positions .
Versatility is key for small forwards because of the nature of their role , which resembles that of a shooting guard more often than that of a power forward .
This is why the small forward and shooting guard positions are often interchangeable and referred to as wings .
Small forwards have a variety of assets , such as quickness and strength inside .
One common thread among all kinds of small forwards is an ability to " get to the line " and draw fouls by aggressively attempting ( post - up ) plays , lay - ups , or slam dunks .
As such , accurate foul shooting is a common skill for small forwards , many of whom record a large portion of their points from the foul line .
Besides being able to drive to the basket , they are also good shooters from long range .
Some small forwards have good passing skills , allowing them to assume point guard responsibilities known as point forwards .
Small forwards should be able to do a little bit of everything on the court , typically playing roles such as swingmen and defensive specialists .
In the NBA , small forwards usually range from to .
POWER FORWARD
Section::::Power forward .
The power forward ( PF ) , also known as the four , often plays a role similar to that of the center , down in the " post " or " low blocks " .
The power forward is often the team 's most versatile scorer , being able to score close to the basket while also being able to shoot mid - range jump shots from 12 to 18 feet from the basket .
Some power forwards , known as stretch fours , have since extended their shooting range to three - pointers .
On defense , they are required to have the strength to guard bigger players close to the basket and to have the athleticism to guard quick players away from the basket .
Most power forwards tend to be more versatile than centers since they can be part of plays and are not always in the low block .
In the NBA , power forwards usually range from to .
CENTER Section::::Center .
The center ( C ) , also known as the five or the pivot , usually plays near the baseline , close to the basket ( the " low post " ) .
They are usually the tallest players on the floor .
The center usually scores " down low , in the paint " ( near the basket , in the key ) , but some can be good perimeter shooters .
They are typically skilled at gathering rebounds , contesting shots and setting screens on plays .
The center position has been traditionally considered one of the most important positions , if not the most important .
The range of players used in the position has transitioned from relatively slower but much taller ' back to the basket ' players to players who would normally be classified as power forwards but can dominate the position with their defensive skills , or mismatch ability to shoot from the high post .
This has been due to the scarcity of players possessing the combination of great skill , ideal height , and durability .
This has been matched by the development of more fast - paced and athletic basketball play which calls for less traditional center play and a more up - and - down the court style .
In the NBA , centers are usually or taller .
SEE ALSO
* Starting line - up REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Basketball players " at BBC Sport Academy
* " How Basketball Works " at HowStuffWorks.com