FLOOR AREA RATIO Floor area ratio ( FAR ) is the ratio of a building 's total floor area ( gross floor area ) to the size of the piece of land upon which it is built .
The terms can also refer to limits imposed on such a ratio through zoning .
As a formula FAR = ( gross floor area ) /
( area of the plot ) TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Floor Area ratio is sometimes called floor space ratio ( FSR ) , floor space index ( FSI ) , site ratio or plot ratio
The difference between FAR and FSI is that the first is a ratio , while the latter is an index .
Index numbers are values expressed as a percentage of a single base figure .
Thus an FAR of 1.5 is translated as an FSI of 150 % .
REGIONAL
VARIATION
Section::::Regional variation .
The terms most commonly used for this measurement vary from one country or region to the next .
In Australia floor space ratio ( FSR ) is used in New South Wales and plot ratio in Western Australia .
In India floor space index ( FSI ) and floor area ratio ( FAR ) are both used .
In the United Kingdom and Hong Kong both plot ratio and site ratio are used .
In Singapore the terms plot ratio add gross plot ratio ( GPR ) are more commonly used .
In the United States and Canada , floor space ratio ( FSR ) and floor area ratio ( FAR ) are both used .
Use ratios are used as a measure of the density of the site being developed .
The ratio is generated by dividing the building area by the parcel area , using the same units .
HISTORY Section::::History .
One of the purposes of the 1916 zoning ordinance of New York City was to prevent tall buildings from obstructing too much light and air .
The 1916 zoning ordinance sought to control building size by regulating height and setback requirements for towers .
In 1961 , a revision to the zoning ordinance introduced the concept of floor area ratio ( FAR ) .
Buildings built before 1961 often have FARs that would be unachievable today , such as the Empire State Building which has an FAR of 25 - meaning that it earns considerably greater rent than a newer building on the same land
could hope for .
PURPOSE AND USE Section::::Purpose and use .
The floor area ratio ( FAR ) can be used in zoning to limit urban density .
While it directly limits building density , indirectly it also limits the number of people that a building can hold , without controlling a building 's external shape .
For example , if lot must adhere to a 0.1 FAR , then the total area of all floors in all buildings on the lot must be no more than one - tenth the area of the parcel itself .
In other words , if the lot was 10,000 sq .
ft , then the total floor area of all floors in all buildings must n't exceed 1,000 sq .
ft .
An architect can plan for either a single - story building consuming the entire allowable area in one floor , or a multi - story building that rises higher above the plane of the land , but which must consequently result in a smaller footprint than would a single - story building of the same total floor area .
By combining the horizontal and vertical limits into a single figure , some flexibility is permitted in building design , while achieving a hard limit on at least one measure of overall size .
One advantage to fixing this parameter , as opposed to others such as height , width , or length , is that floor area correlates well with other considerations relevant to zoning regulation , such as total parking that would be required for an office building , total number of units that might be available for residential use , total load on municipal services , etc .
The amounts of these things tend to be constant for a given total floor area , regardless of how that area is distributed horizontally and vertically .
Thus , many jurisdictions have found it unnecessary to include hard height limitations when using floor area ratio calculations .
Common exclusions to the total calculation of square footage for the purpose of floor area ratio ( FAR ) include unoccupied areas such as mechanical equipment floors , basements , stair towers , elevator shafts , and parking garages .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Japan has extensively adopted the floor area ratio in the zoning system since 1970 .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India FAR and FSI are both used .
FAR regulations vary from city to city and generally it is from 1.3 to 3.25 .
In Mumbai 1.33 is the norm but higher FSI is allowed along the Metro rail line and slum areas like Dharavi .
In Bangalore , 40 feet streets allow only an FAR of 1.75 but 100 feet streets allow 3.25 FAR .
IMPACT
ON
LAND VALUE
Section::::Impact on land value .
FAR has a major impact on the value of the land .
Higher allowable FAR yields higher land value .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Andres Duany et al in Suburban Nation , the Rise of Sprawl and the Decline of the American Dream ( 2000 ) note : *
Abdicating to floor area ratios ( market forces ) is the opposite of aiming a community toward something more than the sum of its parts .
*
* FAR , a poor predictor of physical form , should not be used when the objective is to conserve and enhance neighborhood character ; whereas traditional design standards ( height , lot coverage and setbacks or build - to lines ) enable anyone to make reasonably accurate predictions , recognize violations , and feel secure in their investment decisions .
*
* If FAR is carelessly combined with traditional setbacks , assembled lots have a considerable advantage over individual lots , which has a negative effect on fine - grained cities and the diversity of ownership .
* FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
* Meriam , Dwight ( 2004 ) .
The Complete Guide to Zoning .
McGraw - Hill .
* Birch , Eugenie L. ( 2009 ) . "
The Urban and Regional Planning Reader " .
Routledge .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* An explanation of the floor area ratio by J.H. Crawford