FIFA WORLD CUP VIDEO GAMES FIFA has licensed FIFA World Cup video games since 1986 , of which only a few were received positively by the critics , but given the popularity of the competition , they all did positively on the market , and the license is one of the most sought - after .
Originally in the hands of U.S. Gold , Electronic Arts acquired it in 1997 and is the current holder .
WORLD CUP CARNIVAL ( MEXICO ' 86 )
Section::::World Cup Carnival ( Mexico ' 86 ) .
World Cup Carnival , released by U.S. Gold , was arguably the worst start a franchise could have endured .
While the license was acquired with time to spare and was carefully planned , internal problems plagued the project 's development until it could not be completed anywhere near a commercially usable date .
As Mexico ' 86 was coming closer , U.S. Gold decided to acquire the rights of an older game , World Cup Football by Artic , re - fit it with the properly licensed items , and market it as a revolutionary new title .
However , this late effort was received with cynicism from all in the video game industry : gamers , retailers and reviewers alike , and started a trend of " less than what was expected " games based on football licenses .
It was published on the C64 , the ZX Spectrum and the Amstrad CPC .
WORLD CUP SOCCER :
ITALIA ' 90 Section::::World Cup Soccer :
Italia ' 90 .
Virgin Mastertronic released the official home computer game of the 1990 World Cup .
It was released on Amiga , Amstrad CPC , Atari ST , Commodore 64 , DOS and ZX Spectrum .
Like the 1986 game , this was actually a reworked existing game ( ) .
The game is presented in a bird's - eye view but when the player gets near the goal , it switches to a 3D view of the penalty area and the player must try to score before a defender arrives on screen .
The player can only choose to play as England , Belgium , Italy or Spain .
The teams do not have the correct coloured strips and the tournament is not the same as the actual World Cup .
Virgin also released official console games in Europe as World Cup Italia ' 90 for the Sega Mega Drive and Master System consoles .
The Mega Drive version is a port of World Championship Soccer .
The Master System version was another game , also released as Super Futebol II in Brazil .
A number of unofficial games were also released including Italy 1990 by previous license holders U.S. Gold .
WORLD CUP USA '
94 Section::::World Cup USA ' 94 .
This game from U.S. Gold was ported to most active platforms of the day : DOS , Amiga , Mega Drive / Genesis , Sega CD , Master System , SNES and handhelds Game Boy and Game Gear .
The Sega CD version included a CD soundtrack including two songs by the Scorpions and FMV views of 3D renders of the stadiums used in the competition .
WORLD CUP 98 ( FRANCE )
Section::::World Cup 98 ( France ) .
For the first time in a football game , accurate national team kits were introduced complete with kit manufacturer logos and official merchandise .
The game built on the previously released engine , although it features some minor gameplay improvements such as in - game strategy changes and more tactically accurate player positioning .
As in the FIFA series , World Cup 98 features a song in the menu :
" Tubthumping " , by Chumbawamba .
The game also features voice - overs by Des Lynam and Gary Lineker in the team schedules .
The World Cup classic mode is also an interesting feature , with classic black and white sepia - toned graphics and commentary by Kenneth Wolstenholme creating the feeling of watching an old World Cup game .
The playable teams also included several nations that did not qualify for the finals , but were considered too important to exclude .
It was released for Windows , PlayStation , Nintendo 64 and Game Boy .
JIKKYOU WORLD SOCCER :
WORLD CUP
FRANCE ' 98 WORLD SOCCER JIKKYOU WINNING ELEVEN 3 :
WORLD CUP
FRANCE ' 98 2002 FIFA WORLD CUP ( KOREA / JAPAN )
Section::::2002 FIFA World Cup ( Korea / Japan ) .
An amalgamation between the game engines of FIFA 2002 and FIFA 2003 , the game still incorporates the power bar for shots and crosses but with a steeper learning curve and higher chances of being penalized by the match referee .
The national team kits are accurate along with player likeness and the stadia of the 2002 FIFA World Cup .
Unlike the previous games in the FIFA series , the game had an original soundtrack performed by the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra .
It was released for Windows , PlayStation , PlayStation 2 , Nintendo GameCube , and Xbox .
2006
FIFA WORLD CUP ( GERMANY )
Section::::2006 FIFA World Cup ( Germany ) .
Created by EA Sports and was released during the last two weeks of April 2006 .
This game features not only the World Cup finals themselves , but the six regional qualification rounds .
There are 127 national teams .
You can also create a player and put in your favorite team .
There are minor improvements in the game play over FIFA 06 .
The Global Challenge Mode includes 40 challenges based upon classic matches of the World Cup or qualification matches .
Penalty Shoot - Out mode offers a more realistic experience .
2010 FIFA WORLD CUP ( SOUTH AFRICA ) Section::::2010
FIFA World Cup ( South Africa ) .
The included teams were confirmed by Electronic Arts on 17 February 2010 .
The game contains 199 of the 204 national teams that took part in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification process .
Electronic Arts stated that they have included every team that FIFA have permitted them to use , with some others not being allowed for " various reasons " .
The five teams that were in the draw for World Cup qualifying but are not included in the game are African teams Central African Republic , Eritrea , and São Tomé and Príncipe , and Asian teams Bhutan and Guam .
All five withdrew from the qualifying stage before it began .
Additionally , the game does not feature Brunei , Laos , Papua New Guinea , and the Philippines who did not participate in World Cup qualifying .
The game includes all 10 venues used at the 2010 FIFA World Cup , as well as stadiums from each qualifying region and a range of " generic " stadiums .
2014 FIFA WORLD CUP ( BRAZIL ) Section::::2014 FIFA World Cup ( Brazil ) .
The game contains all of the 203 national teams that took part in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification process .
The national teams of Bhutan , Brunei , Guam , Mauritania and South Sudan , all of which did not participate in World Cup qualifying , and Mauritius , that withdrew before playing any match , are not featured in the game .
The game includes all 12 venues used at the 2014 FIFA World Cup , as well as stadiums from each qualifying region and a range of " generic " stadiums .
There 's also an EA - licensed collectible card game for Android and iOS : 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil World - class Soccer .
The game is released in Japan and mainland China only .
FIFA
18 DLC ( RUSSIA ' 18 )
Section::::FIFA
18 DLC ( Russia ' 18 ) .
On 30 April 2018 , EA announced a free expansion for FIFA 18 based on the 2018 FIFA World Cup , featuring all 32 participating teams ( and the ones already featured in FIFA 18 ) and all 12 stadiums used at the 2018 FIFA World Cup .
This update was released on 29 May on PlayStation 4,Xbox One , Windows and Nintendo Switch , with an update to mobile devices later , on 6 June .
Coins transfer over from the actual Ultimate Team game and there is no transfer market , meaning all players have to be obtained from packs .
SEE ALSO * UEFA European Championship video games * UEFA Champions League video games
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .
MobyGames links for : * Italy 1990 ( US Gold ) , World Cup Italia 90 "
( Sega )
* World Cup USA ' 94 * World Cup 98 * 2002 FIFA World Cup