JOFFREY BARATHEON
Joffrey Baratheon is a fictional character in the A Song of Ice and Fire series of epic fantasy novels by American author George R. R. Martin , and its television adaptation Game of Thrones .
Introduced in 1996 's A Game of Thrones , Joffrey is the eldest son of Cersei Lannister from the kingdom of Westeros .
He subsequently appeared in Martin 's A Clash of Kings ( 1998 ) and A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) .
Joffrey is portrayed by Irish actor Jack Gleeson in the HBO television adaptation .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
Joffrey Baratheon is not a point of view character in the novels , so his actions are witnessed and interpreted through the eyes of other people , such as his uncle Tyrion Lannister and his one - time fiancée Sansa Stark .
Joffrey is mostly a background character in the novels .
He inherits his mother 's traditional Lannister looks , and has blond hair and green eyes , and is believed by many to be very handsome .
CHARACTER DESCRIPTION
Section::::Character description .
In public , Joffrey is allegedly the oldest son and heir of King Robert Baratheon and Queen Cersei Lannister , both of whom entered into a political marriage alliance after Robert took the throne by force from the ' Mad King ' Aerys II Targaryen .
In reality , his biological father is his mother 's twin brother , Jaime Lannister .
He has a younger sister , Myrcella , and a younger brother , Tommen , both of whom are also products of Jaime and Cersei 's incestuous relationship .
Their sole biological grandparents , Tywin and Joanna Lannister , were also first cousins .
Joffrey is an amoral sadist who disguises his cruelty with a thin veneer of charm .
This is best epitomized by his response when his ( then ) betrothed offends him : Joffrey pronounces that his mother had taught him never to strike a woman , and so commissions a knight of the Kingsguard to hit her instead .
He enjoys forcing people to fight to the death , and enforces cruel punishments for lesser crimes .
He has no sense of personal responsibility , blaming failures on others .
He lacks self - control and often insults his allies and family members .
Joffrey is one of the story 's few characters to display no redeeming qualities whatsoever .
Joffrey is 12 years old at the beginning of A Game of Thrones ( 1996 ) .
STORYLINES
A GAME OF THRONES
Section::::Storylines .
Section::::A Game of Thrones .
Prince Joffrey is taken by his parents to Winterfell and is betrothed to Sansa Stark in order to create an alliance between House Baratheon and House Stark .
At first , Joffrey is kind and polite to Sansa .
However , he refuses to show sympathy with the family when Bran Stark falls from a tower ; this makes Joffrey 's uncle Tyrion have to physically punish him until he shows respect .
While on the Kingsroad to King 's Landing , Joffrey and Sansa come across Arya Stark practicing swordplay with a commoner Mycah .
Joffrey accuses Mycah of assaulting a noble girl and makes a cut on his face with a sword .
This causes Arya to hit Joffrey , allowing Mycah to escape .
Joffrey then turns on Arya , making her direwolf Nymeria attack Joffrey , injuring him .
Later , Joffrey lies about the attack , saying it was unprovoked and demands Nymeria to be killed ; however , Sansa 's direwolf Lady is killed instead .
He later orders his bodyguard and sworn sword Sandor " The Hound " Clegane to kill Mycah and bring him back his corpse , which he does .
Later , Eddard Stark discovers that Joffrey is not King Robert 's son and rightful heir , by examining the family history and realizing that black hair is a dominant trait in the Baratheon line , hence the blonde hair can be attributed to the incestuous relationship of Queen Cersei and Ser Jaime .
This causes Eddard to refuse to acknowledge Joffrey 's claim to the throne when King Robert dies .
He is taken into custody and his guards and household are murdered .
Sansa kneels and begs for Joffrey to spare her father 's life and give him a chance to confess the treason .
Joffrey promises Sansa that if Eddard truly does confess , he would be merciful .
Reluctant at first , Eddard begrudgingly accepts Joffrey as the rightful King in order to spare Sansa 's life .
However , Joffrey , though pleased by Eddard 's " confession " , says that he has no acceptance for traitors and instead beheads Eddard and later forces Sansa to look upon her father 's head .
A CLASH OF KINGS Section::::A Clash of Kings .
Joffrey is briefly seen in A Clash of Kings ( 1998 ) .
He rules with whim and caprice , proving difficult for even his mother to control .
Sansa becomes imprisoned to his will , and he frequently has his guards beat her when she displeases him .
When Stannis Baratheon attacks King 's Landing , Joffrey leaves the battlefield , damaging the morale of his army .
The battle is only won by his uncle Tyrion 's use of wildfire and his grandfather Tywin 's last - minute counterattack aided by the forces of House Tyrell .
A STORM OF SWORDS
Section::::A Storm of Swords .
Joffrey sets aside his earlier betrothal to Sansa Stark in favor of Margaery Tyrell , cementing an alliance between the Lannisters and House Tyrell .
At Tyrion and Sansa 's wedding , he humiliates his uncle and is outraged when his uncle threatens him after he commands him to consummate their marriage .
Tyrion only avoids punishment when his father Tywin assures Joffrey that his uncle was drunk and had no intention of threatening the king .
Later after the events of the " Red Wedding " , Joffrey gleefully plans on serving Sansa her recently deceased brother 's head , when Tyrion and Tywin are outraged .
Tyrion threatens Joffrey once again , and later Joffrey turns on Tywin , who responds by commanding Joffrey to be sent to his room , much to Joffrey 's chagrin .
During his wedding feast in the throne room , he presents an extremely offensive play of " The War of the Five Kings , " with each of the kings played by dwarves , to humiliate his uncle .
He also repeatedly torments Tyrion and Sansa , forcing the former to be his cupbearer .
At the conclusion of the dinner , however , Joffrey 's wine is poisoned , and he dies in an event known as " The Purple Wedding , " in which Tyrion is falsely accused and arrested by Cersei in A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) .
It is later revealed that Lady Olenna Tyrell and Lord Petyr Baelish were the true perpetrators , with assistance from royal fool Ser Dontos Hollard , who successfully smuggles Tyrion 's wife Sansa out of King 's Landing before either of them can be caught and tried for Joffrey 's murder .
LATER NOVELS Section::::Later novels .
Joffrey is mentioned a few times in the later novels .
FAMILY TREE
TV ADAPTATION Section::::TV adaptation .
In January 2007 HBO secured the rights to adapt Martin 's series for television .
Years later young actor Jack Gleeson was cast as Joffrey Baratheon .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Joffrey Baratheon is the Crown Prince of the Seven Kingdoms .
He is the eldest of Cersei Lannister 's children and heir to the Iron Throne .
Evil , arrogant , vicious , and cruel , he has a short temper and believes he can do anything he wants .
He is also a coward when confronted by those who are n't afraid of him .
Joffrey is also unaware that King Robert is not his real father – in reality , he is the son of Jaime Lannister .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
After Robert 's death , the Lannisters make Joffrey King against his father 's will , and his mother uses him as a puppet .
A cruel ruler , Joffrey makes a mistake when , against Cersei 's and Sansa 's wishes , he refuses to honor his promise of sparing Ned ; instead , Joffrey has him executed .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
His act worsens the situation with the Lannisters ' war effort as his uncle Jaime is captured by the Starks and his uncles Renly and Stannis have challenged his claim to the Iron Throne .
He frequently orders his Kingsguard to beat Sansa .
His cruelty and ignorance of the commoners ' suffering makes him unpopular after he orders the City Watch to kill all of his father 's bastard children in King 's Landing which would later lead to a riot where he is almost killed .
When Stannis attacks King 's Landing , Joffrey serves only as a figurehead and avoids the heavy fighting .
When the battle eventually turns in Stannis ' favor , Cersei calls her son into the safety of the castle , damaging the morale of his army .
The battle is only won by his uncle Tyrion and his grandfather Tywin , aided by the forces of House Tyrell .
To cement the alliance between their families , Joffrey 's engagement to Sansa is annulled so he can marry Margaery Tyrell .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The marriage is yet to take place , and rifts are growing between Joffrey and his uncle and grandfather , who are ( in their respective ways ) rebutting his cruelty .
He also seems to take little interest in his bride , but is amazed and altered by her ways of winning the people 's favor , in which he takes part .
At Tyrion and Sansa 's wedding , he humiliates his uncle and is outraged when his uncle threatens him after he commands him to consummate their marriage .
Tyrion only avoids punishment when his father Tywin assures Joffrey that his uncle was drunk and had no intention of threatening the king .
Later after the events of the " Red Wedding " , Joffrey gleefully plans on serving Sansa her recently deceased brother 's head , when Tyrion and Tywin are outraged .
Tyrion threatens Joffrey once again , and later Joffrey turns on Tywin , who responds by commanding Joffrey to be sent to his room , much to Joffrey 's chagrin .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
Joffrey finally marries Margaery .
During his wedding feast in the gardens of the Red Keep , he presents an extremely offensive play of " The War of the Five Kings , " with each of the kings played by dwarves , to humiliate his uncle .
He also repeatedly torments Tyrion and Sansa , forcing the former to be his cupbearer .
At the height of festivities , Joffrey is suddenly overcome by poison , and he dies .
His uncle Tyrion is accused and arrested .
It is confirmed , however , he was poisoned by Olenna Tyrell , with assistance from Petyr Baelish and Dontos Hollard , as she wanted to protect Margaery from the physical and emotional abuse that Joffrey had very clearly inflicted on Sansa .
Olenna Tyrell , Margaery 's grandmother , later confides to Margaery that she would never have let her marry " that beast " .
Following Joffrey 's funeral , his younger brother and heir , Tommen , is crowned King and proceeds to marry Joffrey 's widow Margaery .
It is later revealed that Joffrey was poisoned by Olenna with a rare and extremely dangerous poison , called The Strangler .
This made him unable to breathe and turned his face purple .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Jack Gleeson has received positive reviews for his role as Joffrey Baratheon in the television series .
In 2016 , Rolling Stone ranked the character # 4 in their list of the " 40 Greatest TV Villains of All Time " .
Author Martin described Joffrey as similar to " five or six people that I went to school with ... a classic bully ...
incredibly spoiled " .
REFERENCES