DEVOCALIZATION
Devocalization ( also known as ventriculocordectomy or vocal cordectomy and when performed on dogs is commonly known as debarking or bark softening ) is a surgical procedure performed on dogs and cats , where tissue is removed from the animal 's vocal cords to permanently reduce the volume of its vocalizations .
INDICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS Section::::Indications and contraindications .
Devocalization is usually performed at the request of an animal owner ( where the procedure is legally permitted ) .
The procedure may be forcefully requested as a result of a court order .
Owners or breeders generally request the procedure because of excessive animal vocalizations , complaining neighbors , or as an alternative to euthanasia due to a court order .
Contraindications include negative reaction to anesthesia , infection , bleeding , and pain .
There is also the possibility of the removed tissue growing back , or of scar tissue blocking the throat , both requiring further surgeries , though with the incisional technique , the risk of fibrosis is virtually eliminated .
EFFECTIVENESS CANINE Section::::Effectiveness .
Section::::Canine .
The devocalization procedure does not take away a dog 's ability to bark .
Dogs will normally bark just as much as before the procedure .
After the procedure the sound will be softer , typically about half as loud as before , or less , and it is not as sharp or piercing .
So while the procedure does not stop barking or silence the animal completely , it is effective in reducing the sound level and sharpness of the dog 's bark .
Most devocalized dogs have a subdued " husky " bark , audible up to 20 metres .
SURGICAL PROCEDURE Section::::Surgical procedure .
The procedure may be performed via the animal 's mouth , with a portion of the vocal folds removed using a biopsy punch , cautery tool , scissor , or laser .
The procedure may also be performed via an incision in the throat and through the larynx , which is a more invasive technique .
All devocalization procedures require general anesthesia .
REASONS FOR EXCESSIVE
VOCALIZATION Section::::Reasons for excessive vocalization .
Chronic , excessive vocalization may be due to improper socialization or training , stress , boredom , fear , or frustration .
Up to 35 % of dog owners report problems with barking , which can cause disputes and legal problems .
The behavior is more common among some breeds of dog , such as the Shetland Sheepdog , which are known as loud barkers , due to the nature of the environment in which the breed was developed .
LESS INVASIVE INTERVENTIONS Section::::Less invasive interventions .
Vocalizations are a natural behavior of animals which they use widely in intra - specific and inter - specific communication .
As such , devocalization should generally be considered only as a last resort .
Prior to this surgical intervention , there are other , less invasive interventions which can be considered to overcome excessive vocalizations .
TRAINING
Section::::Training .
Training can be one of the most effective techniques to help combat excessive barking in dogs .
Acquiring the help of a professional dog trainer can often help reduce an animal 's barking .
CORRECTIVE COLLARS Section::::Corrective collars .
The use of automatic and manual corrective collars can be useful as a training aid when used correctly ; however , the use of corrective collars , particularly shock collars , is controversial and banned in some countries .
Types of corrective collars include vibration , citronella spray , ultrasonic and electrostatic / shock collar .
ACCOMMODATION Section::::Accommodation .
Because dogs often bark excessively due to stress , boredom , or frustration , changing aspects of an animal 's environment to make them more content is a suitable way to quiet them down , rather than forcibly silencing a distressed animal .
Spending more time with an animal , such as playing , walking , and other bonding activities , will keep them occupied and make them feel more at ease .
If the animal is stressed , it is best to remove the object that is causing them discomfort .
CONTROVERSY AND LEGISLATION
REASONS
OPPOSING
*
In some regions of the US and in the UK , convenience devocalization is considered a form of surgical mutilation .
* Most vets and the RSPCA offer information to behavioral schools on how to train dogs not to bark .
REASONS FAVORING
* After surgery , dogs are allowed to bark more freely , which is a natural behavior .
* The dog is no longer subject to constant disapproval for its barking .
* Breeds and individual animals known for excessive barking / vocalizing have a higher chance of being adopted / rescued and not being repeatedly re - homed if / when training fails .
*
After debarking , dogs that previously had to be kept indoors to avoid antagonizing neighbors can be allowed outdoors .
CONTEXT Section::::Controversy and legislation .
Section::::Context .
Dr. Kathy Gaughan points out that " the surgery stops the barking , but it does n't address why the dog was barking in the first place . "
Gaughan notes that visitors to her clinic who request debarking are usually looking for a " quick fix " .
Gaughan states that , commonly , those who seek debarking live in apartments , or have neighbors who complain .
Gaughan also counts " breeders with many dogs " among those who most often seek convenience devocalization .
However , Dr. Gaughan does not agree with those who claim the procedure is cruel , stating : " Recently , some animal advocates have asserted this surgery is cruel to the animal ; some countries have even outlawed the procedure .
I do not believe the surgical procedure is cruel ; however , failing to address the underlying factors is inappropriate . "
Some breeders seek the surgery in order to limit or diminish noise levels for personal reasons ranging from convenience to prevention ; some breeders even seek the surgery for puppies prior to going to new homes .
OPINIONS OF ANIMAL WELFARE SOCIETIES Section::::Opinions of animal welfare societies .
Multiple animal medicine and animal welfare organizations discourage the use of convenience devocalization , recommending that it only be used as a last resort .
However , organizations such as the American Veterinary Medical Association , American Animal Hospital Association and the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals , oppose laws that would make devocalization illegal .
The American Veterinary Medical Association 's official position states that " canine devocalization should only be performed by qualified , licensed veterinarians as a final alternative after behavioral modification efforts to correct excessive vocalization have failed . "
The AVMA 's position was later adopted by the American Animal Hospital Association .
The Canadian Veterinary Medical Association 's position statement on devocalization of dogs states : " The Canadian Veterinary Medical Association ( CVMA ) discourages " devocalization " of dogs unless it is the only alternative to euthanasia , and humane treatment and management methods have failed . "
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( ASPCA ) recommends that animal caretakers first attempt to address animal behavior problems with humane behavior modification techniques and/or with a treatment protocol set up by an animal behavior specialist .
The ASPCA recommends surgery only if behavior modification techniques have failed , and the animal is at risk of losing its home or its life .
LEGAL RESTRICTION AND BANNING Section::::Legal restriction and banning .
The legality of convenience devocalization varies by jurisdiction .
The procedure is outlawed as a form of mutilation in the United Kingdom and all countries that have signed the European Convention for the Protection of Pet Animals .
In the United States , devocalization is illegal in Massachusetts , New Jersey , and Warwick , Rhode Island .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Debarking is specifically prohibited in the UK , along with ear cropping , tail docking , and declawing of cats .
By law , convenience devocalization is considered a form of surgical mutilation .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , laws vary by state .
In 2000 , anti - debarking legislation was proposed in California , New Jersey , and Ohio .
The California and New Jersey bills failed , partially due to opposition from groups who predicted the ban would lead to similar bans on ear cropping and other controversial cosmetic surgical procedures on dogs .
The Ohio bill survived , and was signed into law by Governor Robert Taft in August 2000 .
However , Ohio Revised Code 955.22 only outlawed debarking of dogs considered " vicious " .
In February 2009 , 15-year - old Jordan Star of Needham , Massachusetts , filed a bill to outlaw performing convenience devocalization procedures upon cats and dogs .
The bill was co - sponsored by Senator Scott Brown , with the title Logan 's Law , after a debarked sheepdog .
Star said of convenience devocalization : " To take a voice away from an animal is morally wrong .
"
The bill became state law on April 23 , 2010 .
Devocalizing cats and dogs became illegal in Massachusetts by state law in 2010 and in Warwick , Rhode Island , by city ordinance in 2011 .
Legislation to ban devocalization of dogs and cats in New York State is underway .
SEE ALSO
* Animal rights
* Animal welfare
*
Bark ( dog )
* Dog breeding
* Humane society
* Meow * Overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Debarking ( Bark Softening ) -
Myths and Facts " *
" Cesar Millan 's Best Tips to Stop Dogs Barking "
* " Debarking Dogs : Bark Softening Surgery " *
" Do n't Debark , Train Your Dog to Stop Barking Instead ! "
: Why Training a Dog to Stop Barking Is n't Rocket Science and
How You Too Can Easily Do it
Starting Now !
* " Dog Training Tutorials , Video Clips , Articles , Guides , and More ... "