TROPICAL RAIN BELT Rainfall and the tropical climate dominate the tropical rain belt , which oscillates from the northern to the southern tropics over the course of the year , roughly following the solar equator .
The tropical rain belt is an area of active rain that is positioned mostly around the tropics .
According to the website Journey North , the reason the rain belt is situated near the tropics can be attributed to the fact that most of the sun 's radiation is directed toward the equator , which is located in the middle of the tropics .
This solar radiation generates large amounts of heat near the equator providing tropical regions with higher temperatures than most other regions on Earth .
With all this solar radiation , the air around the tropics begins to warm up .
Because hot air is less dense than cold air , the hot air rises into the upper levels of the atmosphere and as a result , cold air filters down into the lower levels of the atmosphere .
The dynamics that provide the tropics with the rain belt are founded on the principle that warmer air is able to retain more moisture than colder air .
When the colder air replaces the warmer air in the lower atmosphere , the abundant moisture from the tropics loses the ability to be stored in the atmosphere .
As a result , the excess moisture that can not be held by the colder air is then turned into thunderstorms and rain showers .
These thunderstorms and rain showers are usually located along the equator , but they will extend out to the Tropic of Cancer , which is the 23.5 north latitude , as well as the Tropic of Capricorn , which is the 23.5 south latitude .
It is largely a manifestation of the ITCZ ( pronounced " itch " ) .
The tropical rain belt lies in the southern hemisphere of the Indian ocean and western Pacific ocean roughly from October to March , and during this time the northern tropics experience a dry season in which precipitation is very rare , and days are typically hot and sunny throughout .
From April to September , the rain belt lies in the northern hemisphere , and a wet season occurs there , while the southern tropics experience their dry season .
The rain belt reaches roughly as far north as the Tropic of Cancer and as far south as the Tropic of Capricorn in the western Pacific Ocean .
Its variation in the Western Hemisphere is minimal , roughly between the equator and the 15th parallel north latitude .
Near these latitudes , there is one wet season and one dry season annually .
On the equator , there are two wet and two dry seasons as the rain belt passes over twice a year , one moving north and one moving south .
Between the tropics and the equator , locations may experience both a short wet and a long wet season .
Local geography may substantially modify these climate patterns .
NORTHWARD MOVEMENT AND THE EFFECTS
Section::::Northward movement and the effects .
As the earth warms , the rain belt is projected to move north of the current position .
Recent climate change can be attributed to rising carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere ; caused by the burning of fossil fuels .
The correlation between the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and average global temperature is undeniably direct , meaning that as more carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere , the temperature of the earth is expected to rise as well .
Even though the earth is warming as a whole entity , the Northern Hemisphere is warming faster than the Southern because of melting Arctic sea ice .
As the Northern Hemisphere warms , a temperature gradient is established between the Northern and Southern hemispheres .
The warmer temperatures in the Northern parts of the tropics foster an environment more conducive to the development of moisture .
The additional moisture is met with a low - level atmosphere that is cooler because the warm air has risen to the higher levels of the atmosphere .
This scenario leads to increased precipitation and is a fundament behind the idea that the rain belt is moving north .
The contrast in temperature is only a part of the entire process that is driving the tropical rain belt northward .
Another factor that influences the tropical rain belt is ocean circulation .
Ocean Overturning Circulation is a process that involves ocean circulation between the Antarctic and Arctic regions .
Dargan Frierson explains that in this process , the Northern Hemisphere receives more heat than the Southern because the overturning circulation brings more heat into the Northern Hemisphere as opposed to the Southern .
He also states that as a result , the extra heat is transferred to the tropical regions in the Northern Hemisphere , causing warm ocean water to be situated in the northern tropics .
This warm ocean water is what eventually generates rain and thunderstorms , and because there is more warm water in the northern tropics , it is obvious that the tropical rain belt is moving northward .
Due to global climate change , the circulation of ocean currents and ocean temperatures might adjust in favor of pushing the belt further north into the region of oscillation .
However , there is also the possibility that climate change will slow down ocean currents and circulation , which can change the present - day dynamic and send the rain belt to the south .
Therefore , ocean circulation , ocean temperature , and the temperature of the earth are all attributing to the movement of the tropical rain belt .
It is evident that the trend is northward and the belt is currently situated in the northern tropics , but the possibility of southward movement does exist .
The northward movement does affect many countries and crops because the tropical rain belt is essential to food production in areas that rely on heavy precipitation .
The tropical regions will be affected most by the northward movement of the rain .
The banana and coffee crops in Guatemala and Indonesia will become compromised by the loss of precipitation .
In addition , the effects of a drier climate in Mexico could push the Mexican desert into southern portions of Texas , New Mexico and other areas in the southern U.S. Areas in the Middle East , Western America , and the Amazon rainforest risk the possibility of becoming drier and less humid .
In contrast , the northward trend could bring more rain to areas in Asia already exposed to monsoons .
An increase of moisture in monsoon prone areas could be catastrophic as massive floods could follow the large amounts of rain added to preexisting rain from monsoons .
Using geographical information , it is possible that the northward movement of the rain belt is already evident because of droughts in the western US , Syria and northern China .
Although the possible adversarial effects of the movement can be devastating , the northward movement of the rain belt could bring an increase of rain to areas that have been decimated by droughts , which could prove to be very beneficial .
REFERENCES