PREFRONTAL CORTEX
In mammalian brain anatomy , the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) is the cerebral cortex which covers the front part of the frontal lobe .
The PFC contains the Brodmann areas BA8 , BA9 , BA10 , BA11 , BA12 , BA13 , BA14 , BA24 , BA25 , BA32 , BA44 , BA45 , BA46 , and BA47 .
Many authors have indicated an integral link between a person 's will to live , personality , and the functions of the prefrontal cortex .
This brain region has been implicated in planning complex cognitive behavior , personality expression , decision making , and moderating social behavior .
The basic activity of this brain region is considered to be orchestration of thoughts and actions in accordance with internal goals .
The most typical psychological term for functions carried out by the prefrontal cortex area is executive function .
Executive function relates to abilities to differentiate among conflicting thoughts , determine good and bad , better and best , same and different , future consequences of current activities , working toward a defined goal , prediction of outcomes , expectation based on actions , and social " control " ( the ability to suppress urges that , if not suppressed , could lead to socially unacceptable outcomes ) .
The frontal cortex supports concrete rule learning .
More anterior regions along the rostro - caudal axis of frontal cortex support rule learning at higher levels of abstraction .
STRUCTURE
DEFINITION
Section::::Structure .
Section::::Definition .
There are three possible ways to define the prefrontal cortex :
* as the granular frontal cortex * as the projection zone of the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus
* as that part of the frontal cortex whose electrical stimulation does not evoke movements GRANULAR FRONTAL CORTEX Section::::Granular frontal cortex .
The prefrontal cortex has been defined based on cytoarchitectonics by the presence of a cortical granular layer IV .
It is not entirely clear who first used this criterion .
Many of the early cytoarchitectonic researchers restricted the use of the term prefrontal to a much smaller region of cortex including the gyrus rectus and the gyrus rostralis ( Campbell , 1905 ; G. E. Smith , 1907 ; Brodmann , 1909 ; von Economo and Koskinas , 1925 ) .
In 1935 , however , Jacobsen used the term prefrontal to distinguish granular prefrontal areas from agranular motor and premotor areas .
In terms of Brodmann areas , the prefrontal cortex traditionally includes areas 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 24 , 25 , 32 , 44 , 45 , 46 , and 47 , however , not all of these areas are strictly granular – 44 is dysgranular , caudal 11 and orbital 47 are agranular .
The main problem with this definition is that it works well only in primates but not in nonprimates , as the latter lack a granular layer IV .
PROJECTION ZONE Section::::Projection zone .
To define the prefrontal cortex as the projection zone of the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus builds on the work of Rose and Woolsey , who showed that this nucleus projects to anterior and ventral parts of the brain in nonprimates , however , Rose and Woolsey termed this projection zone " orbitofrontal .
" It seems to have been Akert , who , for the first time in 1964 , explicitly suggested that this criterion could be used to define homologues of the prefrontal cortex in primates and nonprimates .
This allowed the establishment of homologies despite the lack of a granular frontal cortex in nonprimates .
The projection zone definition is still widely accepted today ( e.g. Fuster ) , although its usefulness has been questioned .
Modern tract tracing studies have shown that projections of the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus are not restricted to the granular frontal cortex in primates .
As a result , it was suggested to define the prefrontal cortex as the region of cortex that has stronger reciprocal connections with the mediodorsal nucleus than with any other thalamic nucleus .
Uylings et al .
acknowledge , however , that even with the application of this criterion , it might be rather difficult to define the prefrontal cortex unequivocally .
ELECTRICALLY SILENT AREA OF FRONTAL CORTEX Section::::Electrically silent area of frontal cortex .
A third definition of the prefrontal cortex is the area of frontal cortex whose electrical stimulation does not lead to observable movements .
For example , in 1890 David Ferrier used the term in this sense .
One complication with this definition is that the electrically " silent " frontal cortex includes both granular and non - granular areas .
SUBDIVISIONS Section::::Subdivisions .
The table below shows different ways to subdivide parts of the prefrontal cortex based upon Brodmann areas . !
width="45 " 8 !
width="45 " lateral 9 !
width="45 " 46 !
width="45 " 12 ! width="45 " 44 !
width="45 " 45 !
width="45 " 47 !
width="45 " medial 9 !
width="45 " medial 10 !
width="45 " 24 !
width="45 " 25 !
width="45 " 32 !
width="45 " 11 !
width="45 " 13 ! width="45 " 14 *
The medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ) is composed of granular cortical areas ( medial areas BA9 and BA10 ) and agranular regions ( areas 24 , 25 , and 32 ) which encompasses the anterior cingulate cortex ( area 24 ) , infralimbic cortex ( area 25 ) , and prelimbic cortex ( area 32 ) .
*
The orbitofrontal cortex is composed of granular cortical areas ( area 11 ) and mixed granular and agranular regions ( areas BA13 and BA14 ) .
*
The ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is composed of areas BA12 , BA44 , BA45 , and BA47 .
* The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is composed of the lateral part of area BA9 and all of area BA46 .
*
The caudal prefrontal cortex is composed of area BA8 , including the frontal eye fields .
INTERCONNECTIONS Section::::Interconnections .
The prefrontal cortex is highly interconnected with much of the brain , including extensive connections with other cortical , subcortical and brain stem sites .
The dorsal prefrontal cortex is especially interconnected with brain regions involved with attention , cognition and action , while the ventral prefrontal cortex interconnects with brain regions involved with emotion .
The prefrontal cortex also receives inputs from the brainstem arousal systems , and its function is particularly dependent on its neurochemical environment .
Thus , there is coordination between our state of arousal and our mental state .
The interplay between the prefrontal cortex and socioemotional system of the brain is relevant for adolescent development , as proposed by the Dual Systems Model .
The medial prefrontal cortex has been implicated in the generation of slow - wave sleep ( SWS ) , and prefrontal atrophy has been linked to decreases in SWS .
Prefrontal atrophy occurs naturally as individuals age , and it has been demonstrated that older adults experience impairments in memory consolidation as their medial prefrontal cortices degrade .
In monkeys , significant atrophy has been found as a result of neuroleptic or antipsychotic psychiatric medication .
In older adults , instead of being transferred and stored in the neocortex during SWS , memories start to remain in the hippocampus where they were encoded , as evidenced by increased hippocampal activation compared to younger adults during recall tasks , when subjects learned word associations , slept , and then were asked to recall the learned words .
FUNCTION EXECUTIVE FUNCTION Section::::Function .
Section::::Executive function .
The original studies of Fuster and of Goldman - Rakic emphasized the fundamental ability of the prefrontal cortex to represent information not currently in the environment , and the central role of this function in creating the " mental sketch pad " .
Goldman - Rakic spoke of how this representational knowledge was used to intelligently guide thought , action , and emotion , including the inhibition of inappropriate thoughts , distractions , actions , and feelings .
In this way , working memory can be seen as fundamental to attention and behavioral inhibition .
Fuster speaks of how this prefrontal ability allows the wedding of past to future , allowing both cross - temporal and cross - modal associations in the creation of goal - directed , perception - action cycles .
This ability to represent underlies all other higher executive functions .
Shimamura proposed Dynamic Filtering Theory to describe the role of the prefrontal cortex in executive functions .
The prefrontal cortex is presumed to act as a high - level gating or filtering mechanism that enhances goal - directed activations and inhibits irrelevant activations .
This filtering mechanism enables executive control at various levels of processing , including selecting , maintaining , updating , and rerouting activations .
It has also been used to explain emotional regulation .
Miller and Cohen proposed an Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex Function , that arises from the original work of Goldman - Rakic and Fuster .
The two theorize that " cognitive control stems from the active maintenance of patterns of activity in the prefrontal cortex that represents goals and means to achieve them .
They provide bias signals to other brain structures whose net effect is to guide the flow of activity along neural pathways that establish the proper mappings between inputs , internal states , and outputs needed to perform a given task " .
In essence , the two theorize that the prefrontal cortex guides the inputs and connections , which allows for cognitive control of our actions .
The prefrontal cortex is of significant importance when top - down processing is needed .
Top - down processing by definition is when behavior is guided by internal states or intentions .
According to the two , " The PFC is critical in situations when the mappings between sensory inputs , thoughts , and actions either are weakly established relative to other existing ones or are rapidly changing " .
An example of this can be portrayed in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test ( WCST ) .
Subjects engaging in this task are instructed to sort cards according to the shape , color , or number of symbols appearing on them .
The thought is that any given card can be associated with a number of actions and no single stimulus - response mapping will work .
Human subjects with PFC damage are able to sort the card in the initial simple tasks , but unable to do so as the rules of classification change .
Miller and Cohen conclude that the implications of their theory can explain how much of a role the PFC has in guiding control of cognitive actions .
In the researchers ' own words , they claim that , " depending on their target of influence , representations in the PFC can function variously as attentional templates , rules , or goals by providing top - down bias signals to other parts of the brain that guide the flow of activity along the pathways needed to perform a task " .
Experimental data indicate a role for the prefrontal cortex in mediating normal sleep physiology , dreaming and sleep - deprivation phenomena .
When analyzing and thinking about attributes of other individuals , the medial prefrontal cortex is activated , however , it is not activated when contemplating the characteristics of inanimate objects .
Studies using fMRI have shown that the medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ) , specifically the anterior medial prefrontal cortex ( amPFC ) , may modulate mimicry behavior .
Neuroscientists are suggesting that social priming influences activity and processing in the amPFC , and that this area of the prefrontal cortex modulates mimicry responses and behavior .
As of recent , researchers have used neuroimaging techniques to find that along with the basal ganglia , the prefrontal cortex is involved with learning exemplars , which is part of the exemplar theory , one of the three main ways our mind categorizes things .
The exemplar theory states that we categorize judgements by comparing it to a similar past experience within our stored memories .
A 2014 meta - analysis by Professor Nicole P.Yuan from the University of Arizona found that larger prefrontal cortex volume and greater PFC cortical thickness were associated with better executive performance .
ATTENTION AND MEMORY Section::::Attention and memory .
A widely accepted theory regarding the function of the brain 's prefrontal cortex is that it serves as a store of short - term memory .
This idea was first formulated by Jacobsen , who reported in 1936 that damage to the primate prefrontal cortex caused short - term memory deficits .
Karl Pribram and colleagues ( 1952 ) identified the part of the prefrontal cortex responsible for this deficit as area 46 , also known as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( dlPFC ) .
More recently , Goldman - Rakic and colleagues ( 1993 ) evoked short - term memory loss in localized regions of space by temporary inactivation of portions of the dlPFC .
Once the concept of working memory ( see also Baddeley 's model of working memory ) was established in contemporary neuroscience by Alan Baddeley ( 1986 ) , these neuropsychological findings contributed to the theory that the prefrontal cortex implements working memory and , in some extreme formulations , only working memory .
In the 1990s this theory developed a wide following , and it became the predominant theory of PF function , especially for nonhuman primates .
The concept of working memory used by proponents of this theory focused mostly on the short - term maintenance of information , and rather less on the manipulation or monitoring of such information or on the use of that information for decisions .
Consistent with the idea that the prefrontal cortex functions predominantly in maintenance memory , delay - period activity in the PF has often been interpreted as a memory trace .
( The phrase " delay - period activity " applies to neuronal activity that follows the transient presentation of an instruction cue and persists until a subsequent " go " or " trigger " signal . )
To explore alternative interpretations of delay - period activity in the prefrontal cortex , Lebedev et al .
( 2004 ) investigated the discharge rates of single prefrontal neurons as monkeys attended to a stimulus marking one location while remembering a different , unmarked location .
Both locations served as potential targets of a saccadic eye movement .
Although the task made intensive demands on short - term memory , the largest proportion of prefrontal neurons represented attended locations , not remembered ones .
These findings showed that short - term memory functions can not account for all , or even most , delay - period activity in the part of the prefrontal cortex explored .
The authors suggested that prefrontal activity during the delay - period contributes more to the process of attentional selection ( and selective attention ) than to memory storage .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
In the last few decades , brain imaging systems have been used to determine brain region volumes and nerve linkages .
Several studies have indicated that reduced volume and interconnections of the frontal lobes with other brain regions is observed in patients diagnosed with mental disorders and prescribed potent antipsychotics ; those subjected to repeated stressors ; those who excessively consume sexually explicit materials ; suicides ; those incarcerated ; criminals ; sociopaths ; those affected by lead poisoning ; and daily male cannabis users ( only 13 people were tested ) .
It is believed that at least some of the human abilities to feel guilt or remorse , and to interpret reality , are dependent on a well - functioning prefrontal cortex .
It is also widely believed that the size and number of connections in the prefrontal cortex relates directly to sentience , as the prefrontal cortex in humans occupies a far larger percentage of the brain than in any other animal .
And it is theorized that , as the brain has tripled in size over five million years of human evolution , the prefrontal cortex has increased in size sixfold .
A review on executive functions in healthy exercising individuals noted that the left and right halves of the prefrontal cortex , which is divided by the medial longitudinal fissure , appears to become more interconnected in response to consistent aerobic exercise .
Two reviews of structural neuroimaging research indicate that marked improvements in prefrontal and hippocampal gray matter volume occur in healthy adults that engage in medium intensity exercise for several months .
A functional neuroimaging review of meditation - based practices suggested that practicing mindfulness enhances prefrontal activation , which was noted to be correlated with increased well - being and reduced anxiety ; however , the review noted the need for cohort studies in future research to better establish this .
Treatments with anti - cancer drugs often are toxic to the cells of the brain , leading to memory loss and cognitive dysfunction that can persist long after the period of exposure .
Such a condition is referred to as chemo brain .
To determine the basis of this condition , mice were treated with the chemotherapeutic agent mitomycin C.
In the prefrontal cortex , this treatment resulted in an increase of the oxidative DNA damage 8-oxodG , a decrease in the enzyme OGG1 that ordinarily repairs such damage , and epigenetic alterations .
Chronic intake of alcohol leads to persistent alterations in brain function including altered decision making ability .
The prefrontal cortex of chronic alcoholics has been shown to be vulnerable to oxidative DNA damage and neuronal cell death .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Perhaps the seminal case in prefrontal cortex function is that of Phineas Gage , whose left frontal lobe was destroyed when a large iron rod was driven through his head in an 1848 accident .
The standard presentation ( e.g. ) is that , although Gage retained normal memory , speech and motor skills , his personality changed radically : He became irritable , quick - tempered , and impatient — characteristics he did not previously display — so that friends described him as " no longer Gage " ; and , whereas he had previously been a capable and efficient worker , afterward he was unable to complete tasks .
However , careful analysis of primary evidence shows that descriptions of Gage 's psychological changes are usually exaggerated when held against the description given by Gage 's doctor , the most striking feature being that changes described years after Gage 's death are far more dramatic than anything reported while he was alive .
Subsequent studies on patients with prefrontal injuries have shown that the patients verbalized what the most appropriate social responses would be under certain circumstances .
Yet , when actually performing , they instead pursued behavior aimed at immediate gratification , despite knowing the longer - term results would be self - defeating .
The interpretation of this data indicates that not only are skills of comparison and understanding of eventual outcomes harbored in the prefrontal cortex but the prefrontal cortex ( when functioning correctly ) controls the mental option to delay immediate gratification for a better or more rewarding longer - term gratification result .
This ability to wait for a reward is one of the key pieces that define optimal executive function of the human brain .
There is much current research devoted to understanding the role of the prefrontal cortex in neurological disorders .
Many disorders , such as schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , and ADHD , have been related to dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex , and thus this area of the brain offers the potential for new treatments of these conditions .
Clinical trials have begun on certain drugs that have been shown to improve prefrontal cortex function , including guanfacine , which acts through the alpha-2A adrenergic receptor .
A downstream target of this drug , the HCN channel , is one of the most recent areas of exploration in prefrontal cortex pharmacology .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term " prefrontal " as describing a part of the brain appears to have been introduced by Richard Owen in 1868 .
For him , the prefrontal area was restricted to the anterior - most part of the frontal lobe ( approximately corresponding to the frontal pole ) .
It has been hypothesized that his choice of the term was based on the prefrontal bone present in most amphibians and reptiles .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO * Lobotomy * Interference theory * Self - model theory of subjectivity
* Dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
* Ventromedial prefrontal cortex
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Diagram ( ua.edu )
* Diagram ( universe-review.ca )