BERGDORF GOODMAN Bergdorf Goodman Inc. is a luxury department store based on Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan in New York City .
The company was founded in 1899 by Herman Bergdorf and was later owned and managed by Edwin Goodman , and later his son Andrew Goodman .
Today , Bergdorf Goodman operates from two stores situated across the street from each other at Fifth Avenue between 57th and 58th streets .
The main store , which opened at its current location in 1928 , is located on the west side of Fifth Avenue .
A separate men 's store , established in 1990 , is located on the east side of Fifth Avenue , directly across the street .
Bergdorf Goodman is a subsidiary of Neiman Marcus , which is owned by the private equity firm Ares Management .
HISTORY FOUNDING AND EARLY HISTORY ( 1899–1951 )
Section::::History .
Section::::Founding and early history ( 1899–1951 ) .
The company traces its origins to 1899 when Herman Bergdorf , an immigrant from Alsace , opened a tailor shop just above Union Square in downtown Manhattan .
Edwin Goodman , a 23-year - old merchant , based in Lockport , New York , moved to New York City to work as an apprentice for Bergdorf .
Within two years , Goodman had raised enough money to purchase an interest in the business , which was renamed Bergdorf Goodman in 1901 .
In 1906 , Bergdorf Goodman moved to a new location on 32nd Street , just west of Fifth Avenue and " Ladies ' Mile " .
While Bergdorf preferred the less expensive side street location , Goodman prevailed with the new location and bought Bergdorf 's interest in the company .
Bergdorf would retire to Paris .
Although Goodman had developed a good business as a ladies ' tailor on 32nd Street , he decided to move uptown in 1914 .
Goodman constructed a five - story building at 616 Fifth Avenue , on the site of what is today Rockefeller Center .
In 1914 , Goodman became the first couturier to introduce ready - to - wear , making Bergdorf Goodman a destination for American and French fashion .
The store moved to its present location at 5th Avenue and 58th Street in 1928 , building its Beaux - Arts style store on the site of the Cornelius Vanderbilt II mansion .
He was unsure of the success of the new store 's location , as he was uncertain whether customers would follow the store uptown .
So , Goodman designed the new store so that it could be subdivided into sections with storefronts that could be rented out if needed .
Early tenants included Van Cleef & Arpels , the and Dobbs the Hatter .
During the Great Depression , however , Goodman thrived , buying the entire building .
Throughout the 1930s , Goodman purchased the mortgages of the surrounding businesses , eventually acquiring the entire block .
During this period , Bergdorf Goodman was successful enough to have merited an expansion beyond the single store .
However , Goodman preferred to operate in a single location where he would be able to personally maintain the quality of the merchandise and service .
THE SECOND GENERATION ( 1951–1972 ) Section::::The second generation ( 1951–1972 ) .
Goodman 's son , Andrew , assumed the role of president in 1951 and succeeded as head of the company in 1953 , following the death of his father .
Andrew was responsible for enhancing Bergdorf 's reputation and expanding its range of merchandise and services .
During Andrew 's tenure as chairman , Bergdorf opened a fur salon , developed the successful Bergdorf Goodman Number Nine perfume ( " Love Potion Number Nine " ) , and created Miss Bergdorf , a ready - to - wear line for younger customers .
The store began a $ 1 million expansion in 1959 into two adjacent buildings .
The Boys and Girls gift shop expanded into a whole floor , and the beauty salon and bridal , fur and men 's departments also expanded .
Eight years later , a $ 2.5 million expansion in 1967 nearly doubled the store 's area , to .
NEW OWNERSHIP ( 1972–1990 ) Section::::New ownership ( 1972–1990 ) .
In 1972 , Andrew Goodman sold Bergdorf Goodman to Broadway - Hale Stores , which would become Carter Hawley Hale Stores ( CHH ) for $ 12.5 million .
CHH had acquired Neiman Marcus , a three - unit operation at the time , in 1969 .
By the time of the sale , Bergdorf Goodman was the only large high - quality specialty store in the U.S. that remained independently owned .
However , its decision not to build suburban branches left it with a relatively modest profit margin .
Goodman remained the landlord of the store and kept a penthouse apartment on the building 's top floor .
At first , CHH considered building branch locations , ultimately only constructing one location , in nearby White Plains , New York , in 1972 .
This location eventually became a Neiman Marcus branch in 1981 .
To combat its image difficulties , the company hired Dawn Mello in 1975 as vice president of fashion .
She was successful in reinvigorating the conservative store and became president in 1984 .
She left her post in 1989 to work for the floundering Italian fashion house Gucci , though she returned to her post as president in 1994 .
Bergdorf Goodman 's parent company became the object of takeover bids in the 1980s .
As a way to maintain its independence , Carter Hawley completed a major financial restructuring .
In 1987 , Bergdorf Goodman was spun - off , together with Neiman Marcus and Contempo Casuals , to form Neiman Marcus Group .
The new company was headquartered in Dallas , Texas , where the significantly larger Neiman Marcus had been based for 80 years .
REACHING THE CENTENNIAL ( 1990–PRESENT )
Section::::Reaching the centennial ( 1990–present ) .
Chairman and CEO Ira Neimark expanded the women 's store three times in the 1990s .
He moved the men 's store across the street to the former FAO Schwarz space at 745 Fifth Avenue in 1990 .
This move allowed more space for women 's fashions .
In 1997 , the former Goodman family apartment on the building 's ninth floor became the John Barrett Salon and Susan Ciminelli Day Spa .
In 1999 , the Beauty Level opened directly below the main floor , offering a luxury spa and Goodman 's Café , serving lunch and afternoon tea .
In 2002 , Bergdorf Goodman underwent a major renovation , during which artisans and craftspeople began a dramatic restoration of the main floor of the women 's store .
In 2003 , the store introduced new boutiques for Chanel , Giorgio Armani , Gucci , Versace , and Yves Saint Laurent .
The Bergdorf Goodman Men 's store features exclusive brands such as Loro Piana , Kiton , Brunello Cucinelli , John Lobb , Thom Browne , Bontoni , Tom Ford , and Charvet .
On May 2 , 2005 , two private equity firms , Texas Pacific Group and Warburg Pincus , acquired the Neiman Marcus Group and its Bergdorf subsidiary , in a leveraged buyout ( LBO ) .
IN MEDIA Section::::In media .
The store has been the subject of two documentary films : the 2001 film Dita and the Family Business , exploring the store from the point of view of its owners , and the 2013 feature documentary Scatter
My Ashes at Bergdorf 's , which features many testimonials from designers and celebrities .
The store has also made several appearances in the cartoon Neo Yokio .
The protagonist , Kaz Kaan , and his rival , Arcangelo , both buy their suits from Bergdorf 's .
SEE ALSO
* List of department stores * National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan from 14th to 59th Streets
* List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan from 14th to 59th Streets REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bergdorf Goodman website
* Bergdorf Goodman Windows Archive at anothernormal.com
* Bergdorf Goodman Company History .
Funding Universe * Scatter My Ashes at Bergdorf 's Documentary