HOCUS POCUS ( 1993 FILM )
Hocus Pocus is a 1993 American comedy horror fantasy film directed by Kenny Ortega , starring Bette Midler , Kathy Najimy , and Sarah Jessica Parker ; written by Neil Cuthbert and Mick Garris , and based on a story by Garris and David Kirschner .
It follows a villainous trio of witches , who are inadvertently resurrected by a teenage boy in Salem , Massachusetts .
Although it was not a critical or commercial success when it was first released , Hocus Pocus has become a cult film , largely from annual airings on the Disney Channel and Freeform ( formerly ABC Family ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On October 31 , 1693 near Salem , Massachusetts , Thackery Binx sees his little sister , Emily , spirited away to the cottage of three witches .
There , the Sanderson sisters , Winifred , Sarah and Mary , cast a spell on Emily to absorb her youth and regain their own , killing her in the process .
Thackery confronts the witches who transform him into an immortal black cat to live with his guilt for not saving Emily .
The townsfolk , led by Binx 's father , capture the witches .
But before being hanged , Winifred 's spellbook casts a curse that will resurrect the witches during a full moon on All Hallows ' Eve when any virgin lights the Black Flame Candle .
Thackery guards the cottage to ensure no one summons the witches .
300 years later ( Halloween 1993 ) , Max Dennison is feeling unsettled from his family 's sudden move from Los Angeles to Salem .
Max takes his younger sister Dani trick - or - treating , where they run into Max 's new crush Allison .
Allison mentions that her family owns the Sanderson cottage as a museum .
Max , in an effort to impress Allison , invites her to show him the Sanderson house to convince him that the witches were real .
Investigating inside the cottage , Max lights the Black Flame Candle and inadvertently resurrects the witches , who plot to continue their plan to suck out the souls of all of Salem 's children , beginning with Dani .
Escaping , Max steals Winifred 's spellbook on advice from Thackery .
The witches pursue them to a cemetery , where Winifred raises her unfaithful lover Billy Butcherson as a zombie to chase them on foot .
The witches try to acclimate to the 20th century , but are horrified when they discover Halloween has become a holiday .
The witches plan to achieve their goals or they will be disintegrated at sunrise .
They pursue the children across town using Mary 's enhanced sense of smell .
Max , Allison and Dani find their parents at a Halloween party at the town hall , where Winifred enchants the partygoers to dance and sing until they die .
At Jacob Bailey High School , the children trap the witches in a kiln to burn them alive .
While celebrating , the witches ' curse revives them again .
Not realizing that the witches have n't truly died , Max and Allison open the spellbook in an effort to reverse the spell on Binx .
The open spellbook reveals the location of the group , and the witches track them down and kidnap Dani .
Sarah then uses her siren - like singing to mesmerize Salem 's children , luring them to the Sandersons ' cottage .
Max and Allison rescue Dani and Thackery by tricking the witches into believing sunrise came an hour early .
Back at the cemetery , Max runs into Billy , who cuts open his stitched up mouth and insults
Winifred , joining Max to protect Dani .
The witches attack and Winifred attempts to suck out the soul from Dani with the single vial of potion she retrieved from her cauldron .
Thackery leaps on Winifred and knocks the potion out of her hand into Max 's , but is then thrown to the ground and mortally wounded .
Rather than smashing the vial , Max drinks it in order to force the witches to take him instead of Dani .
The sun rises just as Winifred is about to finish draining Max 's life force , and due to standing on hallowed ground in the cemetery , she turns into a stone statue , before she is disintegrated into dust along with her sisters .
With the witches now gone , a satisfied Billy returns to his grave and Thackery dies , freeing his soul .
He thanks Max , Dani and Allison for their help , and bids farewell to them , before he and Emily walk into the afterlife .
As the end credits begin , the exhausted partygoers are freed from the spell and return home .
Meanwhile , at the Sandersons ' cottage , Jay and Ernie , two male bullies who earlier tormented Max and Dani , remain imprisoned in their cages while passing the time singing " Row , Row , Row Your Boat " .
The film ends with Winnie 's spellbook opening its eye .
CAST
* Bette Midler as Winifred " Winnie " Sanderson , the buck - toothed oldest Sanderson sister and leader of the trio .
* Kathy Najimy as Mary Sanderson , the middle sister , often complimenting and comforting her domineering older sister , Winnie .
She can smell children and hunts them down .
* Sarah Jessica Parker as Sarah Sanderson , the youngest and most beautiful sister .
She has the ability to entrance children with her siren - like singing .
* Omri Katz as Maximilian " Max " Dennison , a teenager originally from Los Angeles , California who moves to Salem , Massachusetts with his family .
Max is angry at his parents for making them move to Salem .
He is responsible for bringing back the Sanderson sisters 300 years later on Halloween night .
* Thora Birch as Danielle " Dani " Dennison , Max 's spoiled 8-year - old sister and an enthusiastic trick - or - treater .
Dani is addicted to candy and looks up to Max .
* Vinessa Shaw as Allison Watts , Max 's love interest and a wealthy native Salem resident , who forms a close bond with Dani .
* Sean Murray as Thackery Binx ; originally a teenager from 1693 , he follows Emily into the woods , where he fails to prevent her death at the hands of the Sanderson sisters .
The witches transform him into an immortal cat , voiced by Jason Marsden .
* Doug Jones as Billy Butcherson , Winifred 's lover and a zombie .
He died on May 1 , 1693 after Winifred found him sporting with her sister Sarah , poisoned him and sewed his mouth shut with a dull needle , so he could n't tell her secrets , even in death .
* Charles Rocket as David " Dave " Dennison , Max and Dani 's father .
* Stephanie Faracy as Jennifer " Jenny " Dennison , Max and Dani 's mother .
* Amanda Shepherd as Emily Binx , Thackery 's younger sister , who died on October 31 , 1693 after the witches drain her life force .
* Larry Bagby as Ernie " Ice " , the leader of a group of high school delinquents and Jay 's best friend .
* Tobias Jelinek as Jay , another delinquent and Ernie 's best friend .
* Steve Voboril as Elijah Morris , Thackery 's best friend in 1693 , who worked as a farmhand on the Binx family 's farm .
* Norbert Weisser as Mr. Binx , Emily and Thackery 's father .
* Kathleen Freeman as Miss Olin , Max 's and Allison 's teacher at Jacob Bailey High School .
* Garry Marshall ( uncredited ) as " The Devil " , a man wearing a devil costume whom the Sanderson sisters assume to be their " Master " .
* Penny Marshall ( uncredited ) as the " Devil 's " wife , who the sisters assume is Medusa due to her curlers , which resemble snakes .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In the 1994 TV documentary Hocus Pocus : Begin the Magic , and on the film 's Blu - ray release , producer David Kirschner said he came up with the idea for the film one night .
He and his young daughter were sitting outside and his neighbor 's black cat strayed by .
Kirschner invented a tale of how the cat was once a boy who was changed into a feline three hundred years ago by three witches .
Hocus Pocus started life as a script by Mick Garris , that was bought by Walt Disney Pictures in 1984 .
The film 's working title was Disney 's Halloween House , it was much darker and scarier , and its protagonists were all 12-year - olds .
Garris and Kirschner pitched it to Steven Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment ; Spielberg saw Disney as a competitor to Amblin in the family film market at the time and refused to co - produce a film with his " rival . "
Various rewrites were made to the script to make the film more comedic and made two of its young protagonists into teenagers ; however , production was stalled several times until 1992 , when Bette Midler expressed interest in the script and the project immediately went forward .
Midler , who plays the central antagonist of the film ( originally written for Cloris Leachman ) , is quoted as saying that Hocus Pocus " was the most fun I 'd had in my career up to that point " .
Leonardo DiCaprio was originally offered the lead role of Max , but declined it in order to pursue What 's Eating Gilbert Grape .
Principal photography began on October 12 , 1992 .
The film is set in Salem , Massachusetts , but most of it was shot on sound stages in Burbank , California .
However , its daytime scenes were filmed in Salem and Marblehead , Massachusetts during two weeks of filming with principal cast .
Production was completed on February 10 , 1993 .
Pioneer Village , a recreation of early - colonial Salem , was used for the opening scenes set in 1693 .
Other locations included Old Burial Hill in Marblehead , where Max is accosted by Ice and Jay , the Old Town Hall in Salem , where the town Halloween party takes place , and Phipps Elementary School , where the witches are trapped in a kiln .
The exterior for Max and Dani 's house is a private residence on Ocean Avenue in Salem .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Hocus Pocus was released July 16 , 1993 and came in at # 4 at the box office with $ 8,125,471 .
It dropped from the top 10 after two weeks of release .
The film was released the same day as Free Willy .
The unusual summer release of Hocus Pocus is said to be due to Disney not wanting it to compete against their other Halloween - themed film , The Nightmare Before Christmas , which was due for release the coming October by Touchstone Pictures .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for Hocus Pocus was composed and conducted by John Debney .
James Horner was originally slated to score the film , but became unavailable at the last minute , so Debney had to score the entire film in two weeks .
Even though he did n't score the film , Horner came back to write the theme for Sarah ( sung by Sarah Jessica Parker , more commonly known as " Come Little Children " ) which is featured in Intrada 's Complete Edition of the score .
Debney released a promotional score through the internet containing 19 tracks from the film .
Bootlegs were subsequently released across the internet , primarily because the promotional release missed the entire opening sequence music .
Songs
*
" Sarah 's Theme " – music by James Horner ; lyrics by Brock Walsh ; performed by Sarah Jessica Parker *
" I Put a Spell on You " – written by Jay Hawkins and produced and arranged by Marc Shaiman ; performed by Bette Midler * " Witchcraft " – written by Cy Coleman , Carolyn Leigh ; performed by Joe Malone *
" I Put a Spell on You " – written by Jay Hawkins ; performed by Joe Malone * " Sabre Dance " – written by George Wilson * Chants and Incantations – conceived and written by Brock Walsh RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received mixed to negative reviews from film critics at the time of its release .
Reception has since grown to be more positive towards the film , and it has become a cult film .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 28 % , based on 46 reviews , with an average rating of 4.4 stars out of 10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Harmlessly hokey yet never much more than mediocre , Hocus Pocus is a muddled family - friendly effort that fails to live up to the talents of its impressive cast . "
The Miami Herald called it " a pretty lackluster affair " , adding this comment : " Despite the triple - threat actress combo , Hocus Pocus wo n't be the Sister Act of 1993 .
There are a lot of gotta - sees this summer , and this is n't one of them . "
The New York Times Janet Maslin wrote that the film " has flashes of visual stylishness but virtually no grip on its story " .
Ty Burr of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C- , calling it " acceptable scary - silly kid fodder that adults will find only mildly insulting .
Unless they 're Bette Midler fans .
In which case it 's depressing as hell " ; and stating that while Najimy and Parker " have their moments of ramshackle comic inspiration , and the passable special effects should keep younger campers transfixed [ ... ]
the sight of the Divine Miss M. mugging her way through a cheesy supernatural kiddie comedy is , to say the least , dispiriting . "
HOME MEDIA AND TELEVISION Section::::Home media and television .
The film was released to VHS in North America on January 5 , 1994 and later to DVD on June 4 , 2002 .
Following the film 's release on the latter format , it has continued to show strong annual sales , raking in more than $ 1 million in DVD sales each October .
In the mid - to - late 1990s , the film was rebroadcast annually on ABC and Disney Channel before switching over to ABC Family 's 13 Nights of Halloween lineup in the early 2000s .
The film has continuously brought record viewing numbers to the lineup , including a 2009 broadcast watched by 2.5 million viewers .
In 2011 , an October 29 airing became the lineup 's most watched program , with 2.8 million viewers .
On September 4 , 2012 , the film was released on Blu - ray .
Disney re - released the film on Blu - ray and Digital HD on September 2 , 2018 , as part of the film 's 25th anniversary .
The new release contains special features , including deleted scenes and a behind - the - scenes retrospective .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Over the years , through various outlets such as strong DVD sales and annual record - breaking showings on Freeform 's 13 Nights of Halloween , the film has achieved cult status .
Various media outlets such as Celebuzz and
Oh No They Did n't have reiterated such claims .
In its 25th anniversary year in 2018 , the first week of Hocus Pocus viewings on Freeform averaged 8.2 million viewers .
A special called the " Hocus Pocus 25th Anniversary Halloween Bash " was filmed at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery and features interviews with members of the cast , including Bette Midler , Sarah Jessica Parker , and Kathy Najimy , as well as a costume contest hosted by Sharon and Kelly Osbourne .
It aired on Freeform October 20 , 2018 .
In October 2011 , the Houston Symphony celebrated various horror and Halloween classics , including Hocus Pocus , with " The Hocus Pocus Pops . "
On October 19 , 2013 , D23 held a special screening of Hocus Pocus at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , California , to honor the 20th anniversary of the film .
Nine of the cast and crew gathered for the screening , and hundreds of D23 members attended .
Returning members included Kathy Najimy , David Kirschner , Thora Birch , Doug Jones , Vinessa Shaw , and Omri Katz .
During her Divine Intervention Tour , Bette Midler appeared on stage dressed as Winifred Sanderson .
Her Harlettes appeared with her dressed as Mary and Sarah , and the three of them performed the film 's version of " I Put a Spell on You " .
On September 15 , 2015 , the Hocus Pocus Villain Spelltacular was introduced at the Magic Kingdom as a part of Mickey 's Not - So - Scary Halloween Party .
The show introduces new actresses as the Sanderson Sisters , who try to make a villain party and summon or attract various Disney villains in the process .
In September 2016 , entertainment critic Aaron Wallace published Hocus Pocus in Focus :
The Thinking Fan 's Guide to Disney 's Halloween Classic , the first full - length book written about the movie .
The book includes a foreword by Thora Birch and afterword by Mick Garris .
Billed as a " lighthearted but scholarly look at the film , " the book analyzes the movie 's major themes , which it identifies as festivity , nostalgia , home , horror , virginity , feminism , Broadway - style musical moments , sibling rivalry , " Spielbergian " filmmaking style , Disney villain traditions , and more .
Wallace also analyzes Walt Disney World 's Hocus Pocus Villain Spelltacular as part of the movie 's legacy and includes " the largest collection of Hocus Pocus fun facts and trivia ever assembled , " complete with extensive endnote citations .
The town of Salem has celebrated its connection to Hocus Pocus , while local filming sites have become an attraction for fans as the movie 's legacy has grown over the years .
In 2018 , the Haunted Happenings Grand Parade , an annual Salem festival held every October , was Hocus - Pocus themed in honor of the movie 's 25th anniversary .
A representative for Destination Salem also reported a huge uptick in tourism for the 25th anniversary year , stating : " There 's always been a ' Hocus Pocus ' component to the visitors to Salem , especially in October .
But it 's like the film 's following grows every year . "
POSSIBLE SEQUEL AND CONFIRMED REMAKE
Section::::Possible sequel and confirmed remake .
In July 2014 , it was announced that Disney was developing a supernatural - themed film about witches , and that Tina Fey was on board as a producer and star .
However , Deadline debunked rumors that the film was a sequel to Hocus Pocus .
In November 2014 , Bette Midler said in an interview that she was ready and willing to return for a sequel .
She also said her co - stars Sarah Jessica Parker and Kathy Najimy were interested in reprising the roles of the Sanderson sisters as well , but stressed that Disney had yet to greenlight any sequel .
In November 2015 , Midler stated in a Facebook Q&A that " after all these years and all the fan demand , I do believe I can stand and firmly say an unequivocal no " in response to a question about a sequel .
In June 2016 , actor Doug Jones mentioned that Disney had been considering a sequel , and behind the scenes discussions were in place to possibly continue the series .
In October 2016 , Sarah Jessica Parker was asked by Andy Cohen about a sequel .
Her response was , " I would love that .
I think we 've been very vocal that we 're very keen . "
In Hocus Pocus in Focus : The Thinking Fan 's Guide to Disney 's Halloween Classic , author Aaron Wallace identifies several potential approaches for a sequel , but notes that the project 's biggest challenge is the Walt Disney Studios ' interest in tentpole projects that promise very high box office returns .
In September 2017 , screenwriter Mick Garris admitted that he was working on a script for Hocus Pocus 2 and that it would potentially be developed as a television film for Disney Channel , Freeform or ABC .
It was later confirmed that it will instead be a remake to air on Freeform , with The Royals writer Scarlett Lacey attached to write , and the original film producer David Kirschner executive producing .
The following month , Midler said she was not fond of the idea of a remake
and she would not be taking part in it .
In July 2018 , a book titled Hocus Pocus and the All - New Sequel was released , containing a novelization of the film and a sequel story .
The sequel focuses on Max and Allison 's daughter , Poppy , who grew up hearing the family story of the first film and parents who avoid Halloween as much as possible .
Poppy is skeptical of the tale and ends up in the Sanderson house on Halloween , twenty - five years to the day after the movie , in an attempt to prove there 's nothing to the story .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Recipient !
Result SEE
ALSO
* List of American films of 1993 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS