HYDRAULIC LIME Hydraulic lime ( HL ) is a general term for varieties of lime ( calcium oxide ) , or slaked lime ( calcium hydroxide ) , used to make lime mortar which set through hydration .
These contrast with varieties of air lime , the other common types of lime mortar , which set through carbonation ( re - absorbing carbon dioxide ( CO ) from the air ) .
Hydraulic lime provides a faster initial set and higher compressive strength than air lime and eminently hydraulic lime will set in more extreme conditions including under water .
The terms hydraulic lime and hydrated lime are quite similar and may be confused but are not necessarily the same material : hydrated lime is any lime which has been slaked whether it sets through hydration , carbonation , or both .
Calcium reacts in the lime kiln with the clay minerals to produce silicates that enable some of the lime to set through hydration ; any unreacted calcium is slaked to calcium hydroxide which sets through carbonation : These are sometimes called semi - hydraulic lime and include the classifications feebly and moderately hydraulic lime , NHL 2 and NHL 3.5 .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are two basic types of hydraulic limes : NATURAL HYDRAULIC LIME ( NHL )
Section::::Natural hydraulic lime ( NHL ) .
Natural hydraulic lime ( NHL ) is produced by heating ( calcining ) limestone that naturally contains clay and other impurities : no materials may be added to create the hydraulicity .
In the United States NHL may be called hydrated hydraulic lime ( HHL ) per ASTM C-141 Standard Specification for Hydrated Hydraulic Lime for Structural Purposes .
ARTIFICIAL HYDRAULIC LIME ( AHL )
Section::::Artificial hydraulic lime ( AHL ) .
Artificial hydraulic lime ( AHL ) or artificial lime ( AL ) becomes hydraulic when hydraulic and/or pozzolan materials are added either before or after burning in a lime kiln .
Artificial limes are more specifically identified as hydraulic lime ( HL ) , as defined European Norm 459 ( EN-459 ) , " Consists of lime and other materials such as Portland cement , blast furnace slag , fly ash , limestone filler and other suitable materials . " ; formulated lime ( FL ) ( EN-459 ) consists of " ... mainly of hydrated lime and or NHL with added hydraulic and/or pozzolanic material .
It is identical to HL but its composition must be declared on the CE marking .
" ; pozzolanic hydraulic lime ( PHL ) ( ASTM C-1707)is " very similar to HL or FL .
Consists mainly of hydrated lime with one or more pozzolans with possible inclusion of inert filler .
When Portland cement , even traces , is present ( can be up to 20 % of binder weight ) , it has to be labeled as ' PHLc ' . " USE IN CONSTRUCTION Section::::Use in construction .
Hydraulic lime is a useful building material for the following reasons :
*
It has a low elastic modulus .
*
There is no need for expansion ( movement ) joints .
*
It allows buildings to " breathe " , and does not trap moisture in the walls .
*
It has a lower firing temperature than Portland cement , and is thus less polluting .
* Stone and brickwork bonded with lime is easier to re - use .
* Lime acts sacrificially in that it is weaker and breaks down more readily than the masonry , thus saving weaker stone such as sandstone and limestone from the harmful effects of temperature expansion and mortar freeze .
*
It is less dense than cement , thus less cold bridging .
*
Lime re - absorbs the carbon dioxide ( CO ) emitted by its calcination ( firing ) , thus partially offsetting the large amount emitted during its manufacture .
The more hydraulic a lime , the less CO is reabsorbed during set , for example , 50 % of CO is reabsorbed by NHL 3.5 during the set , compared to 100 % of CO being reabsorbed by pure calcium hydroxide ( fat lime putty ) .
HYDRAULIC LIME CONCRETE Section::::Hydraulic lime concrete .
Hydraulic lime concretes have been in use since Roman times , either as mass foundation concretes or as lightweight concretes using tufa or pumice as aggregates and a wide range of pozzolans to achieve different strengths and speeds of set .
This meant that lime could be used in a wide variety of applications including floors and even vaults or domes .
An example is the Pantheon in Rome , which has survived for nearly two thousand years .
The dome 's diameter is equal to its height from the floor .
It is constructed from six different lime mixes , which change the properties and lightness of the material .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Natural hydraulic lime ( NHL ) is classified for different uses the first two of which are sometimes called semi - hydraulic lime because they initially set with water but continue to set in contact with carbon dioxide in the air .
FEEBLY HYDRAULIC LIME Section::::Feebly hydraulic lime .
Feebly hydraulic lime ( NHL 2 ) is used for internal work and external work in sheltered areas .
Feebly hydraulic lime contains up to 10 % clay/ clay mixed with other impurities .
It might take one week or more to set after the addition of water .
Setting is the process of permanently taking the shape into which lime has been moulded .
MODERATELY HYDRAULIC
LIME
Section::::Moderately hydraulic lime .
Moderately hydraulic lime ( NHL 3.5 ) can be used for external work in most areas .
Moderately hydraulic lime contains clay in the range of 11 % to 20 % .
This type of lime sets ( assumes given shape ) within a few days after the addition of water .
EMINENTLY HYDRAULIC
LIME Section::::Eminently hydraulic lime .
Eminently hydraulic lime ( NHL 5 ) is used for external work in exposed areas , such as chimneys and for floor slabs / underpinning .
Eminently hydraulic lime contains clay in the range of 21 % to 30 % .
Properties of eminently hydraulic lime are close to those of cement .
Eminently hydraulic lime sets within one day after the addition of water .
BENEFITS
*
Hydraulic limes gain strength over time hence providing flexibility and avoiding the need for expansion joints .
* Considered to be more environmentally friendly than cement as they are burnt at a lower temperature and uniquely re - absorb
some of the carbon dioxide given off during burning as they cure / carbonate in / on the wall .
* Enable building components to be reclaimed and reused as they are ' softer ' than cement .
* Set under water hence making them ideal for applications in contact with the sea , canals , rivers etc .
SEE ALSO
* Lime plaster
* Lime mortar *
Quick lime
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Technology and Use of Hydraulic Lime , by John Ashurst
* The National Lime Association ( US & Canada )
* How to use hydraulic lime and PDF application fact sheets *
The Scottish Lime Centre