MAP SENSOR
The manifold absolute pressure sensor ( MAP sensor ) is one of the sensors used in an internal combustion engine 's electronic control system .
Engines that use a MAP sensor are typically fuel injected .
The manifold absolute pressure sensor provides instantaneous manifold pressure information to the engine 's electronic control unit ( ECU ) .
The data is used to calculate air density and determine the engine 's air mass flow rate , which in turn determines the required fuel metering for optimum combustion ( see stoichiometry ) and influence the advance or retard of ignition timing .
A fuel - injected engine may alternatively use a mass airflow sensor ( MAF sensor ) to detect the intake airflow .
A typical naturally aspirated engine configuration employs one or the other , whereas forced induction engines typically use both ; a MAF sensor on the intake tract pre - turbo and a MAP sensor on the charge pipe leading to the throttle body .
MAP sensor data can be converted to air mass data using the speed - density method .
Engine speed ( RPM ) and air temperature are also necessary to complete the speed - density calculation .
The MAP sensor can also be used in OBD II ( on - board diagnostics ) applications to test the EGR ( exhaust gas recirculation ) valve for functionality , an application typical in OBD II equipped General Motors engines .
EXAMPLE Section::::Example .
The following example assumes the same engine speed and air temperature .
The engine requires the same mass of fuel in both conditions because the mass of air entering the cylinders is the same .
If the throttle is opened all the way in condition 2 , the manifold absolute pressure will increase from 50 kPa to nearly 100 kPa ( 14.5 psi , 29.53 inHG ) , about equal to the local barometer , which in condition 2 is sea level .
The higher absolute pressure in the intake manifold increases the air 's density , and in turn more fuel can be burned resulting in higher output .
Another example is varying rpm and engine loads -
Where an engine may have 60kPa of manifold pressure at 1800 rpm in an unloaded condition , introducing load with a further throttle opening will change the final manifold pressure to 100kPa
, engine will still be at 1800 rpm but its loading will require a different spark and fueling delivery .
VACUUM COMPARISON Section::::Vacuum comparison .
Engine vacuum is the difference between the pressures in the intake manifold and ambient atmospheric pressure .
Engine vacuum is a " gauge " pressure , since gauges by nature measure a pressure difference , not an absolute pressure .
The engine fundamentally responds to air mass , not vacuum , and absolute pressure is necessary to calculate mass .
The mass of air entering the engine is directly proportional to the air density , which is proportional to the absolute pressure , and inversely proportional to the absolute temperature .
Note :
Carburetors are largely dependent on air volume flow and vacuum , and neither directly infers mass .
Consequently , carburetors are precise , but not accurate fuel metering devices .
Carburetors were replaced by more accurate fuel metering methods , such as fuel injection in combination with an air mass flow sensor ( MAF ) .
EGR TESTING Section::::EGR testing .
With OBD II standards , vehicle manufacturers were required to test the exhaust gas recirculation ( EGR ) valve for functionality during driving .
Some manufacturers use the MaP sensor to accomplish this .
In these vehicles , they have a MAF sensor for their primary load sensor .
The MaP sensor is then used for rationality checks and to test the EGR valve .
The way they do this is during a deceleration of the vehicle when there is low absolute pressure in the intake manifold ( i.e. , a high vacuum present in the intake manifold relative to the outside air )
the powertrain control module ( PCM ) will open the EGR valve and then monitor the MaP sensor 's values .
If the EGR is functioning properly , the manifold absolute pressure will increase as exhaust gases enter .
COMMON CONFUSION WITH BOOST SENSORS AND GAUGES
Section::::Common confusion with boost sensors and gauges .
MAP sensors measure absolute pressure .
Boost sensors or gauges measure the amount of pressure above a set absolute pressure .
That set absolute pressure is usually 100 kPa .
This is commonly referred to as gauge pressure .
Boost pressure is relative to absolute pressure - as one increases or decreases , so does the other .
It is a one - to - one relationship with an offset of -100 kPa for boost pressure .
Thus a MaP sensor will always read 100 kPa more than a boost sensor measuring the same conditions .
A MaP sensor will never display a negative reading because it is measuring absolute pressure , where zero is the total absence of pressure .
Vacuum is measured as a negative pressure relative to normal atmospheric pressure .
Vacuum - Boost sensors can display negative readings , indicating vacuum or suction ( a condition of lower pressure than the surrounding atmosphere ) .
In forced induction engines ( supercharged or turbocharged ) , a negative boost reading indicates that the engine is drawing air faster than it is being supplied , creating suction .
The suction is caused by throttling in spark ignition engines and is not present in diesel engines .
This is often called vacuum pressure when referring to internal combustion engines .
In short , in a standard atmosphere most boost sensors will read one atmosphere less than a MaP sensor reads .
At sea level one can convert boost to MaP by adding approximately 100 kPa .
One can convert from MaP to boost by subtracting 100 kPa .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* MaP sensor