BATTLE OF PICACHO PASS
The Battle of Picacho Pass or the Battle of Picacho Peak was an engagement of the American Civil War on April 15 , 1862 .
The action occurred around Picacho Peak , northwest of Tucson , Arizona .
It was fought between a Union cavalry patrol from California and a party of Confederate pickets from Tucson , and marks the westernmost battle of the American Civil War . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
After a Confederate force of about 120 cavalrymen arrived at Tucson from Texas on February 28 , 1862 , they proclaimed Tucson the capital of the western district of the Confederate Arizona Territory , which comprised what is now southern Arizona and southern New Mexico .
Mesilla , near Las Cruces , was declared the territorial capital and seat of the eastern district of the territory .
The property of Tucson Unionists was confiscated and they were jailed or driven out of town .
Confederates hoped a flood of sympathizers in southern California would join them and give the Confederacy an outlet on the Pacific Ocean , but this never happened .
California Unionists were eager to prevent this , and 2,000 Union volunteers from California , known as the California Column and led by Colonel James Henry Carleton , moved east to Fort Yuma , California , and by May 1862 had driven the small Confederate force back into Texas .
Like most of the Civil War era engagements in Arizona ( Dragoon Springs , Stanwix Station and Apache Pass )
Picacho Pass occurred near remount stations along the former Butterfield Overland Stagecoach route , which opened in 1859 and ceased operations when the war began .
This skirmish occurred about a mile northwest of Picacho Pass Station .
BATTLE Section::::Battle .
Twelve Union cavalry troopers and one scout ( reported to be mountain man Pauline Weaver but in reality Tucson resident John W. Jones ) , commanded by Lieutenant James Barrett of the 1st California Cavalry , were conducting a sweep of the Picacho Peak area , looking for Confederates reported to be nearby .
The Arizona Confederates were commanded by Sergeant Henry Holmes .
Barrett was under orders not to engage them , but to wait for the main column to come up .
However , " Lt . Barrett acting alone rather than in concert , surprised the Rebels and should have captured them without firing a shot , if the thing had been conducted properly . "
Instead , in midafternoon the lieutenant " led his men into the thicket single file without dismounting them .
The first fire from the enemy emptied four saddles , when the enemy retired farther into the dense thicket and had time to reload . ...
Barrett followed them , calling on his men to follow him . "
Three of the Confederates surrendered .
Barrett secured one of the prisoners and had just remounted his horse when a bullet struck him in the neck , killing him .
Fierce and confused fighting continued among the mesquite and arroyos for 90 minutes , with two more Union fatalities and three troopers wounded .
Exhausted and leaderless , the Californians broke off the fight and the Arizona Rangers , minus three who surrendered , mounted and carried warning of the approaching Union army to Tucson .
Barrett 's disobedience of orders had cost him his life and lost any chance of a Union surprise attack on Tucson .
The Union troops retreated to the Pima Indian Villages and hastily built Fort Barrett ( named for the fallen officer ) at White 's Mill , waiting to gather resources to continue the advance .
However , with no Confederate reinforcements available , Captain Sherod Hunter and his men withdrew as soon as the column again advanced .
The Union troops entered Tucson without any opposition .
The bodies of the two Union enlisted men killed at Picacho ( George Johnson and William S Leonard ) were later removed to the National Cemetery at the Presidio of San Francisco in San Francisco , California .
However , Lieutenant Barrett 's grave , near the present railroad tracks , remains undisturbed and unmarked .
Union reports claimed that two Confederates were wounded in the fight , but Captain Hunter in his official report mentioned no Confederate casualties other than the three men captured .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Before this engagement a Confederate cavalry patrol had advanced as far west as Stanwix Station , where it was burning the hay stored there when it was attacked by a patrol of the California Column .
The Confederates had been burning hay stored at the stage stations in order to delay the Union advance from California .
About the same time as the skirmish at Picacho Peak , a larger force of Confederates was thwarted in its attempt to advance northward from Santa Fe , New Mexico , in the Battle of Glorieta Pass .
By July the Confederates had retreated to Texas , though pro - Confederate militia units operated in some areas until mid-1863 .
The following year , the Union organized its own territory of Arizona , dividing New Mexico along the state 's current north - south border , extending control southward from the provisional capital of Prescott .
Although the encounter at Picacho Pass was only a minor event in the Civil War , it can be considered the high - water mark of the Confederate West .
RE - ENACTMENT Section::::Re - enactment .
Every March , Picacho Peak State Park hosts a re - enactment of the Civil War battles of Arizona and New Mexico , including the battle of Picacho Pass .
The re - enactments now have grown so large that many more participants tend to be involved than took part in the actual engagements , and include infantry units and artillery as well as cavalry .
The 2015 re - enactment , which was held March 22 and 23 , also included re - enactments of the Battle of Valverde and the Battle of Glorieta Pass , both of which took place in relatively nearby New Mexico .
GALLERY
FURTHER READING *
" The Battle of Picacho Pass : Visiting the Battlefield and Historic Site " .
The War Times Journal .
Retrieved October 19 , 2010 .
* Masich , Andrew E. , The Civil War in Arizona ; the Story of the California Volunteers , 1861–65 ; University of Oklahoma Press ( Norman , 2006 ) . SEE ALSO
* Apache Wars
* New Mexico Campaign * St. Albans Raid REFERENCES