JOCK TAX
In the United States , the jock tax is the colloquially named income tax levied against visitors to a city or state who earn money in that jurisdiction .
Since a state can not afford to track the many individuals who do business on an itinerant basis , the ones targeted are usually very wealthy and high profile , namely professional athletes .
Not only are the working schedules of famous sports players public , so are their salaries .
The state can compute and collect the amount with very little investment of time and effort .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The modern " jock tax " originated in 1991 , when California imposed the tax on the earnings of Chicago Bulls players who traveled to Los Angeles to play the Lakers in that year 's NBA Finals .
Illinois soon retaliated , imposing its own " jock tax " on out - of - state players — although Illinois ' tax is only imposed on athletes from states that impose jock taxes on Illinois - based players .
Other states followed suit ; by 2014 , the only U.S. jurisdictions with major professional teams without a jock tax were Florida , Texas , Washington state , and Washington , D.C.
( the three states do not impose personal income taxes , while the U.S. Congress specifically prohibits the District of Columbia from imposing its income tax on non - residents who work there ) .
IN DEPTH Section::::In depth .
The following is an in - depth analysis of modern - day examples and criticisms of the jock tax .
EXAMPLES ALEX RODRIGUEZ Section::::Examples .
Section::::Alex Rodriguez .
After the 2000 Major League Baseball season , Alex Rodriguez signed what was then the largest contract in American sports history , a ten - year contract worth $ 252 million , with the Texas Rangers .
The tax collecting authorities of other states were notified alongside the public , and would separately demand that Rodriguez 's employer withhold the tax due from his salary and remit it to each of them .
Even though the state of Texas did not have an income tax , he still had to pay the various state income taxes applied to each away game in each location except for Florida , Illinois , Washington state , and Washington , D.C.
( as an American League player , he would visit the three states every season , while he would only visit the District if his team was involved in an interleague game against the Nationals ) .
It is estimated that Rodriguez paid $ 520,000 a year for state income taxes outside his own state .
TENNESSEE " PRIVILEGE TAX " Section::::Tennessee " privilege tax " .
Tennessee , which has only a limited income tax that excludes wages and salaries , began imposing its own special form of jock tax in July 2009 , which it called a " privilege tax " , and later repealed in April 2014 .
The tax was unique in several respects .
First , it was a flat - rate tax of $ 2,500 per game , imposed on all players who were on a team 's roster for a game in the state , including Tennessee residents .
However , the tax applied to a maximum of three games per calendar year .
In another quirk , NFL players were exempt — when first imposed , the tax only applied to NBA and NHL players .
In addition , the tax did not go to the state treasury .
Instead , taxes imposed on NHL players went to the operators of Bridgestone Arena in Nashville , home to the Nashville Predators , while taxes imposed on NBA players went to the operators of FedExForum in Memphis , home to the Memphis Grizzlies ( both teams are Tennessee 's only representatives in their respective leagues ) .
Finally , because the tax was categorized as a fee , it could not be claimed as a deduction on other states ' tax returns .
Because of the quirks of the tax , some players on visiting teams were required to pay more in privilege taxes than they earned from games played in the state .
Another individual who was disproportionately affected by the tax was Chris Johnson , who earned $ 54,000 for eight games with the Grizzlies under two 10-day contracts in , but was still subject to the full $ 7,500 privilege tax — the same amount collected from Grizzlies players who were on the team for an entire calendar year .
The collective bargaining agreement that ended the 2012–13 NHL lockout called for team owners to pay their players ' privilege taxes .
The Tennessee privilege tax was repealed in April 2014 ; the lead sponsor of the repeal bill noted that because the tax was imposed on NBA and NHL players but not on NFL players , it was constitutionally suspect .
It stopped being collected from NHL players starting with the , while the tax continued to be collected from NBA players through the 2015–16 season .
CRITICISM OF THE " JOCK TAX " Section::::Criticism of the " jock tax " .
In 2003 , the Tax Foundation conducted a study on the jock tax .
It concluded that the tax is : * Poorly targeted * Arbitrarily enforced * Unrealistically burdensome to athletes
According to the foundation , the jock tax " forces traveling professionals to file potentially dozens of state and local income tax returns annually .
"
The foundation argues that the jock tax is poor tax policy .
An analyst for the foundation pointed out in 2014 that because taxes are imposed on everyone who travels with a professional sports team , many individuals subject to the tax are not the stereotypical highly - paid athletes : Many trainers and scouts do not earn much more than the national median income , and players earning the league minimum in some leagues , such as Major League Soccer , earn only around $ 35,000 per year .
This can lead to a substantial tax complexity burden because many team members have to file income taxes in around 15 - 20 states each year . ...
the tax hits many people who may not be able to easily absorb the substantial compliance costs associated with the tax .
SEE ALSO
* Taxation in the United States FURTHER READING
* West Federal Taxation : Individual Income Taxes , 2005 Edition , Thomson South - Western .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Tax Foundation articles on jock taxes