MIDNIGHT BLUE Midnight blue is a dark shade of blue named for its resemblance to the apparently blue color of a moonlit night sky around full moon .
Midnight blue is the color of a vat full of indigo dye ; therefore , midnight blue may also be considered a dark shade of indigo .
Midnight blue is identifiably blue to the eye in sunlight or full - spectrum light , but can appear black under certain more limited spectra sometimes found in artificial lighting ( especially early 20th - century incandescent ) .
It is similar to navy , which is also a dark blue .
VARIATIONS X11 Section::::Variations .
Section::::X11 .
There are two major shades of midnight blue — the X11 color and the Crayola color .
This color was originally called midnight .
The first recorded use of midnight as a color name in English was in 1915 .
At right is displayed the color midnight blue .
This is the X11 web color midnight blue .
DARK MIDNIGHT BLUE ( CRAYOLA ) Section::::Dark midnight blue ( Crayola ) .
At right is displayed the dark shade of midnight blue that is called midnight blue in Crayola crayons .
Midnight blue became an official crayola color in 1958 ; before that , since having been formulated by Crayola in 1903 , it was called Prussian blue .
IN CULTURE Section::::In culture .
Comic books
*
There is a comic - book character called Midnight Blue .
Fashion
*
Midnight blue is an alternative to black as a color for dinner jackets .
Due to the deepness of the color , midnight blue formal clothes are often almost indistinguishable from black .
The Duke of Windsor popularized the color in suits and tuxedos .
Law Enforcement
* Most American police departments , like the LAPD , use midnight blue for the color of their Class " A " patrol uniforms .
Military * The dark blue of US Army and US Marine Corps dress blue uniform coats is called midnight blue .
* US Air Force Midnight Blue is the color used on ABU ( Air Battle Uniform ) nametapes and rank insignia .
A thread color from the manufacturers American and Efird that is used by a major supplier of military nametapes is color number 51621 .
Madeira embroidery thread ( 100 % Viscose ) color 1244 is also a very dark midnight ( almost black ) blue thread .
*
The Special Reconnaissance Regiment uses midnight blue on its stable belts , as a flat color all round .
*
The now disbanded Royal Observer Corps called the colour of their berets midnight blue , which observers worn with their uniforms .
The colour in reality is the default British Army blue .
Sports
* The University of Toledo Rockets use midnight blue and gold as their official team colors .
Music
*
In 1963 , the album , Midnight Blue , released by American jazz guitarist Kenny Burrell .
*
In 1979 , the album , Discovery , released by British symphonic rock turned disco band Electric Light Orchestra , contained a song named " Midnight Blue . "
*
In 1987 rock vocalist Lou Gramm released a single entitled " Midnight Blue " .
Television
* The British channel ITV3 uses this color for its current logo .
Car Culture
*
The manga Wangan Midnight popularised this color on cars because of its main character 's S30 sporting this particular shade of blue .
SEE ALSO
* List of colors REFERENCES