GREENLAND SHARK
The Greenland shark ( Somniosus microcephalus ) , also known as the gurry shark , grey shark , or by the Kalaallisut name eqalussuaq , is a large shark of the family Somniosidae ( " sleeper sharks " ) , closely related to the Pacific and southern sleeper sharks .
The distribution of this species is mostly restricted to the waters of the North Atlantic Ocean and Arctic Ocean .
It has the longest known lifespan of all vertebrate species ( estimated to be between 300–500 years ) , and is among the largest extant species of shark .
As an adaptation to living at depth , it has a high concentration of trimethylamine N - oxide in its tissues , which causes the meat to be toxic .
Greenland shark flesh treated to reduce toxin levels is eaten in Iceland as a delicacy known as kæstur hákarl .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Greenland shark is one of the largest living species of shark , with dimensions comparable to those of the great white shark .
Greenland sharks grow to and , and possibly up to and more than .
Most Greenland sharks observed have been around long and weigh up to .
Males are typically smaller than females .
It rivals the Pacific sleeper shark ( possibly up to long ) as the largest species in the family Somniosidae .
The Greenland shark is a thickset species , with a short , rounded snout , small eyes , and very small dorsal and pectoral fins .
The gill openings are very small for the species ' great size .
Coloration can range from pale creamy - gray to blackish - brown and the body is typically uniform in color , though whitish spots or faint dark streaks are occasionally seen on the back .
DENTITION Section::::Dentition .
When feeding on large carcasses , the shark employs a rolling motion of its jaw .
The 48 - 52 teeth of the upper jaw are very thin and pointed , lacking serrations .
These upper jaw teeth act as an anchor while the lower jaw proceeds to cut massive chunks out of their prey for a quick and easy kill .
The 48 - 52 lower teeth are interlocking and are broad and square , containing short , smooth cusps that point outward .
Teeth in the two halves of the lower jaw are strongly pitched in opposite directions .
LIFE HISTORY
DIET Section::::Life history .
Section::::Diet .
The Greenland shark is an apex predator and mostly eats fish .
It has never been observed hunting .
Recorded fish prey have included smaller sharks , skates , eels , herring , capelin , Arctic char , cod , rosefish , sculpins , lumpfish , wolffish , and flounder .
Greenland sharks have also been found with remains of seals , polar bears , horses , moose , and reindeer ( in one case an entire reindeer body ) in their stomachs .
The Greenland shark is known to be a scavenger , and is attracted by the smell of rotting meat in the water .
The sharks have frequently been observed gathering around fishing boats .
It also scavenges on seals .
Although such a large shark could easily consume a human swimmer , the frigid waters it typically inhabits make the likelihood of attacks on humans very low , and no cases of predation on people have been verified .
OTHER BEHAVIOR
Section::::Other behavior .
As an ectotherm living in a just - above - freezing environment , the Greenland shark has the lowest swim speed and tail - beat frequency for its size across all fish species , which most likely correlates with its very slow metabolism and extreme longevity .
It swims at a leisurely , with its fastest cruising speed only reaching .
Because this top speed is only half that of a typical seal in their diet , biologists are uncertain how the sharks are able to prey on the faster seals .
It is hypothesized that they may ambush them while they sleep .
Greenland sharks migrate annually based on depth and temperature rather than distance , although some do travel .
During the winter , the sharks congregate in the shallows ( up to 80 ° north ) for warmth but migrate separately in summer to the deeps or even farther south .
The species has been observed at a depth of by a submersible investigating the wreck of the SS Central America that lies about east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina .
Daily vertical migration between shallower and deeper waters has also been recorded .
In August 2013 , researchers from Florida State University caught the first documented Greenland shark in the Gulf of Mexico at a depth of , where the water temperature was .
A more typical depth for the species is above .
The shark is often colonized by copepod Ommatokoita elongata , which attaches itself to the shark 's eyes .
It was speculated that the copepod may display bioluminescence and thus attract prey for the shark in a mutualistic relationship , but this hypothesis has not been verified .
The shark occupies what tends to be a very deep environment seeking its preferable cold water ( ) habitat .
LONGEVITY Section::::Longevity .
The Greenland shark has the longest known lifespan of all vertebrate species .
One Greenland shark was tagged off Greenland in 1936 and recaptured in 1952 .
Its measurements suggest that Greenland sharks grow at a rate of per year .
In 2016 , a study based on 28 specimens that ranged from in length determined by radiocarbon dating of crystals within the lens of their eyes , that the oldest of the animals that they sampled , which also was the largest , had lived for 392 ± 120 years and was consequently born between 1504 and 1744 .
The authors further concluded that the species reaches sexual maturity at about 150 years of age .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
As recently as 1957 , females were found not to deposit eggs in the bottom mud , but retain the developing embryos within their bodies so they are born alive after an undetermined gestation period ( a process known as ovoviviparity ) .
About 10 pups per litter are normal , each initially measuring some in length .
PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS Section::::Physiological adaptations .
Like other elasmobranchii , Greenland sharks have high concentrations of the nitrogenous waste products urea and trimethylamine N - oxide ( TMAO ) in their tissues , which increases their buoyancy and function as osmoprotectants .
TMAO also counteracts the protein - destabilizing tendencies of urea and of deep - water pressure .
Its presence in the tissues of both elasmobranch and teleost fish has been found to increase with depth .
The blood of Greenland sharks contains three major types of hemoglobin , made up of two copies of α globin combined with two copies of three very similar β subunits .
These three types show very similar oxygenation and carbonylation properties , which are unaffected by urea , an important compound in marine elasmobranch physiology .
They display identical electronic absorption and resonance Raman spectra , indicating that their heme - pocket structures are identical or highly similar .
The hemoglobins also have a lower affinity for O2 compared to temperate sharks .
These characteristics are interpreted as adaptations to living at great water depths .
AS
FOOD Section::::As food .
The flesh of the Greenland shark is toxic because of the presence of high concentrations of trimethylamine oxide ( TMAO ) .
If the meat is eaten without pretreatment , the ingested TMAO is metabolized into trimethylamine , which can produce effects similar to extreme drunkenness .
Occasionally , sled dogs that eat the flesh are unable to stand up because of this effect .
Similar toxic effects occur with the related Pacific sleeper shark , but not in most other shark species .
The meat can be treated for safe consumption by boiling in several changes of water , drying , or fermenting for several months to produce kæstur hákarl .
Traditionally , this is done by burying the meat in boreal ground for 6–8 weeks , which presses the TMAO out of the meat and also results in partial fermentation .
The meat is then dug up and hung up in strips to dry for several more months .
It is considered a delicacy in Iceland .
INUIT LEGENDS Section::::Inuit legends .
The Greenland shark 's poisonous flesh has a high urea content , which gave rise to the Inuit legend of Skalugsuak , the first Greenland shark .
The legend says that an old woman washed her hair in urine and dried it with a cloth .
The cloth blew into the ocean to become Skalugsuak .
Another legend tells of a girl whose father cut off her fingers while drowning her , with each finger turning into a sea creature , including Skalugsuak .
The Greenland shark plays a role in cosmologies of the Inuit from the Canadian Eastern Arctic and Greenland .
Igloolik Inuit believe that the shark lives within the urine pot of Sedna , goddess of the sea , and consequently its flesh has a urine - like smell , and acts as a helping spirit to shamans .
SEE ALSO
* List of sharks REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Greenland Shark and Elasmobranch Education and Research Group * Canadian Museum of Nature SV Greenland Shark
* " Greenland Shark " on As It Happens May 6 , 2008 ; CBC Radio 1(WMV file )