ZONE DEFENSE Zone defense is a type of defense , used in team sports , which is the alternative to man - to - man defense ; instead of each player guarding a corresponding player on the other team , each defensive player is given an area ( a zone ) to cover .
A zone defense can be used in many sports where defensive players guard players on the other team .
Zone defenses and zone principles are commonly used in basketball , American football , association football , ice hockey , lacrosse , Australian rules football , netball and ultimate among others .
BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
The names given to zone defenses start with the number of players on the front of the zone ( farthest from the goal ) followed by the numbers of players in the rear zones .
For example , in a 2–3 zone two defenders cover areas in the top of the zone ( near the top of the key ) while three defenders cover areas near the baseline .
Match - up zone is a hybrid man - to - man and zone defense in which players apply man - to - man defense to whichever opposing player enters their area .
John Chaney , former head coach of Temple University , is the most famous proponent of this defense .
Hybrid defenses also include Box - and - one , in which four defenders are in a 2–2 zone and one defender guards a specific player on the offense .
A variant of this is triangle - and - two , in which three defenders are in a 2–1 zone and two defenders guard two specific offensive players .
Zone defenses are common in international , college , and youth competition .
In the National Basketball Association , zone defenses were prohibited until the 2001–2002 season , and most teams do not use them as a primary defensive strategy .
The NBA has a defensive three - second violation rule , which makes it more difficult for teams to play zone , since such defenses usually position a player in the middle of the key to stop penetration .
The Dallas Mavericks under coach Rick Carlisle are an example of an NBA team that have regularly used zone defenses .
HISTORY OF BASKETBALL ZONE DEFENSE Section::::History of basketball zone defense .
Frank Lindley , Newton , KS High School basketball coach from 1914 to 1945 , was among the first to use the zone defense and other innovations in the game and authored numerous books about basketball .
He finished his career with a record of 594–118 and guided the Railroaders to ten state titles and seven second - place finishes .
Jim Boeheim , coach of the Syracuse Orange men 's basketball team , is famous for using a 2 - 3 zone that is among the best in the NCAA .
His zone , which typically features athletic , disruptive , and aggressive defenders , has become a prototype for use on other teams including the United States men 's national basketball team , where he has spent time as an assistant coach .
ADVANTAGES
Section::::Advantages .
Some of the reasons for using a zone defense are : *
The opposing team has a player / players too quick ( in the case of guards ) or too big ( in the case of forwards or centers ) for a man - to - man defense to be effective .
*
Many zones pack defenders in the lane but allow the offensive team to take long - range shots .
If the opponents are poor long - range shooters , a zone can be very effective .
*
Unless trapping is involved , zone defenses typically do n't involve aggressive pressure on the ball handler and allow the offensive team to easily pass the ball around the perimeter .
This can allow the offense to use more time before a shot is attempted , an advantage for teams wanting to slow the tempo of a game .
* A poor defensive player can often be " hidden " in a zone because teammates can more easily help if he or she is beaten .
* A zone can help players in danger of fouling out by taking pressure off them .
*
Playing a zone is less tiring and thus can help teams suffering from fatigue .
* To prevent easy scores when the ball is in - bounded under the basket .
* Against teams with inexperienced guards , trapping zones can disrupt the offense and force turnovers DISADVANTAGES Section::::Disadvantages .
Playing a zone entails some risks .
* Zones tend to be weak on the perimeter , so they are not very effective against teams with good outside shooters .
* Zones have gaps ( areas that are not well - covered by defenders ) that can be exploited by teams that pass well or have guards capable of penetrating the zone .
* If a team is behind in the game , playing a zone can be a poor strategy because zones usually allow the offense to take more time off the clock on each possession , which limits the time remaining for the losing team to reduce the lead .
It also reduces the chances of stealing the ball from the attackers and attempting a quick counterstrike across open field .
This is not always true ; there are pressure zone defenses that can often cause quicker shots by the opponent or result in turnovers .
* When a shot is attempted , it is often harder for players in a zone to find counterparts to box out for the rebound , which sometimes results in an offensive player getting an easy offensive rebound .
* Zone defenses require a commitment to scheming and practicing zone , both from coaches and players .
While most players are familiar with playing zone defense , they are sometimes not expert in the nuances of the zone , such as spacing , which require familiarity and experience .
When man - to - man teams switch to the zone defense , it is sometimes seen as a gimmick that is easily exploited by disciplined teams .
ATTACKING
A ZONE DEFENSE
Section::::Attacking a zone defense .
While strategies for countering zone defenses vary and often depend on the strengths and weaknesses of both the offensive and defensive teams , there are some general principles that are typically used by offensive teams when facing a zone .
* Many popular zones ( such as the 2–3 , 3 - 2 and 1–2–2 ) have a gap in the middle of the lane .
Getting the ball in this area can be very effective because the defense is often forced to " collapse " on the ball handler , freeing up other players for open shots .
To exploit this gap , many teams assign a forward to operate in the " high post " area near the free throw line to catch and distribute the ball .
A forward in the high post area can also set screens on the players at the top of the zone to allow penetration by the guards .
* Quick passing is an important element of attacking any zone .
The defense will shift as the ball moves , but if the offense can move the ball faster than the defense can react , open shots can result .
Quick passing against a zone often leads to open three - point shots , and zone defenses are less effective against teams with good three - point shooters .
* Dribble penetration is very effective in breaking down a zone .
If a guard can dribble into the gaps in the zone , multiple defenders must converge on the ball .
The ball handler can then often pass to an open teammate for a shot .
This strategy illustrates why preventing dribble penetration is important in playing an effective zone defense .
* Passing the ball to the interior of the zone can have similar effects as dribble penetration : as the defense collapses , a quick kick - out to the perimeter can result in either an open shot or continued quick passing , as the defense is now imbalanced .
* Short Corner : Attacking the " Short Corner " , or baseline area behind the defense outside the lane , against a 2 - 3 zone puts the defense in rotation and opens up the mid post .
* Screening the backside of the zone : this opens up weakside shooters off a skip pass or ball rotation .
AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::American football .
Zone defense in American football refers to a type of " pass coverage " .
See American football defensive strategy and zone blocking .
AUSTRALIAN RULES
FOOTBALL Section::::Australian rules football .
The zone defence tactic , borrowed from basketball , was introduced into Australian football in the late 1980s by Robert Walls and revolutionized the game .
It was used most effectively by Essendon Football Club coach Kevin Sheedy .
The tactic is used from the fullback kick in after a behind is scored .
The side in opposition to the player kicking in places their forward players , including their full - forward and centre half forward , in evenly spaced zones in the back 50-metre arc .
This makes it easier for them to block leading players and forces the kick in to be more precise , in effect increasing the margin for error which can cause a turnover and another shot at goal .
As a result , the best ways to break the zone are for the full - back to bomb it long ( over 50 meters ) , often requiring a low percentage torpedo punt , or to play a short chipping game out of defence and then to switch play as opposition players break the zone .
The latter has negated the effectiveness of the tactic since the 1990s .
Another kick - in technique is the huddle , often used before the zone , which involves all of the players from the opposition team to the player is kicking in huddling together and then breaking in different directions .
The kicker typically aims in whichever direction that the designated target ( typically the ruckman ) runs in .
ICE HOCKEY Section::::Ice hockey .
In ice hockey , players defend zones in the neutral zone trap and left wing lock .
NETBALL Section::::Netball .
Netball is a sport similar to basketball with similar strategies and tactics employed , although with seven players per team .
Zone defense is one of the main defensive strategies employed by teams , along with one - on - one defense .
Common variants include center - court block , box - and - two zone , diamond - and - two zone , box - out zone and split - circle zone .
ULTIMATE Section::::Ultimate .
Ultimate allows for a number of zone defence tactics , usually employed in poor ( such as windy , rainy or snowy ) conditions , to discourage long passes and slow the progress of the opposition 's movement .
SEE ALSO
* Box - and - one defense
* Man - to - man defense * Zonal marking REFERENCES