TIN CAN TELEPHONE
A tin can telephone is a type of acoustic ( non - electrical ) speech - transmitting device made up of two tin cans , paper cups or similarly shaped items attached to either end of a taut string or wire .
It is a form of mechanical telephony , where sound is converted into and then conveyed by vibrations along a liquid or solid medium , and then reconverted back to sound .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before the invention of the electromagnetic telephone , there were mechanical acoustic devices for transmitting spoken words and music over a distance greater than that of normal speech .
The very earliest mechanical telephones were based on sound transmission through pipes or other physical media , and among the very earliest experiments were those conducted by the British physicist and polymath Robert Hooke from 1664 to 1685 .
From 1664 to 1665 Hooke experimented with sound transmission through a taut distended wire .
An acoustic string phone is attributed to him as early as 1667 .
The highly similar acoustic tin can telephone , or ' lover 's phone ' , has also been known for centuries .
It connects two diaphragms with a taut string or wire , which transmits sound by mechanical vibrations from one to the other along the wire ( and not by a modulated electric current ) .
The classic example is the children 's toy made by connecting the bottoms of two paper cups , metal cans , or plastic bottles with tautly held string .
For a short period of time acoustic telephones were marketed commercially as a niche competitor to the electrical telephone , as they preceded the latter 's invention and did n't fall within the scope of its patent protection .
When Alexander Graham Bell 's telephone patent expired and dozens of new phone companies flooded the marketplace , acoustic telephone manufacturers could not compete commercially and quickly went out of business .
Their maximum range was very limited , but hundreds of technical innovations ( resulting in about 300 patents ) increased their range to approximately a half mile ( 800 m ) or more under ideal conditions .
An example of one such company was Lemuel Mellett 's ' Pulsion Telephone Supply Company ' of Massachusetts , which designed its version in 1888 and deployed it on railroad right - of - ways , purportedly with a range of .
In the centuries before tin cans and paper cups became commonplace , other cups were used and the device was sometimes called the " lovers ' telephone " .
During the 20th century , it came into common use in preschools and elementary schools to teach children about sound vibration .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
Sound waves are created as the air vibrates in response to a person 's speech or other sounds .
A second person 's ear collects these sound waves and converts them into nerve impulses which their brain interprets as sound .
In normal speech these waves travel through the air , but with a tin can telephone the waves are transmitted through an additional medium of cups and string .
When the string is pulled taut and someone speaks into one of the cans , its bottom acts as a diaphragm , converting the sound waves into longitudinal mechanical vibrations which vary the tension of the string .
These variations in tension set up longitudinal waves in the string which travel to the second can , causing its bottom to vibrate in a similar manner as the first can , thus recreating the sound , which is heard by the second person .
The signal can be directed around corners with at least two methods : The first method can be implemented by creating a loop in the string which is then twisted and anchored to another object .
Another method makes use of an extra can positioned on the apex of the corner ; the string is threaded through the base of the can so as to avoid coming into contact with the object around which the signal is to be directed .
SEE ALSO * History of the telephone
* Sound powered telephone * Speaking tube
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Tin
Can Telephone
* How to Make a Tin Can Telephone