RED DRUM
The red drum ( Sciaenops ocellatus ) , also known as channel bass , redfish , puppy drum spottail bass , or simply red , is a game fish found in the Atlantic Ocean from Massachusetts to Florida and in the Gulf of Mexico from Florida to northern Mexico .
It is the only species in the genus Sciaenops .
The red drum is related to the black drum ( Pogonias cromis ) , and the two species are often found in close proximity to each other ; they can interbreed and form a robust hybrid , and younger fish are often indistinguishable in flavor .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Red drum are a dark red color on the back , which fades into white on the belly .
The red drum has a characteristic eyespot near the tail and is somewhat streamlined .
Three - year - old red drum typically weigh 6 - 8 lb .
The largest red drum on record weighed just over 94 lb and was caught in 1984 on Hatteras Island .
Red drum and black drum both make a croaking or drumming sound when distressed .
The most distinguishing mark on the red drum is one large black spot on the upper part of the tail base .
Having multiple spots is not uncommon for this fish , but having no spots is extremely rare .
As the fish with multiple spots grow older , they seem to lose their excess spots .
Scientists believe that the black spot near their tail helps fool predators into attacking the red drum 's tail instead of its head , allowing the red drum to escape .
The red drum uses its senses of sight and touch , and its downturned mouth , to locate forage on the bottom through vacuuming or biting .
On the top and middle of the water column , it uses changes in the light that might look like food .
In the summer and fall , adult red drum feed on crabs , shrimp , and mullet ; in the spring and winter , adults primarily feed on menhaden , mullet , pinfish , sea robin , lizardfish , spot , Atlantic croaker , and mudminnows .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Red drum naturally occur along the eastern and southern Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coasts of Louisiana , Texas , Alabama , Mississippi , Florida , Georgia , the Carolinas , and Virginia .
Aquaculture activities involving them occur around the world .
Immature red drum prefer grass marsh areas of bays and estuaries when available .
Both younger mature red drum ( 3 - 6 years of age ) and bull red drum prefer rocky outcroppings including jetties and manmade structures , such as oil rigs and bridge posts .
Around this type of structure , they are found throughout the water column .
REPRODUCTION AND GROWTH Section::::Reproduction and growth .
Mature red drum spawn in near shorelines from mid - August to mid - October .
The red drum 's eggs incubate for 24 hours .
A female lays about 1.5 million ( with a range of 200,000 up to more than three million )
eggs per batch .
Scharf ( 2000 ) reported that in the first year , young red drum in Texas estuaries grew about 0.6 mm per day , though the rates varied with location and year and were higher in more southerly estuaries .
After the first year , they may be 271 – 383 mm long .
About half of red drum are able to reproduce by age 4 years , when they are 660 - 700 mm long and 3.4 – 4 kg in weight .
Red drum can live to be 60 years old .
* Adults mature by 3 – 5 years of age ; approximate length at maturity : males – 28 inches , females – 33 inches .
* Spawn during late summer and fall occurs near estuary inlets and passes along barrier island beaches .
Males produce drumming sounds using muscular contractions to vibrate the swimbladder , to attract females .
*
Larval red drum use vertical migrations to ride high salinity tidal currents into tidal creeks and shallow salt marsh nursery habitats .
As red drum grow longer , they increase in weight exponentially .
The relationship between length ( L ) and weight ( W ) for nearly all species of fish can be expressed by an equation of the form : Invariably , b is close to 3.0 for all species , and a varies between species .
Jenkins ( 2004 ) reported slightly different weight - length relationships for red drum caught in the spring and the fall off the western Gulf Coast of Louisiana : where weight is in grams and length is total length measured in millimeters .
For example , these relationships predict that a 600-mm red drum ( just under 2 ft long ) would weigh about 2300 g ( just over 5 lb ) .
These relationships can be used more specifically to determine how healthy a sample of red drum is by comparing their actual weights to weights predicted by these relationships for the same length .
CONSUMPTION Section::::Consumption .
In the early 1980s , the chef Paul Prudhomme made his dish of Cajun - style blackened redfish ( red drum ) popular .
His seasoning was then sold commercially and the dish became so popular that redfish were overfished to the point of near extinction .
On March 1 , 2009 , redfish was the " secret ingredient " on the television program Iron Chef America , with competitors Mourad Lahlou and Cat Cora both preparing several dishes from the fish .
Red drum have a moderate flavor and are not oily .
Big drum can be tricky to clean ; removing the large scales can be challenging .
Many fishers prefer to fillet with an electric knife , first removing the fillet from along the backbone , and then using the electric knife to cut the fillet from the skin and scales .
Fish over 15 lb can become tough and have a consistency comparable with chicken , rather than the flaky texture of many species of fish .
Younger fish are often indistinguishable in flavor from black drum .
COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL USE Section::::Commercial and recreational use .
From 1980 through 1988 , commercial fishermen took an average of 28 % of the redfish , while sport fishermen harvested 72 % .
Catch limits and size restrictions have increased the average weight of redfish caught in Louisiana coastal waters .
Restrictions on both sport and commercial fishermen allowed the species to rebuild .
States actively vary the recreational catch limits and minimum and maximum lengths to help maintain sustainable red drum populations .
of October 20 , 2007 , issued by U.S. President George W. Bush , designated the red drum as a protected game fish .
The order prohibits sale of red drum caught in federal waters and encourages states to consider designating red drum as a protected game fish within state waters .
While they may no longer be commercially harvested in U.S. federal waters or in most state waters , they are readily caught and still enjoyed as table fare by many .
In addition , farm - raised redfish are still available as a commercial product Commercial netting disappeared after coastal states such as Florida declared red drum prohibited for sale .
Recreational size and bag limits have been highly effective , allowing daily limits to be increased in recent years .
RELATIONSHIP TO HUMANS Section::::Relationship to humans .
The North Carolina General Assembly of 1971 designated the red drum as the official state saltwater fish .
( Session Laws , 1961 , c. 274 ; G.S. 145 - 6 ) .
REFERENCES
* Texas Parks and Wildlife Department .
Red drum ( Sciaenops ocellatus ) .
Retrieved on 6 August 2009 .