PATULOUS EUSTACHIAN TUBE Patulous Eustachian tube , also known as patent Eustachian tube or PET , is the name of a physical disorder where the Eustachian tube , which is normally closed , instead stays intermittently open .
When this occurs , the patient experiences autophony , the hearing of self - generated sounds .
These sounds , such as one 's own breathing , voice , and heartbeat , vibrate directly onto the ear drum and can create a " bucket on the head " effect .
PET is a form of eustachian tube dysfunction ( ETD ) , which is said to be present in about 1 percent of the general population .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
With patulous Eustachian tube , variations in upper airway pressure associated with respiration are transmitted to the middle ear through the Eustachian tube .
This causes an unpleasant fullness feeling in the middle ear and alters the auditory perception .
Complaints seem to include muffled hearing and autophony .
In addition , patulous Eustachian tube generally feels dry with no clogged feeling or sinus pressure .
Some patients with this condition are disturbed by the perceived volume of their voice , causing them to speak very quietly .
Their own voice may also sound lower to other people , because the trachea has more volume when the Eustachian tube is open .
The patient may also sound as if they have congestion when speaking .
Some sufferers may have difficulty in normal activities .
They may also experience increased breathing rate , such as that brought on by physical activity .
The increased activity not only increases the rate and force of pressure changes in the airway , which is therefore transmitted more forcefully into the middle ear , but also drives increased blood flow to peripheral muscles , compounding the problem by further depleting the Eustachian tube of extracellular fluid and increasing patency .
The combination can lead to severe exacerbation of the symptoms .
The urge to clear the ear is often mentioned .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Patulous Eustachian tube is a physical disorder .
The exact causes may vary depending on the person .
Weight loss is a commonly cited cause of the disorder due to the nature of the Eustachian tube itself and is associated with approximately one - third of reported cases .
Fatty tissues hold the tube closed most of the time in healthy individuals .
When circumstances cause overall body fat to diminish , the tissue surrounding the Eustachian tube shrinks and this function is disrupted .
Activities and substances which dehydrate the body have the same effect and are also possible causes of patulous Eustachian tube .
Examples are stimulants ( including caffeine ) and exercise .
Exercise may have a more short - term effect than caffeine or weight loss in this regard .
Pregnancy can also be a cause of patulous Eustachian tube due to the effects of pregnancy hormones on surface tension and mucus in the respiratory system .
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis can also be a cause of this disorder .
It is yet unknown why .
PET can occur as a result of liquid residue in the Eustachian tube , after suffering a middle ear infection ( otitis media ) .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Upon examination of a suspected case of patulous Eustachian tube , a doctor can directly view the tympanic membrane with a light and observe that it vibrates with every breath taken by the patient .
A tympanogram may also help with the diagnosis .
Patulous Eustachian tube is likely if brisk inspiration causes a significant pressure shift .
Patulous Eustachian tube is frequently misdiagnosed as standard congestion due to the similarity in symptoms and rarity of the disorder .
Audiologists are more likely to recognize the disorder , usually with tympanometry or nasally delivered masking noise during a hearing assessment , which is highly sensitive to this condition .
When misdiagnosis occurs , a decongestant medication is sometimes prescribed .
This type of medication aggravates the condition , as the Eustachian tube relies on sticky fluids to keep closed and the drying effect of a decongestant would make it even more likely to remain open and cause symptoms .
The misdiagnosed patient may also have tubes surgically inserted into the eardrum , which increases the risk of ear infection and will not alleviate patulous Eustachian tube .
If these treatments are tried and failed , and the doctor is not aware of the actual condition , the symptoms may even be classified as psychological .
Incidentally , patients who instead suffer from the even rarer condition of superior canal dehiscence are at risk for misdiagnosis of patulous Eustachian tube due to the similar autophony in both conditions .
PATULOUS EUSTACHIAN TUBE Section::::Patulous Eustachian Tube .
Patulous Eustachian Tube ( PET ) or tube to open remains an ET dysfunction category , difficult to diagnose and to treat .
Recent studies suggest that the pathophysiology and etiology of PET is more related to a previous history of otitis media , rather than from weight loss , which was widely recognized as the major causal factor .
Simultaneous weight gain can even be observed in some cases .
The average age is 30 years , with a female prevalence .
It 's rare to find patients of less than 15 years of age , which seems to confirm the opinion that PET is an acquired condition .
Chronic upper respiratory inflammatory diseases are almost always associated with PET ; half of these patients report previous history of nasal or sinus surgery .
Radical posterior / inferior turbinectomies seem to be proportionally connected to PET severity .
History of recurrent otitis media with effusion , with tympanostomy and adenoidectomy during childhood is also frequent .
Laryngopharyngeal reflux ( LPR ) is identified in a great proportion of patients .
Last epidemiological data indicates that PET results from obstructive ET dysfunction evolving over a long period of time .
Since the surgical management of these two pathologies is at diametrically opposed extremes , it is critical to obtain the correct diagnosis before undertaking any treatment .
Visualization of a permanently open tubal valve by endoscopic examination allows settling this question , but its absence does not exclude PET diagnosis .
Sonotubometry and recently developed tubomanometry may help in some specific cases .
Unfortunately , some PET cases remain difficult to diagnose .
PET SYMPTOMS AND CONSEQUENCES Section::::PET symptoms and consequences .
Autophonia ( self - hearing from inside , strongly amplified ) seems to be a common symptom to all PET patients .
Unfortunately , its presence also reveals an advanced degree of patency , requiring in most cases surgical management .
Other symptoms of PET , such as tinnitus , fullness and ear blockage , can also be reported by patients suffering from obstructive ET dysfunction .
This differential diagnosis problem unfortunately leads to some surgeries proposed by well - intentioned but inexperienced ENT surgeons .
Some of these surgeries may make things worse .
At the beginning , patients hear their own voice or its echo from inside .
They describe it as being amplified and unpleasant .
Patients frequently avoid speaking and retire in a rising solitude .
Lying head down may help since it increases venous blood pressure and congestion of the mucosa .
With time patients may develop respiratory autophonia .
At this stage , they hear " from inside " .
They describe hearing their own respiration and sometimes other bodily functions , like heartbeat .
Some patients may find this unbearable and depression is common .
Psychological supervision may be indicated .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Historically , to temporarily alleviate symptoms , patients have tried positional maneuvers , such as tilting their head to one side or upside down , lie down on their backs , or sit in a chair with their head between their knees .
Similarly , a routine of lying down four times per day with legs elevated to around 20 inches for at least two weeks has been attempted as well .
Depending on the underlying cause of the disorder , the individual may need to remove caffeine from their diet , reduce exercise , or gain weight .
It may be the case that the symptoms are induced by anxiety ; anxiolytic drugs or supplements ( e.g. , GABA ) combined with the removal of caffeine from the diet could offer a simple strategy to determine if anxiety is the root cause .
Estrogen ( Premarin ) nasal drops or saturated potassium iodide have been used to induce edema of the eustachian tube opening .
Nasal medications containing diluted hydrochloric acid , chlorobutanol , and benzyl alcohol have been reported to be effective in some patients , with few side effects .
Food and Drug Administration approval is still pending , however .
Nasal sprays have also been a very effective temporary treatment for this disease , as well .
In extreme cases surgical intervention may attempt to restore the Eustachian tube tissues with fat , gel foam , or cartilage or scar it closed with cautery .
These methods are not always successful .
For example , there is the case of the early attempts at surgical correction involving the injections of tetrafluoroetheylene ( Teflon ) paste but , although this treatment was able to give transient relief , it was discontinued due to several deaths that result from inadvertent intracarotid injections .
REFERENCES