EVERYBODY 'S ALL - AMERICAN
Everybody 's All - American is a 1981 novel by longtime Sports Illustrated contributor Frank Deford and later made into a motion picture directed by Taylor Hackford .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The novel tells the story of a fictional famous college football player at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill during the early 1950s .
The setting of the novel was changed to Louisiana University for the movie adaptation .
The main character , Gavin Grey , wins the Heisman Trophy and then goes on to a professional career , but is sidetracked by alcoholism , failed business ventures , and marital difficulties among other misjudgments .
The novel is narrated by Grey 's nephew , Donnie McClure , a historian who has written a biography of Confederate war hero J.E.B. Stuart .
During his college career , Grey 's heroics are often compared to Stuart 's actions .
Both are celebrated not only for their actions , but for their gentle behavior and consideration for others around them .
Grey 's greatest moments came away from the football field .
At a fraternity party , a carelessly placed cigarette ignites the dress of a young woman , who staggers back in fear and nearly starts a much larger fire by lighting a set of drapes .
Despite a strong fear of fire , Grey saves the woman by leaping forward and dousing the flames .
A few weeks later , Grey , McClure , and a UNC teammate , Lawrence , venture into a black neighborhood where Grey meets Narvel Blue , another one - time football star whose greatness was never realized because of bad grades , segregation , and bad luck .
Blue and Grey compare attributes but decide that a foot - race must be held to determine which is the faster runner .
Despite falling behind initially , Grey eventually overcomes Blue by a shade at the end of the race .
After a serious knee injury cuts short his professional career , he is miserable in retirement and returns to accept a lesser role with the Baltimore Colts .
However , his season , and ultimately his football career , end after a knee injury in his third game .
Grey is left calling every team in the NFL , begging for one more chance .
Grey is left to constantly reminisce about his glory days on the football field , boring and embarrassing those around him .
His once - gawky and awkward nephew Donnie becomes a respected scholar and biographer , and his beauty queen wife , Babs , becomes a successful career woman .
All of Grey 's former teammates move toward their life off the gridiron with infinitely more grace , while Narvel Blue overcomes racism in the South to become a successful restaurateur .
As each day passes , Grey falls farther away from his moments of glory .
And with each passing day , his relevance , sense of place , and his grasp of the world around him fade until he is diminished to little more than a ghost .
SPECULATION ON SOURCES
Section::::Speculation on sources .
Some have said that the main character in the novel is based on Charlie " Choo - Choo " Justice , a real - life North Carolina football star .
Then , after the movie was released , simply because the film had been relocated to Louisiana , there were rumors that Deford had based Gavin Grey on LSU 's All - American running back , Billy Cannon .
Deford has always vigorously denied that the character of Gavin Grey was based on any real person , but was , in fact , a composite of many college stars he had known in several sports . "
Never met Justice or Cannon , and hardly knew anything about them . "
he says .
REFERENCES