ORANGE JULIUS Orange Julius is an American chain of fruit drink beverage stores .
It has been in business since the late 1920s .
The eponymous beverage is a mixture of ice , orange juice , sweetener , milk , powdered egg whites and vanilla flavoring , similar to a morir soñando or orange Creamsicle .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The drink grew out of an orange juice stand opened in Los Angeles , California in 1926 by Julius Freed .
Sales were initially modest , about $ 20 a day ( equivalent to approximately $ in dollars ) .
In 1929 , Bill Hamlin , Freed 's real estate broker , developed a mixture that made the acidic orange juice less bothersome to his stomach .
Freed 's stand began serving the drink , which had a frothier , creamier texture .
The sales at the stand increased substantially after the introduction of the new drink , going up to $ 100 a day .
During the 1950s and 1960s , Orange Julius was sold at a variety of outlets , including state and county fairs and freestanding Orange Julius stands .
The original stand also provided medicinal tonics and Bible tracts .
NAMING AND MASCOT Section::::Naming and mascot .
The Orange Julius was named the official drink of the 1964 New York World 's Fair .
In the 1970s and early 1980s , Orange Julius beverage stands used the image of a devil with a pitchfork , similar to that of the Arizona State University mascot , Sparky , around an orange , with the slogan , " A Devilish Good Drink " .
The company later dropped the logo and slogan after threats of a lawsuit from the ASU alumni association .
For a short period in the early 1970s , Orange Julius expanded into the UK and Dutch markets , with a fairly large restaurant in Golders Green , selling Julius Burgers as well as the classic orange drink , and a small outlet in the city centre of Amsterdam .
However , this had gone by the mid-70s . ACQUISITIONS Section::::Acquisitions .
In 1987 , the Orange Julius chain was bought by International Dairy Queen .
IDQ , and by inclusion since 1999 , Berkshire Hathaway , owns the rights to all Orange Julius stores , and has expanded the chain so its drinks are included in many of its Dairy Queen mall stores , called Treat Centers .
In 2004 , Orange Julius launched a line of Premium Fruit Smoothies to compete with smoothie competitors such as Jamba Juice and Smoothie King .
In 2012 , Dairy Queen introduced the Orange Julius line in its restaurants .
SEE ALSO
* Gibeau Orange Julep * Juice bar
NOTES
SOURCES
* Mariani , John F. ( 1999 ) .
The Encyclopedia of American Food and Drink .
New York : Lebhar - Friedman . . .
EXTERNAL LINKS