THE GREATEST GAME
EVER PLAYED
The Greatest Game
Ever Played is a 2005 biographical sports film based on the early life of golf champion Francis Ouimet .
The film was directed by Bill Paxton , and was his last film as a director .
Shia LaBeouf plays the role of Ouimet .
The film 's screenplay was adapted by Mark Frost from his book , The Greatest Game
Ever Played :
Harry Vardon , Francis Ouimet , and the Birth of Modern Golf .
It was shot in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , with the Kanawaki Golf Club , in Kahnawake , Quebec , the site of the golf sequences .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set mainly in 1913 , the film is about Francis Ouimet , the first amateur to win the U.S. Open .
Amateur golf in that era was then a sport only for the wealthy , and Ouimet came from an immigrant family that was part of the working class .
Ouimet watches an exhibition by legendary British golf pro Harry Vardon ( Stephen Dillane ) as a 7-year - old boy , and becomes very interested in golf .
He begins as a caddie at The Country Club , a posh enclave located across the street from his home in suburban Brookline , Massachusetts , while making friends with the other caddies .
He works on his own golf game at every chance , and gradually accumulates his own set of clubs .
Francis practices putting at night in his room .
He wins the Massachusetts Schoolboy Championship .
One day , a Club member , Mr. Hastings , asks Ouimet to play with him over The Country Club course , where caddies have almost no access of their own , and he shoots a fine round of 81 despite a 9 on one hole .
His talent , composure , and good manners earn admirers and interest .
With the help of Mr. Hastings and the Club Caddiemaster , Francis gets a chance to play in an upcoming tournament , the U.S. Amateur , the local qualifying for which is to be held at the very same Country Club course .
However , his father Arthur ( Elias Koteas ) tells his son to quit golf and get a " real job " .
Ouimet needs $ 50 for the entry fee , and so agrees to get a real job and never play golf again if he could not qualify ; his father lends him the money .
On the 18th , Francis faces a three - foot putt that would secure him a spot in the championship , but he looks over and his father is watching .
Ouimet is distracted , misses and falls one stroke short of qualifying for the championship proper .
With much jeer from the rich folk , Ouimet , now 20 , fulfills his promise to his dad and works at a sporting goods shop , while continuing to live at home .
After some time with his golf forgotten , Ouimet is still at the bottom of the working class .
But one day , the president of the United States Golf Association enters the store and personally invites him to play in the upcoming U.S. Open .
After some maneuvering and consideration from his employer , Ouimet secures entry .
His father informs Ouimet that he must find his own place to live after the tournament and Ouimet agrees to this arrangement .
However , his mother has been supportive of his golf from the start .
She admonishes Ouimet 's father for not recognizing Ouimet 's talent and that he now has a chance to demonstrate it in an important tournament .
Ouimet competes in the 1913 U.S. Open that takes place at The Country Club in Brookline , Massachusetts , the familiar course located across the street from his home .
The favorites are British champions Vardon and Ted Ray , who are accompanied by the snobbish Lord Northcliffe ( Peter Firth ) , and the reigning U.S. Open champion , John McDermott .
Northcliffe looks to see that either Vardon or Ray wins the Open , to affirm British dominance over the Americans in golf , and also to prove that only gentlemen were able champions .
Ouimet competes with his 10-year old friend , Eddie Lowery ( Josh Flitter ) , who skips school to caddie for Ouimet .
After the first two rounds , Vardon and Ray have a seemingly comfortable lead , with McDermott unable to keep up .
After some initial struggles , Ouimet rallies back and ends up tying with Vardon and Ray at the end of the fourth round , meaning that the three of them would compete in an 18-hole playoff to determine the champion .
The night before , Northcliffe mocks Ouimet 's social status to Vardon , who came from humble beginnings himself , and Vardon finally tells Northcliffe that he is going to try to win only for his own pride , not Britain 's and that if Ouimet wins , it will be because of his own skill , not his background .
The playoff round commences , with all three competitors keeping it close until the final holes , where Ray fades out , and Ouimet ahead of Vardon by a stroke going into the final hole .
Vardon finishes with a par , giving Ouimet the chance to clinch the win with a par himself .
Seeing him become nervous before the final putt , Eddie calms him down , and Ouimet is able to make the putt and win the U.S. Open .
As the crowd carries him and Eddie on their shoulders , they start to hand him money .
Ouimet refuses it all , only accepting one bill from his now proud father .
In the clubhouse , Vardon privately congratulates Ouimet and suggests that they should play a friendly round together in the future .
Ouimet and Eddie then walk home , carrying the U.S. Open trophy .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
The movie shows a dramatic finish in the playoff , with Ouimet sinking a putt on the 18th hole to win the Championship by a single stroke .
In reality , Ouimet finished birdie - par on 17 and 18 to Vardon 's bogey - double bogey to end the playoff five strokes clear of Vardon and six ahead of Ray .
The movie also shows the playoff as being in fair weather , and moves the rain to the third round .
In the movie the historical 17th hole plays as a " dog leg right " when in fact at Brookline Country Club is played as a " dog leg left " .
CAST
* Shia LaBeouf as Francis Ouimet
* Stephen Dillane as Harry Vardon
* Peter Firth as Lord Northcliffe
* Elias Koteas as Arthur Ouimet * Luke Askew as Alec Campbell * Josh Flitter as Eddie Lowery * Peyton List as Sarah Wallis * Marnie McPhail as Mary Ouimet * Len Cariou as Stedman Comstock
* Michael Sinelnikoff as Lord Bullock
* Stephen Marcus as Ted Ray * Max Kasch as Freddie Wallis
* Mike ' Nug ' Nahrgang as Baritone
* Walter Massey - William Howard Taft RECEPTION
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film opened at # 9 at the U.S. box office in its opening weekend grossing US$ 3,657,322 .
CRITICAL Section::::Critical .
The film received generally positive reviews , from golf fans and non fans of the sport alike .
Roger Ebert gave it three of four stars , stating it gave the real history of the greatest golf match with a strong human element while showing the golf play in a " gripping story " .
He notes that he is " not a golf fan but found ( it ) absorbing all the same ...
Paxton and his technicians have used every trick in the book to dramatize the flight and destination of the golf balls .
We follow balls through the air , we watch them creep toward the green or stray into the rough , we get not only an eagle's - eye view but a club's - eye view and sometimes , I am convinced , a ball's - eye view .
" Larry King proclaimed it " every bit as good as Seabiscuit . "
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , 63 % of critics gave the film a positive " fresh " review .
The website concludes , " Despite all the underdog sports movie conventions , the likable cast and lush production values make The Greatest Game Ever Played a solid and uplifting tale . "
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades .
+ Awards and accolades for The Greatest Game
Ever Played !
Year !
Result !
Award !
Category !
Recipients 2006 ESPY
Awards Best Sports Movie 2006 Satellite Awards
Best Youth DVD 2006 Young Artist Awards Best Performance in a Feature Film - Supporting Young Actor Josh Flitter HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
The film has been released on DVD and UMD by Walt Disney Home Entertainment .
Special features include two " making of " documentaries with cast and crew members , plus a rare 1963 interview with the real Francis Ouimet on WGBH , the Boston public television station , at Brookline , Massachusetts golf course where the 1913 U.S. Open took place .
It was released on Blu - ray Disc in 2009 , and again as a DVD / Blu - ray combo pack in 2011 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Interviews with Shia Labeouf , Bill Paxton , and Mark Frost on LIFETEEN.com