QUESO BLANCO Queso blanco ( ) , with similar cheeses including queso fresco ( ) , is a creamy , soft , and mild unaged white cheese , commonly used in the Iberian Peninsula , several Latin American countries including Mexico , and many parts of the United States .
The name queso blanco is Spanish for " white cheese " , but similar cheeses are used and known throughout the world .
In Brazil they are respectively known as ( ) and in Portugal ( ) .
It is similar to ( if slightly more acidic than ) pot cheese and farmer cheese .
It has been compared to quark ( or tvorog ) from Central and Eastern Europe and to Indian paneer .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Queso blanco is considered one of the easier cheeses to make , as it requires no careful handling and does not call for rennet or a bacterial culture .
It is usually made by heating whole fresh milk to near - boiling , adding an acidifying agent such as vinegar , stirring until curds form , then draining the curds in cheesecloth for three to five hours .
Such cheeses are also known as " bag cheeses " , as the curds are normally hung in a bag of cheesecloth to drain .
Many Mexican home cooks make their own instead of purchasing it ; when made for the evening meal , it is often prepared in early afternoon and left to drain until evening .
As it is highly perishable , it must be refrigerated or used immediately once the whey has drained out .
If it is pressed , and more water is removed , it becomes known as queso seco .
Sometimes it is made by pressing the whey from cottage cheese .
Queso blanco is traditionally made from cow 's milk , whereas queso fresco may be made from a combination of cow 's and goat 's milk .
Some versions of these cheeses , such as Oaxaca cheese , melt
well when heated , but most only soften .
COMMON USES
Section::::Common uses .
Queso blanco and queso fresco may be eaten straight or mixed in with dishes .
They make a creamy addition to recipes .
They are often used as a topping for spicy Mexican dishes such as enchiladas and empanadas , or crumbled over soups or salads .
Meltable versions are used to make quesadillas .
It is used to make cheesecake in some parts of the world , such as the United States .
In Peruvian cuisine , several recipes mix queso fresco and spices to make a spicy cold sauce eaten over peeled boiled potatoes , such as papa a la Huancaína or ocopa .
A melted cheese appetizer using white American cheese or Monterey Jack is sometimes called " queso blanco dip , " but the name is merely descriptive .
It does not include queso blanco cheese .
REFERENCES