NAVY BEAN
The navy bean , haricot , pearl haricot bean , boston bean , white pea bean , or pea bean , is a variety of the common bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris ) native to the Americas , where it was domesticated .
It is a small , dry white bean which is smaller than many other types of white beans , and has an oval , slightly flattened shape .
It features in such dishes as baked beans , and even pies , as well as in various soups such as Senate bean soup .
The green bean plants that produce navy beans may be either of the bush type or vining type , depending on which cultivar they are .
Other white beans include cannellini , ' Great Northern ' , the lima beans known as " butter beans " , and the runner bean .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The name " Navy bean " is an American term coined because the US Navy has served the beans as a staple to its sailors since the mid-1800s .
In Australia , navy bean production began during World War II when it became necessary to find an economical way of supplying a nutritious food to the many troops - especially American troops - based in Queensland .
The United States military maintained a large base in Kingaroy and had many bases and camps throughout south - east Queensland .
It actively encouraged the widespread planting of the beans .
Kingaroy is known as the Baked Bean Capital of Australia .
Another popular name for the bean during this time was " the Yankee bean " .
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
Navy bean cultivars include : * ' Rainy River ' , * ' Robust ' , resistant to the bean common mosaic virus ( BCMV ) , which is transmitted through seeds
* Michelite , descended from ' Robust ' , but with higher yields and better seed quality
* Sanilac , the first bush navy bean cultivar OTHER WHITE BEANS Section::::Other white beans .
Other white beans include : *
Cannellini ( or fazolia , ) , a white kidney bean , a variety popular in central and southern Italy , but first developed in Argentina .
They are larger than navy beans , closely related to the red kidney bean and , like the kidney bean , have higher levels of the toxic lectin phytohaemagglutinin .
They are used in minestrone soups .
* ' Great northern ' , also called " large white " beans , are also larger than navy beans , but smaller than cannellini beans , with a flattened shape similar to lima beans .
They have a delicate flavour .
*
The large white beans known in Greece as gígantes ( Greek : γίγαντες , giants ) and eléfantes ( ελέφαντες , elephants ) are from the runner bean , Phaseolus coccineus .
NUTRITIONAL VALUE
Section::::Nutritional value .
White beans are the most abundant plant - based source of phosphatidylserine ( PS ) yet known .
It contains notably high levels of apigenin , , which vary widely among legumes .
Consumption of baked beans has been shown to lower total cholesterol levels and low - density lipoprotein cholesterol .
This might be at least partly explained by high saponin content of navy bean .
Saponins also exhibit antibacterial and anti - fungal activity , and have been found to inhibit cancer cell growth .
Furthermore , navy bean is the richest source of ferulic acid and p - coumaric acid among the common bean varieties .
STORAGE AND SAFETY Section::::Storage and safety .
Dried and canned beans stay fresh longer by storing them in a pantry or other cool , dark place under .
With normal seed storage , seeds should last from one to four years for replanting , with a very large timetable for cooking for well - kept seeds , nearing on indefinite .
Avoid beans which are discolored from the pure white color of these beans , as they may have been poorly handled while they dried .
REFERENCES