ELECTRICAL TAPE Electrical tape ( or insulating tape ) is a type of pressure - sensitive tape used to insulate electrical wires and other materials that conduct electricity .
It can be made of many plastics , but vinyl is most popular , as it stretches well and gives an effective and long lasting insulation .
Electrical tape for class H insulation is made of fiberglass cloth .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
A wide variety of electrical tapes is available ; some for highly specialized purposes .
" The primary tapes used in electrical applications are vinyl , rubber , mastic , and varnished cambric .
" Electricians generally use only black tape for insulation purposes .
The other colors are used to indicate the voltage level and phase of the wire .
( In fact , the colored tape is referred to as " phasing tape . " )
This is done on large wire which is available only in black insulation .
When wires are phased , a ring of tape is placed on each end near the termination so that the purpose of the wire is obvious .
The following table(s ) describe the use of electrical tape . !
Tape color !
Usage ( U.S. ) !
Usage ( U.K. ) !
Usage ( International – new ) Tape that is approved for electrical applications will carry an approval label from an agency such as Underwriters Laboratories .
Skills and training are important as well .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Today electrical tape is simply , " another form of insulation " .
The original electrical insulating tape was made of cloth tape impregnated with Chatterton 's compound , an adhesive material manufactured using Gutta - percha .
This type of tape was often used to insulate soldered splices on knob and tube wiring .
It was commonly referred to as " friction tape " , and had the unique property of being sticky on both sides .
Because of this , no matter how it was used it stuck to itself very readily .
In the early 1940s , vinyl plastic emerged as a versatile material for a wide range of applications , from shower curtains to cable insulation .
A major ingredient in vinyl film was tricresyl phosphate ( TCP ) , which was used as a plasticizer .
Unfortunately , TCP tended to migrate , giving the surface of the vinyl film an oily quality and degrading every tape adhesive known .
Research chemists and engineers at 3 M set out to create a dependable , pressure - sensitive tape made of vinyl film that would have the required electrical , physical and chemical properties .
Experiments were conducted combining new plasticizers with the white , flour - like vinyl resin .
Finally , in January 1946 , inventors Snell , Oace , and Eastwold of 3 M applied for a patent for a vinyl electrical tape with a plasticizer system and non - sulfur - based rubber adhesive that were compatible .
The first commercially available version of the tape was sold for use as a wire - harness wrapping .
This original black tape was n't black .
Tapes formulated for high - temperature were yellow , and later versions were white .
Electrically insulating tapes are essential for enhancing functionality and reliability in a wide range of applications .
Some of the most popular types include electrically insulating adhesive tape and electrically insulating film , both of which provide reliable electronic isolation and ensure that direct electrical connection is not made between two or more circuits or their adjacent parts .
There is also electrically conducting tape for shielding and similar applications .
White tape , because of its instability in ultraviolet light , was eventually replaced with black tape , although colored vinyl tapes are still used as identification and marking tapes .
Black became the standard industry color for vinyl standard tape , primarily because of its ultraviolet resistance .
Thicknesses originally were 4 mil ( 100 µm ) , 8 mil ( 200 µm ) and 12 mil ( 300 µm ) .
These were standardized to 7 mil ( 180 µm ) and 10 mil ( 250 µm ) in 1948 .
SEE ALSO
* List of adhesive tapes
* Friction tape
*
Myelin sheath
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Electrical Taping Skills : A Lost Art ?
* Electrical Tape Tips by KØFF
* ASTM D1000 - Test methods for electrical tapes