THE ADVENTURES OF SHARKBOY AND LAVAGIRL
IN 3-D
The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl ( also known simply as Sharkboy and Lavagirl ) is a 2005 American adventure film written and directed by Robert Rodriguez and originally released in the United States on June 10 , 2005 by Miramax Films , Columbia Pictures and Dimension Films .
The film uses the anaglyph 3-D technology , similar to the one used in ( 2003 ) .
The film stars Taylor Lautner , Taylor Dooley , Cayden Boyd , David Arquette , Kristin Davis and George Lopez .
Many of the concepts and much of the story were conceived by Rodriguez 's children .
The special effects were done by Hybride Technologies , CafeFX , The Orphanage , Post Logic , Hydraulx , Industrial Light & Magic , R!ot Pictures , Tippett Studio , Amalgamated Pixels , Intelligent Creatures and Troublemaker Digital .
The film received negative reviews from critics with much of the criticism directed at the decision to post - convert the film into 3-D which damaged the film 's visual look , and earned $ 69.4 million on a $ 50 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Max is a lonely child in the suburbs of Austin who creates an imaginary dreamworld named Planet Drool , where all of his dreams come to life .
He creates two characters ; Sharkboy , who was raised by sharks after losing his father at sea and became a shark - hybrid himself , and Lavagirl , who can produce fire and lava , but has trouble touching objects without setting them alight .
The two left Max to guard Planet Drool .
In reality , Max 's parents have little time for him , and their marriage is not going well .
Max is also bullied by fellow schoolmate Linus .
However , he does receive friendship from Marissa , the daughter of his teacher Mr. Electricidad .
After a chase , Linus steals Max 's dream journal and vandalizes it .
The next day , as Max attempts to retaliate , twin tornadoes form outside the school .
Sharkboy and Lavagirl emerge from the tornadoes and have Max accompany them to Planet Drool , which he learns is turning bad because of Mr. Electric , the dreamworld 's now - corrupt electrician .
They confront Mr. Electric , who drops them in the Dream Graveyard , where some of Max 's dreams have been dumped .
They find Tobor , a robot toy that Max never finished building in the real world after being discouraged by his father .
Tobor gives them a lift to other parts of the planet .
The three form a friendship during their journey , but they face hardships , such as Sharkboy 's anger for the oceans being frozen over , and Lavagirl 's desperation to find her true purpose on Planet Drool .
They are pursued by Mr. Electric and his " plughounds " across the planet .
They plan to visit the Ice Princess and obtain the Crystal Heart , which can freeze time , giving them enough time to get to the center of Planet Drool and fix the dreamworld using Max 's daydreaming .
However , they are captured by Mr. Electric , and delivered to Linus 's Planet Drool incarnation Minus , who has altered the dreamworld with Max 's journal , and traps the three in a cage .
Sharkboy gets annoyed by Minus and has a " shark frenzy " , destroying the cage .
After they escape , Max retrieves the dream journal from Minus while he is sleeping .
Max informs Sharkboy that his father is alive in his book , but when Lavagirl wishes to learn what it says about her true identity , she burns the book to ash .
In rage , Lavagirl asks Max why she is made out of lava , but Sharkboy tells him to let her cool down .
After an encounter with the Ice Guardian , Max , Sharkboy , and Lavagirl reach the Ice Princess , the Planet Drool incarnation of Marissa .
She hands over the Crystal Heart , but they are too late to stop the corruption since the ice princess is the only one who can use the Crystal Heart 's power , and she can not leave her home .
Mr. Electric fools Sharkboy into jumping into water filled with electric eels , seemingly killing him .
Lavagirl also dies after jumping into the water to retrieve Sharkboy .
Tobor appears and convinces Max to dream a better and unselfish dream , which in turn revives Sharkboy , who then races Lavagirl to a volcano to revive her .
Max concludes that her purpose is as a light against the dark clouds which have engulfed Planet Drool 's skies .
Max gains reality warping as the Daydreamer and defeats Minus , then offers to make a better dreamworld between the two of them , to which Minus agrees .
Mr. Electric refuses to accept the new dreamworld , and flies to Earth to kill Max while he is dreaming .
Max awakens back in his classroom during the tornado storm .
Mr. Electric materializes , and Max 's parents get sucked into the storm , but are saved by Sharkboy and Lavagirl .
Max gives the Crystal Heart to Marissa so she can use the Ice Princess 's powers to destroy Mr. Electric .
Mr. Electricidad , Linus and Max make peace with one another , and Max reunites with his parents .
Max later informs his class that Planet Drool became a proper dreamworld again , Sharkboy became the King of the Ocean , and Lavagirl became Queen of the Volcanoes , and as the film shows Max finally finishing Tobor , he reminds the class to " dream a better dream , and work to make it real " .
CAST
* Cayden Boyd as Max .
An imaginative 10-year - old boy , known as the " day - dreamer " on Planet Drool .
" At first he 's dreaming all for himself ; he wants Shark Boy and Lava Girl to take him away " , says Boyd about the role .
" I like that he 's selfish in the beginning and he 's not selfish in the end " .
* Taylor Lautner as Sharkboy .
Lautner said about the character , " He 's very self - confident and sometimes his confidence gets him into trouble .
He 's also kinda jealous of the character , Max , because he has an inside crush on Lava Girl
and she 's overly motherly to Max .
"
Lautner 's martial arts skills helped him to obtain the role of Sharkboy .
" When I auditioned for the film , Robert Rodriguez , the director , did n't know that I had my martial arts [ background ] , and while we were there in Austin , TX he saw a DVD of me and asked me to choreograph my own fight scenes " , said Lautner .
Lautner was the first to audition for the film , says Rodriguez , and was chosen immediately .
* as Lavagirl .
The role was cast after the two other main characters , Sharkboy and Max , had already been cast .
Her lava bike was computer - generated , like many of the elements in the film ; Dooley and Lautner described the on - set versions of the lava bike and Sharkboy 's shark - themed jetski as " a green box with handles " .
* David Arquette and Kristin Davis play Max 's parents .
Max 's father is an unemployed writer .
They are on the brink of a divorce .
They mean well for Max but are unable to settle his troubles .
On Planet Drool , Max 's parents appear as a pair of " Cookie Giants , " who live happily in the Land of Milk and Cookies .
* George Lopez as Mr. Electricidad , Mr. Electric , and the voices of Tobor and the Ice Guardian .
Rodriguez states that he kept asking Lopez to play additional characters .
Lopez spent a total of two weeks working on the film .
* Jacob Davich as Linus / Minus .
He is a bully at Max 's school and steals his Dream Journal .
With it , he enters Max 's dreamworld and , using the name " Minus " ( a nickname bestowed by Mr. Electricidad for Linus ' habit of disliked conduct ) , alters it to his version before ultimately befriending Max .
* Sasha Pieterse as Marissa Electricidad / Ice Princess .
Marissa is the daughter of Mr. Electricidad , and at first the only student who befriends Max .
On Planet Drool , she appears as the Ice Princess , keeper of the Crystal Heart , which is a necklace she wears which can freeze anything , including time .
Section::::Cast .
Robert Rodriguez has an uncredited role voicing a shark .
As seen in the credits , two of Robert Rodriguez 's children , Rebel and Racer , portray Sharkboy at age five and age seven respectively .
Rico Torres plays Sharkboy 's father .
Marc Musso and Shane Graham play children at Max 's school .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Parts of the film were shot on location in Texas in October 2004 , where Max resides and goes to school in the film .
Much of the film was shot in a studio against green screen .
Most of the ships , landscapes and other effects including some creatures and characters , were accomplished digitally .
According to Lautner and Dooley , when filming the scene with the dream train , the front part of the train was an actual physical set piece .
" The whole inside was there
and when they have all the gadgets you can pull on , that was all there
but everything else was a green screen , " said Dooley .
Eleven visual effects companies ( Hybride Technologies , CafeFX , The Orphanage , Post Logic , Hydraulx , Industrial Light & Magic , R!ot Pictures , Tippett Studio , Amalgamated Pixels and Intelligent Creatures and Rodriguez 's Texas - based Troublemaker Digital ) worked on the film in order to accomplish over 1,000 visual effect shots .
Robert Rodriguez appears in the credits fourteen times , most notably as director , a producer , a screenwriter ( along with Marcel Rodriguez ) , visual effects supervisor , director of photography , editor , a camera operator , and a composer and performer .
The story is credited to Racer Max Rodriguez , with additional story elements by Rebecca Rodriguez , who also wrote the lyrics for the main song , " Sharkboy and Lavagirl " .
Other members of the Rodriguez family can be seen in the film or were involved in the production .
Miley Cyrus had auditioned for the film with Lautner , and said it came down to her and another girl who was also auditioning ; however , Cyrus began production on Hannah Montana .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl received a 19 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes and the consensus : " The decision to turn this kiddie fantasy into a 3-D film was a miscalculation . "
Roger Ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars and agreed with the other criticisms in which the 3-D process used was distracting and muted the colors , thus , he believes , " spoiling " much of the film and that the film would look more visually appealing when released in the home media market .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
For its opening weekend , the film earned $ 12.6 million in 2,655 theaters .
It was placed # 5 at the box office , being overshadowed by Mr. & Mrs. Smith , Madagascar , , and The Longest Yard .
The film was not very successful in the US , taking in $ 39,177,541 and was a box office bomb .
However , it did manage to gross $ 30,248,282 overseas , for a total of $ 69,425,966 worldwide .
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
The Total Nonstop Action professional wrestler Dean Roll , who trademarked the name " Shark Boy " in 1999 , sued Miramax on June 8 , 2005 , claiming that his trademark had been infringed and demanding " [ any ] money , profits and advantages wrongfully gained " .
In April 2007 , the suit was settled for a disclosed amount of $ 200,000 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Director Robert Rodriguez composed parts of the score himself , with contributions by composers John Debney and Graeme Revell .
Green Day were reportedly set to contribute " Wake Me Up When September Ends " to the soundtrack , but Robert Rodriguez declined it .
BOOKS Section::::Books .
Around the time of the film 's debut Rodriguez co - wrote a series of children 's novels entitled Sharkboy and Lavagirl Adventures with acclaimed science fiction writer Chris Roberson .
They include Book 1 , The Day Dreamer , and Book 2 , Return to Planet Drool , which announces that it will be continued in a third volume , Deep Sleep , which has yet to appear .
They are illustrated throughout by Alex Toader , who designed characters and environments for the film and the previous Spy Kids franchise .
In the first book , the story of the film is told from Lavagirl 's and Sharkboy 's perspective , with at least one new event .
In Return to Planet Drool , Sharkboy , remembering his encounter with the Imagineer in the first book , continues the search for his father by seeking to return to the Dream World .
He meets a very bored Lavagirl in the underwater city of Vent , where she now reigns as queen , and together they embark on a subterranean journey .
They encounter piranhas , a gargantuan red bear , and a city of inhabited by the dreams of bygone eras , where they are held captive by superheroes , pirates , and cowboys .
By the end , after learning the city 's secrets , Sharkboy still hopes to find his father , and Lavagirl the secrets of her origin .
Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly praised another book appearing around the time of the film , The Adventures of SharkBoy and LavaGirl : The Movie Storybook ( by Racer Max Rodriguez and Robert Rodriguez ) , as a far cry from the usual movie storybook tie - in , and also praised Alex Toader 's " cartoony yet detailed " illustrations .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS