THE BLUE LAGOON ( NOVEL )
The Blue Lagoon is a romance novel written by Henry De Vere Stacpoole and was first published by T. Fisher Unwin in 1908 .
It is the first novel of the Blue Lagoon trilogy , which also includes The Garden of God ( 1923 ) and The Gates of Morning ( 1925 ) .
The novel has inspired several film adaptations , most notably The Blue Lagoon starring Brooke Shields as Emmeline and Christopher Atkins as Richard ( " Dicky " in the book ) , which they are two fictional english children .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The story centers on two cousins , Dicky and Emmeline Lestrange , who are marooned with a galley cook on an island in the South Pacific following a shipwreck .
The galley cook , Paddy Button , assumes responsibility for the children and teaches them how to survive , cautioning them to avoid the " arita " berries , which he calls " the never - wake - up berries . "
Two - and - a - half years after the shipwreck , Paddy dies following a drinking binge .
The children survive on their resourcefulness and the bounty of their remote paradise .
They live in a hut and spend their days fishing , swimming , diving for pearls , and exploring the island .
As the years pass , Dicky and Emmeline grow into physically mature young adults and begin to fall in love .
Ignorant of their human sexuality , they do not understand or know how to express their physical attraction to one another .
Eventually , they consummate their relationship .
The author , Henry De Vere Stacpoole , describes their sexual encounter as having been " conducted just as the birds conduct their love affairs .
An affair absolutely natural , absolutely blameless , and without sin .
It was a marriage according to nature , without feast or guests . "
Dicky becomes very attentive toward Emmeline , listening to her stories and bringing her gifts .
Over several months they make love often and eventually Emmeline becomes pregnant .
The couple does not understand the physical changes happening to Emmeline 's body and have no knowledge of childbirth .
When the day comes for delivery , Emmeline disappears into the forest and returns with a child .
They discover over time that the baby requires a name and they call him Hannah because they have only ever known an infant called by that name .
Dicky and Emmeline teach Hannah how to swim , fish , throw spears , and play in the mud .
They survive a violent tropical cyclone and other natural hazards of island life .
Back in San Francisco , Arthur , Dicky 's father and Emmeline 's uncle , believes the two are still alive and is determined to find them , after recognizing a child 's tea set belonging to Emmeline which was retrieved by a whaler on an island .
Arthur finds a captain willing to take him to the island and they set out .
Meanwhile , Dicky , Emmeline , and Hannah row their lifeboat to the place where they had once lived with Paddy as children .
Emmeline breaks a branch off the deadly arita plant as Dicky cuts bananas on the shore .
While in the boat with her son , Emmeline fails to notice that Hannah has tossed one of the oars into the sea .
The tide comes in and sweeps the boat into the lagoon , leaving Emmeline and Hannah stranded .
As Dicky swims to them , he is pursued by a shark .
Emmeline strikes the shark with the remaining oar , earning Dicky time to climb into the boat safely .
Although they are not far from shore , the trio can not get back without the oars and they are unable to retrieve them from the water because of the shark .
The boat is then caught in the current and drifts out to sea ; all the while Emmeline still grasps the arita branch .
Sometime later , Arthur 's ship comes across the lifeboat and finds the three unconscious but still breathing .
The arita branch is now bare save for one berry .
Arthur asks , " Are they dead ? " and the captain replies , " No , sir .
They are asleep .
" The ambiguous ending leaves it uncertain whether or not they can be revived .
CHARACTERS * Emmeline Lestrange , a shipwrecked orphan , the heroine * Dicky Lestrange , Emmeline 's cousin , the hero
* Paddy Button , the galley cook of the wrecked ship * Arthur Lestrange , Dicky 's father and Emmeline 's uncle
*
Hannah , Dicky and Emmeline 's son
FILMS
Section::::Films .
Four films have been based on this novel : * The Blue Lagoon ( 1923 ) , a silent film directed by W. Bowden and Dick Cruickshanks , starring Molly Adair and Dick Cruickshanks
* The Blue Lagoon ( 1949 ) , directed by Frank Launder , starring Jean Simmons and Donald Houston
* The Blue Lagoon ( 1980 ) , directed by Randal Kleiser , starring Brooke Shields and Christopher Atkins * ( 2012 )
SEE ALSO * State of nature
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Blue Lagoon Online Full text of the original novel .
* Primordial , and Three Laws & the Golden Rule by Morgan Robertson .
These 1898 stories , which first appeared in Harper 's monthly , are considered by some fans and scholars to be precursors to The Blue Lagoon .
Some editions of The Blue Lagoon include Primordial in the appendix , the editors believing that Stacpoole may have been inspired by it .
* Fans of Edgar Rice Burroughs also acknowledge Robertson 's contribution to Stacpoole 's work as they study how both stories influenced Burroughs in the creation of Tarzan of the Apes .
The Ape - Man , His Kith and Kin by Georges Doddes , published in Erbzine , is a collection of stories and references to stories about shipwrecked , feral children predating the Tarzan novels .
The Blue Lagoon and Primordial/ Three Laws & the Golden Rule are reprinted in their entirety .
* Free audio recording of The Blue Lagoon from Librivox.org .