RINGER 'S LACTATE SOLUTION
Ringer 's lactate solution ( RL ) , also known as sodium lactate solution and Hartmann 's solution , is a mixture of sodium chloride , sodium lactate , potassium chloride , and calcium chloride in water .
It is used for replacing fluids and electrolytes in those who have low blood volume or low blood pressure .
It may also be used to treat metabolic acidosis in cases other than those caused by lactic acidosis and to wash the eye following a chemical burn .
It is given by injection into a vein or applied to the affected area .
Side effects may include allergic reactions , high blood potassium , volume overload , and high blood calcium .
It may not be suitable for mixing with certain medications and some recommend against use in the same infusion as a blood transfusion .
Ringer 's lactate solution has a lower rate of acidosis as compared with normal saline .
Use is generally safe in pregnancy and breastfeeding .
Ringer 's lactate solution is in the crystalloid family of medication .
It is the same tonicity as blood .
Ringer 's solution was invented in the 1880s with lactate being added in the 1930s .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
Lactated Ringer 's is available as a generic medication .
The wholesale cost in the developing world is about 0.60 to 2.30 per liter .
For people with poor liver function , Ringer 's acetate may be a better alternative with the lactate replaced by acetate .
In Scandinavia Ringer 's acetate is typically used .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Ringer 's lactate solution is very often used for fluid resuscitation after a blood loss due to trauma , surgery , or a burn injury .
Ringer 's lactate solution is used because the by - products of lactate metabolism in the liver counteract acidosis , which is a chemical imbalance that occurs with acute fluid loss or kidney failure .
The IV dose of Ringer 's lactate solution is usually calculated by estimated fluid loss and presumed fluid deficit .
For fluid resuscitation the usual rate of administration is 20 to 30 ml / kg body weight / hour .
RL is not suitable for maintenance therapy ( i.e. , maintenance fluids ) because the sodium content ( 130 mEq / L ) is considered too low , particularly for children , and the potassium content ( 4 mEq / L ) is too low , in view of electrolyte daily requirement .
Moreover , since the lactate is converted into bicarbonate , longterm use will cause patients to become alkalotic .
Ringer 's lactate and other crystalloids are also used as vehicles for the IV delivery of medications .
In a large - volume resuscitation over several hours , LRS maintains a more stable blood pH than normal saline .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
One liter of Ringer 's lactate solution contains : * 130–131 mEq of sodium ion = 130 mmol L * 109–111 mEq of chloride ion = 109 mmol L * 28–29 mEq of lactate ion = 28 mmol L
* 4–5 mEq of potassium ion = 4 mmol L * 2–3 mEq of calcium ion = 1.5 mmol
L Ringer 's lactate has an osmolarity of 273 mOsm L.
The lactate is metabolized into bicarbonate by the liver , which can help correct metabolic acidosis .
Ringer 's lactate solution alkalinizes via its consumption in the citric acid cycle , the generation of a molecule of carbon dioxide which is then excreted by the lungs .
They increase the strong ion difference in solution , leading to proton consumption and an overall alkalinizing effect .
The solution is formulated to have concentrations of potassium and calcium that are similar to the ionized concentrations found in normal blood plasma .
To maintain electrical neutrality , the solution has a lower level of sodium than that found in blood plasma or normal saline .
Generally , the source of the constituent ions is a mixture of sodium chloride ( NaCl ) , sodium lactate ( CHCH(OH)CONa ) , calcium chloride ( CaCl ) , and potassium chloride ( KCl ) , dissolved into distilled water .
Ringer 's solution has the same constituents without the sodium lactate , though sometimes it may also include magnesium chloride ( MgCl ) .
There are slight variations for the composition for Ringer 's as supplied by different manufacturers .
As such , the term Ringer 's lactate should not be equated with one precise formulation .
Although its pH is 6.5 , it is an alkalizing solution .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Ringer 's saline solution was invented in the early 1880s by Sydney Ringer , a British physician and physiologist .
Ringer was studying the beating of an isolated frog heart outside of the body .
He hoped to identify the substances in blood that would allow the isolated heart to beat normally for a time .
The use of Ringer 's original solution of inorganic salts slowly became more popular .
In the 1930s , the original solution was further modified by American pediatrician Alexis Hartmann for the purpose of treating acidosis .
Hartmann added lactate , which mitigates changes in pH by acting as a buffer for acid .
Thus the solution became known as " Ringer 's lactate solution " or " Hartmann 's solution " .
FORMULATIONS Section::::Formulations .
Ringer 's solution technically refers only to the saline component , without lactate .
Some countries instead use a Ringer 's acetate solution or Ringer - acetate , which has similar properties .
This was thought to be helpful when analyzing blood - lactate for signs of anaerobic metabolism ( e.g. present with septic shock , hypovolemic shock ) .
Subsequently it has been shown that lactic acid is metabolized much faster than infused ; lactated ringers is not a cause of elevated lactic acid .
VETERINARY USE
Section::::Veterinary use .
It is used for the treatment or palliative care of chronic renal failure in small animals .
The solution can be administered both by IV and subcutaneously .
Administering the fluids subcutaneously allows the solution to be readily given to the animal by a trained layperson , as it is not required that a vein be located .
The solution is slowly absorbed from beneath the skin into the bloodstream of the animal .
AAHA / AAFP
Fluid Therapy Guidelines
SEE ALSO
* Intravenous therapy
* Oral rehydration therapy
*
Phosphate buffered saline ( cell culture )
* Tyrode 's solution REFERENCES