CAESIUM IODIDE
Caesium iodide or cesium iodide ( chemical formula CsI ) is the ionic compound of caesium and iodine .
It is often used as the input phosphor of an X - ray image intensifier tube found in fluoroscopy equipment .
Caesium iodide photocathodes are highly efficient at extreme ultraviolet wavelengths .
SYNTHESIS AND STRUCTURE Section::::Synthesis and structure .
Bulk caesium iodide crystals have the cubic CsCl crystal structure , but the structure type of nanometer - thin CsI films depends on the substrate material – it is CsCl for mica and NaCl for LiF , NaBr and NaCl substrates .
Caesium iodide atomic chains can be grown inside double - wall carbon nanotubes .
In such chains I atoms appear brighter than Cs atoms in electron micrographs despite having a smaller mass .
This difference was explained by the charge difference between Cs atoms ( positive ) , inner nanotube walls ( negative ) and I atoms ( negative ) .
As a result , Cs atoms are attracted to the walls and vibrate more strongly than I atoms , which are pushed toward the nanotube axis .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
+ Solubility of CsCl in water APPLICATIONS Section::::Applications .
An important application of caesium iodide crystals , which are scintillators , is electromagnetic calorimetry in experimental particle physics .
Pure CsI is a fast and dense scintillating material with relatively low light yield that increases significantly with cooling .
It shows two main emission components : one in the near ultraviolet region at the wavelength of 310 nm and one at 460 nm .
The drawbacks of CsI are a high temperature gradient and a slight hygroscopicity .
Caesium iodide is used as a beamsplitter in Fourier transform infrared ( FTIR ) spectrometers .
It has a wider transmission range than the more common potassium bromide beamsplitters , extending its working range into the far infrared .
However , optical - quality CsI crystals are very soft and hard to cleave or polish .
They should also be coated ( typically with germanium ) and stored in a desiccator , to minimize interaction with atmospheric water vapors .
In addition to image intensifier input phosphors , caesium iodide is often also used in medicine as the scintillating material in flat panel x - ray detectors .
REFERENCES
CITED SOURCES