GILBERT BLYTHE
Gilbert Blythe is a fictional character in Lucy Maud Montgomery 's Anne of Green Gables series of novels .
CHARACTER DESCRIPTION
Section::::Character description .
Gilbert is described in the books as being very handsome , with dark , curly hair and hazel eyes .
He is tall with a lean build .
In his youth , he seems aware of his good looks and popularity with the girls ; perhaps because of this , he sometimes tends to be smug and self - assured .
The dismissal of his affections toward the eponymous Anne Shirley , however , seems to ground him , and he matures and is well liked by many .
Throughout the series , Gilbert is depicted as a fair , practical and reliable man , who is inclined to have a " common sense " view of things .
Keenly intelligent , he has a strong wit and sense of humour .
As Gilbert matures , he becomes less headstrong and demonstrates a sense of patience and devotion .
He eventually becomes a highly respected doctor in the fictional town of Glen St Mary , Prince Edward Island ( PEI ) , where he lives with his wife Anne and their children , and the family 's spinster housekeeper , Susan .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
Gilbert Blythe takes an immediate interest in Anne Shirley upon their first meeting and tries to gain her attention ; however , when Anne ignores him , he teasingly calls her " Carrots " because of her red hair , unaware of her sensitivity about it .
In response , Anne smashes her slate over his head in anger ; and despite his attempts to apologize , she refuses to forgive him for several years .
Throughout the entire first book , Gilbert repeatedly shows admiration for Anne , but she coldly rebuffs him .
She continues her grudge even after he rescues her from the pond after a near - disastrous reenactment of Tennyson 's " Lancelot and Elaine .
" When Anne refuses his offer of friendship after the incident , Gilbert decides to respond in kind and stops openly trying to gain her attention .
They develop a strong academic rivalry instead ( though the competition is entirely goodnatured on Gilbert 's side ) , and Anne gradually acknowledges Gilbert as an intellectual equal ; they eventually compete to win scholarships at Queens Academy .
Following his time at Queens , Gilbert decides to teach at the Avonlea school to finance his future college education .
When one of Anne 's caretakers , Matthew , dies of a heart attack , Anne chooses to give up the Avery Scholarship in order to stay at Green Gables and support his sister Marilla .
After learning of Anne 's predicament , Gilbert , who has always loved Anne , gives up his position so Anne can teach in Avonlea and live at Green Gables with Marilla .
Gilbert goes on to teach at the White Sands School and Anne , after learning of his noble act , finally forgives him and they become good friends .
During the two years Anne teaches in Avonlea , Gilbert and Anne become very close .
At the end of their teaching ' chapter in life ' Anne starts to have stronger feelings towards him , but does not recognize them as love .
Gilbert aspires to become a doctor and goes on to study at Redmond College , where he is joined by Anne , freed of personal obligations after the widowed Rachel Lynde moves to Green Gables to keep Marilla company , in Anne of the Island .
Gilbert 's feelings for Anne become increasingly apparent during their first year of college , while Anne becomes uncomfortable around him because she believes her feelings for Gilbert are entirely platonic as he does not match her idealized notion of true love , which requires a handsome , melancholy , and over - romanticized hero .
However , Anne 's jealousy of Gilbert 's other potential love interests , her moments of physical attraction for him , and her deep respect and devotion to their friendship suggest that she may be falling in love with him without realizing it .
In their second year of college , Gilbert proposes but
Anne refuses him , saying she does n't care for him " in that way " and that she only wants to be his friend .
Disappointed , Gilbert reveals that " your friendship ca n't satisfy me , Anne .
I want your love -- and you tell me I can never have that " .
Their relationship becomes awkward , especially after Anne meets and is courted by fellow Redmond student Roy Gardner , a man who at first seems to personify her " ideal " , although Anne secretly admits to herself that Roy lacks certain qualities and that she and Roy do not share a mutual sense of humour .
Gilbert seems to concede defeat and Anne believes that he has become involved with another student , Christine Stuart , who is later revealed to be only a friend .
Instead , he focuses his attention to obtaining the Cooper Prize , a prestigious scholarship that will allow him to attend medical school .
Not long after graduation , Gilbert contracts typhoid fever as a result of physically exhausting himself during school .
Anne , who has recently refused a proposal of marriage from Roy Gardner after realizing during his proposal that she does not love Roy , is shocked to learn that Gilbert may die .
She realizes that she loves and has always loved him ; that " she belonged to him and he to her " , and recognizes at last that she mistook her " bond " to Gilbert for strong friendship instead of true love , while her relationship with Roy was merely " flattered fancy . "
HAPPY ENDING Section::::Happy ending .
Gilbert recovers from his illness and resumes his friendship with Anne after learning she refused Roy Gardner .
He proposes to her again and she accepts .
However , they remain engaged for three years , as Gilbert intends to finish his medical course before marrying her ; they correspond regularly in their time apart ( Anne of Windy Poplars ) , while Anne works as a principal at Summerside High School .
The two marry in Anne 's House of Dreams , and move to the town of Glen St. Mary , where Gilbert takes over his uncle 's medical practice .
He proves to be an excellent and well - respected doctor .
Their married life is very happy and they have seven children :
Joyce ( also called Joy ; died as an infant ) , James Matthew ( Jem ) , Walter ( who dies during the First World War ) , Anne and Diana ( twins ; also called Nan and Di ) , Shirley ( the youngest boy ) , and Bertha Marilla ( called Rilla ) .
As the series ends , it is 1919 and they are happy ; Gilbert is fifty - five and still sincerely in love with Anne of Green Gables .
SCREEN PORTRAYALS Section::::Screen portrayals .
In the 1934 film adaption , Gilbert was portrayed by Tom Brown .
In the 1972 BBC TV adaptation , the young Gilbert was played by Robin Halstead , and in the follow - up series , Anne of Avonlea , the adult Gilbert was played by Christopher Blake .
In the CBC Television film adaptations of the 1980s , Gilbert Blythe was portrayed by Jonathan Crombie in the CBC Television film adaptations of 1985 , 1987 , and .
In the Japanese anime adaptation of Anne of Green Gables , he is voiced by Kazuhiko Inoue .
The CD recording of the musical that has run for more than 40 years at the Charlottetown Festival , focusing on Anne and Gilbert 's relationship , features Andrew MacBean as Gilbert .
Gilbert is portrayed by Lucas Jade Zumann in the 2017 CBC and Netflix series Anne .
REFERENCES