FEZ ( THAT ' 70S SHOW )
Fez is a fictional character and one of the four male leads on the Fox Network 's That ' 70s Show , portrayed by Wilmer Valderrama .
He was the foreign exchange student in a group of six local teenagers .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Fez was born on August 4 , 1960 .
His real name is deemed unpronounceable by his friends , so they call him " Fez " ( short for Foreign Exchange Student ) .
The series ' official web site explains the spelling " Fez " ( as opposed to " Fes " ) as " poetic license " .
Red usually calls him " the foreign kid " , or by a random foreign ( or Native American ) name through various backgrounds ( e.g. , Hadji , Tonto , Anwar , Sabu , Muhammad Ali , Ali Baba , Pelé , Ahmad , Tutankhamun , etc . ) , which Fez does not mind , with one exception : he hates being called Tarzan because Tarzan is a white man .
Eric 's grandmother calls him " Desi " .
A flashback episode shows when Fez first meets the others .
They rescue him from a janitor 's closet where several bullies have hung him on a coat hook .
The bullies had asked him if he wanted to hang out ; he tells the group he " should n't have said yes " .
Moments later , he states his real name , which is drowned out by a long , ringing school bell ( what Valderrama was actually saying was the first names of the main actors who appear in the show ) , after which Hyde ( hearing the name ) says " OK ... I 'm not going to remember that .
" The only known fact about his name is , as he states in the episode " Killer Queen " , the first five K 's of his last name are silent .
His name has no consonants , only vowels .
Valderrama has stated that he fabricated the accent he used on the show so that no one could identify which country his character is from , a mystery the show creators deliberately kept a secret .
Fez 's host parents , Matthew ( Kevin Farley ) and Rebecca Erdman ( Shannon Holt ) appear only in one episode , " Drive In " .
FEZ 'S HOMELAND Section::::Fez 's homeland .
Fez 's secret country of origin is one of the longest running gags on the show .
Through all eight seasons , Fez 's nationality remains a mystery , even to his closest friends , and the continual hints and clues
Fez drops about his country only leave them more confused .
In the episode " Eric 's Birthday , " Kitty , fantasizing about Eric 's friends causing trouble , imagines Fez saying , " in my home country of ... wherever it is I 'm from ; I can never tell ... " Much is revealed in the episode " Love of My Life , " where one of Fez 's compatriots ( played by Justin Long ) comes for a visit .
In the first teaser , when his friend suggests that he goes home , he says " Yes , I will go to Brazil ... and then catch a flight home . "
In the final teaser , when Hyde finally asks them , " Where the hell are you guys from ?
" , his friend says that the name depends on whether you ask the British or the Dutch .
But the British wo n't say it , Fez explains , because they hate the island , and no one understands a word the Dutch say .
The friend has a heavy English accent ; Fez 's explanation to this is that his friend is from the west side of the island .
We also see throughout the show that Fez almost says where he is from but then stops right before he says it .
Fez is often assumed to be of Hispanic or Latino descent ; it is never revealed if this is so , though earlier episodes , such as " Sunday , Bloody Sunday , " imply he can speak Spanish .
In " Eric 's Burger Job , " during a job interview at Fatso Burger , Fez claims he can speak Dutch .
In " The Immigrant Song , " Fez retells his catch phrase ( " I said good day ! " ) in his native tongue , which sounds like gibberish .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
Initially burdened by cultural barriers , Fez is fascinated by American life and thinks the knowledge he gains from America makes him superior to other people from his island .
In an early episode , he suggests he would one day return to his home country " and rule with an iron fist .
" Fez is openly regarded as weird by his friends .
He exhibits a creepy side , which manifests itself in Fez spying on Kelso and Eric when they are making out with their girlfriends ( with Kelso even allowing him to do so ) .
More than once he is caught hiding in Donna 's closet , and towards the end of the series she does n't even bother to kick him out because it happens so much .
He frequently complains about being lonely and love - starved .
Later on , Fez develops metrosexual habits , appreciating stylish clothes and at times appearing vain and narcissistic about his looks .
He shares an antagonistic relationship with his landlord Fenton ( played by Jim Rash ) because of a previous dispute over what Fez described as " a pair of pants that made my butt look like an oil painting . "
Fez shows off his superior dancing skills in numerous episodes .
OCCUPATION Section::::Occupation .
Fez worked at DMV ( Department of Motor Vehicle ) from season 5 to season 7 , there he met Nina his short stint girlfriend .
With Nina , Fez managed to lose his virginity .
Fez continued to work there after finishing school and being granted a green card .
In season 7 he chose to quit and work at a local salon as shampoo boy , where he stayed until the finale .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Mastro , Dana .
and Morawitz , Elizabeth .
Latino Representation on Primetime Television :
A Content Analysis , Section Stereotypes of Latinos , pp .
7 .
* Thanu Yakupitiyage Battling or Creating Stereotypes in ' Aliens in America ' ? , October 19 , 2007 , Racewire .
* Ben Megargel Reality spin - off falls into familiar traps , The Michigan Daily , February 6 , 2007 .