CRADLE CAP Cradle cap is a yellowish , patchy , greasy , scaly and crusty skin rash that occurs on the scalp of recently born babies .
It is usually not itchy and does not bother the baby .
Cradle cap most commonly begins sometime in the first three months but can occur in later years .
Similar symptoms in older children are more likely to be dandruff than cradle cap .
The rash is often prominent around the ear , the eyebrows or the eyelids .
It may appear in other locations as well , where it is called seborrhoeic dermatitis rather than cradle cap .
Some countries use the term pityriasis capitis for cradle cap .
It is extremely common , with about half of all babies affected .
Most of them have a mild version of the disorder .
Severe cradle cap is rare .
It is not advised to scratch off the flakes .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Cradle cap is seborrheic dermatitis that affects infants .
It presents on the scalp as greasy patches of scaling , which appear thick , crusty , yellow , white or brown .
The affected regions are not usually itchy and do not bother the child .
Other affected areas can include the eyelids , ear , around the nose , and in the groin .
Hair loss can also occur .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Cradle cap is not caused by bacterial infection , allergy or poor hygiene .
Cradle cap is also not contagious .
Doctors do not agree on what causes cradle cap , but the two most common hypotheses are fungal infection and overactive sebaceous glands .
Cradle cap is an inflammatory condition .
A common cause of cradle cap appears to be a common manifestation of biotin insufficiency .
This may be due , in part , to the influence of biotin on fatty acid biosynthesis .
Possibly it has to do with overactive sebaceous glands in the skin of newborn babies , due to the mother 's hormones still in the baby 's circulation .
The glands release a greasy substance that makes old skin cells attach to the scalp instead of falling off as they dry .
There may be a relationship with skin yeasts ( Pityrosporum ovale , newly renamed Malassezia furfur ) .
Seborrheic dermatitis is the adult version of cradle cap .
WARNING SIGNS
Section::::Warning signs .
If the condition thickens , turns red and irritated , starts spreading , appears on other body parts , or if the baby develops thrush ( fungal mouth infection ) , fungal ear infection ( an ear infection that does not respond to antibiotics ) or a persistent diaper rash , medical intervention is recommended .
Severe cases of cradle cap , especially with cracked or bleeding skin , can provide a place for bacteria to grow .
If the cradle cap is caused by a fungal infection which has worsened significantly over days or weeks to allow bacterial growth ( impetigo , most commonly ) , a combination treatment of antibiotics and antifungals may be necessary .
Since it is difficult for a layperson to distinguish the difference between sebaceous gland cradle cap , fungal cradle cap , or either of these combined with a bacterial infection , medical advice should be sought if the condition appears to worsen .
Cradle cap is occasionally linked to immune disorders .
If the baby is not thriving and has other problems ( e.g. diarrhea ) , a doctor should be consulted .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
To help with cradle cap , parents can gently massage their baby 's scalp with their fingers or a soft brush to loosen the scales .
They may want to shampoo the baby 's hair more frequently ( no more than once a day ) , and after shampooing gently brush the baby 's scalp with a soft brush or a terrycloth towel .
Oil remedies can be used by rubbing a small amount of pure , plant - derived oil ( coconut oil , pure olive oil , almond oil ) on the baby 's scalp and leaving it on for 15 minutes .
After 15 minutes , gently comb out the flakes with a fine tooth comb or brush .
Be sure to wash out all of the oil to avoid making the cradle cap worse .
In cases that are related to fungal infection , such as Tinea capitis , doctors may recommend a treatment application of clotrimazole ( commonly prescribed for jock itch or athlete 's foot ) or miconazole ( commonly prescribed for vaginal candidiasis ) .
Doctors may recommend a treatment with a mild dandruff shampoo such as Selsun Blue even though the treatment may cause initial additional scalp irritation .
A doctor may instead prescribe an antifungal soap such as ketoconazole ( 2 % ) shampoo , which can work in a single treatment and shows significantly less irritation than over - the - counter shampoos such as selenium disulfide shampoos .
For adults : see the article on seborrheic dermatitis ( the adult version of cradle cap ) .
SCALP , BEHIND EARS , EYEBROWS Section::::Scalp , behind ears , eyebrows .
If the cradle cap is not severe , it could simply be combed out gently after bathing .
The softened scales can then be brushed away with a soft brush , comb or cloth , but if not done very gently , this could worsen the condition and bring about temporary hair loss .
Applying petroleum jelly ( e.g. , Vaseline )
liberally overnight is another popular treatment .
The softened scales either fall off during the night , or can be brushed off in the morning .
There is broad disagreement regarding the role of shampoos .
Some sources warn against frequent shampooing , others recommend it .
Mild baby shampoo is often recommended , but the exact denotation of the label " mild " in this context is not quite clear .
Baby shampoos often contain detergent surfactants , perfumes , quaternium-15 and other eczemagenic irritants .
No studies have been performed on non - prescription shampoos .
In stubborn cases some doctors may recommend keratolytic ( dandruff ) shampoos ( e.g. with sulfur , selenium , zinc pyrithione , or salicylic acid ) while others warn against the use of medicated shampoos in newborns due to systemic absorption .
Dandruff shampoos often contain sodium dodecyl sulfate , a noted skin irritant .
Steroid and tar preparations have also been used but may have drawbacks .
Immunomodulators ( tacrolimus / Protopic , pimecrolimus / Elidel ) have not been approved for babies under two years .
Ketoconazole shampoos and creams are currently shown to be the most effective medical treatment of moderate to serious cradle cap .
Research indicates that this anti - fungal medication is not absorbed into the bloodstream .
EYELIDS Section::::Eyelids .
Typical medical advice is to use baby shampoo , diluted with warm water , on a cotton swab to cleanse the eyelid .
There is no agreement on the dilution , which ranges from as high as a 1:1 mix to as low as a few drops of shampoo per half - cup of water .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Assurances that this condition will clear as the baby matures are very common .
However , the condition occasionally persists into the toddler years , and less commonly into later childhood .
It tends to recur in adolescence and persists into adulthood .
In an Australian study , about 15 percent of previously diagnosed children still had eczema 10 years later .
Sometimes , cradle cap turns into atopic dermatitis .
Rarely , it turns out to be misdiagnosed psoriasis .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS