GOALTENDING
In basketball , goaltending is the violation of interfering with the ball while it is on its way to the basket
and it is ( a ) in a downward flight , ( b ) entirely above the rim and has the possibility of entering the basket , and ( c ) not touching the rim .
In NCAA basketball , ( W)NBA basketball , goaltending is also called if the ball has already touched the backboard while being above the height of the rim in its flight , regardless of whether it being in an upward or downward flight or whether it is directly above the rim .
Goaltending in this context defines by exclusion what is considered a legal block of a field goal .
In high school and NCAA basketball , goaltending is also called when a player interferes with a free throw at any time in its flight towards the basket .
If goaltending is called for interference with a field goal , the shooting team is awarded the points for the field goal as if it had been made .
In high school and NCAA basketball , if goaltending is called on a free throw , the shooting team is awarded one point and a technical foul is called against the offending player .
Goaltending is commonly confused with the related violation of basket interference ( also called offensive goaltending ) which occurs during an attempted field goal when a player touches the basket , the rim , or the ball when it is on the rim or directly above it .
Like goaltending , basket interference when committed by the defending team results in an award of points to the shooting team as if the attempted field goal had been made .
FIBA rules allow a defender to block any shot that is over the rim and the ball is on its upward flight .
The prohibition against goaltending was adopted by the NCAA in 1944 ( and later by the NBL ) specifically because of George Mikan .
Prior to the advent of the high - jumping 6 ft 10 in ( 2.08 m )
Mikan , goaltending was not addressed because it was thought physically impossible .
It is possible for a team to goaltend at the buzzer , although this is very rare .
This is because , according to ( W)NBA rules , once the shot is taken , the period will be over , so goaltending rules would still apply even after the clock hits 0 .
It happened in the 2012 - 13 season , when Jermaine O'Neal was called for a goaltend against the Houston Rockets after time expired .
This happened in the 4th quarter , so the Phoenix Suns lost the game 101 - 98 .
REFERENCES