CHI - CHI 'S Chi - Chi 's is a Mexican - restaurant chain operating in Belgium , Luxembourg , Austria , The United Arab Emirates , and Kuwait by Tumbleweed ,
Inc. The chain also once operated in the United States and Canada but exited those countries in 2004 .
Currently Chi - Chi 's is also a brand of Mexican - themed grocery foods ( later purchased by Hormel ) with an emphasis on salsa .
One lone restaurant was still open in Utah until 2011 .
HISTORY FOUNDING Section::::History .
Section::::Founding .
Chi - Chi 's was founded in 1975 in Richfield , Minnesota , a suburb of Minneapolis , by restaurateur Marno McDermott
( his wife 's nickname was " Chi Chi " ) and former Green Bay Packers player Max McGee .
MacDermott had previously founded the Zapata fast - food Mexican chain , which later became Zantigo .
From 1977 to 1986 , the chain was run by former KFC executive Dula Brown .
When Dula took leadership , the chain moved its headquarters to his hometown of Louisville .
By March 1995 , the chain had grown to 210 locations .
MANAGEMENT AND MARKETING Section::::Management and marketing .
In 2001 , Chi - Chi 's applied for a trademark on the word " salsafication " but was denied by the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board .
The company 's slogans were " A celebration of food " and , later , " Life always needs a little salsa . "
BANKRUPTCY , HEPATITIS A , AND CLOSURE IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::Bankruptcy ,
hepatitis A , and closure in United States and Canada .
Chi - Chi 's last owner while the company was still in business in the U.S. and Canada was Prandium Inc. , which had filed for bankruptcy several times , including in 1993 as Restaurant Enterprises Group Inc. and again in 2002 as Prandium .
On October 8 , 2003 , Chi - Chi 's and Koo Koo Roo , another Prandium subsidiary , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy themselves .
In February 1990 there was an outbreak of hepatitis at Chi Chi 's Lehigh Valley Mall in Whitehall , Pennsylvania .
In November 2003 , a month after filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy , Chi - Chi 's was hit with the largest hepatitis A outbreak in U.S. history , with at least four deaths and 660 other victims of illness in the Pittsburgh area , including high school students who caught the disease from the original victims .
The hepatitis was traced back to green onions at the Chi - Chi 's at Beaver Valley Mall near Monaca , Pennsylvania , about northwest of Pittsburgh .
Chi - Chi 's settled the hepatitis A lawsuits by July 2004 .
At the time the suits were settled , Chi - Chi 's had only 65 restaurants , fewer than half of the number of four years prior .
In August 2004 , Outback Steakhouse bid $ 42.5 million for the rights to buy its choice of Chi - Chi 's 76 properties , but did not purchase the Chi - Chi 's name , operations , or recipes .
On the weekend of September 18 , 2004 , Chi - Chi 's closed all 65 of its remaining restaurants .
Outback had hoped to convert many of the properties to its own restaurants , but instead eventually sold the majority of the properties to Kimco Realty Corporation , a real estate investment trust company in New Hyde Park , New York .
The location where the hepatitis outbreak started in Monaca has been the home of several different Mexican - themed restaurants in subsequent years , with portions of the site having been demolished for a Dick 's Sporting Goods store .
Chi - Chi 's master franchise now belongs to a Swiss company which franchises Chi - Chi 's in Europe , the Middle East , Asia , and North Africa , the best - represented country being Belgium , with 3 units .
GROCERY BRAND Section::::Grocery brand .
Hormel Foods , which had bought the rights to use the Chi - Chi 's brand on grocery items , continues to produce Chi - Chi 's salsa and related products , and uses the chichis.com domain name to market them .
SEE ALSO
* Chi - Chi 's Europe REFERENCES