TENNIS SCORING
SYSTEM
The tennis scoring system is a way to keep track of tennis matches and pick up games .
Tennis competitions are organised by tournaments that offer matches for singles and doubles .
The great majority are organised as a single - elimination tournament , with competitors being eliminated after a single loss , and the overall winner being the last competitor without a loss .
Optimally , such tournaments have a number of competitors equal to a power of two in order to fully fill out a single elimination bracket .
In many professional and top - level amateur events , the brackets are seeded according to a recognised ranking system , in order to keep the best players in the field from facing each other until as late in the tournament as possible ; additionally , if byes are necessary because of a less - than - full bracket , those byes in the first round are usually given to the highest - seeded competitors .
A tennis match is composed of points , games , and sets .
A set consists of a number of games ( a minimum of six ) , which in turn each consist of points .
A set is won by the first side to win 6 games , with a margin of at least 2 games over the other side ( e.g. 6–3 or 7–5 ) .
There is usually a tie - break if the set is tied at six games per player .
A match is won when a player or a doubles team wins the majority of prescribed sets .
Matches employ either a best - of - three or best - of - five set format .
The best - of - five set format is typically only played in the men 's singles or doubles matches at Grand Slam and Davis Cup matches .
GAME SCORE DESCRIPTION Section::::Game score .
Section::::Description .
A game consists of a sequence of points played with the same player serving , and is won by the first side to have won at least four points with a margin of two points or more over their opponent .
Normally the server 's score is always called first and the opponent 's score second .
Score calling in tennis is unusual in that each point has a corresponding call that is different from its point value . !
Number of points won !
Corresponding call
For instance if the server has won three points so far in the game , and the non - server has won one , the score is " 40 - 15 " .
When both sides have won the same number of points then : when each side has won one , or two , points , the score is described as " 15-all " and " 30-all " ( or " 15-up " and " 30-up " ) , respectively .
However , if each player has won three points , the score is called as " deuce " , not " 40–all " .
From that point on in the game , whenever the score is tied , it is described as " deuce " , regardless of how many points have been played .
In standard play , scoring beyond a " deuce " score , in which both players have scored three points each , requires that one player must get two points ahead in order to win the game .
This type of tennis scoring is known as " advantage scoring " ( or " ads " ) .
The side which wins the next point after deuce is said to have the advantage .
If they lose the next point , the score is again deuce , since the score is tied .
If the side with the advantage wins the next point , that side has won the game , since they have a lead of two points .
When the server is the player with the advantage , the score may be called as " advantage in " .
When the server 's opponent has the advantage , the score may be called as " advantage out " .
These phrases are sometimes shortened to " ad in " or " van in " ( or " my ad " ) and " ad out " ( or " your ad " ) .
Alternatively , the players ' names are used : in professional tournaments the umpire announces the score in this format ( e.g. " advantage Nadal " or " advantage Williams " ) .
In the USTA rule book ( but not the ITF rules ) there is the comment : '
" Zero , " " one , " " two , " and " three , " may be substituted for " Love , " " 15 , " " 30 , " and " 40 .
" This is particularly appropriate for matches with an inexperienced player or in which one player does not understand English . '
For tie - breaks the calls are simply the number of points won by each player . !
Tie break point score examples !
Corresponding call
The current point score is announced orally before each point by the judge , or by the server if there is no judge .
When stating the score , the server 's score is stated first .
If the server ( or the judge ) announces the score as " 30–love " , for example , it means that the server has won two points and the receiver none .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origins of the 15 , 30 , and 40 scores are believed to be medieval French .
The earliest reference is in a ballad by Charles D'Orleans in 1435 which refers to quarante cinque ( " forty - five " ) , which gave rise to modern 40 .
In 1522 there is a sentence in Latin
" we are winning 30 , we are winning 45 " .
The first recorded theories about the origin of 15 were published in 1555 and 1579 .
However , the origins of this convention remain obscure .
It is possible that clock faces were used on court , with a quarter move of the hand to indicate a score of 15 , 30 , and 45 .
When the hand moved to 60 , the game was over .
However , in order to ensure that the game could not be won by a one - point difference in players ' scores , the idea of " deuce " was introduced .
To make the score stay within the " 60 " ticks on the clock face , the 45 was changed to 40 .
Therefore , if both players have 40 , the first player to score receives ten and that moves the clock to 50 .
If the player scores a second time before the opponent is able to score , they are awarded another ten and the clock moves to 60 .
The 60 signifies the end of the game .
However , if a player fails to score twice in a row , then the clock would move back to 40 to establish another " deuce " .
Although this suggestion might sound attractive , the medieval period ran until the end of the 15th century ( i.e. until 1500 ) , at which time clocks recorded only the hours ( 1 to 12 ) .
It was n't until 1690 that clocks regularly had minute hands when the pendulum system was invented and such a valuable piece of delicate equipment would not have been on an early tennis court where it could easily have been damaged .
So the concept of tennis scores originating from the clock face could not have come from medieval times .
Another theory is that the scoring nomenclature came from the French game jeu de paume ( a precursor to tennis which initially used the hand instead of a racket ) .
Jeu de paume was very popular before the French revolution , with more than 1,000 courts in Paris alone .
The traditional court was 90 ft ( pied du roi ) in total with 45 ft on each side .
When the server scored , he or she moved forward 15 ft .
If the server scored again , he or she would move another 15 ft .
If the server scored a third time , he or she could only move 10 ft closer .
The origin of the use of " love " for zero is also disputed .
The most likely explanation is that it derives from the French expression for " the egg " ( l'œuf ) because an egg looks like the number zero .
This is similar to the origin of the term " duck " in cricket , supposedly from " duck 's egg " , referring to a batsman who has been called out without completing a run .
One possibility comes from the Dutch expression iets voor lof doen , which means to do something for praise , implying no monetary stakes .
Another theory on the origins of the use of " love " comes from the acceptance that , at the start of any match , when scores are at zero , players still have " love for each other " .
ALTERNATIVE ( " NO - AD " )
GAME SCORING
Section::::Alternative ( " no - ad " ) game scoring .
A popular alternative to advantage scoring is " no - advantage " ( or " no - ad " )
scoring , created by James Van Alen in order to shorten match playing time .
No - advantage scoring is a scoring method in which the first player to reach four points wins the game .
No - ad scoring eliminates the requirement that a player must win by two points .
Therefore , if the game is tied at deuce , the next player to win a point wins the game .
This method of scoring is used in most World TeamTennis matches .
When this style of play is implemented , at deuce , the receiver then chooses from which side of the court he or she desires to return the serve .
However , in no - ad mixed doubles play gender always serves to the same gender at game point and during the final point of tiebreaks .
SET SCORE DESCRIPTION Section::::Set score .
Section::::Description .
In tennis , a set consists of a sequence of games played with alternating service and return roles .
There are two types of set formats that require different types of scoring .
An advantage set is played until a player or team wins 6 games and that player or team has a 2-game lead over their opponent(s ) .
The set continues , without tiebreak(er ) , until a player or team wins the set by 2 games .
Advantage sets are no longer played under the rules of the United States Tennis Association ; however , they are still used in the final sets in men 's and women 's draws in singles of the Australian Open , French Open ,
[ [ The Championships , and [ [ Fed Cup ] ] .
Mixed doubles at the Grand Slams except for [ [ The Championships , WimbledonWimbledon ] ] are a best - of - three format with the final set being played as a " Super Tie Break " ( sometimes referred to as a " best of two " format ) except at Wimbledon , which still plays a best - of - three match with the final set played as an advantage set and the first two played as tie - break sets .
A tie - break set is played with the same rules as the advantage set , except when the score is tied at 6–6 , a tie - break game ( or tiebreaker ) is played .
Typically , the tie - break game continues until one player wins seven points by a margin of two or more points .
However , many tie - break games are played with different tiebreak point requirements , such as 8 or 10 points .
Often , a 7-point tie - breaker is played when the set score is tied at 6 - 6 to determine who wins the set .
The score of games within a set is counted in the ordinary manner , except when a player or team has a score of no games it is read as " love " .
The score is written using digits separated by a dash .
This score is announced by the judge or server at the start of each game . !
Example set scores !
Corresponding verbal set score
In doubles , service alternates between the teams .
One player serves for an entire service game , with that player 's partner serving for the entirety of the team 's next service game .
Players of the receiving team receive the serve on alternating points , with each player of the receiving team declaring which side of the court ( deuce or ad side ) they will receive serve on for the duration of the set .
COMPARISON Section::::Comparison .
Advantage sets have a tendency to go significantly longer than tie - break sets .
The [ [ Isner – Mahut match at the 2010 Wimbledon Championships2010 Wimbledon first - round match ] ]
between [ [ John Isner ] ] and [ [ Nicolas Mahut ] ] , which is the longest professional tennis match in history , notably ended with Isner winning the fifth set , 70–68 .
The match lasted in total 11 hours and five minutes with the fifth set alone lasting eight hours , 11 minutes .
Nevertheless , even tie - break sets can last a long time .
For instance , once players reach 6–6 set score and also reach 6–6 tiebreaker score , play must continue until one player has a 2-point advantage , which can take [ [ Longest tiebreaker in tennisa considerable time ] ] .
Sets decided by tiebreakers , however , are typically significantly shorter than extended advantage sets .
The set is won by the first player ( or team ) to have won at least six games and at least two games more than his or her opponent .
Traditionally , sets would be played until both these criteria had been met , with no maximum number of games .
To shorten matches , [ [ Jimmy Van AlenJames Van Alen ] ] created a tie - breaker system , which was widely introduced in the early 1970s .
If the score reaches 6–5 ( or 5 - 6 ) , one further game is played .
If the leading player wins this game , the set is won 7–5 ( or 5 - 7 ) .
If the trailing player wins the game , the score is tied at 6–6 and a special tiebreaker game is played .
The winner of the tiebreak wins the set by a score of 7–6 ( or 6 - 7 ) .
The tiebreak is sometimes not employed for the final set of a match and an advantage set is used instead .
Therefore , the deciding set must be played until one player or team has won two more games than the opponent .
This is true in two of the four major tennis championships .
The exceptions are the [ [ US Open ( tennis)US Open ] ] , where a tiebreak is played even in the deciding set ( fifth set for the men , third set for the women ) at 6–6 , and , starting in 2019 , [ [ The Championships , WimbledonWimbledon ] ] , where a tiebreak will be played if the score reaches 12 - 12 in the deciding set .
A tiebreak is not played in the deciding set in the other two majors – the [ [ Australian Open ] ]
and the [ [ French Open ] ] .
( When the tiebreak was first introduced at Wimbledon in 1971 , it was invoked at 8–8 rather than 6–6 . )
The US Open formerly held " Super Saturday " where the two men 's semi - finals were played along with the women 's final on the second Saturday of the event ; therefore a tie - break was more prudent where player rest and scheduling is more important .
SCORING
A TIEBREAK GAME Section::::Scoring a tiebreak game .
At a score of 6–6 , a set is often determined by one more game called a " twelve point tiebreaker " .
Only one more game is played to determine the winner of the set ; the score of the set is always 7–6 ( or 6–7 ) .
Points are counted using ordinary numbering .
The set is decided by the player who wins at least seven points in the tiebreak but also has two points more than his or her opponent .
For example , if the score is 6 points to 5 points and the player with 6 points wins the next point , he or she wins the tiebreak and the set .
If the player with 5 points wins the point , the tiebreak continues and can not be won on the next point , since no player will be two points better .
In the scoring of the set , sometimes the tiebreak points are included as well as the game count , for example 7–6 .
Another way of listing the score of the tiebreak is to list only the loser 's points .
For example , if the set score is listed as 7–6 , the tiebreak score was 10–8 ( since 8 is the loser 's points , and the winner must win by two points ) .
Similarly , 7–6 means the tiebreak score was 7–3 .
The player who would normally be serving after 6–6 is the one to serve first in the tiebreak , and the tiebreak is considered a service game for this player .
The server begins his or her service from the [ [ deuce court ] ] and serves one point .
After the first point , the serve changes to the first server 's opponent .
Each player then serves two consecutive points for the remainder of the tiebreak .
The first of each two - point sequence starts from the server 's [ [ advantage court ] ]
and the second starts from the [ [ deuce court ] ] .
In this way , the sum of the scores is even when the server serves from the deuce court .
After every six points , the players switch ends of the court ; note that the side - changes during the tiebreak will occur in the middle of a server 's two - point sequence .
At the end of the tiebreak , the players switch ends of the court again , since the set score is always odd ( 13 games ) .
An alternative tie - break system called the " Coman Tie - Break " is sometimes used by the United States Tennis Association .
Scoring is the same , but end changes take place after the first point and then after every four points .
This approach allows the servers of doubles teams to continue serving from the same end of the court as during the body of the set .
It also reduces the advantage the elements ( e.g. wind and sun ) could give playing the first six points of a seven - point tiebreak on one side of the court .
HISTORY OF THE TIEBREAK Section::::History of the tiebreak .
The tiebreaker – more recently shortened to just " tiebreak " , though both terms are still used interchangeably – was invented by [ [ Jimmy Van Alen ( tennis player)James Van Alen ] ] and unveiled in 1965 as an experiment at the pro tournament he sponsored at Newport Casino , Rhode Island , after an earlier , unsuccessful attempt to speed up the game by the use of his so - called " Van Alen Streamlined Scoring System " ( " VASSS " ) .
For two years before the Open Era , in 1955 and 1956 , the [ [ United States Pro Championship ] ]
in [ [ Cleveland , Ohio ] ] , was played by VASSS rules .
The scoring was the same as that in [ [ table tennis ] ] , with sets played to 21 points and players alternating five services , with no second service .
The rules were created partially to limit the effectiveness of the powerful service of the reigning professional champion , [ [ Pancho Gonzales ] ] .
Even with the new rules , however , Gonzales beat [ [ Pancho Segura ] ] in the finals of both tournaments .
Even though the 1955 match went to 5 sets , with Gonzales barely holding on to win the last one 21–19 , it is reported to have taken 47 minutes to complete .
The fans attending the matches preferred the traditional rules , however , and in 1957 the tournament reverted to the old method of scoring .
Van Alen called his innovation a " tiebreaker " , and he actually proposed two different kinds or versions of it : best - five - of - nine - points tiebreaker and best - seven - of-12-points tiebreaker .
The first lasts a maximum of 9 points , and awards victory in the set to whichever player or team first reaches 5 points – even if the other player or team already has 4 ; the margin of victory can be a single point .
Because this " 9-point " tiebreaker must end after a maximum of 9 points , even if neither player or team has a 2-point ( or greater ) margin , Van Alen also called it a " sudden - death tiebreaker " ( If and when the score reached four points all , both players faced simultaneous set point and/or match point . ) .
This type of tiebreaker had its Grand Slam debut at 1970 [
[ US Open ( tennis)US Open ] ] and was employed there until 1974 .
Apart from being used for 5 years at US Open
it was also used 1 year at Wimbledon and for a while on the Virginia Slims circuit and in American Colleges .
The other type of tiebreaker Van Alen introduced is the " 12-point " tiebreaker that is most familiar and widely used today .
Because it ends as soon as either player or team reaches 7 points – provided that that player or team leads the other at that point by at least two points – it can actually be over in as few as 7 points .
However , because the winning player or team must win by a margin of at least two points , a " 12-point " tiebreaker may go beyond 12 points – sometimes [ [ Longest tiebreaker in tenniswell beyond ] ] .
That is why Van Alen derisively likened it to a " lingering death " , in contrast to the 9-point ( or fewer ) " sudden - death tiebreaker " that he recommended and preferred .
The impetus to use some kind of a tie - breaking procedure gained force after a monumental 1969 struggle at Wimbledon between [ [ Pancho Gonzales ] ] and [ [ Charlie Pasarell ] ] .
This was a 5-set match that lasted five hours and 12 minutes and took 2 days to complete .
In the fifth set the 41-year - old Gonzales won all seven match points that Pasarell had against him , twice coming back from 0–40 deficits .
The final score was 22–24 , 1–6 , 16–14 , 6–3 , 11–9 for Gonzales .
The tiebreaker gave tennis a definite " finish line " .
In 1971 , the nine - point tiebreaker was introduced at Wimbledon ( the first scoring change at Wimbledon in 94 years ) .
In 1972 , Wimbledon put into effect a 12-point tiebreaker when the score in a set reached 8–8 in games unless the set was one in which one of the players could achieve a match victory by winning it .
In 1979 , Wimbledon changed their rules so that a ( 12-point ) tiebreak would be played once any set except the final set reached 6–6 in games .
In 1989 , the Davis Cup adopted the tie - break in all sets except for the final set , and then extended it to the final set starting in 2016 .
In 2001 , the Australian Open replaced the deciding third set of mixed doubles with an eighteen - point " match tiebreak " ( first to ten points and win by two points wins the match ) .
Despite some criticism of the change by fans and former pros , the US Open and the French Open have since gone on to join the Australian Open in using the same format for mixed doubles .
Wimbledon continues to play a traditional best of three match , requiring an advantage set for the third set .
Tie - break sets are now nearly universal in all levels of play , for all sets in a match ; however , the tie - break is not a compulsory element in any set , and the actual formatting of sets and tie - breaks depends on the tournament director in tournaments , and , in private matches , on the players ' agreement before play begins .
Tie - breaks are not used in the final set in the [ [ Australian Open ] ] for singles , the [ [ French Open ] ]
for singles , [ [ Wimbledon ChampionshipsWimbledon ] ] , or the [ [ Fed Cup ] ] , nor were they used for final sets in [ [ Davis Cup ] ]
play or the [ [ Olympics ] ] before 2016 .
The [ [ US Open ( tennis)US Open ] ] now uses a tiebreak in the final set , both in singles and in doubles , and is the only [ [ Grand Slam ( tennis)major tournament ] ] to use a tiebreak in the final set for singles .
However , the Australian Open and French Open do now use a final set tiebreak in both men 's and women 's doubles .
ALTERNATIVE SET
SCORING
FORMAT
Section::::Alternative set scoring format .
While traditional sets continue until a player wins at least six games by a margin of at least two games there are some alternative set scoring formats in use .
A common alternative set format is the eight or nine game pro set .
Instead of playing until one player reaches six games with a margin of two games , one plays until one player wins eight or nine games with a margin of two games .
A tie - break is then played at eight or nine games all .
While the format is not used in modern professional matches or recognized by the ITF rules , it was supposedly used in early professional tours .
It is commonly utilized in various amateur leagues and high school tennis as a shorter alternative to a best of three match , but longer than a traditional tie - break set .
In addition , eight game pro sets were used during doubles for all Division I college dual matches , until the 2014 - 2015 season .
Another alternative set format are so called " short sets " where the first to four games to win by two games .
In this format a tie - break is played at four games all .
The ITF experimented with this format in low level Davis Cup matches , but the experiment was not continued .
Nevertheless , this alternative remains as an acceptable alternative in the ITF rules of Tennis .
Another alternative set format is seen in [ [ World Team Tennis ] ] where the winner of a set is the first to win five games and a nine - point tie - break is played at 4–4 .
MATCH SCORE DESCRIPTION Section::::Match score .
Section::::Description .
Most singles matches consist of an odd number of sets , the match winner being the player who wins more than half of the sets .
The match ends as soon as this winning condition is met .
Men 's singles and doubles matches may consist of up to five sets ( the winner being the first to take the majority of total allocated sets ) while women 's singles matches are usually best of three sets .
Women 's doubles matches ( as well as mixed doubles ) are usually best of three sets , with a Super TieBreak to ten points played if the score reaches a set all .
While the alternation of service between games continues throughout the match without regard to sets , the ends are changed after each odd game within a set ( including the last game ) .
If , for example , the second set of a match ends with the score at 6–3 , 1–6 , the ends are changed as the last game played was the 7th ( odd ) game of the set and in spite of it being the 16th ( even ) game of the match .
Notably , in situations where a set ends with an odd game , back to back games see change of ends — i.e . , ends are changed before and after the first game of the following set .
A tiebreaker game is treated as a single game for the purposes of this alternation .
Since tiebreakers always result in a score of 7–6 , there is always a court change after the tiebreaker .
The score of a complete match may be given simply by sets won , or with the scores of each set given separately .
In either case , the match winner 's score is stated first .
In the former , shorter form , a match might be listed as 3–1 ( i.e. three sets to one ) .
In the latter form , this same match might be further described as " 7–5 , 6–7 , 6–4 , 7–6 " .
( As noted above , an alternate form of writing the tiebreak score lists only the loser 's score — e.g . , " 7–6 " for the fourth set in the example . )
This match was won three sets to one , with the match loser winning the second set on a tiebreaker .
The numbers in parentheses , normally included in printed scorelines but omitted when spoken , indicate the duration of the tiebreaker following a given set .
Here , the match winner lost the second - set tiebreaker 7–4 and won the fourth - set tiebreaker 8–6 .
TOTAL POINTS WON Section::::Total points won .
Because tennis is scored set by set and game by game , a player may lose a match despite winning the majority of points and/or games played .
Consider a player who wins six games in each of two sets , all by a score of game–30 .
The winner has scored 4×12 = 48 points and the loser 2×12 = 24 .
Suppose also that the loser wins four games in each set , all by a score of game - love .
The loser has scored 4×8 = 32 points and the winner zero in those games .
The final score is a win by 6–4 , 6–4 ; total points 48–56 .
An example of this in actual practice was the record - breaking [ [ Isner – Mahut match at the 2010 Wimbledon ChampionshipsIsner - Mahut match ] ]
in the Wimbledon first round , 22–24 June 2010 .
American [ [ John Isner ] ]
beat [ [ Nicolas Mahut ] ] of France 6–4 , 3–6 , 6–7 , 7–6 , 70–68 –
Mahut winning a total of 502 points to Isner 's 478 .
TOTAL GAMES
WON Section::::Total games won .
Likewise , a player may lose a match despite winning the majority of games played ( or win a match despite losing the majority of games ) .
[ [ Roger Federer ] ]
won the 2009 Wimbledon final over [ [ Andy Roddick ] ] ( 5–7 , 7–6 , 7–6 , 3–6 , 16–14 ) despite Roddick 's winning more games ( 39 , versus Federer 's 38 ) .
ANNOUNCING
THE SCORE Section::::Announcing the score .
When playing a match , it is usually best to report each score out loud with one 's opponent to avoid conflicts .
During a game , the server has the responsibility to announce the game score before serving .
This is done by announcing the server 's score first .
If , for example , the server loses the first three points of his or her service game , he or she would say " love–40 " .
This is to be done every time .
After a set is complete , the server , before serving for the first game of the next set , announces the set scores so far completed in the match , stating his or her own scores first .
If the server has won the first two sets and is beginning the third , he or she would say , " two – love , new set . " If the server had lost the first two sets , he or she would say , " love – two , new set . "
Finally , after the completion of the match , either player , when asked the score , announces his or her own scores first .
As an example , consider a match between [ [ Victoria Azarenka ] ] and [ [ Ana Ivanovic ] ] .
Azarenka wins the first set 6–4 , Ivanovic wins the next set 7–6 , and Azarenka wins the final set 6–0 .
At the end of each set , the umpire would announce the winner of each set : At the completion of the match , the result would be announced as : The result would be written as : The score is always written and announced in respect to the winner of the match .
The score of the tiebreak is not included in announcing the final result ; it is simply said " seven – six " or " six – seven " regardless of the score in the tiebreak .
If a match ends prematurely due to one player retiring or being disqualified ( defaulting ) , the partial score at that point is announced as the final score , with the remaining player as the nominal winner .
For instance , the result in the final of the [ [ 2012 Aegon Championships ] ] is written : VARIATIONS AND SLANG Section::::Variations and slang .
During informal play of tennis , especially at tennis clubs in the U.S. ( also in other English speaking countries ) , score announcements are frequently shortened with the use of abbreviations .
For example , a score 15 is replaced with " five " , or in some cases " fif " .
Similarly , the scores of 30 and 40 may sometimes be spoken as " three " or " four " respectively .
A score of 15-all may sometimes be announced as " fives .
" To further confuse score announcements , a score of 30-all ( 30–30 ) may often be called " deuce " , and the following point referred to as " ad in " or " ad out " ( or " my ad " or " your ad " ) , depending on which player ( or team ) won the point .
The logic for this is that a 30-all score is effectively the same as deuce ( 40–40 ) .
SCORECARDS
Section::::Scorecards .
[ [ File : Isner - Mahut score
card.jpg300pxthumbSample scorecard , from [ [ Isner – Mahut match at the 2010 Wimbledon ChampionshipsIsner – Mahut at Wimbledon 2010 ] ] ] ]
For formal scorekeeping , the official scoring the match ( e.g. the chair umpire ) fills out a scorecard , either on paper or electronically .
The scorecard allows the official to record details for each point , as well as rule violations and other match information .
Standard markings for each point are : * ⁄ – point won *
A – point won via ace
* D – point won via double - fault
* C – point won via code violation
* T – point won via time violation
An additional dot is marked in a score box to indicate a missed first serve fault .
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Faulkner , Trish & Lemelman , Vivian , The Complete Idiot 's Guide to Tennis .
New York :
Macmillan Publishing , 1999 .
Section::::References .
[ [ Category : TennisScore ] ]
[ [ Category : Tennis terminology ] ]
[ [ Category : Scoring ( sport ) ] ]