SCARLETT ( RIPLEY NOVEL )
Scarlett is a 1991 novel by Alexandra Ripley , written as a sequel to Margaret Mitchell 's 1936 novel , Gone with the Wind .
The book debuted on The New York Times bestsellers list , but both critics and fans of the original novel found Ripley 's version to be inconsistent with the literary quality of Gone with the Wind .
It was adapted as a television mini - series of the same title in 1994 starring Timothy Dalton as Rhett Butler and Joanne Whalley - Kilmer as Scarlett O'Hara .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The book begins where Gone with the Wind left off , with Scarlett attending the funeral of her former sister - in - law and rival for Ashley Wilkes ' affection , Melanie Wilkes , at which her estranged husband , Rhett Butler , is not present .
Scarlett , heartbroken and aggravated that Rhett left her , sets out for Tara and is saddened when she learns that Mammy , her mainstay since birth , is dying .
She sends a telegram to notify Rhett about Mammy under the name of Will Benteen ( her sister Suellen 's husband ) , because she knows that Rhett wo n't come if he suspects Scarlett is there .
Before Mammy dies , she makes Rhett swear to look after Scarlett .
Rhett agrees , although he has no intention of honoring the request .
After Mammy 's death , Rhett and Scarlett fight , which culminates in Rhett leaving and Scarlett returning to the Atlanta house , determined to win Rhett back .
Scarlett travels to Charleston to visit Rhett 's family and tries to corner him by winning his mother 's affection .
She convinces Rhett to take her for a sail on the harbour , where their boat capsizes during a terrible storm .
Scarlett and Rhett swim to an island , where they make love in a cave .
Rhett initially denies , then admits , that he loves Scarlett , but he does not want to " lose himself " over her again .
Back in Charleston , Rhett leaves Scarlett near death at his mother 's house , telling her , in a letter , that while he admires her bravery , he will never see her again .
After Scarlett regains her strength , she leaves Charleston with her two aunts , Pauline and Eulalie , to attend her maternal grandfather 's birthday celebration in Savannah .
She leaves a note to Rhett 's mother with Rhett 's sister , Rosemary , who burns the note .
Scarlett connects with the Savannah O'Haras against her maternal family 's wishes .
Scarlett 's grandfather offers Scarlett his inheritance if she remains with him in Savannah until his death and avoids contact with her father 's side of the family .
Scarlett refuses and storms out of the house .
She goes to stay with her cousin Jamie and his family .
Soon another cousin named Colum , a priest from Ireland , joins them .
Scarlett agrees to travel to Ireland with him .
By this time Scarlett has realized that she is pregnant with Rhett 's child
but she keeps her pregnancy hidden .
In Ireland , Scarlett is heartily welcomed by her Irish kin .
Exploring with Colum , they pass an old house called ' Ballyhara ' ; it was O'Hara land long ago before the English seized it .
Scarlett soon receives a notification of divorce from Rhett .
She makes plans to leave for America but learns that Rhett is now married to Anne Hampton , who is said to resemble Melanie Wilkes .
Heartbroken , Scarlett decides to remain in Ireland .
She works with lawyers and leaves her two - third share of her father 's plantation , Tara , to her son Wade Hampton ( fathered by her first husband , Charles Hamilton , brother of Melanie Wilkes ) , buys Ballyhara and settles down in Ireland , to her Irish family 's delight .
She and Colum tell everyone that her husband died rather than tell the truth that she was divorced .
As Ballyhara is restored , Scarlett eagerly awaits the birth of her child , praying for it to be a girl and vowing to be a good mother .
She is well respected by the townspeople and her family , earning her a reputation as a hard worker .
She becomes known as The O'Hara , a title reserved for the undisputed leader of a family clan .
On Halloween night , her water breaks .
Her housekeeper , Mrs. Fitzpatrick , and the midwife whom Colum summons are unable to handle the situation , and it appears that Scarlett will die .
Instead , she is saved by a wise old woman who lives near the haunted tower .
The caesarean birth is successful , but internal damage is done to Scarlett , who can no longer have children .
The baby , a girl , is born with dark skin like Rhett 's , but with blue eyes that slowly turn green .
Scarlett names her Katie Colum O'Hara , and calls her " Cat " because of her green eyes .
After Scarlett has settled down in Ballyhara , she runs into Rhett a number of times — in America while she is on the boat to Boston , at a fair where she admits she still loves him , and at a foxhunt a week later .
He still does not know he has a child .
He then seeks her out at a society ball and Scarlett realizes he still loves her .
Lord Fenton , one of the wealthiest men in Europe , pursues Scarlett , wanting to marry her .
He wants Scarlett to bear his children after seeing Cat 's fiery spirit and fearlessness .
He also plans to unite their estates ; he owns Adamstown , the land adjacent to Scarlett 's .
Angered by his arrogance , Scarlett refuses and orders him out of her house .
Scarlett leaves for Dublin for her yearly visit for parties and hunts .
She later decides to accept Lord Fenton when she hears that Anne is pregnant with Rhett 's child .
The news leaks out about her engagement and a drunken Rhett insults her when she runs into him at a horse race .
A friend tells Scarlett that Anne and the baby both died , and she rushes back to Ballyhara hopeful that Rhett will come looking for her .
She finds English there with a warrant to arrest Colum , who is the head of a group of Irish terrorists .
Colum is murdered and Rosaleen Fitzpatrick sets fire to the English arsenal to avenge him .
The villagers , thinking Scarlett is in league with the English , burn her house down .
Rhett comes to her rescue and tries to convince her to escape with him , but Scarlett runs around her house yelling for her daughter .
When she tells Rhett that he is Cat 's father , he helps her search .
After finding Cat , the three climb into a high tower on Ballyhara and stay there for the night .
Rhett and Scarlett both say " I love you " .
They wake up the next morning ready to start their new lives together and leave Ireland .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviewing the novel for The New York Times in 1991 , Janet Maslin said the book was a " stunningly uneventful 823-page holding action . "
Donald McCaig , author of Rhett Butler 's People , said it was his impression that the Margaret Mitchell estate was " thoroughly embarrassed " by Scarlett .
Scarlett , universally panned by critics , nevertheless was a commercial success .
The book sold millions of copies and remains in print .
The publication of the book effectively extended the term of the copyright on Gone With The Wind which , under the law existing in 1991 , was set to expire in 2011 .
When discussing the possibility of his own works receiving unauthorized sequels after his death , A Song of Ice and Fire author George R. R. Martin called such books " abominations , to my mind , like [ ... ]
Scarlett , the [ ... ]
Gone With the Wind sequel " .
TV ADAPTATION Section::::TV adaptation .
It was adapted as a television mini - series of the same title in 1994 starring Timothy Dalton as Rhett Butler and Joanne Whalley - Kilmer as Scarlett O'Hara .
The plot of the mini - series varies considerably from the book .
REFERENCES