THIRD - PARTY BENEFICIARY
A third - party beneficiary , in the law of contracts , is a person who may have the right to sue on a contract , despite not having originally been an active party to the contract .
This right , known as a ius quaesitum tertio , arises when the third party ( tertius or alteri ) is the intended beneficiary of the contract , as opposed to a mere incidental beneficiary ( penitus extraneus ) .
It vests when the third party relies on or assents to the relationship , and gives the third party the right to sue either the promisor ( promittens , or performing party ) or the promisee ( stipulans , or anchor party ) of the contract , depending on the circumstances under which the relationship was created .
A contract made in favor of a third party is known as a " third - party beneficiary contract . "
Under traditional common law , the ius quaesitum tertio principle was not recognized , instead relying on the doctrine of privity of contract , which restricts rights , obligations , and liabilities arising from a contract to the contracting parties ( said to be privy to the contract ) .
However , the Contracts ( Rights of Third Parties ) Act 1999 introduced a number of allowances and exceptions for ius quaesitum tertio in English law .
Other common - law countries are also making reforms in this area , though the United States is unique in abandoning privity early in the mid-19th century .
IUS
QUAESITUM TERTIO Section::::Ius quaesitum tertio .
While the law on this subject varies , there is nonetheless a commonly accepted construction of third - party rights in the laws of most countries .
A right of action arises only when it appears the object of the contract was to benefit the third party 's interests and the third - party beneficiary has either relied on or accepted the benefit .
A promisee nominates a third party usually for one of two reasons — either the promisee owes something to the third party and the performance of this new obligation will discharge it , or the promisee will somehow get a material benefit by giving something to the third party .
A says to B offer to sell my car for Rs.50000/- B repalis ."I will purchases it for 45000/-
There are also two possible ways to explain the functioning of the contractual relationship : either , * The parties
A ( promisee ) and B ( promisor ) contract each in his own name but with the intention of creating an opportunity for C ( third - party beneficiary ) to acquire a benefit , conditional upon acceptance , from B ; or
* C immediately acquires a conditional right , from which A is able to release B until the moment of acceptance , when the right of A to release B is extinguished .
In either case , a third - party contract differs from agency in that the promisee acts in his own name and for himself , whereas an agent or representative does not .
It is also distinguishable from a promesse de porte - fort under which the third party has a negative obligation to perform and , by expressing his consent , initially substitutes himself for an intended party to a contract and therefore binds himself .
Also , as a somewhat distinct rule , the intended beneficiary of a third - party contract does not need to be in existence at the time the contract is concluded .
This means a contract may benefit an unborn person ( usually a family member ) or secure benefits for a legal person , such as a company , still in the process of forming or registering .
OBJECT TO BENEFIT Section::::Object to benefit .
For third - party rights to come into existence , certain contractual criteria must be met to show an object to benefit :
* A valid contract must exist between two contracting parties and not some other relationship * The contracting parties must have intended to confer a benefit , and not a simple interest , to a third party , either expressly or impliedly * The third - party beneficiary must be named or referred to , or is a member of a distinct class referred to *
The intention to benefit must generally be irrevocable ( though a life insurance policy is an exception )
* Some intimation to the third party of the contract 's existence IRREVOCABILITY Section::::Irrevocability .
To be enforceable , a ius quaesitum tertio must be irrevocable .
This is established by any of the following : * Delivery of the contract to the third party
* Registration for publication
* Intimation to the third party
*
The third party coming under onerous obligations on the faith of having a ius quaesitum tertio
* Evidence that the third party knew of the provision intended for his or her benefit ACCEPTANCE Section::::Acceptance .
A third - party beneficiary only acquires a right of action to enforce his benefit once he has accepted the benefit provided for in the contract .
Under the South African interpretation , however , prior to formal acceptance of the benefit , the third - party beneficiary only has a spes , or expectation ; in other words , he does not have the right to accept , but rather a mere competency .
Acceptance may also be a suspensive condition in certain contracts .
Under Scots law , acceptance is not necessary to be vested in a right of action , but is necessary to be liable .
Before acceptance , however , the ius quaesitum tertio is tenuous so that acceptance of a benefit does not create a right , but rather entrenches that right .
In either case , the contracting parties may vary or rescind the contract until acceptance or reliance .
INTENDED V. INCIDENTAL BENEFICIARY
Section::::Intended v. incidental beneficiary .
In order for a third party beneficiary to have any rights under the contract , he must be an intended beneficiary , as opposed to an incidental beneficiary .
The burden is on the third party to plead and prove that he was indeed an intended beneficiary .
INCIDENTAL BENEFICIARY Section::::Incidental beneficiary .
An incidental beneficiary is a party who stands to benefit from the execution of the contract , although that was not the intent of either contracting party .
For example , if Andrew hires Bethany to renovate his house and insists that she use a specific house painter , Charlie , because he has an excellent reputation , then Charlie is an incidental beneficiary .
Neither Andrew nor Bethany is entering into the contract with the particular intent to benefit Charlie .
Andrew simply wants his house properly renovated ; Bethany simply wants to be paid to do the renovation .
If the contract is breached by either party in a way that results in Charlie never being hired for the job , Charlie nonetheless has no rights to recover anything under the contract .
Similarly , if Andrew were to promise to buy Bethany a Cadillac , and were to later go back on that promise , General Motors would have no grounds upon which to recover for the lost sale .
INTENDED BENEFICIARY Section::::Intended beneficiary .
The distinction that creates an intended beneficiary is that one party — the " promisee"—makes an agreement to provide some consideration to a second party — the " promisor"—in exchange for the promisor 's agreement to provide some product or service to the third - party beneficiary named in the contract .
The promisee must have an intention to benefit the third party ( though this requirement has an unusual meaning under the law ) .
Although there is a presumption that the promisor intends to promote the interests of the third party in this way , if Andrew contracts with Bethany to have a thousand killer bees delivered to the home of Andrew 's worst enemy Charlie , then Charlie is still considered to be the intended beneficiary of that contract .
( This would be illegal if the intent was to scare his enemy ; contracts are voided based on criminality . )
There are two common situations involving intended beneficiaries :
* Creditor beneficiary – e.g. , when Andrew owes some debt to Charlie , and Andrew agrees to provide some consideration to Bethany in exchange for her promise to pay Charlie some of the debt
*
Donee beneficiary – e.g. , when Andrew wishes to make a gift to Charlie and Andrew agrees to provide some consideration to Bethany in exchange for her promise to pay Charlie the amount of the gift .
Under old common law principles , the donee beneficiary actually had a greater claim to the benefits this created , but such distinctions have been abolished .
VESTING OF RIGHTS
Section::::Vesting of rights .
Once the beneficiary 's rights have vested , the original parties to the contract are both bound to perform the contract .
Any efforts by the promisor or the promisee to rescind or modify the contract at that point are void .
Indeed , if the promisee changed his mind and offered to pay the promisor money not to perform , the third party could sue the promisee for tortious interference with the third party 's contract rights .
There are four ways to determine whether the third party beneficiary 's rights have vested : * If the beneficiary knows of and has detrimentally relied on the rights created ; * * If the beneficiary expressly assented to the contract at the request of one of the parties ; * * If the beneficiary files a lawsuit to enforce the contract ; or * * If the beneficiary 's rights vest pursuant to an express term in the contract providing for such vesting .
* BREACH AND DEFENSES Section::::Breach and defenses .
Where a contract for the benefit of a third party is breached by the non - performance of the promisor , the beneficiary can sue the promisor for the breach just as any party to a contract can sue the other .
Because the rights of the third party are defined by the contract created between the promisor and the promisee , the promisor may assert against the beneficiary any defenses to the contract that could be asserted against the promisee .
These include all of the traditional basis by which the formation of a contract may be challenged ( e.g. , lack of capacity , lack of consideration , the statute of frauds ) and all of the traditional bases by which non - performance on the contract may be excused ( e.g. , failure of consideration , impossibility , illegality , frustration of purpose ) .
Because the promisor can assert any defenses that could be asserted against the promisee , the beneficiary also becomes liable for counterclaims on the contract that the promisor could establish against the promisee .
This liability can never exceed the amount that the promisor owes under the contract .
In other words , if the promisor is owed money by the promisee , any award to the third party for the promisor 's failure to perform can be reduced by the amount thus owed .
If the promisor is owed more than the value of the contract , the beneficiary 's recovery will be reduced to nothing ( but the third party can never be made to assume an actual debt ) .
A creditor beneficiary can sue both the promisor and the promisee , but the beneficiary can not recover against both .
If the suit is successful against one party to the contract , the other party will be dismissed .
Because the creditor beneficiary is receiving the performance of the promisor in order to fulfill the promisee 's debt , the failure of the promisor to perform means that the beneficiary can still sue the promisee to recover the preexisting debt .
The failure of performance simply means that the debt has never been paid .
A donee beneficiary can sue the promisor directly to enforce the promise .
( Seaver v. Ransom , 224 NY 233 ,
120 NE 639 [ 1918 ] ) .
A donee beneficiary is when a contract is made expressly for giving a gift to a third party , the third party is known as the donee beneficiary .
The most common donee beneficiary contract is a life insurance policy .
RIGHTS THAT ACCRUE TO THE PROMISEE Section::::Rights that accrue to the promisee .
The promisee can also sue the promisor for failing to pay the third party beneficiary .
Under the common law , such suits were barred , but courts have since determined that the promisee can sue for specific performance of the contract , provided that the beneficiary has not already sued the promisor .
Furthermore , if the promisee was in debt to a creditor beneficiary , and the failure of the promisor to perform caused the promisee to be held liable for that debt , the promisee can sue to recover the amount of the debt .
NOTES SEE ALSO
* Beneficial interest
* Pay it forward