SEASONED SALT
Seasoned salt is a blend of table salt , herbs , spices , other flavourings , and sometimes monosodium glutamate ( MSG ) .
It is sold in supermarkets and is commonly used in fish and chip shops and other take - away food shops .
Seasoned salt is often the standard seasoning on foods such as chicken , French fries , deep - fried seafood , and potatoes .
UNITED STATES
SEASONED SALT Section::::United States .
Section::::Seasoned salt .
The seasoned salt industry in the United States sells $ 100 million USD in seasoned salt annually .
According to the US Federal Trade Commission , two brands make up 80 % of that market .
LAWRY 'S Section::::Lawry 's .
Lawry 's the oldest commonly used " seasoned salt " in the US was originally developed for seasoning steaks in the 1930s .
MORTON SEASON - ALL Section::::Morton Season - all .
Season - All is the # 2 Seasoned salt in the US by marketshare .
ANTI - TRUST ISSUES Section::::Anti - trust issues .
The combined marketshare of Lawry 's seasoned salt and Season - all was of sufficient concern that the FTC required McCormick , the former owner of the Season - all brand , to sell ( divest )
the Season - all brand to Morton as a condition of McCormick purchasing Lawry 's seasonings in 2008 .
CREOLE SEASONING Section::::Creole Seasoning .
In South East Texas and South West Louisiana , many companies make Cajun / Creole seasonings .
It is a spicy blend of onion powder , garlic powder , paprika , oregano or thyme , salt , pepper , and chili powder .
Among the brands include Tony Cachere , Zatarain 's , Paul Prudhomme , and Emeril 's .
OLD BAY Section::::Old Bay .
A celery salt based seasoned salt used on seafood .
UK CHIP SPICE Section::::UK . Section::::Chip spice .
Invented in the 1970s in the English city of Hull and claimed to have been inspired by American seasonings , " chip spice " was introduced into the United Kingdom in the 1970s in Kingston upon Hull by the Spice Blender company ; the recipe was based on American spiced salts containing paprika .
AUSTRALIA
CHICKEN SALT Section::::Australia .
Section::::Chicken salt .
Chicken salt was originally developed in the 1970s to season chicken for rotisseries .
The first recipe for chicken salt consisted of onion powder , garlic powder , celery salt , paprika , chicken bouillon and monosodium glutamate with some curry powder .
Chicken salt is not related to the chicken flavouring or seasoning found on potato crisps , although it can be similar in appearance ( both have a slight yellow colouring ) .
There are versions of chicken salt that use chicken flavoring as well as vegan versions .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Ingredients vary by recipe or manufacturer .
Common herbs and spices may include : * Black pepper
* Celery seed * Chili powder *
Garlic powder *
Kala Namak
* Marjoram * Mustard seed *
Onion powder * Oregano *
Paprika * Sugar * Thyme
* Turmeric * White pepper Also , for an umami taste : * Monosodium glutamate * Soy sauce powder
SEE ALSO
* Bouillon cube
* List of edible salts
* Garlic salt * Onion
salt * Celery salt REFERENCES