MONTGOMERY GENTRY Montgomery Gentry is an American country music duo founded by vocalists Eddie Montgomery and Troy Gentry , both natives of Kentucky .
Eddie Montgomery and Troy Gentry began performing in the 1990s as part of two different bands with Montgomery 's brother , John Michael Montgomery .
Although Gentry won a talent contest in 1994 , he reunited with Eddie Montgomery after Gentry was unable to find a solo record deal , and Montgomery Gentry was formed in 1999 .
The duo was known for its Southern rock influences , and collaborated with Charlie Daniels , Toby Keith , Five for Fighting , and members of The Allman Brothers Band .
Montgomery Gentry released six studio albums for Columbia Records ' Nashville division : Tattoos & Scars ( 1999 ) , Carrying On ( 2001 ) , My Town ( 2002 )
, You Do Your Thing ( 2004 )
, Some People Change ( 2006 ) , and
Back
When I Knew It All ( 2008 ) , and a Greatest Hits package .
These albums produced more than twenty chart singles for the duo on the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts , including the number 1 hits "
If You Ever Stop Loving Me " , " Something to Be Proud Of " , " Lucky Man " , " Back When I Knew It All " , and " Roll with Me " .
Ten more of their songs reached the top 10 on the country charts , including the number 3 hit " Gone " , the most played country song by a duo in 2005 .
Tattoos & Scars , My Town , and You Do Your Thing are all certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America .
In 1999 , they were awarded Favorite New Artist — Country at the American Music Awards .
Both the Academy of Country Music and Country Music Association named them Duo of the Year in 2000 , an award for which they have been nominated by both associations in every year since .
In 2009 , they were inducted into the Grand Ole Opry .
On September 8 , 2017 , Gentry died in a helicopter crash in Medford , New Jersey , where the duo was scheduled to perform that evening .
Despite Gentry 's death , Montgomery continues to tour under the Montgomery Gentry name .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Gerald Edward Montgomery was born September 30 , 1963 , in Danville , Kentucky .
Troy Lee Gentry ( April 5 , 1967 – September 8 , 2017 ) was born in Lexington , Kentucky .
When Montgomery was thirteen years old , he played drums in his parents ' band , Harold Montgomery and the Kentucky River Express .
In 1990 , Montgomery founded the band Early Tymz , which included his younger brother , John Michael Montgomery , and Troy Gentry .
After Early Tymz disbanded , the Montgomery brothers and Gentry briefly performed as Young Country , with John Michael as lead vocalist .
John Michael left for a solo career in the early 1990s .
Gentry went solo and won the Jim Beam National Talent Contest in 1994 , which led to him opening for Patty Loveless and Tracy Byrd .
Gentry initially wanted to pursue a solo career , but after he was unable to find a record deal , he reunited with Eddie Montgomery to form a duo called Deuce , which played at local nightclubs .
The duo later changed its name to Montgomery Gentry , and signed with Columbia Records ' Nashville division in 1999 .
MUSICAL CAREER
1999–2000 : TATTOOS & SCARS Section::::Musical career .
Section::::1999–2000 :
Tattoos & Scars .
Montgomery Gentry released its debut single , " Hillbilly Shoes " , in early 1999 .
It entered the Billboard country singles charts two weeks before its scheduled release date , peaking at number 13 on the country charts and 62 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
High radio demand for the single led to the label advancing the release date of the duo 's debut album , Tattoos & Scars , from early May to April 6 .
" Lonely and Gone " was the album 's second single , peaking at number 5 on the country charts by year 's end .
The song was co - written by Dave Gibson and former Pirates of the Mississippi lead singer Bill McCorvey .
Following it was the top 20
" Daddy Wo n't Sell the Farm " , which won its co - writer , Canadian country singer Steve Fox , the 2000 Society of Composers , Authors , and Music Publishers of Canada ( SOCAN ) award for Song of the Year .
After it , Montgomery Gentry charted the number 31 singles " Self Made Man " and " All Night Long " .
The latter , which featured guest vocals from Charlie Daniels , was previously the b - side to " Hillbilly Shoes " .
It was also Daniels ' first appearance in the top 40 since " Mister DJ " in 1990 .
The duo won the Vocal Duo of the Year award at the Country Music Association Awards in late 2000 , the first time in eight years that Brooks & Dunn did not win this award .
They also won the Top New Vocal Duo or Group award from the Academy of Country Music and the 2000 Favorite New Artist — Country award at the American Music Awards .
By the end of 2000 , Montgomery Gentry charted at number 38 with a cover of Robert Earl Keen 's " Merry Christmas from the Family " , itself the b - side to " All Night Long " .
Tattoos & Scars was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2001 , for shipments of one million copies .
The album received generally positive reviews for the duo 's Southern rock influences .
Thom Jurek of Allmusic gave it four stars out of five , calling it " one of the best pop records of the year .
Period . "
and Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly rated it " B " , saying that the album was " testosterone - laden " .
In comparison , Country Standard Time reviewer Jeffrey B. Remz thought that many of the duo 's songs lacked distinctiveness , saying that they seemed to be derivative of Daniels and Travis Tritt .
2001–2002
: CARRYING ON Section::::2001–2002 : Carrying On .
Montgomery Gentry 's second album , Carrying On , was released in mid-2001 .
Lead - off single " She Could n't Change Me " peaked at number 2 on the country charts and number 37 on the Hot 100 , making their first Top 40 entry there .
The album 's only other single , " Cold One Comin ' On " , reached number 23 on the country charts .
Also included on the album was a cover of Waylon Jennings '
" I 'm a Ramblin ' Man " .
In March 2002 , they charted at number 45 with the track " Did n't I " , a cut from the soundtrack to the film We Were Soldiers which was never officially released as a single .
The duo promoted the album both on a headline tour sponsored by Jim Beam , and on the Brooks & Dunn Neon Circus & Wild West Tour , which included Toby Keith and Keith Urban .
Later in 2002 , they toured with Kenny Chesney on his No Shoes , No Shirt , No Problems tour .
Mike Kraski , then the senior vice president of sales and marketing at Sony Music Nashville , thought that Carrying On showed an artistic growth over Tattoos & Scars , and the duo itself thought that Carrying On was more " edgy " in comparison .
It was less favorably received than its predecessor ; William Ruhlmann thought that many of the songs " sound like they 're trying to hard to be macho " , and Country Standard Time 's Mike Clark thought that the duo was " playing it safe " , although he described the singles favorably .
The album was certified gold for shipments of 500,000 copies .
2002–2004 :
MY TOWN
Section::::2002–2004 :
My Town .
On August 27 , 2002 , Montgomery Gentry released My Town .
After working with producer Joe Scaife on their first two albums , they switched to Blake Chancey .
He allowed them to pick different session musicians than typically used on mainstream country albums , such as Chuck Leavell and Johnny Neel of The Allman Brothers Band , whose " Good Clean Fun " was covered on it .
They also chose songs co - written by songwriters who had not appeared on their previous albums , including Jeffrey Steele and Rivers Rutherford .
The album produced three singles , all co - written by Steele : the title track and " Speed " both at number 5 , and " Hell Yeah
" at number 4 .
Along with Blake Shelton and Andy Griggs , they contributed a guest appearance on Tracy Byrd 's mid-2003 single " The Truth About Men " , which made the country top 20 .
In March 2004 , My Town became the duo 's second platinum - certified album .
Ruhlmann gave the album a generally positive review , saying that it " rocks harder as it goes along " .
On the same site , Rick Cohoon praised " My Town " for " painting in words and music both the pace of living in a small town " , and " Speed " for being " slower and more deliberate than the recklessness the title suggests . "
On Country Standard Time , Tom Netherland called it " their third and finest release " .
2004–2006
: YOU DO YOUR THING AND SOMETHING TO BE PROUD OF :
THE BEST OF 1999–2005 Section::::2004–2006 :
You Do Your Thing and Something To Be Proud Of : The Best Of 1999–2005 .
You Do
Your Thing , their fourth album , was issued in mid-2004 .
It was led off by " If You Ever Stop Loving Me " , which in mid-2004 became Montgomery Gentry 's first number 1 single on the country charts .
It was also their biggest hit on the Hot 100 , reaching number 30 there .
Following it , the album 's title track went to number 22 on the country charts , while " Gone " peaked at number 3 and " Something to Be Proud Of " became their second number 1 single .
The song spent two weeks at number 1 , thus making it the first single for Columbia Records ' Nashville division to spend more than one week at number 1 since " Daddy 's Money " by Ricochet in 1996 .
" Gone " was also the most - played single by a country music duo in 2005 , and it received a digital gold certification for 500,000 certified music downloads .
You Do Your Thing became their third platinum - selling album .
Scaife , Chancey , Rutherford , Steele , and Mark Wright split production duties on the album .
Steele also co - wrote " Gone " and " Something to Be Proud Of " with Bob DiPiero and Chris Wallin , respectively , while Rutherford and DiPiero co - wrote " If You Ever Stop Loving Me " with Tom Shapiro .
In October 2005 , You Do Your Thing became the duo 's third platinum album .
Rick Bell gave the album a favorable review on Country Standard Time , saying that the duo " unleash [ Southern rock ] in a torrent of brash lyrics , wailing guitars , and pounding percussion . "
Jurek wrote that it " is easily the finest outing by modern country 's most relevant duo ; it rocks , it 's soulful , and it 's memorable . "
Montgomery Gentry toured in late 2004 – early 2005 with Trace Adkins in support of the album .
" Something to Be Proud Of " also served as the title track to Montgomery Gentry 's first greatest hits album , .
Also included on this disc were " Did n't I " , " Merry Christmas from the Family " and the new song "
She Do n't Tell Me To " ( also co - written by Rutherford , Shapiro , and DiPiero ) , which peaked at number 5 on the country charts in early 2006 .
Something to Be Proud Of was certified gold .
2006–2007 : SOME PEOPLE CHANGE
Section::::2006–2007 : Some People Change .
Some People Change was the title of Montgomery Gentry 's fifth album , which was released in 2006 under the production of Rutherford and Wright .
Its title track , co - written by Neil Thrasher , Jason Sellers , and Michael Dulaney , was previously recorded by Kenny Chesney on his 2004 album When the Sun Goes Down .
Gentry told the Edmonton Sun that Some People Change " is based more on family issues , the love of the family , the love of neighbors , relationships " , and said that the title track " is about being able to challenge your inner demons and the things that can bring people down , alcoholism , or hatred or racism . "
Montgomery Gentry 's version of the song peaked at number 7 , followed by the two - week number 1 hit " Lucky Man " and the number 3 "
What Do Ya Think About That " .
In 2008 , " Lucky Man " was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , the duo 's first Grammy nomination .
Some People Change was Montgomery Gentry 's lowest - selling album at the time .
Joe Galante , then - president of Sony Music Nashville , thought that the album 's poor sales were because it " strayed musically from what the base had been .
They have an edge to their sound , and I think we got a little too soft . "
Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times gave a mixed review , saying that it was more " touchy - feely " than You Do Your Thing , and that " no one works a snarling country chorus like Montgomery Gentry " .
Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a " C " , criticizing the duo for the contradictory viewpoints of personal changes on the title track versus the " defense of the American right to piss off your neighbors " in " What Do Ya Think About That " .
Jurek comparatively called it a " masterpiece " and said that it was " a new pinnacle for the duo " , calling the title track " one of those tunes that defines something that lies at the heart of what is good about Americans . "
2008–2009 :
BACK
WHEN I KNEW IT ALL
Section::::2008–2009 :
Back
When I Knew It All .
In 2008 , the duo went to the Ardent studios in Memphis , Tennessee to record their sixth album , Back When I Knew It All .
Once again , they worked with Blake Chancey as producer .
This album 's title track , co - written by Trent Willmon , was the duo 's fastest - climbing single .
Both it and followup " Roll with Me " , which included a backing vocal from Five for Fighting , went to number 1 .
" One in Every Crowd " , co - written by Montgomery with Kim Tribble and former Trick Pony bassist Ira Dean , was issued in January 2009 as the third single .
By the middle of the year , this song peaked at number 5 .
The fourth single , the number 23 " Long Line of Losers " , was co - written and previously recorded by Kevin Fowler .
Toby Keith , with whom Montgomery Gentry toured in mid-2008 , contributed a guest vocal on the Terri Clark co - write "
I Pick My Parties " , and Lillie Mae Rische of Jypsi made an appearance on " God Knows Who I Am " .
Thom Jurek wrote of this album , " The hardcore fans will love it , but this is n't the album that will win over many new ones . "
On May 26 , 2009 , Montgomery Gentry was formally invited by Charlie Daniels to become members of the Grand Ole Opry .
Marty Stuart and Little Jimmy Dickens inducted them on June 23 .
Also in May 2009 , Cracker Barrel restaurants released an exclusive compilation titled For Our Heroes , which included some of their hits along with " Did n't I " and three other songs which had previously been released only as bonus tracks .
The restaurant chain donated a portion of all profits from the album to the Wounded Warrior Project .
2009–2011
: FREEDOM AND HITS
AND MORE :
LIFE BESIDE A GRAVEL ROAD
Section::::2009–2011 : Freedom and Hits
And More : Life Beside A Gravel Road .
On November 30 , 2009 , Montgomery Gentry released the single " Oughta Be More Songs About That " .
It was to have been included on an album titled Freedom , which was to have included a song that the two wrote with Gary Hannan and Phil O'Donnell titled " Freedom Never Goes Out of Style " .
The label scrapped Freedom and instead chose to release an extended play titled Hits and More
: Life Beside a Gravel Road , which would have included past hits and three new songs .
Its first single , " While You 're Still Young " , peaked at number 32 in mid-2010 .
On September 17 , 2010 , a day before the extended play 's slated release , Montgomery Gentry exited the label , and Hits and More was shelved .
Both members told Country Weekly that they decided to leave Columbia because " there were so many people trying to encourage us to do something a little different musically .
Some of it worked and some of it did n't . "
2011–2012 :
REBELS ON THE RUN AND FRIENDS AND FAMILY
Section::::2011–2012 : Rebels On The Run and Friends and Family .
Montgomery Gentry signed to Average Joes Entertainment , a label co - owned by country rap artist Colt Ford , in March 2011 .
Their first release for the label , " Where I Come From " , appears on their seventh album Rebels on the Run , released on October 18 .
The album was produced by Michael Knox , who also produces for Jason Aldean .
Jurek thought that the album was " the most consistent offering " since Some People Change " even if it does n't quite scale those heights " , and Country Weekly reviewer Jessica Nicholson called it " classic Montgomery Gentry " .
In early 2012 , " Where I Come From " peaked at number 8 on the country charts .
It was followed by " So Called Life " , which failed to make Top 40 .
On October 23 , 2012 , the duo released a digital - only EP titled Friends and Family .
The EP contains four tracks , including " I 'll Keep the Kids " , which was released as a single .
2013–2015
: FOLKS LIKE US Section::::2013–2015 : Folks Like Us .
The duo spent the better part of 2012 and 2013 touring .
They signed to Blaster Records in February 2014 and announced that a new album , to be produced by Michael Knox , would be released within the year .
However , the album 's lead single , titled " Headlights " , did not perform as expected on the charts , peaking at number 44 on Country Airplay .
As a result , the album 's release was delayed .
The album 's second single " Folks Like Us " , was released to country radio in March 2015 .
Folks Like Us was released on June 9 , 2015 .
2016–PRESENT :
GENTRY 'S DEATH , HERE 'S TO YOU AND 20 YEARS OF HITS Section::::2016–present : Gentry 's death , Here 's to You and 20 Years of Hits .
In November 2016 , the duo left Blaster Records and re - signed with Average Joes Entertainment .
They began working on a new album , then slated for a 2017 release .
Following Gentry 's death on September 8 , 2017 , the label announced that the duo had completed their new album prior to the fatal helicopter crash . "
Better Me , " the lead single , was released on September 15 , 2017 .
In November 2017 , the album 's title Here 's to
You was announced , as was its release date of February 2 , 2018 .
Eddie Montgomery has confirmed that he will continue the Montgomery Gentry name as a solo act due to Troy Gentry 's death and he plans to tour in 2018 in support of the new album .
On November 16 , Average Joes issued the new compilation 20 Years of Hits , which includes new re - recordings of the duo 's biggest hits that were completed before Gentry 's death .
MUSICAL STYLES Section::::Musical styles .
Montgomery Gentry 's sound was defined by Southern rock influences .
Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that the duo " evokes the sound and spirit of Southern rockers like Lynyrd Skynyrd , the Marshall Tucker Band , and Charlie Daniels , painting themselves as rowdy redneck rebels who still hold small - town values .
" They cite Daniels , Lynyrd Skynyrd and Hank Williams , Jr. as primary musical influences .
Montgomery and Gentry alternated as lead vocalists , with Gentry often accompanying on acoustic guitar .
Jurek wrote that " Montgomery 's rough hewn baritone and Gentry 's almost unreal range and trademark phrasing make something highly original " .
In his book Country , Richard Carlin describes Montgomery Gentry as " rock[ing ] harder than Brooks & Dunn , although their music could be seen as an extension of that successful pair 's boot - scootin ' sound . "
He also wrote that Gentry sings with a " sweet , high tenor " while Montgomery " complements with an earthy , sometimes raspy , baritone " , and notes that the duo has an " energetic stage show and dress " .
Many of the duo 's mid - tempo songs , such as " My Town " , centralized on a theme of rural lifestyles .
Others , such as " You Do Your Thing " and " Some People Change " , contained messages of tolerance towards others with differing opinions .
PERSONAL LIVES
EDDIE MONTGOMERY
Section::::Personal lives .
Section::::Eddie Montgomery .
Gerald Edward " Eddie " Montgomery was born in Danville , Kentucky , on September 30 , 1963 , to parents Carol Dean ( née Lay ) and Harold Edward Montgomery ( 1941–1994 ) .
In November 2010 , Eddie Montgomery told Great American Country that he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer .
The cancer was successfully removed a month later .
The same month , his wife , Tracy Nunan Montgomery , announced their divorce , serving him papers at Eddie Montgomery 's Steakhouse , a restaurant he owned in Harrodsburg , Kentucky .
The restaurant closed abruptly in Spring 2013 .
The couple had four children and had been married for over 20 years .
Montgomery posted to Twitter and Facebook that she divorced him because she did not want to " cope with his illness " , but she subsequently denied it .
Montgomery subsequently married his longtime girlfriend , Jennifer Belcher , in 2014 .
On September 27 , 2015 , Montgomery wrote that his and ex - wife Tracy Nunan 's 19-year - old son , Hunter , had been killed in an accident .
Nunan subsequently clarified that Hunter died of an overdose , which she believed was accidental .
TROY GENTRY
Section::::Troy Gentry .
Troy Gentry was born on April 5 , 1967 , in Lexington , Kentucky , to Patricia ( née Webb ; 1942–2007 ) .
and Lloyd Gentry ( 1934–2017 )
He had a brother , Keith Gentry , and a sister , Jana Gentry Eckhardt .
Troy graduated from Lexington Community College and attended the University of Kentucky .
Gentry married Angie McClure in 1999 .
They had a child , Kaylee , who was born in November 2002 .
He also had a child , Taylor , from a previous marriage .
In 2004 , Gentry purchased a black bear named " Cubby " from a facility called the Minnesota Wildlife Connection and subsequently shot the bear from inside an electrified enclosure , a practice commonly known as " canned hunting " .
On November 27 , 2006 , Gentry pleaded guilty to a charge of falsely tagging a bear that was killed in a fenced enclosure as if it had been killed in the wild .
Under the plea agreement , he agreed to pay a $ 15,000 fine , give up hunting , fishing and trapping in Minnesota for five years and forfeit Cubby 's taxidermied remains and the bow he used to shoot Cubby .
In a statement that he posted on the duo 's website on November 9 , 2010 , he apologized for his actions as well as the unethical manner in which he killed Cubby .
On September 8 , 2017 , Gentry died in a helicopter crash while taking a helicopter tour of Medford , New Jersey , where he and Montgomery were set to perform that evening .
On Twitter , the band released the following statement :
" It is with great sadness that we confirm that Troy Gentry , half of the popular country duo , Montgomery Gentry , was tragically killed in a helicopter crash which took place at approximately 1:00 p.m. today in Medford , New Jersey . "
On September 14 , 2017 , a public memorial service for Gentry was held at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville .
On November 5 , 2018 , the final National Transportation Safety Board report was issued , with the accident being primarily attributed to the pilot 's " failure to maintain rotor rpm ... which resulted in an uncontrolled descent . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Result DISCOGRAPHY Studio albums
* Tattoos & Scars ( 1999 )
* Carrying On ( 2001 )
* My Town ( 2002 )
* You Do Your Thing ( 2004 )
* Some People Change ( 2006 )
*
Back
When I Knew It All ( 2008 )
* Rebels on the Run ( 2011 )
* Folks Like Us ( 2015 )
*
Here 's to You ( 2018 ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS