BLOCKING THE PLATE
In baseball , blocking the plate is a technique performed by a catcher to prevent a runner from scoring .
The act of blocking the plate accounted for most of the physical contact in Major League Baseball prior to the 2014 season , when it was outlawed except when the catcher already has possession of the ball .
By the rules of baseball , a runner has the right to an unobstructed path to a base .
However , this right is not granted if the fielder guarding the base possesses the ball or is in the process of catching the ball .
The fielders guarding first base through third base are unlikely to risk physical harm and will generally place themselves out of the path of the runner .
The catcher guarding home plate , however , wears padding and a face mask and often placed his body as an obstacle between the runner and home plate , even prior to receiving the ball .
Since the runner did not have to worry about remaining on home plate , only tagging it , he typically ran at full speed in an effort to reach the plate .
The speed of the runner combined with the fact that the catcher still had to tag him ( unless the bases were loaded and a force play at home was still available ) often resulted in collisions .
Since the 1970 Major League Baseball All - Star Game , there have been rules established , mainly in amateur levels of baseball , against home plate collisions between runners and catchers to make the obstruction ( defense ) and interference ( offense ) rules consistent at the plate with the three bases .
The rules , long enforced at lower levels , were implemented at the professional level in 2014 .
TECHNIQUE Section::::Technique .
Any time there is a close play at home plate , meaning the ball and runner reach the plate at roughly the same time , the catcher will often squat in front of the plate to block the runner 's clear path to the plate .
Unless he is willing to be tagged out , the runner who is faced with a blocked plate has two choices .
He can :
* Attempt to slide around the catcher and avoid being tagged , or , * * Collide with the catcher with such force that the catcher loses possession of the ball .
*
If the runner slides , the catcher will often make a sweeping motion with his glove to quickly tag the runner out .
Otherwise , the catcher must brace for impact and keep the ball in his glove or hand in order to tag the runner out .
RISK Section::::Risk .
Both players place themselves at risk of injury when there is a close play at home plate .
Though they wear protective equipment , catchers are more likely to be injured than runners .
Catchers often have bad knees due to the squatting stance they take at the plate .
A catcher 's knees are also his closest body parts to an incoming runner , and there is a chance of an ACL injury to the catcher .
Other injuries include broken bones , bruises , and concussions .
In one infamous incident , Cleveland Indians catcher Ray Fosse suffered a separated shoulder when Pete Rose intentionally collided with him on a play at the plate during the 1970 Major League Baseball All - Star Game .
Rose was roundly criticized because the game was an exhibition and also because he could have easily slid around Fosse rather than collide with him .
Ultimately , the incident served to help build Rose 's " Charlie Hustle " reputation and Fosse , who had been having a phenomenal rookie season , was never quite the same after the play .
RULE DIFFERENCES BY LEVEL Section::::Rule differences by level .
Different levels of baseball have instituted different rules in regards to collisions at home plate or on the bases , in part because of the Fosse - Rose collision and other instances where athletes have been injured or suffered concussions as a result of violent contact between runner and fielder .
In high school , the " malicious contact " rule prevents collisions at home plate or elsewhere on the field .
The defense is prohibited from initiating flagrant contact with the base runner while the offense , in turn , is required to attempt to avoid significant contact , often through the use of a slide .
If the defense violates , the ball is dead and the offender ejected as the umpire awards penalties that in his / her judgment will nullify the act of malicious contact .
If the offense violates , the ball is dead , the offender declared out and then ejected from the game .
In college , the " flagrant collision " rule discourages , but does not prohibit , collisions at home plate and on the bases .
Instead , only " unnecessary and violent " collisions are outlawed .
While defensive players are allowed to block the plate / base with clear possession of the ball , offensive players must take steps to ensure contact with the fielder is legal — for instance , it must be below the waist .
Violations of this rule carry similar penalties to the high school malicious contact rule .
In professional baseball — MLB — collisions at home plate have been legal and were unaddressed since the game 's inception until a series of serious player injuries and also former catchers who were MLB managers recommending changes .
In 2011 , San Francisco catcher Buster Posey suffered a season - ending injury in a collision at home plate .
The incident led to a reinterpretation of Rule 7.08 ( b ) .
On December 11 , 2013 , the MLB Rules Committee proposed a rules change that would outlaw the plate collision by dictating what both the defensive and offensive players may and may not do in such a situation .
This establishes home plate with similar regulations as other bases in regards to obstruction ( for the catcher ) and interference ( for the runner ) .
On February 24 , 2014 , Major League Baseball and the MLBPA jointly announced an experimental rule — rule 7.13—intended to increase player safety by eliminating " egregious " collisions at home plate .
The rule went into effect starting with the 2014 season but starting in 2015 the rule was renumbered as rule 6.01 ( i ) .
Informally known as the " Buster Posey Rule , " some highlights of rule 7.13 include :
* A runner may not run out of a direct line to the plate in order to initiate contact with the catcher , or any player , covering the plate .
If he does , the umpire can call him out even if the player taking the throw loses possession of the ball .
*
The catcher may not block the pathway of a runner attempting to score unless he has possession of the ball .
If the catcher blocks the runner before he has the ball , the umpire may call the runner safe .
*
All calls will be based on the umpire 's judgment .
The umpire will consider such factors as whether the runner made an effort to touch the plate and whether he lowered his shoulder or used his hands , elbows or arms when approaching the catcher .
*
Runners are not required to slide , and catchers in possession of the ball are allowed to block the plate .
However , runners who do slide and catchers who provide the runner with a lane will never be found in violation of the rule .
*
The expanded instant replay rules , which also went into effect in 2014 , are available to review potential violations of Rule 7.13 .
In Finnish baseball , the runner is considered tagged and out when he has not arrived at a target base and the defending player is holding the ball while touching that base , similar to force out .
No physical contact is necessary and the base umpire will call the runner out by raising a sign with the letter X and whistling twice .
ENFORCING RULE 7.13
Section::::Enforcing Rule 7.13 .
Text of rule 7.13 is as follows :
The decision on whether or not a player violated Rule 7.13 falls into the hands of the umpire .
A manager can choose to see if there was a rule violation rather than challenge a call , which might lead to a free challenge .
The umpire makes the final decision .
RESPONSE TO RULE 7.13 Section::::Response to Rule 7.13 .
Some managers hope the rule does not decide the final game in the World Series , but many managers have stated that the rule need clarification and explanation .
The rule depends on the perception of the umpire and if he /
she thinks that the contact was intentional and done with malicious intent .
Regardless of what the rule states , many managers instruct players to slide .
REFERENCES