MARY INGALLS
Mary Amelia Ingalls ( January 10 , 1865 – October 20 , 1928 ) was born near the town of Pepin , Wisconsin .
She was the first child of Caroline and Charles Ingalls and older sister of author Laura Ingalls Wilder , known for her Little House on the Prairie book series .
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Biography .
At the age of 14 , Ingalls suffered an illness — thought to be scarlet fever — at the time believed to have caused her to lose her eyesight .
A 2013 study published in the journal Pediatrics , concluded it was actually viral meningoencephalitis that caused Ingalls ' blindness , based on evidence from first - hand accounts and newspaper reports of her illness as well as relevant school registries and epidemiologic data on blindness and infectious diseases .
Between 1881 and 1889 , Ingalls attended the Iowa Braille and Sight Saving School in Vinton , Iowa .
The historical record is silent as to why Ingalls did not attend school during one year in that period , but she did finish the seven - year course of study in 1889 and graduated .
She then returned home to De Smet , South Dakota , living with her parents .
Ingalls contributed to the family income by making fly nets for horses .
After her father died in 1902 , Ingalls and her mother rented out a room in their home for extra income .
Following her mother 's death in April 1924 , Ingalls lived for a time with her sister , Grace Ingalls Dow in Manchester , South Dakota .
After that , Ingalls travelled to Keystone , South Dakota , to live with her sister Carrie Ingalls Swanzey .
It was there that Ingalls suffered from a stroke and died not long after as a result of pneumonia October 20 , 1928 at the age of 63 .
Her body was returned to De Smet , where she was buried in the Ingalls family plot next to her parents at De Smet Cemetery .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Ingalls was portrayed in the television series Little House on the Prairie by actress Melissa Sue Anderson .
Unlike her real - life counterpart , the television version of Mary Ingalls became a teacher in a school for the blind and married a blind fellow teacher , Adam Kendall , who was portrayed by Linwood Boomer .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Mary Ingalls Era 1877 - 1889 . "
Vinton School for the Blind .