MEET THE ROBINSONS Meet the Robinsons is a 2007 American computer - animated science fiction comedy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures on March 30 , 2007 .
The 47th Disney animated feature film , it was released in standard and Disney Digital 3-D versions .
The film is loosely based on characters from the children 's book A Day with Wilbur Robinson , by William Joyce .
The voice cast includes Jordan Fry , Wesley Singerman , Harland Williams , Tom Kenny , Steve Anderson , Laurie Metcalf , Adam West , Tom Selleck , and Angela Bassett .
It was the first film released after then - Pixar executive John Lasseter became chief creative officer of Walt Disney Animation Studios .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lewis is an aspiring 12-year - old inventor at an orphanage whose inventions have been scaring off potential parents .
He works all night on a machine to scan his memory to locate his mother , who abandoned him at the orphanage when he was a baby .
While taking the scanner to his school 's science fair , Lewis meets 13-year - old Wilbur Robinson , a mysterious boy claiming to be a time cop from the future .
Wilbur needs to recover a time machine that a man wearing a bowler hat has stolen .
Lewis tries to demonstrate the scanner , but it has been sabotaged and falls apart , throwing the science fair into chaos .
Lewis leaves while the Bowler Hat Guy , with the help of a robotic bowler hat named Doris , repairs and steals the scanner .
Wilbur meets Lewis at the orphanage and asks him to repair the scanner .
Lewis agrees to do so only if Wilbur can prove he is telling the truth , which Wilbur does by taking them to the year 2037 in a second time machine .
When they arrive , he and Wilbur get into an argument and crash .
Wilbur asks Lewis to fix the time machine , but Lewis has another condition : Wilbur has to take him to visit his mother afterwards .
Reluctantly , Wilbur agrees and hides Lewis in the garage .
Lewis does not stay there for long , however , and ends up meeting the rest of the Robinson family except for Cornelius , Wilbur 's father , who is away on a business trip .
Having followed Lewis , the Bowler Hat Guy and Doris try to kidnap him , but the Robinsons beat them back .
The Robinsons offer to adopt Lewis , but change their mind when they learn that he is from the past .
Wilbur admits to lying to Lewis about taking him back to see his mom , causing Lewis to run off in disgust .
Lewis then discovers that Cornelius Robinson is , in fact , a future version of himself , and Wilbur is his future son .
Lewis also finds out that the Bowler Hat Guy is a grown - up version of Lewis ' roommate , Michael " Goob " Yagoobian .
Because he was kept awake by Lewis ' work on the scanner , Goob fell asleep during an important Little League game and failed to make an important catch that cost the game .
Goob became so bitter as a result that he was never adopted and remained in the orphanage long after it closed .
Doris is " DOR-15 " , one of Lewis ' failed and abandoned inventions .
They both blamed Lewis for their misfortunes and decided to ruin his career by stealing the memory scanner and claiming credit for it .
Leaving Lewis behind , they take off with the scanner , drastically altering the future to a world where Doris ' clones have enslaved humanity .
Lewis repairs the second time machine , confronts Doris and destroys her by promising to never invent her , restoring the future to its Utopian self .
After persuasion from Lewis , Wilbur tries to ask the adult Goob to join the family , but he has disappeared , apparently ashamed at what he has done .
Back in Wilbur 's time , Lewis finally meets Cornelius face to face .
Cornelius explains how the memory scanner started their successful career , and persuades Lewis to return to the science fair .
Wilbur takes Lewis back , but makes one stop first : as he promised , he takes Lewis back to the moment when his mother abandoned him .
Wilbur drops Lewis off in his own time and leaves .
Lewis heads to the fair , but en route wakes up Goob just in time for him to make the winning catch .
Back at the fair , Lewis asks for one more chance to demonstrate his scanner , which this time succeeds .
He is adopted by Lucille , one of the science fair judges , and her husband Bud , who nicknames him " Cornelius " and takes him home .
CAST * Daniel Hansen and Jordan Fry as Lewis
* Tom Selleck as Cornelius ,
Lewis ' older self
* Wesley Singerman as Wilbur Robinson * Harland Williams as Carl
* Tom Kenny as Mr. Willerstein
* Steve Anderson as Bowler Hat Guy
* Matthew Josten as Michael " Goob " Yagoobian , Bowler Hat Guy 's younger self
* Anderson also provided the voices of Grandpa Bud and Cousin Tallulah
* Angela Bassett as Mildred * Laurie Metcalf as Lucille Krunklehorn * Adam West as Uncle Art * Nicole Sullivan as Franny Robinson
* Jessie Flower as young Franny * Ethan Sandler as : * DOR-15 ( Doris ) * Uncle Fritz ( and Aunt Petunia )
* Spike and Dimitri * Cousin Laszlo * The CEO of InventCo * Don Hall as Uncle Gaston * Hall also provided the voice of the Gym Coach * Kelly Hoover as Aunt Billie * Tracey Miller - Zarneke as Lizzy * Joe Mateo as Tiny the T - Rex * Aurian Redson as Frankie the Frog * Jamie Cullum as the singing voice of Frankie the Frog * Paul Butcher as Stanley * Dara McGarry as InventCo Receptionist , Mrs. Harrington * John H. H. Ford as Mr. Harrington
* Nathan Greno as Lefty PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Originally titled A Day with Wilbur Robinson , production began in June 2004 , and was scheduled for a 2006 release .
While the film was in production , Disney announced on January 24 , 2006 that it would be acquiring Pixar , and as a result , John Lasseter became the chief creative officer of both Pixar and Walt Disney Animation Studios .
When he saw an early screening for the movie , he told the director Stephen Anderson that he did not find the villain scary or threatening enough , and suggested that he make some changes .
Ten months later , almost 60 % of the film had been scrapped and redone .
The villain had improved and was given a new sidekick , a dinosaur chase had been added , and the ending was changed .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Over 600 REAL D Cinema digital 3D - equipped theaters presented Disney Digital 3-D version of the film .
The 3D version was preceded by the 1953 Chip ' n Dale 3D short Working for Peanuts .
The final credits of the 3D version were left two - dimensional , except for the names of those who converted the film to 3D. HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
The DVD and Blu - ray versions were both released on October 23 , 2007 .
Both versions feature 1.78 widescreen aspect ratio and Dolby Digital 5.1 surround sound , plus music videos , the " Family Function 5000 " game , deleted scenes , and other bonus features .
The DVD 's audio commentary contains Anderson 's narration , occasionally interrupted by himself as the Bowler Hat Guy .
The Blu - ray also includes uncompressed 5.1 audio and a BD - J game , Bowler Hat Barrage ! .
A 3D Blu - ray was released on November 8 , 2011 .
As of January 2008 , the DVD had sold approximately 4 million copies .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 67 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , based on 139 reviews with an average score of 6.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus states "
Meet the Robinsons is a visually impressive children 's animated film marked by a story of considerable depth .
"
Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 61 out of 100 , based on 27 reviews .
Realmovienews stated that it has " a snappy plot that demands close attention as it whizzes back and forth in the space - time continuum , touching on serious ideas and proposing some rather disturbing alternate realities .
And the witty story twists are handled with rare subtlety and intelligence .
In the end it may get a little weepy and inspirational .
But it 's so charming that we do n't mind at all " .
Danny Minton of the Beaumont Journal said that " The Robinsons might not be a family you want to hang out with , but they sure were fun to meet in this imaginative and beautiful 3-D experience " .
Andrew L. Urban of Australian Urban Cinefile said that " Walt Disney stood for fantasy on screen and this is a loving tribute to his legacy " .
Kyle Smith of the New York Post named it the 10th best film of 2007 .
Conversely , A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote : " Meet the Robinsons is surely one of the worst theatrically released animated features issued under the Disney label in quite some time " , while Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " C " and said " This is one bumpy ride " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film grossed $ 25,123,781 on its opening weekend , falling behind Blades of Glory .
Over its theatrical run , it grossed $ 97,822,171 in the United States and Canada and $ 71,510,863 in other territories , totaling $ 169,333,034 worldwide .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on March 27 , 2007 .
Contributors to the album beyond the Danny Elfman score include the Jonas Brothers , Rufus Wainwright , Rob Thomas , Jamie Cullum , The All - American Rejects , and They Might Be Giants .
The track " Little Wonders " , recorded by Rob Thomas , reached number 5 on the Billboard AC chart and the top 20 in Australia and Canada .
The song " This Much Fun " by Cowboy Mouth , which was featured in the trailer , was not featured in the film or on the soundtrack .
The song " There 's a Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow " was originally from the Disneyland attraction General Electric 's Carousel of Progress .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Disney 's Meet the Robinsons video game is available from Buena Vista Games for PlayStation 2 , Xbox 360 , Wii , Nintendo GameCube , Nintendo DS , and PC .
The independent England - based company Climax Group developed their own adaption for the Game Boy Advance .
CANCELLED SEQUEL
Section::::Cancelled sequel .
DisneyToon Studios originally planned to make a sequel to the film , tentatively titled Meet the Robinsons 2 : First Date .
However , when John Lasseter became Walt Disney Animation Studios ' new chief creative officer , he called off all future sequels DisneyToon originally planned , including sequels to Chicken Little ( 2005 ) and The Aristocats ( 1970 ) , and refocused on spin - off films and original productions .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS