MINIBIKE
A minibike , sometimes called a minimoto or pocketbike , is a miniature motorcycle .
Most minibikes use two - stroke engines and chain drive .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Doodle Bug scooter was a very compact , small - wheeled motorscooter built from 1946-'48 in Webster City , Iowa by the Beam Manufacturing Company .
Sold by the Gambles store chain , a total of 40,000 of these were built — a small number with single - cylinder Clinton engines , and most with 1.5 hp Briggs & Stratton air - cooled , single - cylinder engines .
They were marketed under the " Hiawatha " brand name .
Complete Doodle Bugs were to be found here and there for decades thereafter and , as well , their frames and other parts were not uncommon .
However in the 1950s , like go - karts , minibikes were made by enthusiasts from spare parts found in their garages .
These were first popularly used as " pit bikes " , for drag racers to travel in the pits during races in the late 1950s .
They were very useful for this purpose , as they could maneuver very well in the tight pit roads , fit in about the same space as a small bicycle in a trailer or pickup .
As racers brought them home and used them around their neighborhoods , many children liked the idea of having a mini motorcycle and started building their own .
The June 1967 Popular Mechanics magazine had an article with plans .
All you needed was an engine from a lawnmower and a neighbor with a welding torch .
Commercial manufacture
A market for minibikes developed , and from the early 1960s many cottage and major industries developed to meet the demand .
Most lawnmower shops began carrying a line of mini - bikes .
Minibike companies include Arctic - Cat , Rupp , Taco , Heath , Gilson , and Fox , many of which also made other power toys such as go - karts , trikes and choppers .
Traditional motorcycle manufacturers also began coming out with models like the Honda Z50A , inspired by aspects of minibikes .
In America the peak of the minibike / go - kart era was from the late 1960s to the early 1970s .
Many of the brands , foremost Rupp , have gained a cult - following of enthusiasts and owners .
Early minibike power train
These early minibikes usually had a power train with a small four - stroke , horizontal crankshaft , flathead engine .
The transmission usually was of a crank - mounted centrifugal clutch and chain drive to a rear sprocket .
As the minibike and the mini - powersports field grew , Comet introduced a continuously variable transmission , much like a snowmobile 's , called the Torque - a - Verter , which automatically adjusts gear ratios , resulting in better top speed and acceleration .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Today minibikes have evolved into several specialized types .
Pocketbike / minimoto
These look like sport bikes and are used in pocketbike racing on kart racing tracks .
The usual height is less than , and up to length .
Power usually comes from a two - stroke engine with a maximum of .
Maximum speed varies between .
Pocketbikes are also made in both four - stroke gasoline and electric versions .
The four - stroke models are usually 110cc automatic or manual engines , and are referred to as Super Pocket Bikes .
Common Super Pocket Bike models include the X7 , X15 , X18 , X19 , and X22 .
The popularity of these types of minibikes grew due to the influx of cheap pocket bikes imported from China .
Pitbikes Pit bikes are true to the original concept of a small scooter used to quickly move around the pit areas of motor racing tracks and events .
Modern versions look like motocross motorcycles and are also used in some motocross competitions .
Recently the sport of pitbike racing ( racing pit bikes on motocross and supercross tracks ) has taken off .
There are numerous series in the United States and there are also full - fledged pitbike pros .
The Las Vegas Mini Supercross is the biggest pitbike event of the year .
The sport of mini - motard consists of pitbikes racing with slick tires on go - cart tracks , much like super - motard or super - moto .
The bikes are prepared for racing with precautions such as catch tanks to collect fluid spills on the track , causing skidding hazards .
Mini choppers
Mini choppers are mini bikes that look like choppers , but still have the general look of a pocket or mini bike .
Midi motos /
Super pocket bikes Midi motos , also called super pocket bikes , are similar to pocket bikes , but slightly larger .
They are still smaller than the street bikes they mimic , but the seat height is about a foot to two feet higher than a mini moto 's seat height .
They started off with 47cc 2 stroke engines ( capable of around 48–64 km / h/30 - 40 mph ) in the midi motos and then included 110cc 4 stroke engines ( capable of around 86–105
km / h/55 - 65 mph ) .
Most midi bikes are made in China and usually equipped with a Honda engine or copy of a Honda engine .
Quad bikes LEGAL STATUS CANADA Section::::Legal status .
Section::::Canada .
In Canada mini motorcycles , commonly referred to as " pocket bikes " or " mini choppers , " do not meet federal safety standards for use on public roads .
These vehicles do not meet minimum height specifications for headlamps , tail lamps , stop lamps , and turn signals .
They are also difficult for other motorists to see .
Transport Canada classifies mini motorcycles as restricted use motorcycles that are permitted to be imported as competition vehicles for closed - course racing only .
In Ontario , pocket bikes may not be operated on public roads , sidewalks , or parks .
It is recommended riders be twelve years of age or older to ride pocket bikes .
Although many people unknowingly disobey the law by riding these bikes on sidewalks and in parks , police officers do not fine riders without a complaint from other people .
Pocket bikes may not be driven on highways under any circumstances .
In Alberta , pocket bikes are considered miniature vehicles , which may only be operated on private property .
Miniature vehicles include : personal transporters , pocket bikes , go - carts , electric scooters , and golf carts .
In British Columbia , a $ 900 fine may be applied along with seizure of the vehicle .
It is not recommended that children under 6 years of age be permitted to ride .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the UK , it is illegal for minibikes to be ridden on public roads or off - road on public land .
The only places these types of vehicle may be ridden are purpose - built race tracks and privately owned land with the owner 's permission ( and where they do not cause harassment , alarm or distress ) .
All of these minibikes are regarded as " motor vehicles " as defined by section 185 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 and so to be ridden on the public road , a motor vehicle must comply with all aspects of road traffic law and meet the mandatory European construction requirements by having a " Certificate of Conformity " indicating that they have European Community Whole Vehicle Type Approval ( ECWVTA ) .
Minibikes are not manufactured to meet these requirements , and would need to be modified significantly to do so .
Reported instances of this occurring are incredibly rare , meaning that it is very unlikely that minibikes can actually be registered for road use .
However , where a minibike or other vehicle does not have ECWVTA , it might conceivably pass a Motorcycle Single Vehicle Approval ( MSVA ) inspection which would result in a Ministerial Certificate of Approval , permitting it to be road - registered .
In addition to the Vehicle Type Approval , to be ridden on the road the minibike must be registered with the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency , display a valid road tax disc ( vehicle excise duty ) , and the driver or rider must be aged 17 or over ( or 16 if the vehicle meets the definition of a moped ) , have an appropriate driving license , and insurance .
The only exceptions relate to electrically - assisted pedal cycles and mobility aids for disabled people .
In the UK there are in most areas mini bike tracks for the public .
During August 2006 the UK Government ran a campaign to highlight the dangers of minibike misuse on roads and their anti - social use .
A guidance document was produced to provide police and other agencies with practical information to deal with the issues and prevent misuse .
The guidance outlined the legal status of minibikes and included information on enforcement measures and the provision of legal sites .
Later the death of Abbi Perrin from Louth brought the dangers back into public view .
Police may seize and destroy the vehicle and prosecute the rider when caught riding on public roads .
USA
Section::::USA .
DOT laws vary by state , but for the most part minibikes are unlawful for use on public roadways because most do not carry the necessary equipment ( and often size requirements ) to be street legal .
In many states the seat of a motorcycle must be at least off the ground , which is often a limiting factor in registration .
Use on public roadways may result a number of offenses , including but not limited to : no indicator lights , no rearview mirror , no horn or signaling device , no headlight , too - small muffler ( noise pollution ) , improper lane change ( no blinkers ) , or reckless driving .
Some of the larger " super " pocket bikes ,
most commonly the X15 ( FS549 ) , X18 ( FS559 ) , X19 ( FS569 ) , and X22 could meet all the requirements .
However , they were imported and sold as " off road use purposes only " .
In some states , they could be registered for legal street use by converting an off - road purposes only bike into a road - worthy model .
These bikes had headlights , turn signals , tail / brake lights , a horn , and speedometer , and could also do the speed limit in most scenarios ( typically 4 stroke bikes with manual 4 speed transmissions can reach speeds of 55 mph ) .
In many states all one needs to do is add a rearview mirror and a license plate bracket , but it is best to check with local DMV authorities for exact requirements .
In some cases , if the bike requires minor modification to meet requirements , one may be able to register it as a " unique / home - built . "
Like full - size motorcycles , the rider of a modified super pocket bike must carry insurance , have a current inspection , and wear a helmet if local laws require it .
Depending on if the state classes a pocketbike as a " moped " or full " motorcycle " , the rider may or may not need a special motorcycle license .
If not , a regular driver 's license may suffice .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Minibikes are not toys , although often treated as such .
Even the cheapest 38 cc US - made bikes ( often sold for as little as $ 150 ) are capable of speeds of at least .
The 49 cc pocket bikes can reach speeds of , and the 110–125 cc four - stroke bikes are capable of 60 - 80 mph .
Gasoline - powered bikes are substantially faster and require more skill than off - the - shelf electric bikes , which typically can not exceed .
The number of injuries caused by pocket bikes each year is unknown .
The Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ) estimates that 2,345 injured riders of pocket bikes and larger minibikes were treated in emergency rooms in 2003 .
There have also been numerous deaths in The USA and Canada .
SEE ALSO
* Tote Gote *
Pocketbike racing * Honda Z series - known in the UK as the Monkey bike .
* Mini chopper * MotoVox REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Good Hiawatha
Doodle Bug pic * Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents –
Mini Motorbike Safety Factsheet ( PDF )