THE FIRST WIVES CLUB
The First Wives Club is a 1996 American comedy film based on the best - selling 1992 novel of the same name by Olivia Goldsmith .
Narrated by Diane Keaton , it stars Keaton , Goldie Hawn , and Bette Midler as three divorced women who seek revenge on their ex - husbands who left them for younger women .
Stephen Collins , Victor Garber and Dan Hedaya co - star as the husbands , and Sarah Jessica Parker , Marcia Gay Harden and Elizabeth Berkley as their lovers , with Maggie Smith , Bronson Pinchot and Stockard Channing also starring .
Scott Rudin produced and Hugh Wilson directed ; the film was distributed by Paramount Pictures .
The film became a surprise box - office hit following its North American release , eventually grossing $ 181,490,000 worldwide , mostly from its domestic run , despite receiving mixed reviews .
It developed a cult following particularly among middle - aged women , and the actresses ' highest - grossing project of the decade helped revitalize their careers in film and television .
Composer Marc Shaiman was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Music Score , while Hawn was awarded a Blockbuster Entertainment Award and both Midler and Parker received Satellite Award nominations for their portrayals .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
At Middlebury College in 1969 , four young friends , Annie MacDuggan , Elise Elliot , Brenda Morelli , and Cynthia Swann , are graduating .
Excited for the future and the potential it holds , the girls enthusiastically make a champagne toast celebrating their graduation as well as their friendship .
As graduation gifts , valedictorian Cynthia presents the girls with matching Bulgari pearl necklaces .
As the graduates take a commemorative picture of the four of them ( presumably for the last time ) , Cynthia makes Annie , Brenda and Elise promise that they will always be there for each other throughout the remainder of their lives .
In the present time , the four friends eventually lose touch with one another , as evident when Cynthia ( Stockard Channing ) is tearfully gazing at the picture of the four of them on that graduation day .
Now wealthy and living in a luxurious penthouse , she gives her maid her own Bulgari pearl necklace ( matching the three she gave to her friends on graduation day ) , and has the maid mail letters to them .
She later walks outside of the balcony of her penthouse in a floor length fur coat , a cigarette and a drink , and then commits suicide by jumping to her death after learning through the tabloids that her ex - husband Gil ( whom Cynthia made wealthy through her connections , according to narrator Annie ) married his much younger mistress the day before .
Cynthia 's suicide is subsequently splashed all over the news .
The surviving three former friends , shocked by the tragic event , all attend her funeral .
After the funeral , the three friends reconnect over a long lunch to catch - up on their lives post - graduation .
As it turns out , Cynthia 's former friends are n't doing much better .
Annie ( Diane Keaton ) is separated , suffering extreme self - esteem issues , and going through therapy with her husband .
Brenda ( Bette Midler ) is divorced , left for a younger woman , depressed , and struggling financially .
Elise ( Goldie Hawn ) , whose husband also left her for a younger woman , is now an aging alcoholic movie actress who has become a plastic - surgery addict to keep her career afloat .
Shortly after Cynthia 's funeral , at which the three remaining friends are reunited for the first time since college , Annie 's husband , Aaron ( Stephen Collins ) , leaves her for her younger therapist ( Marcia Gay Harden ) and asks her for a divorce after spending a night together ( and leading Annie to believe it would reconcile them ) ; Brenda has a rather unpleasant encounter at a clothing store with her ex , Morty ( Dan Hedaya ) and his younger and rather hateful mistress Shelly ( Sarah Jessica Parker ) , and Elise finds out that her soon - to be ex - husband , Bill ( Victor Garber ) , is requesting alimony and half of their marital assets claiming that Elise owes her fame to him .
Also , during a meeting with a director for a possible leading lady movie role , she discovers that she is only to play the lead female 's mother ; she later learns the lead female is Bill 's current girlfriend .
Shortly thereafter , the three friends receive the letters that Cynthia mailed to them before her suicide .
After each one reads her letter from Cynthia , and feeling that they have been taken for granted by their husbands , the women decide to create the First Wives Club , aiming to get revenge on their exes .
Annie 's lesbian daughter Chris ( Jennifer Dundas ) also gets in on the plan by asking for a job at her father 's advertising agency so she can supply her mother with inside information , as payback for Aaron 's unfairness toward Annie .
Brenda finds out through her uncle Carmine ( Philip Bosco ) , who has Mafia connections , that Morty is guilty of income tax fraud , while Annie makes a plan to revive her advertising career and buy out Aaron 's partners .
Elise starts to liquidate all of the marital assets
she and Bill collected during their marriage , agreeing to split the proceeds of the liquidation between the two of them .
However , as their plan moves through , things start to fall apart when they find out that Bill has no checkered past and nothing for them to use against him .
Elise , feeling sorry for herself , gets drunk , which only results in her and Brenda hurling vicious insults at each other , and the women drift apart .
When Annie starts thinking about closing down the First Wives Club , her friends come back , saying that they want to see this to the end , and Bill has n't done anything blatantly wrong , but only as far as he knows .
As a result , the wives manage to uncover information revealing that Bill 's mistress ( Elizabeth Berkley ) is actually a minor .
Deciding that revenge would make them no better than their husbands , they instead use these situations to push their men into funding the establishment of a nonprofit organization dedicated to aiding abused women , in memory of Cynthia .
The film ends with a celebration at the new Cynthia Swann Griffin Crisis Center for Women .
Elise starts a relationship with a cast member in her play , Brenda and Morty reconcile and Annie rebuffs
Aaron 's attempt to get back together with him .
While outside the center Bill meets Shelly and the two start to flirt .
The film concludes with the three women joyfully singing " You Do n't Own Me " .
CAST
* Diane Keaton as Annie MacDuggan - Paradis , the vehicle for the film 's sporadic voice - over and its central character ; an anxious and slightly neurotic housewife , saddled with self - esteem problems , attempting to save her marriage with estranged husband Aaron – much to her daughter 's dismay .
After Aaron has sex with her and then leaves her for her therapist , she decides to band together with Brenda and Elise to form the First Wives Club .
Annie learns that Aaron is having problems with his advertising firm partners through the help of her daughter , and buys them out at the end of the film ; making her the majority owner of Aaron 's firm .
* Adria Tennor as Young Annie * Bette Midler as Brenda Morelli - Cushman , a wise - cracking Sicilian - Jewish single mother who helped set her husband Morty on his feet financially , before he left her for his younger employee Shelly , cheating her out of an equitable settlement .
She later blackmails Morty to get ownership of his business .
However , when she realizes Morty is contrite about his sins , Brenda accepts attempts at reconciliation of their relationship .
* Michele Brilliant as Young Brenda * Goldie Hawn as Elise Eliot - Atchison , a former one - time Oscar - winning actress , now an alcoholic and heavy smoker relegated to B movies due to her ' unprofitable ' age .
Her husband , Bill , who left her for another woman , is suing for alimony and insisting that all of their joint assets be sold and the profits divided between them .
She liquidates their assets by selling them to Annie for a very low amount , and Annie auctions them so she can buy out her husband 's partners .
Elise also blackmails Bill about dating a minor .
* Dina Spybey as Young Elise * Maggie Smith as Gunilla Garson Goldberg , a wealthy New York City society leader who helps the First Wives Club along with their schemes because she was once a first wife , as well as a " second , third and fourth wife " , according to Annie .
She fools the social climbing Shelly into thinking Durato Felice is a reputable decorator .
* Sarah Jessica Parker as Shelly Stewart , Morty 's dim - witted but manipulative fiancée .
It 's indicated throughout the film that Shelly believes a position in high society can be obtained through money and the protagonists exploit her social - climbing attitude for their revenge .
This is Parker 's second film with Midler as her co - star , the first being the 1993 Disney film Hocus Pocus .
* Dan Hedaya as Morton ' Morty ' Cushman , Brenda 's ex - husband , an electronics tycoon , who takes advantage of his former wife 's having signed an out - of - court settlement - just to finance his girlfriend Shelly 's extravagant taste .
He 's later blackmailed into giving Brenda a substantial amount of his money when she and her Uncle Carmine obtain proof of Morty 's criminal activity .
This later causes him to apologize to Brenda when he realizes Shelly only loved him because of his money , leading to his and Brenda 's reconciliation .
* Stephen Collins as Aaron Paradis , Annie 's conflicted husband and CEO of an advertising agency , who leaves his wife for their therapist , Leslie Rosen .
Eventually he is left alone as Leslie runs off and Annie does not want him back .
* Marcia Gay Harden as Dr. Leslie Rosen , Aaron 's short - time affair , who is the therapist for both Annie and Aaron .
Leslie has been " helping " Annie with her self - esteem problems .
* Victor Garber as Bill Atchison , a successful film producer , who rose to fame through Elise 's connections and eventually left her in favor of a young starlet .
* Elizabeth Berkley as Phoebe LaVelle , an up - and - coming actress , living with Bill .
She presumably tells him that she is twenty - one , but Elise investigates and reveals to Bill that she is sixteen years old and a high school dropout .
* Eileen Heckart as Catherine MacDuggan , Annie 's ' controlling ' mother .
By the end of the film , she tells Annie that she is proud of her and that she does n't need anyone to make her happy .
* Bronson Pinchot as Duarto Felice , Brenda 's boss and ( according to Annie )
" one of the ten worst interior decorators in New York . "
He poses as a famous interior designer to help the First Wive 's Club sneak into Morty and Shelly 's apartment .
* Stockard Channing as Cynthia Swann - Griffin , a college friend of the three main protagonists , who commits suicide after her husband , Gil , leaves her and marries his young mistress three days after their divorce is finalized .
* Juliehera Destefano as Young Cynthia
* Jennifer Dundas as Christine " Chris " Paradis , Annie 's lesbian and feminist daughter , who resents her father for what he is putting her mother through .
She gets a job working at her father 's advertising firm to spy on him for Annie .
This is the second film in which Dundas plays Keaton 's daughter , having previously done so in Mrs. Soffel .
* Ari Greenberg as Jason Cushman , Brenda 's son , who is caught in an emotional battle between his parents .
* Philip Bosco as Uncle Carmine Morelli , Brenda 's paternal uncle and part of her family 's Sicilian Mafia connections .
He is the one who informs Brenda that Morty had his stores stocked with stolen electronics , which the Mafia had done to help Morty and Brenda financially during the shaky early years of their marriage .
* Timothy Olyphant as Brett Artounian , a movie director who is interested in casting Elise as the main character 's aging mother in his new movie .
* Aida Linares as Teresa , Cynthia 's loyal maid .
* Ivana Trump as herself ( special guest appearance ) .
* Kathie Lee Gifford as herself ( special guest appearance ) .
* Ed Koch and Gloria Steinem as party guests ( special guest appearances ) .
* James Naughton as Gil Griffin , Cynthia 's ex - husband ( special guest appearance ) .
* Heather Locklear as Gil 's new wife ( special guest appearance ) .
* Edward Hibbert as Maurice , a barman serving Elise as she drowns her sorrows
* J. K. Simmons as Federal Marshal * Rob Reiner as Dr. Morris Packman , who warns Elise against overdoing it on plastic surgery .
* Gregg Edelman as Mark Loest
* Debra Monk as Jilted Lover * Kate Burton as Woman in Bed
* Walter Bobbie as Man in Bed DEVELOPMENT WRITING Section::::Development .
Section::::Writing .
The film project originally belonged to Sherry Lansing , who bought the unpublished manuscript of the novel in 1991 , after many publishers had rejected it , and handed it over to producer Scott Rudin when she became CEO of Paramount Pictures in 1992 .
" It was one of the single best ideas for a movie I 've ever heard , " she said in a 1996 interview with The New York Times .
" The situation of a woman getting left for a younger version of herself was far too common .
But we did n't want a movie about women as victims .
We wanted a movie about empowerment . "
Rudin consulted Robert Harling to write the screenplay , whose script was reworked by Paul Rudnick when Harling left to direct 1996 's The Evening Star , the sequel to the 1983 drama Terms of Endearment .
Rudnick , however , felt the final script was " incomprehensible " : " To figure out the structure of that movie would require an undiscovered Rosetta Stone , " he told The New York Times .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Diane Keaton was the first actress reported to have landed one of the starring roles , having previously worked with Rudin on the film Mrs. Soffel ( only to later work with him again in Marvin 's Room ) , followed by Bette Midler who had originally auditioned for the " more glamorous role " of Elise .
Although Rudin originally intended to cast Jessica Lange in the latter role , the team decided to rewrite the character of the book in favour of a " glitzier " version which eventually went to eleventh - hour addition Goldie Hawn .
Actor Mandy Patinkin dropped out shortly before shooting started and was replaced by Stephen Collins when he decided to leave the project in favour of his musical ambitions , while Dan Hedaya won the role of Morty over Héctor Elizondo .
Elizabeth Berkley only took her part to " work with the best actresses around , " and Timothy Olyphant , who had impressed with local stage work , made his screen debut as director Brett Artounian in the film .
Cameos of note include Ivana Trump ( who famously stated in the film , " Do n't get mad , get everything . " ) , Gloria Steinem , and Kathie Lee Gifford as themselves , as well as author Olivia Goldsmith , director Hugh Wilson as a commercial director , and Heather Locklear as the younger lover of James Naughton 's character Gil .
Additionally , Jon Stewart was hired to play the lover of Goldie Hawn 's character Elise ; however , he never actually made it to the film .
" I played her boyfriend and apparently they felt that that was not inherently part of the storyline
and so she broke up with me before the movie started , " he joked on Larry King Live in 2006 .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Principal photography took place over three months at the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens , New York City between December 4 , 1995 , and March 19 , 1996 .
Among the 60 sites showcased on screen are Christie 's auction house , the Bowery Bar , a suite at The Waldorf - Astoria Hotel , Café des Artistes , the King Cole Bar at the St. Regis Hotel , Frank E. Campbell 's funeral home , and Barneys .
Other familiar sites include the Chrysler Building , the NoHo neighborhood , both 5th and 7th Avenues , Riverside Drive , and Central Park .
Production designer Peter Larkin took much inspiration from Hollywood 's romantic comedies of the 1930s , incorporating a post - Great Depression view on style and luxury , widely popularized through these films .
" Those sets looked better than real New York penthouses and nightclubs ever could , " he said upon creation . "
In this film I wanted settings that had that kind of striking nature . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film has received mixed reviews by critics .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 41 % of critics gave the film a positive rating , based on 34 reviews , with an average score of 5.4/10 .
On Metacritic , which uses a normalized rating system , the film holds a 58/100 rating , indicating " mixed or average reviews " based on 21 critics .
Edward Guthmann of the San Francisco Chronicle called the film a " terrific comedy " and " a glamorous revenge romp , a 9 to 5 mixed with Auntie Mame " , giving " each star the opportunity to do her best work in a long , long time . "
He added that " what 's surprising is n't that each of them is so delightfully good but that they work together so well . "
In his review for Variety , Leonard Klady found that director " Hugh Wilson wisely gets out of the way of his performers , providing a simple glossy look enhanced by cameraman Donald Thorin , designer Peter Larkin and the costumes of Theoni V. Aldredge " .
He noted that " with its combination of comic zingers and star turns , [ the ] pic shapes up as one of the more commercial fall
[ 1996 ] entries " , that " at its core , is a celebration of its star trio as consummate performers .
In that respect , First Wives Club is a highly enjoyable movie romp . "
Janet Maslin from The New York Times remarked that the film " freely overhauls the amusing beach book by Olivia Goldsmith , eliminating the sex , adding more slapstick and tailoring the leading roles to suit three divas in starring roles . "
While she felt that " Bette Midler , Diane Keaton and Goldie Hawn make a spirited , surprisingly harmonious trio , " reeling off " one - liners with accomplished flair , even when the film turns silly and begins to , pardon the expression , sag " , she found that the film fared " better with sight gags and quick retorts than with plot development " .
Roger Ebert , writing for the Chicago Sun - Times gave The First Wives Club two out of four stars .
He declared the film " heavy on incident but light on plot " , filled with " heartfelt talks with slapstick and sitcom situations . "
Owen Gleiberman , writer for Entertainment Weekly , wrote that " paced like a Chris Farley movie and photographed like a denture - cream commercial , The First Wives Club is the sort of overbright plastic - package comedy that tends to live or die by its jokes , its farcical audacity — anything but its ' conviction ' . "
He gave the film a C+ rating .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film 's Total Lifetime Grosses for the Worldwide box office are $ 181.5 million .
At the Domestic North American box office , the film has a Total Lifetime Gross of $ 105.5 million .
The film has a Foreign Total Lifetime Gross of $ 76 million .
At the Domestic North American box office , the film reached the Rank of Number 1 , making $ 18.9 million in its opening weekend over September 20–22 , 1996 , and the film remained at the Number 1 position for three consecutive weeks .
In the Yearly Chart for Domestic North American Box Office 1996 , The First Wives Club is ranked at Number 11 , and in the Yearly PG Rated 1996 Chart , the film is ranked at Number 1 .
On the Worldwide Yearly Chart 1996 , the film is ranked at Number 11 .
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS SEQUEL Section::::Further developments .
Section::::Sequel .
For years there have been rumors of a sequel to the film .
Although columnists Stacy Jenel Smith and Marilyn Beck reported in a 2002 article that producer Scott Rudin would refuse to work on a sequel , the actresses have made various statements to the contrary .
In a Chicago Sun - Times interview in 2003 , Keaton expressed her readiness to appear in a second film .
A year later , writer Paul Rudnick reportedly started writing a draft , entitled Avon Ladies of the Amazon , and in 2005 , Midler confirmed to USA Today that there was indeed a manuscript but that " the strike kept it from happening . "
However , as Hawn declared in a 2006 interview with the New York Daily News , Paramount Pictures declined the trio 's services due to their demand for an increase in fees : " I got a call from the head of the studio , who said , ' Let 's try to make it work .
But I think we should all do it for the same amount of money . '
Now , if there were three men that came back to do a sequel , they would have paid them three times their salary at least . "
On February 25 , 2011 , Goldie Hawn posted a picture on Twitter of the three at a lunch confirming that they had all signed on for a sequel , and the next day re - tweeted a message from Bravo TV confirming this again .
In 2016 , Hawn confirmed that Netflix was working on a sequel , though she also admitted that " the script is n't working . "
ON STAGE Section::::On stage .
A musical stage version of the film opened at The Old Globe Theatre in San Diego , California on July 17 , 2009 , in previews , through August 23 , 2009 , prior to a projected Broadway engagement .
The book was by Rupert Holmes , with a score by the " one - time only reunited " Holland – Dozier – Holland songwriting team from 1960s Motown soul music fame .
Francesca Zambello directed the San Diego production .
The creators and Zambello were engaged for the project in 2006 .
An industry reading of the musical was held in February 2009 , with principals Ana Gasteyer , Carolee Carmello and Adriane Lenox .
The principal cast in the San Diego production originally included Karen Ziemba as Annie , Adriane Lenox as Elise , Barbara Walsh as Brenda , John Dossett as Aaron , Kevyn Morrow as Bill , Brad Oscar as Morty , Sara Chase as Trophy Wife , and Sam Harris as Duane .
Lisa Stevens choreographed , with scenic design by Peter J. Davison and costumes by Paul Tazewell .
On June 16 , 2009 , Lenox dropped out of the production due to health concerns and was replaced by Sheryl Lee Ralph .
The production 's tryout received mixed to negative reviews , but the production sold approximately 29,000 tickets in its 5-week run .
The ticket demand was so strong early on that the show 's run was extended an extra week prior to its opening night .
Producers announced November 11 , 2009 , that Francesca Zambello withdrew as director , and they would secure a new director prior to any Broadway run .
The originating producers , Jonas Neilson and Paul Lambert , teamed with Elizabeth Williams and John Frost , and have since brought on Simon Phillips to direct .
A newly adapted version of First Wives Club
The Musical began previews at Chicago 's Oriental Theatre on February 17 , 2015 , with the opening on March 11 and running through March 29 .
The production aimed for Broadway in the 2015 - 2016 season .
The new production is directed by Simon Phillips , choreographed by David W. Connolly , and has a new book written by Linda Bloodworth - Thomason .
The newly adapted version features new songs by the composers Holland - Dozier - Holland , the trio that wrote lots of Motown hits during the 60s .
The show also contains a few of their classic hits , such as " Reach Out ...
I'll Be There , " " Stop !
In the Name of Love " and " I Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie , Honey Bunch ) .
" Faith Prince , Christine Sherrill , and Carmen Cusack lead the cast as Brenda , Elise , and Annie respectively .
Complete casting was announced in January 2015 .
TV SERIES Section::::TV series .
TV Land announced in March 2016 that it had ordered a pilot for a television adaptation of the film , to be written by Rebecca Addelman and executive produced by Jenny Bicks and Karen Rosenfelt .
However , the network failed to pick up the pilot .
The project went to the Paramount Network for redevelopment in early 2017 .
In October 2017 , Girls Trip Tracy Oliver was tapped to write the series .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Wins
* National Board of Review Awards :
Best Acting by an Ensemble * Blockbuster Entertainment Awards :
Favorite Actress − Comedy ( Goldie Hawn ) * ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards : Top Box Office Films ( Marc Shaiman ) Nominations *
Academy Awards :
Best Original Score ( Marc Shaiman )
* Artios Awards :
Best Casting for Feature Film , Comedy ( Ilene Starger )
* Satellite Awards : Best Actress − Musical or Comedy ( Bette Midler ) , Best Supporting Actress − Musical or Comedy ( Sarah Jessica Parker )
American Film Institute recognition :
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100
Laughs − Nominated SOUNDTRACKS Section::::Soundtracks .
The official soundtrack titled Music From The Motion Picture
The First Wives Club ...
And Then Some was released on September 17 , 1996 , shortly before the film 's premiere .
It peaked at number 90 on the Billboard 200 chart .
* " Wives and Lovers " by Dionne Warwick − 2:55
* * " A Beautiful Morning " by The Rascals − 2:33 * *
" Over and Over " by Puff Johnson − 4:43 *
* " Piece of My Heart " by Diana King − 3:41
* * " Game of Love " by Brownstone − 4:45
*
*
" Love Is On the Way " by Billy Porter − 4:22 * *
" Sisters Are Doin' It for Themselves " by Eurythmics and Aretha Franklin − 5:53
* * " Think " by Aretha Franklin − 2:17
*
* " Heartbreak Road " by Dionne Farris − 3:51 * *
" I Will Survive " by Chantay Savage − 6:13 * *
" Moving on Up " by M People − 3:56 *
* " I 'm Still Standing " by Martha Wash − 4:02
*
*
" You Do n't Own Me " by Bette Midler , Goldie Hawn and Diane Keaton − 2:31 *
The film 's original score , composed by Marc Shaiman , was also released on November 26 , 1996 .
* " Cynthia " − 2:14 * * " Annie " − 0:46 * * " Elise " − 0:47 *
* " Brenda " − 0:45
* * " Bad News " − 0:51 * * " Wham , Bam , Divorce Me Ma'am " − 1:23 * * " Letter to Three Wives " − 1:56 * *
" The First Wives Club " − 1:48 * * " Gathering Information " − 1:55
*
*
" Setting Up Shop " − 1:11 * * " Tea Time with Gunilla " − 2:53 *
* " Duarto Makes His Entrance " − 0:41 * * " The Big Break
In " − 5:17 * * " Phone Tag " − 0:59 * * " The Auction " − 1:58 * * " Operation Hell Hath No Fury " − 4:45 * * " The Unveiling " − 0:56 * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
First Wives Club
The Musical Official Site