MEDIAN INCOME Median income is the amount that divides the income distribution into two equal groups , half having income above that amount , and half having income below that amount .
Mean income ( average ) is the amount obtained by dividing the total aggregate income of a group by the number of units in that group .
Mode income is the most frequently occurring income in a given income distribution .
Median income can be calculated by household income , by personal income , or for specific demographic groups .
GROSS MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY COUNTRY
Section::::Gross median household income by country .
In 2013 , Gallup published a list of countries with median annual household income , based on a self - reported survey of approximately 2000 adults from each country .
Using median , rather than mean income , results in a much more accurate picture of the typical income of the middle class since the data will not be skewed by gains and abnormalities in the extreme ends .
The figures are in international dollars using purchasing power parity and are based on responses from 2006 to 2012 inflation adjusted to 2010 levels .
Below is a list of the top 30 countries .
The figures do not take taxes and social contributions into account .
Please note that the list below does not correspond to citizens of each country , but to all its residents .
States rich in fossil fuels such as Qatar and Kuwait have a very large gap in terms of median annual earnings of citizens and non - citizens ( reaching more than tenfold ) . !
Rank !
Country /
Territory !
Gross household incomein Int$ ( PPP ) !
Gross per - capita incomein Int$
( PPP ) MEDIAN EQUIVALENT ADULT INCOME
Section::::Median equivalent adult income .
The annual median equivalence disposable household income for selected OECD countries is shown in the table below .
This is the disposable income of an equivalent adult in a household in the middle of the income distribution in a year .
Data are in United States dollars at current prices and current purchasing power parity for private consumption for the reference year . !
Rank !
Country !
Median income ( US$ , PPP ) !
Year
* An academic study on the Census income data claims that when correcting for underreporting , U.S. gross median household income was 15 % higher in 2010 ( table 3 ) .
MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME AND THE US ECONOMY
Section::::Median household income and the US economy .
Since 1980 , U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) per capita has increased 67 % , while median household income has only increased by 15 % .
Median household income is a politically sensitive indicator .
Voters can be critical of their government if they perceive that their cost of living is rising faster than their income .
The early-2000s recession began with the bursting of the dot - com bubble and affected most advanced economies including the European Union , Japan and the United States .
An economic recession will normally cause household incomes to decrease , often by as much as 10 % .
The late-2000s recession began with the bursting of the U.S. housing bubble , which caused a problem in the dangerously exposed sub prime - mortgage market .
This in turn triggered a global financial crisis .
In constant price , 2011 American median household income was 1.13 % lower than what it was in 1989 .
This corresponds to a 0.05 % annual decrease over a 22-year period .
In the mean time , GDP per capita has increased by 33.8 % or 1.33 % annually .
A study on US Census income data claims that when using the national accounting methodology , U.S. gross median household income was $ 57,739 in 2010 ( table 3 ) .
In 2015 , the US median household income spiked 5.2 per cent , reaching $ 56,000 , making it the first annual hike in median household income since the start of the Great Recession .
SEE ALSO
* List of countries by average wage
* List of U.S. states by income
*
Mean household income
* Income distribution
* Income quintiles * Household income in the United States
* International Ranking of Household Income * Median * Median household income in Australia and New Zealand * Median income per household member
* Places in the United States with notable demographic characteristics
* Poverty in the United States REFERENCES