CAJETA
Cajeta is a confection of thickened syrup usually made of sweetened caramelised goat 's milk .
It is a type of dulce de leche .
In Mexico , it is considered a specialty of the city of Celaya in the state of Guanajuato .
Cajeta is made by simmering goat 's milk , or occasionally a sweetened liquid , stirring frequently , until it becomes very viscous due to evaporation of water , and caramelized .
While goat milk is the most usual base , other liquids or juices may be used .
In Celaya , and eventually the rest of Mexico , the confection of half goat 's milk and half cow 's milk became known by the name cajeta , elsewhere , the milk candy is known as leche quemada , dulce de leche , etc .
It has cousins in the many Indian milk - based sweets like pera and
the milk fudge burfi , and in the opera fudge of the United States .
Cajeta is eaten on its own as a sweet , as a spread or filling for breads and pastries , such as churros , and as a topping for ice cream .
Certain liquors are added to special recipes called cajeta envinada .
In addition , cajeta envinada especial is enriched with raisins , almonds , pecans or nuts .
Often it is used as a topping for crêpes , as a sweet sauce boiled and softened down with milk to soak the crepes , resulting in a tasty dessert .
It is also very common to place cajeta between obleas to make a traditional Mexican candy .
RECENT EVENTS Section::::Recent events .
In 2005 , the Hershey Company introduced a line of cajeta - flavored confections styled " Cajeta Elegancita " , targeted at Mexican - food aficionados living in the United States .
The marketing decision made headlines when it was discovered the word is a risqué term for the vulva in Argentinian and Uruguayan parlance .
That same year , Nestlé released a " cajeta"-flavored Nesquik in Mexico .
In 2006 , San Antonio , Texas - based grocery chain H - E - B introduced cajeta - flavored ice cream .
In September , 2010 , cajeta was declared the Bicentennial Dessert of Mexico , honouring its history , tradition and origin .
Cajeta was born in the city of Celaya , Guanajuato , the state where the Independence of Mexico started back in 1810 , with the famous Grito de Dolores by father Miguel Hidalgo .
In Celaya , Hidalgo was named Captain General of America by his staff , making it an important element of the Independence War , as cajeta was easily stored and transported , and lasted for several months without decomposing , thus becoming an important food complement for the poorly fed troops .
SEE ALSO
* Penuche * List of Mexican dishes NOTES
REFERENCES
* ENCICLOPEDIA DE MEXICO(2001 ) .
Enciclopedia de México ..
Mexico City , Mexico : Enciclopedia de México .
* EDITORIAL PORRÚA , S.A. ( 1964 ) .
Diccionario Porrúa .
Historia , biografía y geografía de México ..
Mexico City , Mexico :
Editorial Porrúa , S.A.