NIGELLA SATIVA Nigella sativa ( black caraway , also known as black cumin , nigella , and kalonji ) is an annual flowering plant in the family Ranunculaceae , native to south and southwest Asia .
N. sativa grows to tall , with finely divided , linear ( but not thread - like ) leaves .
The flowers are delicate , and usually colored pale blue and white , with five to ten petals .
The fruit is a large and inflated capsule composed of three to seven united follicles , each containing numerous seeds which are used as spice , sometimes as a replacement for black cumin ( Bunium bulbocastanum ) .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The genus name Nigella is a diminutive of the Latin ( black ) , referring to the seeds .
In English , N. sativa and its seed are variously called black caraway , black seed , black cumin , fennel flower , nigella , nutmeg flower , Roman coriander , and kalonji ( from Hindi - Urdu ) .
Blackseed and black caraway may also refer to Bunium persicum .
DESCRIPTION CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
The seeds of N. sativa are used as a spice in Indian and Middle Eastern cuisines .
The black seeds taste like a combination of onions , black pepper , and oregano .
They have a pungent , bitter taste and smell .
The dry - roasted seeds flavor curries , vegetables , and pulses .
They can be used as a " pepper " in recipes with pod fruit , vegetables , salads , and poultry .
In some cultures , the black seeds are used to flavor bread products , and are used as part of the spice mixture panch phoron ( meaning a mixture of five spices ) and alone in many recipes in Bengali cuisine and most recognizably in naan .
Nigella is also used in Armenian string cheese , a braided string cheese called majdouleh or majdouli in the Middle East .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Archaeological evidence about the earliest cultivation of N. sativa is unrecorded , but N. sativa seeds were found in several sites from ancient Egypt , including Tutankhamun 's tomb .
Seeds were found in a Hittite flask in Turkey from the second millennium BCE .
N. sativa may have been used as a condiment of the Old World to flavor food .
The Persian physician , Avicenna , in his Canon of Medicine , described N. sativa as a treatment for dyspnea .
N. sativa was used in the Middle East as a traditional medicine .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
N. sativa oil contains linoleic acid , oleic acid , palmitic acid , and trans - anethole , and other minor constituents .
Aromatics include thymoquinone , dihydrothymoquinone , p - cymene , carvacrol , α - thujene , thymol , α - pinene , β - pinene and trans - anethole .
Oils are 32 % to 40 % of the total composition of N. sativa seeds .
The seeds also contain thymoquinone .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
One meta - analysis of clinical trials found weak evidence that N. sativa has a short - term benefit on lowering systolic and diastolic blood pressure , with limited evidence that various extracts of black seed can reduce triglycerides and LDL and total cholesterol , while raising HDL cholesterol .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Nigella sativa