ROME ( TV SERIES )
Rome is a British - American - Italian historical drama television series created by John Milius , William J. MacDonald , and Bruno Heller .
The show 's two seasons were broadcast on HBO , BBC Two , and Rai 2 between 2005 and 2007 .
They were later released on DVD and Blu - ray .
Rome is set in the 1st century BC , during Ancient Rome 's transition from Republic to Empire .
The series features a sprawling cast of characters , many of whom are based on real figures from historical records , but the lead protagonists are ultimately two soldiers named Lucius Vorenus and Titus Pullo , who find their lives intertwined with key historical events .
Rome was initially a ratings success for HBO and the BBC , though the numbers declined considerably in the second season .
The series received much media attention from the start , and was honoured with numerous awards and nominations in its two - season run .
The series was filmed in various locations , but most notably in the Cinecittà studios in Italy .
PLOT OVERVIEW Section::::Plot overview .
The series primarily chronicles the lives and deeds of the rich , powerful , and historically significant , but also focuses on the lives , fortunes , families , and acquaintances of two common men : Lucius Vorenus and Titus Pullo , fictionalized versions of a pair of Roman soldiers mentioned in Caesar 's Commentarii de Bello Gallico .
The fictional Vorenus and Pullo manage to witness and often influence many of the historical events presented in the series , although some license is taken .
The first season depicts Julius Caesar 's civil war of 49 BC against the traditionalist conservative faction in the Roman Senate ( the Optimates ) , his rise to dictatorship over Rome , and his fall , spanning the time from the end of his Gallic Wars ( 52 BC or 701 ab urbe condita ) until his assassination on 15 March 44 BC ( the infamous Ides of March ) .
Against the backdrop of these cataclysmic events , we also see the early years of the young Octavian , who is destined to become Augustus , the first Emperor of Rome .
The second season chronicles the power struggle between Octavian and Mark Antony following Caesar 's assassination , spanning the period from Caesar 's death in 44 BC to the suicide of Antony and Cleopatra in 30 B.C. after their defeat at the Battle of Actium .
CAST * Kevin McKidd as Lucius Vorenus ( Season 1 and 2 ) – A staunch , traditional Roman officer who struggles to balance his personal beliefs , his duty to his superiors , and the needs of his family and friends .
The basis for this character is the historical Roman soldier of the same name , who is briefly mentioned in Julius Caesar 's De Bello Gallico 5.44 .
* Ray Stevenson as Titus Pullo ( Season 1 and 2 ) – A friendly , upbeat , devil - may - care soldier with the morals of a pirate , the appetites of a hedonist , and a total lack of personal responsibility , who discovers hidden ideals and integrity within himself .
* Ciarán Hinds as Julius Caesar ( Season 1 ) – Caesar is ambitious but his aims and motives are often kept ambiguous to further complicate the plot and test the personal loyalties of other characters .
He advertises himself as a reformer who sides with the Plebeians , though he is himself a Patrician .
He is also merciful to his beaten enemies , genuinely distressed by their deaths and relieved at their willingness to make peace where a more vindictive individual would have simply killed them .
* Kenneth Cranham as Pompey Magnus ( Season 1 ) – A legendary general , past the days of his prime , who tries to recapture the glories of his youth as well as to do what is right for the Republic .
The real Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus was a Roman general and politician who was as ambitious as Caesar and just as unorthodox in his youth .
He chose to ally himself with the optimates in opposing Caesar and supporting the traditional Roman Republic .
* Polly Walker as Atia of the Julii ( Season 1 and 2 ) – The niece of Julius Caesar and mother of Octavian / Augustus and Octavia .
She is depicted as a cheerfully amoral and opportunistic manipulator .
Her family connections and sexual liaisons have brought her into contact with some of the most powerful individuals in Rome , making her a highly influential figure in Roman society .
Atia is very loosely based on the historical figure Atia Balba Caesonia about whom little detail is known .
Rome Historical Consultant Jonathan Stamp identifies the historical figure Clodia as the primary basis for the character of Atia .
* James Purefoy as Mark Antony ( Season 1 and 2 ) – A very popular and cunning Roman general and politician and a close supporter of Julius Caesar in Season 1 .
In Season 2 , he is in a power struggle with the power hungry and unaccomplished Octavian .
* Tobias Menzies as Marcus Junius Brutus ( Season 1 and 2 ) – Portrayed as a young man torn between what he believes is right , and his loyalty and love of a man who has been like a father to him .
The real Marcus Junius Brutus was the most famous of Julius Caesar 's assassins , and one of the key figures in the civil wars that followed the assassination .
* Max Pirkis ( Season 1 and early 2 ) and Simon Woods ( Season 2 ) as Gaius Octavian – Portrayed as a shrewd , if somewhat cold , young man , with a precocious understanding of the world , people , philosophy and politics .
He is eager to enter political life and follow in Caesar 's footsteps - an ambition soon more easily achieved when he is able to use his inheritance ( both the money and the name of Caesar ) as a means to further his political career .
The basis for this character is the early life of Augustus , the first Roman Emperor .
* Lindsay Duncan as Servilia of the Junii ( Season 1 and 2 )
–
The mother of Marcus Junius Brutus , lover of the married Julius Caesar , and enemy of Atia of the Julii .
Servilia is depicted as a sophisticated and regal Roman matron who follows her heart to her detriment , betrayed by love , and hungering for revenge .
Slowly she becomes as cold , calculating , and cruel as those whom she would destroy .
Servilia is loosely based on the historical personage of Servilia , mother of Marcus Junius Brutus , and famous lover of Julius Caesar .
*
Indira Varma as Niobe ( Season 1 ) –
A beautiful woman devoted to her family , Niobe is a proud Plebeian from a large clan .
After marrying Lucius Vorenus and giving birth to their two daughters , she functioned as a single parent when Lucius went off to war .
After being told ( incorrectly ) by the army that Vorenus is dead , she embarks on a love affair with her sister 's husband , giving birth to a son a few months before a very much alive Vorenus returns home .
Convinced he will kill her and all the children
should he learn of the affair , she tells Vorenus that the baby Lucius is his grandson by their older daughter and her lover .
* Nicholas Woodeson as Posca ( Season 1 and 2 ) –
A Greek slave of Julius Caesar , and also his friend , aide - de - camp , and confidant in most things personal and professional .
As a slave , he will seldom receive credit , but it appears that some of the simpler and more elegant solutions to Caesar 's problems come from the mind of Posca .
Posca is freed and given a stipend in Caesar 's will at the start of the second season .
He throws his support behind Antony , but later strategically defects to Octavian .
* Kerry Condon as Octavia of the Julii ( Season 1 and 2 )
– The character is based on the Roman matron Octavia Thurina Minor , sister of Roman Emperor Augustus , born to one of the most powerful families in Rome , the Julii .
Octavia is the only daughter and elder child of Atia of the Julii , who is the niece of Gaius Julius Caesar .
In Season 2 , for political reasons she is married to Mark Antony .
This is something she did in real life when Antony was newly a widower in 40 BC as part of the Pact of Brundisium , having been ordered by the Senate to set aside the mandatory ten - month term of widowhood after the death of her first husband , Claudius Marcellus .
* Rick Warden as Quintus Pompey ( Season 1 and 2 ) – The son of Pompey .
There is no basis for this character , but he may be meant to represent the younger of Pompey 's historical sons Sextus Pompeius .
* Karl Johnson as Porcius Cato ( Season 1 ) –
An extreme traditionalist , against political , social , and moral decay , and a staunch defender of the Roman Republic .
The real Cato the Younger was a Roman orator , author and politician who committed suicide to avoid living under Caesar 's tyranny .
* David Bamber as Marcus Tullius Cicero ( Season 1 and 2 ) – A moderate politician and scholar , faced with trying to save the traditional Republic from the ambitions of the various characters on the show .
He is depicted as craven and willing to take any position to save his own skin .
The real Cicero was a Roman politician , writer and orator , and as far as is known was not a self - serving coward but a steadfast and courageous patriot .
* Lee Boardman as Timon ( Season 1 and 2 ) – A Roman Jew , depicted as a " hired sword " – from bodyguard to assassin – for Atia of the Julii , from whom he is quite willing to take her body in lieu of coin .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
William J. MacDonald and John Milius pitched the idea to HBO as a mini series , but the network made it a full - fledged series .
In 2002 , HBO and the BBC agreed to co - produce the series , committing a US$ 100–110 million ( £ 62.7 million ) budget to the production of twelve 1-hour episodes , with HBO contributing $ 85 million , and the BBC contributing $ 15 million .
The BBC contributed £ 800,000 to every episode of Rome in its first season .
Rome is the largest co - produced series with the American film market in the BBC 's history .
The series also marked the first series on which HBO and the BBC worked together as co - producers , although the two companies had worked together in other roles in earlier series , including Band of Brothers and The Gathering Storm .
Tranter from the BBC has said this about the development of Rome : " It felt like something that could have been developed by us , and HBO felt like natural partners for the BBC " .
On 20 April 2006 , Carolyn Strauss , president of HBO announced the development of a second season for Rome .
FILMING Section::::Filming . Between March 2004 and May 2005
Rome was filmed in co - production with Rai Fiction in the Italian countryside on Cinecittà studios ' six sound stages in Rome .
A collection of massive sets in Cinecittà studios ' back lots comprised an elaborate " period reconstruction " of sections of ancient Rome .
It was a huge undertaking , with an international crew of 350 , and more than 50 local Italian interns .
The production is regarded as one of the most expensive in the history of television .
Funding was generously employed to recreate an impressively detailed set featuring a number of Roman Villas , the Forum , and a vast slum area of the ancient city of Rome .
A significant part of this set was later destroyed by a fire that burned down a portion of the Cinecittà Studios in 2007 .
According to HBO , the fire started after they had finished filming the second season .
A portion of the set was also used in late 2007 by the crew of the long - running BBC sci - fi drama series
Doctor
Who , for the fourth - season episode " The Fires of Pompeii " .
Audio commentary on the Season 1 DVD indicates that many of the background performers used in the series were also their true professional counterparts .
One example is that the actor shown in the series working as a butcher on the streets of Rome was in fact a real - life butcher .
EDITING Section::::Editing .
In a separate move , the BBC also decided to re - edit the first three episodes ( all directed by Michael Apted ) into two episodes .
The BBC claimed that this was because the British audience were more familiar with the history of Rome than their American counterparts and so much of the history was unnecessary ; however , Apted claims that the purpose was to boost the ratings by increasing the prominence of the scenes of sex and violence .
In an interview with The Times , Apted said : I 'm really pissed off with the BBC for bringing down my first three episodes to two and , in doing so , taking out much of the vital politics .
What also makes me very grumpy is that I was told that the cuts had been introduced by the BBC because they thought British viewers already knew the historical background .
But all that 's happened as far as the viewer is concerned is that it has made Rome hard to follow .
Apted also said that he only learned of the edits by accident , " ... a couple of weeks ago when one of the actors told me " .
Since then , the original uncut Season 1 episodes aired on UKTV Drama , coincident with the UK broadcast of Season 2 on BBC Two .
The Italian broadcast of the series was also marred by controversy .
Strong language was removed in the Italian dubbing process ; as for the more explicit sex scenes and disturbing violence , they were replaced by " safe " alternative versions shot during production especially for the Italian market .
Rai 4 began showing the " complete version " of the series on Italian TV in September 2009 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Jeff Beal was invited to audition for Rome after he completed work on HBO 's Carnivàle .
The producers sent him a short edit of episode seven .
From that , Beal began writing a demo score .
Based on head writer Bruno Heller 's desired gritty pre - Christian feel for the series , and HBO 's interest in a non - modern sound , Beal chose to compose and record with live instruments from across the ancient Roman world .
For each episode , Beal had about two weeks to work : in the first , he composed for – and recorded – the instruments he performed on the soundtrack .
In the second week , he incorporated producer 's notes , orchestrated and recorded the other live instrumental sections .
BROADCAST AND DVD RELEASES Section::::Broadcast and DVD releases .
Rome 's first season originally aired on HBO in the United States between 28 August and 20 November 2005 , subsequently being broadcast on the United Kingdom 's BBC Two between 2 November 2005 and 4 January 2006 , and on Rai 2 in Italy between 17 March 2006 and 28 April 2006 .
The second season aired on HBO in the US from 14 January 2007 to 25 March 2007 .
INTERNATIONAL SYNDICATION
Section::::International syndication .
The series was launched in the United States on 25 August 2005 , at Wadsworth Theatre in Los Angeles .
HBO broadcast the series pilot " The Stolen Eagle " four days later .
According to the Nielsen ratings system , the pilot broadcast was seen by 3.8 million viewers and achieved a 9.1 household rating for Sunday primetime .
HBO re - aired the pilot 11 times in the week following the 28 August 2005 premiere , garnering a total viewership of 8.9 million for all 11 airings .
After the broadcast of only three first - season episodes , HBO announced plans to produce a second season of Rome in 2006 , for release in March 2007 .
HBO aired each episode multiple times a week , and by the end of the first season , the total weekly audience for all airings exceeded seven million viewers .
The second season premiered in January 2007 , with the first episode attracting 1.5 million viewers .
The final episode aired 25 March 2007 in the US , garnering 2.4 million viewers .
In total , HBO spent about $ 10 million US$ to promote Rome .
HBO enlisted the Mozilla Firefox web browser in its marketing campaign for the series by designing a downloadable custom Rome Firefox theme .
BBC Two premiered Rome in the United Kingdom on 2 November 2005 , attracting 6.6 million viewers ( 27 % ) ; viewing figures declined in future episodes , with the season finale only attracting 3 million viewers ( 13 % ) .
The first episode of the second season aired on BBC Two on 20 June 2007 .
A " sanitized " version of the first series of Rome – with toned - down nudity and violence – aired on Rai 2 in Italy , garnering only a meager 10 % audience share .
RAI also stated to have co - produced the show , whereas HBO listed only itself and BBC as co - producers .
The Italian newspaper , Corriere della Sera called it a " prime example of historical misinformation " , and called actor Ciarán Hinds ( Julius Caesar ) a " parody " .
The paper also called the relationship between Atia of the Julii ( Polly Walker ) and Mark Antony ( James Purefoy ) " ridiculous " .
The second series was never broadcast at all on analog TV ; however , starting from October 2009 , digital - only channel Rai 4 broadcast the original uncut version of the first series and went on to broadcast the second series unaltered as well .
CANCELLATION AND FUTURE Section::::Cancellation and future .
HBO Chairman Chris Albrecht announced in a July 2006 news conference that season two of Rome would be its last , citing the fact that the series ( called " notoriously expensive " by Broadcasting & Cable ) had been developed under a two - year contract with the BBC that would have been difficult for the BBC to extend due to the series ' cost .
Of the storyline , co - creator Heller said : POTENTIAL
FILM
Section::::Potential film .
In a February 2008 interview with Movieweb.com , actor Ray Stevenson stated that a Rome film was in development , with Heller working on a script .
Heller confirmed in December that there was " talk of doing a movie version " , adding that " It 's moving along .
It 's not there until it is there .
I would love to round that show off " .
In an April 2009 interview with the Associated Press , actor Kevin McKidd stated the Rome film was " in development " , and Lucius Vorenus would likely be a part of it .
McKidd said in a later 2009 interview , " There is a script that is being shopped and it 's supposedly very good , I have n't seen it , but I am definitely going to be a part of the movie ...
He is very much alive , so that should be a fun story to tell . "
In March 2010 , Entertainment Weekly stated that Heller had completed the script for Morning Light Productions , the film 's financiers , and was now awaiting a director and a studio , since HBO Films " wo n't be involved " .
However , in a 2011 interview with Entertainment Weekly , Heller indicated the project had stalled – " I 'm not holding my breath . "
HOME RELEASE Section::::Home release .
Rome : The Complete First Season was released as a six - disc Region 1 DVD box set in the United States in 2006 , distributed by HBO Home Video .
Featuring all 12 episodes , it included features such as episode commentaries , behind - the - scenes footage and making - of features .
The set ( without the episodic previews and recaps ) was also released in Region 2 , with the same title .
Season 2 was released in North America in 2007 and soon after in Region 2 .
Rome :
The Complete Series was released in November 2009 on Blu - ray in North America .
EPISODES
IMPACT RECEPTION
Section::::Impact .
Section::::Reception .
Rome has garnered mostly positive reviews .
Sean Woods from Rolling Stone called the series " masterful " and " epic " and gave the series 3.5 out of 4 .
Alessandra Stanley from The New York Times said : "
But behind all that gritty squalor the glory that was Rome gets lost " , while reviewing season 2 .
Lisa Schwarzbaum from Entertainment Weekly gave season 2 a B and commented on the " spectacular " clothing design .
Michael Ventre from Variety magazine was positive towards the series and was intrigued by the " complex " character of Atia of the Julii .
James Poniewozik from TIME magazine commented on the " slow start " , but further stated that the series " draws you " to the ancient city of Rome .
Empire magazine reviewer Helen O'Hara said : " Not as good - looking as Gladiator , perhaps , but richer in ( reasonably accurate ) history and texture " , and gave season 1 of Rome four out of five stars .
Robert Bianco from USA Today called season 2 " the fall of Rome " , commenting that season 2 was not as good as season 1 citing " off - key characterizations and plot absurdities " .
Linda Stasi from The New York Post called herself a " slave " to the show .
Melanie McFarland from Seattle Post - Intelligencer called season 2 " at top of its form " and said it was as good as the former season .
Historian Robin Lane Fox , writing in The Guardian called the series " splendidly ambitious " .
Eric Neigher from Slant Magazine called season 1 of Rome " good art " .
Robert Abele from LA Weekly called it the " most lavish dramatic series yet " released by HBO .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Capping its successful first season , Rome won four Emmy Awards out of eight nominations in 2006 , for the episodes " Caesarion " , " Triumph " , " Kalends of February " and " Stealing from Saturn " .
The series also won an Art Directors Guild ( ADG ) in the category " Excellence in Production Design – Single - Camera Television Series " for the pilot episode " The Stolen Eagle " .
Michael Apted won the Directors Guild of America ( DGA ) in the category " Outstanding Directing – Drama Series , Night " for " The Stolen Eagle " .
The series itself was nominated for a Golden Globe Award in the category " Best Television Series - Drama " , and Polly Walker who portrayed Atia of the Julii was nominated in the category " Best Performance by an Actress In A Television Series – Drama " .
The series was also nominated for three Satellite Awards , two for season 1 and the last for season 2 .
The pilot episode " The Stolen Eagle " won a Visual Effects Society ( VES ) award in the category " Outstanding Visual Effects – Broadcast Series " .
Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) nominated the series for the category " Best Writing – New Television Series " in 2005 .
The series was also nominated for four British Academy Television Awards ( BAFTA ) , three in season 1 ( 2006 ) and one in season 2 ( 2008 ) .
In 2005 , the series was nominated for a Cinema Audio Society Award ( CAS ) in the category " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for Television Series " for the episode " The Spoils " .
The British award ceremony nominated the series for the Royal Television Society ( RTS ) award in the category " Best Visual Effects – Digital Effects " .
For season 2 ( 2007 )
Alik Sakharov won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series , for the episode " PassoverArt Directors Guild Award 2005 Excellence in Production Design – Single - Camera Television Series
" The Stolen Eagle " Directors Guild of America Award 2005 Outstanding Directing – Drama Series , Night Michael Apted for " The Stolen Eagle " Outstanding Art Direction for a Single - Camera Series " Caesarion " ;
" Triumph " ; " Kalends of February " Outstanding Costumes for a Series " Triumph " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series " Stealing from Saturn " Outstanding Main Title Design Outstanding Makeup for a Series ( Non - Prosthetic ) " Caesarion " Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore )
" Triumph " Outstanding Main Title Theme Music Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series
" The Stolen Eagle " Outstanding Art Direction for a Single - Camera Series " Heroes of the Republic " ; " Philippi " ; " Deus Impeditio Esuritori Nullus (
No God Can Stop a Hungry Man ) " Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series Alik Sakharov for " Passover " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series " De Patre Vostro ( About Your Father )
" Outstanding Costumes for a Series " De Patre Vostro ( About Your Father ) " Outstanding Makeup for a Series ( Non - Prosthetic ) " De Patre Vostro ( About Your Father ) " Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " Philippi " Outstanding Visual Effects for a Series " Philippi " Best Performance by an Actress In A Television Series – Drama Polly Walker as Atia of the Julii Best Television Series - Drama Outstanding Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film Polly Walker as Atia of the Julii Outstanding Television Series –
Drama 2007
Best DVD Release of a TV Show Season 2 Screen Actors Guild Award 2007
Outstanding Stunt Cast – Television Series Visual Effects Society Award 2005
Outstanding Visual Effects – Broadcast Series
" The Stolen Eagle " Writers Guild of America Award 2005
Best Writing – New Television Series
HISTORICAL
DEVIATIONS Section::::Historical deviations .
There are numerous inaccuracies in the series ' representation of various historical events and personages .
Co - creator Bruno Heller has said : " We try to balance between what people expect from previous portrayals and a naturalistic approach ...
This series is much more about how the psychology of the characters affects history than simply following the history as we know it " .
Series Historical Consultant Jonathan Stamp also notes that the show aims for " authenticity " rather than " accuracy " .
The filmmakers stressed that they wanted to portray a more accurate picture of Rome , a gritty and realistic city as opposed to what they call the " Hollyrome " presentation that audiences are used to from other films , with " cleanliness and marble and togas that looked pressed . "
Lucius Vorenus and Titus Pullo are historical figures mentioned briefly in Caesar 's Commentarii de Bello Gallico , but their adventures and involvement in key events in the series are fictional .
Some important events are not mentioned in Rome , including the whole year spent before the Battle of Dyrrhachium , which , though indecisive , was considered a victory for Pompeius .
Many significant members of the Optimates , the traditionalist faction of Brutus and Cato , are also missing from the series .
They include Titus Labienus , Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus , Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus , and Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther , who failed to empty Rome 's treasury before the Optimates ' departure , resulting in a severe lack of funds to support their war effort .
SEE ALSO
* List of historical drama films * List of films set in ancient Rome REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * on HBO.com * on BBC.co.uk * on RAI.it * The Real Pullo and Vorenus illustrated article about the Caesarian centurions Titus Pullo and Lucius Vorenus