WWE DRAFT
The WWE draft , called the WWE Superstar Shake - up since 2017 , is a process used by the American professional wrestling promotion WWE to refresh its rosters .
The draft was first used during the brand extension of 2002 , though it was officially incepted and used in 2004 .
Since the inception of the process , it has been referred to as the WWE draft lottery ( 2004–2005 ) and later simplified to the " draft " ( 2007–2011 ) .
Starting in 2005 , the draft took place during the month of June ; it was held in April between 2009 and 2011 .
After that , WWE terminated the brand split and promotion of interbrand competition from 2011 to 2016 .
On May 25 , 2016 , due to SmackDown moving to Tuesdays and to a live broadcast starting July 19 , necessitating a brand extension , WWE announced that the draft would be returning .
It would later be announced that the 2016 WWE draft would take place on July 19 during SmackDowns first live broadcast , which was also the first time that the draft took place on SmackDown .
From 2017 , the draft was relabeled as the WWE Superstar Shake - up ' as instead of a traditional draft , the general managers of Raw and SmackDown can trade and make deals between their respective talent .
HISTORY INITIAL SPLIT Section::::History .
Section::::Initial split .
During the 2002 draft , Undisputed WWE Champion Triple H and Women 's Champion Jazz were ineligible to be drafted as , at the time , their respective services were deemed available to both brands .
The rest of the champions , however , were eligible to be drafted to either brand 's roster .
The first half of the draft was televised live on TNN for two hours , as part of the WWF 's flagship program , Raw .
The second half was conducted over the Internet on the WWF 's official website , WWF.com .
There were thirty draft picks , with sixty wrestlers drafted overall by co - owners of the WWF , onto their respective brands , Raw and SmackDown .
The remaining wrestlers were divided randomly in a draft lottery , with each brand receiving a grand total of thirty wrestlers .
A draft did not occur in 2003 , with the second official draft occurring in 2004 .
The draft took place live for two hours on WWE 's flagship television program , Raw on Spike TV .
Post - draft trades were announced on WWE 's website , until midnight on March 22 , 2004 .
There were twelve draft picks , with nineteen wrestlers overall switching between the promotion 's two brands : Raw and SmackDown .
During the draft lottery , the General manager of Raw , Eric Bischoff , and the General manager of SmackDown ! , Paul Heyman , stood on opposite ends of the stage on the Raw set , where they drafted six wrestlers randomly via two machines .
At the conclusion of the draft , the two GMs would then be allowed to trade anyone on the roster until Midnight EST , which was later extended until Tuesday night after Heyman resigned .
Every WWE employee was eligible to be drafted , including injured wrestlers , commentators , champions , and general managers .
During the 2005 draft , WWE Champion John Cena was drafted to Raw and kept his championship .
General Manager Theodore Long announced that a new SmackDown Championship was to be created but the idea was abandoned when World Heavyweight Champion Batista was drafted to SmackDown , bringing the title with him .
There were ten draft picks and an eleven - person trade conducted between the promotion 's two brands : Raw and SmackDown , where twenty - two wrestlers were drafted and traded overall .
The draft took place on WWE 's two - hour television programs , Raw , which aired on Spike TV , and SmackDown ! , which aired on UPN .
Post - draft trades were announced on WWE 's website .
The draft picks were announced each Monday on Raw and each Thursday on SmackDown !
from June 6 to June 30 .
Each draftee was drafted at random .
Like the previous year , all WWE personnel were eligible to be drafted .
ADDITION OF ECW Section::::Addition of ECW .
There was no Raw and SmackDown draft in 2006 , however , ECW became a third brand .
The draft featured ECW representative Paul Heyman receiving two total draft picks from the existing SmackDown and Raw rosters for the newly created ECW brand .
During the 2007 draft , ECW World Champion Bobby Lashley was stripped of the title after being drafted to Raw .
The first half of the draft was televised live for three hours on World Wrestling Entertainment 's flagship program , Raw on USA Network .
The second half of the draft , or the " supplemental draft " , was conducted over WWE 's website , WWE.com , for four hours on June 17 , 2007 as draft picks were announced at twenty - minute intervals .
There were twenty - three draft picks , with twenty - seven wrestlers drafted overall , between the promotion 's three brands : Raw , SmackDown , and ECW .
For the televised half of the draft , each brand 's draft pick was determined by nine matches , one being a battle royal for two draft picks , where wrestlers from their respective brands wrestled to earn a draft pick .
The supplemental draft , however , was conducted randomly , with each brand receiving random draft selections .
Raw and SmackDown !
received five random draft picks , while ECW received three random draft picks .
The televised draft picks were randomly selected by a computer that was shown on the Raw titantron .
Every WWE wrestler from Raw , SmackDown ! , and ECW was eligible to be drafted .
During the 2008 draft , Matt Hardy was drafted to ECW with his United States Championship , Triple H was drafted to SmackDown with his WWE Championship , and Kane was drafted to Raw with his ECW Championship .
The draft took place live for three hours on Raw .
Every WWE employee was eligible to be drafted .
Similar to the 2007 draft , wrestlers from each brand competed in matches to win a random draft pick for their brand .
Draft picks were kayfabe selected at random via a computer that was shown on the Raw titantron .
Like the previous year , a supplemental draft took place on June 25 , where draft selections were randomly conducted .
During the 2009 draft , Unified WWE Tag Team Champions The Colóns ( Carlito and Primo ) , Divas Champion Maryse , United States Champion MVP , and WWE Champion Triple H were drafted to Raw , while Women 's Champion Melina and Intercontinental Champion Rey Mysterio were drafted to SmackDown .
The draft took place over two days : the first day was televised live for three hours on April 13 ; the second part , the " supplemental draft " , was held on April 13 .
The first day was broadcast on WWE 's program Raw , and the supplemental draft was available on the Internet , at WWE 's official website .
The televised portion was held in Atlanta , Georgia , at Philips Arena .
The 2009 draft marked the third time that the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands were featured in the draft ; wrestlers , general managers and commentators were all eligible to be drafted from the company 's roster .
For the televised half , matches determined which brand received a random draft selection .
During the supplemental draft , brand and employee selections were made at random .
Overall , 36 draft selections were made , the most since the original draft in 2002 ( which featured 57 selections ) .
Twelve selections were made on television ; six were made by Raw , five by SmackDown , and one by ECW .
All of the draftees were wrestlers : 28 males ( 10 drafted on television ) and 8 females ( 2 drafted on television ) .
DISBANDING OF ECW Section::::Disbanding of ECW .
Before the 2010 draft , the ECW brand was disbanded , and therefore the draft was once again only Raw and SmackDown .
During the draft , Unified WWE Tag Team Champions The Hart Dynasty ( Tyson Kidd and David Hart Smith ) were drafted to Raw .
The draft took place over two days : the first day was televised live for three hours on April 26 , and the second part , the " supplemental draft " , was held on April 27 .
The first day was broadcast on WWE 's Monday night program Raw , and the supplemental draft was available on WWE 's official website .
The televised portion was held at Richmond Coliseum in Richmond , Virginia .
During the 2011 draft , United States Champion Sheamus was drafted to SmackDown .
The draft aired live on Raw , for two hours in Raleigh , North Carolina from the RBC Center .
As a standard for previous drafts , most on - air personnel were eligible to be drafted .
A continuation of the draft took place on WWE 's official website at 12:00pm Eastern time on the following afternoon .
SmackDown received 16 additional members to its roster while Raw received 13 .
For the first time in draft history , two of the draft picks consisted of the same wrestler ( John Cena ) being selected to SmackDown with the first pick and back to Raw with the last televised pick .
With the end of the first brand extension in August 2011 , no drafts were held until the brand extension was brought back in 2016 .
SECOND SPLIT Section::::Second split .
During the 2016 draft , SmackDown drafted WWE Champion Dean Ambrose and Intercontinental Champion
The Miz ( along with his wife Maryse ) , while Raw drafted Women 's Champion Charlotte , United States Champion Rusev ( along with his wife Lana ) , and WWE Tag Team Champions The New Day .
During the 2017 WWE Superstar Shake - up , Intercontinental Champion Dean Ambrose and the championship moved to Raw , while United States Champion Kevin Owens and the championship moved to SmackDown .
The 2018 WWE Superstar Shake - up occurred on the April 16 and April 17 episodes of Raw and SmackDown Live , respectively .
DRAFTS Section::::Drafts . !
No . !
Year ! Date(s ) !
Brands March 25 Raw , SmackDown 2004 March 22 Raw ,
SmackDown 2005
Raw , SmackDown 2006 May 29
ECW 2007 June 11 Raw , SmackDown , ECW June 23 Raw , SmackDown , ECW April 13 April 16–17 April 8–9
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of the WWE draft lottery