LARRY O'BRIEN CHAMPIONSHIP TROPHY
The Larry O'Brien NBA Championship Trophy is the championship trophy awarded annually by the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) to the winner of the NBA Finals .
The name of the trophy was the Walter A. Brown Trophy until 1984 .
The current design , depicting a basketball over a hoop and basket , was first awarded in 1977 still under its original name , which was changed in honor of former NBA commissioner Larry O'Brien who served from 1975 to 1984 .
Before joining the NBA , O'Brien was the United States Postmaster General under President Lyndon B. Johnson from 1965 to 1968 .
HISTORY PREVIOUS
DESIGN Section::::History .
Section::::Previous design .
The trophy was originally referred to as the NBA Finals trophy , but was renamed in after Walter A. Brown , the original owner of the Boston Celtics who was instrumental in merging the BAA and the National Basketball League into the NBA in 1949 .
The original trophy was awarded to the BAA / NBA champions from 1947 to 1976 .
The trophy was kept by the winning team for one year and given to the winning team of the following year 's finals , unless the previous team won again , much like the NHL 's Stanley Cup , which continues that tradition to this day .
The inaugural winners of the trophy were the Philadelphia Warriors , who defeated the Chicago Stags .
From 1957 to 1969 , the Celtics won the NBA Finals 11 out of 13 times , including eight consecutive wins .
The final winners of the trophy were the Philadelphia 76ers , who defeated the Los Angeles Lakers in the 1983 NBA Finals .
In 1984 , the trophy was renamed the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy .
CURRENT DESIGN
Section::::Current design .
A new trophy design was created for the 1977 NBA Finals , although it retained the Walter A. Brown title .
Unlike the original championship trophy , the new trophy was given permanently to the winning team and a new one was made every year .
In 1984 , the trophy was renamed to the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy , in honor of Larry O'Brien , who served as NBA commissioner from 1975 to 1984 .
The current trophy is made out of 14.5 pounds of sterling silver and vermeil with a 24 karat gold overlay and stands tall .
It is designed to look like a basketball about to enter a net .
The year and team names are engraved on the trophies , which are often prominently displayed in the winning team 's arena .
The Boston Celtics were the inaugural winners of the renamed trophy , defeating the Los Angeles Lakers in seven games ( 4–3 ) in the 1984 NBA Finals .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The trophy is two feet tall and is made of 14.5 pounds of sterling silver and vermeil with a 24 karat gold overlay .
The trophy is manufactured by Tiffany &
Co. The championship team maintains permanent possession of the trophy ( although one exception exists , as described below ) .
The year and winning team names are engraved on the trophies , and are often prominently displayed in the winning team 's arena .
After the sale of the Houston Rockets from Leslie Alexander to Tilman Fertitta in late 2017 , Alexander maintained the ownership of the team 's 1993 - 94 and 1994 - 95 trophies as mementos of his ownership .
Thus , the team commissioned Tiffany to create replica versions of both Larry O'Brien trophies ( and replacing the 1993 - 94 trophy , which was unexpectedly dropped and dented by reserve center Richard Petruška during the celebration ) , which were publicly unveiled on September 20 , 2018 .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
Although the Larry O'Brien Trophy has been compared with the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Stanley Cup , it has never been as prominent as the NHL trophy .
To reduce this discrepancy , the NBA has been actively promoting the O'Brien Trophy in recent years to generate more recognition and an iconic status for the trophy .
After the Detroit Pistons won the NBA Finals in 2004 , the trophy was toured around the state of Michigan , marking the first time the trophy toured around the state of the winning team .
In 2005 , the NBA Legends Tour was launched in New York City .
As part of the tour , the O'Brien Trophy was showcased in various cities — including those that were hosting the playoffs — for fans ' autograph and photo sessions .
It was escorted by many former players , including Julius Erving , Kareem Abdul - Jabbar and Bill Russell .
In May 2007 , the NBA unveiled the NBA Headquarters on Second Life , an Internet - based virtual reality environment .
With this launch , fans could take pictures with the championship trophy in the virtual Toyota Larry O'Brien Trophy Room .
In August , the trophy traveled to Hong Kong for the first time as part of the NBA Madness Asia Tour .
REFERENCES