FOOTBALL BOOT Football boots , called cleats or soccer shoes in North America , are an item of footwear worn when playing football .
Those designed for grass pitches have studs on the outsole to aid grip .
From simple and humble beginnings football boots have come a long way and today find themselves subject to much research , development , sponsorship and marketing at the heart of a multi - national global industry .
Modern " boots " are not truly boots in that they do not cover the ankle - like most other types of specialist sports footwear , their basic design and appearance has converged with that of sneakers since the 1960s .
HISTORY OF BOOTS Section::::History of boots .
1800s : During the 19th century football became extremely popular in Britain .
People who played would wear their heavy and hard work boots to play .
These were the first ever boots with the steel toe cap at the front , long laces and ankle support .
These boots also had metal studs or tacks put in the sole the bottom
so the players would have more stability on the pitch .
In the later part of the 19th century the first ever football - specific boot was designed , made of thick and heavy leather which ran right to the ankle for increased protection ; the first boot weighed 500 g and would double in weight when it was wet .
1900–1940 : During this period the style of football boots stayed very basic .
They remained so during the inter - war years , despite many famous football boot producers , such as Gola , Hummel and Valsport becoming evermore popular .
1940–1960 : After the Second World War , the designs of the football boot changed dramatically .
The South Americans designed a lighter and more flexible boot .
This design was focused on increasing good control and better kicking power rather than a more protective boot .
In 1954 Adi Dassler introduced screw - in studs which gave the German team a tangible advantage during a rain - lashed World Cup that year .
That Dassler was the first to come up with screw - in studs is disputed by his older brother , Rudolf Dassler , founder of Puma .
1960s :
In the 1960s many football boots were designed with a lower cut .
These enabled the best players in Europe and South America to move faster and change direction quicker .
Mitre , Joma and Asics joined the fray .
1970s : The 1970s and the 1980s saw many large advances and changes in the football boot design .
These included lighter boots and a variety of colours .
Boot sponsorship also became more widespread .
Adidas was the market leader in this period .
At the end of the decade , in 1979 , it cemented its status by releasing what has gone on to become the best selling boot of all time , the Copa Mundial .
During this time period , some of the most common types of natural leather came into production : kangaroo leather , calfskin and full - grain / cow leather .
Diadora entered the market in this decade .
1980s : Umbro , Lotto and Kelme joined the market in this decade .
1990–2000s : New types of sole were introduced to increase the balance of the player .
The Adidas Predator , designed by Australian Craig Johnston in the late 1980s , was released in 1994 and enjoyed instant success .
In the first decade of the 21st century laser technology was introduced to produce the first fully customised football boot in 2006 .
2010s : In the era of the modern game that sees the tempo of matches becoming faster and players more technically inclined , manufacturers introduce new advances in technology including lighter footwear made from alternative materials .
DIFFERENT STYLES FOR DIFFERENT SPORTS Section::::Different styles for different sports .
Depending on the type of surface , kind of sport and even the wearer 's position or role in the game , different cuts of boot and particularly stud arrangements are available .
For hard pitches , amateur participants may wear a sneaker shoe or a plastic - stud boot ( known as a " moulded sole " ) ; in most sports and positions this is adequate , although on a well - grassed or sodden field , screw - in studs are recommended for more grip ; these may be metal , rubber or plastic .
When playing on this kind of pitch , some players favor using a boot with screw - in studs in their non - dominant ( supporting ) foot to provide grip , and a boot with short rubber or plastic studs in the dominant ( kicking / passing ) foot to provide accuracy .
Presently , boot designs are based on the " criteria " of speed , power , touch or control with some boots offering a combination of these .
However , these specifications matter little on the player 's actual playing ability and are actually a marketing strategy .
For indoor football , indoor boots are used .
These come with rubber soles , meant to maximize grip on the floor .
Some are built on the design of firm - ground football boots , and some are specifically designed for the indoor game .
For football on turf or artificial grass , some players wear regular firm ground football boots .
But wearing regular football boots on turf greatly reduces the life of the boot , so companies such as Nike have developed football boots for artificial grass ( AG ) .
For rugby union , the screw - in stud is preferred , especially in the positions of prop , hooker , and lock , where more grip is required for contested scrums .
These screw - in studs have to be of a maximum length of 21 mm .
These boots are often heavier than appropriate for other types of football .
One of the more obvious differences between association football and rugby boots is the formation of the studs - rugby boots typically have no fewer than nine studs whilst those worn for soccer can have a minimum of six .
Also , some rugby boots tend to have a high cut around the ankles but this type is becoming less popular , especially at elite level .
There are several types of rugby boot , meant for players in different positions .
Screw - in studs have been banned in some Australian rules football leagues since the 1990s due to the frequency of severe injuries to players as a result of contact with the metal .
In football , referees must now check all boots prior to kick off to check for damage to studs , to prevent injury .
Before this time , preference between the screw - in stud was based primarily on weather conditions .
More recently , moulded soles with specially designed boots known as blades have moulded soles facing in multiple directions , theoretically to maximise grip and minimise ankle injury .
Recently , however , " bladed " football boots have faced criticism from some UK sporting bodies for causing potentially serious injuries to players .
English football club Manchester United have even banned their players from wearing boots with bladed studs after players like Wayne Rooney and David Beckham suffered repeated metatarsal injuries .
FOOTBALL MARKETS AND BRANDS Section::::Football markets and brands .
Originally , football boots were available only in black , but in more recent years have become available in various colours such as blue , green , red , white , yellow , silver , gold and even pink .
Big name companies such as Nike , Adidas , Puma and the like have made an impact on the market with record sales .
Nike 's flagship shoes are the Hypervenoms , Magistas , Tiempos and The Nike Mercurial worn by Cristiano Ronaldo and others .
German company Adidas are responsible for the Predator range worn by David Beckham , Gary Neville , and Steven Gerrard , as well as the long - surviving Copa Mundial .
The entire German national side wore Adidas boots during the 2006 FIFA World Cup .
Another German firm Puma flagship shoes are the Kings , Evospeed , Evopower and Evotouch worn by Sergio Agüero , Marco Reus , Cesc Fàbregas and Antoine Griezmann .
The Puma King soccer cleat have been worn by legendary players such as Pelé , Eusébio , Johan Cruyff and Diego Maradona .
In recent times , the most successful companies are Nike and Adidas , and their products enjoy great popularity among professional footballers ; among Nike 's endorsers are two - time FIFA World Player of the Year Ronaldinho , aforementioned duo Wayne Rooney and Cristiano Ronaldo , striker Ronaldo , Wesley Sneijder , Zlatan Ibrahimović , and other popular players .
Adidas , which has been providing football boots with screw - in studs to the German national side since the 1954 FIFA World Cup , have made their impact on the modern market by signing big name players as endorsers : players such as David Beckham , former France captain Zinedine Zidane , Frank Lampard , five - time world player of the year Lionel Messi , David Villa , Steven Gerrard and other successful players .
Adidas sells with an image of technology and class in their boots which is key to their success .
CUSTOMIZATION Section::::Customization .
Many players use personalisation around the world to improve the look of their boots and to make them easily identifiable in the club dressing room .
It is now very common to have football boots fully personalised with either a name , initials , number or club logo .
Many retailers offer various options and colours to personalise football boots by using the embroidery machinery .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
SEE ALSO
* Comparison of orthotics