THE SANDLOT
The Sandlot is a 1993 American coming - of - age sports comedy film co - written , directed and narrated by David Mickey Evans , which tells the story of a group of young baseball players during the summer of 1962 .
It stars Tom Guiry , Mike Vitar , Karen Allen , Denis Leary and James Earl Jones .
The filming locations were in Midvale , Salt Lake City , and Ogden , Utah .
It grossed $ 33 million worldwide and has become a cult film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the San Fernando Valley during the summer of 1962 , Scotty Smalls is the new boy in the neighborhood , seeking desperately to fit in .
He would be welcomed on the local sandlot baseball team that practices every day , which only has eight players .
His mother encouraged to make friends this summer .
Smalls , however , can not play baseball ; on his first visit to the sandlot he finds himself in the outfield with a fly ball descending toward him which bounces off his glove , causing the other boys , except Benny " the Jet " Rodriguez , the team 's leader , to burst out laughing .
Smalls , humiliated , leaves the baseball field .
Smalls asks his stepfather to teach him to play , and while his stepdad agrees , Scott can not successfully catch or throw the ball .
Benny soon teaches him what he needs to know , and with Benny 's support , he gets a place on the team .
Meanwhile , behind a wall at the end of the sandlot is a backyard inhabited by " the Beast " , an English Mastiff so large and savage that it has become a neighborhood legend .
One day , the boys ' last ball lands in the Beast 's backyard .
Smalls attempts to retrieve it , but the others , knowing about the Beast , stop him .
That evening , they tell him all about the Beast , and that his owner , Mr. Mertle , got him when he was just a puppy when thieves were plaguing his junkyard , Mertle 's Acres .
After a couple of weeks , the puppy became the Beast ; he grew enormous and aggressive , killing and devouring the thieves , bones and all .
Eventually , Squints ' grandfather , who was the police chief at the time , had Mr. Mertle chain up the Beast in the backyard and keep him under his house forever .
Smalls also learns that many baseballs end up in the backyard , and then they just disappear .
The next day , at a local swimming pool , Squints pretends to drown so that he can kiss the lifeguard , Wendy Peffercorn , whom he has a crush on .
She does not take too kindly to it , and they are banned from the pool .
Nonetheless , she realizes that Squints has feelings for her .
One day , Benny busts the guts out of their baseball and Smalls steals his stepfather 's ball .
After that ball also ends up with the Beast , Smalls discovers the ball was special ; it was signed by Babe Ruth .
Smalls ' stepfather has gone to Chicago for a week - long business trip , putting Smalls and the others on a race against time to recover the ball before he returns .
They make many attempts to retrieve the ball , but the Beast thwarts each attempt .
One night , Benny has a dream in which Babe Ruth gives him advice , and Benny explains to him about the Beast , saying that he ate one kid who hopped the fence and went into Mr. Mertle 's backyard .
The next day , Benny puts on PF Flyers , shoes " guaranteed " to make a kid run faster and jump higher , and goes into Mr. Mertle 's backyard , despite protests from his team .
Benny retrieves the ball , but the Beast breaks his chain and escapes , chasing Benny through the streets , a theater , a picnic , the local swimming pool and eventually back to the sandlot .
Mr. Mertle 's fence falls on top of the Beast , but Smalls and Benny manage to get the fence off him ; he shows the kids that he has been keeping all the baseballs they hit into the backyard in a small hole .
Smalls and Benny then meet Mr. Mertle , who reveals that the Beast 's real name is Hercules , an English Mastiff , and that he knew Babe Ruth , because he was also a baseball player who went blind after getting hit by a baseball .
Mr. Mertle trades the destroyed Babe Ruth - autographed baseball for a baseball signed by all of the 1927 New York Yankees , which Smalls gives to his stepfather as a gift to make up for the other ball .
The sandlot boys enjoy the rest of the summer and the next few years , with the Beast as their mascot .
Over the next three decades , the boys grow up and go into different careers .
Benny and Smalls remain close ; Benny becomes a famous MLB player , while Smalls becomes a sportscaster .
CAST
* Tom Guiry as Scotty Smalls * Mike Vitar as Benjamin " Benny " Franklin Rodriguez * Patrick Renna as Hamilton " Ham " Porter * Chauncey Leopardi as Michael " Squints " Palledorous * Marty York as Alan "
Yeah - Yeah " McClennan * Brandon Quintin Adams as Kenny DeNunez * Grant Gelt as Bertram Weeks
* Victor Di Mattia as Timmy Timmons
* Shane Obedzinski as Tommy " Repeat " Timmons * Karen Allen as Mrs. Smalls
* Denis Leary as Bill * James Earl Jones as Mr. Mertle * Marley Shelton as Wendy Peffercorn * Art LaFleur as The Babe * Pablo Vitar as Adult Benny
" The Jet " Rodriguez RECEPTION CRITICAL Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical .
The Sandlot has received mixed to positive reviews from critics .
The film currently holds a 56 % " rotten " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 48 reviews .
The site 's consensus says " It may be shamelessly derivative and overly nostalgic , but The Sandlot is nevertheless a genuinely sweet and funny coming - of - age adventure . "
Critic Roger Ebert gave the film three stars , comparing the movie to a summertime version of A Christmas Story , based on the tone and narration of both films : Bob Cannon of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+ , praising its simplicity and strong fundamentals .
Leonard Klady of Variety gave the film a mostly negative review .
He praised the cinematography and score , but felt the baseball team did not come together , and that the film , while sincere , was a " remarkably shallow wade , rife with incident and slim on substance . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film grossed $ 4 million in its opening weekend and a further $ 32 million through ticket sales .
Figures for worldwide VHS and DVD sales are estimated to be at $ 76 million .
Since its release on both VHS and DVD , the film has become a cult favorite .
DEFAMATION SUIT Section::::Defamation suit .
In 1998 , Michael Polydoros sued 20th Century Fox and the producers of the film for defamation .
Polydoros , a childhood classmate of David Mickey Evans , the author and director of The Sandlot , claimed that the character Michael " Squints " Palledorous was derogatory and caused him shame and humiliation .
The trial court found in favor of the filmmakers , and that finding was affirmed by the California Court of Appeal .
After initially agreeing to review the case in 1998 , the Supreme Court of California reversed its decision , dismissing the review and reinstating the Court of Appeal 's opinion in favor of 20th Century Fox .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
In 1993 , The Sandlot first came to video in a slipcase , along with the LaserDisc in widescreen , but later came in a clam shell case in 1994 .
On January 29 , 2002 , the DVD came in a Family Feature , in widescreen ( Side B ) and full screen ( Side A ) .
The 2013 repackaged DVD is only in widescreen .
On March 26 , 2013 , the film released on Blu - ray for the first time to celebrate its 20th anniversary .
The film then had a re - release on Blu - ray and Digital HD on March 27 , 2018 as part of the film 's 25th anniversary .
SEQUELS AND PREQUEL
* The Sandlot 2 ( 2005 ) – A direct - to - video sequel in which a new Sandlot gang is featured .
The only returning cast member is James Earl Jones in his role of Mr. Mertle .
* ( 2007 ) –
Another direct - to - video sequel starring Luke Perry as Tommy " Santa " Santorelli who gets knocked back to 1976 from 2005 and relives his childhood .
Chauncey Leopardi reprises his role as Squints .
* A prequel was announced on July 31st , 2018 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's original score was composed by David Newman , and was not released until 2006 , when a limited edition was released as part of the Varèse Sarabande CD Club .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS