LITTLE RED - HAIRED GIRL
The Little Red - Haired Girl is an unseen character in the Peanuts comic strip by Charles M. Schulz , who serves as the object of Charlie Brown 's affection , and a symbol of unrequited love .
While never seen in the strip , she appears onscreen in several television specials , in which her name has been revealed as Heather Wold .
Charlie Brown most often notices her while eating lunch outdoors , always failing to muster the courage to speak to her .
She figures prominently in Valentine 's Day strips , several of which focus on Charlie Brown 's hope of getting a valentine from her .
Charlie Brown typically attempts to give her a valentine but panics at the last minute .
APPEARANCES Section::::Appearances .
Charlie Brown first catches sight of her in the November 19 , 1961 strip , saying he would " give anything in the world if that little girl with the red hair would come over and sit with me . "
In July 1969 , a story arc ran depicting the Little Red - Haired Girl moving away .
Charlie Brown despaired that he would never see her again .
He saw her from a distance later that year while skiing .
Peppermint Patty and Marcie encountered her at summer camp a few years later in 1972 , where it is stated that she is aware of Charlie Brown ( despite his belief that she does not know he exists ) and is talking about him to the other girls at camp , although what she says of him and how she feels about him are not stated .
Eventually , the Little Red - Haired Girl moved back to Charlie Brown 's neighborhood , with no further mention of her ever having been away .
The 1967 Peanuts animated TV special You 're in Love , Charlie Brown revolved entirely around Charlie Brown 's obsession with the Little Red - Haired Girl .
After several failed attempts at making conversation with her on the last two days of school , she stuffs a note into Charlie Brown 's hands as students rush past him to board the school bus .
Thinking he has ruined his final chance at meeting her , he reads the letter , which affectionately states , " I like you , Charlie Brown .
Signed , the Little Red - Haired Girl . "
Ecstatic , Charlie Brown skips his way home , realizing he has triumphed against what he considers all odds .
Throughout the entirety of You 're in Love , Charlie Brown , the Little Red - Haired Girl is not seen once .
The Little Red - Haired Girl returned in the 1977 special
It 's Your First Kiss , Charlie Brown , making her first ever onscreen appearance .
Linus tells Charlie Brown that her name is " Heather " , and that she is the Homecoming Queen .
Charlie Brown becomes a wreck , trying desperately to impress her once he learns that he has been chosen to escort her to the dance after the football game .
After spending nearly the entire duration of the special stressing about meeting her , he eventually musters up the courage to give her a kiss .
Heather appeared onscreen again in the 1985 special Happy New Year , Charlie Brown !
She did not have a speaking role in either of the aforementioned specials .
Schulz did not consider these animated appearances to be canonical , although he wrote the screenplay himself .
The Little Red - Haired Girl was once seen in the comics in silhouette on May 25 , 1998 , dancing with Snoopy .
When the storyline was adapted as part of the 2002 special A Charlie Brown Valentine , she was seen unshadowed but had a different design than suggested by the silhouette , and completely different from her two previous appearances in It 's Your First Kiss , Charlie Brown and Happy New Year , Charlie Brown !
A third animated version of the Little Red - Haired Girl is briefly seen in the introduction sequence used in the second season of The Charlie Brown and Snoopy Show , in which she again looks different from her other appearances .
Another appearance includes the 1988 special Snoopy ! ! !
The Musical ( albeit a brief cameo ) .
She also appears in A Charlie Brown Valentine .
In The Peanuts Movie , she has a much different design based on the earlier mentioned silhouette , and on the test score sheet , it is revealed her name is Heather Wold , after her name in the specials and the last name of Donna Wold , the real - life inspiration behind the character .
The film marked the first time the Little Red - Haired Girl spoke in all Peanuts - related media , with Charlie Brown finally succeeding in talking to her .
She is voiced by Francesca Capaldi who also voiced Frieda .
INSPIRATION
Section::::Inspiration .
A former co - worker , Donna Mae
Wold ( born Donna Mae Johnson January 3 , 1929 in Minneapolis , Minnesota , died August 8 , 2016 in Richfield , Minnesota ) , was Schulz 's inspiration for the character .
A 1947 high school graduate , Johnson was working in the accounting department of the Art Instruction , Inc. , a correspondence school where Schulz worked .
Johnson and Schulz eventually became romantically involved and dated for three years , but in 1950 when Schulz proposed to her , she turned him down , saying she was already engaged .
Schulz was devastated , but he and Donna remained friends for the rest of his life .
Said Schulz of the relationship , " I can think of no more emotionally damaging loss than to be turned down by someone whom you love very much .
A person who not only turns you down , but almost immediately will marry the victor .
What a bitter blow that is . "
Only one known Schulz drawing ( aside from the aforementioned silhouette ) of the little red - haired girl exists .
It was drawn in 1950 , long before she was mentioned in Peanuts .
The girl in the drawing strongly resembles Patty ( not to be confused with the later character Peppermint Patty ) , a character who was prominent in the early days of the strip .
A book containing the sketch also has a photo of Johnson with Schulz .
" I 'd like to see Charlie Brown kick that football , and if he gets the little red - haired girl , that 's fine with me , " Donna said around the time Schulz announced his retirement in 1999 .
On Valentine 's Day 2011 , the Schulz Museum gave free admission to all redheaded girls and boys in honor of the Little Red - Haired Girl .
VOICED BY
* Francesca Capaldi ( 2015 ) REFERENCES