NO - CONTEST CLAUSE
A no - contest clause , also called an in terrorem clause , is a clause in a legal document , such as a contract or a will , that is designed to threaten someone , usually with litigation or criminal prosecution , into acting , refraining from action , or ceasing to act .
The phrase is typically used to refer to a clause in a will that threatens to disinherit a beneficiary of the will if that beneficiary challenges the terms of the will in court .
Many states in the United States hold a no - contest clause in a will to be unenforceable , so long as the person challenging the will has probable cause to do so .
NO - CONTEST CLAUSE IN WILLS Section::::No - contest clause in wills .
The Uniform Probate Code ( UPC ) § § 2 - 517 and 3‑905
allow for no contest clauses so long as the person challenging the will does n't have probable cause to do so .
The full wording is : The UPC has been adopted in several smaller states , including Alaska , Idaho , Montana , and New Mexico , but also by Florida , one of the larger states in population .
Some states allow for " living probate " and " ante mortem " probate , which are statutory provisions which authorize testators to institute an adversary proceeding during their life to declare the validity of the will , in order to avoid later will contests .
NO - CONTEST CLAUSES
BY
STATE
CALIFORNIA Section::::No - contest clauses by state .
Section::::California .
In California , no - contest clauses are of limited effect , and will divest a party that unsuccessfully contests a will containing such a clause only if the Court determines that the party brought the action without probable cause .
Probate Code § § 21310–21315 .
These statutes , which comprise California 's statutory scheme governing the enforceability of no - contest clauses , became effective January 1 , 2010 .
As of that date , the predecessor statutes are repealed .
FLORIDA Section::::Florida .
In Florida no - contest clauses in wills are specifically unenforceable , irrespective of probable cause , pursuant to statute .
See Fla. Stat .
732.517 ( 2009 ) which states : MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
Massachusetts General Laws allow for Penalty Clause for Contest language in wills .
See M.G.L. Ch .
190B , Art .
II , Sec .
2 - 517 .
NEVADA Section::::Nevada .
Nevada law specifically directs the court to enforce no - contest clauses .
These statutes recognize that a beneficiary may , without penalty , seek enforcement of the will or trust , seek a judicial ruling as to the meaning of the will or trust .
The statutes also recognize an exception where legal action challenging the validity of the document is " instituted in good faith and based on probable cause that would have led a reasonable person , properly informed and advised , to conclude that there was a substantial likelihood that the trust or other trust - related instrument was invalid . "
NEW YORK Section::::New York .
New York has rejected the " probable cause " defense to enforcement of such clauses .
Such clauses are given full effect upon challenge .
Some exceptions apply , e.g. election against the will by a minor , contest on ground of forgery or revocation by later Will .
N.Y. EPTL specifically states : TEXAS Section::::Texas .
Texas allows for a no - contest clause to be challenged for just cause and provided the action to challenge was made in good faith .
OREGON Section::::Oregon .
Oregon enforces no - contest clauses against losing parties even when there was probable cause to contest the will .
REFERENCES