CHUCK HUGHES Charles Frederick " Chuck " Hughes ( March 2 , 1943 – October 24 , 1971 ) was an American football player , a wide receiver in the National Football League from 1967 to 1971 .
He is , to date , the only NFL player to die on the field during a game .
EARLY YEARS
Section::::Early years .
Born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , Hughes moved with his family to Texas when he was young , along with his twelve siblings .
Hughes attended high school in Abilene at Abilene High School .
COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::College career .
Hughes played college football at Texas Western College , now the University of Texas at El Paso , where he is still listed in the all - time football records ; his accomplishments include : * The most all - purpose yards in a single game , 401 in 1965 against North Texas State ( he is also second with 360 the same year against Arizona State ) * The most yards per reception for a single game , 34.9 , also in 1965 against North Texas —
this is also an NCAA record
*
The most receptions in a single game , 17 , also against Arizona State in 1965
* Second in all - purpose yards for a season , with 2044 in 1966
*
First in all - purpose yards per game for a season , 204 in 1965
* Second in all - purpose yards per game for his career with 132
*
Fifth in all - purpose yards all - time with 3,989
*
Second in career receiving touchdowns with 19 and yardage with 2,882
He was inducted into the UTEP Athletics Hall of Fame in 2006 .
PROFESSIONAL CAREER Section::::Professional career .
Hughes was selected in the fourth round by the Philadelphia Eagles in the 1967 NFL / AFL draft and played three seasons with the Eagles before he was traded to the Detroit Lions prior to the start of the 1970 season .
Although listed as a wide receiver he saw most action on special teams , being a backup at wide receiver .
In his five - year career he caught only 15 passes .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
During week six of the 1971 season on October 24 , the Lions hosted the Chicago Bears at Tiger Stadium .
Late in the game , with Detroit trailing 28–23 , the Lions were driving into Chicago territory and Hughes , who entered the game as an injury replacement , caught a pass from quarterback Greg Landry for thirty - two yards and a first down at the Bears ' 37-yard line .
Three plays later
, Landry threw a pass that tight end
Charlie Sanders dropped near the end zone .
Hughes , a decoy on the play , began running back to the huddle with 1:02 showing on the clock .
Suddenly , he dropped to the turf clutching his chest around the 20-yard line .
Hughes collapsed near Bears linebacker Dick Butkus , who saw him begin to convulse violently on the field .
Butkus motioned to the sideline frantically to get Hughes assistance .
Both teams ' doctors and trainers , along with a physician who happened to be attending the game , ran to Hughes to try and save him .
An ambulance was called for and arrived to take Hughes to Henry Ford Hospital , where he was pronounced dead at 5:34 pm that afternoon .
He was 28 years old .
The game was played to its conclusion in front of a now - stunned silent crowd in Tiger Stadium , with the Bears ' lead holding .
The Lions awaited word of Hughes ' condition after the game and the players were informed once word had broken that he was dead .
A postmortem examination revealed that Hughes was suffering from undiagnosed and advanced arteriosclerosis ( one of his coronary arteries was 75 % blocked ) and that he had a family history of heart disease .
The direct cause of death was a coronary thrombosis , which caused a massive myocardial infarction that cut off the blood flow to his heart .
Hughes was buried in San Antonio , Texas , and all 40 of his Lions teammates attended his funeral , including head coach Joe Schmidt .
He is survived by his widow , Sharon Leah , and his son , who was 1 year and 11 months old at the time , Brandon Shane .
A $ 10,000 trust fund was set up for his son Brandon by an insurance company .
His widow filed a $ 21.5 million malpractice lawsuit against Henry Ford Hospital in 1972 for not diagnosing his condition when he was hospitalized after complaining of chest pains .
The lawsuit was settled on October 3 , 1974 for an undisclosed amount of money .
SEE ALSO
* List of American football players who died during their career
* List of sportspeople who died during their career REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Sports Reference – collegiate statistics – Chuck Hughes