FEMORAL VEIN
In the human body , the femoral vein is a blood vessel that accompanies the femoral artery in the femoral sheath .
It begins at the adductor canal ( also known as Hunter 's canal ) and is a continuation of the popliteal vein .
It ends at the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament , where it becomes the external iliac vein .
The femoral vein bears valves which are mostly bicuspid and whose number is variable between individuals and and often between left and right leg .
DRAINAGE Section::::Drainage .
Several large veins drain into the femoral vein :
* popliteal vein * deep vein of the thigh
* great saphenous vein CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Clinical significance .
Occlusion of the femoral vein can be life - threatening due to its size .
The femoral vein is often used to place central venous lines .
The practice of delivering recreational drugs intravenously using the femoral vein is relatively common amongst injecting drug users ( IDUs ) .
USE OF THE TERM SUPERFICIAL
FEMORAL VEIN Section::::Use of the term superficial femoral vein .
The term superficial femoral vein is recognized as a legitimate anatomic term .
However , some specialist physicians ( e.g. radiologists , and orthopaedic / vascular surgeons ) use the term superficial femoral vein for the distal part of the femoral vein to :
* differentiate the femoral vein segments before and after the deep vein of the thigh ( profunda femoris vein ) joins with it , and *
* differentiate the distal segment of the femoral vein from the deep vein of the thigh , which is paired with the deep artery of the thigh .
* Usage of this term is discouraged by many physicians because it leads to confusion among general medical practitioners .
The femoral vein is considered a deep vein , unlike the adjective superficial suggests and has led some physicians to falsely conclude it is a superficial vein , which has resulted in patients ( with deep vein thrombosis ) being denied efficacious anticoagulant or thrombolytic therapy .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " The Arteries of the Lower Extremity " * - " Veins of the lower extremity shown in association with major landmarks . "