INDIAN PAINTING Indian painting has a very long tradition and history in Indian art .
The earliest Indian paintings were the rock paintings of pre - historic times , the petroglyphs as found in places like Bhimbetka rock shelters , some of the Stone Age rock paintings found among the Bhimbetka rock shelters are approximately 30,000 years old .
India 's Buddhist literature is replete with examples of texts which describe palaces of the army and the aristocratic class embellished with paintings , but the paintings of the Ajanta Caves are the most significant of the few survivals .
Smaller scale painting in manuscripts was probably also practised in this period , though the earliest survivals are from the medieval period .
Mughal painting represented a fusion of the Persian miniature with older Indian traditions , and from the 17th century its style was diffused across Indian princely courts of all religions , each developing a local style .
Company paintings were made for British clients under the British raj , which from the 19th century also introduced art schools along Western lines , leading to modern Indian painting , which is increasingly returning to its Indian roots .
Indian paintings provide an aesthetic continuum that extends from the early civilisation to the present day .
From being essentially religious in purpose in the beginning , Indian painting has evolved over the years to become a fusion of various cultures and traditions .
SHADANGA OF INDIAN PAINTING Section::::Shadanga of Indian painting .
Around the 1st century BC the Shadanga or Six Limbs of Indian Painting , were evolved , a series of canons laying down the main principles of the art .
Vatsyayana , who lived during the third century A.D. , enumerates these in his Kamasutra having extracted them from still more ancient works .
These ' Six Limbs ' have been translated as follows :
* Rupabheda The knowledge of appearances .
*
* Pramanam Correct perception , measure and structure .
*
*
Bhava Action of feelings on forms .
*
* Lavanya Yojanam Infusion of grace , artistic representation .
* * Sadrisyam Similitude .
* * Varnikabhanga Artistic manner of using the brush and colours .
( Tagore . )
*
The subsequent development of painting by the Buddhists indicates that these ' Six Limbs ' were put into practice by Indian artists , and are the basic principles on which their art was founded .
GENRES OF INDIAN PAINTING
Section::::Genres of Indian painting .
Indian paintings can be broadly classified as murals and miniatures .
Murals are large works executed on the walls of solid structures , as in the Ajanta Caves and the Kailashnath temple .
Miniature paintings are executed on a very small scale for books or albums on perishable material such as paper and cloth .
The Palas of Bengal were the pioneers of miniature painting in India .
The art of miniature painting reached its glory during the Mughal period .
The tradition of miniature paintings was carried forward by the painters of different Rajasthani schools of painting like the Bundi , Kishangarh , Jaipur , Marwar and Mewar .
The Ragamala paintings also belong to this school , as does the Company painting produced for British clients under the British Raj .
Ancient Indian art has seen the rise of the Bengal School of art in 1930s followed by many forms of experimentations in European and Indian styles .
In the aftermath of India 's independence , many new genres of art developed by important artists like Jamini Roy , M. F. Husain , Francis Newton Souza , and Vasudeo S. Gaitonde .
With the progress of the economy the forms and styles of art also underwent many changes .
In the 1990s , Indian economy was liberalised and integrated to the world economy leading to the free flow of cultural information within and without .
Artists include Subodh Gupta , Atul Dodiya , Devajyoti Ray , Bose Krishnamachari and Jitish Kahllat whose works went for auction in international markets .
Bharti Dayal has chosen to handle the traditional Mithila painting in most contemporary way and created her own style through the exercises of her own imagination , they appear fresh and unusual .
HISTORY OF INDIAN PAINTING
MURALS Section::::History of Indian painting .
Section::::Murals .
The history of Indian murals starts in ancient and early medieval times , from the 2nd century BC to 8th – 10th century AD .
There are known more than 20 locations around India containing murals from this period , mainly natural caves and rock - cut chambers .
The highest achievements of this time are the caves of Ajanta , Bagh , Sittanavasal , Armamalai Cave ( Tamil Nadu ) , Ravan Chhaya rock shelter , Kailasanatha temple in Ellora Caves .
Murals from this period depict mainly religious themes of Buddhist , Jain and Hindu religions .
There are though also locations where paintings were made to adorn mundane premises , like the ancient theatre room in Jogimara Cave and possible royal hunting lodge
circa 7th - century AD – Ravan Chhaya rock shelter .
The pattern of large scale wall painting which had dominated the scene , witnessed the advent of miniature paintings during the 11th and 12th centuries .
This new style figured first in the form of illustrations etched on palm - leaf manuscripts .
The contents of these manuscripts included literature on Buddhism and Jainism .
In eastern India , the principal centres of artistic and intellectual activities of the Buddhist religion were Nalanda , Odantapuri , Vikramshila and Somarpura situated in the Pala kingdom ( Bengal and Bihar ) .
EASTERN INDIA PAINTING Section::::Eastern India painting .
In eastern India miniature painting developed in the 10th century .
These miniatures , depicting Buddhist divinities and scenes from the life of Buddha were painted on the leaves ( about 2.25 by 3 inches ) of the palm - leaf manuscripts as well as their wooden covers .
Most common Buddhist illustrated manuscripts include the texts Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita , Pancharaksa , Karandavyuha and Kalachakra Tantra .
The earliest extant miniatures are found in a manuscript of the Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita dated in the sixth regnal year of Mahipala ( c. 993 ) , presently the possession of The Asiatic Society , Kolkata .
This style disappeared from India in the late 12th century .
INFLUENCES IN FOREIGN ARTS Section::::Influences in foreign arts .
The influence of eastern Indian paintings can be seen in various Buddhist temples in Bagan , Myanmar particularly Abeyadana temple which was named after Queen consort of Myanmar , Abeyadana who herself had Indian roots and Gubyaukgyi Temple .
The influences of eastern Indian paintings can also be clearly observed in Tibetan Thangka paintings .
WESTERN INDIAN MINIATURE PAINTING Section::::Western Indian Miniature Painting .
Miniature paintings are beautiful handmade paintings , which are quite colorful but small in size .
The highlight of these paintings is the intricate and delicate brushwork , which lends them a unique identity .
The colors are handmade , from minerals , vegetables , precious stones , indigo , conch shells , pure gold and silver .
The evolution of Indian Miniatures paintings started in the Western Himalayas , around the 17th century
The subjects of these miniature paintings are in relation to the subjects of the manuscripts mostly religious and literary .
Many paintings are from Sanskrit and folk literature .
It is on the subject of love stories .
Some paintings from Vaishnav sect of Hindu religion and some are from Jain sect .
The Paintings of Vaishnav sect are regarding various occasions of the life of Lord Krishna and Gopies .
Vaishnav paintings of " Gita Govinda " is about Lord Krishna .
The paintings of Jain sect is concerning to Jain Lords and religious subjects .
These paintings were created on " Taadpatra "
that means the leaf of the palm tree , and Paper .
During that period earlier manuscripts were created from the leaf of the palm tree and later on from the paper .
In these paintings there are very few human characters with front face are seen .
Most of the human characters are seen with side profile .
Big eyes , pointed nose and slim waist are the features of these paintings .
The skin colours of human being are Brown and fair .
The skin colour of the Lord Krishna is Blue .
The colour of the hair and eyes is black .
Women characters have long hair .
Human characters have worn jewellery on the hand , nose , neck , hair , waist and ankles .
Men and women wear the traditional Indian dress , slippers and shoes .
Men wear turbans on their head .
In these paintings trees , rivers , flowers , birds , the land , the sky , houses , traditional chairs , cushions , curtains , lamps , and human characters have been painted .
Mostly Natural colours have been used in these paintings .
Black , red , white , brown , blue , and yellow colours are used to decorate the paintings .
The Kings , Courtiers of the kings , wealthy businessmen , and religious leaders of the time were the promoters of these miniature paintings .
Painters of these pictures were from the local society .
" Vaachhak " was the famous painter of the time .
Painters tried to make the subject of the manuscript live by these pictures so that the readers of the manuscript can enjoy reading .
MALWA , DECCAN AND JAUNPUR SCHOOLS OF PAINTING
Section::::Malwa , Deccan and Jaunpur schools of painting .
A new trend in manuscript illustration was set by a manuscript of the Nimatnama painted at Mandu , during the reign of Nasir Shah ( 1500–1510 ) .
This represent a synthesis of the indigenous and the patronized Persian style , though it was the latter which dominated the Mandu manuscripts .
There was another style of painting known as Lodi Khuladar that flourished in the Sultanate 's dominion of North India extending from Delhi to Jaunpur .
The miniature painting style , which flourished initially in the Bahmani court and later in the courts of Ahmadnagar , Bijapur and Golkonda is popularly known as the Deccan school of Painting .
One of the earliest surviving paintings are found as the illustrations of a manuscript Tarif - i - Hussain Shahi ( c.1565 ) , which is now in Bharata Itihasa Samshodhaka Mandala , Pune .
About 400 miniature paintings are found in the manuscript of Nujum - ul - Ulum ( Stars of Science ) ( 1570 ) , kept in Chester Beatty Library , Dublin .
MUGHAL PAINTING Section::::Mughal painting .
Mughal painting is a particular style of Indian painting , generally confined to illustrations on the book and done in miniatures , and which emerged , developed and took shape during the period of the Mughal Empire between the 16th and 19th centuries .
Mughal paintings were a unique blend of Indian , Persian and Islamic styles .
Because the Mughal kings wanted visual records of their deeds as hunters and conquerors , their artists accompanied them on military expeditions or missions of state , or recorded their prowess as animal slayers , or depicted them in the great dynastic ceremonies of marriages .
Akbar 's reign ( 1556–1605 ) ushered a new era in Indian miniature painting .
After he had consolidated his political power , he built a new capital at Fatehpur Sikri where he collected artists from India and Persia .
He was the first monarch who established in India an atelier under the supervision of two Persian master artists , Mir Sayyed Ali and Abdus Samad .
Earlier , both of them had served under the patronage of Humayun in Kabul and accompanied him to India when he regained his throne in 1555 .
More than a hundred painters were employed , most of whom were Hindus from Gujarat , Gwalior and Kashmir , who gave a birth to a new school of painting , popularly known as the Mughal School of miniature Paintings .
One of the first productions of that school of miniature painting was the Hamzanama series , which according to the court historian , Badayuni , was started in 1567 and completed in 1582 .
The Hamzanama , stories of Amir Hamza , an uncle of the Prophet , were illustrated by Mir Sayyid Ali .
The paintings of the Hamzanama are of large size , 20 x 27 " and were painted on cloth .
They are in the Persian safavi style .
Brilliant red , blue and green colours predominate ; the pink , eroded rocks and the vegetation , planes and blossoming plum and peach trees are reminiscent of Persia .
However , Indian tones appear in later work , when Indian artists were employed .
After him , Jahangir encouraged artists to paint portraits and durbar scenes .
His most talented portrait painters were Ustad Mansur , Abul Hasan and Bishandas .
Shah Jahan ( 1627–1658 ) continued the patronage of painting .
Some of the famous artists of the period were Mohammad Faqirullah Khan , Mir Hashim , Muhammad Nadir , Bichitr , Chitarman , Anupchhatar , Manohar and Honhar .
Aurangzeb had no taste for fine arts .
Due to lack of patronage artists migrated to Hyderabad in the Deccan and to the Hindu states of Rajasthan in search of new patrons .
RAJPUT PAINTING Section::::Rajput painting .
Rajput painting , a style of Indian painting , evolved and flourished , during the 18th century , in the royal courts of Rajputana , India .
Each Rajput kingdom evolved a distinct style , but with certain common features .
Rajput paintings depict a number of themes , events of epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata , Krishna 's life , beautiful landscapes , and humans .
Miniatures were the preferred medium of Rajput painting , but several manuscripts also contain Rajput paintings , and paintings were even done on the walls of palaces , inner chambers of the forts , havelies , particularly , the havelis of Shekhawati .
The colours extracted from certain minerals , plant sources , conch shells , and were even derived by processing precious stones , gold and silver were used .
The preparation of desired colours was a lengthy process , sometimes taking weeks .
Brushes used were very fine .
MYSORE PAINTING
Section::::Mysore painting .
Mysore painting is an important form of classical South Indian painting that originated in the town of Mysore in Karnataka .
These paintings are known for their elegance , muted colours and attention to detail .
The themes for most of these paintings are Hindu Gods and Goddesses and scenes from Hindu mythology .
In modern times , these paintings have become a much sought - after souvenir during festive occasions in South India .
The process of making a Mysore painting involves many stages .
The first stage involves the making of the preliminary sketch of the image on the base .
The base consists of cartridge paper pasted on a wooden base .
A paste made of zinc oxide and arabic gum is made called " gesso paste " .
With the help of a thin brush all the jewellery and parts of throne or the arch which have some relief are painted over to give a slightly raised effect of carving .
This is allowed to dry .
On this thin gold foil is pasted .
The rest of the drawing is then painted using watercolours .
Only muted colours are used .
TANJORE PAINTING
Section::::Tanjore painting .
Tanjore painting is an important form of classical South Indian painting native to the town of Tanjore in Tamil Nadu .
The art form dates back to the early 9th century , a period dominated by the Chola rulers , who encouraged art and literature .
These paintings are known for their elegance , rich colours , and attention to detail .
The themes for most of these paintings are Hindu Gods and Goddesses and scenes from Hindu mythology .
In modern times , these paintings have become a much sought - after souvenir during festive occasions in South India .
The process of making a Tanjore painting involves many stages .
The first stage involves the making of the preliminary sketch of the image on the base .
The base consists of a cloth pasted over a wooden base .
Then chalk powder or zinc oxide is mixed with water - soluble adhesive and apply it on the base .
To make the base smoother , a mild abrasive is sometimes used .
After the drawing is made , decoration of the jewelry and the apparels in the image is done with semi - precious stones .
Laces or threads are also used to decorate the jewelry .
On top of this , the gold foils are pasted .
Finally , dyes are used to add colours to the figures in the paintings .
KANGRA PAINTING Section::::Kangra painting .
This style originated in Guler State , in the first half of the 18th century and reached its zenith during the reign of Maharaja Sansar Chand Katoch .
MADHUBANI PAINTING Section::::Madhubani painting .
Madhubani painting is a style of painting , practised in the Mithila region of Bihar state .
Themes revolve around Hindu Gods and mythology , along with scenes from the royal court and social events like weddings .
Generally no space is left empty ; the gaps are filled by paintings of flowers , animals , birds , and even geometric designs .
In this paintings , artists use leaves , herbs , and flowers to make the colour which is used to draw the paintings .
PATTACHITRA Section::::Pattachitra .
Pattachitra refers to the Classical painting of West Bengal and Odisha , in the eastern region of India .
'Patta '
in Sanskrit means ' Vastra ' or ' clothings ' and ' chitra ' means paintings .
The Bengal Patachitra refers to the painting of West Bengal .
It is a traditional and mythological heritage of West Bengal .
The Bengal Patachitra is divided into some different aspects like Durga Pat , Chalchitra , Tribal Patachitra , Medinipur Patachitra , Kalighat Patachitra etc .
The subject matter of Bengal Patachitra is mostly mythological , religious stories , folk lore and social .
The Kalighat Patachitra , the last tradition of Bengal Patachitra is developed by Jamini Roy .
The artist of the Bengal Patachitra is called Patua .
The tradition of Orisha Pattachitra is closely linked with the worship of Lord Jagannath .
Apart from the fragmentary evidence of paintings on the caves of Khandagiri and Udayagiri and Sitabhinji murals of the Sixth century A.D. , the earliest indigenous paintings from Odisha are the Pattachitra done by the Chitrakars ( the painters are called Chitrakars ) .
The theme of Oriya painting centres round the Vaishnava sect .
Since beginning of Pattachitra culture Lord Jagannath who was an incarnation of Lord Krishna was the major source of inspiration .
The subject matter of Patta Chitra is mostly mythological , religious stories and folk lore .
Themes are chiefly on Lord Jagannath and Radha - Krishna , different " Vesas " of Jagannath , Balabhadra and Subhadra , temple activities , the ten incarnations of Vishnu basing on the ' Gita Govinda ' of Jayadev , Kama Kujara Naba Gunjara , Ramayana , Mahabharata .
The individual paintings of gods and goddesses are also being painted .
The painters use vegetable and mineral colours without going for factory made poster colours .
They prepare their own colours .
White colour is made from the conch - shells by powdering , boiling and filtering in a very hazardous process .
It requires a lot of patience .
But this process gives brilliance and premanence to the hue . '
Hingula ' , a mineral colour , is used for red . '
Haritala ' , king of stone ingredients for yellow , ' Ramaraja ' a sort of indigo for blue are being used .
Pure lamp - black or black prepared from the burning of cocoanut shells are used .
The brushes that are used by these ' Chitrakaras ' are also indigenous and are made of hair of domestic animals .
A bunch of hair tied to the end of a bamboo stick make the brush .
It is really a matter of wonder as to how these painters bring out lines of such precision and finish with the help of these crude brushes .
That old tradition of Oriya painting still survives to - day in the skilled hands of Chitrakaras ( traditional painters ) in Puri , Raghurajpur , Paralakhemundi , Chikiti and Sonepur .
BENGAL SCHOOL Section::::Bengal school .
The Bengal School of Art was an influential style of art that flourished in India during the British Raj in the early 20th century .
It was associated with Indian nationalism , but was also promoted and supported by many British arts administrators .
The Bengal school arose as an avant garde and nationalist movement reacting against the academic art styles previously promoted in India , both by Indian artists such as Ravi Varma and in British art schools .
Following the widespread influence of Indian spiritual ideas in the West , the British art teacher Ernest Binfield Havel attempted to reform the teaching methods at the Calcutta School of Art by encouraging students to imitate Mughal miniatures .
This caused immense controversy , leading to a strike by students and complaints from the local press , including from nationalists who considered it to be a retrogressive move .
Havel was supported by the artist Abanindranath Tagore , a nephew of the poet Rabindranath Tagore .
Tagore painted a number of works influenced by Mughal art , a style that he and Havel believed to be expressive of India 's distinct spiritual qualities , as opposed to the " materialism " of the West .
Abanindranath Tagore 's best - known painting , Bharat Mata ( Mother India ) , depicted a young woman , portrayed with four arms in the manner of Hindu deities , holding objects symbolic of India 's national aspirations .
Tagore later attempted to develop links with Far - Eastern artists as part of an aspiration to construct a pan - Asianist model of art .
Those associated with this Indo - FarEastern model included Nandalal Bose , Mukul Dey , Kalipada Ghoshal , Benode Behari Mukherjee , Vinayak Shivaram Masoji ,
B.C. Sanyal , Beohar Rammanohar Sinha , and subsequently their students
A. Ramachandran , Tan Yuan Chameli , Ramananda Bandopadhyay and a few others .
The Bengal school 's influence on Indian art scene gradually started alleviating with the spread of modernist ideas post - independence .
K. G. Subramanyan 's role in this movement is significant .
CONTEXTUAL MODERNISM Section::::Contextual Modernism .
The term Contextual Modernism that Siva Kumar used in the catalogue of the exhibition has emerged as a postcolonial critical tool in the understanding of the art the Santiniketan artists had practised .
Several terms including Paul Gilroy 's counter culture of modernity and Tani Barlow 's Colonial modernity have been used to describe the kind of alternative modernity that emerged in non - European contexts .
Professor Gall argues that ' Contextual Modernism ' is a more suited term because " the colonial in colonial modernity does not accommodate the refusal of many in colonised situations to internalise inferiority .
Santiniketan 's artist teachers ' refusal of subordination incorporated a counter vision of modernity , which sought to correct the racial and cultural essentialism that drove and characterised imperial Western modernity and modernism .
Those European modernities , projected through a triumphant British colonial power , provoked nationalist responses , equally problematic when they incorporated similar essentialisms . "
According to R. Siva Kumar " The Santiniketan artists were one of the first who consciously challenged this idea of modernism by opting out of both internationalist modernism and historicist indigenousness and tried to create a context sensitive modernism . "
He had been studying the work of the Santiniketan masters and thinking about their approach to art since the early 80s .
The practice of subsuming Nandalal Bose , Rabindranath Tagore , Ram Kinker Baij and Benode Behari Mukherjee under the Bengal School of Art was , according to Siva Kumar , misleading .
This happened because early writers were guided by genealogies of apprenticeship rather than their styles , worldviews , and perspectives on art practice .
The literary critic Ranjit Hoskote while reviewing the works of contemporary artist Atul Dodiya writes , " The exposure to Santinketan , through a literary detour , opened Dodiya 's eyes to the historical circumstances of what the art historian R Siva Kumar has called a " contextual modernism " developed in eastern India in the 1930s and ' 40s during the turbulent decades of the global Depression , the Gandhian liberation struggle , the Tagorean cultural renaissance and World War II . "
Contextual Modernism in the recent past has found its usage in other related fields of studies , specially in Architecture .
MODERN INDIAN PAINTING Section::::Modern Indian Painting .
During the colonial era , Western influences started to make an impact on Indian art .
Some artists developed a style that used Western ideas of composition , perspective and realism to illustrate Indian themes .
Others , like Jamini Roy , consciously drew inspiration from folk art .
Bharti Dayal has chosen to handle the traditional Mithila Painting in most contemporary way and uses both realism as well abstractionism in her work with a lot of fantasy mixed in to both .Her
work has an impeccable sense of balance , harmony and grace .
By the time of Independence in 1947 , several schools of art in India provided access to modern techniques and ideas .
Galleries were established to showcase these artists .
Modern Indian art typically shows the influence of Western styles , but is often inspired by Indian themes and images .
Major artists are beginning to gain international recognition , initially among the Indian diaspora , but also among non - Indian audiences .
The Progressive Artists ' Group , established shortly after India became independent in 1947 , was intended to establish new ways of expressing India in the post - colonial era .
The founders were six eminent artists – K. H. Ara , S. K. Bakre , H. A. Gade , M.F. Husain , S.H. Raza and F. N. Souza , though the group was dissolved in 1956 , it was profoundly influential in changing the idiom of Indian art .
Almost all India 's major artists in the 1950s were associated with the group .
Some of those who are well - known today are Bal Chabda , Manishi Dey , V. S. Gaitonde , Krishen Khanna , Ram Kumar , Tyeb Mehta , Beohar Rammanohar Sinha and Akbar Padamsee .
Other famous painters like Jahar Dasgupta , Prokash Karmakar , John Wilkins , and Bijon Choudhuri enriched the art culture of India .
They have become the icon of modern Indian art .
Art historians like Prof. Rai Anand Krishna have also referred to those works of modern artistes that reflect Indian ethos .
Also , the increase in the discourse about Indian art , in English as well as vernacular Indian languages , appropriated the way art was perceived in the art schools .
Critical approach became rigorous , critics like Geeta Kapur , R .
Siva Kumar , contributed to re - thinking contemporary art practice in India .
Their voices represented Indian art not only in India but across the world .
The critics also had an important role as curators of important exhibitions , re - defining modernism and Indian - art .
Indian Art got a boost with the economic liberalisation of the country since the early 1990s .
Artists from various fields now started bringing in varied styles of work .
Post - liberalisation Indian art thus works not only within the confines of academic traditions but also outside it .
In this phase , artists have introduced even newer concepts which have hitherto not been seen in Indian art .
Devajyoti Ray has introduced a new genre of art called Pseudorealism .
Pseudorealist Art is an original art style that has been developed entirely on the Indian soil .
Pseudorealism takes into account the Indian concept of abstraction and uses it to transform regular scenes of Indian life into a fantastic images .
In post - liberalisation India , many artists have established themselves in the international art market like Anish Kapoor and Chintan whose mammoth artworks have acquired attention for their sheer size .
Many art houses and galleries have also opened in USA and Europe to showcase Indian artworks .
Some artists like chiman dangi(painter , printmaker )
Bhupat Dudi , Subodh Gupta , Piu Sarkar , Vagaram Choudhary , Amitava Sengupta and many others have done magic worldwide .
Chhaya Ghosh is a gifted painter , and is pretty active in Triveni Art Gallery , New Delhi .
VERNACULAR INDIAN PAINTING Section::::Vernacular Indian Painting .
Vernacular art is an art alive ( contemporary art ) , based on the past ( the mythes , the traditions and the religion ) and made by defined groups .
Vernacular art is based on the collective memory of this group .
Examples of Vernacular Indian Painting : Tribal Painting :
* Bhil painting
* Warli painting *
Gond painting *
Santhal painting * Saora painting
* Kurumba painting Rural Painting :
* Pattachitra painting * Madhubani painting
* Kalamkari painting
* Kolam painting * Kalam painting * Mandana Paintings GALLERY SOME NOTABLE
INDIAN PAINTINGS
* Hemen Majumdar 's " Lady with the Lamp " * Sudip Roy 's " Charulata Series " * Rabindranath Tagore 's " Self portrait " * Abanindranath Tagore 's Bharat Mata * Raja Ravi Varma 's Shakuntala * Ramkinkar Baij 's " Jakkha 0 Jakkhi " * Bikash Bhattacharjee 's " Doll - series " * Geeta Vadhera 's Jogia " Dhoop series " * Jahar Dasgupta 's " Confrontation " * MF Hussain 's " Horses - series "
* Jamini Roy 's " Jesus " * John Wilkins 's " Gossip " , * Rakesh Vijay " Persian and Mogul styles " * Jainul Abedin 's " Series on Bengal Famine " * Sunil Das 's " Bull Series " *
Devajyoti Ray 's " In Despair " * Tyeb Mehta 's " Mahisasur " * B. G. Sharma 's Krishna miniatures * ShakthiDass 's * Amrita - Sher - Gil * M. Narayan 's " Indian Ethnic " " Horses " Mother Teresa " SEE ALSO * Warli Painting *
Painting * History of painting * Eastern art history
* Cave paintings in India *
Rabindra Chitravali NOTES FURTHER READING * Indian Painting , by Percy Brown .
Published by Y. M. C. A. publishing house , 1960 .
* Indian Painting , by Philip S. Rawson .
Published by P.Tisné , 1961 .
* Indian Painting : The Scene , Themes , and Legends , by Mohindar Singh Randhawa , John Kenneth Galbraith .
Published by Houghton Mifflin , 1968 .
* Indian Painting , by Douglas E. Barrett , Basil Gray .
Published by Skira , 1978 . .
* Kossak , Steven .
( 1997 ) .
Indian court painting , 16th–19th century .
Metropolitan Museum of Art .
* A History of Indian Painting : The Modern Period by Krishna Chaitanya .
Published by Abhinav Publications , 1994 . .
*
Ramayana by Valmiki illustrated with Indian miniatures from the 16th to the 19th century , Diane de Selliers Publisher , 2011 , EXTERNAL LINKS * Indian State Traditional Paintings
* Miniature Painting , Wall paintings , and modern Indian painting , Indian Government , Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
* Archaeological Survey of India * Mithila Paintings or Madhubani Paintings
*
Online exhibits * Metmuseum.org