THROW - IN
A throw - in is a method of restarting play in a game of football ( or soccer )
when the ball has exited the side of the field of play .
PROCEDURE Section::::Procedure .
The throw - in is taken from the point where the ball crossed the touch - line , either on the ground or in the air , though typically a referee will tolerate small discrepancies between the position where the ball crossed the touch - line and the position of the throw - in .
The throw - in is taken by the opponents of the player who last touched the ball when it crossed the touch - line .
Opposing players may stand at any distance from the thrower but no closer than , so long as they are still on the pitch .
A player may take a throw - in at a distance further back from the touch - line .
At the moment of delivering the ball , the thrower must face the field of play .
The thrower must have part of each foot on the touchline or on the ground outside the touchline , and use both hands to deliver the ball from behind and over the head .
The ball becomes in play as soon as it enters the field of play and leaves the hands of the thrower .
A goal can not be scored directly from a throw - in ; if a player throws the ball directly into their own goal without any other player touching it , the result is a corner kick to the opposing side .
Likewise an offensive goal can not be scored directly from a throw in ; the result , in this case , is a goal kick for the defending team .
A player may not be penalised for an offside offence when receiving the ball directly from a throw - in .
Skillful attackers can sometimes take advantage of this rule by getting behind the last defender(s ) to receive the throw - in and having a clear path to goal .
The optimal release angle for attaining maximum distance is about 30 degrees above the horizontal , according to researchers at Brunel University .
According to the study , players are able to throw the ball with greater release velocity for lower angles .
The optimal angle would be 45 degrees if the release velocity did not depend on the angle of throw , if the ball were thrown from ground level instead of above the head , and if there was not air drag .
INFRINGEMENTS Section::::Infringements .
If an opposing player fails to respect the required distance ( 2 m ) before the ball is in play or otherwise unfairly distracts or impedes the thrower , he or she may receive a caution ( yellow card ) for unsporting behaviour .
If the thrower fails to deliver the ball per the required procedure , or delivers it from a point other than where the ball left the field of play , the throw - in is awarded to the opposing team .
This is commonly known as a " foul throw " , though such throws are not considered fouls .
It is an infringement for the thrower to touch the ball a second time until it has been touched by another player ; this is punishable by an indirect free kick to the opposing team from where the offence occurred , unless the second touch was also a more serious handling offence , in which case it is punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick .
It is legal to throw the ball into the goal with no contact ; however , a goal will not be scored directly from a throw in , nor can an own - goal , without being touched by a player .
The restarts are a goal kick for the defending team and a corner kick for the attacking team , respectively .
If any player ( legally ) touches the ball before it goes into the goal , then a goal is scored .
A goalkeeper can not handle a ball thrown directly to him or her by a teammate .
This can not be circumvented by the keeper using the feet first before handling the ball .
If this infringement occurs within the goalkeeper 's penalty area , an indirect free kick is awarded .
If the infringement occurs outside the goalkeeper 's penalty area , a direct free kick is awarded .
HISTORY
BEFORE 1863 Section::::History . Section::::Before 1863 .
A detailed description of an early predecessor of the throw - in is recorded in the novel Tom Brown 's School Days , published in 1857 but based on the author 's experiences at Rugby School from 1834 to 1842 : Several features of this passages are notable : * possession is awarded to the first player to touch the ball after it goes out of play
( this is the origin of the term " touch " for the area beyond the field of play )
* the ball must be played " straight out "
( i.e. perpendicular to the touch - line )
* the player must " knock " or " strike " the ball back into play
The 1851 rules of Rugby School describe a similar procedure , except that the ball is thrown in rather than struck or hit ; this is the ancestor of the line - out in rugby union :
Similar " throw - in " laws are found in the Cambridge rules of 1856 , the Sheffield rules of 1858 , the laws of Melbourne FC ( 1859 ) , and indeed the original FA laws of 1863 ( see below ) .
Other codes had a kick - in rather than a throw - in .
These included the " Foot - Ball Club " of Edinburgh ( 1833 ) , Harrow football ( 1858 ) , Barnes FC ( 1862 ) , Blackheath FC ( 1862 ) , and the later version of the Cambridge rules from November 1863 .
Some of these laws permitted the ball to be kicked in any direction , while others required that it be perpendicular to the touch - line .
The Eton field game 's rules , as recorded in 1847 , specified that a throw - in and a " bully " ( scrummage ) should be used alternately , while its 1857 rules used the bully exclusively .
THE FA LAWS OF 1863 Section::::The FA laws of 1863 .
The throw - in law initially adopted by the Football Association in 1863 is very similar to those of Rugby School and Sheffield described earlier : The original draft permitted the ball to the kicked or thrown , but the option of kicking was removed during the revision process .
The throw - in from the 1863 rules features several differences from the throw - in in modern association football :
* possession is awarded to the first player to touch the ball after it goes out of play ( in the modern game , it is awarded against the team last touching the ball before it goes out of play )
* the ball must be thrown perpendicular to the touch - line ( in the modern game , the ball may be thrown in any direction )
* the manner in which the ball is thrown is not specified ( in the modern game , the ball must be thrown with two hands from above the head )
SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENTS UNITY WITH SHEFFIELD RULES Section::::Subsequent developments .
Section::::Unity with Sheffield rules .
In 1867 , the laws of the Sheffield Football Association awarded the throw - in against the team kicking the ball out of play .
In 1868 , these Sheffield rules were revised further to award a kick - in instead of a throw - in .
It continued to be awarded against the team who kicked the ball into touch , and could now be played in any direction .
In 1873 , Nottingham Forest FC proposed a change in the FA 's throw - in law to make it more similar to the Sheffield rule : the throw - in would be awarded against the team who kicked out of play , and it could optionally be replaced by a kick - in .
Only part of the suggested change was approved by the FA 's meeting : the throw - in would be awarded against the team who kicked the ball out of play , but it could not be replaced by a kick - in .
It was still required to be thrown in perpendicular to the touch - line .
At the FA meetings of 1875 and 1876 , the Sheffield clubs attempted to introduce their kick - in into the FA 's laws .
Both times the change was narrowly rejected after heated debate .
Matters came to a head in 1877 .
At the regular meeting of the FA , in February , the Sheffield Association again proposed its kick - in rule , while Clydesdale FC proposed a compromise rule which retained the throw - in but allowed it to go in any direction .
The Sheffield Association agreed to withdraw its own proposal in favour of Clydesdale FC 's compromise .
However , even this compromise proposal was rejected , " to the intense regret of those who desired one common code of rules " .
This rejection prompted the publication of a pseudonymous letter in The Sportsman decrying the " hasty , ill - judged decision ... bringing the Football Association into disrepute " , and denying that it represented " the general body of [ Football ] Association players -- even of those in London " .
A subsequent extraordinary general meeting of the FA was held on the 17th of April , at which the Clydesdale amendment was reconsidered and passed .
As a result of this change in the FA laws , the Sheffield Association held a meeting one week later at which it agreed to abandon its own rules and accept the FA laws .
As a result of these developments , the throw - in of 1877 looked quite similar to today 's : it was awarded against the team who kicked the ball out of play , and it could be thrown in any direction .
There was no restriction on the technique by which the ball could be thrown ; players would throw the ball great distances using only one arm .
It is reported that the England international Norman Bailey was capable of propelling the ball " from the centre of the ground into the goal mouth " .
UNITY WITH SCOTLAND Section::::Unity with Scotland .
In December 1882 , an " international conference " was held to address discrepancies between the laws used by the English , Scottish , Welsh and Irish football associations .
One of the topics settled at this conference was the throw - in : the Scottish laws required the ball to be thrown in over the head with two hands , while the English laws , as described above , allowed the ball to be thrown with one hand in any direction .
As a result of the conference , the Scottish version of the throw - in law was accepted .
This new throw - in law , requiring the ball to be thrown from over the head with two hands , was formally adopted by the FA in 1883 .
SCORING A GOAL FROM A THROW - IN
Section::::Scoring a goal from a throw - in .
The laws of the game have never permitted a goal to be scored directly from a throw - in by the attacking team .
In 1882 , a change in the laws , introduced by N. Lane Jackson of Finchley FC and Morton Betts of Old Harrovians FC , made it possible to score an own goal directly from a throw - in .
This possibility was removed in 1898 .
OFFSIDE FROM A THROW - IN Section::::Offside from a throw - in .
Under the original laws of 1863 , it was not possible to be offside from a throw - in ; however , since the ball was required to be thrown in at right - angles to the touch - line , it would have been unusual for a player to gain significant advantage from being ahead of the ball .
After the ball was permitted to be thrown in any direction in 1877 , the very next year ( 1878 ) a new law was introduced to allow a player to be offside from a throw - in .
This situation lasted until 1920 , when the law was altered to prevent a player being offside from a throw - in .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS
Section::::Other requirements .
Since 1866 , the player taking the throw - in has been forbidden to touch the ball again until it has been touched by another player .
In 1895 , the player taking the throw - in was required to face the field of play .
In 1896 , the player was required to have " any part of both feet on the [ touch]-line when he throws the ball " .
In 1925 , this was changed to " both feet on the ground outside the line " , and in 1932 to " both feet on or outside the touch - line " .
Since 2005 , opponents have been forbidden from approaching closer than 2 metres to the player taking the throw - in .
This change was made because FIFA perceived " an increasing trend for an opponent to stand immediately in front of the thrower at a throw - in , with his feet virtually on the touch - line " , with the result that " the thrower is being impeded from completing the throw - in " .
There was also a concern about the possibility of " a confrontational situation developing between both players . "
DEFUNCT REQUIREMENTS
Section::::Defunct requirements .
In 1866 , players were forbidden from playing the ball before it had touched the ground .
This requirement was removed when the Clydesdale throw - in law was adopted in 1877 .
In 1871 a law - change introduced by Wanderers FC forbade players from playing the ball until it had travelled at least six yards .
This requirement was dropped when the Scottish throw - in law was adopted in 1883 .
PUNISHMENT FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE THROW - IN LAW Section::::Punishment for violations of the throw - in law .
In 1882 , an indirect free - kick was awarded for any violation of the throw - in law .
In 1931 , on a proposal by the Irish Football Association , this was changed to an award of the throw - in the opposing team ( except for a violation of the double - touch rule , which remained punishable by an indirect free - kick ) .
NAME Section::::Name .
The name " throw - in " is first found in the laws of 1891 .
SUMMARY UNUSUAL THROW - INS
Section::::Unusual throw - ins .
Rory Delap was highlighted for his throw - in technique : a former schoolboy javelin champion , Delap was renowned for having one of the longest and most powerful throw - ins in football .
An uncommon but effective technique for delivering a faster than usual throw is the flip throw ( notably employed in recent years by , among others , Estonian player Risto Kallaste , and Icelander Steinthor Freyr Thorsteinsson ) : in it the player , during the run - up , plants the ball on the ground , flips over it , and uses the momentum gained from the flip to increase the velocity of the ball .
In the Guinness Book of World Records the Danish player Thomas Grønemark is recorded to have made a throw - in of 51.33 metres .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * FIFA Laws of the Game – Law 15 )
* Q&A on Throw Ins(from AskTheRef.com )