AMERICAN CHEESE American cheese is a type of processed cheese .
It can be orange , yellow , or white in color , is mild , salty , and faintly sweet in flavor , has a medium - firm consistency , and has a very low melting point .
Very early in its history , American cheese was only white in color — as it was made from a blend of cheeses ( most often including cheddar cheese ) which were originally only white .
However , the later versions are often a yellow hue due to the addition of annatto , a sweet and nutty seasoning added to cheddar and to Colby so that by the late 1800s American cheese was often simply called " yellow cheese " .
Today 's American cheese is , by law , required to be manufactured from at least two types of cheese .
Because its manufacturing process differs from " unprocessed " traditional cheeses , American cheese can not be legally sold under the name ( authentic ) " cheese " in the US .
Instead , federal laws mandate that it be labeled as " processed cheese " if simply made from combining more than one cheese , or " cheese food " if dairy ingredients such as cream , milk , skim milk , buttermilk , cheese whey , or albumin from cheese whey are added .
As a result , sometimes even the word " cheese " is absent altogether from the product 's labeling in favor of , e.g. , " American slices " or " American singles " .
In the United Kingdom , packs of individually wrapped slices are labeled as " singles " , although they are commonly referred to as " cheese slices " .
The previously used marketing term , " American cheese " , for processed cheese – combined with the commonality of processed cheeses in the US , versus outside it – has led to the terms American cheese and " processed cheese " to often be confused outside the United States .
However , the term " American cheese " has a legal definition as a type of pasteurized processed cheese under the American Code of Federal Regulations .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
British colonists made cheddar cheese soon upon their arrival in North America .
By 1790 , American cheddars were being exported back to England .
According to Robert Carlton Brown , author of The Complete Book of Cheese , " The English called our imitation Yankee , or American , Cheddar , while here at home it was popularly known as yellow or store cheese " .
In 1878 , the total export of American cheese was 355 million pounds per year , with an expected growth to 1,420 million pounds .
After the invention of processed cheese in 1911 , and its subsequent popularization by James L. Kraft in the late-1910s and the 1920s , the term " American cheese " rapidly began to refer to this variety , instead of the traditional but more expensive cheddars also made and sold in the US .
The latter had already begun to be produced on an industrial scale in the 1890s , leading to the term " factory cheese " .
The Oxford English Dictionary defines American cheese as a " cheese of cheddar type , made in the U.S. " and lists 1804 as the first known usage of " American cheese " , occurring in the Frankfort , Kentucky newspaper Guardian of Freedom .
The next usage given is in 1860 by Charles Dickens in his series The Noncommercial Traversal .
The English method of producing cheddar cheese was known in America as " the Joseph Harding Method " .
MODERN VARIETIES Section::::Modern varieties .
Even though the term " American cheese " has a legal definition in the United States as a type of pasteurized processed cheese , and is actually something different , products called " cheese product " are by no means identical .
Depending on the additives and the amounts of milk fat , oil , and water added during emulsification , the taste and texture of solid American cheese varies .
As a result , some varieties ( e.g. , " American cheese " and " American processed cheese " ) bear remarkable similarity to traditional / unprocessed cheeses , while other varieties ( e.g. , " American cheese food " and " American cheese product " ) are much more like Velveeta or Cheez Whiz .
The taste and texture of different varieties of American cheese vary considerably .
Depending on the food manufacturer , the color of the cheese ( orange , yellow , or white ) may indicate different ingredients or processes .
Typically , yellow to orange American cheese is made with cheeses ( such as Cheddar or Colby cheese ) that are seasoned with annatto , while white American cheese is made with cheeses ( such as White Cheddar or Jack cheese ) which do not contain annatto .
The processed variety of American cheese is sold in three basic packaging varieties : individually - wrapped cheese slices ( which are not sliced from a block of cheese , but rather slabs of processed cheese which are formed from a viscous processed cheese which only solidifies between the wrapping medium ) ; small , pre - sliced blocks of 8 to 36 slices ; and large blocks meant for use behind deli counters .
The individually - wrapped cheese slices are , typically , the least like traditional cheese .
Small blocks of pre - sliced ( e.g. , 8–36 slices ) , unwrapped American cheese are also marketed , often with the branding " deluxe " or " old - fashioned " ; this variety of American cheese is similar in ingredients and texture to that of modern block American cheese .
Before the advent of the individually - wrapped variety , this was the typical variety that Americans purchased .
Hence , some people refer to this as " classic " or " traditional " American cheese .
MARKET SIZE Section::::Market size .
Americans purchased about $ 2.77 billion worth of American cheese in 2018 , but the popularity is falling and according to Bloomberg News , sales are projected to drop 1.6 % in 2018 .
The average price for a pound of American is below $ 4 for the first time since 2011 .
SEE ALSO
* List of cheeses * List of dairy products
* Government cheese *
Kraft Singles
* Velveeta * Provel * Cheez Whiz * Easy Cheese *
Chile con queso
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
Making American cheese on the farm for home consumption ,
Farmers ' Bulletin No . 1734 , U.S. Department of Agriculture , October 1934 .
Hosted at University of North Texas Government Documents Department .
* An American - type cheese : how to make it for home use , Farmers ' Bulletin No . 2075 , U.S. Department of Agriculture , October 1954 .