COMMUNITY INTEREST COMPANY
A community interest company ( CIC ) is a type of company introduced by the United Kingdom government in 2005 under the Companies ( Audit , Investigations and Community Enterprise ) Act 2004 , designed for social enterprises that want to use their profits and assets for the public good .
CICs are intended to be easy to set up , with all the flexibility and certainty of the company form , but with some special features to ensure they are working for the benefit of the community .
They have proved popular and some 10,000 registered in the status 's first 10 years .
AS SOCIAL ENTERPRISE Section::::As
social enterprise .
A community interest company is a business with primary social objectives whose surpluses are principally reinvested for that purpose in the business or in the community , rather than being driven by the need to maximise profit for shareholders and owners .
CICs tackle a wide range of social and environmental issues and operate in all parts of the economy .
By using business solutions to achieve public good , it is believed that CICs have a distinct and valuable role to play in helping create a strong , sustainable and socially inclusive economy .
The community interest company emerged from a number of sources , many citing the absence in the UK of a company form for not - for - profit social enterprises similar to the public benefit corporation in the USA .
One early notable proposal was advanced in 2001 by the Public Management Foundation in " The case for the public interest company " , based on research supported by the Gulbenkian Foundation , Gordon Roddick and the Office for Public Management .
CICs are diverse .
They include social and community enterprises , social firms , mutual organisations such as co - operatives , and large - scale organisations operating locally , regionally , nationally or internationally .
LEGAL FORMS AND SOCIAL OBJECTIVES
Section::::Legal forms and social objectives .
CICs must be limited companies of one form or another .
A CIC can not be a charity , an IPS or an unincorporated organisation .
Regular limited liability companies that do not have charitable status find it difficult to ensure that their assets are dedicated to public benefit .
There is no simple , clear way of locking assets of such a company to a public benefit purpose other than applying for charitable status .
The community interest company is intended to meet this need .
When a CIC is requested , the CIC regulator considers whether applications meet the criteria to become a CIC .
If satisfied , the regulator advises the registrar in Companies House who , provided that all the documents are in order , will issue a certificate of incorporation as a CIC .
A charity can convert to a CIC with the consent of the Charity Commission .
In so doing it will lose its charitable status including tax advantages .
A charity may own a CIC , in which case the CIC would be permitted to pass assets to the charity .
CICs are more lightly regulated than charities but do not have the benefit of charitable status , even if their objects are entirely charitable in nature .
Those who may want to set up a CIC are expected to be philanthropic entrepreneurs who want to do good in a form other than charity .
This may be because :
* CICs are specifically identified with social enterprise .
Some organisations may feel that this is more suitable than charitable status .
* Members of the board of a charity may only be paid where the constitution contains such a power and it can be considered to be in the best interests of the charity .
It means that , in general , the founder of a social enterprise who wishes to be paid can not be on the board and must give up strategic control of the organisation to a volunteer board , which is often unacceptable .
This limitation does not apply to CICs .
*
They are looking to work for community benefit with the relative freedom of the non - charitable company form to identify and adapt to circumstances , but with a clear assurance of not - for - profit distribution status .
*
The definition of community interest that applies to CICs is wider than the public interest test for charity .
FORMATION AND REGISTRATION Section::::Formation and registration .
The formation and registration is similar to that of any limited company .
New organisations can register by filing the Form IN01 and memorandum and articles of association together with a form CIC36 signed by all their directors , explaining their community credentials to the Registrar of Companies for England and Wales , or the Registrar for Scotland with a fee of £ 35 .
Existing companies can convert to a CIC by passing resolutions which make changes to their name and to their memorandum and articles of association and by delivering to the Registrar of Companies copies of these documents , together with a fee for £ 35 , and a form CIC37 ( which is similar to a CIC36 , but asks for confirmation that the company is not a charity , or that permission has been obtained from the Charity Commission to convert from a charity to a CIC ) .
The Registrar will conduct the normal checks for registration and pass the papers to the Regulator of Community Interest Companies , to determine whether the company satisfies the community interest test .
CICs can not :
* be politically motivated ( see regulation 3 of the Community Interest Company Regulations 2005 ( " CIC Regs " ) ) * be set up to serve an unduly restrictive group ( see regulations 4 & 5 of the CIC Regs )
* be a charity
* carry out unlawful activities SEE ALSO * B Corporation ( certification )
* Community Contribution Companies *
Social entrepreneurship * L3C ( similar type of legal structure in the United States ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Community Interest Companies Regulator
* CIC Association website * Social Enterprise and Business Structures in Canada Discussion paper on work being done in Canada to create a unique social enterprise legal business structure , using the UK example .