THE BOY IN THE PLASTIC BUBBLE
The Boy in the Plastic Bubble is a 1976 American made - for - television drama film inspired by the lives of David Vetter and Ted DeVita , who lacked effective immune systems .
It stars John Travolta , Glynnis O'Connor , Diana Hyland , Robert Reed , Ralph Bellamy & P.J. Soles .
It was written by Douglas Day Stewart , executive produced by Aaron Spelling and Leonard Goldberg ( who , at the time , produced Starsky and Hutch and Charlie 's Angels ) , and directed by Randal Kleiser , who would work with Travolta again in Grease shortly after .
The original music score was composed by Mark Snow .
The theme song " What Would They Say " was written and sung by Paul Williams .
William Howard
Taft High School in Woodland Hills was used for filming .
The movie first aired on November 12 , 1976 , on the ABC television network .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
John and Mickey Lubitch conceive a child .
After multiple previous miscarriages and the death of their first son ( who was born without a functioning immune system ) , Mickey fears the likelihood that something gravely wrong could happen to their child .
John assures her that the odds of their next child being born with the same condition are low .
The pregnancy results in the birth of a live baby boy , whom they name Tod .
Tod 's immune system also does not function properly , meaning that contact with unfiltered air may kill him .
John and Mickey are told he may have live out his entire life in incubator - like conditions .
After a strenuous four years of Tod living in the hospital , Mickey convinces John to find a way to bring Tod home .
He lives with his parents , in Houston , Texas .
He is restricted to staying in his room all his life , where he eats , learns , reads , and exercises , while being protected from the outside world by various coverings .
As Tod grows , he wishes to see more of the outside world and meet regular people his age .
He is enrolled at the local school after being equipped with suitable protective clothing , similar in style to a space suit .
He falls in love with his next door neighbor , Gina Biggs , and he must decide between following his heart and facing near - certain death , or remaining in his protective bubble forever .
In the end , after having a discussion with his doctor who tells him he has built up some immunities which may possibly be enough to survive the real world , he steps outside his house , unprotected , and he and Gina ride off on her horse .
MAIN CAST
* John Travolta as Tod Lubitch
* Glynnis O'Connor as Gina Biggs
* Robert Reed as Johnny Lubitch * Diana Hyland as Mickey Lubitch
* Ralph Bellamy as Dr. Gunther
* P.J. Soles as Deborah * Kelly Ward as Tom Shuster * Vernee Watson as Gwen RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The " Bubble Boy " who inspired this film , David Vetter , questioned the film 's depiction of how sterile Tod 's use of the spacesuit was .
Vetter scoffed at the idea that Travolta 's character could simply wear the space suit back into the isolator without contaminating the bubble .
The film was nominated for four Emmy Awards , winning one posthumously for Hyland .
Travolta 's positive experiences on the film led him to request Kleiser as director when he was cast as the lead in the 1978 film Grease ; Kelly Ward also appeared in that film .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
Days after Bill Clinton was inaugurated as U.S. President , William Safire reported on the phrase " in the bubble " as used in reference to living in the White House .
Safire traced that usage in U.S. presidential politics to a passage in the 1990 political memoir What I Saw at the Revolution by Peggy Noonan , where she used it to characterize Ronald Reagan 's " wistfulness about connection " ; Richard Ben Cramer used the phrase two years later in What It Takes : The Way to the White House with reference to George H. W. Bush and how he had been " cosseted and cocooned in comfort by 400 people devoted to his security " and " never s[aw ]
one person who was not a friend or someone whose sole purpose it was to serve or protect him .
"
Noonan 's use was a reference to The Boy in the Plastic Bubble .
The film inspired the first song on the 1986 Paul Simon album Graceland .
In 1992 , the film 's premise was satirized in the seventh episode of the fourth season of Seinfeld .
It was also the subject of the 2001 comedic remake Bubble Boy and the 2007 musical In the Bubble produced by American Music Theatre Project and featuring a book by Rinne Groff , music by Michael Friedman and Joe Popp and lyrics by Friedman , Groff and Popp .
The film was mentioned several times on the series
That ' 70s Show , in the episodes of NCIS " SWAK " and " Thirst " , on the Family Guy episode " The Father , The Son and The Holy Fonz " and in the film Superstar .
In " Thirst " " Very Special Agent " Tony DiNozzo mentions it to partner Tim McGee , who asks if it was " pre or post Barbarino " to which Tony says that he thinks it was post , suggesting that Tim watch it on Netflix .
It was actually during Welcome Back , Kotter , which began in 1975 .
The film had a personal impact on Travolta and Hyland , who began a six - month romantic relationship until her death , after the film ended principal photography .
On Dance Moms Series 6
Abby Lee Miller said the girls are doing a dance which is inspired by the movie .
SEE ALSO
* Bubble Boy
* List of television films produced for American Broadcasting Company REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Boy in the Plastic Bubble on YouTube
*
The Boy in the Plastic Bubble , listed as " Public Domain " at Desert Island Films Pro