HOLE IN ONE
In golf , a hole in one or hole - in - one ( also known as an ace , mostly in American English ) occurs when a ball hit from a tee finishes in the cup .
This awards the player a score of one for the hole due to the fact that it took them one stroke to get the ball in the hole , but the score would be higher if the player is making a second shot from the tee due to a lost ball , out of bounds or water hazard .
Holes in one most commonly occur on par 3 holes , the shortest distance holes on a standard size golf course .
Longer hitters have also accomplished this feat on longer holes , though nearly all par 4 and par 5 holes are too long for golfers to reach in a single shot .
While well known outside of golf and often requiring a well hit shot and significant power , holes in one needs also a significant element of luck .
As such , they are more common and considered less impressive than other hole accomplishments such as completing a par 5 in two shots ( an albatross ) .
, a condor ( four under par ) hole - in - one on a par 5 hole had been recorded on four occasions , aided by thin air at high altitude , or by cutting the corner on a doglegged or horseshoe - shaped hole .
Holes - in - one ( " aces " ) are also recorded in disc golf .
The current world record for disc golf 's longest hole in one is held by Brent Bell , who set the record at the 2002 Big Sky State Games at the Diamond X Disc Golf Course in Billings , Montana .
RARITY Section::::Rarity .
Holes in one are rare , and , although skill definitely increases the probability , there is a great element of luck involved .
It is traditional for a player who has scored a hole in one to buy a round of drinks for everyone at the clubhouse bar .
Among the memorable holes in one , one occurred in the 1973 British Open
when at age 71 , Gene Sarazen made a hole in one .
Earl Dietering of Memphis , Tennessee , 78 years old at the time , is believed to hold the record for the eldest person to make a hole - in - one twice during one round .
During the second round of the 1971 Martini International tournament , held at the Royal Norwich Golf Club in England , John Hudson had two consecutive holes in one .
Teeing off , using a 4-iron , at the par - three , 195-yard 11th hole , Hudson holed his tee shot for a hole - in - one .
At the next hole , the downhill 311-yard , par - four 12th , and this time using a driver , he once again holed his tee shot , for another ace .
This is believed to be the only time a player has scored holes - in - one at consecutive holes in a major professional tournament .
Despite the relative rarity of holes in one , there have been a total of six in Ryder Cup matches .
Peter Butler scored the first in 1973 at Muirfield followed by a 20-year gap before Nick Faldo scored a hole in one in 1993 .
Two years later , Costantino Rocca and Howard Clark both scored holes in one before an 11-year gap to 2006 saw Paul Casey and Scott Verplank both hole out in one on the 14th hole .
On August 11 , 2016 , Justin Rose shot a hole in one during the first round of the golf tournament of the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro , which is considered to be the first in Olympic history .
For the 189 yards 3-par hole , he used a 7-iron . COMPETITIONS Section::::Competitions .
Occasionally special events host a hole in one contest , where prizes as expensive as a new car , or cash awards sometimes reaching $ 4 million are offered if a contestant records a hole in one .
Usually such expensive prizes are backed by an insurance company who offers prize indemnification services .
Actuaries at such companies have calculated the chance of an average golfer making a hole in one at approximately 12,500 to 1 , and the odds of a tour professional at 2,500 to 1 .
HOLES - IN - ONE
ON PAR 5 ( OR HIGHER ) HOLES Section::::Holes - in - one on par 5 ( or higher ) holes .
As of October 2008 , a condor ( four under par ) hole - in - one on a par 5 hole had been recorded on four occasions , aided by thin air at high altitude , or by cutting the corner on a doglegged or horseshoe - shaped hole .
A horseshoe - shaped par 5 hole once enabled a condor hole in one to be achieved with a 3-iron club .
The longest recorded straight drive hole - in - one is believed to be , on the par 5 No . 9 hole at Green Valley Ranch Golf Club in Denver in 2002 , aided by the thin air due to the high altitude .
None of these four par 5 holes - in - one were achieved during a professional tournament .
A condor is also known as a double albatross , or a triple eagle .
KIM JONG - IL MYTH Section::::Kim Jong - il myth .
Over a period of several years , many U.S. and European media outlets – including ESPN and the New York Times – reported that former North Korean Supreme Leader Kim Jong - il was claimed to have shot five holes in one during his first attempt at playing golf ( an alternate version of the story claims North Korean media once reported Kim had shot 18 holes in one ) .
This is explained as a case of the North Korean government assigning supernatural feats of heroism to its leaders as part of an effort to perpetuate a cult of personality .
This myth was originally published by Eric Ellis , a reporter for the Australian Financial Review , as having been told by a Pyongyang Golf Club professional in 1994 .
NK News reports that " informal surveys of North Koreans themselves revealed that no one in Pyongyang was aware of this legendary feat , unless told it by a tourist . "
Richard Seers , a British journalist who played at the Pyongyang Golf Club asked officials there , who revealed it was nothing more than an urban myth .
SEE ALSO
* Golf glossary REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hole - In - One FAQs United States Golf Association