DRAG ( PHYSICS ) !
Shape and flow !
FormDrag !
Skinfriction
In fluid dynamics , drag ( sometimes called air resistance , a type of friction , or fluid resistance , another type of friction or fluid friction ) is a force acting opposite to the relative motion of any object moving with respect to a surrounding fluid .
This can exist between two fluid layers ( or surfaces ) or a fluid and a solid surface .
Unlike other resistive forces , such as dry friction , which are nearly independent of velocity , drag forces depend on velocity .
Drag force is proportional to the velocity for a laminar flow and the squared velocity for a turbulent flow .
Even though the ultimate cause of a drag is viscous friction , the turbulent drag is independent of viscosity .
Drag forces always decrease fluid velocity relative to the solid object in the fluid 's path .
EXAMPLES OF DRAG Section::::Examples of drag .
Examples of drag include the component of the net aerodynamic or hydrodynamic force acting opposite to the direction of movement of a solid object such as cars , aircraft and boat hulls ; or acting in the same geographical direction of motion as the solid , as for sails attached to a down wind sail boat , or in intermediate directions on a sail depending on points of sail .
In the case of viscous drag of fluid in a pipe , drag force on the immobile pipe decreases fluid velocity relative to the pipe .
In physics of sports , the drag force is necessary to explain the performance of runners , particularly of sprinters .
TYPES OF DRAG Section::::Types of drag .
Types of drag are generally divided into the following categories : * parasitic drag , consisting of * form drag , * skin friction , * interference drag , * lift - induced drag , and * wave drag ( aerodynamics ) or wave resistance ( ship hydrodynamics ) .
The phrase parasitic drag is mainly used in aerodynamics , since for lifting wings drag it is in general small compared to lift .
For flow around bluff bodies , form and interference drags often dominate , and then the qualifier " parasitic " is meaningless .
Further , lift - induced drag is only relevant when wings or a lifting body are present , and is therefore usually discussed either in aviation or in the design of semi - planing or planing hulls .
Wave drag occurs either when a solid object is moving through a fluid at or near the speed of sound or when a solid object is moving along a fluid boundary , as in surface waves .
Drag depends on the properties of the fluid and on the size , shape , and speed of the object .
One way to express this is by means of the drag equation : where The drag coefficient depends on the shape of the object and on the Reynolds number where formula_8 is some characteristic diameter or linear dimension and
formula_9 is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid ( equal to the viscosity formula_10 divided by the density ) .
At low formula_11 , formula_6 is asymptotically proportional to formula_13 , which means that the drag is linearly proportional to the speed .
At high formula_11 , formula_6 is more or less constant and drag will vary as the square of the speed .
The graph to the right shows how formula_6 varies with formula_11 for the case of a sphere .
Since the power needed to overcome the drag force is the product of the force times speed , the power needed to overcome drag will vary as the square of the speed at low Reynolds numbers and as the cube of the speed at high numbers .
It can be demonstrated that Drag force can be expressed as a function of a dimensionless number , which is dimensionally identical to the Bejan number .
Consequently Drag force and Drag coefficient van be a function of Bejan number .
In fact , from the expression of drag force it has been obtained : formula_18 and consequently allows expressing the drag coefficient formula_6as a function of Bejan number and the ratio between wet area formula_20and front area
formula_21 : formula_22 where formula_23is the Reynold Number related to
fluid path length L. DRAG AT
HIGH VELOCITY Section::::Drag at high velocity .
As mentioned , the drag equation with a constant drag coefficient gives the force experienced by an object moving through a fluid at relatively large velocity ( i.e. high Reynolds number , Re > ~1000 ) .
This is also called quadratic drag .
The equation is attributed to Lord Rayleigh , who originally used L in place of A ( L being some length ) .
The reference area
A is often orthographic projection of the object ( frontal area)—on a plane perpendicular to the direction of motion — e.g . for objects with a simple shape , such as a sphere , this is the cross sectional area .
Sometimes a body is a composite of different parts , each with a different reference areas , in which case a drag coefficient corresponding to each of those different areas must be determined .
In the case of a wing the reference areas are the same and the drag force is in the same ratio to the lift force as the ratio of drag coefficient to lift coefficient .
Therefore , the reference for a wing is often the lifting area ( " wing area " ) rather than the frontal area .
For an object with a smooth surface , and non - fixed separation points — like a sphere or circular cylinder — the drag coefficient may vary with Reynolds number R , even up to very high values ( R of the order 10 ) .
For an object with well - defined fixed separation points , like a circular disk with its plane normal to the flow direction , the drag coefficient is constant for R > 3,500 .
Further the drag coefficient C is , in general , a function of the orientation of the flow with respect to the object ( apart from symmetrical objects like a sphere ) .
POWER Section::::Power .
Under the assumption that the fluid is not moving relative to the currently used reference system , the power required to overcome the aerodynamic drag is given by :
Note that the power needed to push an object through a fluid increases as the cube of the velocity .
A car cruising on a highway at may require only to overcome aerodynamic drag , but that same car at requires .
With a doubling of speed the drag ( force ) quadruples per the formula .
Exerting 4 times the force over a fixed distance produces 4 times as much work .
At twice the speed
the work ( resulting in displacement over a fixed distance ) is done twice as fast .
Since power is the rate of doing work , 4 times the work done in half the time requires 8 times the power .
When the fluid is moving relative to the reference system ( e.g. a car driving into headwind )
the power required to overcome the aerodynamic drag is given by : Where formula_27 is the wind speed and formula_28 it the object speed ( both relative to ground ) .
VELOCITY OF A FALLING OBJECT Section::::Velocity of a falling object .
The velocity as a function of time for an object falling through a non - dense medium , and released at zero relative - velocity v = 0 at time t = 0 , is roughly given by a function involving a hyperbolic tangent ( tanh ) :
The hyperbolic tangent has a limit value of one , for large time t.
In other words , velocity asymptotically approaches a maximum value called the terminal velocity v :
For an object falling and released at relative - velocity v = v at time t = 0 , with v ≤ v , is also defined in terms of the hyperbolic tangent function :
Actually , this function is defined by the solution of the following differential equation :
Or , more generically ( where F(v ) are the forces acting on the object beyond drag ) :
For a potato - shaped object of average diameter d and of density ρ , terminal velocity is about For objects of water - like density ( raindrops , hail , live objects — mammals , birds , insects , etc . )
falling in air near Earth 's surface at sea level , the terminal velocity is roughly equal to with d in metre and v in m / s .
For example , for a human body ( formula_36 ~ 0.6 m )
formula_37 ~ 70 m / s , for a small animal like a cat ( formula_36 ~ 0.2 m )
formula_37 ~ 40 m / s , for a small bird ( formula_36 ~ 0.05 m )
formula_37 ~ 20 m / s , for an insect ( formula_36 ~ 0.01 m )
formula_37 ~ 9 m / s , and so on .
Terminal velocity for very small objects ( pollen , etc . )
at low Reynolds numbers is determined by Stokes law .
Terminal velocity is higher for larger creatures , and thus potentially more deadly .
A creature such as a mouse falling at its terminal velocity is much more likely to survive impact with the ground than a human falling at its terminal velocity .
A small animal such as a cricket impacting at its terminal velocity will probably be unharmed .
This , combined with the relative ratio of limb cross - sectional area vs. body mass ( commonly referred to as the Square - cube law ) , explains why very small animals can fall from a large height and not be harmed .
VERY LOW REYNOLDS NUMBERS :
STOKES ' DRAG Section::::Very
low Reynolds numbers :
Stokes ' drag .
The equation for viscous resistance or linear drag is appropriate for objects or particles moving through a fluid at relatively slow speeds where there is no turbulence ( i.e. low Reynolds number , formula_44 ) .
Note that purely laminar flow only exists up to Re = 0.1 under this definition .
In this case , the force of drag is approximately proportional to velocity .
The equation for viscous resistance is : where : When an object falls from rest , its velocity will be which asymptotically approaches the terminal velocity
formula_49 .
For a given formula_46 , heavier objects fall more quickly .
For the special case of small spherical objects moving slowly through a viscous fluid ( and thus at small Reynolds number ) , George Gabriel Stokes derived an expression for the drag constant : where : The resulting expression for the drag is known as Stokes ' drag : For example , consider a small sphere with radius formula_52
= 0.5 micrometre ( diameter = 1.0 µm ) moving through water at a velocity formula_56 of 10 µm / s .
Using 10 Pa·s as the dynamic viscosity of water in SI units , we find a drag force of 0.09 pN.
This is about the drag force that a bacterium experiences as it swims through water .
AERODYNAMICS Section::::Aerodynamics .
In aerodynamics , aerodynamic drag is the fluid drag force that acts on any moving solid body in the direction of the fluid freestream flow .
From the body 's perspective ( near - field approach ) , the drag results from forces due to pressure distributions over the body surface , symbolized formula_57 , and forces due to skin friction , which is a result of viscosity , denoted formula_58 .
Alternatively , calculated from the flowfield perspective ( far - field approach ) , the drag force results from three natural phenomena : shock waves , vortex sheet , and viscosity .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
The pressure distribution acting on a body 's surface exerts normal forces on the body .
Those forces can be summed and the component of that force that acts downstream represents the drag force , formula_57 , due to pressure distribution acting on the body .
The nature of these normal forces combines shock wave effects , vortex system generation effects , and wake viscous mechanisms .
The viscosity of the fluid has a major effect on drag .
In the absence of viscosity , the pressure forces acting to retard the vehicle are canceled by a pressure force further aft that acts to push the vehicle forward ; this is called pressure recovery and the result is that the drag is zero .
That is to say , the work the body does on the airflow , is reversible and is recovered as there are no frictional effects to convert the flow energy into heat .
Pressure recovery acts even in the case of viscous flow .
Viscosity , however results in pressure drag and it is the dominant component of drag in the case of vehicles with regions of separated flow , in which the pressure recovery is fairly ineffective .
The friction drag force , which is a tangential force on the aircraft surface , depends substantially on boundary layer configuration and viscosity .
The net friction drag , formula_60 , is calculated as the downstream projection of the viscous forces evaluated over the body 's surface .
The sum of friction drag and pressure ( form )
drag is called viscous drag .
This drag component is due to viscosity .
In a thermodynamic perspective , viscous effects represent irreversible phenomena and , therefore , they create entropy .
The calculated viscous drag formula_61 use entropy changes to accurately predict the drag force .
When the airplane produces lift , another drag component results .
Induced drag , symbolized formula_62 , is due to a modification of the pressure distribution due to the trailing vortex system that accompanies the lift production .
An alternative perspective on lift and drag is gained from considering the change of momentum of the airflow .
The wing intercepts the airflow and forces the flow to move downward .
This results in an equal and opposite force acting upward on the wing which is the lift force .
The change of momentum of the airflow downward results in a reduction of the rearward momentum of the flow which is the result of a force acting forward on the airflow and applied by the wing to the air flow ; an equal but opposite force acts on the wing rearward which is the induced drag .
Induced drag tends to be the most important component for airplanes during take - off or landing flight .
Another drag component , namely wave drag , formula_63 , results from shock waves in transonic and supersonic flight speeds .
The shock waves induce changes in the boundary layer and pressure distribution over the body surface .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The idea that a moving body passing through air or another fluid encounters resistance had been known since the time of Aristotle .
Louis Charles Breguet 's paper of 1922 began efforts to reduce drag by streamlining .
Breguet went on to put his ideas into practice by designing several record - breaking aircraft in the 1920s and 1930s .
Ludwig Prandtl 's boundary layer theory in the 1920s provided the impetus to minimise skin friction .
A further major call for streamlining was made by Sir Melvill Jones who provided the theoretical concepts to demonstrate emphatically the importance of streamlining in aircraft design .
In 1929 his paper ' The Streamline Airplane ' presented to the Royal Aeronautical Society was seminal .
He proposed an ideal aircraft that would have minimal drag which led to the concepts of a ' clean ' monoplane and retractable undercarriage .
The aspect of Jones 's paper that most shocked the designers of the time was his plot of the horse power required versus velocity , for an actual and an ideal plane .
By looking at a data point for a given aircraft and extrapolating it horizontally to the ideal curve , the velocity gain for the same power can be seen .
When Jones finished his presentation , a member of the audience described the results as being of the same level of importance as the Carnot cycle in thermodynamics .
LIFT - INDUCED
DRAG Section::::Lift - induced drag .
Lift - induced drag ( also called induced drag ) is drag which occurs as the result of the creation of lift on a three - dimensional lifting body , such as the wing or fuselage of an airplane .
Induced drag consists primarily of two components : drag due to the creation of trailing vortices ( vortex drag ) ; and the presence of additional viscous drag ( lift - induced viscous drag ) that is not present when lift is zero .
The trailing vortices in the flow - field , present in the wake of a lifting body , derive from the turbulent mixing of air from above and below the body which flows in slightly different directions as a consequence of creation of lift .
With other parameters remaining the same , as the lift generated by a body increases , so does the lift - induced drag .
This means that as the wing 's angle of attack increases ( up to a maximum called the stalling angle ) , the lift coefficient also increases , and so too does the lift - induced drag .
At the onset of stall , lift is abruptly decreased , as is lift - induced drag , but viscous pressure drag , a component of parasite drag , increases due to the formation of turbulent unattached flow in the wake behind the body .
PARASITIC
DRAG
Section::::Parasitic drag .
Parasitic drag is drag caused by moving a solid object through a fluid .
Parasitic drag is made up of multiple components including viscous pressure drag ( form drag ) , and drag due to surface roughness ( skin friction drag ) .
Additionally , the presence of multiple bodies in relative proximity may incur so called interference drag , which is sometimes described as a component of parasitic drag .
In aviation , induced drag tends to be greater at lower speeds because a high angle of attack is required to maintain lift , creating more drag .
However , as speed increases the angle of attack can be reduced and the induced drag decreases .
Parasitic drag , however , increases because the fluid is flowing more quickly around protruding objects increasing friction or drag .
At even higher speeds ( transonic ) , wave drag enters the picture .
Each of these forms of drag changes in proportion to the others based on speed .
The combined overall drag curve therefore shows a minimum at some airspeed - an aircraft flying at this speed will be at or close to its optimal efficiency .
Pilots will use this speed to maximize endurance ( minimum fuel consumption ) , or maximize gliding range in the event of an engine failure .
POWER CURVE IN AVIATION
Section::::Power curve in aviation .
The interaction of parasitic and induced drag vs. airspeed can be plotted as a characteristic curve , illustrated here .
In aviation , this is often referred to as the power curve , and is important to pilots because it shows that , below a certain airspeed , maintaining airspeed counterintuitively requires more thrust as speed decreases , rather than less .
The consequences of being " behind the curve " in flight are important and are taught as part of pilot training .
At the subsonic airspeeds where the " U " shape of this curve is significant , wave drag has not yet become a factor , and so it is not shown in the curve .
WAVE DRAG IN TRANSONIC AND SUPERSONIC FLOW Section::::Wave drag in transonic and supersonic flow .
Wave drag ( also called compressibility drag ) is drag that is created when a body moves in a compressible fluid and at speeds that are close to the speed of sound in that fluid .
In aerodynamics , wave drag consists of multiple components depending on the speed regime of the flight .
In transonic flight ( Mach numbers greater than about 0.8 and less than about 1.4 ) , wave drag is the result of the formation of shockwaves in the fluid , formed when local areas of supersonic ( Mach number greater than 1.0 ) flow are created .
In practice , supersonic flow occurs on bodies traveling well below the speed of sound , as the local speed of air increases as it accelerates over the body to speeds above Mach 1.0 .
However , full supersonic flow over the vehicle will not develop until well past Mach 1.0 .
Aircraft flying at transonic speed often incur wave drag through the normal course of operation .
In transonic flight , wave drag is commonly referred to as transonic compressibility drag .
Transonic compressibility drag increases significantly as the speed of flight increases towards Mach 1.0 , dominating other forms of drag at those speeds .
In supersonic flight ( Mach numbers greater than 1.0 ) , wave drag is the result of shockwaves present in the fluid and attached to the body , typically oblique shockwaves formed at the leading and trailing edges of the body .
In highly supersonic flows , or in bodies with turning angles sufficiently large , unattached shockwaves , or bow waves will instead form .
Additionally , local areas of transonic flow behind the initial shockwave may occur at lower supersonic speeds , and can lead to the development of additional , smaller shockwaves present on the surfaces of other lifting bodies , similar to those found in transonic flows .
In supersonic flow regimes , wave drag is commonly separated into two components , supersonic lift - dependent wave drag and supersonic volume - dependent wave drag .
The closed form solution for the minimum wave drag of a body of revolution with a fixed length was found by Sears and Haack , and is known as the Sears - Haack Distribution .
Similarly , for a fixed volume , the shape for minimum wave drag is the Von Karman Ogive .
Busemann 's Biplane is not , in principle , subject to wave drag at all when operated at its design speed , but is incapable of generating lift .
D'ALEMBERT 'S
PARADOX Section::::d'Alembert 's paradox .
In 1752 d'Alembert proved that potential flow , the 18th century state - of - the - art inviscid flow theory amenable to mathematical solutions , resulted in the prediction of zero drag .
This was in contradiction with experimental evidence , and became known as d'Alembert 's paradox .
In the 19th century the Navier – Stokes equations for the description of viscous flow were developed by Saint - Venant , Navier and Stokes .
Stokes derived the drag around a sphere at very low Reynolds numbers , the result of which is called Stokes ' law .
In the limit of high Reynolds numbers , the Navier – Stokes equations approach the inviscid Euler equations , of which the potential - flow solutions considered by d'Alembert are solutions .
However , all experiments at high Reynolds numbers showed there is drag .
Attempts to construct inviscid steady flow solutions to the Euler equations , other than the potential flow solutions , did not result in realistic results .
The notion of boundary layers — introduced by Prandtl in 1904 , founded on both theory and experiments — explained the causes of drag at high Reynolds numbers .
The boundary layer is the thin layer of fluid close to the object 's boundary , where viscous effects remain important even when the viscosity is very small ( or equivalently the Reynolds number is very large ) .
SEE ALSO
* Added mass * Aerodynamic force
* Angle of attack
* Boundary layer * Coandă effect
* Drag crisis
* Drag coefficient * Drag equation
* Gravity drag * Keulegan – Carpenter number
* Lift ( force )
* Morison equation
*
Nose cone design *
Parasitic drag * Ram pressure *
Reynolds number * Stall ( fluid mechanics )
* Stokes ' law
* Terminal velocity
* Wave drag * Windage REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * L. J. Clancy ( 1975 ) , Aerodynamics , Pitman Publishing Limited , London .
* Anderson , John D. Jr. ( 2000 ) ; Introduction to Flight , Fourth Edition , McGraw Hill Higher Education , Boston , Massachusetts , USA .
8th ed .
2015 , .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Educational materials on air resistance * Aerodynamic Drag and its effect on the acceleration and top speed of a vehicle .
* Vehicle Aerodynamic Drag calculator based on drag coefficient , frontal area and speed .
* Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum 's How Things Fly website
* Effect of dimples on a golf ball and a car