DIRECT FREE KICK
A direct free kick is a method of restarting play in a game of association football that is awarded to a team following most types of fouls .
In a direct free kick , the fouled team is entitled to freely kick the ball from the spot of the foul , with opponents required to be at least from the ball .
The kicking team may score a goal directly from a direct free kick , that is , without the ball having first touched another player .
This is in contrast with an indirect free kick – a restart with a similar procedure that is usually awarded for technical infringements – where the ball must contact another player before a goal is scored .
If a player commits a foul punishable by a direct freekick within his / her own penalty area , a penalty kick is awarded instead .
Direct free kicks awarded near the opponent 's goal can often lead to scoring opportunities , either from the kick itself or from an ensuing set piece .
Accordingly , developing plays from free kicks are an important part of team strategy , and defending against them is an important skill for defenders .
PROCEDURE Section::::Procedure .
The kick is taken from where the foul occurred , unless it was within the fouled team 's own goal area , in which case it may be taken from anywhere within the goal area .
The ball must be stationary prior to being kicked .
Opponents must remain from the ball ( and outside the penalty area if the kick is taken from within the kicking team 's penalty area ) until the ball is in play .
The ball becomes in play as soon as it is kicked and moves , unless the kick was taken from within the kicking team 's penalty area , in which case it is in play once it has passed directly beyond the penalty area .
A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick , but only against the opposing side ( i.e. an own goal may not be scored ) .
Should the ball directly land in the kicking team 's own goal , a corner kick is awarded to the opposing team .
A player may be penalised for an offside offence committed from a direct free kick ; with the exception of receiving the ball directly from a goal kick or corner kick .
QUICK FREE KICK
Section::::Quick free kick .
A team may choose to take a " quick " free kick , that is , take the kick while opponents are within the minimum required distance .
This is usually done for some strategic reason , such as surprising the defence or taking advantage of their poor positioning .
The referee has full discretion on whether to allow a quick free kick , and all other rules on free kicks still apply .
However , in taking a quick free kick the kicking team waives their entitlement to retake the kick if an opponent who was within 10 yards intercepts the ball .
Football governing bodies may provide further instruction to referees on administering quick free kicks ; for example , the United States Soccer Federation advises that referees should not allow a quick free kick if a card is shown prior to the restart , if a trainer has to enter the field to attend to an injured player , if the kicking team requests enforcement of the 10-yard rule , or if the referee needs to slow the pace of the match ( e.g. , to talk to a player ) .
SCORING OPPORTUNITIES
Section::::Scoring opportunities .
There are various techniques used with direct free kicks .
First , the player taking the direct free kick may blast the ball as hard as he can , usually with the laces of the boot .
Alternatively , some players try to curl the ball around the keeper or the wall , with the inside or outside the boot .
Additionally , certain free - kick specialists will choose to kick the ball with minimal spin , making the ball behave unpredictably in the air ( similar to the action of a knuckleball pitch in baseball ) .
The kicker may also attempt to drive the shot under the wall formed by the opposition defenders .
Free kick takers may also attempt to cross the ball to their centre - backs or strikers to get a header on goal , since they usually are the tallest members of the team , especially if the position of the free kick is close to the wings .
INFRINGEMENTS AND SANCTIONS Section::::Infringements and sanctions .
If an opponent is less than from the spot where the kick is taken , the kick is re - taken unless the kicking team chooses to do a quick free kick ( see above ) .
An opponent also may be cautioned ( yellow card ) for failing to retreat 10 yards .
For a kick taken by a team inside their own penalty area , the ball is not considered in play until it has left the area .
If the ball fails to travel directly out of the penalty area the kick is retaken .
The kicker will concede an indirect free kick to their opponents if they touch the ball again before another player ( of either team ) has touched it .
If this second touch is an illegal handling of the ball offence , this takes priority and is penalised ( with a direct free kick or penalty ) accordingly .
STRATEGY Section::::Strategy .
Most teams have one or two designated free kick takers , depending on the distance from goal and the side of the field the free kick is to be taken from .
The strategy may be to score a goal directly from the free kick , or to use the free kick as the beginning of a set piece leading towards a goal scoring opportunity .
The kicking team may have more than one player line up behind the ball , run up to the ball , and/or feint a kick in order to confuse or deceive the defence as to their intentions ; this is usually legal as long as no other infringements occur .
Where there is a potential for a shot on goal to occur from a direct free kick , often the defending side will erect a " wall " of players standing side - by - side as a barrier to the shot .
The number of players composing the wall varies based on distance and strategy .
It is not fully known when the wall was started .
A kicker who has the skill to curl the ball around a wall is at a distinct advantage .
Since 2000 , referees at the highest levels of football have used vanishing spray to enforce the 10-yard minimum required distance for the wall ; referees without vanishing spray may indicate the minimum distance verbally and/or with hand gestures .
SEE ALSO
* Indirect free kick
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Work on your Freekicks
* When is a direct free - kick awarded ?