CORNINGWARE Corning Ware , also written CorningWare , was originally a brand name for a unique glass - ceramic ( Pyroceram ) cookware resistant to thermal shock .
It was first introduced in 1958 by Corning Glass Works in the United States .
The brand was later spun off with the sale of the Corning Consumer Products Company subsidiary ( now known as Corelle Brands of Rosemont , Illinois ) .
Glass - ceramic based Corning Ware can be taken from the refrigerator or freezer and used directly on the stovetop , in an oven or microwave , under a broiler , for table / serving use , and when ready for cleaning put directly into a dishwasher .
CorningWare is sold worldwide , and it is popular in North America , Asia , and Australia .
HISTORY DISCOVERY Section::::History .
Section::::Discovery .
In 1953 S. Donald Stookey of the Corning Research and Development Division discovered Pyroceram , a white glass - ceramic material capable of withstanding a thermal shock ( sudden temperature change ) of up to 450 ° C ( 840 ° F ) , by accident .
He was working with photosensitive glass and placed a piece into a furnace planning on heating it to 600 degrees Fahrenheit .
When he checked on his sample the furnace was at 900 degrees and the glass had turned milky white .
He reached into the furnace with tongs to discard the sample and it slipped and hit the floor without shattering .
The material was used in the ballistic missile program as a heat - resistant material for nose cones .
DISCONTINUATION Section::::Discontinuation .
Production of the original Pyroceram based version of Corning Ware ceased in 2000 and the brand was relaunched as a line of stoneware based bakeware in 2001 .
Corelle Brand 's ( then known as " World Kitchen " )
2001 annual report indicated that the stove top and dinnerware product lines were halted at the end of the century " as part of a program designed to reduce costs through the elimination of under - utilized capacity , unprofitable product lines , and increased utilization of the remaining facilities .
" Facilities in Charleroi , Pennsylvania and Clinton , Illinois were closed .
REINTRODUCTION Section::::Reintroduction .
In December 2008 , the stovetop line of CorningWare was reintroduced by Corelle Brands .
The cookware is manufactured by Keraglass / Eurokera ( a subsidiary of Corning also specialised in vitroceramics for cooktop panels and equipment for laboratories ) in Bagneaux - sur - Loing , France .
This is one of the only factories in the world still manufacturing Pyroceram - based cookware .
At the time it restarted the production of CorningWare , Keraglass / Eurokera was able to abandon the use of arsenic in the manufacture of their products , thanks to the modern technology of their newly built oven .
PATTERNS AND PRODUCTS Section::::Patterns and products .
Corning Ware 's range / oven - to - table service first featured the blue ' Cornflower ' pattern decoration , designed by Joseph Baum , an artist at the Charles Brunelle Advertising Agency in Hartford , Connecticut .
It became the trademark of Corning consumer products for three decades .
Following the ' Cornflower ' pattern , many additional patterns were offered by Corning over the years .
Corelle Brand 's Pyroceram based Corning Ware is popular in the Asia – Pacific region .
Additional patterns have been created specifically for this market , including Bliss , Blue Elegance , Cool Pansies , Country Rose , Dainty Flora , Dandy Blossoms , Elegant City , European Herbs , Herb Country , Lilyville , Lush , Petite Trio , Plum , Salad Seasons and Warm Pansies among others .
The lids of CorningWare and Pyroflam ( Europe ) are typically made of Pyrex .
Though some early lids were made of Pyroceram , most subsequent lids have been made of tempered borosilicate or soda - lime glass .
Unlike the cookware , these lids have a lower tolerance for thermal shock and can not be used over or under direct heat .
More than 750 million pieces of Corning Ware 's range / oven - to - table service have been manufactured since its inception .
A partial product list includes : browning skillets , cake pans , casserole dishes , coffee pots ( drip ) , dinner service ( Centura by Corning ) , Dutch ovens , frying pans , grab -
it bowls , loaf pans , percolators , pie plates , ramekins , restaurant ware ( Pyroceram ) , roasters , sauce pans , skillets , souffle dishes , and teapots .
RELATED PRODUCTS Section::::Related products .
Corelle Brands sells similar looking products under the CorningWare brand name ( including a copy of " French White " ) that are made of glazed stoneware , rather than Pyroceram .
The packaging for these newer CorningWare branded cookware products say specifically that they are not for stovetop use .
Visions , a brand of transparent stove top cookware originally created by Corning France and still being produced today , is made of a transparent version of Pyroceram , called Calexium in some regions of the world .
It features thermal traits similar to Corning Ware plus improved resistance to staining and the detrimental effects of acids and detergents .
Corelle , a brand name for break - resistant glass dishware also originally created by Corning Glass Works , has offered matching designs to many Corning Ware patterns .
Care must be made to distinguish between Corning Ware cookware and tableware marketed under the Corelle or Pyrex brand names , as the thermal properties of each product are quite different .
Arc International , Europe , sells equivalent cookware to Corning Ware under the name Arcoflam and , in the United States , through Princess House as Nouveau cookware with a slightly different design .
Since 2009 , Arcoflam and Nouveau have been manufactured in the same French factory as Corning Ware .
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Freepatentsonline.com — possibly the Corning Visions Patent * BlueCornflower.com
: Corning Ware showcase
* Corning Ware 411 :
Vintage Corningware Information