INDUSTRIAL AND PROVIDENT SOCIETY
An industrial and provident society ( IPS ) was a legal entity for a trading business or voluntary organisation in the United Kingdom , the Republic of Ireland , and New Zealand .
The name is still used in New Zealand , the Republic of Ireland and within the UK in Northern Ireland .
Recent legal developments in Great Britain include the Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014 , which has renamed these societies as co - operative or community benefit societies .
From 1 August 2014 a new society has had to register as either a co - operative or a community benefit society rather than , as was the case previously , a society that meets either requirement .
Societies already registered before that date remain registered under the 2014 Act and under ss 1 & 2 of the 2014 Act all three types of society – co - operative societies , community benefit societies , and societies already registered before 1 August 2014 – are referred to together as " registered societies " .
However , for administrative purposes the three types of society are categorised separately .
The Act applies to Great Britain but not Northern Ireland .
CATEGORIES Section::::Categories .
See Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014 for information about the current law on these societies .
HISTORY 1965
TO 2014 Section::::History 1965 to 2014 .
In 1965 , an act of Parliament came into effect called the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1965 .
In 2006 , the Friendly and Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1968 ( Audit Exemption )
( Amendment ) Order 2006 increased the audit exemption threshold level for industrial and provident societies to £ 5.6 million .
Also the Charities Act 2006 removed certain exemptions of charitable IPSs in England and Wales .
From that point , charitable IPSs had to register with both the FCA and the Charity Commission , except registered social landlords , who register with the Tenant Services Authority .
Since 2010 the IPS laws explicitly name co - operatives in their titles .
The ' Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1965 ' was renamed ' Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies and Credit Unions Act 1965 ' .
In 2011 , the Legislative Reform ( Industrial and Provident Societies and Credit Unions ) Order 2011 increased the maximum shareholding limit , changed the date of submission of the annual return , permitted children to be members , and allows the publication of unaudited interim accounts .
In January 2012 , the UK Prime Minister , David Cameron announced a project to consolidate all the legislation applicable to industrial and provident societies to be passed by 2015 .
There was some uncertainty as to how far new developments would address the problems with the legislation .
Cameron stated , " We know that breaking monopolies , encouraging choice , opening up new forms of enterprise is not just right for business but the best way of improving public services too . "
Ed Mayo , Secretary General of Co - operatives UK , welcomed the project .
In mid-2012 , revision of laws for co - operative was in its early stages .
Some felt the reforms did not deal with certain key problems .
Changes to the registration system under the Financial Services Act 2012 which splits the Financial Services Authority into the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) and
the Prudential Regulation Authority ( PRA ) took effect on 1 April 2013 .
The registration function for societies was transferred to the FCA while the prudential regulation of credit unions was transferred to the PRA .
In September 2013 , the English and Scottish Law Commissions published a draft consolidation bill and related documents for consultation .
Earlier that year , the UK Treasury , which is the department responsible for legislation for societies , published a series of proposals to increase the holding limit for withdrawable share capital in societies to at least £ 31,000 , to apply insolvency rescue procedures to societies , and to change the rules applicable to their registers of members .
Draft regulations linked to that consultation were also available , having been circulated to a small number of people .
Those drafts and other materials , including a private member 's bill to liberalise the use of share capital by societies presented to the UK House of Lords were explained and brought together online .
In 2014 , the Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014 was given royal assent .
REGULATION
Section::::Regulation .
IPSs were registered ( but not regulated ) by the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) , which took over the job from the Registrar of Friendly Societies when it was part of the Financial Services Authority ( FSA ) ( both being supervised by the Treasury ) .
Note that IPS registration is quite separate from the FCA 's function of regulating financial institutions .
Such businesses have been controlled in the past by the Industrial and Provident Societies Partnership Act 1852 , the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1893 , and the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1965 .
The legislation in the Republic of Ireland is based on modifications of the UK Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1893 .
LEGISLATION
* Industrial and Provident Societies Partnership Act 1852
* Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1893
* Industrial and Provident Societies ( Amendment ) Act 1913
* Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies and Credit Unions
Act 1965
* Industrial and Provident Societies Act 2002
* Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2003
* Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies and Credit Unions
Act 2010
* Financial Services Act 2012
* Co - operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2014 FORMS OF FINANCIAL CAPITAL Section::::Forms of financial capital .
Unlike a company limited by guarantee , an IPS generally has a share capital .
However , in a not - for - profit IPS the share capital may be limited to a nominal amount .
Both types of IPS have a share capital , but it is usually not made up of equity shares like those in a company limited by shares , which appreciate or fall in value with the success of the enterprise that issues them .
Rather they are par - value shares , which can only be redeemed ( if at all ) at face value .
The profits and losses of an IPS are thus the common property of the members .
The share typically acts as a " membership ticket " , and voting is on a " one member one vote " basis .
The maximum individual withdrawable shareholding is currently set at £ 100,000 ( although other IPSs may hold more shares than this ) .
The Legislative Reform Order ( Industrial & Provident Societies and Credit Unions )
Order 2011 removed the limit for non - withdrawable shares .
Since 2006 , the FSA has been willing , in principle , to permit societies to have non - user investor members providing certain conditions are met and this , in combination with the removal of the £ 100,000 holding limit for non - withdrawable shares , may open up wider possibilities for co - operatives to raise finance from investors while maintaining user control .
It may be withdrawable share capital , an unusual form of finance which is treated as equity but may be withdrawn subject to specified conditions , and is relatively cheap for small co - operatives to raise as it is exempt from certain regulations applicable to conventional share issues regarding the publication of a prospectus .
However , an IPS with withdrawable share capital is not allowed to carry on a banking business , presumably because a withdrawable share capital would make it impractical to ensure capital adequacy requirements are continuously met .
EXAMPLES COMMUNITY BENEFIT SOCIETIES
* Broadband 4 Rural North * F.C. United of Manchester
* Fordhall Community Land Initiative * Greater Manchester Tree Station
* Manchester United Supporters ' Trust
* RLLMUK CO - OPERATIVES * Ethical Consumer Research Association * Shared Interest SEE ALSO * Community interest company REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * shares.coop - The Community Shares Marketplace * Community Shares directory * Industrial & Provident Societies , Financial Services Authority * FSA Mutuals
Public Register - searchable , Financial Services Authority