ENGLISH DRAUGHTS English draughts ( British English ) or checkers ( American English ; see spelling differences ) , also called American checkers or straight checkers , is a form of the strategy board game draughts .
It is played on an 8×8 chequered board with 12 pieces per side .
The pieces move and capture diagonally forward , until they reach the opposite end of the board , when they are crowned and can thereafter move and capture both backward and forward .
As in all forms of draughts , English draughts is played by two opponents , alternating turns on opposite sides of the board .
The pieces are traditionally black , red , or white .
Enemy pieces are captured by jumping over them .
The 8×8 variant of draughts was weakly solved in 2007 by the team of Canadian computer scientist Jonathan Schaeffer .
From the standard starting position , both players can guarantee a draw with perfect play .
PIECES Section::::Pieces .
Though pieces are traditionally made of wood , now many are made of plastic , though other materials may be used .
Pieces are typically flat and cylindrical .
They are invariably split into one darker and one lighter colour .
Traditionally and in tournaments , these colours are red and white , but black and red are common in the United States , as well as dark- and light - stained wooden pieces .
The darker - coloured side is commonly referred to as " Black " ; the lighter - coloured side , " White " .
There are two classes of pieces : men and kings .
Men are single pieces .
Kings consist of two men of the same colour , stacked one on top of the other .
The bottom piece is referred to as crowned ( or kinged in the U.S. ) .
Some sets have pieces with a crown molded , engraved or painted on one side , allowing the player to simply turn the piece over or to place the crown - side up on the crowned man , further differentiating kings from men .
Pieces are often manufactured with indentations to aid stacking .
RULES
STARTING POSITION Section::::Rules .
Section::::Starting position .
Each player starts with 12 men on the dark squares of the three rows closest to that player 's side ( see diagram ) .
The row closest to each player is called the kings row or crownhead .
The player with the darker - coloured pieces moves first .
MOVE RULES
Section::::Move rules .
There are two different ways to move in English draughts :
* Simple move : A simple move consists of moving a piece one square diagonally to an adjacent unoccupied dark square .
Uncrowned pieces can move diagonally forward only ; kings can move in any diagonal direction .
*
* Jump :
A jump consists of moving a piece that is diagonally adjacent an opponent 's piece , to an empty square immediately beyond it in the same direction .
( Thus " jumping over " the opponent 's piece . )
Men can jump diagonally forward only ; kings can jump in any diagonal direction .
A jumped piece is considered " captured " and removed from the game .
Any piece , king or man , can jump a king .
* Multiple jumps are possible , if after one jump , another piece is immediately eligible to be jumped — even if that jump is in a different diagonal direction .
If more than one multi - jump is available , the player can choose which piece to jump with , and which sequence of jumps to make .
The sequence chosen is not required to be the one that maximizes the number of jumps in the turn ; however , a player must make all available jumps in the sequence chosen .
Jumping is always mandatory : if a player has the option to jump , he must take it , even if doing so results in disadvantage for the jumping player .
For example , a mandated single jump might set up the player such that the opponent has a multi - jump in reply .
KINGS Section::::Kings .
If a man moves into the kings row on the opponent 's side of the board , it is crowned as a king and gains the ability to move both forward and backward .
If a man jumps into the kings row , the current move terminates ; the piece is crowned as a king but can not jump back out as in a multi - jump , until another move .
END OF GAME Section::::End of game .
A player wins by capturing all of the opponent 's pieces or by leaving the opponent with no legal move .
The game ends in a draw if neither side can force a win , or by agreement ( one side offering a draw , the other accepting ) .
RULE VARIATIONS
*
In tournament English draughts , a variation called three - move restriction is preferred .
The first three moves are drawn at random from a set of accepted openings .
Two games are played with the chosen opening , each player having a turn at either side .
This tends to reduce the number of draws and can make for more exciting matches .
Three - move restriction has been played in the U.S. championship since 1934 .
A two - move restriction was used from 1900 until 1934 in the United States and in the British Isles until the 1950s .
Before 1900 , championships were played without restriction , a style is called Go As You Please ( GAYP ) .
*
One rule of long standing that has fallen out of favour is the huffing rule .
In this variation jumping is not mandatory , but if a player does not take their jump ( either deliberately or by failing to see it ) , the piece that could have made the jump is blown or huffed , i.e. removed from the board .
After huffing the offending piece , the opponent then takes their turn as normal .
Huffing has been abolished by both the American Checker Federation ( ACF ) and the English Draughts Association .
* Two common rule variants , not recognised by player associations , are : * Capturing with a king precedes capturing with a man .
In this case , any available capture can be made at the player 's choice .
*
* A man that has jumped to become a king , can then in the same turn continue to capture other pieces in a multi - jump .
* NOTATION Section::::Notation .
There is a standardised notation for recording games .
All 32 reachable board squares are numbered in sequence .
The numbering starts in Black 's double - corner .
Black 's squares on the first rank are numbered 1 to 4 ; the next rank 5 to 8 , and so on .
Moves are recorded as " from - to " , so a move from 9 to 14 would be recorded 9 - 14 .
Captures are notated with an " x " connecting the start and end squares .
The game result is often abbreviated as BW / RW ( Black / Red wins ) or WW ( White wins ) .
SAMPLE GAME Section::::Sample game .
White resigned after Black 's 46th move .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
In Unicode , the draughts are encoded in block Miscellaneous Symbols : SPORT Section::::Sport .
The men 's World Championship in English draughts dates to the 1840s , predating the men 's Draughts World Championship , the championship for men in International draughts , by several decades .
Noted world champions include Andrew Anderson , James Wyllie , Robert Martins , Robert D. Yates , James Ferrie , Alfred Jordan , Newell W. Banks , Robert Stewart , Asa Long , Walter Hellman , Marion Tinsley , Derek Oldbury , Ron King , Michele Borghetti , Alex Moiseyev , Patricia Breen , and Amangul Durdyyeva .
Championship held in GAYP ( Go As You Please ) and 3-Move versions .
The winners in men 's have been from the United Kingdom , United States , Barbados , and most recently Italy in the 3-Move division .
The woman 's championship is more recent and started in 1993 , the winners have been from Ireland , Turkmenistan , and the Ukraine .
The European Cup has been held since 2013 ; the World Cup , since 2015 .
COMPUTER PLAYERS Section::::Computer players .
The first English draughts computer program was written by Christopher Strachey , M.A. at the National Physical Laboratory , London .
Strachey finished the programme , written in his spare time , in February 1951 .
It ran for the first time on NPL 's Pilot ACE on 30 July 1951 .
He soon modified the programme to run on the Manchester Mark 1 .
The second computer program was written in 1956 by Arthur Samuel , a researcher from IBM .
Other than it being one of the most complicated game playing programs written at the time , it is also well known for being one of the first adaptive programs .
It learned by playing games against modified versions of itself , with the victorious versions surviving .
Samuel 's program was far from mastering the game , although one win against a blind checkers master gave the general public the impression that it was very good .
In the 1990s , the strongest program was Chinook , written in 1989 by a team from the University of Alberta led by Jonathan Schaeffer .
Marion Tinsley , world champion from 1955–1962 and from 1975–1991 , won a match against the machine in 1992 .
In 1994 , Tinsley had to resign in the middle of an even match for health reasons ; he died shortly thereafter .
In 1995 , Chinook defended its man - machine title against Don Lafferty in a thirty - two game match .
The final score was 1–0 with 31 draws for Chinook over Don Lafferty .
In 1996 Chinook won in the U.S. National Tournament by the widest margin ever , and was retired from play after that event .
The man - machine title has not been contested since .
In July 2007 , in an article published in Science Magazine , Chinook 's developers announced that the program had been improved to the point where it could not lose a game .
If no mistakes were made by either player , the game would always end in a draw .
After eighteen years , they have computationally proven a weak solution to the game of checkers .
Using between two hundred desktop computers at the peak of the project and around fifty later on , the team made just 10 calculations to search from the initial position to a database of positions with at most ten pieces .
However , the solution is only for the initial position rather than for all 156 accepted random 3 move openings of tournament play .
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
Section::::Computational complexity .
The number of possible positions in English draughts is 500,995,484,682,338,672,639 and it has a game - tree complexity of approximately 10 .
By comparison , chess is estimated to have between 10 and 10 legal positions .
When draughts is generalized so that it can be played on an n×n board , the problem of determining if the first player has a win in a given position is EXPTIME - complete .
The July 2007 announcement by Chinook 's team stating that the game had been solved must be understood in the sense that , with perfect play on both sides , the game will always finish with a draw .
However , not all positions that could result from imperfect play have been analysed .
LIST OF TOP DRAUGHTS PROGRAMS * Cake
* Chinook * KingsRow SEE ALSO
* Alquerque * High Jump
* International draughts
* Konane * List of draughts players
* List of world championships in mind sports
* List winners of Czech Republic championship in English draughts
* Tanzanian draughts
* World Checkers / Draughts Championship REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* World Checkers Draughts Federation ( WCDF )
* American Checker Federation ( ACF ) * English Draughts Association * List of world checkers champions