U.S. MARSHALS ( FILM )
U.S. Marshals is a 1998 American action crime thriller film directed by Stuart Baird .
The storyline was conceived from a screenplay written by Roy Huggins and John Pogue .
The film is a spin - off to the 1993 motion picture
The Fugitive , which in turn was based on the television series of the same name , created by Huggins .
The story does not involve the character of Dr. Richard Kimble , portrayed by Harrison Ford in the initial film , but instead the plot centers on United States Deputy Marshal Sam Gerard , once again played by Tommy Lee Jones .
The plot follows Gerard and his team as they pursue another fugitive , Mark Sheridan , played by Wesley Snipes , who attempts to escape government officials following an international conspiracy scandal .
The cast features Robert Downey Jr. , Joe Pantoliano , Daniel Roebuck , Tom Wood , and LaTanya Richardson , several of whom portrayed Deputy Marshals in the previous film .
The film was a co - production between the motion picture studios of Warner Bros. and Kopelson Entertainment .
Theatrically , it was commercially distributed by Warner Bros. and by the Warner Home Video division for home media markets .
On March 10 , 1998 , the original motion picture soundtrack was released by the Varèse Sarabande music label .
The soundtrack was composed and orchestrated by musician Jerry Goldsmith .
U.S. Marshals premiered in theaters in the United States on March 6 , 1998 , grossing $ 57 million in its domestic run .
The film took in an additional $ 45 million through international release for a worldwide total of $ 102 million .
The film was generally met with mixed critical reviews .
The film was released on home video on July 21 , 1998 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In New York , security cameras in a United Nations parking garage record two Diplomatic Security Service ( DSS ) agents attempting to intercept a briefcase exchange between two men .
One man kills the agents ; the other escapes with top secret information .
In Chicago , months later , and after a car crash , police arrest tow truck driver Mark Warren for possession of an illegal handgun and discover that he is federal fugitive Mark Roberts , wanted for the double homicide of the DSS agents .
Roberts boards a prisoner transport aircraft back to New York , sharing it with Deputy U.S. Marshal Samuel Gerard , who is escorting another prisoner .
A Chinese prisoner armed with a zip gun tries to kill Roberts but a bullet pierces a window , depressurizing the cabin and sending the assassin and another Marshal to their deaths .
The plane makes an emergency crash landing in Southern Illinois , where Roberts flees and Gerard issues a manhunt for the escapee .
DSS Director Bertram Lamb assigns DSS Special Agent John Royce to join Gerard 's team .
Gerard inspects Royce 's firearm and dismissively insists Royce replace it with a Glock .
Roberts is tracked by the team to a swamp , where he takes Royce 's gun and shoots Gerard with it , who is wearing a bulletproof vest , allowing him to escape .
After traveling to New York City and securing money , weapons and fake identification , Roberts tails Chinese diplomat Xiang Chen , the other man from the parking garage .
In Chicago , Gerard and the Marshals pursue several leads , including Roberts ' girlfriend Marie Bineaux .
Roberts secretly contacts Bineaux to explain that he secretly worked for the government and was ambushed during a routine exchange , killing the men before realizing they were DSS agents .
The Marshals track the airplane mechanic who was bribed to hide the zip gun and discover that he has been murdered by Chen .
Gerard acquires the surveillance footage of the murders and finds Roberts killed the agents in self - defense and was wearing gloves , thus could not have been identified by fingerprints at the scene as Lamb claimed .
Lamb admits that Roberts is in fact Mark Sheridan , a former Force Recon Marine working as an unofficial operative for the government , who they believe is a mole within the U.S. State Department selling covert secrets to China .
The agents were tailing Chen , a Chinese intelligence agent who was the mole 's contact , but when they tried to intercept the exchange , Sheridan killed them and fled .
Eventually , Gerard and his team catch up with Sheridan in Queens Hill Cemetery as he ambushes DSS Special Agent Frank Barrows , who conspired with the mole to frame Sheridan by duping him into making the exchange .
As Sheridan holds Barrows hostage to clear his name , Chen inadvertently kills Barrows while trying to shoot Sheridan .
Chen is apprehended , while Sheridan flees to a retirement home followed by Gerard , Royce and Marshal Noah Newman .
During a struggle , Royce disarms Sheridan and holds him at gunpoint .
Before Royce can kill Sheridan , Newman walks into the room and Royce shoots him , giving Sheridan the opportunity to escape off the roof and onto a moving subway .
Royce claims Sheridan shot Newman , who dies before he can reveal the truth .
A vengeful Gerard abandons his team , taking Royce along as they track Sheridan to a loading dock in Bayonne , New Jersey , where he is stowing away on a freighter bound for Canada .
Gerard confronts , fights and nearly kills Sheridan but lets his guard down , enabling Sheridan to get the upper hand .
Royce fires his new Glock at Sheridan , hitting him in the shoulder , who is taken into custody .
At the hospital , Gerard recognizes the gun that killed Newman as Royce 's old firearm .
Royce goes into Sheridan 's room and admits he is the mole , giving Sheridan a knife to make his intended murder appear as self - defense .
Gerard walks in and confronts Royce about killing Newman .
Royce tries to shoot Gerard for catching him in the act like before , but Gerard had emptied Royce 's Glock beforehand .
When Royce attempts to draw his backup firearm , Gerard shoots and kills him first .
Sheridan is publicly exonerated at a government hearing and makes peace with Gerard , who gives his team a backhanded apology before they depart to honor Newman 's memory .
CAST * Tommy Lee Jones as Chief Deputy U.S.
Marshal Samuel Gerard * Wesley Snipes as Mark J. Sheridan / Mark Roberts / Mark Warren * Robert Downey Jr. as Special Agent John Royce
* Joe Pantoliano as Deputy U.S. Marshal Cosmo Renfro * Daniel Roebuck as Deputy U.S.
Marshal Bob Biggs
* Tom Wood as Deputy U.S.
Marshal Noah Newman
* LaTanya Richardson as Deputy U.S. Marshal Savannah Cooper
* Irène Jacob as Marie Bineaux * Kate Nelligan as United States Marshal Catherine
Walsh
* Patrick Malahide as Director Bertram Lamb
* Rick Snyder as Special Agent Frank Barrows
* Michael Paul Chan as Xiang Chen PRODUCTION FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Filming .
Filming locations for the film included , Metropolis , Illinois ; Bay City , Illinois ; Shawneetown , Illinois ; Chicago , Illinois ; New York , New York ; Benton , Kentucky ; and at Reelfoot Lake , in Lake County , Tennessee .
MUSIC AND SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music and soundtrack .
The original motion picture soundtrack for U.S. Marshals was released by the Varèse Sarabande music label on March 10 , 1998 .
The score for the film was orchestrated by Jerry Goldsmith and mixed by Bruce Botnick .
Kenneth Hall edited the film 's music .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Among mainstream critics in the U.S. , the film received mixed reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 26 % based on reviews from 34 critics , with an average score of 5 out of 10 .
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average out of 100 to critics ' reviews , U.S. Marshals was given a score of 47 based on 20 reviews .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A- " on an A+ to F scale .
Barbara Shulgasser , writing in The San Francisco Examiner , commented in positive sentiment about the acting , saying , " The film 's pacing is unimpeachable and good performances are delivered by Jones , Snipes , Irene Jacob as Sheridan 's loyal girlfriend and , for brief moments , Kate Nelligan as Gerard 's tough but lovable boss .
"
Left impressed , Desson Howe in The Washington Post noted how " Every story beat is expertly planned and executed . "
Howe also praised director Baird , exclaiming how he " runs the show with a smart eye and a metronome ticking somewhere in his mind . "
In a mixed to negative review , Russell Smith of The Austin Chronicle bluntly deduced that , " Unlike Kimble , whose innocence and decency are known from the beginning in The Fugitive , Sheridan is a total cipher to both Gerard and the audience until deep into this two - hours - plus film .
Ergo , we ca n't be expected to give a rat 's ass what happens to him — and do n't .
"
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly opined that U.S. Marshals was " Lean , tense , and satisfyingly tricky . "
The film however , was not without its detractors .
Writing for the Chicago Sun - Times , Roger Ebert , giving the film two and a half stars out of four , observed , " I did n't expect U.S. Marshals to be the equal of The Fugitive , and it is n't .
But I hoped it would approach the taut tension of the 1993 film , and it does n't .
It has extra scenes , needless characters , an aimless plot and a solution that the hero seems to keep learning and then forgetting . "
In a primarily negative review , Mick LaSalle , writing for the San Francisco Chronicle , called the film " a bad idea to begin with . "
He noted his confusion with the plot , remarking , " the movie tells us from the beginning that the fugitive is not quite innocent .
He killed two fellow agents in self - defense .
All this does is muddy the moral waters , making us queasy about the one guy we like .
At no point is there ever a compelling reason to keep watching . "
Describing a mild negative opinion , James Berardinelli of ReelViews professed Marshal Gerard as exhibiting " only a token resemblance to the character who doggedly pursued Kimball in The Fugitive .
As re - invented here , Gerard is a generic action hero ; most of the quirks that made him interesting ( and that earned Jones an Oscar ) are absent .
With a few minor re - writes , John McClane from the Die Hard movies could have been plugged into this role . "
Dissatisfied with the film 's quality , Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader said that it was " Not so much a sequel to The Fugitive as a lazy spin - off that imitates only what was boring and artificially frenetic about that earlier thriller ; the little that kept it interesting — Tommy Lee Jones 's Oscar - winning inflections , better - than - average direction — is nowhere in evidence .
"
Stephen Hunter , writing for The Washington Post , reasoned , " It turns out to be one of those lame double - agent things where everybody 's working for everybody else , the security of Taiwan ( Taiwan ! ) is at stake , and it never quite lurches into clarity or acquires any real emotional punch .
I did n't think the end of The Fugitive was so great either :
Who wants to watch doctors fistfight on a roof ?
But by the time it winds down , U.S. Marshals has all but destroyed itself .
" Film critic Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide was not consumed with the nature of the subject matter , declaring , " To every hit there is a season , and a time for every sequel under heaven — no matter what narrative contortions it takes .
" She later surmised , " The minute Gerard mocks Royce 's ' nickel - plated sissy pistol , ' it 's clear they 're headed for a cathartic showdown , and anyone who ca n't see which member of Gerard 's merry band might as well be wearing a ' Dead Meat Walking ' T - shirt really should n't be allowed to operate complicated machinery . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
U.S. Marshals premiered in cinemas on March 6 , 1998 in wide release throughout the United States .
During that weekend , the film opened in 2nd place , grossing $ 16,863,988 at 2,817 locations .
The film Titanic was in 1st place during that weekend , with $ 17,605,849 in revenue .
The film 's revenue dropped by 32 % in its second week of release , earning $ 11,355,259 .
For that particular weekend , the film fell to 3rd place with the same theater count .
The continuing success of Titanic remained unchallenged in 1st place with $ 17,578,815 in box office business .
During its final week in release , U.S. Marshals was in 60th place , grossing a marginal $ 16,828 in revenue .
U.S. Marshals went on to top out domestically at $ 57,167,405 in total ticket sales through its theatrical run .
For 1998 as a whole , the film would cumulatively rank at a box office performance position of 36 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Following its cinematic release , the Region 1 Code widescreen edition of the film was released on DVD in the U.S. on July 21 , 1998 .
Special features for the DVD include ; interactive behind - the - scenes documentary - Anatomy of the Plane Crash ; historical documentary - Justice Under the Star ; feature - length commentary by director Stuart Baird ; interactive menus ; production notes ; two theatrical trailers ; three TV spots ; and scene access .
Additionally , a Special Edition repackaged DVD was also released on November 3 , 2009 .
Special features include ; a closed caption option ; interactive behind - the - scenes documentary - Anatomy of the Plane Crash ; historical documentary - Justice Under the Star ; feature length commentary by director Stuart Baird ; two theatrical trailers ; and three TV spots .
In supplemental fashion , a VHS format version of the film was released on February 2 , 1999 .
A restored widescreen hi - definition Blu - ray Disc version of the film was released on June 5 , 2012 .
Special features include ; two documentaries - Anatomy of the plane crash and Justice under the star ; commentary by director Stuart Baird ; and the theatrical trailer .
An additional viewing option for the film in the media format of Video on demand has been made available as well .
IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
A novelization of the film , U.S. Marshals :
A Novel , written by Max Allan Collins , was released on March 1 , 1998 .
SEE ALSO
* The Fugitive ( TV series )
* 1998 in film REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS