KICK - OFF ( ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL )
A kick - off is the method of starting and , in some cases , restarting play in a game of association football .
The rules concerning the kick - off are part of Law 8 of the Laws of the Game .
AWARD Section::::Award .
A kick - off is used to start each half of play , and each period of extra time where applicable .
The kick - off to start a game is awarded to the team that lost the pre - game coin toss ( the team that won the coin - toss chooses which direction they wish to play ) .
The kick - off begins when the referee blows the whistle .
The kick - off to start the second half is taken by the other team .
If extra time is played another coin - toss is used at the beginning of this period .
A kick - off is also used to restart play after a goal is scored , and is taken by the team that conceded the goal .
PROCEDURE Section::::Procedure .
The kick - off is taken from the centre spot .
All players , except for the kicker , must be in their own half of the field of play , and all opposing players must remain at least 10 yards ( 9.16 m ) from the ball ( a distance marked on the pitch by the centre circle ) , until the ball is in play .
The ball is initially stationary until it is put into play by being kicked .
The player who has first kicked the ball may not touch it again until it has been touched by another player .
A stipulation that this kick must be towards the opponents ' goal existed in the rules from 1883 until 2016 .
This resulted in kick - offs typically involving two people ( as pictured ) , with one tapping the ball forward and the other passing it back to the rest of the team .
Now a team may kick the ball backwards explaining why the kicker may be in the other half of the field when kicking the ball .
A goal may be scored directly from a kick - off against the opponent .
INFRINGEMENTS Section::::Infringements .
If a player moves from their required position as detailed above the kick is retaken .
Failure to maintain position may constitute misconduct and be punished by a caution ( yellow card ) .
It is an offence for the kicker to touch the ball a second time until it has been touched by another player ; this is punishable by an indirect free kick to the defending team from where the offence occurred , unless the second touch was also a more serious handling offence , in which case it is punishable by a direct free kick .
HISTORY
BEFORE 1863 Section::::History . Section::::Before 1863 .
One of the few things we know about the rules of English traditional football is the means by which the matches were started : it appears to have been the custom in several places for the game to start with the ball being " thrown up " in the middle of the field of play by a neutral official .
The players would then contest for possession of the ball as it descended .
The rules of Surrey Football Club , published in 1849 , likewise specify that the game is started by the ball being " tossed up in the centre of the ground " .
A game played on Christmas Day 1841 is recorded as having been started with the ball placed in the middle of the field of play , with each team attempting to play the ball as soon as possible after the firing of a pistol .
The oldest published laws of football ( Rugby School , 1845 ) specify that the game is to be started with a " kick off " from the middle of the field of play , which must be a place - kick .
Most codes of laws from this era provide for a similar " kick off " from the centre of the ground ; these include the Cambridge rules of 1856 , the Sheffield rules of 1858 , and the rules for Harrow football of 1858 .
One exception is the laws for the Eton field game ( 1862 ) , which specify instead a " bully " in the middle of the field ( similar to a scrummage in rugby union ) .
The novel Tom Brown 's School Days ( published in 1857 but based on the author 's experiences at Rugby School from 1834 to 1842 ) gives a detailed description of the kick - off : THE FA LAWS OF 1863 Section::::The FA Laws of 1863 .
The original FA laws of 1863 specify that " [ t]he game shall be commenced by a place kick from the centre of the ground by the side losing the toss , the other side shall not approach within 10 yards of the ball until it is kicked off " .
A " place kick " is further defined as " a kick at the ball while on the ground , in any position in which the kicker may choose to place it " .
Another law states that " [ a]fter a goal is won the losing side shall kick off and the goals shall be changed . "
SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENTS THE INITIAL KICK - OFF Section::::Subsequent developments .
Section::::The initial kick - off .
The original laws of 1863 specified that the initial kick - off should be taken by the side losing the toss .
In 1873 , the team winning the toss was given the option of whether to choose ends or to take the initial kick - off .
In 1997 , the law was changed back , so that the initial kick - off was once again taken by the team losing the toss .
KICK - OFF IN THE SECOND HALF Section::::Kick - off in the second half .
The original laws of 1863 made no provision for half - time .
In 1870 , a change of ends was introduced at half - time , but only if no goals had been scored in the first half ; the laws did not specify that the second half should be started by a kick - off .
In 1874 , the laws specified that a kick - off should occur at the start of the second half , provided no goal had been scored up to that point ; this kick - off was taken by same side as originally kicked off the game .
This was changed in 1875 to the current situation , whereby there is always a break and change of ends at half - time , and the kick - off for the second half is taken by the opposite team to that which kicked off the first half .
PLAYERS ' POSITION
Section::::Players ' position .
The original laws of 1863 placed no restriction ( other than offside ) on the players ' position during the kick - off , except that opponents could not approach within 10 yards of the ball .
In 1874 , a new restriction was added that all players had to be in their own half of the field .
As of 2016 , the kicker is allowed to be in the opponents ' half ( within 10 yards of the ball when the whistle is blown is assumed ) .
DIRECTION OF THE KICK Section::::Direction of the kick .
In 1883 , the kick - off was required to be kicked forwards .
This restriction was removed in 2016 .
DRIBBLING
Section::::Dribbling .
In 1875 , it was forbidden for the player taking the kick - off to play the ball again until it had been kicked by another player .
SCORING A GOAL FROM THE KICK - OFF
Section::::Scoring a goal from the kick - off .
In 1875 , it was forbidden to score a goal directly from the kick - off .
This restriction was reversed in 1997 , when it was permitted once again to score a goal directly from the kick - off .
In 2016 , at the same time the backwards kick - off was legalized , the possibility of scoring an own goal directly from the kick - off ( an extremely unlikely situation ) was removed , with a corner kick being awarded to the opponents instead .
PITCH
MARKINGS
Section::::Pitch markings .
In 1891 , internal pitch - markings were introduced .
These included a " suitable mark " at the centre of the pitch and a " circle of radius 10 yards " to mark the area within which opponents were forbidden .
SUMMARY REFERENCES
* FIFA Laws of the Game ( PDF )