ROYAL PREROGATIVE OF MERCY
In the English and British tradition , the royal prerogative of mercy is one of the historic royal prerogatives of the British monarch , by which he or she can grant pardons ( informally known as a royal pardon ) to convicted persons .
The royal prerogative of mercy was originally used to permit the monarch to withdraw , or provide alternatives to death sentences ; the alternative of penal transportation to " partes abroade " has been used since at least 1617 .
It is now used to change any sentence or penalty .
A royal pardon does not itself overturn a conviction .
Officially , this is a power of the monarch .
Formally , in Commonwealth realms , this has been delegated to the Governor - General of the realm , which in practice means to government ministers who advise the monarch or viceroy , usually those responsible for justice .
Specifically , it has been delegated to the Lord Chancellor in England and Wales ; the Scottish Ministers in Scotland ; and the federal cabinet in Canada .
In Australia , the Governor - General acts on the advice of the Attorney - General or Minister for Justice , and may only exercise the prerogative of mercy in relation to a federal offender convicted of a Commonwealth offence .
The pardon may be a full pardon ( said to be a free , absolute and unconditional pardon ) , a conditional pardon , a remission or partial remission of a penalty , or the ordering of an inquiry .
Each state and territory ( apart from the Australian Capital Territory , which only provides for an inquiry ) has also enacted legislation providing for the reconsideration of convictions or sentences .
In New Zealand , the prerogative of mercy is exercised by the Governor - General as the Queen 's representative .
The Governor - General will act on the advice of the Minister of Justice , and has the power to grant a pardon , reduce a sentence , or refer a case back to the courts for reconsideration .
In the important case of Derek Bentley , a court found that this royal prerogative power is " probably " entirely a matter of policy , and thus not justiciable .
The royal pardon can be contrasted with the statutory pardon , which is a pardon issued through an Act of Parliament or an Order - in - Council .
The statutory pardon is preferred in most cases .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
In 2001 two inmates at HMP Prescoed , south Wales , received early release under the Royal prerogative of mercy when they saved the life of the manager of the prison farm when he was attacked and gored by a captive wild boar .
In 2013 a posthumous pardon was awarded to Alan Turing under the Royal prerogative of mercy .
Wartime codebreaker Turing had been convicted of gross indecency in 1952 .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES