RETROVERTED UTERUS
A retroverted uterus ( tilted uterus , tipped uterus ) is a uterus that is tilted posteriorly .
This is in contrast to the slightly " anteverted " uterus that most women have , which is tipped forward toward the bladder , with the anterior end slightly concave .
Between 1 in 3 and 1 in 5 women ( depending on the source ) have a retroverted uterus , which is tipped backwards towards the spine .
RELATED TERMS
Section::::Related terms .
The following table distinguishes among some of the terms used for the position of the uterus :
A retroverted uterus should be distinguished from the following :
Additional terms include : * retrocessed uterus : both the superior and inferior ends of the uterus are pushed posteriorly
* severely anteflexed uterus : the uterus is in the same position as " normal " and bends in the same direction ( concave is anterior ) but the bend is much more pronounced * vertical uterus : the fundus ( top of the uterus ) is straight up .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
In most cases , a retroverted uterus is genetic and is perfectly normal ; however , there are other factors that can cause the uterus to be retroverted .
Some cases are caused by pelvic surgery , pelvic adhesions , endometriosis , fibroids , pelvic inflammatory disease , or the labor of childbirth .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A retroverted uterus is usually diagnosed during a routine pelvic examination or with an internal ultrasound .
It usually does not pose any medical problems , though it can be associated with dyspareunia ( pain during sexual intercourse ) and dysmenorrhea ( pain during menstruation ) .
FERTILITY AND PREGNANCY Section::::Fertility and pregnancy .
Rarely , a sharply tilted uterus is due to a disease such as endometriosis , an infection or prior surgery .
Although this may make it more challenging for the sperm to reach the egg , conception can still occur .
A tipped uterus will usually right itself during the 10th to 12th week of pregnancy .
Rarely ( 1 in 3000 to 8000 pregnancies ) a tipped uterus will cause painful and difficult urination , and can cause severe urinary retention .
Treatment for this condition ( called " incarcerated uterus " ) includes manual anteversion of the uterus , and usually requires intermittent or continuous catheter drainage of the bladder until the problem is rectified or spontaneously resolves by the natural enlargement of the uterus , which brings it out of the tipped position .
In addition to manual anteversion and bladder drainage , treatment of urinary retention due to retroverted uterus can require the use of a pessary , or even surgery , but often is as simple as having the pregnant mother sleep on her stomach for a day or two , to allow the retroverted uterus to move forward .
If a uterus does not right itself , it may be labeled persistent .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Treatment options are rarely needed , and include exercises , a pessary , manual repositioning , and surgery .
REFERENCES * A Clinical Approach for Retroverted Uterus Diagnosis & Treatment EXTERNAL LINKS
* Overview at mayoclinic.com
* Diagram at womens-health.co.uk * Diagrams at mayamassage.co.uk ( includes comparisons of retroverted , retroflexed , anteflexed , and retrocessed )