SALT WATER TAFFY Salt water taffy is a variety of soft taffy originally produced and marketed in the Atlantic City , New Jersey area of the Jersey Shore starting in the 1880s .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
The original invention of the candy has several different stories circulating , likely all apocryphal .
One relates to an assistant who substituted fresh water with sea water — either through laziness or accident .
Another cites a storm which caused ocean water to wash over the candy , which was consequently ( and successfully ) marketed with the appropriate name .
Joseph Fralinger popularized the candy by boxing it and selling it in Atlantic City .
Fralinger 's first major competition came from candy maker Enoch James , who refined the recipe , making it less sticky and easier to unwrap .
James also cut the candy into bite - sized pieces , and is credited with mechanizing the " pulling " process .
The candy was also sold mail order ; in 1926 sheet music was commissioned by James with the title " Send Home
Some Taffy Today!"/
Both Fralinger 's and James 's stores still operate on the Atlantic City boardwalk .
Both companies have been owned and operated by the Glaser family since 1947 .
On August 21 , 1923 , John Edmiston obtained a trademark for the name " salt water taffy " ( number 172,016 ) , then demanded royalties from companies using his newly acquired name .
He was sued over this demand , and in 1925 , the trademark was invalidated as being in common use .
Salt water taffy is still sold widely on the boardwalks in Atlantic City ( including shops in existence since the 1800s ) , nearby island Ocean City , and other popular beaches throughout the United States , especially Cape Cod , and Atlantic Canada , as well as in Salt Lake City , Utah .
Taffy is also distributed throughout the U.S. to some specialty shops and markets , and other places where an especially wide and diverse variety of candy is sold .
It is also available for mail order through Internet sources .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Salt water taffy is composed of sugar , cornstarch , corn syrup , glycerine , water , butter , salt , natural and/or artificial flavor , and food color .
Some examples of flavoring include vanilla , lemon , maple , banana , red licorice , watermelon , raspberry or mint extracts .
Despite its name , the taffy contains no salt water ( seawater ) , but does contain both salt and water .
SEE ALSO
* List of candies * List of regional dishes of the United States REFERENCES