TOYOTA HIGHLANDER
The , also known as the , is a mid - size crossover SUV produced by Toyota .
It is built on the same platform as used on the Toyota Camry , but based on size of the Toyota Avalon chassis .
Announced in April 2000 at the New York Auto Show and arriving in late 2000 in Japan and January 2001 in North America , the Highlander became one of the first car - based mid - size SUV or mid - size crossovers .
The Highlander is the crossover counterpart to the more rugged , truck - based midsize 4Runner and became Toyota 's best - selling SUV before being surpassed by the smaller RAV4 in 2006 .
In Japan , the Kluger is exclusive to dealership network called Toyota NETZ as a larger alternative to the RAV4 .
Unable to use the Highlander name in Japan and Australia because of a trademarked Hyundai Terracan trim line , Toyota calls the vehicle the Toyota Kluger ( pronounced Klu - ger ) there .
The name is derived from the German word klug , which means smart or clever ( " Kluger " meaning " one who is smart " ) .
FIRST GENERATION
( XU20 ; 2000–2007 )
Section::::First generation
( XU20 ; 2000–2007 ) .
The Highlander ( or Kluger in Japan and Australia ) shared a platform with its Lexus RX / Toyota Harrier cousin .
It came in five ( 2001–2007 ) and seven - seat ( 2004–2007 ) configurations and became a sales success for Toyota in a number of markets across the world .
The Highlander came standard with front wheel drive and offered all wheel drive ( 50:50 front : rear fixed torque split ) .
Unlike Toyota 's own 4Runner and other mid - sized competitors such as the Jeep Grand Cherokee , or Chevrolet TrailBlazer , the Highlander aimed for on - road comfort with its unibody construction and independent rear suspension .
Although it was longer than the 1996–2002 4Runner available at the time it was launched , the Highlander was surpassed in length by the redesigned 4Runner in 2002 .
The Highlander was available in three trim lines in the United States : the base model , the Sport model , and the Limited model .
The base and Limited models were present when the Highlander was initially introduced , while the Sport model was introduced in March 2006 .
In Japan , it is regarded as a luxury vehicle as the Kluger exceeds Japanese Government regulations regulating engine displacement and exterior dimensions .
In 2004 the wheels on the Limited trim changed from a six - spoke to a five - spoke alloy .
The base - model Highlander wheels also changed from steel - rims to the alloy wheels that were on the 2001–2003 model year Highlander Limited and B - Package .
The Sport models had a distinctive grille design , differentiating themselves from the non - Sport models .
Wheel styling also serves to differentiate the various models — the hybrid sports a unique twin - spoke design .
The Kluger was introduced to Australia in October 2003 .
It was available in three guises : CV , CVX , and Grande .
A limited edition
CV Sport model was also released in 2006 .
There was no hybrid model available in Australia .
The only engine offered was the 3.3-liter 3MZ - FE V6 .
Typical fuel economy using the Australian standard testing regime is .
Engines : * 2001–2007 2.4 L 2AZ - FE I4 , 155 hp ( 119 kW ) * 2001–2003 3.0 L 1MZ - FE V6 , 220 hp ( 164 kW ) * 2004–2007 3.3 L 3MZ - FE V6 , 225 hp ( 172 kW )
The 3.0-liter engine was able to propel the Kluger from 0–60 mph in approximately 8.8 seconds .
In 2004 the Kluger was given a new 3.3-liter V6 engine to compete with the more powerful V6 offerings from its competitors , mainly the Nissan Murano and the Honda Pilot .
The larger engine made it possible for the Kluger to reach 0 to in 7.8 seconds .
2001 UPDATE Section::::2001 update .
The Japanese and Australian Kluger was released with a center console integrated with the dashboard , while the North American Highlander initially lacked this integrated center console .
The integrated center console was introduced in all US Highlanders and in Canadian Limited Highlanders in 2001 , for the 2002 model year , and in all Canadian Highlanders in 2003 , for the 2004 model year .
However , for these early Highlanders without the integrated center console , a smaller non - integrated stand - alone center console was available as an option , which was installed at the factory or could be installed by the dealer .
2003 UPDATE Section::::2003 update .
In 2003 , for the 2004 model year , in addition to the 3.3-liter engine , V6-powered models were equipped with a new five - speed automatic transmission , replacing the four - speed automatic transmission , while the inline - four models continued to use the old four - speed .
This year also saw the introduction of the optional third row seat allowing for two additional passengers .
The center console , which was previously exclusive to the top trim level , is now standard across all trims .
The unibody was slightly modified behind the second row seats to include a depression in the trunk floor able to accommodate the optional third row seating .
On models without third row seating , this depression was turned into a storage compartment ( prior to 2004 the spare tire was accessible from inside the vehicle where the third row seating would subsequently be located ; beginning in 2004 the spare tire is accessible from underneath the vehicle ) .
Subtle changes to the front grille , front and rear bumpers , headlights and taillights ( LED taillights on later hybrid models )
round - out the major changes for the 2003 mid - cycle refresh .
2005 UPDATE Section::::2005 update .
In 2005 , for the 2006 model year , Highlanders sold in Canada were offered only in a V6 all - wheel drive configuration .
Hybrid models were available with part - time four - wheel drive , which Toyota refers to as 4WD - i whereby the rear wheels are powered by a separate electric motor .
This system is intended for use on snow and ice and is prone to overheating the rear electric motor off - road .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Anti - lock brakes , brake assist and electronic brakeforce distribution were standard , Vehicle Stability Control w / traction control optional on 2001–03 models became standard for 2004 models ( Hybrids come standard with VDIM ) .
Also standard for 2004 was a tire pressure monitor .
Front seat - mounted side torso airbags were optional on 2001–06 models , while front and second row side curtain airbags were optional on 2004–06 models .
Side airbags became standard on 2007 models and the curtain airbags gained a rollover sensor that year as well .
+ NHTSA crash test ratings , no side airbags ( 2002 ) : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver : Side Rear Passenger : Rollover : + NHTSA crash test ratings , no side airbags ( 2004 ) : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver : Side Rear Passenger : Rollover ( 2005 ) :
In Insurance Institute for Highway Safety ( IIHS ) crash tests the Highlander was rated " Good " overall in the frontal offset crash test .
The IIHS reported the Highlander had one of the lowest driver fatality rates among all vehicles , and amongst SUVs , only the Toyota 4Runner had a lower driver fatality rate .
This report looked at 2001–2005 model year vehicles in the US .
HYBRID ( MHU28 , 2005–2007 )
Section::::Hybrid ( MHU28 , 2005–2007 ) .
Initially , the Kluger was a regular , non - hybrid SUV driven by an internal combustion engine , but later Toyota introduced a hybrid version , the Kluger Hybrid that utilizes the company 's Hybrid Synergy Drive technology combined with the company 's 3MZ - FE 3.3-liter V6 engine offered in either FWD or AWD trim .
The hybrid drivetrain was unveiled at the 2004 North American International Auto Show , and was offered to the public in July 2005 as a 2006 model .
The power steering pump , water pump and AC compressor were changed from belt - drive to electrically powered versions .
A modified alternator was incorporated into the hybrid system .
In North America , the hybrid version was called the Highlander Hybrid .
It was also the first seven - seat hybrid vehicle .
With the electric motors providing power including lower speeds overall acceleration is improved particularity at passing speeds .
Other additions include Toyota 's Vehicle Dynamics Integrated Management ( VDIM ) system and Electronically Controlled Brake ( ECB ) .
The California Air Resources Board gave it a SULEV emission rating .
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( revised standards ) rated it at City/ Highway for FWD models and / for AWD models .
This system is near identical to that of the Lexus RX 400h .
All - wheel drive models were rated to tow .
SECOND GENERATION ( XU40 ; 2007–2013 ) Section::::Second generation ( XU40 ; 2007–2013 ) .
Toyota revealed the second - generation Highlander and Highlander Hybrid at the 2007 Chicago Auto Show , with American sales beginning in July and hybrids in late September .
But the second - generation Highlander and Highlander Hybrid are not sold in Japan .
The five - seat Highlander for the United States and Canada was dropped as the larger Venza replaced it .
Initially the sole powertrain for the 2008 Highlander was a 3.5-liter 2GR - FE V6 mated to a five - speed automatic .
The four - cylinder model had been discontinued but added again in 2009 .
While the 3.5-liter engine has 55 more bhp than the previous 3.3-liter V6 and dimensional increases along with increased sound proofing added nearly 500 pounds to the vehicle 's curb weight of approximately 4,000 lbs , fuel economy is slightly improved .
The EPA estimated fuel economy for front - wheel drive models is at For 2009 , Toyota again offered a 4-cylinder for 5-passenger front - wheel drive models with the all - new ULEV - II
certified 2.7-liter 1AR - FE I4 paired to a six - speed automatic .
It generates at 5,800 rpm and of peak torque at 4,100 rpm on regular 87 octane fuel .
The four - cylinder delivers an EPA estimated fuel economy of city and highway .
This is better than the previous model 's four - cylinder with /.
The same three trim levels were offered ( Base , Sport , and Limited ) until early 2010 when the SE model replaced the Sport model , buyers are still able to choose between front - drive or all - wheel drive on V6 platforms .
Also new is an Electric Power Steering ( EPS ) system .
Sport and Limited models get a standard backup camera using a 3.5-inch LCD display .
Major options include leather seats , heated seats , a touch - screen DVD based navigation system , a new Smart Key System , an upgraded JBL Synthesis stereo , a rear - seat DVD entertainment system with 9-inch screen , and a towing package that increases towing capacity to 5000 pounds .
The XU40 was initially produced exclusively at the Miyata plant in Miyawaka , Fukuoka , Japan for all global markets beginning in May 2007 .
Production in China for local sales was started on 25 May 2009 by GAC Toyota in Nansha District , Guangzhou , Guangdong .
Toyota had intended on building the Highlander in Blue Springs , Mississippi for the North American market in the 2011 model year .
However , the Corolla was built there instead , and the Highlander is being built at Toyota Motor Manufacturing Indiana in Princeton , Indiana , from the 2010 model year onward for a majority of North America , replacing Tundra production .
TMMI Highlander production began in October 2009 for gasoline engine models only ; hybrids continued to be imported from Japan until the release of the third generation
XU50 , where all production except for China was consolidated at TMMI .
In Australia , the new generation Kluger was launched in August 2007 .
There are three grades available , KX - R , KX - S and Grande .
All grades are available with either 2WD or AWD .
The base model KX - R is also available with either five or seven seats , whilst the latter grades are seven seaters only .
Specifications are mostly similar to the US Highlander , sharing the same 3.5-litre V6 2GR - FE engine and five - speed automatic transmission .
However , there are no plans at present to introduce a hybrid version of the Kluger into the Australian market .
2010 UPDATE Section::::2010 update .
In 2010 , for the 2011 model year , Toyota made some changes to the Highlander and Highlander Hybrid .
While the general design remains similar to the 2010 model , the Highlander 's front end has been significantly revised , now featuring new headlights , a new black with chrome accent rocker panel , and new front grille .
The non - hybrid engines for 2011 remain the same , although now the 2.7-liter four - cylinder engine may be had on the SE trim level , previously only available on the base model .
More standard features are now equipped on all trim levels , with the base model receiving front and rear air conditioning , power locks / windows , cruise control , and a multi - function keyless entry control .
Pre - facelift styling Post - facelift
styling SAFETY Section::::Safety .
+ NHTSA crash test ratings ( 2008 ) : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver :
Side Rear Passenger :
Rollover :
All models come standard with enhanced Vehicle Stability Control which immediately alters electric powering steering assist w / traction control ( hybrids come standard with VDIM ) , anti - lock brakes , brake assist and electronic brakeforce distribution .
Also standard is a tire pressure monitor , a driver 's knee airbag , front seat - mounted side torso airbags , side curtain airbags for all three rows which includes a rollover sensor and active front headrests .
Hill Start Assist Control ( HAC ) is also standard which prevents rolling backwards on slopes , and Downhill Assist Control ( DAC ) is standard on AWD trims .
The IIHS rates the Highlander " Good " overall in their frontal offset crash test , and good in all subcategories except for " Head / neck , " which is rated as " Acceptable . "
And " Good " overall in the side impact crash test , with " Good " rating in all nine measured categories .
The Highlander is also rated " Good " in the roof strength test , giving it a " top safety pick " rating .
In Australasian New Car Assessment Program ( ANCAP ) testing the Kluger is given a rating but only a rating for pedestrian protection .
The safety and effectiveness of the Highlander / Kluger 's Vehicle Stability Control system has been questioned by some motoring journalists .
During testing for Wheels magazine Car of the Year in 2007 , the magazine 's editor rolled the vehicle during high - speed gravel road testing .
Noting that it was the first such event in the magazine 's 45-year history , he criticised the vehicle 's stability system stating that " Deficiencies in the Kluger 's ESP contributed to the crash " .
Six of the seven other judges also stated that they felt " the vehicle 's ESP performance was sub - standard " , and remarked that the vehicle was " almost dangerous on dirt [ roads ] " .
In a written response , Toyota disputed the circumstances of the accident and criticised the testing procedures as " unscientific " .
HYBRID
Section::::Hybrid .
The Kluger Hybrid features Toyota 's Hybrid Synergy Drive which continues to allow an electric only powered mode for short distances and speeds .
Weight and cost have been improved over the previous hybrid .
The expanded size and new features have led to an increase of 500 pounds to its curb weight .
All Highlander Hybrids are all - wheel drive , and the EPA has rated the hybrid at for the city and for the highway , same as the previous model .
The Highlander 's fuel economy , while better than the Lexus RX 400h 's , lags behind the compact 4cyl Ford Escape Hybrid , which ceased production in 2012 , and the latest RX 450h , but still produces significantly fewer emissions than the non - hybrid version with a CARB SULEV rating .
The Highlander Hybrid continues to use the same 3.3-liter 3MZ - FE V6 ( 208 hp ) offered in AWD from the prior model , net power is .
VDIM and Electronically Controlled Brake remain new features include a driver selectable electric only EV mode ( when possible ) and another ECON mode which restricts acceleration and minimizes air conditioning during acceleration .
The Highlander Hybrid Hybrid uses a 1.9 kWh sealed nickel - metal hydride traction battery .
For the 2011 model year the Highlander Hybrid received styling changes and was upgraded with the 3.5-liter 2GR - FXE V6 ( 245 hp ) , increasing net power by , and a powertrain similar to the RX450h .
The vehicle is now rated at for the city , highway and combined cycles .
HIGHLANDER FCHV ( 2007 )
Section::::Highlander FCHV ( 2007 ) .
It was a test vehicle using compressed hydrogen gas , with average fuel economy of 68.3 miles / kg ( approximate mpg equivalent ) .
The vehicle was unveiled in 2007 LA Auto Show .
CHINESE VERSION
Section::::Chinese version .
The Chinese version of the Highlander ( ASU40 / GSU45 ) was unveiled in 2009 at the 13th Shanghai International Automobile Industry Exhibition .
THIRD GENERATION
( XU50 ; 2013–PRESENT )
Section::::Third generation
( XU50 ; 2013–present ) .
On 27 March 2013 , Toyota unveiled the third - generation XU50 series Highlander at the New York International Auto Show , with plans to have the vehicle reach dealerships in early 2014 .
Production began on 5 December .
This version is longer and wider than the outgoing generation and its design has changed from its boxy look to one that is similar to other mid - size crossover SUVs .
In addition to the changes , this one will feature seating for eight people with a sliding second - row point of entry that gives it 4.3 inches of added width space , soft - touch materials on the instrument panel , lane - departure warning , pre - collision warning and blind spot monitoring systems .
HD Radio and Bluetooth will become a standard on all trims for the US version , which will also come equipped with Toyota 's Entune multimedia system along with a 6.1-inch touchscreen display audio system .
An eight - inch touchscreen system and Toyota 's Entune app suite with 12 JBL speakers will be offered as an optional feature .
The three powertrain trims that will be offered include a 2.7-liter , six - speed automatic , front - wheel drive base model , a 3.5-liter , six - speed automatic model in both front- or all - wheel drive , and the AWD - only Hybrid trim with a 3.5-liter V6 mated to an eCVT .
The newest Highlander is also approved for use as a New York City taxicab .
2016
FACELIFT Section::::2016 facelift .
A refreshed 2017 model year Highlander appeared at the March 2016 New York Auto Show with sales starting in the fourth quarter of 2016 .
In V6 powered models , an eight - speed automatic replaced the six - speeder and the revised V6 engine ( now designated 2GR - FKS )
added Toyota 's D4-S direct injection fuel system .
The new Highlander has a new fascia with restyled headlights and taillights , new SE grade , and XLE and LE Hybrid grades plus new exterior and interior colors .
Pre - facelift styling Post - facelift
styling SAFETY Section::::Safety .
+2016 Toyota Highlander on NHTSA Overall : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver :
Side Passenger : Side Pole Driver : Rollover AWD :
+2015 Toyota Highlander on IIHS SALES Section::::Sales .
Toyota set a Highlander sales record in the US in 2017 , selling 215,775 Highlanders . !
Calendar year !
US total sales !
US hybrid sales
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official websites for Australia , Canada , China , US