J.CREW J.Crew Group , Inc. , is an American multi - brand , multi - channel , specialty retailer .
The company offers an assortment of women 's , men 's and children 's apparel and accessories , including swimwear , outerwear , lounge - wear , wedding , bags , sweaters , denim , dresses , suiting , jewelry , and shoes .
As of August 2016 , it operates more than 450 retail stores throughout the United States .
The company conducts its business through retail , factory , crew cuts , Madewell stores , catalogs and online .
HISTORY FORMATION AND CATALOG GROWTH Section::::History .
Section::::Formation and catalog growth .
In 1947 , Mitchell Cinader and Saul Charles founded Popular Merchandise , Inc. , a store which did business as Popular Club Plan and sold low - priced women 's clothing marketed through in - home demonstrations .
Throughout the mid-1980s , sales from catalog operations grew rapidly .
" Growth was explosive—25 to 30 percent a year , " Cinader later recollected in The New York Times .
Annual sales grew from $ 3 million to more than $ 100 million over five years .
In 1985 , the " Clifford & Wills " brand was launched , selling women 's clothing that was more affordable than the Popular Merchandise line .
In 1987 , two executives left the company to start their own catalog , Tweeds .
The 1980s marked a booming sales period for catalog retail giants Lands ' End , Talbots , and L. L. Bean .
Popular Merchandise initiated its own catalog operation , focusing on leisurewear for upper - middle - class customers , aiming for a Ralph Lauren look at a much lower price .
The first Popular Club Plan catalog was mailed to customers in January 1983 and continued under that name until 1989 .
Popular Club Plan catalogs often showed the same garment in more than one picture with close - up shots of the fabrics , so customers could get a sense of how the garment looked on the body and be assured of the company 's claims of quality .
NAME CHANGE AND FIRST STORES Section::::Name change and first stores .
In 1983 , Popular Merchandise , Inc. became known as J.Crew ,
Inc. The company attempted , but failed to sell the Popular Club Plan brand .
Also in 1989 , J.Crew opened its first retail store , in South Street Seaport in downtown Manhattan .
J.Crew Group was owned by the Cinader family for most of its existence , but in October 1997 investment firm Texas Pacific Group Inc. purchased a majority stake .
By the year 2000 , Texas Pacific held an approximate 62 percent stake , a group of J.Crew managers held about 10 percent , and Emily Cinader Woods , the chairman of J.Crew , along with her father , Arthur Cinader , held most of the remainder .
The brand Clifford & Wills was sold to Speigel , Inc. in 2000 with the intent to boost sales .
In 2004 , J.Crew bought the rights to the brand Madewell , a defunct workwear manufacturer founded in 1937 , and used the name from 2006 onwards as " a modern - day interpretation " , targeted at younger women than their main brand .
PRIVATIZATION Section::::Privatization .
In 2011 , TPG Capital LP and Leonard Green & Partners LP privatized J.Crew in a $ 3 billion leveraged buyout .
On November 23 , 2010 , the company had agreed to be taken private in a $ 3 billion deal led by management with the backing of TPG Capital and Leonard Green & Partners , two large private equity firms .
The announcement of the offer from two investment firms — including one that used to own J.Crew — came as the retailer reported that its third - quarter net income fell by 14 percent due to weak women 's clothing sales .
The company also lowered its guidance for the 2010 year .
Under the deal as proposed , J.Crew shareholders would receive $ 43.50 per share in cash , representing a 16 percent premium to the stock 's closing price the prior day of $ 37.65 .
CEO Mickey Drexler , the former Gap Inc. chief credited with turning J.Crew around since coming aboard in 2003 , remained in that role and retained a " significant " stake in the company ( as of September 2010 , he holds 5.4 % of outstanding shares ) .
TPG , one of the investment firms in the deal , took a majority stake in J.Crew Group Inc. in 1997 and remained majority shareholder until the company went public in 2006 .
Shortly after the announcement of the deal , some in the business community criticized the terms of the deal involving the company 's CEO and a majority shareholder .
As a result , the " go - shop " period was extended shortly after the initial announcement .
In addition , several investigations relating to potential shareholder actions against the company were announced .
After the deal , TPG and Leonard Green borrowed more to help finance dividends totaled $ 787 million to them .
RECENT Section::::Recent .
In June 2015 , The New York Times reported that J.Crew 's women 's division was undergoing a slump because of the company 's failure to react to two market trends : cheap " fast fashion " and " athleisure " items .
In 2016 , J.Crew partnered with Nordstrom to begin selling their products in stores and online .
In December 2016 , the company faced litigation after it moved its intellectual property " out of the reach of lenders . "
In April 2017 , the company cut 250 jobs , largely from its headquarters .
The company also underwent several management changes , and long - term creative director Jenna Lyons left the company in April .
The brand 's longtime head of menswear , Frank Muytjens , left the company that month as well , and in June 2017 , the company 's CEO , Mickey Drexler , announced that he would later be stepping down as CEO role after 14 years with the company .
Drexler announced he would stay on as chairman and still own 10 % of the company .
On June 12 , 2017 , J.Crew Group Inc. announced it had " made an offer to some of its bondholders to push back its most pressing debt obligation — about $ 567 million due in May 2019—and amend its term loan .
" At the time , J.Crew Group had around $ 2 billion in debt .
Also in 2017 , Drexler approached Amazon Inc about selling J.Crew to the tech giant .
In the summer of 2017 , the company avoided a bankruptcy filing by having bondholders do a debt swap tapping into its brand name value .
The majority of the bondholders agreed to the deal , with several others failing to stock the deal with a lawsuit .
The deal lowered the company 's debt .
On February 16 , 2018 , J.Crew hired long - time Starbucks executive , Adam Brotman as president and chief experience officer .
In November 2018 , J.Crew announced its CEO , James Brett would step down and be replaced by an office of the CEO consisting of four senior executives from J.Crew .
Brett took up the position in June 2017 .
The company released a press release stating Brett 's departure was a " mutual agreement " between Brett and the company 's board of directors .
Brett will be replaced by Michael Nicholson , president and COO , Adam Brotman , president and chief experience officer , Lynda Markoe , chief administrative officer , and Libby Wadle , president of Madewell Brand .
The new office of the CEO will be responsible of managing J.Crew 's operations as the board establishes a permanent management structure .
On November 29 , J.Crew discontinued their Mercantile and Nevereven brands , which had been operating for less than a month .
RETAIL STORES Section::::Retail stores .
The company operates 575 retail stores , including 281 J.Crew stores , 113 Madewell stores , and 181 J.Crew Factory ( including 39 J.Crew Mercantile ) outlet locations , as reported in 2017 .
The company also operates internationally in Canada , France , UK , China , and Korea .
Additionally , the company has 76 locations in Japan , which are operated under license by ITOCHU Corporation .
In March 1989 , the first J.Crew retail outlet opened in the South Street Seaport in Manhattan , and the company planned to open 45 more stores .
Five months after the opening of its first store , J.Crew added two new catalog lines : " Classics " and " Collections . "
" Collections " used more complicated designs and finer fabrics to create dressier and more expensive items , while " Classics " featured clothes that could be worn both to work and for leisure activities .
In the fall of 1989 , J.Crew opened three new stores in Chestnut Hill , Massachusetts ; San Francisco , California ; and Costa Mesa , California , all locations with strong catalog sales .
By the end of the year , retail sales nearly hit $ 10 million .
Despite 1989 , revenues that year were estimated at $ 320 million , J.Crew suffered a setback when its agreement to sell its Popular Club unit collapsed at the end that year .
In addition , rumors circulated that the company 's Clifford & Wills low - priced women 's apparel catalog was doing poorly .
J.Crew saw revenues reach $ 400 million in 1990 but reported that its four existing stores had not yet started producing enough profits to cover their overheads .
The next phase of store openings included outlets in Philadelphia , Cambridge , and Portland .
The company scaled back its plans for opening retail stores from 45 stores to 30 or 35 .
In early 1991 the company hired a director of new marketing development and began efforts to expand their sales into Canada .
In April 1991 , J.Crew mailed 75,000 J.Crew catalogs and 60,000 Clifford & Wills catalogs to potential customers in the province of Ontario .
Response rates to this effort were slightly lower than in the United States , but each order , on average , was higher .
In 1992 , J.Crew intensified its push into international markets by hiring a new vice - president for international development .
The company already mailed hundreds of catalogs to customers in Japan and Europe , most of whom had become acquainted with J.Crew while traveling or living in the United States .
In 2011 , J.Crew opened its first international store in the Yorkdale Shopping Centre in Toronto , Ontario .
In 2012 , J.Crew announced four new Canadian locations : Edmonton , Alberta in West Edmonton Mall , Vancouver , British Columbia on Robson Street , and Toronto , Ontario in Fairview Mall and the Toronto Eaton Centre .
All locations will carry women 's and men 's collections .
Along with 5 new stores , although some of these stores have been closed recently .
J.Crew announced to opening of two new factory stores in Canada , with one in Vaughan Mills and the other in Edmonton ( The second J.Crew in Alberta )
Continuing with its expansion in the Greater Toronto Area , J.Crew opened at Markville Shopping Centre in 2013 .
In early 2014 , J.Crew unveiled its new flagship location in Yorkville , Toronto .
In an interview with the Financial Times in 2011 , CEO of J.Crew Mickey Drexler said that J.Crew would be expanding to the U.K. with their flagship store being on London 's Regent Street .
He indicated that the company would be following up their recent expansion into Canada and Canadian e - commerce with a physical store in England , most likely followed by e - commerce elsewhere , such as France and Germany .
Although a few locations were reviewed for the London store , including Covent Garden and the East End , the ultimate decision was to open on Regent Street .
In early 2014 , J.Crew announced plans to open brick - and - mortar locations in Asia – to be spearheaded by two establishments in Hong Kong .
A women 's store is slated to open in the International Finance Centre , while a men 's shop is in the works for On Lan Street .
Both opened for business in May 2014 .
By June 2017 , J.Crew Group had around 600 stores , including about 460 J.Crew locations .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Each year the company issues 24 editions of the J.Crew catalog , distributing more than 80 million copies .
J.Crew has been criticized for labeling its new super - small jeans as " size 000 " .
, and for advertising them as " toothpick jeans " .
Critics have said the labeling promotes vanity , a practice known as vanity sizing .
The " size 000 " is smaller than a size zero and has three zeros , implying that it is two sizes smaller than the smallest normal size .
This has caused people to question whether negative sizes will be available in the future , and if the method of labeling should be changed .
In early 2011 , J.Crew was under fire by conservative media outlets for an advertisement featuring its creative director and president , Jenna Lyons , painting her son 's toenails pink .
Beneath the picture was a quote that read , "
Lucky for me I ended up with a boy whose favorite color is pink .
" Some people were of the opinion that J.Crew was challenging traditional gender identity roles , although author Jo B. Paoletti said that it was " no big deal " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official page on Facebook