OLIVIA BENSON Olivia Margaret Benson is a fictional character on the NBC police procedural drama , portrayed by Mariska Hargitay .
Benson holds the rank of Lieutenant and is the Commanding Officer of the Manhattan Special Victims Unit of the New York City Police Department , which operates out of the 16th precinct .
When the series begins , she holds the rank of Detective and is partnered with Detective Elliot Stabler ( Christopher Meloni ) .
Following Stabler 's departure at the end of the 12th season after a deadly shootout in the precinct , she is partnered with Detective Nick Amaro ( Danny Pino ) .
During the 15th season , Benson is promoted to Sergeant and appointed as acting commanding officer , in the wake of the retirement of both Sergeant John Munch ( Richard Belzer ) and Captain Donald Cragen ( Dann Florek ) .
During the 17th season , she is promoted to Lieutenant and becomes the squad 's official commanding officer .
The character first appeared in the Law & Order : Special Victims Unit pilot episode , " " , which aired September 20 , 1999 .
Hargitay remains the only original cast member still present on the series .
Benson has been credited in 444 episodes of SVU ( 452 in the franchise / universe ) , and as of season 20 , she is currently the longest serving character in the Law & Order universe .
She made her 400th credited appearance in the third episode of the eighteenth season of Law & Order : Special Victims Unit , surpassing Donald Cragen as the character with the most credited appearances in the franchise .
Hargitay 's portrayal of Olivia Benson has received critical acclaim , and she has been the recipient of numerous awards and nominations , including an Emmy and a Golden Globe .
CHARACTER OVERVIEW Section::::Character overview .
Series creator Dick Wolf named his two lead detectives after his son , Elliot , and his daughter , Olivia .
Wolf conceived Benson as a detective in the Manhattan Special Victims Unit , which investigates sex crimes .
For the first twelve seasons of the show , she is partnered with Elliot Stabler ( Christopher Meloni ) ; after he resigns ( offscreen ) at the beginning of season 13 , she is partnered with Nick Amaro ( Danny Pino ) .
She is tough , empathetic , and gets emotionally involved in cases .
Executive producer and head writer Neal Baer has explained that she is " the empathetic , passionate voice for these victims " , in contrast to Stabler , who embodies " the rage we feel , the ' How can this happen ? '
feeling " .
Of their partnership , Baer assessed that : " They both represent the feelings that we feel simultaneously when we hear about these cases .
That 's why they work so well together . "
In the episode " Paranoia " , Benson described how , despite the difficulty she faced in dealing with a two - year - old female rape victim on her second case , Karen Smythe ( Khandi Alexander ) , who trained her , praised her for displaying a talent in dealing with victims .
Benson herself is a child of her mother 's rape .
Her mother 's rapist , Joseph Hollister , later committed suicide .
Benson 's mother Serena ( Elizabeth Ashley ) , an English professor , was an alcoholic who emotionally and physically abused Olivia .
In the season 2 episode " " , Serena Benson dies falling down a flight of subway stairs outside the entrance to a bar .
In a later episode , " " , Benson mentions being engaged briefly when she was 16 to one of her mother 's students ; when her mother found out , she broke a bottle of vodka and went after her with it .
Benson fought back , kicked her mother twice , and ran out of the house .
Benson is a graduate of Siena College .
While there , she held a membership in a sorority .
In addition to English , Benson speaks Italian , some Spanish and French , and is able to read the Miranda warnings in at least two other languages .
She owns a black 1965 Ford Mustang convertible but rarely drives it .
She has a younger half - brother named Simon Marsden ( Michael Weston ) .
Simon , whom she found by illegally running her DNA through the system , was a suspect in a rape case .
However , his name was cleared after it is revealed that he was framed by Captain Julia Millfield ( Kim Delaney ) , who believed ( incorrectly ) that he sexually assaulted her sister .
Benson 's life is further complicated when she is named the legal guardian of a young boy named Calvin Arliss ( Charlie Tahan ) .
Calvin 's mother , Vivian ( Maria Bello ) , abandons him and flees when Benson 's investigation uncovers that Vivian ( also a child of rape ) may have killed her mother 's rapist .
Vivian names Benson as Calvin 's legal guardian .
Calvin lives with her for a while , until she finds Vivian and her lover
Sara have relapsed into drug use .
Sara confesses to murdering Vivian 's father and is then shot dead .
Vivian revokes Benson 's parental rights and sends Calvin to live with his grandparents in Vermont .
Both Calvin and Benson are devastated by the separation .
In season 13 , she is seen with Calvin and his grandparents during or right before Halloween .
In the season 13 episode " Child 's Welfare " , Simon reveals to Benson that she has a niece and a step - nephew named Olivia and Ty , and that he is planning to marry a woman named Tracy .
When the children are taken by the City because of Simon 's criminal background , Benson calls Defense Attorney Bayard Ellis ( Andre Braugher ) , with whom she has become good friends , to help Simon and Tracy get the children back .
When a judge denies the Marsdens their children back , Simon kidnaps them .
Ellis makes a deal to have Simon serve a 60-day sentence , knocking his charge down from kidnapping to a misdemeanor , custodial interference .
One of the conditions of the reduced charges is that he must give up his custody petition and agree to visit his daughter only in a supervised setting for the next three years .
Simon is reluctant , but Benson tells him that the deal is better than his daughter visiting him in jail .
At the conclusion of the finale , Benson becomes the court - appointed custodial guardian of Noah Porter , an orphaned baby .
The appointment is for a trial period of one year , with the option to apply for legal adoption at the end of that period .
Although the year is rocky due to Noah 's health issues and the demands of her job , Benson grows to love Noah and formally adopts him a year later .
At the end of season 17 , Sergeant Mike Dodds ( Andy Karl ) is taken hostage by corrupt Corrections Officer Gary Munson ( Brad Garrett ) , who ultimately kills him .
Benson blames herself for not checking Munson for weapons before leaving him alone with Dodds .
At the end of season 19 premiere " Gone Fishin ' " , her ex - boyfriend and former SVU colleague , Brian Cassidy ( Dean Winters ) , now a DA Investigator , tells her that she is being investigated by the DA 's office on suspicions of abusing Noah .
The investigation was dropped in " Mood " .
In " Contrapasso " , her lawyer Trevor Langan ( Peter Hermann ) returns to tell her that Ellie Porter had lied about having relatives and discovers that Noah has a grandmother , Sheila Porter ( Brooke Shields ) , Ellie 's mother .
In " No Good Reason " , she brings Benson to family court , accusing her of being an unfit parent ; the case is dismissed , but Benson agrees that it 's in Noah 's best interest that they stop fighting .
In " Unintended Consequences " , Benson lets her visit and spend time with Noah .
At the end of " Intent " , she gets a call from Sheila telling her that Noah had been kidnapped in the mall .
In " Gone Baby Gone " , it is revealed that Sheila was behind the kidnapping , and that she intends to take Noah to live with her in Derry , New Hampshire .
Benson goes to Sheila 's cabin in Franconia , New Hampshire to rescue Noah , where Sheila attacks her ; Benson manages to subdue and arrest her , however , and takes Noah back home with her .
Benson is forced to kill a suspect on three separate occasions during her tenure on the show
: in Season 1 's " Disrobed " , she shoots and kills serial rapist Roger Silver ( Jack Gwaltney ) in self - defense ; in Season 3 's " Wrath " , serial killer Eric Plummer ( Justin Kirk ) commits suicide by cop by attacking a child and forcing Benson to shoot him ; and in Season 18 's " Next Chapter " , she shoots and kills rapist ( and retired corrections officer )
Tom Cole ( Chris Bauer ) during a hostage situation when Cole attacks her SVU colleague Detective Dominick " Sonny " Carisi Jr. ( Peter Scanavino ) .
Also , in Season 6 's " Rage " , she shoots and wounds serial killer Gordon Rickett ( Matthew Modine ) to prevent Stabler from killing him in cold blood .
RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Relationships .
Hargitay has characterized Benson and Stabler 's relationship as " very complicated " .
Her assessment is that : Baer agrees that a romantic relationship between the two is unlikely , though commented : " You never can say never " .
Hargitay has stated that her favorite SVU scene occurs in the episode " Fault " , when Benson is faced with the possibility of losing Stabler : " Lou Diamond Phillips [ who played a child killer ] has a gun to Elliot 's head .
I 'm negotiating [ with him to drop the gun ] .
It was a painful , high - stakes scene .
Elliot and I have to admit what we mean to each other ...
He is everything that [ my character ]
Olivia has .
So this was where we really got that to pay off . "
In an episode where Stabler goes undercover , Benson tries to talk him into coming back ; but they are interrupted by Stabler 's targets , and she undresses and pretends to be a prostitute .
Benson takes it hard when Stabler resigns from the NYPD in the 13th season opener , " Scorched Earth " , and takes a while to warm up to her new partner , Nick Amaro .
While Stabler has yet to appear again in the series , Benson frequently mentions him in both a professional and personal context ; she tells the squad 's newer detectives what Stabler would do in a given situation , and says more than once that she is " getting over someone " .
In season 1 , Benson has a sexual relationship with one of her SVU colleagues , Detective Brian Cassidy ( Dean Winters ) .
In the episode " Closure " , Benson refers to it as a drunken one - night stand .
It is implied that the relationship continued based on comments in the episode " " .
Cassidy leaves the precinct at the end of that episode .
In the season 5 episode " Lowdown " , it is revealed Benson had a relationship with a murder victim who turned out to be gay and HIV positive .
Medical Examiner Melinda Warner ( Tamara Tunie ) immediately tests Benson and the results come back negative .
In the season 9 episode " Closet " , the SVU squad are surprised to find out that Benson has been in a relationship with journalist Kurt Moss ( Bill Pullman ) for several months .
It comes out only because Internal Affairs is investigating Benson and Stabler in a case in which the department accidentally outed a professional football player .
By the end of the episode , she breaks up with Moss .
While Benson has only been portrayed in relationships with men , she has , according to lesbian entertainment website AfterEllen.com , " attracted a large lesbian following " .
Fan speculation exists over alleged sexual tension between Benson and Assistant District Attorney Alexandra Cabot ( Stephanie March ) , which Baer admits to indulging : " We read the fan sites .
We know that people are into the Alex - Olivia thing .
All the codes are in there . "
In the middle of season 13 , Benson enters into a relationship with a new prosecutor to the District Attorney 's Office , ( Harry Connick Jr. ) .
Hargitay has said that Connick , who is a friend of hers , improved the show to a more romantic advanced stance .
" This is a home run on so many levels , " she said .
" The show is very fortunate to have Harry 's extraordinary talent , and I 'm lucky because I get to work with my friend .
I think Olivia could n't have asked for a better companion to take her through a new stage in her life and career . "
Haden and Benson begin their relationship at the end of the episode , " Official Story " .
In the episode " Hunting Ground " , she decides to take it slow with Haden , claiming she needs time to see if their relationship will last .
That night , they end up sleeping together in her apartment .
This makes her late for a case , which is frowned upon in the NYPD .
In the episode " " , Benson and Haden end their relationship due to a conflict of interest .
In the season 14 premiere , Benson shares a kiss with Cassidy after she tells him she is not the same person from 13 years before , when they had a brief sexual relationship .
Later that season , in the episode " Undercover Blue " , it is revealed that Cassidy and Benson had been seeing each other for quite some time .
Their relationship hits a rough patch in the episode when Cassidy is accused of rape , which results in their relationship becoming public .
The charges against Cassidy are later dropped when the SVU detectives discover that he was being set up .
In season 15 , Benson stays with Cassidy as she recovers from her imprisonment by a serial rapist .
A few months after she returns to work , they get a new apartment together .
They break up in the episode " Downloaded Child " , however .
In " Chicago Crossover " and " They 'll Have to Go Through Me " , Benson strikes up a friendship with Sergeant Hank Voight ( Jason Beghe ) of the Chicago Police Department , despite their differing methodologies when it comes to solving crime .
Upon the conclusion of their joint operation , the two share drinks before Benson returns to New York .
It is suggested throughout that Benson is in a relationship with Capt .
Ed Tucker ( Robert John Burke ) of Internal Affairs .
In " Manhattan Transfer " , they are forced to confirm their relationship when Tucker is accused – by his own cousin , a priest – of being complicit with a sex trafficking ring that has ties to Vice and the Catholic Church .
Tucker is eventually cleared , and he continues his relationship with Benson .
In season 18 , Tucker tries to convince Benson to retire with him , though at the conclusion of the episode " Next Chapter " , Benson realizes she is not ready to do so , as being a cop is part of who she is .
As a result , Benson breaks it off with Tucker at the end of the episode " Chasing Theo " .
SEXUAL ASSAULT STORYLINES
Section::::Sexual assault storylines .
In the season 9 episode " Undercover " , Benson poses as an inmate in a women 's prison to investigate an alleged rape by a corrections officer .
While there , the corrections officer in question , Captain Lowell Harris ( Johnny Messner ) , attacks her and attempts to force her to perform oral sex on him .
She is rescued by SVU colleague Fin Tutuola ( Ice - T ) , who gets there just in time to stop the rape .
Later , Benson helps convict the rapist by questioning his earlier victim about distinguishing features on his penis , prompting the victim to recall a mole on it , which Benson later explains to Warner that she had also seen .
When Warner asks Benson if she had been raped , she replies , " It was the closest I 've ever come . "
In season 10 , Benson is seen struggling with now being a victim of sexual assault herself .
She is attending group therapy , something she has not shared with anyone but Tutuola .
In the episode " PTSD , " while investigating the rape of a Marine , she is pushed against a wall while trying to break up a fight between a suspected rapist and another Marine .
She subsequently breaks up the fight by holding her weapon to the back of the suspect 's head .
Later , while in questioning , the other Marine tells Tutuola that , " She [ Benson ] has PTSD , I would recognize that glassy - eyed look anywhere .
" At the end of the episode , the original suspect is cleared , and Benson apologizes to him , admitting that she was a victim of sexual assault .
In the season 11 episode " Perverted , " Benson becomes the prime suspect in the sexual mutilation and murder of a biker gang member .
As more evidence is found linking her to the crime , an Internal Affairs detective insinuates that she may have committed it while suffering from a flashback to the assault .
The other detectives eventually discover that Benson has been framed by a man she sent to prison years earlier .
WILLIAM LEWIS STORYLINE Section::::William Lewis storyline .
At the end of the season 14 finale " Her Negotiation " , Benson is kidnapped by serial rapist / murderer William Lewis ( Pablo Schreiber ) .
During the season 15 premiere " Surrender Benson " , Lewis makes her watch while he rapes and tortures the mother of his own attorney and kills a police officer who attempted to pull him over .
He then beats and tortures her , burning her with cigarettes and wire hangers , and holds her hostage for four days .
Just as he is about to rape her , she breaks free , handcuffs him , and holds him at gunpoint .
When he taunts her , she loses control and beats him within an inch of his life with an iron rod .
She is rescued by her fellow detectives moments later , and Cragen puts her on mandatory leave so she can recover .
She returns to work in the following episode , " Imprisoned Lives " , which takes place two months later , but is still haunted by the experience .
She begins seeing a therapist ( Bill Irwin ) to cope with the trauma .
It is later revealed that Lewis survived and is in prison awaiting trial .
In " Psycho / Therapist " , a visibly injured and still - recovering Lewis fires his new attorney and chooses to represent himself .
He calls Benson as a witness and accuses her of assaulting him because he rejected her sexual advances .
She vehemently denies it , and lies under oath that he had broken free of his restraints and lunged at her .
Lewis is found guilty of kidnapping and assaulting a police officer , but the jury voices doubts about Benson 's story and acquits him of attempted rape .
The episode closes with Benson weeping on the courthouse stairs and , four months later , Lewis being wheeled away on a stretcher .
In " Beast 's Obsession " , Lewis uses the distraction caused by his ( self - induced ) cardiac incident to escape from prison .
He then rapes a teenaged girl , kidnaps her younger sister , and threatens to kill her unless Benson tells the truth about her testimony .
Benson holds a press conference and admits that she lied on the witness stand .
When Lewis does not release the girl , Benson tracks him down and surrenders to him .
With his hostage watching , Lewis at first attempts to rape Benson , but changes his mind when she refuses to show him fear ; instead , he forces her to play Russian roulette with him .
As a police squad closes in , Lewis taunts her one last time before committing suicide right in front of her .
In " Post - Mortem Blues " , she is brought before a grand jury to explain her admission and Lewis ' death .
Her career is threatened until SVU 's temporary commanding officer , Lt .
Declan Murphy ( Donal Logue ) , tells the grand jury that he instructed Benson to lie in her press conference , thus clearing her of Lewis ' death and possible perjury charges .
Murphy then makes Benson his second - in - command .
In subsequent seasons , Lewis ' name becomes a kind of code for an intensely dangerous situation and Benson reveals that her trauma and ordeal with him will always be a part of her .
During a heated exchange with Amaro , he pointedly asks her whether she can ever forgive Lewis ; she does not answer , and he apologizes .
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Character development .
Hargitay has deemed the storyline which saw Benson find her paternal family " probably the biggest thing that 's ever happened to Olivia " .
She feels her character is a role model for teenage girls , revealing : SERVICE Section::::Service .
Benson joined the NYPD in 1992 , and was trained by Sergeant Karen Smythe ( Khandi Alexander ) at the 55th Precinct in the Bronx .
After completing her probationary period , Smythe recommended that Benson be transferred to the Sex Crimes Unit ( later renamed the Special Victims Unit ) .
From 1993 to 1998 , she was partnered with Detective Patrick Griffin ( Anthony Edwards ) , who in 1992 testified on her behalf when she was accused of taking money and drugs during her first bust .
However , he lied for her , as he had not actually been with her in the same room at the time .
By 1998 , she had received her detective 's shield and was assigned to the 16th Precinct as a Detective 3rd Grade , and was partnered with Stabler .
She is promoted to Detective 2nd Grade in 2001 , and Detective 1st Grade in 2011 .
In 2006 , she is temporarily reassigned to the Computer Crimes Unit ; later that year , she does a stint undercover for the FBI 's Domestic Terrorism Unit at the request of her friend , Special Agent Dana Lewis ( Marcia Gay Harden ) .
Benson and Stabler work together for over 12 years , until Stabler retires in 2011 after he kills an 18-year - old girl who shot up the SVU squad room .
Following Stabler 's resignation , she is partnered with Det .
Nick Amaro .
Cragen asks Benson to take the Sergeant 's exam following the retirement of Sgt .
John Munch ( Richard Belzer ) , and she gets the promotion soon afterward
; Cragen congratulates her for placing 48th out of 8,000 applicants .
Cragen announces at another dinner party that Benson has been approved to remain at SVU ( it was feared she would be reassigned ) ; at the end of the episode , Cragen reveals his impending retirement from the NYPD , making Benson SVU 's acting commanding officer .
Benson remains in command until Lieutenant Declan Murphy ( Donal Logue ) takes over the squad ; he makes her his second - in - command .
When Murphy returns to undercover work , he appoints her acting commander .
Lt .
Ed Tucker ( Robert John Burke ) , representing 1 Police Plaza , asks Benson to take the Lieutenant 's exam in order to officially take command of SVU before the NYPD appoints another officer to the position .
She passes the Lieutenant 's exam with flying colors , and is officially promoted to Lieutenant after some politicking by her boss , Deputy Chief William Dodds ( Peter Gallagher ) .
Benson had wanted Tutuola as her second - in - command , but Chief Dodds arranges for the politically unsavvy Benson to be assigned a Sergeant who does know how to play the game – his own son , Mike ( Andy Karl ) .
Following the events of " Manhattan Transfer " , Benson is relieved of her duties as Commanding Officer of SVU , largely due to her ( personal ) involvement with now - Captain Tucker , who becomes a person of interest in a complex corruption case SVU stumbled upon .
Mike Dodds is made Acting Commanding Officer .
In spite of this , Benson quietly continues to call the shots at SVU since Dodds disagrees with her suspension and continues to seek her advice in secret .
Benson is reinstated after SVU managed to bust the sex trafficking ring and Tucker is cleared .
Sometime after Tucker is cleared , Benson and Dodds , on the latter 's last day at SVU , are involved in a hostage situation involving corrupt Rikers Island corrections officer Gary Munson ( Brad Garrett ) holding his wife hostage .
Benson takes Munson 's children out of the house and Dodds tried to resolve the situation , but while trying to get the gun from the officer , he ends up being shot .
He suffers a stroke during surgery and dies .
Benson blames herself for Dodds ' death because they did not initially search Munson for a weapon .
As commanding officer , Benson has worked cases frequently with each of the detectives under her command :
Tutuola , Amanda Rollins ( Kelli Giddish ) and Dominick " Sonny " Carisi ,
Jr. ( Peter Scanavino ) .
LIST OF ASSIGNMENTS * Probationary Patrol Officer , NYPD 55th Precinct ( 1992–93 ) * Patrol Officer , NYPD 55th Precinct ( 1993–98 ) * Junior Detective , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit )
( 1998 – May 18 , 2011 ) * Senior Detective , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit )
( September 21 , 2011 – January 15 , 2014 )
* Acting Commanding Officer ( Sergeant ) , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit ) ( January 22 , 2014 – April 9 , 2014 ) * Sergeant — Supervisor Detective Squad , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit ) ( April 9 , 2014 – May 21 , 2014 ) * Acting Commanding Officer ( Sergeant ) , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit ) ( May 21 , 2014 – October 7 , 2015 )
* Lieutenant — Commander Detective Squad , NYPD 16th Precinct ( Special Victims Unit )
( October 7 , 2015 –
Present ) TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENTS
* Detective , NYPD Computer Crimes Unit ( May 2 , 2006 – May 9 , 2006 )
* Undercover operative , FBI Domestic Terrorism Unit ( September 19 , 2006 – October 31 , 2006 )
* Special Deputy United States Marshal for the Eastern District of New York ( October 6 , 2010 )
* Public Relations Officer , NYPD One Police Plaza ( Public Relations )
( March 2 , 2016 – March 23 , 2016 )
RANKS
* Officer * Detective 3rd Grade
* Detective 2nd Grade * Detective 1st Grade ( Shield number 40115 )
* Sergeant ( Shield number 01139 )
* Lieutenant PARTNERS *
Sergeant Karen Smythe , NYPD ( Khandi Alexander ) –
Training officer ( 1992–1993 ) * Detective Patrick Griffin , NYPD ( Anthony Edwards ) –
First partner ( 1993–98 ) * Detective Elliot Stabler , NYPD Special Victims Unit ( Christopher Meloni )
( 1998–2011 )
* Detective Nick Amaro , NYPD Special Victims Unit ( Danny Pino )
( 2011–2014 ) * None ( Squad Supervisor )
( 2014–15 )
* None ( Commanding Officer )
( 2015–present ) AWARDS AND DECORATIONS AS A SERGEANT Section::::Awards and decorations .
Section::::As
a Sergeant .
The following are the medals and service awards worn by then - Sergeant Benson , as seen in " Betrayal 's Climax " and " Beast 's Obsession " .
American Flag Breast Bar World Trade Center
Breast Bar
NYPD Commendation —
Integrity AS
A LIEUTENANT Section::::As a Lieutenant .
The following are the medals and service awards worn by Lieutenant Benson , as seen in " Heartfelt Passages " .
American Flag Breast Bar World Trade Center
Breast Bar
NYPD Combat Cross NYPD Medal for Valor NYPD
Meritorious Police Duty , w / numeral " 2 " NYPD
Meritorious Police Duty DEVELOPMENT AND CASTING Section::::Development and casting .
Casting for the lead characters on Law & Order : Special Victims Unit occurred in the spring of 1999 .
Dick Wolf , along with officials from NBC and Studios USA , were at the final auditions for the two leads at Rockefeller Center .
The last round had been narrowed down to six finalists .
For the female lead – Benson – Samantha Mathis , Reiko Aylesworth , and Hargitay were being considered .
For the male role – Stabler – the finalists were Tim Matheson , John Slattery , and Christopher Meloni .
Meloni and Hargitay had auditioned in the final round together and after the actors left , there was a moment of dead silence , after which Wolf blurted out , "
Oh well .
There 's no doubt who we should choose – Hargitay and Meloni . "
The duo , who Wolf believed had the perfect chemistry from the first time he saw them together , were his first choice .
Garth Ancier , then head of NBC Entertainment , agreed , and the rest of the panel assembled voiced their assent .
Hargitay trained as a rape crisis advocate to prepare for the role of Benson .
During the last months of her pregnancy in 2006 , Hargitay took maternity leave from SVU , and was temporarily replaced by Connie Nielsen .
In May 2009 , after the show 's , Hargitay and Meloni 's contracts expired when they were reportedly making $ 375,000–$385,000 per episode .
During negotiations in April for a new contract , the duo attempted to receive a percentage of the show 's profits as other high - profile Law & Order actors had done in the past .
It was rumored that NBC threatened to replace Hargitay and Meloni if they persisted in their demands .
However , two months later it was officially reported that both their contracts had been renewed for two more years .
When the thirteenth season was about to air , initial reports indicated that Hargitay would appear in only the first 13 episodes .
However , NBC chairman Bob Greenblatt later clarified that she would be in every episode of the season .
Since 2012 , Hargitay earns approximately $ 400,000 to $ 500,000 per episode .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Hargitay has won a number of awards for her role as Benson : ' Individual Achievement for Best Female Lead ' and ' Outstanding Female Lead ' Gracie Awards in 2004 and 2009 respectively , an Emmy for ' Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series ' in 2006 , a Prism Award for ' Performance in a Drama Series Episode ' in 2006 , and a Golden Globe for ' Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series ' in 2005 .
Of her Emmy win , Hargitay commented : " It makes me only want to be better .
Now I 'm an Emmy winner .
I have to step it up . "
The San Francisco Chronicle 's John Carman called Hargitay " the show 's weakest performer " when the series originally premiered in 1999 .
In 2006 , however , fellow San Francisco Chronicle writer Jean Gonick deemed Benson a suitable role model for teenage girls , calling her " courageous and strong , and unspeakably gorgeous " , and writing that " Olivia Benson is our own special hero .
She battles evil , avenges her mother , faces her demons but refuses to date them . "
In 2001 , Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker criticized Benson and Stabler as " the most naive , bleeding heart molester buster in America . "
A poll on the Hallmark Channel voted her second - greatest detective in the Law & Order franchise , only being beaten by s Robert Goren ( Vincent D'Onofrio ) .
Benson appeared in Comcast 's list of TV 's Most Intriguing Characters and also in the website 's list of TV 's Top Cops .
She was included in TV Guides list of " TV 's Sexiest Crime Fighters " .
UGO Networks placed " the hard - charging detective " among the " fifty greatest fictional detectives of all time " .
A 2015 poll released by Trailer Park , Inc. in conjunction with QC Strategy ranked Benson as the No . 1 " favourite female television character " .
APPEARANCES ON OTHER SHOWS Section::::Appearances on other shows .
Benson appears on three episodes of Law & Order , one episode of , three episodes of Chicago P.D. and one episode of Chicago Fire .
* Law & Order : " Entitled : Part 2 " ( February 18 , 2000 ) * Law & Order : " Fools for Love " ( February 23 , 2000 )
* Law & Order : Trial by Jury : " Day " ( May 3 , 2005 )
* Law & Order : " Flaw " ( September 28 , 2005 )
* Chicago P.D. : " They 'll Have to Go Through Me " ( November 12 , 2014 )
* Chicago Fire : " We Called Her Jellybean " ( April 28 , 2015 )
* Chicago P.D. : " The Number of Rats " ( April 29 , 2015 ) * Chicago P.D. : " The Song of Gregory William Yates " ( February 10 , 2016 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS