BILLFISH
The term billfish refers to a group of predatory fish characterised by prominent bills , or rostra , and by their large size ; some are longer than 4 m ( 13 ft ) .
Billfish include sailfish and marlin , which make up the family Istiophoridae , and swordfish , sole member of the family Xiphiidae .
They are apex predators which feed on a wide variety of smaller fish , crustaceans , and cephalopods .
These two families are sometimes classified as belonging to the order Istiophoriformes , a group with origins in the Late Cretaceous around 71 million years ago with the two families diverging from one and another in the Late Miocene around 15 million years ago .
However , they are also classified as being closely related to the mackerels and tuna within the suborder
Scombroidei of the order Perciformes .
However , the 5th edition of the Fishes of the World does recognise the Istiophoriformes as a valid order , albeit including the Sphyraenidae , the barracudas .
Billfish are pelagic and highly migratory .
They are found in all oceans , although they usually inhabit tropical and subtropical waters ; swordfish are found in temperate waters , as well .
Billfish use their long spears or sword - like upper beaks to slash at and stun prey during feeding .
Their bills can also be used to spear prey , and have been known to spear boats ( probably accidentally ) , but they are not normally used in that way .
They are highly valued as gamefish by sports fishermen .
SPECIES Section::::Species .
The term billfish refers to the fishes of the families Xiphiidae and Istiophoridae .
These large fishes are " characterized by the prolongation of the upper jaw , much beyond the lower jaw into a long rostrum which is flat and sword - like ( swordfish ) or rounded and spear - like ( sailfishes , spearfishes , and marlins ) . " TRUE BILLFISH Section::::True billfish .
The 12 species of true billfish are divided into two families and five genera .
One family , Xiphiidae , contains only one species , the swordfish Xiphias gladius , and the other family , Istiophoridae , contains 11 species in four genera , including marlin , spearfish , and sailfish .
Controversy exists about whether the Indo - Pacific blue marlin , Makaira mazara , is the same species as the Atlantic blue marlin , M. nigricans .
FishBase follows Nakamura ( 1985 ) in recognizing M. mazara as a distinct species , " chiefly because of differences in the pattern of the lateral line system " .
+ Billfish species !
Family !
Genus !
Common name !
Scientific name !
Maximumlength !
Commonlength !
Maximumweight !
Maximumage !
Trophiclevel !
FishBase !
FAO !
IUCN status
BILLFISH - LIKE FISH
Section::::Billfish - like fish .
A number of other fishes have pronounced bills or beaks , and are sometimes referred to as billfish , despite not being true billfish .
Halfbeaks look somewhat like miniature billfish , and the sawfish and sawshark , which are cartilaginous fishes with long , serrated rostrums .
Needlefish are sometimes confused with billfish , but they are " easily distinguished from the true billfish by having both jaws prolonged , the dorsal and anal fins both single and similar in size and shape , and the pelvic fins inserted far behind the pectorals .
" Paddlefish have elongated rostrums containing electroreceptors that can detect weak electrical fields .
Paddlefish are filter feeders and may use their rostrum to detect zooplankton .
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE BILL Section::::Structure and function of the bill .
Billfish have a long , bony , spear - shaped bill , sometimes called a snout , beak or rostrum .
The swordfish has the longest bill , about one - third its body length .
Like a true sword , it is smooth , flat , pointed and sharp .
The bills of other billfish are shorter and rounder , more like spears .
Billfish normally use their bills to slash at schooling fish .
They swim through the fish school at high speed , slashing left and right , and then circle back to eat the fish they stunned .
Adult swordfish have no teeth , and other billfish have only small file - like teeth .
They swallow their catch whole , head - first .
Billfish do n't normally spear with their bills , though occasionally a marlin will flip a fish into the air and bayonet it .
Given the speed and power of these fish , when they do spear things the results can be dramatic .
Predators of billfish , such as great white and mako sharks , have been found with billfish spears embedded in them .
Pelagic fish generally are fascinated by floating objects , and congregate about them .
Billfish can accidentally impale boats and other floating objects when they pursue the small fish that aggregate around them .
Care is needed when attempting to land a hooked billfish .
Many fisherman have been injured , some seriously , by a billfish thrashing its bill about .
OTHER CHARACTERISTICS
Section::::Other characteristics .
Billfish are large swift predators which spend most of their time in the epipelagic zone of the open ocean .
They feed voraciously on smaller pelagic fish , crustaceans and small squid .
Some billfish species also hunt demersal fish on the seafloor , while others descend periodically to mesopelagic depths .
They may come closer to the coast when they spawn in the summer .
Their eggs and larvae are pelagic , that is they float freely in the water column .
Many grow over three metres ( 10 feet ) long , and the blue marlin can grow to five metres ( 16 feet ) .
Females are usually larger than males .
Like scombroids ( tuna , bonito and mackerel ) , billfish have both the ability to migrate over long distances , efficiently cruising at slow speeds , and the ability to generate rapid bursts of speed .
These speed bursts can be quite astonishing , and the Indo - Pacific sailfish has been recorded making a burst of 68 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) , nearly top speed for a cheetah and the highest speed ever recorded for a fish .
Some billfish also descend to considerable mesopelagic depths .
They have sophisticated swim bladders which allow them to rapidly compensate for pressure changes as the depth changes .
This means that when they are swimming deep , they can return swiftly to the surface without problems . "
Like the large tuna , some billfish maintain their body temperature several degrees above ambient water temperatures ; this elevated body temperature increases the efficiency of the swimming muscles , especially during excursions into the cold water below the thermocline . "
In 1936 the British zoologist James Gray posed a conundrum which has come to be known as Gray 's paradox .
The problem he posed was how dolphins can swim and accelerate so fast when it seemed their muscles lacked the needed power .
If this is a problem with dolphins it is an even greater problem with billfish such as swordfish , which swim and accelerate faster than dolphins .
In 2009 , Taiwanese researchers from the National Chung Hsing University introduced new concepts of " kidnapped airfoils and circulating horsepower " to explain the swimming capabilities of swordfish .
The researchers claim this analysis also " solves the perplexity of dolphin 's Gray paradox " .
They also assert that swordfish " use sensitive rostrum / lateral - line sensors to detect upcoming / ambient water pressure and attain the best attack angle to capture the body lift power aided by the forward - biased dorsal fin to compensate for most of the water resistance power . "
Billfish have prominent dorsal fins .
Like tuna , mackerel and other scombroids , billfish streamline themselves by retracting their dorsal fins into a groove in their body when they swim .
The shape , size , position and colour of the dorsal fin varies with the type of billfish , and can be a simple way to identify a billfish species .
For example , the white marlin has a dorsal fin with a curved front edge and is covered with black spots .
The huge dorsal fin , or sail of the sailfish is kept retracted most of the time .
Sailfish raise them if they want to herd a school of small fish , and also after periods of high activity , presumably to cool down .
DISTRIBUTION AND MIGRATION Section::::Distribution and migration .
Billfish occur worldwide in temperate and tropical waters .
They are highly migratory oceanic fish , spending much of their time in the epipelagic zone of international water following major ocean currents .
Migrations are linked to seasonal patterns of sea surface temperatures .
They are sometimes referred to as " rare event species " because the areas they roam over in the open seas are so large that researchers have difficulty locating them .
Little is known about their movements and life histories , so assessing how they can be sustainably managed is not easy .
Unlike coastal fish , billfish usually avoid inshore waters unless there is a deep dropoff close to the land .
Instead , they swim along the edge of the continental shelf where cold nutrient rich upwellings can fuel large schools of forage fish .
Billfish can be found here , cruising and feeding " above the craggy bottom like hawks soaring along a ridge line " .
COMMERCIAL FISHING Section::::Commercial fishing .
In parts of the Pacific and Indian ocean such as the Maldives , billfishing , particularly for swordfish , is an important component of subsistence fishing .
RECREATIONAL FISHING Section::::Recreational fishing .
Billfish are among the most coveted of big gamefish , and major recreational fisheries cater to the demand .
In North America , " the apex of the salt water pursuits is billfishing , the quest for elusive blue marlin and sailfish in the deep blue water about 60 miles out . "
A lot of resources are committed to the activity , particularly in the construction of private and charter billfishing boats to participate in the billfishing tournament circuit .
These are expensive purpose - built offshore vessels with powerfully driven deep sea hulls .
They are often built to luxury standards and equipped with many technologies to ease the life of the deep sea recreational fisherman , including outriggers , flying bridges and fighting chairs , and state of the art fishfinders and navigation electronics .
The boats cruise along the edge of the continental shelf where billfish can be found down to 200 metres ( 600 ft ) , sometimes near weed lines at the surface and submarine canyons and ridges deeper down .
Commercial fishermen usually use drift nets or longlines to catch billfish , but recreational fishermen usually drift with bait fish or troll a bait or lure .
Billfish are caught deeper down the water column by drifting with live bait fish such as ballyhoo , striped mullet or bonito .
Alternatively , they can be caught by trolling at the surface with dead bait or trolling lures designed to imitate bait fish .
Most recreational fishermen now tag and release billfish .
A 2003 study surveyed 317,000 billfish known to have been tagged and released since 1954 .
Of these , 4122 were recovered .
The study concluded that , while tag and release programs have limitations , they provided important information about billfish that can not currently be obtained by other methods .
AS
FOOD Section::::As food .
Billfish make good eating fish , and are high in omega-3 oils .
Blue marlin has a particularly high oil content .
However , because billfish have high trophic levels , near the top of the food web , they also contain significant levels of mercury and other toxins .
According to the United States Food and Drug Administration , swordfish is one of four fishes , along with tilefish , shark , and king mackerel , that children and pregnant women should avoid due to high levels of methylmercury found in these fish and the consequent risk of mercury poisoning . !
colspan="4
" Comparative mercury levels !
colspan="2 " Species !
Mean ppm Billfish are primarily marketed in Japan , where they are eaten raw as sashimi .
They are marketed fresh , frozen , canned , cooked and smoked .
It is not usually a good idea to fry billfish .
Swordfish and marlin are best grilled or broiled , or eaten raw as in sashimi .
Sailfish and spearfish are somewhat tough and are better cooked over charcoal or smoked .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
Billfish are exploited both as food and as fish .
Marlin and sailfish are eaten in many parts of the world , and many sport fisheries target these species .
Swordfish are subject to particularly intense fisheries pressures , and although their survival is not threatened worldwide , they are now comparatively rare in many places where once they were abundant .
The istiophorid billfishes ( marlin and spearfish ) also suffer from intense fishing pressures .
High mortality levels occur when they are caught incidentally by longline fisheries targeting other fish .
Overfishing continues to " push these declines further in some species " .
Because of these concerns about declining populations , sport fishermen and conservationists now work together to gather information on billfish stocks and implement programs such as catch and release , where fish are returned to the sea after they have been caught .
However , the process of catching them can leave them too traumatised to recover .
Studies have shown that circle fishing hooks do much less damage to billfish than the traditional J - hooks , yet they are at just as effective for catching billfish .
This is good for conservation , since it improves survival rates after release .
The stocks for individual species in billfish longline fisheries can " boom and bust " in linked and compensatory ways .
For example , the Atlantic catch of blue marlin declined in the 1960s .
This was accompanied by an increase in sailfish catch .
The sailfish catch then declined from the end of the 1970s to the end of the 1980s , compensated by an increase in swordfish catch .
As a result , overall billfish catches remained fairly stable .
" Many of the world 's fisheries operate in a data poor environment that precludes predictions about how different management actions will affect individual species and the ecosystem as a whole .
"
In recently years pop - up satellite archival tags have been used to monitor billfish .
The capability of these tags to recover useful data is improving , and their use should result in more accurate stock assessments .
In 2011 , a group of researchers claimed they have , for the first time , standardized all available data about scombrids and billfishes so it is in a form suitable for assessing threats to these species .
The synthesis shows that those species which combine a long life with a high economic value , such as the Atlantic blue marlin and the white marlin , are generally threatened .
The combination puts such species in " double jeopardy " .
SEE ALSO
* The Old Man and the Sea REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Lynch PD , Graves JE and Latour RJ ( 2011 )
" Challenges in the assessment and management of highly migratory bycatch species : a case study of the Atlantic marlins " In : WA Taylor , AJ Lynch and M Schechter
( Eds . ) , Sustainable Fisheries : Multi - level Approaches to a Global Problem , American Fisheries Society . .
Review * Maguire , Jean - Jacques ( 2006 )
The state of world highly migratory , straddling and other high seas fishery resources and associated species Fisheries technical paper 495 , FAO , Rome . .
* Schultz , Ken ( 2011 )
Ken Schultz 's Field Guide to Saltwater Fish John Wiley and Sons . .
*
Stobutzki I , Lawrence E , Bensley N and Norris W ( 2006 ) "
Bycatch mitigation approaches in Australia 's Eastern Tuna and Billfish Fishery : seabirds , turtles , marine mammals , sharks and non - target fish " Information Paper WCPFC - SC2 / EBSWG – IP5 .
Ecosystem and Bycatch Specialist Working Group of the Second Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the WCPFC .
* Ward P and Hindmarsh S ( 2006 )
" An overview of historical changes in the fishing gear and practices of pelagic longliners " WCPFC Scientific Committee , Second Regular Session .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Atlas of Tuna and Billfish Catches Interactive Atlas , FAO , Rome .
* Family Istiophoridae at Fishbase.org
* Family Xiphiidae at Fishbase.org
*
The Billfish Foundation * PBS / BBC / NHK Documentary
Superfish * Bill Fish Outdoor Lodge .
* One Quarter of Tuna and Billfish Fishstocks in Need of Conservation Fish Channel , 26 July 2011 .
* Swordfish & Billfish WWF .
* Offield Center for Billfish Studies
* Eastern Tuna And Billfish Fishery Management
The FishSite , June 2011 .
* Billfish Tagging Tuna Research and Conservation Center .
* Scientists find tuna and billfish species at risk European Commission , 12 September 2011 .
* One Quarter of Tuna and Billfish Fishstocks in Need of Conservation Fish Channel , 26 July 2011 .
* Blue marlin blues :
Loss of dissolved oxygen in oceans squeezes billfish habitat EurekAlert , 14 December 2011 .
* Expanding Dead Zones Are Shrinking Tropical Blue Marlin Habitat ScienceDaily , 12 December 2011 .
* Study helps assess global status of tuna and billfish stocks EurekAlert , 15 August 2011 .
*
Assessing Global Status of Tuna and Billfish Stocks ScienceDaily , 15 August 2011 .
* Campaign on mercury levels sparks controversy
Tico Times , 20 May 2011 .