FREAKY FRIDAY ( 2003 FILM )
Freaky Friday is a 2003 American fantasy comedy film directed by Mark Waters and written by Heather Hach and Leslie Dixon , based on Mary Rodgers ' 1972 novel of the same name .
It stars Jamie Lee Curtis and Lindsay Lohan as a mother and daughter whose bodies are switched due to a mysterious and magical fortune cookie .
The film was released in theaters on August 6 , 2003 , by Walt Disney Pictures and Buena Vista Pictures .
It received positive reviews from film critics and it earned over $ 160 million worldwide on a $ 20 million budget .
It was Disney 's third film adaptation of the novel , after the 1976 film Freaky Friday starring Barbara Harris and Jodie Foster , and the 1995 television film Freaky Friday starring Shelley Long and Gaby Hoffmann .
It was released on VHS and DVD on December 16 , 2003 by Walt Disney Home Video .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Anna Coleman is an average teenager with a stressful life due to her stodgy widowed mother , Tess , and annoying younger brother , Harry .
Several conflicts are happening in Anna 's life :
Tess ' upcoming second marriage to Ryan , which Anna is not emotionally ready for due to her father 's death three years before , Anna 's band , Pink Slip , which Tess hates because she thinks that they are " all noise " , Anna 's claims about her archrival , Stacey Hinkhouse , who does not stop tormenting her and has Tess convinced that she and Anna are still best friends like they used to be , and her sadistic English teacher , Mr. Bates , who gives her an " F " on everything she does no matter how hard she tries , and Tess ' disapproval of Anna 's crush on older student named Jake .
To make matters worse , Anna gets detention twice during one school day : once for talking back to Mr. Bates in the hallway , and again for intentionally hitting Stacey in the head with a volleyball during gym class after Stacey did it to her multiple times .
The Colemans eat out at Pei - Pei 's Chinese restaurant , where Anna begs Tess to let her go on an important audition with her band .
Tess refuses since the show is on the same Friday as the rehearsal dinner for her wedding .
They begin arguing again until Pei - Pei 's mother interrupts to give them fortune cookies , which contain a body switching spell .
The next morning , they wake up in each other 's bodies , but can not go directly back to the restaurant as Anna ( now Tess )
has school and Tess ( now Anna ) has her therapy patients .
At school , Tess finds that Anna was right about Stacey and Mr. Bates ; she soon recognizes the latter as a former classmate , Elton , whom she turned down when he asked her out to the prom , and he is now taking his frustration over it out on Anna .
She threatens to report him to the school board unless he stops abusing Anna .
Before Anna goes to Tess ' office , she gives Tess ' body a makeover , much to her mother 's dismay .
At the office , Anna has some difficulty handling her patients apart from a mother who has concerns over her daughter .
At lunchtime , they go back to the restaurant to confront Pei - Pei and her mother , but she explains that only showing selfless love to one another will break the spell .
In the afternoon , Anna attends Harry 's parent - teacher conference , where she reads a composition about how much he actually admires her .
She sees him in a different light , and vows to treat him nicer .
Meanwhile , Tess attempts to make amends with Stacey , but Stacey frames her for cheating .
Jake helps her finish the test , which makes her realize that she has misjudged him .
Unfortunately , he is no longer enamored with " Anna " after Tess sabotages Stacey 's test in revenge .
Meanwhile , Ryan surprises Anna with a talk show interview to discuss Tess ' new psychology book .
However , she turns the interview into a wild romp to cover the fact she has not read the book .
Tess and Jake catch it on TV and while she is embarrassed , he is impressed .
Later , Anna bumps into him at a coffee shop , and they bond over their favorite music .
He begins to fall in love with " Tess " and attempts to pursue her , much to the real Tess ' horror .
At the rehearsal dinner , Anna 's bandmates come to try to convince " Anna " to sneak off to the audition , but they are caught by security .
Ryan surprises Tess and Anna by giving " Anna " permission to go .
He explains that he just wants the kids to accept him , and he urges " Tess " to go support the band , finally winning her over .
Since Tess can not play , Anna unplugs her guitar , and plays while Tess mimes along and enjoys doing so .
Jake watches the performance and realizes that Anna is the one for him .
Tess also realizes how fun music is , and promises to treat Anna 's band with more respect .
Back at the rehearsal dinner , Tess tells Anna to ask Ryan to postpone the wedding , so that Anna will not have to go through marrying him in Tess ' body .
Instead , she proposes a toast where she finally accepts him because of how happy he makes Tess .
This is the act of selfless love needed to break the spell , and their bodies are switched back .
Tess and Ryan later marry , she and Anna finally make up after so long and Anna and Jake start dating with Tess ' approval .
Anna 's band even plays at the reception .
The film ends after Pei - Pei 's mother attempts to give Harry and Grandpa Alan
the body switching fortune cookies when they argue , but her daughter confiscates them in the nick of time by tackling them to the ground .
CAST * Jamie Lee Curtis as Dr. Tess Coleman * Lindsay Lohan as Anna Coleman
* Chad Michael Murray as Jake ,
Anna 's love interest * Mark Harmon as Ryan ,
Tess ' love interest * Harold Gould as Grandpa Alan * Stephen Tobolowsky as Mr. Elton Bates * Christina Vidal as Maddie * Ryan Malgarini as Harry Coleman * Haley Hudson as Peg
* Rosalind Chao as Pei - Pei
* Lucille Soong as Pei - Pei 's mother * Willie Garson as Evan * Dina Waters as Dottie Robertson * Julie Gonzalo as Stacey Hinkhouse * Cayden Boyd as Harry 's friend * Christopher Guest as Mr. Coleman PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film 's producer Andrew Gunn said he initially hoped Jodie Foster ( who played Annabel in the original 1976 Freaky Friday film ) would be interested in playing the mother in the remake .
She declined in order to spend more time with her family and because of concerns that the stunt casting would overshadow the film 's overall merit .
Annette Bening was then cast in the role , but dropped out because of family obligations .
Jamie Lee Curtis was given the role only four days before filming began .
Lindsay Lohan 's character was originally written as a Goth , but she did not think anyone would relate to that , and decided to dress in a preppy style for her audition .
The character ended up being rewritten .
Marc McClure , who played Boris Harris , Annabel 's love interest in the original film , has a brief cameo as Boris the delivery man .
Director Mark Waters also makes a cameo holding a baby at the wedding .
In the end scene when Anna is dancing with Jake , there is a woman in the background dancing with an older gentleman , and she looks directly at the camera .
That is Lindsay Lohan 's mother , Dina Lohan .
Ryan Shuck coached Jamie Lee Curtis to play the guitar solo for the concert scene .
Lohan trained for one year to learn to play the guitar before production .
In the final version of the film , however , both Curtis and Lohan were overdubbed by professional studio musicians .
The snapshots in the opening credits are photos of Jamie Lee Curtis and her daughter , Annie Guest .
Kelly Osbourne was originally set to play Maddie , but dropped out because she did not want to do a children 's movie .
She was replaced by Christina Vidal .
Principal photography began on October 5 , 2002 and Principal photography ended on December 18 , 2002 HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and VHS on December 16 , 2003 , by Walt Disney Home Video .
It is now also available on Blu - Ray disc .
Special Edition Blu - ray and Blu - ray 3D was released on September 11 , 2012 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 22.2 million in 2,954 theaters , finishing second at the box office , behind S.W.A.T. ( $ 37.1 million ) .
The film went on to gross $ 110.2 million in North America and $ 50.6 million in other territories for a total of $ 160.8 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Freaky Friday received positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 88 % , based on 150 reviews , with an average rating of 7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Jamie Lee Curtis and Lindsay Lohan charm in Mark Waters ' nicely pitched -- and Disney 's second -- remake of the 1976 hit . "
On Metacritic the film has a score of 70 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Jamie Lee Curtis 's performance was singled out for praise by many critics .
David Ansen of Newsweek noted that , " the most startling metamorphosis is Curtis ' transformation from fading horror - flick queen to dazzling comedienne .
She goes on a teenage tear — tormenting Anna 's younger brother ( who wonders why Mom 's acting so weird ) , getting down and dirty on a TV talk show where Tess is supposed to discuss her book on aging — with fiercely funny conviction . "
Lisa Schwarzbaum from Entertainment Weekly called her performance " glorious , " and A. O. Scott from The New York Times contended that she " does some of her best work ever [ in Freaky Friday ] .
" Nick Davis described her as " so frisky and pouty and incandescent in Freaky Friday , she made the whole movie feel like something special .
" Her performance was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy .
Lohan 's performance was also praised .
Roger Ebert wrote that she " has that Jodie Foster sort of seriousness and intent focus beneath her teenage persona .
"
The film earned her the award for Breakthrough Performance at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards .
Some critics , however , objected to the caricatured portrayal of Chinese people in the body switching scene , with Nick Schager of Slant Magazine calling it " a strange bit of ' Oriental mysticism ' stereotyping that seems at odds with the film 's thematic focus on tolerance and understanding . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The orchestral score was written by Rolfe Kent and orchestrated by Tony Blondal .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
List awards to film and actress / actors .
Won * 2004
– MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance to Lindsay Lohan
* 2004 – Teen Choice Awards for Choice Breakout Movie Star – Female to Lindsay Lohan * 2004 – Teen Choice Award for Choice Hissy Fit to
Lindsay Lohan * 2004
– Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards for Best Live Action Family Film * 2004 – BMI Film Music Award to Rolfe Kent Nominated * 2003 – Satellite Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy to Jamie Lee Curtis * 2004 –
Golden Globe Award for Best Actress –
Motion Picture Musical or Comedy to Jamie Lee Curtis * 2004 – Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film * 2004 – Saturn Award for Best Actress to Jamie Lee Curtis * 2004
– Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor to Lindsay Lohan * 2004 – Saturn Award for Best Writing to Heather Hach & Leslie Dixon
* 2004 – Critics Choice Award for Best Family Film – Live Action * 2004 – Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards for Best Live Action Family Film * 2004 –
Teen Choice Awards for Choice Movie – Comedy * 2004 – Young Artist Awards for Best Performance in a Feature Film – Leading Young Actress to Lindsay Lohan * 2004 – Young Artist Awards for Best Performance in a Feature Film –
Young Actor
Age Ten or Younger to Ryan Malgarini REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS