PINE OIL Pine oil is an essential oil obtained by the steam distillation of stumps , needles , twigs and cones from a variety of species of pine , particularly Pinus sylvestris .
As of 1995 , synthetic pine oil was the " biggest single turpentine derivative .
" Synthetic pine oils accounted for 90 % of sales as of 2000 .
In alternative medicine , it is said to be used in aromatherapy , as a scent in bath oils or more commonly as a cleaning product , and as a lubricant in small and expensive clockwork instruments .
It may also be used varyingly as a disinfectant , sanitizer , mircobicide / microbistat , virucide , insecticide , and a massage oil .
It is also used as an effective herbicide where its action is to modify the waxy cuticle of plants , resulting in desiccation .
Pine oil is distinguished from other products from pine , such as turpentine , the low - boiling fraction from the distillation of pine sap , and rosin , the thick tar remaining after turpentine is distilled .
Chemically , pine oil consists mainly of α - terpineol and other cyclic terpene alcohols .
It may also contain terpene hydrocarbons , ethers , and esters .
The exact composition depends on various factors , such as the variety of pine from which it is produced and the parts of the tree used .
PROPERTIES AS
A DISINFECTANT Section::::Properties as a disinfectant .
Pine oil is a disinfectant that is mildly antiseptic .
It is effective against Brevibacterium ammoniagenes , the fungi Candida albicans , Enterobacter aerogenes , Escherichia coli , Gram - negative enteric bacteria , household germs , Gram - negative household germs such as those causing salmonellosis , herpes simplex types 1 and 2 , influenza type A , influenza virus type
A / Brazil , influenza virus type A2 / Japan , intestinal bacteria , Klebsiella pneumoniae , odor - causing bacteria , mold , mildew , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Salmonella choleraesuis , Salmonella typhi , Salmonella typhosa ,
Serratia marcescens , Shigella sonnei , Staphylococcus aureus , Streptococcus faecalis , Streptococcus pyogenes , and Trichophyton mentagrophytes .
It will kill the causative agents of typhoid , gastroenteritis ( some agents ) , rabies , cholera , several forms of meningitis , whooping cough , gonorrhea and several types of dysentery .
It is not effective against spore related illnesses , such as tetanus or anthrax , or against non - enveloped viruses such as poliovirus , rhinovirus , hepatitis B , or hepatitis C.
FROTH FLOTATION
Section::::Froth flotation .
Industrially , pine oil is used as a frother in mineral extraction from ores .
For example , in copper extraction pine oil is used to condition copper sulfide ores for froth flotation .
Therefore , it is important in the industry for the froth flotation process .
It has largely been replaced by synthetic alcohols and polyglycol ethers .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Pine oil has a relatively low human toxicity level , a low corrosion level and limited persistence ; however , it irritates the skin and mucous membranes and has been known to cause breathing problems .
Large doses may cause central nervous system depression .
SEE ALSO
* List of cleaning products * Pine - Sol , cleaning product that originally contained pine oil , though it switched to a different active ingredient in 2013 due to the availability of pine oil REFERENCES FURTHER READING