WALT LLOYD Walter " Walt " Lloyd is a fictional character portrayed by Malcolm David Kelley in the American ABC television series Lost .
The series follows the lives of over forty survivors of the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 .
Walt is introduced in the pilot episode as one of the survivors aboard the plane , which crashes onto the island where most of the programme takes place .
He is the 10-year - old son of Michael Dawson ( played by Harold Perrineau ) .
Walt appears in thirty episodes of Lost ; 27 in seasons one and two as a series regular , and three more episodes as a guest star .
He also features in the Lost epilogue " The New Man in Charge " .
Throughout the series , he is the only child main character .
Initially , Walt and Michael have a dysfunctional father - son relationship , causing Walt to form friendships with other survivors , such as Locke and Sun .
Walt leaves the island on a raft with Michael and two other survivors during the episode " Exodus " , but is kidnapped by a group of hostile island inhabitants known as the Others .
Walt is then released by the Others in the episode
" Live Together , Die Alone " , who claim that he was " more than [ they ] could handle " , and he and Michael leave the island at the end of season two .
When originally developed , Lost creators intended for Walt to display supernatural powers , such as the ability to summon animals through telepathy , but when Kelley had aged significantly for him to no longer convincingly look ten years old , the character 's arc was changed and Walt was written out of the show .
After auditioning many children for the part , Kelley was hired by the programme 's producers , who had been impressed by his performance in the 2002 film Antwone Fisher .
ARC
BEFORE THE CRASH Section::::Arc .
Section::::Before the crash .
Walt is the 10-year - old son of Michael Dawson , a construction worker / part - time artist .
He was born August 24 , 1994 , and is named after Michael 's father , Walter .
His mother is Susan Lloyd , a law student , who refused to marry Michael .
When offered a job in Amsterdam , Susan persuades Michael to let her take Walt with her while he is still a baby .
Two weeks before Walt 's second birthday , Susan tells Michael that she and her boss , Brian Porter , are planning to get married and will be moving to Rome , Italy , at the end of the month .
A legal battle ensues between Walt 's parents .
Several months later , they settle their dispute amicably and Michael lets Susan keep Walt with her .
Eight years later , Susan dies in Australia due to a " blood disorder " .
Brian pleads with Michael to take custody of the boy and even gives him tickets for the flight to Sydney and back , plus money for travel expenses .
Brian reveals that he had never wanted to adopt Walt and that he is scared of him .
When Michael arrives in Australia to collect Walt , he does not take too well to him .
Michael spares Walt 's feelings by telling him that Brian wants to keep him , but that it is up to Michael
and he has decided to take him .
AFTER THE CRASH Section::::After the crash .
Soon after the crash , Walt is left under the care of different people due to Michael 's involvement in helping other survivors — in particular , Walt spends time with John Locke .
He is intrigued by Locke 's hunting instincts , and constantly tries to sneak away with him , always unsuccessfully .
He sneaks away with Locke and Boone , and exhibits a natural talent in knife throwing .
Michael soon arrives and is enraged , taking Walt away from them and forbidding him to see Locke again .
Walt takes Vincent , the dog , and leaves camp , heading into the jungle , where he encounters a polar bear .
He is rescued by Michael and Locke .
Michael begins constructing a raft to leave the island , and finishes it after a few days .
Walt secretly sets alight to it , completely destroying it .
Later , Walt confesses to burning the original raft , explaining that he did not want to leave the island , but decides they need to leave .
The next morning , Walt gives Vincent to Shannon before he leaves on the raft with Michael , Jin and Sawyer .
That night , however , they encounter the Others , who kidnap Walt .
Walt remains in captivity with the Others , but frequently appears to Shannon .
In the mobisode " Room 23 " it is revealed Walt posed a greater threat to the Others than they had expected , as he had been doing something unspecified that frightened them so that they would not go in to see him .
Ben responds to a particular situation with a blaring alarm and people in commotion , and Juliet suggests that Ben take responsibility of the situation and bring Walt back to Michael .
As Michael is inspecting the technical equipment inside the hatch , he unexpectedly receives a message that he believes is from Walt .
Michael is briefly reunited with Walt after he is brought to the Others ' camp .
Later , Michael returns with Jack , Kate , Sawyer and Hurley , in an exchange for Walt and their freedom .
Walt waits in a boat , and he and Michael sail off .
AFTER THE ISLAND Section::::After the island .
While off the island , Walt learns that Michael killed Ana - Lucia and Libby and decided to live at his grandmother 's house so as not to speak or have anything to do with his father .
In " The Life and Death of Jeremy Bentham " , Walt is shown to be living in New York City .
He is visited by Locke , using a wheelchair at that point , having returned from the Island .
Locke does not ask Walt to return to the Island as he does with the rest of the Oceanic returnees , as he felt that the boy had been through enough already .
In " There 's No Place Like Home " , after being visited by Locke , Walt visits Hurley at the Santa Rosa Mental Institution with his grandmother .
He asks Hurley why the Oceanic Six are lying and is told that they 're lying to protect the people left behind on the island .
Walt is under the assumption that his father is still alive and living on the island .
In " The End " , Lost final episode , neither Walt nor Michael feature among the main characters moving on to the afterlife .
However , in the 12-minute epilogue to the series , " The New Man in Charge " ( included on the DVD box set ) , Ben and Hurley visit Walt in the mental hospital that Hurley had previously been in .
Ben promises Walt he can " help his father , " even though they both know Michael is dead .
Hurley and Ben take Walt " home " to the Island , where Hurley promises him he will have a " job " .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
Walt is a bit uneasy initially after being left with his father .
He spends most of season 1 dodging his father and exploring the island with his dog , Vincent .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Many children were seen for the role of Walt .
They were narrowed down to a top three , with Malcolm David Kelley winning the part after the producers were impressed with his role in the 2002 film Antwone Fisher .
When Kelley was originally cast , the character of Walt was a 10-year - old boy , but , after two seasons , Kelley no longer looked 10 .
While the first four seasons move slowly through time and only months have passed on the show , the actual filming stretched over several years .
The show 's writers dealt with this by sending Michael and Walt away from the island at the end of the second season .
In his brief appearance at the end of season three , Kelley is noticeably taller and older with a deeper voice .
This fact is acknowledged by Locke in " Confirmed Dead " .
In the season four episode , " Meet Kevin Johnson " , Kelley makes a brief uncredited cameo as Walt in the episode 's flashbacks .
Make - up and CGI were used to make Kelley look younger and more like a 10-year - old .
In the season four finale , " There 's No Place Like Home " , Walt appears in a flash - forward , but this scene is set about three years after the plane crash , so Kelley 's older appearance is not a problem .
When asked about the production difficulties associated with Walt and possible appearances of the character in the fourth season , co - creator Damon Lindelof stated : " We 've always known Malcolm was going to grow faster than we could shoot the show .
And we planned for it .
Trust us .
Please trust us .
You 'll see [ Walt ] again .
But you 're gon na have to be patient .
Sorry . "
When the Lost producers were developing the character of Walt , they initially intended for him to display supernatural powers by summoning animals — in the episode " Special " , it is suggested that Walt is able both to cause a bird to fly into a window and make a polar bear attack him through telepathy .
This is also alluded to in " Live Together , Die Alone " , when Ben describes Walt as being " more than [ the Others ] could handle " .
Kelley himself was also under the impression that his character possessed " magic powers " , but after he had aged significantly enough for him to look no longer ten years old , the writers ' plans were changed , and Walt was written out at the end of season two .
Walt returned to Lost in " The Life and Death of Jeremy Bentham " , when Locke visits him in New York .
Kelley had stated a willingness to return to the show again , which was realized in " The New Man in Charge " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Walt 's only centric episode was the season one episode , " Special " , which received positive reviews from critics .
Chris Carabott of IGN described the relationship " or lack thereof " between Walt and his father as " heart wrenching " .
Kirthana Ramisetti of Entertainment Weekly stated that it was " interesting " to discover that " Walt is ' different ' and has special powers " .
She also named the scene of Walt and Michael reading letters towards the end of the episode as " one of [ her favorites ] of the entire season " .
For his performance as Walt , Kelley won the award for Best Supporting Performance in a TV Series ( Comedy or Drama ) at the 2006 Young Artist Awards .
He had been nominated for the Leading Performance award in the same category the previous year .
He also co - won the 2005 Screen Actors Guild Award for " Best Ensemble – Drama Series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Walt Lloyd at Lost Wikia * Seasonal promotional photographs for Walt Lloyd at Lost - Media