CONJUGAL VISIT
A conjugal visit is a scheduled period in which an inmate of a prison or jail is permitted to spend several hours or days in private with a visitor , usually their legal spouse .
The parties may engage in sexual activity .
The generally recognized basis for permitting such visits in modern times is to preserve family bonds and increase the chances of success for a prisoner 's eventual return to life after release from prison .
They also provide an incentive to inmates to comply with the various day - to - day rules and regulations of the prison .
Conjugal visits usually take place in designated rooms or a structure provided for that purpose , such as a trailer or a small cabin .
Supplies such as soap , condoms , lubricant , bed linens , and towels may be provided .
COUNTRY AUSTRALIA Section::::Country .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , conjugal visits are permitted in the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria .
Other jurisdictions , including Western Australia and Queensland , do not permit conjugal visits .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
In Brazil , male prisoners are eligible to be granted conjugal visits for both heterosexual and homosexual relationships , while women 's conjugal visits are tightly regulated , if granted at all .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , all inmates , with the exception of those on disciplinary restrictions or at risk for family violence , are permitted " private family visits " of up to 72 hours ' duration once every two months .
Eligible visitors , who may not themselves be prison inmates , are : spouse , or common - law partner of at least six months ; children ; parents ; foster parents ; siblings ; grandparents ; and " persons with whom , in the opinion of the institutional head , the inmate has a close familial bond " .
Food is provided by the institution but paid for by the inmates and visitors , who are also responsible for cleaning the unit after the visit .
During a visit , staff members have regular contact with the inmate and visitors .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
In Denmark , conjugal visits are permissible .
The State Prison of East Jutland has apartments for couples , where inmates who have been sentenced to more than 8 years in prison can have visitation for 47 hours per visit .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Germany allows prisoners and their spouses or partners to apply for conjugal visits .
Those who are approved are allowed unsupervised visits so that prisoners can preserve intimate bonds with their partners .
However , prisoners are searched before being allowed a visit .
In 2010 , an inmate murdered his girlfriend and attempted suicide during a visit , leading to additional criticism of the allegedly lax security in German prisons .
INDIA Section::::India .
In 2015 , the Punjab and Haryana High Court held that the right of married convicts and jail inmates to have conjugal visits or artificial insemination for pregnancy was a fundamental right .
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND Section::::Republic of Ireland .
Marie and Noel Murray , an anarchist married couple imprisoned for a 1976 murder , lost a 1991 appeal for conjugal rights .
The Supreme Court ruled that the Constitutional right to beget children within marriage was suspended while a spouse was lawfully imprisoned .
ISRAEL Section::::Israel .
The Israel Prison Service ( IPS ) allows standard conjugal visits to inmates who are married or are in a common - law relationship or if their partner has been visiting them frequently for at least two years , and have a record of good behavior .
Inmates who receive prison furloughs are not eligible for conjugal visits .
Conjugal visits can be withheld on security grounds or as a means of punishment for misbehavior .
IPS guidelines were clarified in July 2013 to allow conjugal visits of same - sex partners .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
Conjugal visits are a universal practice in Mexico , independent of a prisoner 's marital status ; in some correctional facilities entire families are allowed to live in prisons with their imprisoned relative for extended periods .
Specifically in Mexico City , in July 2007 , the prison system in that city has begun to allow gay prisoners to have conjugal visits from their partners , on the basis of a 2003 law which bans discrimination based on sexual orientation .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
New Zealand does not permit conjugal visits .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
In Pakistan , conjugal visits prior to 2009 were permitted only under special circumstances .
In August 2009 , Federal Shariat Court ruled that married prisoners should be allowed conjugal visits at the designated facilities within the jail complex and alternatively , they should be granted a short parole to visit their spouses .
Following the ruling , the Province of Sindh was the first to adopt legislation providing conjugal visits for married prisoners within Jail premises .
Human Rights Book 2010 reports that Conjugal visits are now available for Prisoners in all Provinces and Federal territories if they are male and married .
Since Homosexuality is considered a criminal offense in Pakistan and same - sex marriage is not recognized by law , this privilege applies only to straight couples .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
In the Russian penal system , since a campaign of prison reform that began in 2001 , well - behaved prisoners are granted an eighteen - day holiday furlough from incarceration to see loved ones .
Prisoners also get extended on - site family visits , approximately once per month .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
In Spain , prisoners are allowed conjugal visits every four to eight weeks .
They are held in private rooms and can last up to three hours .
Couples are provided with condoms , shower facilities , and clean towels .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
Since April 2013 , the Turkish General Directorate of Prisons and Detention offers conjugal visits as a reward to well - behaved prisoners .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Neither the English , Welsh , Scottish , nor Northern Irish prison systems allow conjugal visits .
However , home visits , with a greater emphasis on building other links with the outside world to which the prisoner will be returned , are allowed .
These home visits are usually only granted to prisoners who have a few weeks to a few months remaining of a long sentence .
Furthermore , home visits are more likely to be granted if the prisoner is deemed to have a low risk of absconding ( i.e. prisoners being held in open prisons have a better chance of being granted home visits than prisoner being held in closed conditions ) .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In Lyons v. Gilligan ( 1974 ) , the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio held that prisoners have no constitutional right to conjugal visits with their spouses during sentences .
The United States Federal Bureau of Prisons does not allow conjugal visits for prisoners in federal custody .
For prisoners in state custody , the availability of conjugal visits is governed by the law of the particular state .
Where conjugal visits are allowed , inmates must meet certain requirements to qualify for this privilege :
The visitor may be required to undergo a background check , and the inmate must also be free of any sexually transmitted diseases .
As a matter of procedure , both visitor and inmate are searched before and after the visit , to ensure that the visitor has not attempted to smuggle any items into or out of the facility .
The first state to implement conjugal visits was Mississippi in the Mississippi State Penitentiary ( Parchman ) .
It was enacted to convince black male prisoners to work harder in their manual labor .
Jorja Leap , a professor of social welfare at the Luskin School of Public Affairs at the University of California , Los Angeles stated that criminologists believe allowing conjugal visits would build family ties and reduce recidivism .
Over the last 40 years , most new prisons included special buildings specifically designed for " Sunday visits . "
By the early 1990s , 17 states had conjugal programs .
According to Leap , conjugal visits declined after an increase in attitudes that prison should be a place for punishment and that conjugal visits were not appropriate for people being punished , and also because academic literature in the 1980s and 1990s argued that it was not possible to rehabilitate some criminals .
In June 2007 , the California Department of Corrections announced it would allow same - sex conjugal visits .
The policy was enacted to comply with a 2005 state law requiring state agencies to give the same rights to domestic partners that heterosexual couples receive .
The new rules allow for visits only by registered married same sex couples or domestic partners who are not themselves incarcerated .
Further , the same sex marriage or domestic partnership must have been established before the prisoner was incarcerated .
As of 2008 , conjugal visitation programs are now known as the extended - family visits or family - reunion visits because mothers , fathers , and other family members may attend these visits .
The focus is on family ties and rehabilitation .
In April 2011 , New York adopted legislation to allow family visits for married partners .
In January 2014 , the head of the Mississippi Department of Corrections , Chris Epps , terminated the state conjugal program .
New Mexico announced it was also ending its program in May 2014 .
The states with conjugal visits are California , Connecticut , New York and Washington .
SEE ALSO * Same - sex conjugal visit , in the article LGBT people in prison
* Relationships for incarcerated individuals NOTES REFERENCES