WALTON - ON - THAMES RAILWAY
STATION
Walton - on - Thames railway station is at the southern edge of the town of Walton - on - Thames in Surrey , England and borders Burwood Park , Hersham .
It is from and is situated between and .
The station 's main entrance borders the Ashley Park area of the largely residential town and features a taxi rank and pick - up apron .
The station opened as Walton for Hersham in 1838 and today has rush hour services two stops from central London .
Only the two outer platforms on the slow lines are currently used .
The central island platform is disused .
SERVICES Section::::Services .
Services from Walton - on - Thames are split into rush hour ( Monday - Friday , early mornings and evenings ) , off peak ( Monday - Friday , Saturday ) and Sunday .
RUSH HOUR
* 4tph to London Waterloo , stopping to Surbiton then , non stop to London Waterloo .
* 2tph to Woking , two extending to Guildford one extending to Portsmouth Harbour
* 2tph to Basingstoke one extending to Branksome one extending to Portsmouth Harbour via Eastleigh Section::::Rush Hour .
Rush hour services to London Waterloo only operate in the morning , and services to Woking and Guildford operate in the evening rush hour with one service running semi fast to Basingstoke .
OFF PEAK
* 2tph to London Waterloo , stopping service * 2tph to London Waterloo , semi fast * 2tph to Woking , stopping service
* 2tph to Basingstoke , semi fast to Woking then stopping to Basingstoke Section::::Off Peak .
There are also three direct trains to Portsmouth Harbour two via Basingstoke one via Guildford per day , Mon - Sat , and one direct train to Branksome in the early morning .
In the evening there are two services from Portsmouth Harbour via Basingstoke and one from Weymouth to Walton on Thames .
SUNDAYS
* 2tph to London Waterloo , stopping service * 1tph to London Waterloo , semi fast * 2tph to Guildford , stopping service * 1tph to Woking semi fast where the train divides to either Basingstoke or Alton HISTORY Section::::History .
The station first operated in 1838 , and was one of the first stations on the South Western Main Line , between and Ditton Marsh ( now Esher ) and Weybridge .
The first services ran from Nine Elms to Woking Common ( now Woking ) .
The middle platforms were abandoned when slower services only used the outer tracks , leaving the inside tracks for non stop services to Woking .
TICKET GATES AND ACCESSIBILITY Section::::Ticket gates and accessibility .
Walton - on - Thames railway station was one of the first stations selected by South West Trains to have automatic ticket gates installed at all of the exits to the station .
These were installed and in operation on 25 June 2009 .
There were also smartcard validators installed , intended ( in the future ) for use when the barriers are unattended and open .
As of June 2018 , there was a digital barcode scanner installed for mobile ticketing on Platform 1 .
Ramps were installed on 31 October 2009 , making both platforms accessible to all from street level .
Access from the Ashley Park / ticket office side of the station to the Burwood Park side requires use of the railway - owned subway which is via a short flight of steps or a detour of more than 600 m by road or pavement .
This station has a taxi rank and bus stops .
Bus routes 458 and 555 serve the station , both connecting passengers to the town centre .
In 2016 , a petition was started by a local resident calling for London Travelcard Zone 6 to be extended to include this station , as well as and stations .
This would allow Oyster cards to be used from the station , allowing for cheaper fares and shorter queues for the station 's ticket machines .
IMMEDIATE SURROUNDINGS Section::::Immediate surroundings .
The station is just north of the approximate midpoint of the medieval parish boundaries of Walton .
Today it is on the southern boundary of Walton and the northern boundary of Hersham , and more particularly between two large - plot , neighbourhoods of detached homes , Burwood Park and Ashley Park .
These are predominantly low rise and have avenues and greens ; they are not a conservation area with no buildings which pre - date 1750 but the former has one or two listed buildings for architecture .
The commercial centre of Walton is north .
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS