ONYCHOMYCOSIS
Onychomycosis , also known as tinea unguium , is a fungal infection of the nail .
Symptoms may include white or yellow nail discoloration , thickening of the nail , and separation of the nail from the nail bed .
Toenails or fingernails may be affected , but it is more common for toenails to be affected .
Complications may include cellulitis of the lower leg .
A number of different types of fungus can cause onychomycosis including dermatophytes and Fusarium .
Risk factors include athlete 's foot , other nail diseases , exposure to someone with the condition , peripheral vascular disease , and poor immune function .
The diagnosis is generally suspected based on the appearance and confirmed by laboratory testing .
Onychomycosis does not necessarily require treatment .
The antifungal medication , terbinafine , taken by mouth appears to be the most effective but is associated with liver problems .
Trimming the affected nails when on treatment also appears useful .
There is a ciclopirox - containing nail polish , but it does not work as well .
The condition returns in up to half of cases following treatment .
Not using old shoes after treatment may decrease the risk of recurrence .
It occurs in about 10 percent of the adult population .
Older people are more frequently affected .
Males are affected more often than females .
Onychomycosis represents about half of nail disease .
It was first determined to be the result of a fungal infection in 1853 by Georg Meissner .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
The most common symptom of a fungal nail infection is the nail becoming thickened and discoloured : white , black , yellow or green .
As the infection progresses the nail can become brittle , with pieces breaking off or coming away from the toe or finger completely .
If left untreated , the skin underneath and around the nail can become inflamed and painful .
There may also be white or yellow patches on the nailbed or scaly skin next to the nail , and a foul smell .
There is usually no pain or other bodily symptoms , unless the disease is severe .
People with onychomycosis may experience significant psychosocial problems due to the appearance of the nail , particularly when fingers – which are always visible – rather than toenails are affected .
Dermatophytids are fungus - free skin lesions that sometimes form as a result of a fungus infection in another part of the body .
This could take the form of a rash or itch in an area of the body that is not infected with the fungus .
Dermatophytids can be thought of as an allergic reaction to the fungus .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The causative pathogens of onychomycosis are all in the fungus kingdom and include dermatophytes , Candida ( yeasts ) , and nondermatophytic molds .
Dermatophytes are the fungi most commonly responsible for onychomycosis in the temperate western countries ; while Candida and nondermatophytic molds are more frequently involved in the tropics and subtropics with a hot and humid climate .
DERMATOPHYTES Section::::Dermatophytes .
Trichophyton rubrum is the most common dermatophyte involved in onychomycosis .
Other dermatophytes that may be involved are T. interdigitale , Epidermophyton floccosum , T. violaceum , Microsporum gypseum , T. tonsurans , and T. soudanense .
A common outdated name that may still be reported by medical laboratories is Trichophyton mentagrophytes for T. interdigitale .
The name T. mentagrophytes is now restricted to the agent of favus skin infection of the mouse ; though this fungus may be transmitted from mice and their danders to humans , it generally infects skin and not nails .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Other causative pathogens include Candida and nondermatophytic molds , in particular members of the mold genus Scytalidium ( name recently changed to Neoscytalidium ) , Scopulariopsis , and Aspergillus .
Candida species mainly cause fingernail onychomycosis in people whose hands are often submerged in water .
Scytalidium mainly affects people in the tropics , though it persists if they later move to areas of temperate climate .
Other molds more commonly affect people older than 60 years , and their presence in the nail reflects a slight weakening in the nail 's ability to defend itself against fungal invasion .
RISK FACTORS Section::::Risk factors .
Aging is the most common risk factor for onychomycosis due to diminished blood circulation , longer exposure to fungi , and nails which grow more slowly and thicken , increasing susceptibility to infection .
Nail fungus tends to affect men more often than women , and is associated with a family history of this infection .
Other risk factors include perspiring heavily , being in a humid or moist environment , psoriasis , wearing socks and shoes that hinder ventilation and do not absorb perspiration , going barefoot in damp public places such as swimming pools , gyms and shower rooms , having athlete 's foot ( tinea pedis ) , minor skin or nail injury , damaged nail , or other infection , and having diabetes , circulation problems , which may also lead to lower peripheral temperatures on hands and feet , or a weakened immune system .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The diagnosis is generally suspected based on the appearance and confirmed by laboratory testing .
The four main tests are a potassium hydroxide smear , culture , histology examination , and polymerase chain reaction .
The sample examined is generally nail scrapings or clippings .
These being from as far up the nail as possible .
Nail plate biopsy with periodic acid - Schiff stain appear more useful than culture or direct KOH examination .
To reliably identify nondermatophyte molds , several samples may be necessary .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
There are four classic types of onychomycosis :
* Distal subungual onychomycosis is the most common form of tinea unguium and is usually caused by Trichophyton rubrum , which invades the nail bed and the underside of the nail plate .
* White superficial onychomycosis ( WSO ) is caused by fungal invasion of the superficial layers of the nail plate to form " white islands " on the plate .
It accounts for around 10 percent of onychomycosis cases .
In some cases , WSO is a misdiagnosis of " keratin granulations " which are not a fungus , but a reaction to nail polish that can cause the nails to have a chalky white appearance .
A laboratory test should be performed to confirm .
* Proximal subungual onychomycosis is fungal penetration of the newly formed nail plate through the proximal nail fold .
It is the least common form of tinea unguium in healthy people , but is found more commonly when the patient is immunocompromised .
*
Candidal onychomycosis is Candida species invasion of the fingernails , usually occurring in persons who frequently immerse their hands in water .
This normally requires the prior damage of the nail by infection or trauma .
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Section::::Differential diagnosis .
In many cases of suspected nail fungus there is actually no fungal infection , but only nail deformity .
To avoid misdiagnosis as nail psoriasis , lichen planus , contact dermatitis , nail bed tumors such as melanoma , trauma , or yellow nail syndrome , laboratory confirmation may be necessary .
Other conditions that may appear similar to onychomycosis include : psoriasis , normal aging , yellow nail syndrome , and chronic paronychia .
TREATMENT MEDICATIONS Section::::Treatment .
Section::::Medications .
Most treatments are with antifungal medications either topically or by mouth .
Avoiding use of antifungal therapy by mouth ( e.g. terbinafine ) in persons without a confirmed infection is recommended because of the possible side effects of that treatment .
Topical agents include ciclopirox nail paint , amorolfine , and efinaconazole .
Some topical treatments need to be applied daily for prolonged periods ( at least 1 year ) .
Topical amorolfine is applied weekly .
Topical ciclopirox results in a cure in 6 % to 9 % of cases ; amorolfine might be more effective .
Ciclopirox when used with terbinafine appears to be better than either agent alone .
Medications that may be taken by mouth include terbinafine ( 76 % effective ) , itraconazole ( 60 % effective ) and fluconazole ( 48 % effective ) .
They share characteristics that enhance their effectiveness : prompt penetration of the nail and nail bed , and persistence in the nail for months after discontinuation of therapy .
Ketoconazole by mouth is not recommended due to side effects .
Oral terbinafine is better tolerated than itraconazole .
For superficial white onychomycosis , systemic rather than topical antifungal therapy is advised .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Chemical ( keratolytic ) or surgical debridement of the affected nail appears to improve outcomes .
As of 2014 evidence for laser treatment is unclear as the evidence is of low quality and varies by type of laser .
Tea tree oil is not recommended as a treatment , since it is not effective .
COST UNITED STATES Section::::Cost .
Section::::United States .
However , according to a 2015 study , the cost in the United States of testing with the periodic acid – Schiff stain ( PAS ) was about $ 148 .
Even if the cheaper KOH test is used first and the PAS test is used only if the KOH test is negative , there is a good chance that the PAS will be done ( because of either a true or a false negative with the KOH test ) .
But the terbinafine treatment only cost $ 10 ( plus an additional $ 43 for liver function tests ) .
In conclusion the authors say that terbinafine has a relatively benign adverse effect profile , with liver damage very rare , so it makes more sense cost - wise for the dermatologist to prescribe the treatment without doing the PAS test .
( Another option would be to prescribe the treatment only if the potassium hydroxide test is positive , but it gives a false negative in about 20 % of cases of fungal infection . )
On the other hand , as of 2015 the price of topical ( non - oral ) treatment with efinaconazole was $ 2307 per nail , so testing is recommended before prescribing it .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Following effective treatment , recurrence is common ( 10–50 % ) .
Nail fungus can be painful and cause permanent damage to nails .
It may lead to other serious infections if the immune system is suppressed due to medication , diabetes or other conditions .
The risk is most serious for people with diabetes and with immune systems weakened by leukemia or AIDS , or medication after organ transplant .
Diabetics have vascular and nerve impairment , and are at risk of cellulitis , a potentially serious bacterial infection ; any relatively minor injury to feet , including a nail fungal infection , can lead to more serious complications .
Infection of the bone is another rare complication .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
A 2003 survey of diseases of the foot in 16 European countries found onychomycosis to be the most frequent fungal foot infection and estimates its prevalence at 27 % .
Prevalence was observed to increase with age .
In Canada , the prevalence was estimated to be 6.48 % .
Onychomycosis affects approximately one - third of diabetics and is 56 % more frequent in people suffering from psoriasis .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term is from Greek onyx " nail " , mykēs " fungus " , and the suffix -ōsis " functional disease " .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Research suggests that fungi are sensitive to heat , typically .
The basis of laser treatment is to try to heat the nail bed to these temperatures in order to disrupt fungal growth .
As of 2013 research into laser treatment seems promising .
There is also ongoing development in photodynamic therapy , which uses laser or LED light to activate photosensitisers that eradicate fungi .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS