RUNNING WITH SCISSORS ( MEMOIR ) Running with Scissors is a 2002 memoir by American writer Augusten Burroughs .
The book tells the story of Burroughs 's bizarre childhood life after his mother , a chain - smoking aspiring poet , sent him to live with her psychiatrist .
Running with Scissors spent eight weeks on the New York Times bestseller list .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Running with Scissors covers the period of Burroughs ' adolescent years , beginning at age 12 after a brief overview of his life as a child .
Burroughs spends his early childhood in a clean and orderly home , obsessing over his clothes , hair , accessories , and having great potential , with his parents constantly fighting in the background .
When his parents separate and his mother begins to second - guess her sexuality , Burroughs is sent to live with his mother 's psychiatrist , Dr. Finch , who lives in a rundown Victorian house in Northampton , Massachusetts .
Finch lives with his " legal " wife , Agnes , as well as his biological and adopted children and some of his own patients .
Rules are practically nonexistent and children of all ages do whatever they please , such as having sex , smoking cigarettes and cannabis , and rebelling against authority figures .
Finch feels that , at age 13 , children should be in charge of their own lives .
However , the dysfunctional issues that occur in the Finch family are outdone by the psychotic episodes frequently experienced by Burroughs ' mother .
The Finch house is a parallel universe to the home Burroughs came from .
It is filthy , with cockroaches roaming around the uncleaned dishes , Christmas trees left up year - round , stairs up which Burroughs is afraid to walk because he thinks that they will collapse under him , and nothing off limits .
Eventually , Finch comes to believe that God is communicating with him through his feces and develops a form of divination to try and decipher these messages .
When Hope , Finch 's second oldest daughter , believes her cat is dying , she keeps it in a laundry basket for four days until it dies : "
Hope said Freud died of kitty leukemia and old age , I thought it was because Freud was stuck under a laundry basket with no food or water for 4 days . "
Burroughs ' mother is shown as emotionally drained , excessive , self - centered , and ultimately incapable of being a parent .
She has a sexual relationship with a local minister 's wife , which is revealed to Burroughs when he accidentally walks in on them when he skips school .
When this relationship ends , Burroughs ' mother starts another with an affluent African - American woman .
This relationship is tumultuous and unstable .
At one point , they have a mental patient named Cesar live at their house after another of his mother 's breakdowns as his " dad " .
Cesar attempts to rape Burroughs while he is sleeping , but is unsuccessful ( when Cesar goes to live with the Finches later in the book , he pays one of the Finches ' daughters for sex and is then forced from the home ) .
His mother 's biggest psychotic episode happens when she and Dorothy ( her partner ) move everything out of their house and attack Burroughs when he tries to intervene .
This later ends with a " road trip " and events leading to Burroughs ' mother being restrained on a bed .
Burroughs tells Dr. Finch 's adopted 33-year - old son , Neil Bookman , that he is gay .
From the age of 13 to 15 , Burroughs has an intense and open sexual relationship with Bookman , which begins when Bookman forces the young boy to perform oral sex on him .
Neither his mother nor any member of the Finch family is bothered by their relationship .
Burroughs begins to enjoy exacting power over Bookman by threatening to charge him with statutory rape .
Bookman is obsessed with the young boy , even though Burroughs has problems with their relationship ( going in phases of needing the affection of Bookman to wanting to humiliate or get away from him ) which only infatuates Bookman more .
Bookman eventually leaves Northampton for New York City and is never heard from again by Burroughs or the Finches , even after they try everything in their power to find him .
Burroughs forms a close relationship with Finch 's daughter , Natalie , who is one year older than he is , even though he dislikes her at the beginning of the book .
They do everything together , from finding jobs to running behind a waterfall to demolishing the kitchen ceiling .
They finally leave the Finch household together .
At the end of the book , when Burroughs is living in his own apartment with Natalie , he is asked to choose between his mother and Finch when she accuses the doctor of raping her in a motel to cure her of one of her psychotic episodes .
He still considers Finch 's family and his mother to be his family , and he can not bring himself to choose sides , although he is fairly certain that Finch did rape his mother .
Quoted from the book , Burroughs states : "
So it came to this :
Was I a turd - reading Finch ?
Or was I my crazy mother 's son ?
In the end , I decided that I was neither . "
CHARACTERS Augusten Burroughs :
The main character , son of Deirdre and Norman , was sent to live with his psychotic mother 's psychiatrist , Dr. Finch , and his family at the age of 13 and is eventually signed off to the Finch family .
He has mild obsessive compulsive tendencies .
It is at the Finch house where he enters into a relationship with Neil , trying to live with the insane and dirty living conditions of the Finches while coping with his mother 's mental condition .
He has a close relationship with Natalie , Dr. Finch 's youngest daughter .
He has a passion for hair products , wanting to have his name on a line of hair products .
Deirdre Burroughs : Deirdre is the mother of Augusten and was married to Norman until their divorce .
She is a mentally unstable poet , who , after her divorce , engages in a relationship with the local minister 's wife .
She allows Augusten to pretend to attempt suicide so he can be released from school .
She has a relationship with a teenage girl after the minister 's wife will not divorce her own husband .
Dr. Finch : The psychiatrist of Deirdre , father of Natalie and Hope , and " husband " of Agnes Finch .
Although Agnes and Dr. Finch are technically married , Dr. Finch has multiple other relationships with various women , all of whom he calls his wife , saying that Agnes is only his " legal " wife and does n't understand him .
Dr. Finch takes Augusten in , and later legally adopts him , after Deirdre decides she can not handle the emotional stress of mothering Augusten .
Dr. Finch 's psychiatric methods are highly unconventional ; he unwittingly makes his patients worse instead of curing them by giving them unmarked medicines , using techniques that disturb them , and generally encouraging their unhealthy behavior .
Neil Bookman : The adopted son of Dr. Finch .
Soon after Burroughs moves in with the Finches , Neil , who was 33 , forms a sexual relationship with Burroughs , who was only 13 .
He becomes infatuated with and very protective of Burroughs , who rarely returns these feelings , but still maintains a relationship with him .
His infatuation eventually turns to obsession and he constantly tells Burroughs he would die if Burroughs left him .
Natalie Finch : The youngest daughter of Dr. Finch and Agnes who is seen as wild , unruly , and promiscuous throughout the memoir , giving her first hand job at the age of 11 .
She is only one year older than Burroughs , with whom she eventually becomes great friends .
Norman Burroughs : The abusive and alcoholic husband of Deirdre and father of Augusten .
His abusive , oppressive relationship with Deirdre is one of the main causes of her instability and Augusten 's difficult life .
When Augusten later tries to reach out to him , his phone calls are ignored , leading to further estrangement .
Agnes Finch : Mother of the Finch children and wife of Dr. Finch .
Her role in the family is small , serving as more of a maid than a wife or mother .
No one in the household shows her any respect and rarely even listen to her , telling her constantly to " shut up " .
Hope Finch :
The older sister to Natalie .
She works as a receptionist in Dr. Finch 's office and is the first person in the Finch family to befriend Burroughs .
Fern : The first female lover of Deirdre Burroughs .
She is a minister 's wife with children , and keeps her relationship with Deirdre a secret .
The relationship ends when Fern refuses to leave her family .
Dorothy :
A teenage , African - American former patient of Dr. Finch who becomes Dierdre 's second female lover .
Dorothy , who was also mentally unstable , encouraged Dierdre 's erratic behavior , finding it exciting .
She does everything from setting money on fire to putting broken glass in the bathtub .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
The film adaptation of Running with Scissors , released in 2006 , stars Alec Baldwin , Annette Bening , Brian Cox , Joseph Fiennes , Evan Rachel Wood , Jill Clayburgh , Gwyneth Paltrow and Joseph Cross as Burroughs .
The plot of the film is focused on the relationship between the mother and the son .
LEGAL CASE
Section::::Legal case .
In 2005 , the family of Dr. Rodolph H. Turcotte ( 1919–2000 ) , of Massachusetts filed suit against Burroughs and his publisher , alleging defamation of character and invasion of privacy .
They stated that they were the basis for the Finch family portrayed in the book but that Burroughs had fabricated or exaggerated various descriptions of their activities .
The case was later settled with Sony Pictures Entertainment in October 2006 , prior to the release of the film adaptation .
Burroughs and his publisher , St. Martin 's Press , settled with the Turcotte family in August 2007 .
The Turcottes were reportedly seeking damages of $ 2 million for invasion of privacy , defamation , and emotional distress ; the Turcottes alleged Running with Scissors was largely fictional and written in a sensational manner .
Burroughs defended his work as " entirely accurate " , but agreed to call the work a " book " ( instead of a " memoir " ) in the author 's note , to alter the acknowledgments page in future editions to recognize the Turcotte family 's conflicting memories of described events , and express regret for " any unintentional harm " to the Turcotte family .
Burroughs felt vindicated by the settlement .
" I 'm not at all sorry that I wrote [ the book ] .
And you know , the suit settled — it settled in my favor .
I did n't change a word of the memoir , not one word of it .
It 's still a memoir , it 's marketed as a memoir , they 've agreed one hundred percent that it is a memoir . "
Future printings of Running with Scissors will contain modified language in the Author 's Note and Acknowledgments pages .
Where the Acknowledgments page had read : " Additionally , I would like to thank each and every member of a certain Massachusetts family for taking me into their home and accepting me as one of their own , " the following was substituted :
" Additionally , I would like to thank the real - life members of the family portrayed in this book for taking me into their home and accepting me as one of their own .
I recognize that their memories of the events described in this book are different than my own .
They are each fine , decent , and hard - working people .
The book was not intended to hurt the family .
Both my publisher and I regret any unintentional harm resulting from the publishing and marketing of Running with Scissors . "
In addition , on the Author 's Note page — but , as the family agreed , nowhere else — the word " book " replaced the word " memoir . " The work is still described as a memoir on the cover , title page and elsewhere .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Literary Review @
Reader Meet
Author
* Full summary of Running with Scissors