NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY New York Life Insurance Company ( NYLIC ) is the third - largest life insurance company in the United States , the largest mutual life insurance company in the United States and is ranked # 69 on the 2018 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue .
NYLIC has about $ 570 billion in total assets under management , and more than $ 25 billion in surplus and AVR .
In 2007 , NYLIC achieved the best possible ratings by the four independent rating companies ( Standard & Poor 's , AM Best , Moody 's and Fitch ) .
Other New York Life affiliates provide an array of securities products and services , as well as institutional and retail mutual funds .
HISTORY EARLY HISTORY Section::::History .
Section::::Early history .
New York Life Insurance Company first opened in Manhattan 's Financial District as Nautilus Mutual Life in 1845 , 10 years after the first life insurance charter was granted in the United States .
Originally chartered in 1841 , the company also sold fire and marine insurance .
The company 's first president , James De Peyster Ogden , was appointed in 1845 .
Nautilus renamed itself New York Life Insurance Company in 1849 to concentrate on its life insurance business .
In its early years ( 1846–1848 ) the company , along with other insurance companies of the day including Aetna and US Life , insured the lives of slaves for their owners .
By 1847 these accounted for onethird of New York Life 's policies .
The board of trustees voted to end the sale of insurance policies on slaves in 1848 .
The company also sold policies to soldiers and civilians involved in combat during the American Civil War and paid claims under a flag of truce during that time .
In the late 1800s , the company began employing female agents .
New York Life continued to grow throughout its first 100 years as the national population and the market for life insurance increased .
New York Life 's growth was in part fueled by its introduction of a system by which the company used agents to find new business .
In 1892 , company President John A. McCall introduced the branch office system : offices that served as liaisons between New York and field agents .
In 1894 , the company became the first US - based insurance provider to offer life insurance to women at the same cost as men ; social reformer Susan B. Anthony was one of the company 's first female policyholders .
In 1896 , New York Life became the first company to insure people with disabilities or in hazardous occupations .
20TH CENTURY Section::::20th century .
The New York Life Building at 51 Madison Avenue in Manhattan , designed by American architect Cass Gilbert , opened in December 1928 .
The company moved into the 34-story skyscraper in 1929 .
Later that year , New York Life 's assets survived the stock market crash ; state regulation and company investing policy had led New York Life to invest in government bonds and real estate , not common stocks .
Following World War II , New York Life further diversified ; it invested in real estate development in the late 1940s and launched a mortgage - loan program for veterans in 1946 .
In 1957 , New York Life hired one of the industry 's first black agents , Cirilo McSween .
In the 1970s , New York Life began selling annuities and mutual funds .
In the late 1990s and early 2000s , as other mutual life insurance companies became publicly traded corporations , New York Life remained a mutual company .
New York Life entered the Mexican market in 1999 when it acquired Seguros Monterrey from Aetna .
RECENT HISTORY Section::::Recent history .
New York Life , along with other insurance companies , relaxed the claims process for missing persons in the wake of the September 11 attacks .
Fearful of the stability of the market during the two years prior to the financial crisis of 2007–2008 , New York Life moved its cash into other investments such as treasury bonds .
In the ensuing financial crisis , New York Life Insurance Company rejected assistance from the U.S. Treasury Department .
Following the 2013 acquisition of Dexia Asset Management , later renamed Candriam Investors Group , New York Life Investments became one of the largest asset managers worldwide , with access to markets in Europe , Asia and Australia , in addition to the United States .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
As of 2016 , New York Life Insurance Company was the country 's third - largest life insurance company .
A mutual insurance company , New York Life is owned by its policyholders and has no outside shareholders .
As a mutual , New York Life distributes a portion of its earnings to eligible policyholders as annual dividends .
As of 2016 , the company has paid a dividend every year since 1854 .
Through Seguros Monterrey New York Life , the company offers insurance in Mexico .
New York Life 's core product is whole life insurance , a type of life insurance offering lifelong protection that builds cash value over time .
New York Life also sells term life insurance , universal life insurance , variable universal life insurance , long - term care insurance and annuities .
The company operates New York Life Direct , selling direct - to - consumer policies , and is the exclusive life insurance partner of the AARP .
ASSET MANAGEMENT BUSINESSES Section::::Asset management businesses .
New York Life 's global asset management business serves both institutional and retail clients .
New York Life Investments ranks No . 26 by total worldwide institutional assets under management , according to Pensions & Investments ' Largest Money Managers Survey 2017 .
The group manages money through independent investment boutiques .
These boutiques include : * Ausbil , an Australian investment boutique specializing in equities
* Candriam Investors Group , which focuses on high yield , absolute return , emerging debt , sustainable investments and asset allocation strategies
* Credit Value Partners , which specializes in opportunistic , distressed debt and high - yield corporate credit
* GoldPoint Partners , a private equity firm * IndexIQ , which specializes in exchange - traded funds and alternative investment strategies * MacKay Shields , an asset management firm that focuses on income generation and offers capital growth through mutual and hedge funds * Madison Capital Funding , which provides financing to private equity firms * Private Advisors , an asset manager specializing in hedge funds and private equity funds CHARITABLE EFFORTS Section::::Charitable efforts .
New York Life Foundation is the insurance company 's philanthropic arm .
Its areas of focus include childhood bereavement .
New York Life Foundation first became involved in childhood bereavement programs when it supported the Comfort Zone Camp in 2007 .
Its partners and programs include the National Alliance of Grieving Children , Grief Reach , Coalition to Support Grieving Students , Camp Erin / Moyer Foundation , Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors and Boys and Girls Clubs of America .
It sponsored the HBO documentary One Last Hug .
The company also emphasizes giving to various cultural communities , including the African - American community .
The company also funded a $ 10 million endowment to the Colin Powell Center for Policy Studies at the City College of New York called the New York Life Endowment for Emerging African - American Issues in 2006 .
RATINGS AND RANKINGS Section::::Ratings and rankings .
As of June 2018 , New York Life ranks No . 69 on the Fortune 500 .
Fortune also named New York Life to its Most Admired Companies list for the life insurance industry group in 2017 .
Forbes ranked New York Life as one of America 's Best Large Employers in 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website