GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING
The gross vehicle weight rating ( GVWR ) , or gross vehicle mass ( GVM ) is the maximum operating weight / mass of a vehicle as specified by the manufacturer including the vehicle 's chassis , body , engine , engine fluids , fuel , accessories , driver , passengers and cargo but excluding that of any trailers .
The term is used for motor vehicles and trains .
The weight of a vehicle is influenced by passengers , cargo , even fuel level , so a number of terms are used to express the weight of a vehicle in a designated state .
Gross combined weight rating ( GCWR ) refers to the total mass of a vehicle , including all trailers .
GVWR and GCWR both describe a vehicle that is in operation and are used to specify weight limitations and restrictions .
Curb weight describes a vehicle which is " parked at the curb " and excludes the weight of any occupants or cargo .
Dry weight further excludes the weight of all consumables , such as fuel and oils .
Gross trailer weight rating specifies the maximum weight of a trailer and the gross axle weight rating specifies the maximum weight on any particular axle .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
A car driver licence is limited to driving vehicles up to a maximum GVM of .
Beyond this , a different class of licence is required .
A vehicle with a GVM up to 4,500 kg is termed a light vehicle , while those over 4,500 kg are termed heavy vehicles .
Many models of small truck are manufactured to have a GVM rating of but sold with the option of a GVM of just under 4,500 kg so that they can be driven on a car licence .
Often , the only difference between the models is where the exhaust exits , with diesel engined heavy rated vehicles having a vertical exhaust stack above the cabin and the light rated vehicles having the exhaust exit under the side or rear like a car .
Many minor roads , including some in rural areas and some in suburban areas , have GVM restrictions such as 5,000 kg or 8,000 kg .
These restrictions may be applied for technical reasons such as load limited bridges , or as a method of reducing the number of heavy vehicles on local roads .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
A standard car driving licence issued by an EU country ( i.e. class B ) limits the licence - holder to driving vehicles with a " maximum authorised mass " ( i.e. GVWR ) of .
This includes holders of UK class B driving licences who passed their driving tests on or after 1 January 1997 A UK driving licence holder who passed his or her class B driving test in or before 1996 is limited to driving vehicles with a GVWR of or less , including minibuses not used for hire or reward .
Anyone looking to drive a heavy goods vehicle ( i.e. any vehicle , other than a bus ) with a GVWR of over must obtain a class C truck licence .
Anyone looking to drive a truck with a GVWR of must obtain a class C1 licence .
Anyone with a class C licence can drive class C1 vehicles .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , two important GVWR limitations are and .
Vehicles over 6,000 lb are restricted from some city roadways ( though there is some dispute about whether this restriction is for actual curb weight or GVWR ) .
Commercial vehicles over the 8,500 lb threshold are required to have insurance under Section 387.303 of the Motor Carrier Act of 1980 .
Vehicles or combinations over GVWR generally require a Commercial Driver License ( CDL ) or a Non - Commercial Class " A " or " B " license .
A CDL is also required for certain vehicles under 26,000 lb GVWR , such as buses and for - hire passenger vehicles of 16 or more passengers , all vehicles transporting placarded hazardous materials or wastes regardless of weight or load class , and any vehicle towing a trailer with a Gross Trailer Weight over 10,000lbs where the combination weight is greater than 26,000lbs . LABELING Section::::Labeling .
On vehicles designed for the North American market , the GVWR can be found alongside other vehicle technical specifications on the Vehicle ID Plate that is usually located on the interior of the B - pillar according to U.S. or Canadian Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards ( FMVSS ) .
( inside driver door near door latch ) .
Most U.S. and Australian commercial trucks are required by licensing authorities to have this information printed on the outside of the vehicle , and for it to be clearly visible from a specified distance .
SEE ALSO * Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) * Curb weight * Heavy - duty vehicle * Large goods vehicle
* Light commercial vehicle * Light - duty vehicle
* Truck classification
* Vehicle category * International Driving Permit
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* What is GVWR ?
from about.com