DOUBLE DRIBBLE
In basketball , an illegal dribble ( colloquially called a double dribble ) , occurs when a player ends his / her dribble by catching or causing the ball to come to rest in one or both hands and then dribbles it again with one hand or when a player touches it twice before the ball hits the ground .
The dribble also ends when the dribbler palms / carries the ball by allowing it to come to rest in one or both hands .
This is a palming / carrying the ball violation if the player continues with another dribble .
There is an exception to the rule , however , and that is the power dribble .
It can only be used once and can only be used after receiving a pass in the lane .
The player ( usually a center and/or power forward ) slams the ball quickly with both hands and retrieves it .
This is used to help big men back defenders down and get a strong stance .
It usually is used in / near the paint ( the lane ) .
There is no violation during the jump ball , a throw - in or free throw .
OFFICIAL NBA RULES Section::::Official NBA rules .
In the National Basketball Association , a dribble is movement of the ball , caused by a player in control , who throws or touches the ball into the air or to the floor .
The dribble ends when the player : * Touches the ball simultaneously with both hands .
* * Permits the ball to come to rest while the player is in control of it .
*
* Touches the ball more than once while dribbling , before it touches the floor .
* FIBA RULE Section::::FIBA rule .
Art .
24.2 of the FIBA rules provides that : A player shall not dribble for a second time after his first dribble has ended unless between the 2 dribbles he has lost control of a live ball on the playing court because of : * A shot for a field goal .
* * A touch of the ball by an opponent .
* * A pass or fumble that has touched or been touched by another player .
* PENALTY Section::::Penalty .
Under NCAA , NFHS and FIBA rules , if an illegal dribble violation occurs , then the ball is awarded to the opposing team out of bounds nearest the point where the violation took place .
Under NBA rules , the ball is awarded to the opposing team at the nearest spot , but no closer to the end line than the free throw line extended .
SEE ALSO
* Carrying ( basketball ) , dribbling by placing the hand palm up under the ball while dribbling .
REFERENCES