LIST OF ENGLISH WORDS CONTAINING
Q NOT FOLLOWED
BY U
In English , the letter Q is usually followed by the letter U , but there are some exceptions .
The majority of these are anglicised from Arabic , Chinese , Hebrew , Inuktitut , or other languages which do not use the English alphabet , with Q representing a sound not found in English .
For example , in the Chinese pinyin alphabet , qi is pronounced by an English speaker , as pinyin uses " q " to represent the sound , which is approximated as in English .
In other examples , Q represents in standard Arabic , such as in qat , faqir and Qur'ān .
In Arabic , the letter ق , traditionally romanised as Q , is quite distinct from ك , traditionally romanised as K ; for example , means " heart " but means " dog " .
However , alternative spellings are sometimes accepted which use K ( or sometimes C ) in place of Q ; for example , Koran ( Qur'ān ) and Cairo ( al - Qāhira ) .
Of the 71 words in this list , 67 are nouns , and most would generally be considered loanwords ; the only modern - English words that contain Q not followed by U and are not borrowed from another language are qiana , qwerty , and tranq .
However , all of the loanwords on this list are considered to be naturalised in English according to at least one major dictionary ( see References ) , often because they refer to concepts or societal roles that do not have an accurate equivalent in English .
For words to appear here , they must appear in their own entry in a dictionary ; words which occur only as part of a longer phrase are not included .
Proper nouns are not included in the list .
There are , in addition , many place names and personal names , mostly originating from Arabic - speaking countries , Albania , or China , that have a Q without a U.
The most familiar of these are the countries of Iraq and Qatar , along with the derived words Iraqi and Qatari .
Iqaluit , the capital of the Canadian territory of Nunavut , also has a Q which is not directly followed by a U. Qaqortoq , in Greenland , is notable for having three such Qs .
Other proper names and acronyms that have attained the status of English words include : Compaq ( a computer company ) , Nasdaq ( a US electronic stock market ) , Qantas ( an Australian airline ) , and QinetiQ ( a British technology company ) .
Saqqara ( an ancient burial ground in Egypt ) is a proper noun notable for its use of a double Q. WORDS Section::::Words .
Unless noted otherwise , all words listed here are assumed to be pluralized by adding -s or -es .
References in the " Sources " column relate to the headword in column one ; variant spellings are then separately referenced .
The sources given are selective , and the absence of a reference to a particular dictionary does not necessarily mean that the word does not appear in that dictionary .
buqsha
A former Yemeni monetary unit Also written
bogache
Arabic burqa
A veiled garment worn by some Muslim women Also written burka , burkha , or burqua Urdu and Persian burqa , from Arabic burqu `
cinq
The number five , as signified in dice or cards French cinq , " five " cinqfoil
A plant of the genus Potentilla , or an ornamental design thereof Much more commonly written cinquefoil Middle English , from Latin quinquefolium , from quinque " five " + folium " leaf " coq A trimming of cock feathers on a woman 's hat French coq , " cockerel " } faqih
An Islamic jurisprudent Plural faqihs or fuqaha Arabic faqir
A Muslim ascetic More commonly written fakir Arabic , " poverty - stricken " fiqh Muslim jurisprudence Arabic فقه , " understanding " inqilab
A revolution in India or Pakistan
Arabic mbaqanga
A style of South African music Zulu umbaqanga , " steamed maize bread " miqra The Tanakh , or Hebrew text of the Bible Hebrew muqaddam A Bangladeshi or Punjabi headman
Arabic nastaliq
An Arabic script used in Persian writings Also written nasta'liq , nestaliq , nastaleeq , or shortened to just taliq Persian , from naskh + ta`liq niqab
A veil for the lower - face worn by some Muslim women Also written niqaab From Arabic pontacq A sweet wine from Pontacq ( France )
French qabab
A dish consisting of pieces of seasoned meat More commonly written kebab , kebap , kebob , kibob , kebhav , kephav , kebabie , or kabob Persian qabalah
A form of Jewish mysticism More commonly written Kabbalah , and also written Qabala , Qabbala , Cabalah etc .
Derived words include qabalism , qabalist , and qabalistic .
Hebrew qadarite
A member of the Qadariyah qadariyah
In Islam , adherents of the doctrine of free will Also written Qadariya qaddish
In Judaism , a prayer of mourning
More commonly written Kaddish
Hebrew
qadi
A Muslim judge Also written qadhi , qaadi , kadi , kazi qaadee or qazi Arabic qadiriyah
In Islam , a Sufi order Also written
Qadiriya
Arabic qaf
Twenty - first letter of the Arabic alphabet Also written qaph or qap Arabic qaid A Muslim tribal chief Also written caid or kaid Arabic , " leader " , " commander "
qaimaqam
A minor official of the Ottoman Empire Also written kaymakam , kaimakam , caimacam , or qaim makam From Arabic , " standing " + " place " , meaning " standing in place " qalamdan
A Persian writing - case qalandar
A member of an order of mendicant dervishes Also written calender , or capitalised qanat
A type of water - supply tunnel found in north Africa and the Middle East
Also written kanat , khanat , kunut , kona , konait , ghanat , or ghundat Persian , from Arabic qanāt , " channel " qanun
A type of harp Also written qanon or kanun Arabic , rule , principle or mode
qasida
An Arabian poem of praise or satire Also written
qasidah
Arabic qat
A kind of Arabian shrub used as a narcotic More commonly written khat , kat or gat
Arabic qāt qawwal
A person who practises qawwali music qawwali
Devotional music of the Sufis Arabic ( qawwāli ) , " loquacious " or " singer " qepiq An Azerbaijani unit of currency Also written qapik or qepik Azerbaijani qəpik qere
A marginal reading in the Hebrew Bible Also written qeri or qre Aramaic , " [ what is ] read " qhat
An obsolete spelling of what rowspan="4 " Likely of Scots origin , in which an older spelling convention used " quh- " or " qh- " where English had " wh- " .
qheche
An obsolete spelling of which qhom An obsolete spelling of whom qhythsontyd
An obsolete spelling of Whitsuntide ( the day of Pentecost ) qi
In Chinese culture , a physical life force Commonly written chi or ki qiana
A type of nylon Originally a trademark of DuPont , now generic qibla
The point to which Muslims turn in prayer
Also written qiblah , kiblah , qiblih , kibla or qib'lah , sometimes capitalised 17th - century Arabic , " the opposite " qibli
A local Libyan name for the sirocco ,
a southeasterly Mediterranean wind
Also written ghibli Arabic , " coming from the qibla qigong A Chinese system of medical exercises Also written chi gong , ki gong , or chi kung qin
A classification of Chinese musical instruments qinah
A Hebrew elegy Also written kinah ; plural qinot ,
qinoth
Hebrew qindar , qindarkë An Albanian unit of currency , equal to one one - hundredth of a lek Plural qindarka or qindars .
Also written qintar or quintal Albanian qinghaosu A drug , artemisinin , used to treat malaria qipao
A traditional Chinese dress Also written chi pao qirsh A monetary unit of Saudi Arabia and , formerly , various other countries Also written qurush , qursh , gursh , girsh or ghirsh qiviut
The wool of the musk - ox
Inuktitut ᕿᕕᐅᖅ qiyas An analogy in Sharia , Islamic law
Arabic qoph
The nineteenth letter of the Hebrew alphabet Also written koph Hebrew qorma
A type of curry Much more commonly written korma
Persian→Urdu
qwerty
A standard English keyboard
layout Plural qwertys or qwerties ; also rendered QWERTY Named after the letters on the top row of a typewriter .
rencq
An obsolete spelling of rank sambuq A type of dhow , a small Arabian boat Arabic
sheqel
A unit of weight originally used in Mesopotamia .
The currency of Israel , divided into 100 agorot Plural sheqels or sheqalim ; more commonly written shekel Hebrew ,
Yiddish souq
An Arab marketplace Also written sooq , soq , suq , souk , esouk , or suk Arabic ( sūq ) talaq
A form of Islamic divorce Arabic talaq , from talaqa , " repudiate " taluq
An Indian estate Also written taluk or talook Arabic→Urdu , ta'alluqa , " connection " , " relationship " taluqdar
A person who collects the revenues of a taluq
Also written talukdar or talookdar Arabic→Urdu , ta'alluq - dar , " landholder " , " possessor of an estate " , " lord of a manor " taluqdari
An Indian landholding tenure taqiya
In Islam , the dissimulation of faith displayed for fear of one 's life
Also written taqiyah , or capitalised Arabic taqlid Acceptance of Muslim orthodoxy
Arabic tariqa A Sufi method of spiritual development , or a Sufi missionary Also written tariqat or tarika Arabic tranq
A form of sedative Also written trank Apocopation from tranquilizer tsaddiq
In Judaism , a term bestowed upon the righteous .
Plural tsaddiqs or tsaddiqim ; also written tzaddiq , tzadik or tzaddik
Hebrew umiaq
An open Inuit boat Also spelled umiak , umialak , umiac , oomiac or oomiak waqf A charitable trust in Islamic law Also written wakf ; plural waqf or waqfs Arabic , literally " stoppage " from waqafa , " come to a standstill " yaqona A Fijian intoxicating beverage , kava Fijian yaqona , in which q represents https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:English_words_containing_Q_not_followed_by_U Link to a full list of the words USES IN SCRABBLE Section::::Uses in Scrabble .
In many word games , notably in Scrabble , a player must build a word using a certain set of letters .
If a player is obliged to use a q but does not have a u , it may be possible to play words from this list .
Not all words in this list are acceptable in Scrabble tournament games .
Scrabble tournaments around the world use their own sets of words from selected dictionaries which may not contain all the words listed here .
Qi is the most commonly played word in Scrabbler tournaments , and was added to the official North American word list in 2006 .
Other words listed in this article , such as suq , umiaq or qiviut , are also acceptable , but since these contain a u , they are less likely to be useful in the situation described .
SEE ALSO
* English words without vowels
* English words without consonants
* Constrained writing
FOOTNOTES
* [ AH ] : * [ AHC ] : * [ AOX ] : * [ C ] : * [ Co ] : * [ COD ] : * [ E ] : * [ L ] : * [ LC ] : * [ MW ] : * [ MWO ] : * [ ODE ] : * [ OED ] : * [ OSPD4 ] : * [ RHU ] : * [ RHW ] : * [ SOED ] : * [ TWL ] : * [ W ] : * [ WI ] : REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Scrabble Word Lists Q without U – Parker Brothers , attributed to : EXTERNAL LINKS * Wiktionary 's list of English words containing Q not followed by U :