FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is one of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks of the United States .
It is located at 33 Liberty Street , New York , NY .
It is responsible for the Second District of the Federal Reserve System , which encompasses New York State , the 12 northern counties of New Jersey , Fairfield County in Connecticut , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
Working within the Federal Reserve System , the New York Federal Reserve Bank implements monetary policy , supervises and regulates financial institutions and helps maintain the nation 's payment systems .
Among the other regional banks , New York Federal Reserve Bank and its president are considered first among equals .
Its current president is John C. Williams .
It is by far the largest ( by assets ) , most active ( by volume ) and most influential of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks .
RESPONSIBILITIES Section::::Responsibilities .
The New York Fed publishes a monthly recession probability prediction derived from the yield curve and based on the work by Dr. Arturo Estrella & Dr. Tobias Adrian .
Their models show that , when the difference between short - term interest rates ( using three - month T - bills ) and long - term interest rates ( using ten - year Treasury bonds ) at the end of a Federal Reserve tightening cycle is negative or less than 93 basis points positive , a rise in unemployment usually occurs .
LARGEST REGIONAL FEDERAL RESERVE BANK
Section::::Largest regional Federal Reserve Bank .
Since the founding of the Federal Reserve banking system , the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in Manhattan 's Financial District has been the place where monetary policy in the United States is implemented , although policy is decided in Washington , D.C. by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors .
The New York Fed is the largest in terms of assets of the twelve regional banks .
Operating in the financial capital of the U.S. , the New York Fed is responsible for conducting open market operations , the buying and selling of outstanding U.S. Treasury securities .
The Trading Desk is the office at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that manages the FOMC Directive to sell or buy bonds .
Note that the responsibility for issuing new U.S. Treasury securities lies with the Bureau of the Public Debt .
In 2003 , Fedwire , the Federal Reserve 's system for transferring balances between it and other banks , transferred $ 1.8 trillion a day in funds , of which about $ 1.1 trillion originated in the Second District .
It transferred an additional $ 1.3 trillion a day in securities , of which $ 1.2 trillion originated in the Second District .
The New York Fed is also responsible for carrying out exchange rate policy by buying and selling dollars at the discretion of the United States Treasury Department .
The New York Federal Reserve is the only regional bank with a permanent vote on the Federal Open Market Committee and its president is traditionally selected as the Committee 's vice chairman .
MOVE TO 33 LIBERTY STREET Section::::Move to 33 Liberty Street .
A public competition for the design of the building was held and the architectural firm of York and Sawyer submitted the winning design .
The bank moved to its current location in 1924 .
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York maintains a vault that lies below street level and below sea level , resting on Manhattan bedrock .
By 1927 , the vault contained 10 % of the world 's official gold reserves .
Currently , it is reputedly the largest gold repository in the world ( though this can not be confirmed as Swiss banks do not report their gold stocks ) and holds approximately of gold bullion ( $ 415 billion as of October 2011 ) , more than Fort Knox .
Nearly 98 % of the gold at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is owned by the central banks of foreign nations .
The rest is owned by the United States and international organizations such as the IMF .
The Federal Reserve Bank does not own the gold but serves as guardian of the precious metal , which it stores at no charge to the owners , but charging a $ 1.75 fee ( in 2008 ) per bar to move the gold .
Moving the bars requires special footwear for the staff , to protect their feet in case they drop one of the gold bars weighing .
The vault is open to tourists .
TERRORISM ATTEMPT Section::::Terrorism attempt .
On October 17 , 2012 , Quazi Mohammad Rezwanul Ahsan Nafis , 21 , was arrested while attempting to detonate what he believed to be an 800-pound bomb .
A joint FBI / NYPD operation flagged the suspect on the Internet and set up the sting with fake explosives .
In 2013 , Nafis pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 30 years in federal prison .
BRANCHES Section::::Branches .
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York Buffalo Branch used to be the only branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , but it was closed on October 31 , 2008 .
HISTORY BENJAMIN STRONG , 1914 - 1928 Section::::History .
Section::::Benjamin Strong , 1914 - 1928 .
The New York Fed opened for business on November 16 , 1914 , under the leadership of Benjamin Strong Jr. , who had previously been president of the Bankers Trust Company .
He led the Bank until his death in 1928 .
Strong became the executive officer ( then called the " governor"—today , the term would be " president " ) .
As the leader of the Federal Reserve 's largest and most powerful district bank , Strong became a dominant force in U.S. monetary and banking affairs .
One biographer has termed him the " de facto leader of the entire Federal Reserve System .
" This was not only because of Strong 's abilities , but also because the central board 's powers were ambiguous and , for the most part , limited to supervisory and regulatory functions under the 1913 Federal Reserve Act because many Americans were antagonistic to centralized control .
When the United States entered World War I , Strong was a major force behind the campaigns to fund the war effort via bonds owned primarily by U.S. citizens .
This enabled the United States to avoid many of the post - war financial problems of the European belligerents .
Strong gradually recognized the importance of open market operation , or purchases and sales of government securities , as a means of managing the quantity of money in the U.S. economy and thus affecting interest rates .
This was particularly important at the time because gold had flooded into the United States during and after World War I. Thus , its gold - backed currency was well - protected , but prices had been pushed up substantially by the currency expansion due to the gold standard - imposed expansion of currency .
In 1922 , Strong unofficially scrapped the gold standard and instead began aggressively pursuing open market operations as a means of stabilizing domestic prices and thus internal economic stability .
Thus , he began the Federal Reserve 's practice of buying and selling government securities as monetary policy .
John Maynard Keynes , a prominent British economist who had previously not questioned the gold standard , used Strong 's activities as an example of how a central bank could manage a nation 's economy without the gold standard in his book " A Tract on Monetary Reform " ( 1923 ) .
To quote one authority : It was Strong more than anyone else who invented the modern central banker .
When we watch ...
[ central bankers of today ] describe how they are seeking to strike the right balance between economic growth and price stability , it is the ghost of Benjamin Strong who hovers above him .
It all sounds quite prosaically obvious now , but in 1922 it was a radical departure from more than two hundred years of central banking history .
Strong 's policy of maintaining price levels during the 1920s through open market operation and his willingness to maintain the liquidity of banks during panics have been praised by monetarists and harshly criticized by Austrian economists With the European economic turmoil of the 1920s , Strong 's influence became worldwide .
He was a strong supporter of European efforts to return to the gold standard and economic stability .
Strong 's new monetary policies not only stabilized U.S. prices , they encouraged both U.S. and world trade by helping to stabilize European currencies and finances .
However , with virtually no inflation , interest rates were low and the U.S. economy and corporate profits surged , fueling the stock market increases of the late 1920s .
This worried him , but he also felt he had no choice because the low interest rates were helping Europeans ( particularly Great Britain ) in their effort to return to the gold standard .
Economic historian Charles P. Kindleberger states that Strong was one of the few U.S. policymakers interested in the troubled financial affairs of Europe in the 1920s , and that had he not died in 1928 , just a year before the Great Depression , he might have been able to maintain stability in the international financial system ; After Strong died in 1928 , the New York Bank lost its energetic leadership .
In the 1930s some of its power was transferred to the Federal Reserve System headquarters in Washington .
CRITICISMS Section::::Criticisms .
In 2009 , the New York Federal Reserve Bank commissioned a probe into its own practices .
David Beim , finance professor at Columbia Business School submitted a report in 2009 , released by the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission in 2011 , saying " that a number of people he interviewed at the reserve bank believe that supervisors paid excessive deference to banks and , as a result , they were less aggressive in finding issues or in following up on them in a forceful way . "
Following Stephen Friedman 's resignation on 7 May 2009 , Denis Hughes , formerly Deputy Chair , was designated as Interim Chair .
The current Chair ( for 2013 ) is Emily Rafferty , President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art .
In 2012 , Carmen Segarra , then New York Fed bank examiner , told her superiors that Goldman Sachs had no policy governing conflicts of interest .
She was " fired in May 2012 after refusing to change her findings on the conflict - of - interest policy and sued the New York Fed October 2013 " .
In April 2014 the U.S. District court in Manhattan dismissed the case , " ruling that Segarra failed to make a legally sufficient claim under the whistle - blower protections of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act " .
In September 2014 , Segarra´s secretly recorded conversations were aired by This American Life and the New York Fed was accused of political corruption by being a " captured agency " , i.e. , subject to regulatory capture , of the banks which it supervises .
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Section::::Board of Directors .
The following people serve on the board of directors .
Terms expire on December 31 of their final year on the board .
+
Class A !
Name !
Title !
Term Expires !
Paul P. Mello President and Chief Executive
OfficerSolvay BankSolvay , New York 2017 !
James P. Gorman Chairman and Chief Executive OfficerMorgan StanleyNew York , New York 2018 !
Gerald Lipkin 2019 + Class B !
Name !
Title !
Term Expires !
Terry J. Lundgren Chairman and Chief Executive OfficerMacy 's ,
Inc . New York , New York 2017 !
Glenn H. Hutchins Co - FounderSilver LakeNew York , New York 2018 !
David M. Cote Chairman and Chief Executive
OfficerHoneywell International Inc .
Morris Plains , New Jersey 2019 + Class C !
Name !
Title !
Term Expires !
Emily K. Rafferty President EmeritaMetropolitan Museum of ArtNew York , New York 2017 !
Sara Horowitz Founder and Executive
DirectorFreelancers UnionBrooklyn , New York 2018 !
Denise Scott Executive Vice PresidentLocal
Initiatives Support CorporationNew York , New York 2019
PRESIDENTS
* 4 .
Hayes ( 1956–1975 ) * 6 .
Solomon ( 1980–1985 ) * 8 .
McDonough ( 1993–2003 ) IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
In the first Godfather movie , the " meeting of the Dons " scene uses the Federal Reserve building exterior , even though the interior of another New York building ( the Penn Central railway boardroom ) was also used for filming .
In the 1974 film The Taking of Pelham One Two Three hijackers take over a subway train car and demand $ 1 million for release of the car and 19 passengers , and the city must deliver it to the train car within one hour or the hijackers will start executing passengers at the rate of one per minute until it 's delivered .
The money for the ransom , to be provided in bundles of used $ 50 and $ 100 bills , is frantically assembled by workers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York while a police cruiser waits at the front entrance for it to be assembled for delivery .
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York plays a prominent role in the 1995 film Die Hard with a Vengeance , starring Bruce Willis and Jeremy Irons .
The Federal Reserve Bank is the setting for a major heist of the gold by Jeremy Irons ' character , Simon Gruber .
The vault is penetrated under the pretense of construction work and the gold bullion transported via dump trucks to a location outside the city .
SEE ALSO
* Economy of New York City * Federal Reserve Act * Federal Reserve System
* Federal Reserve Districts
* Federal Reserve Branches * Federal Reserve Bank of New York Buffalo Branch
* Official gold reserves
* Structure of the Federal Reserve System * East Rutherford Operations Center ( regional office for cash handling and processing of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York )
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
Further reading * Alessi , Lucia , et al .
" Central bank macroeconomic forecasting during the global financial crisis : the European Central Bank and Federal Reserve Bank of New York experiences . " Journal of Business & Economic Statistics ( 2014 )
32#4 pp : 483 - 500 .
* Chandler , Lester Vernon .
Benjamin Strong : Central Banker ( Brookings Institution , 1958 )
* Clark , Lawrence Edmund .
Central Banking Under the Federal Reserve System : With Special Consideration of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York ( Macmillan , 1935 )
* Greider , William .
Secrets of the temple : How the Federal Reserve runs the country ( Simon and Schuster , 1989 )
* Meltzer , Allan H. A History of the Federal Reserve ( 2 vol , University of Chicago Press , 2010 ) EXTERNAL LINKS * Federal Reserve Bank of New York
* " World 's Greatest Treasure Cave " Popular Mechanics , January 1930 , pp .
34–38
*
" How Uncle Sam Guards His Millions " , March 1931 , Popular Mechanics article showing the upgrades for gold storage at the New York Federal Reserve Bank * Historical resources by and about the Federal Reserve Bank of New York including annual reports back to 1915