CLERY ACT
The Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act or Clery Act , signed in 1990 , is a federal statute codified at , with implementing regulations in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at .
The Clery Act requires all colleges and universities that participate in federal financial aid programs to keep and disclose information about crime on and near their respective campuses .
Compliance is monitored by the United States Department of Education , which can impose civil penalties , up to $ 54,789 per violation , against institutions for each infraction and can suspend institutions from participating in federal student financial aid programs .
The law is named after Jeanne Clery , a 19-year - old Lehigh University student whom Josoph Henry raped and murdered in her campus hall of residence in 1986 .
Henry 's murder of Ms. Clery triggered a backlash against unreported crime on campuses across the country .
JEANNE CLERY Section::::Jeanne Clery .
Josoph M. Henry , another student , raped and murdered Jeanne Clery in April 1986 in Stoughton Hall at Lehigh University in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania .
Henry was given a death sentence via the electric chair by a trial court , a decision which was upheld by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court when appealed .
The attack on Clery was one of 38 violent crimes recorded at the university in three years .
Her parents argued that , had the university 's crime record been known , Clery would not have attended .
They sued , were awarded $ 2 million , and founded Security on Campus , a non - profit group .
REQUIREMENTS OF ACT ANNUAL SECURITY REPORT Section::::Requirements of act .
Section::::Annual security report .
By October 1 of each year , institutions must publish and distribute their Annual Campus Security Report to current and prospective students and employees .
Institutions are also allowed to provide notice of the report , a URL if available , and how to obtain a paper copy if desired .
This report is required to provide crime statistics for the prior three years , policy statements regarding various safety and security measures , campus crime prevention program descriptions , and procedures to be followed in the investigation and prosecution of alleged sex offenses .
CRIME LOG Section::::Crime log .
The institution 's police department or security departments are required to maintain a public log of all crimes reported to them , or those of which they are made aware .
The log is required to have the most recent 60 days ' worth of information .
Each entry in the log must contain the nature , date , time and general location of each crime and disposition of the complaint , if known .
Information in the log older than 60 days must be made available within two business days .
Crime logs must be kept for seven years , three years following the publication of the last annual security report .
TIMELY
WARNINGS Section::::Timely warnings .
The Clery Act requires institutions to give timely warnings of crimes that represent a threat to the safety of students or employees .
Institutions are required to publish their policies regarding timely warnings in their Annual Campus Security Report .
The institution is only required to notify the community of crimes which are covered by the Clery statistics .
CRIME STATISTICS Section::::Crime statistics .
An institution must keep the most recent eight years ( as of 2012 ) of crime statistics that occurred : on campus , in institution residential facilities , in noncampus buildings , or on public property .
Offenses are defined by the UCR Handbook and are not the state crime definitions but rather Federal crime definitions .
This has led to possible discrepancies in data reporting .
Some changes have been made to further define discrepancies in recent updates to the Clery Act .
In 2014 , new amendments were made to require reporting on domestic violence , dating violence and stalking .
In cases of forcible sexual offenses , there have been reports of colleges questioning accounts of alleged victims , further complicating documentation and policing of student assaults .
Institutions are required to report on crimes such as : * Murder ( including nonnegligent and negligent manslaughter ) * Sex offenses ( forcible / nonforcible , domestic violence , dating violence , and stalking )
* Robbery * Aggravated assault * Burglary * Motor vehicle theft
* Arson * Arrest Institutions are required to report on persons referred for campus disciplinary action for : * Liquor law violations
* Drug - related violations * Weapons possession Institutions are required to report on crimes or bodily harm related to / caused by : * Hate crimes NOTABLE INCIDENTS Section::::Notable incidents .
Numerous institutions have been fined and found in non compliance of the Clery act .
Many include defining of crimes , reporting methods and alerting students of dangers .
From 2008 - 2012 , 14 higher education institutions were fined for Clery Act noncompliance .
Large scale Clery violations results in financial fines at institutions such as Pennsylvania State University , Eastern Michigan University and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University .
Reports on complaints of Clery Act
noncompliance are available from the Federal Student Aid ( FSA ) website .
Federal Student Aid , an office of the Department of Education , conducts reviews to evaluate compliance with the Clery Act .
According to the Federal Student Aid ( FSA ) page on Clery Act Reports , " The Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act is a federal statute requiring colleges and universities participating in federal financial aid programs to maintain and disclose campus crime statistics and security information .
The U.S. Department of Education conducts reviews to evaluate an institution 's compliance with the Clery Act requirements ...
Once a review is completed , the Department issues a Final Program Review Determination .
Although regular program reviews may contain Clery Act findings , this page includes only those program reviews that were focused exclusively on the Clery Act .
Below , you can access these reports as well as accompanying documentation which may include the complaint , school response , or fine action that resulted from the program review . "
EASTERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY Section::::Eastern Michigan University .
The case involving the highest fine imposed on an institution occurred in 2008 .
Eastern Michigan University was fined $ 357,500 for failing to warn the campus of a student 's assault and death that occurred in 2006 .
Beyond reporting the incident , the school was fined for violating federal crime - reporting laws .
The Laura Dickinson incident has been seen as a wake - up call on how universities report and display statistics on crimes that occur on university campuses .
The incident brought forth university - wide changes in campus safety and safety notifications .
The incident also brought changes in university administration , including the dismissal of the university 's president , John A. Fallon .
PENN STATE
UNIVERSITY Section::::Penn State University .
The U.S. Department of Education is investigating Penn State over the Penn State sex abuse scandal .
Their investigation arises from the university administration 's alleged failure to report allegations of sex offenses on campus by Jerry Sandusky , a former school official , as being a violation of the Act .
Former Penn State Defensive Coach Jerry Sandusky has been convicted of sexually abusing several young boys over several years , including incidents on campus .
A campus safety advocacy group called the scandal " the most extensive investigation the Department of Education has ever conducted " .
VIRGINIA
TECH Section::::Virginia Tech .
In the final report regarding the April 16 , 2007
Virginia Tech massacre issued on Thursday , December 9 , 2010 by the U.S. Department of Education under Arne Duncan , Virginia Tech was said to have violated this Act .
Additionally the Department of Education fined the University $ 55,000 on March 29 , 2011 for " failure to issue a timely warning " in response to the shootings at West Ambler Johnston .
The university appealed the fine arguing that actions were in compliance with guidelines distributed to schools by the Department of Education in a handbook .
On March 30 , 2012 , the U.S. Department of Education 's administrative law judge ruled in favor of the university , saying in a statement : " This was not an unreasonable amount of time in which to issue a warning . … .
if the later shootings at Norris Hall had not occurred , it is doubtful that the timing of the email would have been perceived as too late . "
SEE ALSO
* Crime mapping
* Duty to warn * Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act ( FERPA )
* Murder of Yeardley Love REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS LAWS AND REGULATIONS
* Clery Act - 20 USC 1092(f )
* Legislative history of the Clery Act CRIME STATISTICS
* US Department of Education 's Campus Security Statistics Website OTHER INFORMATION
* Clery Center for Security On Campus , Inc. - Information regarding the Clery Act * US Department of Education - Campus Security
* Clery Act Campus Crime Reporting Handbook ( PDF )
* SPLC 's Student Media Guide to the Clery Act