ALEXANDRA CABOT Alexandra " Alex " Cabot is a fictional character within the Law & Order universe portrayed by Stephanie March .
She is a primary character in and Conviction .
CHARACTER OVERVIEW Section::::Character overview .
Cabot first appears in the SVU episode " Wrong Is Right " , when she is hired to work with SVU as their permanent assistant district attorney ( ADA ) overseeing the legality of its arrests , following a rotating mix of ADAs , among them Abbie Carmichael ( Angie Harmon ) of the original Law & Order .
She is a graduate of Harvard Law School , and has an " uncle Bill " who is a federal judge .
While Cabot has great compassion for the victims of sexual assault , child sexual abuse and domestic violence whom she advocates for , her strict code of legal ethics often forces her to make harsh decisions and judgments that go against her personal feelings .
Her moral compass has earned her respect within the SVU squad .
She does occasionally bend the rules to suit her own notions of justice , but often with unpleasant results .
In one case , she is so determined to put serial child molester Roy Barnett ( Beau Gravitte ) in prison that she aggressively pressures one of his victims , Sam Cavanaugh ( Bret Harrison ) to testify , going so far as to threaten the boy with legal action if he does not comply .
Sam later attempts suicide , leaving him with severe brain damage and thus unable to testify .
She then lies to the detectives about having a search warrant for Sam 's home , which results in Barnett 's conviction on a technicality , but gets her in trouble with her superiors .
She is let off with a one - month suspension , but feels responsible for Sam 's plight .
Executive producer and head writer Neal Baer has said that an unaddressed sexual tension exists between Cabot and Detective Olivia Benson ( Mariska Hargitay ) .
Baer said , " We read the fan sites .
We know that people are into the Alex - Olivia thing .
All the codes are in there . "
When asked in a 2009 press call if Cabot and Benson were in love , March said , " I 'm not saying we 're not … I'm not saying we 're not in love . "
DEPARTURE FROM SVU Section::::Departure from SVU .
After three seasons , Cabot made her departure from SVU in the season - five episode " Loss " , in which she is prosecuting a rapist named Rafael Zapata Gaviria ( Jacinto Taras Riddick ) , who works for drug lord Cesar Velez .
Zapata had brutally raped and murdered an undercover NYPD officer who was working with the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) .
Cabot receives a threat on her life , as well as that of her mother .
Despite warnings from the rest of the SVU squad , Cabot continues to prosecute the case , unwilling to let Zapata scare her .
Tim Donovan ( Josh Hopkins ) , a key witness and DEA special agent , is murdered in a car bombing right before Cabot 's eyes .
Cabot initially wants to try Zapata , even with no witness and her own life on the line , but after pressuring from the SVU detectives and District Attorney Arthur Branch ( Fred Thompson ) , she drops the charges .
However , Zapata is immediately arrested by federal agents for the witness 's murder and is subsequently killed in his cell .
At the conclusion of the episode , Cabot is apparently killed in a drive - by shooting while saying goodnight to Benson and Detective Elliot Stabler ( Christopher Meloni ) .
In the following scene , a cold , quiet SVU squad room is shown with Stabler reading a newspaper proclaiming her death .
Benson and Stabler are called to a deserted area by federal agents , where Cabot emerges from the car .
She tells the stunned detectives that she had insisted on telling them the truth before disappearing into the Witness Protection Program .
She is replaced in the following episode by ADA Casey Novak ( Diane Neal ) .
FIRST REAPPEARANCE ON SVU Section::::First reappearance on SVU .
In the season - six episode " " , events surrounding the arrest of Liam Connors ( Brian F. O'Byrne ) , the assassin who shot her , led to Cabot 's return from the Witness Protection Program as Connors is arrested for her murder while being pursued for several others and an attempted murder of a young boy who witnessed one of his crimes .
She reveals that the assumed identity she was given was an insurance salesperson from Tulsa , that she was living and working in Wisconsin under the name " Emily " , and that she missed her mother 's funeral while in hiding .
She is reluctant to see Connors convicted of a murder he did not commit ( he does not know she is alive , either ) , but still wants justice and testifies against him in court .
Connors goes to prison , having been found guilty under two counts of attempted murder ( Cabot and an eight - year - old boy ) , plus five counts of murder .
Upon winning the case , the SVU squad goes to Novak 's office to celebrate , awaiting Cabot to join them .
She does not show up , and federal agents inform them that she has once again been moved and given a new identity .
IN CONVICTION Section::::In Conviction .
About a year after her reappearance on SVU , Cabot returns to New York and resumes her work in the district attorney 's office as the homicide bureau chief ( replacing Tracey Kibre from ) in the Law & Order spinoff Conviction .
She plays a tough but understanding supervisor to a young group of ADAs .
Her attitude and personality in this role were much different from those of the young ADA who prosecuted cases in SVU .
Cabot 's departure from witness protection and return to New York as a bureau chief was not explained during the show 's airing , as she was a last - minute addition to the cast and most of the early episodes had already been written before she was added .
Plans were made for later episodes to explain Cabot 's return to New York , plus a greater exploration of her personal life and past , but the cancellation of Conviction made this moot .
SECOND REAPPEARANCE ON SVU Section::::Second reappearance on SVU .
The explanation of Cabot 's return from witness protection to the DA 's office in Conviction was finally revealed in the SVU season-10 episode , " " , where she reveals to the SVU detectives that she has been asked by DA Jack McCoy ( Sam Waterston ) to step in for Kim Greylek ( Michaela McManus ) , when Greylek was called back to the Justice Department .
At that point , she had not told her former colleagues of her return ; she is implied , and later confirmed , to be still traumatized by her attempted murder .
The detectives learn she had left witness protection after Velez died in prison and Connors was extradited to Ireland .
Sometime between 2006 and 2007 , she stepped down from the position of homicide bureau chief and is replaced by Christine Danielson ( Gloria Reuben ) .
Cabot begins work in the Appeals Bureau until her return to SVU .
She remains at SVU for the remainder of the season , in which she appears in six episodes in what Cabot calls a " temporary " role .
She replaces Greylek .
In the season-11 premiere , Cabot is revealed to be training in Albany , and will eventually return to the Appeals Bureau .
McCoy asks Executive ADA Sonya Paxton ( Christine Lahti ) to assume Cabot 's role .
Paxton is ultimately fired for showing up to trial drunk , and Cabot returns to her old job , commenting that she had " clawed her way " out of Appeals to return to SVU , to prosecute Kevin O'Donnell ( Garret Dillahunt ) , the leader of a pedophile advocacy group .
In this episode , Stephanie March is added to the season-11 opening credits as a series regular ( though only in episodes in which she appears ) .
Benson and Stabler are later informed that Cabot had been accused of withholding evidence and is being investigated by the state bar association .
In that same episode , Paxton returns to give Cabot some " much needed advice " that helps her win the case .
In another episode , Cabot tries a rape case with an illegal immigrant from the Democratic Republic of the Congo as her star witness .
The witness was herself raped in the Congo , and Cabot works to help her get asylum , as well as trying the rape case , which then becomes a murder case after the victim dies from an infection caused by injuries sustained during the rape .
Cabot succeeds in getting the rapist convicted and gets the witness a visa that would allow her to remain in the United States without fear of being deported .
However , the case affects both the witness and Cabot ; the witness decides to return to the Congo to help rape victims there , while Cabot decides to take a leave of absence and joins the prosecutor 's office of the International Criminal Court , which prosecutes sex crimes and other human - rights abuses in areas such as the Congo .
She is replaced by ( Sharon Stone ) .
SUBSEQUENT APPEARANCES SEASON 13 Section::::Subsequent appearances .
Section::::Season 13 .
ADAs Alexandra Cabot and Casey Novak both returned to for the show 's 13th season .
In the season premiere " Scorched Earth " , Cabot makes her first appearance in the squad room since season 11 .
She is the lead prosecutor in a rape case against Roberto DiStasio ( Franco Nero ) , a diplomat in the running to become Italy 's next prime minister .
When the accuser , a hotel maid , is caught on tape admitting she could make money off her alleged rapist , Cabot 's new boss , SVU 's Bureau Chief ADA Michael Cutter ( Linus Roache ) , says that they are dropping the charges .
Cabot fights Cutter , however , and the case does make it to trial , with mixed results ; the jury finds the defendant guilty of unlawful imprisonment , but are deadlocked on the rape charge .
In the episode " Spiraling Down " , Cabot is convinced by the detectives to set up a sting operation to catch johns after they rescue an underaged prostitute .
They arrest former professional quarterback Jake Stanton ( Treat Williams ) , and both Cabot and Benson seek to make an example out of him , but Cabot is unexpectedly forced to face off with defense attorney Bayard Ellis ( Andre Braugher ) at trial , after Benson tells Stanton 's wife to call him .
After the case takes a turn for the worse , Cabot berates Benson after court when Benson defends Stanton .
Cabot implies she knows Benson had something to do with Ellis defending Stanton .
Cabot ultimately loses the case after the jury finds Stanton not guilty due to mental instability caused by the numerous concussions he suffered during his career .
Cabot is the prosecutor in seven episodes of season 13 , sharing the ADA duties with Novak , Cutter , and David Haden ( Harry Connick Jr. ) .
The character makes her final appearance in the season in " Learning Curve " , in which she helps the investigation of sexual abuse in an exclusive preparatory school .
SEASON 19
Section::::Season 19 .
Cabot returns six years later in the Season 19 episode , " Sunk Cost Fallacy " .
At this point , she has retired from the D.A 's office , and now helps battered women escape their abusers by " disappearing " them - smuggling them out of New York City and giving them new identities .
In SVU 's latest case , a woman named Jules Hunter ( Sarah Wilson ) and her four - year - old daughter Ruby have gone missing , and the detectives find evidence of their apparent murders in Jules ' car .
They arrest their chief suspect , Jules ' abusive husband Nick ( Scott Porter ) .
However , now - Lieutenant Benson discovers that Cabot had faked Jules ' and Ruby 's deaths in order to help them escape their abusive home and start new lives .
Benson is forced to reduce the charges against Nick to assault , and he makes bail .
He then sues the department and the D.A 's office for $ 50 million .
During the resulting bench trial , Nick 's lawyer calls Benson as a witness and gets her to reveal that Jules and Ruby are alive .
Cabot tries to hide them again , but Benson persuades Jules to stay and help put Nick in prison .
Soon afterward , however , Jules is killed in an apparent car accident .
Both Cabot and Benson believe that Nick is responsible , but he nevertheless wins custody of Ruby .
Though now on opposite sides , Cabot and Benson part ways on good terms ; they express admiration for each other , and embrace .
Cabot then goes to meet another client .
CREDITS Section::::Credits .
March has been credited in 96 episodes of SVU ( appearing in 92 ) , making her the third - longest ADA in the franchise history , surpassed by Casey Novak ( SVU ) , and Ron Carver REFERENCES