LIVER DIALYSIS
Liver dialysis is a detoxification treatment for liver failure and has shown promise for patients with hepatorenal syndrome .
It is similar to hemodialysis and based on the same principles .
Like a bioartificial liver device , it is a form of artificial extracorporeal liver support .
A critical issue of the clinical syndrome in liver failure is the accumulation of toxins not cleared by the failing liver .
Based on this hypothesis , the removal of lipophilic , albumin - bound substances such as bilirubin , bile acids , metabolites of aromatic amino acids , medium - chain fatty acids and cytokines should be beneficial to the clinical course of a patient in liver failure .
This led to the development of artificial filtration and absorption devices .
Hemodialysis is used for kidney failure and primarily removes water - soluble toxins .
However , it does not remove toxins bound to albumin that accumulate in liver failure .
PROGNOSIS / SURVIVAL Section::::Prognosis / survival .
While the technique is in its infancy , the prognosis of patients with liver failure remains guarded .
Liver dialysis , currently , is only considered to be a bridge to transplantation or liver regeneration ( in the case of acute liver failure ) and , unlike kidney dialysis ( for kidney failure ) , can not support a patient for an extended period of time ( months to years ) .
DEVICES Section::::Devices .
Artificial detoxification devices currently under clinical evaluation include the Single Pass Albumin Dialysis ( SPAD ) , Molecular Adsorbent Recirculating System ( MARS )
® , Prometheus system , and Dialive .
SINGLE PASS ALBUMIN DIALYSIS ( SPAD )
Section::::Single Pass Albumin Dialysis ( SPAD ) .
Single pass albumin dialysis ( SPAD ) is a simple method of albumin dialysis using standard renal replacement therapy machines without an additional perfusion pump system : The patient 's blood flows through a circuit with a high - flux hollow fiber hemodiafilter , identical to that used in the MARS system .
The other side of this membrane is cleansed with an albumin solution in counter - directional flow , which is discarded after passing the filter .
Hemodialysis can be performed in the first circuit via the same high - flux hollow fibers .
MOLECULAR ADSORBENTS RECIRCULATION SYSTEM Section::::Molecular adsorbents recirculation system .
The Molecular Adsorbents Recirculation System ( MARS ) , is the best known extracorporal liver dialysis system and has existed for approximately ten years .
It consists of two separate dialysis circuits .
The first circuit consists of human serum albumin , is in contact with the patient 's blood through a semipermeable membrane and has two filters to clean the albumin after it has absorbed toxins from the patient 's blood .
The second circuit consists of a hemodialysis machine and is used to clean the albumin in the first circuit , before it is recirculated to the semipermeable membrane in contact with the patient 's blood .
COMPARING SPAD , MARS AND CVVHDF Section::::Comparing SPAD , MARS and CVVHDF .
SPAD , MARS and continuous veno - venous haemodiafiltration ( CVVHDF ) were compared in vitro with regard to detoxification capacity .
SPAD and CVVHDF showed a significantly greater reduction of ammonia compared with MARS .
No significant differences could be observed between SPAD , MARS and CVVHDF concerning other water - soluble substances .
However , SPAD enabled a significantly greater bilirubin reduction than MARS .
Bilirubin serves as an important marker substance for albumin - bound ( non - water - soluble ) substances .
Concerning the reduction of bile acids no significant differences between SPAD and MARS were seen .
It was concluded that the detoxification capacity of SPAD is similar or even higher when compared with the more sophisticated , more complex and hence more expensive MARS .
As albumin dialysis is a costly procedure , financial aspects are important : For a seven - hour treatment with MARS , approximately € 300 for 600 ml human serum albumin solution ( 20 % ) , € 1740 for a MARS treatment kit , and € 125 for disposables used by the dialysis machine have to be spent .
The cost of this therapy adds up to approximately € 2165 .
Performing SPAD according to the protocol by Sauer et al . , however , requires 1000 ml of human albumin solution ( 20 % ) at a cost of € 500 .
A high - flux dialyzer costing approximately € 40 and the tubings ( € 125 ) must also be purchased .
The overall costs of a SPAD treatment is approximately € 656—30 % of the costs of an equally efficient MARS therapy session .
The expenditure for the MARS monitor necessary to operate the MARS disposables is not included in this calculation .
PROMETHEUS
Section::::Prometheus .
The Prometheus system ( Fresenius Medical Care , Bad Homburg , Germany ) is a new device based on the combination of albumin adsorption with high - flux hemodialysis after selective filtration of the albumin fraction through a specific polysulfon filter ( AlbuFlow ) .
It has been studied in a group of eleven patients with hepatorenal syndrome ( acute - on - chronic liver failure and accompanying kidney failure ) .
The treatment for two consecutive days for more than four hours significantly improved serum levels of conjugated bilirubin , bile acids , ammonia , cholinesterase , creatinine , urea and blood
pH.
Prometheus was proven to be a safe supportive therapy for patients with liver failure .
DIALIVE Section::::Dialive .
Dialive incorporates albumin removal and replacement and , endotoxin removal .
It is at " Technology readiness level " ( TRL ) 5 , which means it is validated in the disease environment .
SEE ALSO * American Society for Artificial Internal Organs
*
Artificial extracorporeal liver support * Bioartificial liver device
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Liver Support Working Group of the European Society for Artificial Organs ( ESA0 )
* Information on different Liver Dialysis Systems
* Hepa Wash GmbH , Munich — Research - based company dealing with liver dialysis modules and techniques ; based in Germany .
* European Society for Artificial Organs SPAD
* Artificial Liver Support Systems — Charité Berlin — Campus Virchow — Division of Experimental Surgery and Regenerative Medicine — gives detailed descriptions on artificial and bioarticial liver support concepts and — in particular — on SPAD * Modular Extracorporeal Liver Support ( MELS)—Charité Berlin — Campus Virchow — Division of Experimental Surgery and Regenerative Medicine
* Hepa Wash , Munich SPAD - based liver dialysis technique .
MARS
* Gambro — the manufacturer of MARS .
* MARS — Molecular Adsorbent Recycling System — a description of MARS .
* MARS - Leberdialyse — has a picture of MARS in action .
PROMETHEUS
* Fresenius Medical Care — Manufacturer of the Prometheus system
* Liver Support Therapy — Product description with pictures of the system * The Prometheus System — Development of an Adsorptive Blood Purification System called Prometheus — Donau - Universität Krems