COLONIAL PERIOD OF SOUTH
CAROLINA
The history of the colonial period of South Carolina focuses on the English colonization that created one of the original Thirteen Colonies .
Major settlement began after 1651 as the northern half of the British colony of Carolina attracted frontiersmen from Pennsylvania and Virginia , while the southern parts were populated by wealthy English people who set up large plantations dependent on slave labor , for the cultivation of cotton , rice , and indigo and memess .
The colony was separated into the Province of South Carolina and the Province of North Carolina in 1712 .
South Carolina 's capital city of Charleston became a major port for traffic on the Atlantic Ocean , and South Carolina developed indigo , rice and Sea Island cotton as commodity crop exports , making it one of the most prosperous of the colonies .
A strong colonial government fought wars with the local Indians , and with Spanish imperial outposts in Florida , while fending off the threat of pirates .
Birth rates were high , food was abundant , and these offset the disease environment of malaria to produce rapid population growth among whites .
With the expansion of plantation agriculture , the colony imported numerous African slaves , who comprised a majority of the population by 1708 .
They were integral to its development .
The colony developed a system of laws and self - government and a growing commitment to Republicanism , which patriots feared was threatened by the British Empire after 1765 .
At the same time , men with close commercial and political ties to Great Britain tended to be Loyalists when the revolution broke out .
South Carolina joined the American Revolution in 1775 , but was bitterly divided between Patriots and Loyalists .
The British invaded in 1780 and captured most of the state , but were finally driven out .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
After several expeditions a settlement attempted in the 16th century , France and Spain had abandoned the area of present - day South Carolina
In 1629 , Charles I granted his attorney general a charter to everything between latitudes 36 and 31 .
Later , in 1663 , Charles II granted the land to eight Lords Proprietors in return for their financial and political assistance in restoring him to the throne in 1660 .
Anthony Ashley Cooper , later the 1st Earl of Shaftesbury emerged as the leader of the Lords Proprietors , and John Locke became his assistant and chief planner .
The two men were chiefly responsible for developing the Grand Model for the Province of Carolina , which included the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina .
The newly created province was intended in part to serve as an English bulwark to contest lands claimed by Spanish Florida .
There was a single government of the Carolinas based in Charleston until 1712 , when a separate government ( under the Lords Proprietors ) was set up for North Carolina .
In 1719 , the Crown purchased the South Carolina colony from the absentee Lords Proprietors and appointed Royal Governors .
By 1729 , seven of the eight Lords Proprietors had sold their interests back to the Crown ; the separate royal colonies of North Carolina and South Carolina were established .
Throughout the Colonial Period , the Carolinas participated in numerous wars with the Spanish and the Native Americans , particularly the Yamasee , Apalachee , and Cherokee .
During the Yamasee War of 1715 - 1717 , South Carolina faced near annihilation due to Native American attacks .
An indigenous alliance had formed to try to push the colonists out , in part as a reaction to their trade in Native American slaves for the nearly 50 years since 1670 .
The effects of the slave trade affected tribes throughout the Southeast .
Estimates are that Carolinians exported 24,000 - 51,000 Native American slaves to markets from Boston to Barbados .
The emerging planter class used the revenues to finance the purchase of enslaved Africans and financing of indentured servants .
So many Africans were imported that they comprised a majority of the population in the colony from 1708 through the American Revolution .
Living and working together on large plantations , they developed what is known as the Gullah culture and creole language , maintaining many west African traditions of various cultures , while adapting to the new environment .
The white population of the Lowcountry was dominated by wealthy planters of English descent and indentured servants from southern and western England .
The interior Carolina upcountry was settled later , largely in the 18th century by Ulster Scots immigrants arriving via Pennsylvania and Virginia , German Calvinists , French Huguenot refugees in the Piedmont and foothills as well as by working class English indentured servants who moved inland after completing their terms of service working on coastal plantations .
Toward the end of the Colonial Period , the upcountry people were underrepresented politically and felt they were mistreated by the planter elite .
In reaction , many took a Loyalist position when the Lowcountry planters complained of the new taxes , an issue that later contributed to the colony 's support of the American Revolution .
In North Carolina a short - lived colony was established near the mouth of the Cape Fear River .
A ship was sent southward to explore the Port Royal , South Carolina area , where the French had established the short - lived Charlesfort post and the Spanish had built Santa Elena , the capital of Spanish Florida from 1566 to 1587 , until it was abandoned .
Captain Robert Sanford made a visit with the friendly Edisto Indians .
When the ship departed to return to Cape Fear , Dr. Henry Woodward stayed behind to study the interior and native Indians .
In Bermuda , an 80-year - old Puritan Bermudian colonist , Colonel William Sayle , was named governor of Carolina .
On March 15 , 1670 , under Sayle ( who sailed on a Bermuda sloop with a number of Bermudian families ) , they finally reached Port Royal .
According to the account of one passenger , the Indians were friendly , made signs toward where they should land , and spoke broken Spanish .
Spain still considered Carolina to be its land ; the main Spanish base , St. Augustine , was not far away .
The Spanish missionary provinces of Guale and Mocama occupied the coast south of the Savannah River and Port Royal .
Although the Edisto Indians were not happy to have the English settle permanently , the chief of the Kiawah Indians , who lived farther north along the coast , arrived to invite the English to settle among his people and protect them from the Westo tribe , slave - raiding allies of Virginia .
The sailors agreed and sailed for the region now called West Ashley .
When they landed in early April at Albemarle Point on the shores of the Ashley River , they founded Charles Town , named in honor of their king .
On May 23 , Three Brothers arrived in Charles Town Bay without 11 or 12 passengers who had gone for water and supplies at St. Catherines Island , and had run into Indians allied with the Spanish .
Of the hundreds of people who had sailed from England or Barbados , only 148 people , including three African slaves , lived to arrive at Charles Town Landing .
MONARCHS Section::::Monarchs . ! width=15
% NameReign !
width="105 "
Portrait !
width="105 "
Arms ! width=20
% Birth ! width=20
% Marriage(s)Issue ! width=19
% Death !
Claim Monarchy Abolished
THE END OF PROPRIETARY RULE Section::::The end of proprietary rule .
Proprietary rule was unpopular in South Carolina almost from the start , mainly because propertied immigrants to the colony hoped to monopolize the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina as a basis for government .
Moreover , many Anglicans resented the Proprietors ' guarantee of freedom of religion to Dissenters .
In November 1719 , Carolina elected James Moore as governor and sent a representative to ask the King to make Carolina a royal province with a royal governor .
They wanted the Crown to grant the colony aid and security directly from the English government .
Because the Crown was interested in Carolina 's exports and did not think the Lords Proprietor were adequately protecting the colony , it agreed .
Robert Johnson , the last proprietary governor , became the first royal governor .
Meanwhile , the colony of Carolina was slowly splitting in two .
In the first fifty years of the colony 's existence , most settlement was focused on the region around Charleston , as the northern part of the colony had no deep water port .
North Carolina 's earliest settlement region , the Albemarle Settlements , was colonized by Virginians and closely tied to Virginia .
In 1712 , the northern half of Carolina was granted its own governor and named " North Carolina " .
North Carolina remained under proprietary rule until 1729 .
Because South Carolina was more populous and more commercially important , most Europeans thought primarily of it , and not of North Carolina , when they referred to " Carolina " .
By the time of the American Revolution , this colony was known as " South Carolina . "
FRONTIER SETTLEMENT Section::::Frontier settlement .
Governor Robert Johnson encouraged settlement in the western frontier to make Charles Town 's shipping more profitable , and to create a buffer zone against attacks .
The Carolinians arranged a fund to lure European Protestants .
Each family would receive free land based on the number of people that it brought over , including indentured servants and slaves .
Every 100 families settling together would be declared a parish and given two representatives in the state assembly .
Within ten years , eight townships formed , all along navigable streams .
Charlestonians considered the towns created by the Huguenots , German Calvinists , Scots , Ulster - Scots Presbyterians , working class English laborers who were former indentured servants and Welsh farmers , such as Orangeburg and Saxe - Gotha ( later called Cayce ) , to be their first line of defense in case of an Indian attack , and military reserves against the threat of a slave uprising .
Between 1729 and 1775 , twenty - nine new towns were founded in South Carolina .
By the 1750s the Piedmont region attracted numerous frontier families from the north , using the Great Wagon Road .
Differences in religion , philosophy and background between the mostly subsistence farmers in the Upcountry and the slaveholding planters of the Low Country bred distrust and hostility between the two regions .
The Low Country planters traditionally had wealth , education and political power .
By the time of the Revolution , however , the Upcountry contained nearly half the white population of South Carolina , about 30,000 settlers .
Nearly all of them were Dissenting Protestants .
After the Revolution , the state legislature disestablished the Anglican Church .
The main source of wealth during the late - colonial period was the export of rice , deerskins and , by the 1760s , indigo .
Sea Island cotton , produced on large plantations off the coast , was also highly profitable .
CHEROKEE WARS Section::::Cherokee Wars .
Although Governor Francis Nicholson attempted to pacify the Cherokee with gifts , they had grown discontented with the arrangements .
Sir Alexander Cuming negotiated with them to open some land for settlement in 1730 .
Because Governor James Glen stepped in to bring peace between the Creek people and Cherokee , who were traditional enemies , the Cherokee rewarded him by granting South Carolina a few thousand acres of land near their major Lower Town of Keowee .
In 1753 , the Carolinians built Fort Prince George as a British outpost and trading center near the Keowee River .
Two years later Old Hop , an important Cherokee chief , made a treaty with Glen at Saluda Old Town , midway between Charles Town and Keowee .
Old Hop gave the Carolinians the 96th District , a region that included parts of ten currently separate counties .
From 1755 to 1758 , Cherokee warriors served as British allies in campaigns along the Virginia and Pennsylvania frontier .
Returning homeward , they were killed by Virginia frontiersmen .
In 1759 , the Cherokee avenged these killings and began attacking white settlers in the southern colonial Upcountry .
South Carolina 's Governor William Henry Lyttelton raised an army of 1,100 men and marched on the Lower Towns , which quickly agreed to peace .
As part of the peace terms , two dozen Cherokee chiefs were imprisoned as hostages in Fort Prince George .
Lyttelton returned to Charles Town , but the Cherokee continued raiding the frontier .
In February 1760 , the Cherokee attacked Fort Prince George trying to rescue the hostages .
In the battle , the fort 's commander was killed .
His replacement quickly ordered the execution of the hostages , then fought off the Cherokee assault .
Unable to put down the rebellion , Governor Lyttelton appealed to Jeffrey Amherst , who sent Archibald Montgomery with an army of 1,200 British regulars and Scots Highlanders .
Montgomery 's army burned a few of the Cherokees ' abandoned Lower Towns .
When he tried to cross into the region of the Cherokee Middle Towns , he was ambushed and defeated at " Etchoe Pass " and forced to return to Charles Town .
In 1761 , the British made a third attempt to defeat the Cherokee .
General Grant led an army of 2,600 men , including Catawba scouts .
The Cherokee fought at Etchoe Pass but failed to stop Grant 's army .
The British burned the Cherokee Middle Towns and fields of crops .
In September 1761 , a number of Cherokee chiefs led by Attakullakulla petitioned for peace .
The terms of the peace treaty , concluded in Charleston that December , included the cession of lands along the South Carolina frontier .
SETTLEMENT OF UPCOUNTRY Section::::Settlement of Upcountry .
After the Cherokee defeat and cession of land , new settlers from Ulster flooded into the Upcountry through the Waxhaws in what is now called Lancaster County .
Lawlessness ensued and robbery , arson , and looting became common .
Upcountry residents formed a group of " Regulators , " vigilantes who took the law into their own hands to control the criminals .
Having acquired 50 % of the state 's white population , but just three elected assemblymen in the Commons House of Assembly , the Upcountry sent representative Patrick Calhoun and other representatives before the Charles Town state legislature to appeal for representation , courts , roads , and supplies for churches and schools .
Before long , Calhoun and Moses Kirkland were in the legislature as Upcountry representatives .
By 1775 , the colony contained 60,000 European Americans and 80,000 mostly enslaved African Americans .
Lord William Campbell was the last English Governor of the Province of South Carolina .
RELIGION Section::::Religion .
Numerous churches built bases in Charleston , and expanded into the rural areas .
From the founding of Charleston onwards , the colony welcomed many different religious groups , including Jews and Quakers , but Catholics were prohibited from practicing until after the American Revolution .
Baptists and Methodists increased in number rapidly in the late 18th century as a result of the Great Awakening and its revivals , and their missionaries attracted many slaves with their inclusive congregations and recognition of blacks as preachers .
The Scots - Irish in the Backcountry were Presbyterians , and the wealthy planters in the Low Country tended to be English Anglicans .
The different churches recognized and supported each other , eventually building the colony into a pluralist and tolerant society .
Despite official religious tolerance , tensions did exist between Anglican and ' Dissenter ' factions throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries .
The highly successful preaching tour of evangelist George Whitefield in 1740 ignited a religious revival — called the First Great Awakening — which energized evangelical Protestants .
They expanded their membership among the white farmers , and women were especially active in the small Methodist and Baptist churches that were springing up everywhere .
The evangelicals worked hard to convert the slaves to Christianity and were especially successful among black women , who had played the role of religious specialists in Africa and again in America .
Slave women exercised wide - ranging spiritual leadership among Africans in America in healing and medicine , church discipline , and revival enthusiasm .
AFRICAN SLAVES
Section::::African slaves .
Many of the rich planters came from Barbados and other islands in the Caribbean , and brought seasoned African slaves from there .
The planters duplicated elements of the Caribbean economies , developing plantations for the cultivation of export crops , such as Sea Island cotton , indigo , and particularly rice .
The slaves came from many diverse cultures in West Africa , where they had developed an immunity to endemic malaria , which helped them survive in the Low Country of South Carolina , where it frequently occurred .
Peter Wood documents that " Negro slaves played a significant and often determinative part in the evolution of the colony .
" They were integral to the expansion of the rice culture , and were also important in timber harvesting , as coopers , and in the production of naval stores .
They were also active in the fur trade , and as boatmen , fishermen and cattle herders .
By 1708 , expansion of plantation agriculture had required continuing importation of slaves from Africa and they comprised a majority of the population in the colony , a status maintained after the colonial era .
On the large rice and cotton plantations , where slaves were held in large numbers with few white overseers , they gradually developed what has become known as the Gullah culture , which preserved numerous African customs and practices within adaptations to the local environment , and they developed a creole language based on West African languages and English .
Colonists tried to regulate the numerous slaves , including establishing dress rules to maintain differences between the classes .
Relations between colonists and slaves were a result of continuing negotiation , with increasing tensions as slaves sought freedoms .
In 1739 , a group of slaves rose up in the Stono rebellion .
Some of the leaders were from the Catholic kingdom of Kongo and appeared to be seasoned warriors ; they introduced ritual practices from there and appeared to use military tactics they had learned in the Kongo .
The site of the Stono Rebellion was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1974 , in recognition of the slaves ' bid for freedom .
The comprehensive Negro Act of 1740 was passed in South Carolina , during Governor William Bull 's time in office , in response to the Stono Rebellion in 1739 .
The act made it illegal for enslaved Africans to move abroad , assemble in groups , raise food , earn money , and learn to write ( though reading was not proscribed ) .
Additionally , owners were permitted to kill rebellious slaves if necessary .
The Act remained in effect until 1865 .
HURRICANES Section::::Hurricanes .
South Carolina was struck by four major hurricanes during the colonial period .
Colonists became constantly aware of the threat these storms posed and their effects even on warfare .
The 1752 hurricane caused massive damage to homes , businesses , shipping , outlying plantation buildings and the rice crop ; about 95 people died .
Charles Town , the capital , was the fifth - largest city in British North America at the time .
The storm was compact and powerful ; the city and surrounding areas were saved from even greater destruction only because the wind shifted some three hours before high tide .
The destruction resulted in a series of political effects that together substantially weakened the relationship between the royal governor and the local political elites in the Commons House Assembly : there was bickering between the various political authorities over money for rebuilding following the destruction of the colony 's defenses , and the disruption caused a devastating financial crisis .
The Commons threatened to report Governor Glen 's conduct to the king .
REFERENCES CITATIONS BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Edgar , Walter .
South Carolina :
A History , ( 1998 )
the standard scholarly history
* Edgar , Walter , ed .
The South Carolina Encyclopedia , University of South Carolina Press , ( 2006 ) , , the most comprehensive scholarly guide * Rogers Jr. , George C. and C. James Taylor .
A South Carolina Chronology , 1497 - 1992 2nd
Ed . ( 1994 )
* Wallace , David Duncan .
South Carolina :
A Short History , 1520 - 1948 ( 1951 ) standard scholarly history
* Clarke , Erskine .
Our Southern Zion : A History of Calvinism in the South Carolina Low Country , 1690 - 1990 ( 1996 )
* Coclanis , Peter A. , " Global Perspectives on the Early Economic History of South Carolina , " South Carolina Historical Magazine , 106 ( April – July 2005 ) , 130–46 .
* Crane , Verner W.
The Southern Frontier , 1670 - 1732 ( 1956 )
* Johnson Jr. , George Lloyd .
The Frontier in the Colonial South : South Carolina Backcountry , 1736 - 1800 ( 1997 )
* Edelson , S. Max .
Plantation Enterprise in Colonial South Carolina ( 2007 )
* Hewat , Alexander .
An Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of the Colonies of South Carolina and Georgia Vol.1 and Vol.2 ( London 1779 )
* LeMaster , Michelle , ed .
Creating and Contesting Carolina .
Proprietary Era Histories , ( 2013 )
* Nagl , Dominik .
No Part of the Mother Country , but Distinct Dominions - Law , State Formation and Governance in England , Massachusetts and South Carolina , 1630 - 1769 ( 2013 )
* Rogers , George C. Evolution of a Federalist : William Loughton Smith of Charleston ( 1758 - 1812 ) ( 1962 ) * Roper , L. H.
Conceiving Carolina : Proprietors , Planters , and Plots , 1662 - 1729 ( 2004 ) , .
* Smith , Warren B. White Servitude in Colonial South Carolina ( 1961 )
* Tortora , Daniel J. Carolina in Crisis : Cherokees , Colonists , and Slaves in the American Southeast , 1756–1763 ( 2015 ) , .
* Wilson , Thomas D. The Ashley Cooper Plan : The Founding of Carolina and the Origins of Southern Political Culture .
Chapel Hill , NC : University of North Carolina Press , 2016 .
* Wood , Peter H. Black Majority : Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670 Through the Stono Rebellion ( 1996 )
* Wright , Louis B. South Carolina : A Bicentennial History ' ( 1976 )