THE RAGE : CARRIE 2
The Rage : Carrie 2 is a 1999 American supernatural horror film directed by Katt Shea and a sequel to the 1976 horror film Carrie , based on the novel of the same name by Stephen King , and features Carrie White 's baby half - sister Rachel Lang in the lead role .
Directed by Katt Shea , the film stars Emily Bergl , Jason London , Dylan Bruno , J. Smith - Cameron , and Amy Irving who reprises her role of Sue Snell from the previous film , the latter one being the only actress to do so .
The film was released on March 12 , 1999 , and received generally poor reviews from critics .
The film was a box office bomb at the time of release , grossing $ 17 million against a $ 21 million production budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Barbara Lang paints a barrier around her living room to protect her telekinetic daughter , Rachel , from the devil .
Unfortunately for her , Barbara is ordered to be locked up at a mental institution for schizophrenia .
Years later Rachel , living with foster parents , talks with her best friend Lisa , who has lost her virginity to Eric , a football player .
The football players have a game where they sleep with girls and receive points , revealing Eric never cared for Lisa .
After Eric rejects her , Lisa commits suicide .
Her self - induced death reignites Rachel 's dormant and strong telekinetic abilities which causes lockers to open and bathroom stalls to automatically close from a distance inside the school ; whereas Rachel had been outside .
Upon discovering a photograph of Lisa and Eric making out , Rachel tells school guidance counselor Sue Snell and Sheriff Kelton that Lisa and Eric had slept together .
Kelton looks into charging Eric with statutory rape .
Walter , Rachel 's Basset Hound dog , is struck by a car , but Rachel flags down Jesse as he drives past .
After taking Walter to an animal hospital , they get coffee .
Learning that Rachel gave Kelton the photograph , Eric and Mark attempt to intimidate her into not talking .
They become victims of her unusually strong telekinesis , and run off when her foster parents arrive .
Sue Snell meets with Rachel .
When Sue learns that Rachel is telekinetic , she brings Rachel to the site of the original high school .
She tells Rachel about Carrie White , and the malicious prank that was pulled on her on prom night that caused her to snap and cause the school to burn down , along with over 70 people killed .
Rachel does not believe her when Sue tells her that she and Carrie White are paternal half - sisters from the same father , Ralph White .
Jesse pursues Rachel , angering popular cheerleader Tracy .
Jesse convinces Rachel he was unaware of their attack , and Rachel agrees to date him .
The Senior D.A. covers up the statutory rape because of the political influence of the families of the players .
Encouraged , Mark plots to humiliate Rachel for what she did to Eric .
He apologizes to Jesse and offers his parents ' cabin so Jesse can spend the night with Rachel .
The two share a romantic evening , and Rachel loses her virginity , both unaware that a hidden video camera is filming them .
After a football game , one of the players , Brad , and his girlfriend
Monica invite Rachel to a party at Mark 's .
She leaves with Monica , while Jesse is sidetracked by Tracy , who attempts to seduce him .
Rachel is with Jesse 's friends when the football players reveal their sex game and claim that Rachel was added to Jesse 's list , making Rachel believe Jesse never cared for her .
They also play the videotape and abuse her .
As it triggers Rachel 's telekinesis , she closes the doors and kills most of the party - goers , including Deborah and Chuck .
Sue takes Barbara from the mental hospital and goes to Mark 's house .
As Sue peers in the door , Rachel kills both Sue ( unknowingly ) and Brad .
Rachel later kills Monica and Eric when they try to stop her with spear guns .
While distracted by her mother 's voice , Mark , in an attempt to stop her , shoots Rachel with a flare gun as she falls into a pool , causing a sensor to extend the cover .
When Mark makes the mistake of checking the pool , the injured Rachel pulls Mark into the pool , and , with the cover fully extended , uses his spear gun to free herself while he drowns .
When Barbara sees Rachel 's current state , she believes Rachel is possessed and flees .
Rachel prays for help to die .
Jesse and Tracy find the house in flames and their friends dead .
When Rachel sees Tracy , she kills her without hesitation .
The videotape of Rachel and Jesse is still playing ; when he sees it Jesse tells her he did not know they were taped .
Rachel calls him a liar as a notebook hits him , opening to the score page .
Jesse says he loves her , but she does not believe him until she hears him say it on the videotape , realizing he told the truth .
When the ceiling collapses over Jesse 's head , Rachel pushes him out of the way and is pinned .
She tells him she loves him , and they kiss .
Rachel pushes him out of the house before allowing herself to be consumed by the flames .
A year later , Jesse is at King 's University , sharing his room with Rachel 's beloved dog , Walter .
Jesse dreams Rachel approaches him in his room .
When he walks towards her , she shatters into pieces .
CAST * Emily Bergl as Rachel Lang * Kayla Campbell as Young Rachel
* Jason London as Jesse Ryan : a popular jock with whom Rachel falls in love .
* Dylan Bruno as Mark Bing : a football player who owns the mansion where the football game after - party takes place .
* J. Smith - Cameron as Barbara Lang :
Rachel 's insane mother .
* Amy Irving as Sue Snell : the sole survivor of Carrie 's rage in the original film , now a guidance counselor .
* Zachery Ty Bryan as Eric Stark : a jock who seduces and then humiliates Lisa , resulting in her suicide .
* John Doe as Boyd : Rachel 's foster father * Charlotte Ayanna as Tracy Campbell : Jesse Ryan 's ex - girlfriend , a popular cheerleader .
* Rachel Blanchard as Monica Jones :
Tracy 's best friend .
* Justin Urich as Brad Winters : football player and Monica 's boyfriend .
* Mena Suvari as Lisa Parker : Rachel 's best friend , who commits suicide .
* Elijah Craig as Chuck Potter : football player .
* Eddie Kaye Thomas as Arnold : Rachel 's friend .
* Clint Jordan as Sheriff Kelton
* Kate Skinner as Emilyn : Rachel 's foster mother * Gordon Clapp as Mr. Stark : Eric 's father * Steven Ford as Coach Walsh * Deborah Meschan as Deborah : One of Monica 's friends who takes part in setting Rachel up * Katt Shea as Deputy D.A.
* Robert D.Raiford as The Senior D.A. * Rhoda Griffis as Mrs. Porter : A Saleswoman * Sissy Spacek as Carrie White :
Rachel 's deceased half - sister , and the protagonist of the original film .
Sissy Spacek turned down an offer to cameo in the film but gave permission to have her likeness used in the film .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Originally titled The Curse , the film was scheduled to start production in 1996 with Emily Bergl in the lead , however production stalled for two years .
The plot heavily borrows from a real - life 1993 incident in which a group of high school jocks known as The Spur Posse were involved in a sex scandal .
In 1998 , the film finally went into production under the title Carrie 2 :
Say You 're Sorry .
A few weeks into production , director Robert Mandel quit over creative differences and Katt Shea hurriedly took over the reins with less than a week to prepare to start filming , and two weeks ' worth of footage to reshoot .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Amy Irving reprised the role of Sue Snell , which she originated in the first Carrie , though she was initially wary of taking the role and asked Brian De Palma , director of the original film , for his blessing .
Director Shea was told that she would not be able to use footage of Sissy Spacek from the original Carrie , but she edited several scenes into the film and presented the film to Spacek , who granted permission for her likeness to be used .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was theatrically released on March 12 , 1999 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on VHS and DVD on October 12 , 1999 .
A Blu - ray version of the film was released on 14 April 2015 in a double feature with the 2002 TV version of Carrie from Scream Factory .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Rage : Carrie 2 , was released on March 12 , 1999 .
It opened in second place that weekend but was not successful .
It grossed a total of $ 17,762,705 domestically against a $ 21 million budget , making the film a box office disappointment .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mostly negative reviews upon its release , with many moviegoers and critics criticizing the film 's failure to capture the essence of what made the original so creepy , yet believable .
Rotten Tomatoes reported the film had a 21 % approval rating based on thirty - two reviews and a 33 % with six reviews based on top critics .
On Metacritic it had a rating of 42 on a scale from 0–100 based on 21 reviews indicating mixed or average reviews .
Roger Ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars stating " The original Carrie worked because it was a skillful teenage drama grafted onto a horror ending .
Also , of course , because De Palma and his star , Sissy Spacek , made the story convincing .
The Rage : Carrie 2 is more like a shadow " .
SOUNDTRACK
* " Crazy Little Voices " – Ra * *
" Quick , Painless and Easy " –
Ivy * * " Resurrection " –
Fear Factory
*
*
" Year of Summer " –
Paradise Lost *
* " Low Down " – 10
Watt Mary *
* " Looking Down the Barrel " –
Five Times Down
* * " Die with Me " – Type O
Negative
*
* " Keep Sleeping " – 16Volt * * " Dark Love " – Kate Shrock * * " Laughter Lines " – Sack * *
"
The Slower
I Go " –
L.A.X. * * " Sleep " – Trailer Park Pam * * " Spark Somebody Up " –
Budda Mo b * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS