REMINGTON MODEL 11 - 87
The Remington 11 - 87 is a semi - automatic shotgun manufactured by Remington Arms .
It is based on the Remington 1100 and was first announced in 1987 .
The 11 - 87 is a gas operated semi - automatic ( autoloading ) shotgun , meaning that some of the high - pressure gases from the burning gunpowder are diverted through two small holes in the underside of the barrel .
The gases force a piston ( and the bolt ) toward the rear of the shotgun , which in turn ejects the spent shell .
A spring then forces the bolt forward , sending a new shell from the magazine into the chamber .
This gas operation has the effect of reducing the recoil felt by the shooter , since the total recoil energy is spread out over a longer period of time than would be the case with fixed breech shotguns .
The 11 - 87 incorporates a self - compensating gas system design , which allows the gun to operate with every type of load , from light 2 ¾ " to 3 " Magnum shells without any shooter adjustments .
It is manufactured in two different gauges : 20 and 12 , and both will cycle 2 ¾ " and 3 " shells .
Some 11 - 87 shotguns , especially those with barrels shorter than 26 " , or Magnum models , may have issues cycling light target and birdshot loads consistently .
The 12 gauge 3 - 1/2 " SuperMag and 20 gauge Magnum models come with an extra component on the magazine tube called a " barrel seal activator " that helps cycle lighter loads .
Failure to remove the barrel seal activator before firing 2 3/4 " magnum , 3 " , and 3 1/2 " loads may bring pressure to dangerous levels which could damage the gun .
Recently , a Super Magnum version has been introduced to operate with the newer 3 ½ " 12 gauge shells .
Some 11 - 87s have interchangeable screw - in chokes , although barrels are available with fixed chokes .
Most barrels are not interchangeable between 1100 and 11 - 87 models .
Barrel lengths range from the police to .
The weapon found widespread notoriety when a sound - suppressed version of it was used by the main antagonist in the Coen brothers ' film No Country for Old Men , based on the Cormac McCarthy novel .
USERS Used by numerous law enforcement agencies .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Website * Modern Firearms REFERENCES