PAK KIL - YON Pak Kil - yon
( or ; born 1943 , Chagang ) is a North Korean diplomat .
He served as Permanent Representative to the United Nations from 2001 to 2008 .
EARLY LIFE AND CAREER Section::::Early life and career .
Pak is a graduate of Pyongyang University of International Affairs .
He has served in the North Korean diplomatic corps since 1969 , when he was Consul to the embassy in Myanmar .
He subsequently served in Singapore , and then domestically as the director - general of the American Bureau of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
Thereafter he was named chief representative for the North Korean UN mission in 1985 .
He subsequently served as ambassador to countries including Colombia and Cambodia , before taking his present post .
Pak has been a delegate to the 8th , 9th and 11th sessions of the Supreme People 's Assembly .
He was awarded the Order Of Kim II - Sung in 1992 .
REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS Section::::Representative to the United Nations .
Pak has been the ambassador to the United Nations for North Korea since 2001 .
During this time , he has called for the UN to prevent Japan from obtaining a permanent seat on the Security Council .
On May 13 , 2005 , he met with Joseph DeTrani , a special envoy for the United States , to discuss a North Korean return to the " six - party talks " on North Korean nuclear proliferation .
This meeting was the first between US and North Korean officials in six months .
He is known sarcastically by diplomats as ' Dr. Chuckles ' because of his rhetoric .
Following the 2006 North Korean nuclear test , Pak made headlines when he said that the United Nations should " congratulate " his country 's scientists and researchers on their achievement , instead of issuing what he called " notorious , useless and reckless resolutions .
" Following the United Nations Security Council 's imposition of sanctions on North Korea , Pak called the Council 's actions " gangster - like " and stormed out of the chamber .
This led to then - U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations John R. Bolton replying that that action was the equivalent of Nikita Khrushchev pounding his shoe at the United Nations in 1960 .
SEE ALSO
* Politics of North Korea REFERENCES