RED BEANS AND RICE Red beans and rice is an emblematic dish of Louisiana Creole cuisine ( not originally of Cajun cuisine ) traditionally made on Mondays with red beans , vegetables ( bell pepper , onion , and celery ) , spices ( thyme , cayenne pepper , and bay leaf ) and pork bones as left over from Sunday dinner , cooked together slowly in a pot and served over rice .
Meats such as ham , sausage ( most commonly andouille and Chaurice ) , and tasso ham are also frequently used in the dish .
The dish is customary – ham was traditionally a Sunday meal and Monday was washday .
A pot of beans could sit on the stove and simmer while the women were busy scrubbing clothes .
The dish is now fairly common throughout the Southeast .
Similar dishes are common in Latin American cuisine , including moros y cristianos and gallo pinto .
Red beans and rice is one of the few New Orleans style dishes to be commonly served both in people 's homes and in restaurants .
Many neighborhood restaurants continue to offer it as a Monday lunch or dinner special , usually with a side order of either smoked sausage or a pork chop .
While Monday washdays are largely a thing of the past , red beans remain a staple for large gatherings such as Super Bowl and Mardi Gras parties .
Indeed , red beans and rice is very much part of the New Orleans identity .
New Orleanian Louis Armstrong 's favorite food was red beans and rice – the musician would sign letters " Red Beans and Ricely Yours , Louis Armstrong " .
The vegetarian dish Rajma chawal is very similar ( which translates literally to red beans and rice ) , popular in North India .
Red beans and rice is also a dietary staple in Central America , where it is known as " arroz con habichuelas " .
The dish is popular in Cuban , Puerto Rican , Dominican , Haitian and Jamaican cuisine as well .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Red kidney beans or small red beans are used and they are usually ( but not always ) soaked beforehand .
NUTRITIONAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Nutritional significance .
The dish is very nutritious .
Rice is rich in starch , an excellent source of energy .
Rice also has iron , vitamin B and protein .
Beans also contain a good amount of iron and an even greater amount of protein than rice .
Together they make up a complete protein , which provides each of the amino acids the body can not make for itself .
In addition , rice and beans are common and affordable ingredients , often available in difficult economic times .
SEE ALSO
* Cuisine of New Orleans
* Hoppin ' John * Rajma * List of legume dishes * List of regional dishes of the United States
* List of rice dishes * List of sausage dishes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Beans and Rice –
Southern U.S. Cuisine
* New Orleans Red Beans and Rice –
The Gumbo Pages
* How To Make Red Beans and Rice Video – Cookbook Man