I WANNA BE YOUR MAN
"
I Wanna
Be Your Man " is a Lennon – McCartney - penned song recorded and released as a single by the Rolling Stones , and then recorded by the Beatles .
The song was primarily written by Paul McCartney , and finished by Lennon and McCartney in the corner of a room while Mick Jagger and Keith Richards were talking .
THE ROLLING STONES ' VERSION Section::::The Rolling Stones ' version .
Released as their second single on 1 November 1963 , the Stones ' version was an early hit , peaking at number 12 on the British chart .
Their rendition features Brian Jones ' distinctive slide guitar and Bill Wyman 's driving bass playing .
It is one of the few Rolling Stones songs to feature only Brian Jones on backing vocals .
In the US , the song was initially released as London 45-LON 9641 ( with " Stoned " on the B side ) without any success and was soon after re - released on 6 March 1964 as the B - side to " Not Fade Away " .
According to various accounts , either the Rolling Stones ' manager / producer Andrew Loog Oldham or the Rolling Stones themselves ran into Lennon and McCartney on the street as the two were returning from an awards luncheon .
Hearing that the band were in need of material for a single , Lennon and McCartney went to their session at De Lane Lea Studio and finished off the song – whose verse they had already been working on – in the corner of the room while the impressed Rolling Stones watched .
Mick Jagger recalled the song in 1968 :
McCartney stated in 2016 :
Bill Wyman noted how the Rolling Stones adapted the song to their style : Released only as a single , the Rolling Stones ' rendition did not appear on a studio album .
The song was released in the UK on the 1972 Decca compilation album Milestones and on the UK compilation album in 1975 .
In 1989 , it was issued on the US compilation album .
It is included on the four CD version of the 2012 GRRR !
compilation .
The B - side of the second single was " Stoned " , a " Green Onions " influenced instrumental composed by Nanker / Phelge , the early collective pseudonym for the group .
Additionally , it included the ' Sixth Stone ' pianist Ian Stewart , making it the first released self - penned composition , with added spoken asides by Mick Jagger .
Some original 1963 copies were issued with the misprinted title as " Stones " , making it doubly collectable as a rarity .
A promotional video featuring the song was the first song ever performed on the Top of the Pops TV program in the UK .
A performance of the song on The Arthur Haynes Show recorded on 7 February 1964 appears as part of the bonus material on the 2012 documentary film Crossfire Hurricane .
PERSONNEL
* Mick Jagger – lead vocals
* Brian Jones – lead guitar , backing vocals
* Keith Richards – rhythm guitar
* Bill Wyman – bass
* Charlie Watts – drums THE BEATLES ' VERSION Section::::The Beatles ' version .
The Beatles ' version was sung by Ringo Starr and appeared on the group 's second UK album , With the Beatles , released 22 November 1963 and on the US release Meet the Beatles ! , released on 20 January 1964 .
It was driven by a heavily tremoloed , open E - chord on a guitar played through a Vox AC30 amplifier .
John Lennon was dismissive of the song in 1980 , saying : The Beatles also recorded two versions of the song for the BBC .
One version was for the Saturday Club , recorded on 7 January 1964 and first broadcast on 15 February .
The second version was released on the Live at the BBC collection from the From Us to You show .
It was recorded on 28 February and broadcast on 30 March .
The Beatles also recorded a version for the Around The Beatles TV show , recorded on 19 April 1964 .
This version was released on the Anthology 1 collection in 1995 .
Bob Dylan recorded a song for Blonde on Blonde ( 1966 ) called
" I Wanna Be Your Lover " as a " tip of the hat " to the Lennon / McCartney song .
It was left off the final album , but was eventually released on the compilation boxed set Biograph ( 1985 ) .
The song features a heavy Bo Diddley beat .
Bo Diddley himself acknowledged this in the song " London Stomp " ( album " Hey Good Lookin ' " ) .
He sings " Hey , Liverpool , we got the London Stomp " over a
" I Wanna Be Your Man " background .
PERSONNEL
* Ringo Starr – double - tracked lead vocals , drums , maracas , tambourine , handclaps * John Lennon – backing vocal , tremolo electric rhythm guitar , screaming , handclaps * Paul McCartney – backing vocal , bass , screaming , handclaps * George Harrison – electric lead guitar , handclaps * George Martin –
Hammond organ
LIVE VERSIONS RINGO STARR AND THE ALL - STARR BAND VERSION Section::::Live versions .
Section::::Ringo Starr and the All - Starr Band version .
Ringo Starr & His All - Starr Band have performed the song as a concert staple during their 1989 through 2012–2013 All - Starr Band concerts .
The song was on the setlist for the first line - up in 1989 .
The 1992 line - up did not perform the song .
Every All - Starr Band line - up from 1995 to 2012–2013 has included the song on their setlist .
The song has appeared on the following compilation albums :
Ringo Starr and His Third All - Starr Band - Volume 1 , King Biscuit Flower Hour Presents Ringo & His New All - Starr Band , The Anthology ...
So Far , Ringo Starr and Friends , , Ringo Starr & His All Starr Band Live 2006 , and Live at the Greek Theatre 2008 .
X - PENSIVE WINOS VERSION Section::::X - Pensive Winos version .
Keith Richards performed the song live with his group the X - Pensive Winos during their 1988 Talk is Cheap tour of the US .
They performed the song at the Orpheum Theatre in Boston , at the Universal Amphitheater in Los Angeles , the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford , New Jersey , and at the Hollywood Palladium .
THE ROLLING STONES 2012 LIVE VERSION Section::::The Rolling Stones 2012 live version .
The Rolling Stones performed the song live during their 2012 50th anniversary concerts , the 50 & Counting Tour .
The song opened their 25 November 2012 concert at the O2 Arena in London .
The song was also featured in their 29 November 2012 performance at the O2 Arena .
They also performed the song live during their concert at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn , New York on 8 December 2012 .
OTHER RECORDINGS
Section::::Other recordings .
The song was also recorded by Adam Faith in 1965 , Count Basie and his Orchestra in 1966 , the Day Brothers , Terry Manning in 1970 , Suzi Quatro in 1973 , The Rezillos in 1977 , Roger Webb and his Trio , the Sparrows , the Merseyboys , Bob Leaper , the Flamin ' Groovies in 1993 , Sam Phillips in 2003 , Les Baronets in French as " Oh !
Je Veux Être À Toi " , the Rockin ' Ramrods , the Smithereens in 2007 , and the Stooges on their 2007 album
The Weirdness featuring Iggy Pop .
NOTES REFERENCES