TARGET AUSTRALIA Target Australia ( formerly Lindsay 's and later Lindsay 's Target ) is a mid - price department store chain owned by Wesfarmers .
It is Australia 's largest department store chain by store number , operating 301 stores throughout the country .
Products it sells include branded clothing , cosmetics , homewares , electronics , fitness and consumer electronics .
The company 's national support office is currently located in North Geelong but will move its headquarters to Williams Landing at the end of 2018 .
HISTORY BEGINNINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Beginnings .
In 1926 , George Lindsay and Alex McKenzie opened their first store in Geelong selling dress fabrics , bedding and furnishings .
Lindsay had begun his retail empire five years earlier , running a store in Ouyen , Victoria , but moved to Geelong to increase the opportunity for growth .
The company progressively established stores throughout Victoria , running with a policy of selling quality goods at half the normal rate of profit .
In 1968 , Myer Emporium purchased the chain of 16 stores and renamed the company Lindsay 's Target , with an aim to expand the business .
With the stores rebranded as Target , it quickly established itself throughout Australia , and within 3 years had stores in Victoria , South Australia , Queensland and New South Wales .
Despite the similar logo , name and type of outlets , Target carried no corporate connection to US department store Target .
In March 1973 , " Lindsay 's " was dropped from the company name when the business was renamed
Target Australia Pty Ltd. By 1982 , Myer was operating 27 stores under the Target brand , but sold 22 of these with 14 going to GJ Coles & Coy Ltd. COLES MYER ERA Section::::Coles Myer era .
In August 1985 , Myer Emporium Ltd and GJ Coles & Coy Ltd merged to become Coles Myer Limited .
In 1996 , Coles Myer merged the Target and Fosseys brands , and their first speciality store Baby Target was established .
Then in 1998 , their second speciality store , Target Home opened .
Fosseys stores were later renamed Target Country , becoming the third speciality store under the Target name .
In 2001 , Target announced its first ever loss , to the sum of $ 43 m .
New senior management was soon put in place , with Target repositioning itself from a store directly competing with Coles Myer stablemate Kmart and Woolworths Limited 's Big W , to a more stylish , up - market , but still value - for - money , alternative to speciality stores .
Store fittings and layouts were altered to reflect this change .
In 2006 Target appointed Launa Inman as managing director , named Telstra Business Women of the Year in 2003 , a result of her achievements as an apparel retail buyer for the company .
Her position saw Target 's $ 32 million loss at the end of 2000 turn into a $ 68 million profit 18 months later .
WESFARMERS ERA Section::::Wesfarmers era .
Prior to its November 2007 takeover of Coles Group , Wesfarmers stated in August 2007 that it would consider converting some Kmart stores to the Target brand .
In May 2009 , Target stopped providing free plastic bags for its customers , but in 2013 reversed this decision .
In November 2011 , Dene Rogers , the former chief executive of North American retailer Sears Canada , replaced Inman as Target 's managing director , but by April 2013 Rogers had been replaced by former chief operations director at Coles Stuart Machin .
In February 2016 , Wesfarmers restructured Target and Kmart under a single ' Department Stores ' division , headed by Kmart managing director Guy Russo .
An accounting scandal that created $ 21 million in fraudulent profits was reported on 11 April 2016 .
Although it is not believed CEO Stuart Machin orchestrated or ordered the accounting irregularities , he took the blame for the scandal and departed Target .
In June 2016 at a Wesfarmers annual strategy briefing Guy Russo announced that Target would be exiting toy sales , pet care and luggage .
Target announced in April 2016 it would relocate its Geelong head office to Melbourne , resulting in an unspecified number of redundancies .
Following the April 2016 announcement , Wesfarmers confirmed in December that Target would relocate to Williams Landing in late 2018 .
In June 2017 , Wesfarmers announced that Target and Kmart would be merging some of their back office operations including procurement .
Some Target stores would be converted to Kmart stores while others would be closed .
BABY TARGET AND TARGET HOME
( DISCONTINUED ) Section::::Baby Target and Target Home ( discontinued ) .
In 1996 , Target introduced Baby Target as a standalone store format specifically for baby products .
The concept had limited success .
Another format tried by Target was the homewares - themed store Target Home , but was later discontinued .
Target Home stores have since been phased out to become larger Target stores , and still stock a larger range of homewares in a number of locations in Australia and New Zealand including Joondalup and Carousel in WA , Edwardstown in SA , Highpoint and Greensborough in VIC , and Westfield Warringah Mall in NSW and Tauranga , North Island .
FOSSEYS AND TARGET COUNTRY Section::::Fosseys and Target Country .
Fosseys was established in 1926 at George Street , Sydney by Alfred Bristow Fossey and grew to 148 stores throughout Australia , with an annual turnover of $ 300 million .
As part of the acquisition of Grace Bros , which had purchased JB Young 's of Queanbeyan who owned Fossey 's , Myer and later Coles Myer came to own Fossey 's .
Coles Myer used the Fosseys brand to unify a range of smaller variety stores trading under a range of other names , including Coles Variety stores , which had been the foundation of GJ Coles & Coy Ltd. Coles Myer merged the operations of Fosseys with Target in 1996 , redesigning Fosseys stores to focus on family apparel retailing in rural Australia .
It also introduced Fosseys - branded merchandise with attributes of value , convenience and confidence .
By 2001 , all Fosseys stores located close to Target stores were closed ; the remaining Fosseys stores , rebranded Target Country , continue to focus on apparel sales in smaller towns without full - merchandise Target stores .
From the mid 1990s onwards there was a rebranding of some Grace Bros stores in regional NSW to Target .
This included a large number of stores which had previously been part of the Dubbo based Western Stores .
Locations which converted from Grace Bros to Target
and then Target Country include Bathurst , Cowra , West Wyalong , Forbes , and Young .
As of 1 July 2007 , employees of Fosseys ( Australia )
Pty Ltd were transferred to Target Australia Pty Ltd , and Fosseys as a legal entity was dissolved .
As at June 2008 , there were 118 Target Country stores throughout Australia .
TARGET COUNTRY
CHARTERS
TOWERS Section::::Target Country Charters Towers .
In Charters Towers , Queensland the long established Pollard 's Store became a Fosseys and is now , most likely the only Target or Target Country store which features leadlight windows .
DESIGNERS FOR TARGET Section::::Designers for Target .
In March 2007 , Target launched a 42-piece winter collection designed by Stella McCartney .
This exclusive Australian launch was heralded as one of the biggest retail coups of the year , and Australian media noted frenzied activity in Target stores on the morning of the launch .
A number of metropolitan stores sold out of the range as soon as 10 minutes after opening , and items from the collection soon began appearing for sale on eBay at inflated prices .
Another Stella McCartney collection was released in October 2010 , to lesser fanfare .
In May 2007 , Target announced its next designer range from Joshua Goot to a mixed reaction , and subsequently produced a collaboration with American designer Zac Posen in April 2008 .
In the same month , Australian fashion designer Collette Dinnigan released a range of lingerie labelled the ' Wild Hearts ' collection .
In February 2012 , Target launched a line of women 's lingerie designed by American burlesque dancer and model Dita Von Teese .
Throughout 2012 , Target also announced designer collaborations for children with Collette Dinnigan and Ksubi and Roberto Cavalli for women .
In March 2016 , Target launched a collection of women 's , men 's , children 's and home wares by Jean - Paul Gaultier .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Online shop
* Designers For Target website