SIX FLAGS NEW ORLEANS Six Flags New Orleans ( SFNO ) is a 140-acre , abandoned theme park in New Orleans that has been closed since Hurricane Katrina struck the state in August 2005 .
It is owned by the Industrial Development Board ( IDB ) of New Orleans .
Six Flags had leased the park from 2002 until 2009 , when the lease was terminated during its bankruptcy proceedings .
The former park is located in New Orleans East , off Interstate 10 .
Despite various announced plans to redevelop the site , as of December 2018 it is still an abandoned amusement park in extremely poor condition .
Trespassing is prohibited , and the park is patrolled for 24 hours a day by the New Orleans Police Department .
Despite these deterrents , videos and photos of the site have surfaced over the years from thrill - seekers and YouTubers .
As a result , city officials became more diligent in securing the park and banning tours .
FUNCTIONING AMUSEMENT PARK ,
2000–05 ORIGINAL JAZZLAND ( 2000–2002 ) Section::::Functioning amusement park , 2000–05 .
Section::::Original Jazzland ( 2000–2002 ) .
The park opened under the name Jazzland in 2000 .
It was operated by Alfa Smartparks ( later Odgen Entertainment and now known as Palace Entertainment ) , but owned by a Spanish company called Parques Reunidos .
Rides included Mega Zeph , a wooden roller coaster track built on a steel frame to prevent termite infestation and withstand hurricane - force winds .
Mega Zeph was inspired by the old Zephyr roller coaster at the closed Pontchartrain Beach Amusement Park that was located next to Lake Pontchartrain by the University of New Orleans .
The intent was to rebuild the Zephyr , but it was a smaller roller coaster , so that idea was scrapped in favor of the current larger Mega Zeph .
Other rides included a junior steel coaster called Rex 's Rail Runner , a wild mouse steel coaster and a common steel shuttle looping Vekoma boomerang rollercoaster called a Zydeco Scream ( there are well over a dozen of these identical coasters in parks in the US ) .
The park had a log flume called Cypress Plunge and a splashwater falls ride called Spillway Splashout .
In addition , the park had common amusement park spinning rides and a carousel merry - go - round .
The park was not profitable , as Alpha Smart Parks specialized in running water parks and smaller amusement arcade centers .
In 2001 , the lease was put up for sale , and in March 2002 Six Flags purchased the lease , although the park 's name did not change that year .
SIX FLAGS NEW ORLEANS ( 2003–2005 ) Section::::Six Flags New Orleans ( 2003–2005 ) .
In early 2003 , Six Flags upgraded the park and renamed it " Six Flags New Orleans . "
Six Flags added more shaded areas and many new flat spinning rides .
The park was renamed Six Flags , and the " it 's playtime !
" theme was adopted that included a dancing old man , Mr. Six .
They added a Bolliger & Mabillard inverted coaster named ( a mirrored version of the B&M Batman : The Ride coaster model ) relocated from the defunct Thrill Valley in Japan , and a Vekoma multiple looping coaster called The Jester relocated from Six Flags Fiesta Texas .
A water park that would be included in the admission ( like Six Flags Parks such as Six Flags St. Louis and Six Flags America , for example ) was in the planning stages in early 2005 and was going to be announced at the end of August .
However , Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans , which put those plans and the continued operations of the park in question .
The last day the park operated was August 21 , 2005 .
Weekday operations had ended a couple weeks earlier , as schools start early in August in the New Orleans area and end in mid - May .
The park was scheduled to reopen on August 27 and August 28 , but once Katrina was forecast late on Friday , August 26 to directly hit New Orleans , the weekend opening was cancelled in order to prepare for the storm and begin evacuations .
THEMED AREAS * Main Street Square ( Formerly Jazz Plaza ) * Cajun Country * Pontchartrain Beach * DC Comics Super Hero Adventures
* Looney Tunes Adventures ( Formerly Kids ' Carnival )
* Mardi Gras
* Good Time Gardens STANDING BUT NOT OPERATING RIDES AND ATTRACTIONS MAIN STREET
SQUARE
* Zydeco Zinger ( Fabbri Wave Swinger ) CAJUN COUNTRY
* Muskrat Scrambler ( L&T Systems Wild Mouse )
* Lafitte 's Pirate Ship ( Fabbri Pirate Ship )
* Ozarka Splash ( Hopkins Rides log flume formerly known as Cypress Plunge ) * Gator Bait ( Huss Airboat ) * SpongeBob SquarePants
The Ride ( SimEx - Iwerks motion simulator )
DC COMICS SUPER HERO ADVENTURES * Catwoman 's Whip ( Mondial Shake )
* Joker 's Jukebox ( Wieland Schwarzkopf Polyp )
* Lex Luthor 's Invertatron ( Zamperla Windshear ) PONTCHARTRAIN BEACH
* Beach Bang - Up ( Reverchon Bumper Cars )
* The Big Easy ( Vekoma Ferris Wheel )
* Zydeco Scream ( Vekoma Boomerang )
* Dizzy Lizzy ( Fabbri Boomerang ) MARDI GRAS *
The Jester ( Vekoma Hurricane )
* Mega Zeph ( Custom Coasters International
Double Out and Back wooden hybrid )
* Krazy Krewe ( Fabbri Cataclysm )
* Mad Rex ( Chance Morgan Wipeout )
* Jocco 's Mardi Gras Madness ( Sally Corporation interactive dark ride )
* Spillway Splashout ( Hopkins Rides Shoot the Chutes ) * Skycoaster ( Skycoaster Inc. Reverse freefall swing )
* Mardi Gras Menagerie ( Chance Morgan Carousel )
LOONEY
TUNES
ADVENTURES * Pepe Le Pew & The Swings de Paris ( children 's swing ride formerly known as Zinger Swinger )
* Daffy Duck and the Backlot Tour Bus ( Zamperla Crazy Bus formerly known as Jolly Jitney )
* Tazmanian Devil Rumble in the Jungle ( Formerly known as Cajun Crawler )
* Yosemite Sam and the Wild West Wheel ( Zamperla Ferris Wheel formerly known as Little Easy )
* Tweety 's Tweehouse ( Zamperla Jumpin '
Star formerly known as Frog Hopper )
* Technocolor Tweety Balloons ( Zamperla Samba Tower )
*
Bugs Bunny Barnstormers ( airplane ride formerly known as Beadville Airport )
FORMER RIDES CAJUN COUNTRY
* Pirates 4-D -
The theater ended this film in 2003 in favor of SpongeBob SquarePants :
The Ride .
DC COMICS SUPER HERO
ADVENTURES
*
( Bolliger & Mabillard steel inverted )
- Dismantled in 2007 and relocated to Six Flags Fiesta Texas , refurbished , and renamed as Goliath .
It was reopened on April 18 , 2008 .
PONTCHARTRAIN BEACH
* Pontchartrain Flyers ( Chance - Morgan Aviator ) - Removed for spare parts .
LOONEY TUNES ADVENTURES
* Road Runner Express ( Vekoma Junior Coaster 207 M formerly known as Rex 's Rail Runner ) - Removed by Six Flags in 2009 and was moved to Six Flags Magic Mountain in California and refurbished there .
The ride is still called Road Runner Express and it reopened on May 28 , 2011 .
MARDI GRAS * Bayou Blaster and Sonic Slam
( S&S Worldwide Space Shot and Turbo Drop )
- Bayou Blaster started at the bottom and shot riders to the top , while the Sonic Slam lifted riders to the top slowly , then dropped riders free - fall style to the bottom .
The ride was removed in 2008 and taken to Great Escape in Lake George , New York , where it was refurbished and installed as Sasquatch .
The ride reopened on May 10 , 2009 .
* King Chaos ( Chance Morgan Chaos ) - Removed earlier in 2005 and seen in the boneyard .
* Voodoo Volcano ( Chance Morgan Inverter ) - Removed earlier in 2005 and seen in the boneyard .
AFTER HURRICANE KATRINA Section::::After Hurricane Katrina .
The park grounds are located on a low - lying section of Eastern New Orleans , with a earthen flood berm running along the perimeter , creating an artificial basin .
As such , this area was heavily flooded in 2005 in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina .
After the park 's drainage pumps failed during the storm , the berm retained the combination of rainwater and sea water overflow from Lake Pontchartrain caused by Katrina 's massive storm surge , submerging the entire park grounds in corrosive , brackish floodwater to a depth of for over a month .
Due to the extensive water and wind damage received , the park was closed indefinitely without plans to reopen .
Initial damage reports by Six Flags inspectors stated that the park buildings were 80 % demolished , all of the flat rides ( except for one which was being serviced off - site at the time of the storm ) were effectively destroyed by long term salt - water immersion and both the wooden track and steel superstructure of the Mega Zeph were likely damaged beyond repair .
The only large ride to escape relatively unscathed was the Batman :
The Ride roller - coaster , due to its elevated station platform and corrosion - resistant support structure .
On July 1 , 2006 , having announced that the park would be closed " at least " through 2007 , Six Flags announced that it had concluded its damage assessments and declared the park to be an " effective total loss"—with no desire or intent by the company to undertake the prohibitive cost of rebuilding — and was in negotiations with the City of New Orleans to make an early exit from the 75-year lease which Six Flags entered into on the property in 2002 .
However , then - Mayor Ray Nagin said he planned to hold Six Flags to the lease agreement and force them to rebuild .
If held to the terms of the lease agreement , Six Flags would have been legally obligated to rebuild the park on the same site , but only to the extent of the insurance money Six Flags received .
Six Flags determined the value of assets destroyed by the storm at $ 32.5 million .
As of September 2006 , Six Flags had collected $ 11.5 million of insurance proceeds , bringing the insurance receivable balance to $ 24.4 million .
In January 2007 , Six Flags officials revealed to the New Orleans Times - Picayune that the company was suing its insurers for the remaining $ 17.5 million in coverage .
The park had been one of the least profitable parks in the Six Flags portfolio , being well away from the French Quarter and other tourist attractions .
It has been stated that the park would most likely have been more profitable had it been built somewhere on the West Bank or in Metairie , as these places are a shorter distance from tourist districts .
These potential locations would have placed the park much closer to affluent population centers where a strong local base of repeat customers could be cultivated , as opposed to poverty- and crime - afflicted New Orleans East where few residents could afford or were interested in expensive season passes to the theme park .
On December 15 , 2006 , Six Flags confirmed that it was removing Batman :
The Ride for refurbishment and relocation to a new park , as it was considered to be the only salvageable ride .
Batman :
The Ride was reassembled at Six Flags Fiesta Texas in San Antonio and opened under the new name Goliath on April 18 , 2008 .
In addition to Batman : The Ride , Six Flags removed shade coverings , ride parts , lights , security cameras , planting structures and various other salvageable items .
Besides Batman : The Ride , other rides were later removed from the park .
Bayou Blaster and Sonic Slam were removed in 2008 and taken to Great Escape in Queensbury , New York , where the ride was refurbished and reopened under the name Sasquatch on May 10 , 2009 .
The Road Runner Express was removed in 2009 and taken to Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia , California , where it was refurbished and reopened on May 28 , 2011 under the same name .
As late as the fall of 2009 , the Six Flags website said the company was " still in the process of settling claims with its insurers due to substantial damage caused by Hurricane Katrina , " adding that the park would remain closed .
The statement ended with " We know that it is still a difficult time for the residents of New Orleans and we remain committed to working with the city in support of the recovery efforts . "
REDEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
SOUTHERN STAR
AMUSEMENT ( 2008–11 ) Section::::Redevelopment proposals .
Section::::Southern Star Amusement ( 2008–11 ) .
In April 2008 , Southern Star Amusement Inc. proposed to take over the site lease from the then - owner Six Flags , promising to expand the park to over 60 rides ( more than double its pre - Katrina size ) , complete a water park that Six Flags had been planning , and add an RV park .
Southern Star Amusement Inc. pledged to open the park as Legend City Adventure Park , with 60 rides in place , including a new water park by the summer of 2009 if the city approved the lease takeover , with the campground to follow .
One issue concerning rebuilding was Six Flags ' continued removal of infrastructure from the park .
In a quarterly conference call Six Flags discussed plans to remove the S&S Towers by 2009 with more ride removals to follow .
Items from existing Jazzland rides , such as Mega Zeph 's trains and Spillway Splashout 's boats , were sent to other parks .
On September 27 , 2008 , Southern Star stated on its website that it would no longer be trying to revive Six Flags New Orleans .
In February 2009 , Southern Star was taking another look at the park and considering a takeover bid with the City of New Orleans .
Southern Star planned a scaled down effort , with intentions only to reopen the park with a water park added within the existing midway area .
The idea was to reopen and build incrementally , saving about $ 50 million in improvements for the next few years .
Given the poor economic situation at the time , this plan seemed to be the only way that the park could be saved .
The basic idea was to use investors and Go Zone Bonds to raise the $ 35 to $ 40 million needed to just reopen the park with basic improvements that are needed to make a real recovery and profit .
Southern Star 's CEO Danny R. Rogers asked that Six Flags stop all removal action of equipment from the park , as the equipment in question belongs to the City of New Orleans and not Six Flags .
The return of other equipment taken from the park by Six Flags was also requested .
On August 18 , 2009 , it was announced that the land would be redeveloped into a Nickelodeon - branded theme / water park .
On September 18 , 2009 , the city of New Orleans fined Six Flags $ 3 million and ordered the park to vacate its lease .
( On June 13 , 2009 , the Six Flags had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . )
As of early 2010 , the site was overgrown with debris and weeds .
Removal of the debris and underbrush had begun .
As of April 11 , 2010 , the site was still shut down with no clear future , since the city of New Orleans owned the property by this time and the plans for the Nickelodeon - branded theme park fell through three months after bonds failed to come through .
On January 21 , 2011 , Southern Star went public with its third redevelopment plans for the park , posting a link on their company website .
On January 26 , 2011 , Southern Star posted a Letter of Intent for the park on its website .
The redevelopment plans gave a brief history of the property , pre and post - Katrina condition photos , development concept photos , written descriptions of each phase of the redevelopment procedure and business projections for when it opens .
During " Phase I " , Southern Star planned to restore what is left of the park , and expand it by adding more rides and reverting the park back to its original Louisiana theme .
The park would be revamped to reflect Louisiana 's history and heritage , with one of the proposed sections paying tribute to the now defunct Pontchartrain Beach , which closed in 1983 .
" Phase II " entailed adding a water park and future expansion phases included adding a youth sports complex , an on - site hotel / resort and a movie studio / backlot that would cater to the needs of various production companies filming in the New Orleans area .
Plans also included developing an entertainment and shopping district within the park .
These plans entailed utilizing all of the site of which only were to be developed and occupied by the remains of the Six Flags New Orleans park .
The Letter of Intent from Southern Star set out a lease agreement between the city and the company stating Southern Star 's proposed terms of the lease and its intent for utilizing and restoring the area .
The company would enter a 75-year lease and take on the property in its current condition .
Southern Star planned to take possession of the property prior to the establishment of the lease in order to provide preliminary security and repair / cleanup services .
The lease would not have taken effect until Southern Star had taken possession of the property , started the cleanup process and provided proof of funding to the city .
After that , the city had 15 days to execute its end of the agreement .
Any and all improvements made would belong to the company and the lease would end in the year 2018 .
The plans never came to fruition , however .
JAZZLAND OUTLET MALL ( 2011–14 ) Section::::Jazzland Outlet Mall ( 2011–14 ) .
In August 2011 , the city of New Orleans called for proposals for redevelopment ideas for the site .
Eight entrepreneurs stepped forward to suggest turning the property into a power plant , a theme park , or even an outlet mall .
On November 29 , 2011 , the city of New Orleans chose two of the proposed projects : an outlet mall and a green theme park .
On February 6 , 2012 , it was reported that the selection committee rejected the plan for the site of Six Flags New Orleans to become a theme park , leaving the upscale outlet mall as the only proposal being considered by the committee .
Despite the committee 's actions , one of the original eight entrepreneurs continued to try to get public support for their Jazzland Park proposal , which includes the addition of a water park and movie studio back lot .
On March 6 , 2012 , the city of New Orleans gave the green light to build Jazzland Outlet Mall to Provident Reality Advisors and DAG Development .
The proposal was for a upscale outlet mall and entertainment boardwalk on the former theme park site , costing $ 40 million for part of Phase One and using some of the existing rides from the theme park .
Construction would have taken between three and four years to build .
During the planned period of due diligence and pre - construction , in March 2013 the development plans were abruptly called off .
The developer cited competition from the planned expansion of Riverwalk Marketplace to include an outlet mall , making the Jazzland Outlet Mall concept unviable .
However , as of the summer of 2013 , Provident Reality Advisors and DAG Development has been back at the negotiating table with the city to come up with a new idea for the park ; they will have to present a development plan to the Industrial Development Board ( IDB ) in October 2013 , according to a contract .
Once presented IDB will then accept or reject the proposal .
The contract also states that construction of an outlet mall is to proceed , but it does not explicitly prohibit giving the developers an opportunity to put something else there .
USE AS
FILM SHOOT LOCATION ( 2011–PRESENT ) Section::::Use as film shoot location ( 2011–present ) .
In 2011 , Killer Joe was filmed in the park featuring the wooden coaster Mega Zeph .
Stolen was also filmed at the park that year .
Stolen used the Main Street Square section to double as the Quarter .
Additionally , a burning car was driven into the lagoon and the Orpheum Theatre was used as the home of the film 's villain .
The Industrial Development Board ( IDB ) agreed to let 20th Century Fox film the 2013 film in the theme park during the summer of 2012 through August .
Mega Zeph , Ozarka Splash and The Big Easy are three rides that have been shot for the film along with five other rides that the production crew had brought into the park , since all the original rides were rendered inoperable to shoot for the film .
Before shooting at the park for five weeks , the production crew took two weeks to restore the derelict park into the needed condition by installing lighting and covering up graffiti on the buildings .
The park portrays the fictional Circeland on the island of Polyphemus that was built by the goddess Circe , only to be destroyed by the cyclops Polyphemus .
During the summer of 2013 , portions of the park were being filmed for the movie Dawn of the Planet of the Apes until mid - August .
The park was also used to film portions of the movie Jurassic World in June 2014 .
Jurassic World used the parking lot as the location for the Jurassic World park .
Deepwater Horizon built its oil rig set in the parking lot .
Deepwater Horizon was the last film to use the parking lot .
No movie studio has signed up to use the park for filming since August 2015 .
In January of 2015 , the park was photographed as part of a photo essay / series by Cleveland - based photographer Johnny Joo .
In this series , Joo documented the abandoned or historic structures of New Orleans , which still remained 10 years after Hurricane Katrina .
He also documented portions of revitalization in the community of New Orleans to show how the area has been rebuilt after one of the largest natural disasters in United States history .
In 2016 , the video game Mafia III , is set in a fictional version of New Orleans .
The abandoned amusement park in that game features a partially flooded site , a similar entrance way , and a roller - coaster which strongly resembles the Mega Zeph .
DREAMLANDING FESTIVAL PARK ( 2016 - 18 ) Section::::Dreamlanding Festival Park ( 2016 - 18 ) .
In 2016 , a group that included the former head of Southern Star , came together to form " Dreamlanding Festival Park " in order to buy and rebuild this park , pending city council
/ Mayoral approval .
According to their website , they are ready to spend over 100 million dollars to re - open the park and have plans to open in 2019 .
The website also states they have more coasters ready for 2020 .
Included in this plan is a waterpark , which is set to open in spring of 2019 , and that construction of the entire park will begin as early as the summer of 2018 .
A festival park and an R.V. site is also in their plans .
They are currently waiting on the city 's approval to purchase the park .
In 2018 , on the Dreamlanding Festival Park website , the following statement was released .
" It is very hard to walk away from all the time and efforts we have put into New Orleans but in truth the old Jazzland /Six Flags park has now reached a point of no return .
On our last inspection and after further review we find that the Rides that were savable as well as the majority of building are no longer economically viable to salvage . "
As of July 2018 , no further news has emerged .
JAZZLAND PAIDIA COMPANY ( 2011–PRESENT ) Section::::Jazzland Paidia Company ( 2011–present ) .
In 2011 , eight groups , including the Paidia Company , responded to an RFP issued by the Mayor 's office .
Paidia proposed to re - open the park as Jazzland , the park 's name until 2002 .
The company was not selected during the first RFP .
A second RFP was issued in January 2014 .
Jazzland submitted the only proposal .
The plans include newly designed themes for the park , a new Baritone Beach water park , Sportsman 's Paradise Resort Hotel and a mixed - use retail / dining / entertainment area .
A few rides would be rebuilt , but most would be new .
A " Sportsman 's Paradise " section would include the existing Jester coaster , the " Beach " would include Megazeph .
Ozarka Splash would be rebuilt as a " sugar flume " , using the state 's sugar cane industry for its theme .
In February 2017 , the company submitted a purchase offer for the property .
In May 2017 , the IDB voted to turn over decision making power to the Mayor 's office .
In June 2018 the IDB renewed the cooperative agreement with the new Mayor , keeping the decision power with the mayor 's office .
Jazzland maintains its interest in purchasing the property .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Jazzland Park
* Photo tour of the abandoned park in 2010 and 2012 on Opacity * Six Flags New Orleans on Modern Day Ruins
* Great source of information of Six Flags New Orleans pre - Katrina