SUPERFECUNDATION Superfecundation is the fertilization of two or more ova from the same cycle by sperm from separate acts of sexual intercourse , which can lead to twin babies from two separate biological fathers .
The term superfecundation is derived from fecund , meaning the ability to produce offspring .
Heteropaternal superfecundation refers to the fertilization of two separate ova by two different fathers .
Homopaternal superfecundation refers to the fertilization of two separate ova from the same father , leading to fraternal twins .
While heteropaternal superfecundation is referred to as a form of atypical twinning , genetically , the twins are half siblings .
Superfecundation , while rare , can occur through either separate occurrences of sexual intercourse or through artificial insemination .
CONCEPTION Section::::Conception .
Superfecundation most commonly happens within hours or days of the first instance of fertilization with ova released during the same cycle .
The time window when eggs are able to be fertilized is small .
Sperm cells can live inside a female 's body for four to five days .
Once ovulation occurs , the egg remains viable for 12–48 hours before it begins to disintegrate .
Thus , the fertile period can span five to seven days .
Ovulation is usually suspended during pregnancy to prevent further ova becoming fertilized and to help increase the chances of a full - term pregnancy .
However , if an ovum is released after the female was already impregnated when previously ovulating , a chance of a second pregnancy occurs , albeit at a different stage of development .
This is known as superfetation .
HETEROPATERNAL SUPERFECUNDATION IN MAMMALS Section::::Heteropaternal superfecundation in mammals .
Heteropaternal superfecundation is common in animals such as cats and dogs .
Stray dogs can produce litters in which every puppy has a different sire .
Though rare in humans , cases have been documented .
In one study on humans , the frequency was 2.4 % among dizygotic twins whose parents had been involved in paternity suits .
CASES IN MYTHOLOGY Section::::Cases in mythology .
Greek mythology holds many cases of superfecundation :
* Leda lies with both her husband Tyndareus and Zeus , the latter in the guise of a swan .
Nine months later , she bears two daughters : Clytemnestra by Tyndareus and Helen by Zeus .
This happens again ,
this time Leda bears two sons : Castor by Tyndareus and Pollux by Zeus .
*
Alcmene is raped by Zeus , who is disguised as her husband Amphitryon ; the real Amphitryon later sleeps with Alcmene and she gives birth to two sons : Iphicles by Amphitryon and Heracles by Zeus .
SELECTED CASES INVOLVING
SUPERFECUNDATION
Section::::Selected cases involving superfecundation .
In 1982 , twins who were born with two different skin colors were discovered to be conceived as a result of heteropaternal superfecundation .
In 1995 , a young woman gave birth to diamniotic monochorionic twins , who were originally assumed to be monozygotic twins until a paternity suit led to a DNA test .
This led to the discovery that the twins had different fathers .
In 2001 , a case of spontaneous monopaternal superfecundation was reported after a woman undergoing IVF treatments gave birth to quintuplets after only two embryos were implanted .
Genetic testing supported that the twinning was not a result of the embryos splitting , and that all five boys shared the same father .
In 2016 , an IVF - implanted surrogate mother gave birth to two children : one genetically unrelated child from an implanted embryo , and a biological child from her own egg and her husband 's sperm .
SEE ALSO
* Chimera ( genetics )
* Mixed twins * Polyspermy REFERENCES FURTHER READING