ROBERT CLARY Robert Clary ( born Robert Max Widerman ; March 1 , 1926 ) is a French - American actor , published author , artist and lecturer .
He is known for his role in the television sitcom Hogan 's Heroes as Corporal Louis LeBeau .
EARLY LIFE AND HOLOCAUST SURVIVAL
Section::::Early life and Holocaust survival .
Born in 1926 in Paris , France , Clary was the youngest of 14 children .
At the age of twelve , he began a career singing professionally on French radio and also studied art at the Paris Drawing School .
In 1942 , because he was Jewish , he was deported to the Nazi concentration camp at Ottmuth , in Upper Silesia ( now Poland ) .
He was tattooed with the identification " A5714 " on his left forearm .
He was later sent to Buchenwald concentration camp .
At Buchenwald concentration camp , he sang to an audience of SS soldiers every other Sunday , accompanied by an accordionist .
He said , " Singing , entertaining , and being in kind of good health at my age , that 's why I survived .
I was very immature and young and not really fully realizing what situation I was involved with ...
I do n't know if I would have survived if I really knew that . "
Writing about his experience , Clary said , " We were not even human beings .
When we got to Buchenwald , the SS shoved us into a shower room to spend the night .
I had heard the rumors about the dummy shower heads that were gas jets .
I thought , ' This is it . '
But no , it was just a place to sleep .
The first eight days there , the Germans kept us without a crumb to eat .
We were hanging on to life by pure guts , sleeping on top of each other , every morning waking up to find a new corpse next to you .
...
The whole experience was a complete nightmare — the way they treated us , what we had to do to survive .
We were less than animals .
Sometimes I dream about those days .
I wake up in a sweat terrified for fear I 'm about to be sent away to a concentration camp .
But I do n't hold a grudge because that 's a great waste of time .
Yes , there 's something dark in the human soul .
For the most part human beings are not very nice .
That 's why when you find those who are , you cherish them . "
Clary was liberated from Buchenwald on April 11 , 1945 .
Twelve other members of his immediate family were sent to Auschwitz concentration camp ; Clary was the only member of his family to survive the camps .
When he returned to Paris after World War II , he learned that three of his 13 siblings had not been taken away and had survived the Nazi occupation of France .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Clary returned to the entertainment business and began singing songs that not only became popular in France , but in the United States as well .
Clary made his first recordings in 1948 ; they were brought to the United States on wire and were issued on disk by Capitol Records .
He went to the U.S. in October 1949 .
One of Clary 's first American appearances was a French language comedy skit on The Ed Wynn Show in 1950 .
Clary later met Merv Griffin and Eddie Cantor .
This eventually led to Clary meeting Cantor 's daughter , Natalie Cantor Metzger , whom he married in 1965 , after being " the closest of friends " for 15 years .
Cantor later got Clary a spot on The Colgate Comedy Hour .
In the mid-1950s , he appeared on NBC 's The Martha Raye Show and on CBS 's Appointment with Adventure , a dramatic anthology series .
Clary 's comedic skills were quickly recognized by Broadway , where he appeared in several popular musicals , including New Faces of 1952 , which was produced as a film in 1954 .
In 1952 , he appeared in the film Thief of Damascus which also starred Paul Henreid and Lon Chaney ,
Jr. In 1958 , he guest - starred on NBC 's The Gisele MacKenzie Show .
LEBEAU
ON HOGAN 'S HEROES Section::::LeBeau on Hogan 's Heroes .
In 1965 , the diminutive ( 5 ft 1 in ) Clary was offered the role of Corporal Louis LeBeau on a new television sitcom called Hogan 's Heroes , and he accepted the role when the pilot sold .
The series was set in a German prisoner of war ( POW ) camp during World War II , and Clary played a French POW who was a member of an Allied sabotage unit operating from inside the camp .
Asked about parallels between LeBeau 's incarceration and his own , Clary said , " Stalag 13 is not a concentration camp .
It 's a POW camp , and that 's a world of difference .
You never heard of a prisoner of war being gassed or hanged .
When the show went on the air , people asked me if I had any qualms about doing a comedy series dealing with Nazis and concentration camps .
I had to explain that it was about prisoners of war in a Stalag , not a concentration camp , and although I did not want to diminish what soldiers went through during their internments , it was like night and day from what people endured in concentration camps . "
Clary became one of the last two surviving principal cast members of Hogan 's Heroes , with Kenneth Washington ( Sergeant Richard Baker , final season ) , when Cynthia Lynn ( Helga , first season , 1965–1966 ) died on March 10 , 2014 .
LATER LIFE AND CAREER Section::::Later life and career .
After Hogan 's Heroes went off the air , Clary maintained close ties to fellow Hogan 's Heroes cast members Werner Klemperer , John Banner and Leon Askin , whose lives were also affected by the Holocaust .
Following the show 's cancellation , he appeared in a handful of feature films with World War II themes , including the made - for - television film Remembrance of Love , about The Holocaust .
Clary also appeared on the soap operas Days of Our Lives and The Young and the Restless , where he played Pierre Roulland ( 1973–1979 ) .
Clary appeared in the 1975 film The Hindenburg , which portrayed a fictional plot to blow up the German airship after it arrived at the Lakehurst Naval Air Station .
He played Joseph Späh , a real - life passenger on the airship 's final voyage .
Clary spent years touring Canada and the United States , speaking about the Holocaust .
He is a painter , painting from photographs he takes on his travels .
Clary wrote a memoir , From the Holocaust to Hogan 's Heroes : The Autobiography of Robert Clary in 2001 .
FILMS
* Ten Tall Men ( 1951 ) — Mossul * Thief of Damascus ( 1952 ) — Aladdin * A New Kind of Love ( 1963 ) — Frenchman at restaurant
* New Faces ( 1954 ) — various songs and characters in this musical comedy revue , recreating his role from Broadway 's New Faces of 1952
* The Hindenburg ( 1975 ) — Joseph Späh * Remembrance of Love ( 1982 ) — played himself as an Auschwitz survivor
TELEVISION
* Hogan 's Heroes ( 1965 - 1971 ) — Corporal Louis LeBeau * The Young and the Restless ( 1973 - 1979 ) — Pierre Roulland
* Days of Our Lives ( 1972 - 1973 , 1975 - 1980 , 1981 - 1983 , 1986 - 1987 ) — Robert LeClair * Fantasy Island ( 1978 ) — Ipsy Dauphin
* The Bold and the Beautiful ( 1990 - 1992 ) — Pierre Jourdan
* The High Chaparral ( 1967 - 1971 ) — Lucien Charot REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Official Robert Clary Website * Interview with Clary about his experiences being arrested by the Germans during World War II — filmed when the C - SPAN School Bus visited the Simon Wiesenthal Center Library & Archives , aired February 9 , 1999 * Interview March , 2016
The Spectrum