ICE AGE :
THE MELTDOWN Ice Age
: The Meltdown is a 2006 American computer - animated comedy adventure film produced by Blue Sky Studios and distributed by 20th Century Fox .
As the first sequel to the 2002 film Ice Age , it focuses on The Herd escaping an upcoming flood , during which Manny finds love .
It was directed by Carlos Saldanha , co - director of the first film , with the music composed by John Powell .
The original voice cast —
Ray Romano , John Leguizamo , Denis Leary and Chris Wedge — is joined by Queen Latifah , Seann William Scott and Josh Peck .
The film premiered in Belgium on March 1 , 2006 .
It was eventually released in 70 countries , with the last release being in China , on June 9 , 2006 .
The Meltdown received mixed critical reaction but was a box office success by earning over $ 660 million .
Three more sequels were released — in 2009 , in 2012 and in 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Manny , Sid , and Diego are currently living in a large valley surrounded by an enormously high ice wall on all sides .
However , the trio discovers that the ice wall is actually a dam that is barely holding a massive body of water that could flood the valley to nearly a mile underwater .
A vulture tells them that there is a boat at the other end of the valley that may save them all , but they only have three days to reach it or die .
Manny is also having trouble fearing the fact that he may be the last mammoth left .
During the evacuation , a glacier that contains two sea reptiles from the Mesozoic era , Cretaceous a Cymbospondylus and Maelstrom a Pliosauroidea , breaks off .
When Manny is briefly separated from them , Diego and Sid encounter two mischievous opossums named Crash and Eddie who drive them nuts by playing Whac - A - Mole with them .
Manny is still worried about being the last mammoth alive and his family , who had been killed by humans , but is surprised when he encounters Ellie , a female woolly mammoth who believes she is an opossum and Crash and Eddie 's adoptive sister .
Sid invites her to tag along with the group to escape the flood , and she brings her brothers .
After a dangerous encounter with Cretaceous and Maelstrom while crossing a pond , Sid prompts Diego to encourage him to admit and face his fears - Diego insists that " fear is for prey " , so Sid points out that Diego is behaving as if he is the water 's prey .
They discover an area which Ellie recalls as the place where she was adopted .
She finally realizes she is a mammoth and also expresses her suspicions about how different she was from other opossums .
Despite this bonding moment with Manny , she distances herself from him when he suggests " saving their species " .
Ellie and Manny ultimately make up when they must co - operate to save the group when the ground cracks under their feet .
Sid is kidnapped by a tribe of mini - sloths who believe Sid to be a god .
Sid lights a fire for them , and believes that he has finally found respect , but they plan to sacrifice him by tossing him into a volcano ; Sid narrowly escapes .
The next morning , Sid tells the others his experience but none are convinced .
After being harassed by vultures , the group finds the boat behind a field of hot geysers , which separates Manny , Sid and Diego from Ellie and her brothers when they argue about which way 's safest to go through .
When the flood comes , Manny saves Ellie from drowning as she is caught in a cave ( due to falling rocks ) , while Diego overcomes his fear of water to save Sid , Crash and Eddie from drowning .
Cretaceous and Maelstrom arrive , but due to Manny 's quick thinking , they are finished off by a rock which falls on them , killing them both .
The other animals are at the mercy of the water currents .
Meanwhile , Scrat climbs up the glacier and at the top sticks the acorn he has into the ice .
This forms a crack in the glacier , which widens into a fissure , diverting the flood and saving the animals in the valley ; Scrat is then washed away .
In the final scene , a herd of mammoths show up , proving mammoths are n't extinct .
But Manny and Ellie decide to remain together anyway , taking Sid , Diego and the opossum brothers along .
Sid encounters the mini - sloths again - they believe Sid stopped the flood and invite him to be their leader .
Diego , surprised to see the mini - sloths are real , convinces Sid to stay with the others , admitting that Sid is a vital part of their ' herd ' .
The epilogue shows Scrat having a near death experience after falling into the fissure .
He enters a heaven full of acorns .
Suddenly , he finds himself torn away .
He unhappily wakes up , having been resuscitated by Sid , who he proceeds to viciously attack .
VOICE CAST
* Ray Romano as Manny , the woolly mammoth .
* John Leguizamo as Sid , the giant ground sloth .
* Denis Leary as Diego , the Smilodon .
* Chris Wedge as Scrat , the saber - toothed squirrel .
* Queen Latifah as Ellie , the woolly mammoth , who is under the delusion that she is a possum .
* Seann William Scott and Josh Peck as Crash and Eddie , the opossums , respectively .
* Will Arnett as Lone Gunslinger Vulture * Jay Leno as Fast Tony , the giant armadillo .
* Tom Fahn as Stu , the Glyptodon .
* Alex Sullivan as James , the aardvark .
* Alan Tudyk as Cholly , the chalicothere .
* Clea Lewis as Female Mini Sloth /
Dung Beetle Mom .
* Debi Derryberry as Diatryma Mom .
* Cindy Slattery as Aardvark Mom .
* Zack Shada as Additional Voices .
* Ariel Winter as Additional Voices .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After the release of Ice Age in March 2002 , executive producer Chris Meledandri commented on the potential Ice Age sequel : " The success of Ice Age is something that gives us additional momentum .
It 's too early to say , but it 's certainly something we 'll explore . "
By June 2002 , Blue Sky Studios was already working on the sequel .
In 2003 , Lori Forte , the producer of the first film , signed a multi - year deal with Fox Feature Films to develop and produce animated films , including a potential Ice Age sequel .
During an interview with Denis Leary in July 2003 , he said that he had expressed hope to reprise his role as Diego in the sequel :
" I think there 's a story – the people at Fox are working on one right now .
I think they 're talking about going back into the studios something around late Fall .
" In that same year , 2006 was reported as the planned release year , and by August 2004 , its final release date , March 31 , 2006 , had been set .
Initially developed under the working title of Ice Age 2 , it was renamed by June 2005 to Ice Age 2 : The Meltdown , but for the film 's final release in March 2006 , the creators decided to remove the number 2 , calling it Ice Age : The Meltdown .
However , in the United Kingdom , Ireland , Mexico , and Australia , its title is promoted as Ice Age 2 : The Meltdown .
Also , most of the sponsors of the film had the 2 in their packaging after the name change ( they however did edit the 2 out of their TV ads ) .
Carlos Saldanha , the director of the film , strove to make the characters eyes appear alive and not mechanical .
" You want the facial expressions to work .
I wanted it to be so that if you looked into their eyes , you would know what they were thinking . "
in his own words .
The characters , despite being from the last movie , were remodeled for the sequel .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The score is by John Powell ; the soundtrack also features the song " Food Glorious Food " from the musical and film Oliver ! .
Powell composed brand new music for the film that replaced the theme songs from the previous film .
Aram Khachaturian 's Adagio from Spartacus is featured during Scrat 's Heavenly vision .
Ice Age : The Meltdown was composed by John Powell and was released on March 28 , 2006 by Varèse Sarabande Records .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Ice Age : The Meltdown had its world premiere on March 19 , 2006 , at the Mann 's Grauman Chinese Theater in Los Angeles , California .
The film was re - released in 3D on October 13 , 2014 in China only .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
As an additional marketing ploy a special " anti - cell " spot was created with Sid complaining to the audience about a ringing cellular phone .
The same was done for Brother Bear , I , Robot , Kung Fu Panda , and Robots .
On Family Guy 's episode " Sibling Rivalry " , Scrat is shown trying to take three nuts out of the side of a glacier ; Peter shows up and tries to stop him , admonishing the squirrel for stealing , which drives Scrat to subsequently attack Peter .
Apart from Peter , the scene was rendered in 3D ( Family Guy is normally drawn in 2D ) , and Scrat was voiced by Chris Wedge who voices him in the films .
The episode originally aired the week before the film opened .
Fox aired promotions for the film throughout the evening .
During the same evening of this cameo , Sid was hosting the entire FOX line - up , showing up in intermittent times between commercials .
Re - edited scenes of Ice Age
: The Meltdown were shown in Airhead candy commercials on several kids ' channels and programs , such as the Disney Channel , Nickelodeon , ABC Kids on ABC , and more .
It shows , in part , that after Scrat defeats a school of piranha , he proudly displays an Airhead packet ( replaced by an acorn in the actual film ) , when suddenly an eagle comes over and swipes it from him .
One of the posters for the film was a parody of an iPod advertisement , with " iAge " replacing " iPod " and an acorn replacing an iPod .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Ice Age : The Meltdown was released on Blu - ray Disc and DVD were released in the North America on November 21 , 2006 according to the official web store .
They were released in the UK on October 23 , 2006 , and both include a new Scrat short , No Time for Nuts .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film exceeded expectations by opening with an $ 68,033,544 in its first weekend .
This was the second biggest opening for a non - summer , non - holiday release , after the $ 83,848,082 of The Passion of the Christ .
But the record for highest grossing weekend for March only lasted a year , due to the $ 70,885,301 weekend of 300 .
The film grossed a total of $ 195,330,621 at United States and Canadian box offices , making it the first film in 2006 to pass the $ 100 million mark .
The film has grossed $ 660,940,780 worldwide and it is the 66th highest - grossing film of all time .
Ice Age : The Meltdown was the highest grossing animated film worldwide of 2006 , but lost to Cars for being the highest grossing animated film in North America .
Meledandri , then president of 20th Century Fox Animation , credited the film 's successful performance to the studio 's strength in global marketing and distribution , the diversity of the crew , and Saldanha 's method of using images rather than words to solve creative problems , which helped him realize that the animation of a film is just as important as the story and dialogue , leading him to start Illumination Entertainment with Universal a year later .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Ice Age :
The Meltdown received mixed reviews , with Rotten Tomatoes giving the film a " rotten " rating , with 57 % of reviews positive .
The consensus statement reads : " Despite its impressive animation and the hilarious antics of the saber - toothed squirrel Scrat , Ice Age 2 : The Meltdown comes up short on the storytelling front . "
Another review aggregator , Metacritic , calculated a score of 58 , placing it at the high end of the site 's " mixed or average reviews " category .
Roger Ebert gave the film two - and - a - half stars out of four , stating " the first Ice Age movie more or less exhausted these characters and their world , and the meltdown does n't add much . "
CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend , cinema audiences gave The Meltdown an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video and computer game based on the film was developed and published by Vivendi Games , and the Wii version was released shortly after the launch of the system .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
The third Ice Age film , was released on July 1 , 2009 .
It was again directed by Carlos Saldanha , and it tells a story of the protagonists discovering a tropical world inhabited by dinosaurs .
The fourth film , , was released in 3-D on July 13 , 2012 .
It was directed by Steve Martino and Mike Thurmeier — the first time without Carlos Saldanha .
Scrat 's never - ending pursuit of acorns has world - changing consequences , separating Manny , Sid and Diego from the rest , forcing them to stand up to a pirate gang .
The fifth film , , was released in 3D on July 22 , 2016 .
SEE ALSO
* List of animated feature - length films
* List of computer - animated films REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website archived from the original on December 15 , 2012 Video game * Ice Age 2 : The Meltdown at Eurocom