CICUTA Cicuta , commonly known as water hemlock , is a genus of four species of highly poisonous plants in the family Apiaceae .
They are perennial herbaceous plants which grow up to tall , having distinctive small green or white flowers arranged in an umbrella shape ( umbel ) .
Plants in this genus may also be referred to as cowbane or poison parsnip .
Cicuta is native to temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere , mainly North America and Europe , typically growing in wet meadows , along streambanks and other wet and marshy areas .
These plants bear a close resemblance to other members in the family Apiaceae and may be confused with a number of other edible and poisonous plants .
The common name hemlock may also be confused with poison hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) , or with the Hemlock tree .
Water hemlock is considered one of North America 's most toxic plants , being highly poisonous to humans .
Three members of the genus contain a toxin named cicutoxin which causes central nervous system stimulatory effects including seizures following ingestion .
Medical treatment of poisoning may include the use of activated charcoal to decrease gastrointestinal absorption of the toxic principle along with supportive care including anticonvulsant drugs such as a benzodiazepine .
High doses of anticonvulsant medicine are often required to halt seizure activity and further medical care including intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Cicuta spp .
are perennial plants that are all similar in morphology , growing up to a maximum of in height .
The stem of the plant is branching , erect , smooth and hollow ( except for partitions at the junction of the leaves and stem ) , sometimes being purple - striped , or mottled ( typically only C. maculata has the purple stripes or spots ) .
Attached to the base of the stem is a tuberous root with thickened rootstocks .
The rootstocks are multichambered and contain a yellowish oily liquid which turns reddish brown on exposure to air and emits a characteristic smell of raw parsnip .
The alternate leaves are 2 or 3 pinnately compound and may reach to in length .
The leaflets are lanceolate , serrate , to in length , and sharply toothed .
The plant flowers in spring or early summer ; the flowers are small with green or white petals clustered in an umbrella shape ( umbel ) characteristic to this family ; the umbel measures to across .
The plants produce a cylindrical fruit which is to in length .
The plant is spread primarily by seeds which are produced in large numbers and are small in size .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The genus Cicuta is one of many genera in the family Apiaceae , which is in the order Apiales .
Apiaceae is also known as Umbelliferae , and both of these family names are permitted to be used by the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature .
In Europe , Cicuta was not distinguished from the similar genus Conium before the year 1500 .
The first mention of the genus in the United States was in the eighteenth century .
Carl Linnaeus formally described three species in 1753 .
The type species is Cicuta virosa .
The genus is now recognized to comprise four species : !
Species Name !
Common Name
Cicuta bulbifera L. bulblet - bearing water hemlock
, bulbous water hemlock
Cicuta douglasii ( DC . )
Coult .
& Rose Douglas water hemlock , western water hemlock
Cicuta maculata
L. spotted cowbane , spotted parsley , spotted water hemlock Cicuta virosa
L. cowbane , Mackenzie 's water hemlock , northern water hemlock Other species names such as Cicuta bolanderi , Cicuta californica , and Cicuta curtissii are older names now recognized to be varieties of the widespread , morphologically variable Cicuta maculata .
Cicuta maculata is now recognized to have four varieties : var .
maculata , var .
angustifolia , var .
victorinii , and var .
bolanderi .
Phylogenetic analysis using the sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer ( ITS ) loci was not conclusive but seems to show that C. bulbifera and C. virosa are monophyletic , while C. douglasii may not be .
It was also suggested a specimen from California may warrant recognition as a distinct species .
Other common names for the genus in general include poison parsnip , beaver poison , wild carrot , wild parsnip , and false parsley .
SIMILAR SPECIES Section::::Similar species .
Members of the family Apiaceae bear close resemblance to each other , and have many characteristics in common .
Cicuta spp .
are often mistaken for edible plants such as kvanne ( Angelica archangelica ) , wild celery ( Apium graveolens ) , pignut ( Conopodium majus ) , wild carrot ( Daucus carota ) , wild parsnip ( Pastinaca sativa ) , and water parsnip ( Berula spp . ) .
One of the more common misidentifications is between water hemlock and water parsnip ; both have clusters of small white flowers shaped like umbrellas , and both have the same habitat near the shoreline of lakes and rivers .
Differences between water parsnip and water hemlock include the water parsnip having leaves only once compound while the water hemlock has leaves which are two or three times compound .
Water hemlock also has a large swelling at the stem base which water parsnip lacks .
Additionally , water hemlock has bracts at the base of each small flower cluster , not at the base of the main flower head , while water parsnip has both bracts at the base of flowers and also at the main flower head .
Additionally , there can be confusion between the various water hemlock species and poison hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) as the common name hemlock is applied to both Cicuta and Conium maculatum .
Both are poisonous and can be differentiated by differences in their root structure .
Water hemlock has a branched root systems with tubules , while poison hemlock has a single tap root .
Another reliable method to identify water hemlock is to examine the leaf veins .
Water hemlock is unique in the family Apiaceae in that it has leaf veins which terminate in the notches between the leaf tips , rather than extend to the tip of the leaf , as is found in the leaf structure of other members of this family .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Cicuta spp .
are found growing across North America and Europe .
Typically , they grow in wet habitats usually alongside ponds and streams , in marshes or swamps , or areas that are swampy at least part of the year .
Plants can also be found growing in water .
Of the four species , Cicuta maculata has the most widespread distribution occurring across the majority of North America .
Cicuta bulbifera also has a relatively large distribution , found throughout Northern North America .
Cicuta douglasii is found in the northwest corner of North America , while Cicuta virosa is only found in central Europe and in the far north of North America .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
All members of Cicuta except C. bulbifera contain high levels of the poisonous principle cicutoxin , an unsaturated aliphatic alcohol that is structurally closely related to the toxin oenanthotoxin found in the plant hemlock water dropwort .
Cicutoxin is present at all stages of growth and in all parts of the plant , but is most concentrated in the roots which appear to be the most toxic in the early spring .
Its primary toxic effect is to act as a stimulant in the central nervous system .
It is a non - competitive gamma - aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) receptor antagonist .
Cicutoxin acts on the GABA receptor causing a block of the chloride channel which results in neuronal depolarization .
In the presence of cicutoxin this depolarization continues unabated causing cell overactivity .
The hyperactivity in brain cells results in seizures .
Cicutoxin is highly poisonous and water hemlock is considered one of North America 's most toxic plants .
Ingestion of Cicuta can be fatal in humans and there are reports in the medical literature of severe poisoning and death as early as 1670 .
A number of people have also died following ingestion of the plant in the 20th and 21st century .
The in mice administered cicutoxin by intraperitoneal injection is 48.3 mg per kg body weight ( mg / kg ) ; this compares with 5.9 mg / kg for mice given potassium cyanide by intraperitoneal injection , while the LD for arsenic via intraperitoneal injection in mice is 46.2 mg / kg .
The exact toxic dose of plant material in humans is unknown ; it is thought ingestion of water hemlock in any quantity can result in poisoning and very small amounts may lead to death .
Poisoning has been reported following children blowing whistles made from the hollow stem of water hemlock plants .
Intoxication has also been reported following skin contact with the plant ; a case was reported where a family of five people rubbed the plant onto the skin and were poisoned , with two children dying .
Livestock have long been the worst affected , leading to the common name " cowbane " .
Poisoning in livestock is common and typically occurs following ingestion of roots of the plant .
In the spring when the ground is soft , grazing animals tend to pull the entire plant out of the ground ingesting both the foiliage and the roots .
Roots exposed by ploughing can also be the source of livestock poisonings .
Ingestion of plant material may cause death in the animal in as little as 15 minutes .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Upon consumption , both in humans and other species , the symptoms of poisoning are mainly characterized by generalized seizures .
The onset of symptoms following ingestion may be as soon as 15 minutes post ingestion .
Initial symptoms reported may include nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , tremors , confusion , weakness , dizziness , and drowsiness ; although the rapid onset of seizure activity may be the first sign presented following poisoning .
Seizures are usually described as clonic or tonic – clonic .
Complications of ongoing seizure activity include increased body temperature , decreases in the pH of the blood ( metabolic acidosis ) , swelling in the brain , blood coagulation disorders , muscle breakdown ( rhabdomyolysis ) , and kidney failure .
Additional neurological symptoms may include hallucinations , delirium , tingling , pricking , or numbness of a person 's skin , dilated pupils , and coma .
Cardiovascular symptoms include alternating slow or fast heart rate and alternating low and high blood pressure .
Other cardiac effects may include ECG abnormalities such as widening of the PR interval , supraventricular tachycardia , and ventricular fibrillation .
Symptoms of excess salivation , wheezing , respiratory distress , and absence of breathing have also been reported .
Deaths usually occur from respiratory failure or ventricular fibrillation secondary to ongoing seizure activity ; fatalities have occurred within a few hours of ingestion .
Poisoned people who recover usually regain consciousness and seizures cease within 24 to 48 hours of poisoning , although seizures may persist for up to 96 hours .
There are occasional long - term effects such as retrograde amnesia of the events leading to intoxication and the intoxication itself .
Other ongoing mild effects may include restlessness , muscle weakness , twitching , and anxiety .
Complete resolution of symptoms may take a number of days or , in some cases , these ongoing symptoms may persist for months after poisoning .
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT Section::::Diagnosis and treatment .
Water hemlock poisoning is usually diagnosed following a history of plant ingestion and symptoms of abrupt onset of seizures .
Laboratory tests to determine the presence of cicutoxin in the blood such as spectrofluorimetry , high pressure liquid chromatography , thin layer chromatography , and mass spectrometry have been used to detect cicutoxin but these tests are not performed routinely in hospital laboratories .
If a sample of the plant ingested has been retained , diagnosis can be confirmed by having the plant identified by a botanist .
Initial treatment of poisoning may include gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal .
Decontamination is typically only performed if a potentially toxic amount of plant matter has been ingested up to one hour previously and the patient has a normal intact airway or has been intubated .
There is no specific antidote for water hemlock poisoning and treatment mainly consists of supportive care .
Treatment may include control of seizures with the administration of a benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam , or if seizures are refractory to this treatment , a barbiturate such as phenobarbital is administered .
The anticonvulsant phenytoin is not recommended as it has not been shown to be effective for seizure control following water hemlock poisoning .
Treatment with high doses of benzodiazepines or barbiturates may cause respiratory depression and respiratory support including intubation and mechanical ventilation is required in these patients .
Continuous electroencephalography monitoring is recommended in symptomatic patients .
Further treatment for complications of metabolic acidosis , rhabdomyolysis , hyperthermia , or low blood pressure may be required .
Metabolic acidosis is treated by administering sodium bicarbonate .
Low blood pressure is usually treated with intravenous fluid replacement , but the administration of dopamine or norepinephrine may be required to restore blood pressure .
The management of rhabdomyolysis includes ensuring adequate hydration and urinary alkalinization ; a complication of rhabdomyolysis is acute renal failure which may require management with hemodialysis .
However , hemodialysis , hemoperfusion or other extracorporeal techniques do not remove cicutoxin from the blood and are therefore not useful in enhancing elimination .
SEE ALSO
* List of poisonous plants *
Weed
*
Cicuta virosa REFERENCES