FLOWERS IN THE ATTIC Flowers in the Attic is a 1979 Gothic novel by V. C. Andrews .
It is the first book in the Dollanganger Series , and was followed by Petals on the Wind , If There Be Thorns , Seeds of Yesterday , " Garden of Shadows " , " " , " " and " " .
The novel is written in the first - person , from the point of view of Cathy Dollanganger .
It was twice adapted into films in 1987 and 2014 .
The book was extremely popular , selling over forty million copies world - wide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1957 , the Dollanganger family lives an idyllic life in Gladstone , Pennsylvania until Mr. Dollanganger dies in a car accident , leaving his wife Corrine deep in debt with four children and no professional skills .
The family is forced to move in with Corrine 's wealthy parents , from whom she is estranged .
Upon arrival at Foxworth Hall , the family is greeted coldly by Corrine 's mother Olivia , who sneaks them into a small bedroom connected to the attic .
Only Corrine is allowed in the grand estate , as the children remain hidden from their grandfather Malcolm .
The older children , Cathy and Chris , attempt to make the best of the situation for their younger siblings , twins Carrie and Cory , by turning the attic into an imaginary garden .
Yet the children learn the truth of their terrible new fate , as Olivia treats them with disdain and threatens to severely punish them for any disobedience .
Corrine returns from meeting with her parents , having been savagely whipped by Olivia .
She confesses that the children 's dead father was her half - uncle , her father 's half - brother , and the incest is the cause of her and her parents ' estrangement .
Corrine plans to win back her father 's love , hoping to introduce the children to him soon .
At first , Corrine visits her children daily , sometimes bringing expensive gifts .
Yet the grandmother emotionally and physically abuses the children , constantly threatening to whip them for any acts she considers " sinful " .
At Christmas time , Corrine allows Cathy and Chris to watch the ball at Foxworth Hall from a hiding spot , where they see their grandfather for the first time and also see their mother with Bart Winslow , Malcolm 's attorney .
Their mother 's visits become less frequent as she grows detached , eventually slapping Chris and threatening to whip them .
Despite her apologies and promises to make amends , Cathy worries their mother has changed and no longer cares for them .
A year later , Cathy and Chris have both entered puberty and adopted parental roles with Carrie and Cory , who no longer recognize Corrine .
While Cathy and Chris are both entering adulthood , the twins ' physical growth is stunted from a lack of adequate nutrition , sunlight and fresh air .
Despite personal shame , Cathy and Chris develop physical attraction toward each other .
Olivia catches Chris staring at a half - dressed Cathy and orders him to cut off Cathy 's hair .
Chris refuses , and Olivia abandons them for three weeks , driving them to near - starvation .
When Cathy cuts her own hair , meals resume and now include sugared doughnuts as a surprise .
Corrine visits for the first time in six months , returning from her wedding and European honeymoon with Bart .
Cathy and Chris react angrily , but relent when Corrine threatens to never visit again .
The older children plan to escape , sneaking into the house to steal money and valuables from their mother 's room .
One night , Cathy discovers her sleeping stepfather and kisses him .
When Chris learns of the act , he is enraged and rapes Cathy .
He apologizes after , and Cathy forgives him by saying she wanted it too .
Cory becomes sick and Corrine agrees to take him to the hospital only after threats from Cathy .
The next day , Corrine returns and tells them Cory died , allegedly from pneumonia .
Without warning , their mother and Bart move out .
Eavesdropping on the servants , Chris learns that Malcolm died and Olivia is now leaving out doughnuts sprinkled with rat poison in an attempt to clear the attic 's " mouse " infestation .
The three remaining children finally flee , catching a train to Florida .
At the train station , Chris reveals he discovered Corrine 's inheritance is conditional on her having no descendants , and she was poisoning them to secure her father 's wealth .
Chris and Cathy decide against contacting the police as their main concern is to stay together and protect Carrie , who is still a minor .
Chris assures Cathy that they can make a new life without their mother , but Cathy swears to exact revenge one day .
CHARACTERS
* Catherine Leigh " Cathy " Dollanganger : The protagonist and narrator of the novel .
Cathy is the second child and older daughter of Christopher and Corrine .
She becomes an accomplished ballerina and later a novelist .
During their time in the attic , she falls in love with Chris , her brother .
* Christopher Garland " Chris " Dollanganger , Jr. : Older son and oldest child of Christopher and Corrine .
Chris is the older brother of Cathy , Cory , and Carrie .
He is an over - achiever and later becomes a doctor .
During their time in the attic , he falls in love with Cathy .
* Cory Dollanganger :
Twin brother of Carrie and younger brother of Cathy and Chris .
The " quiet one " of the twins , Cory is introverted but musically talented .
He becomes ill during their time in the attic and dies from arsenic poisoning at the hands of his mother .
* Carrie Dollanganger : Twin sister to Cory and the younger sister of Cathy and Chris .
Prior to Cory 's death , she is an extraverted girly girl , but after Cory dies she refuses to speak for months .
* Corrine Dollanganger ( née Foxworth ) : Mother of Chris , Cathy , Cory , and Carrie and widow of Christopher Dollanganger .
Eventually becomes an antagonist in the story when she tries to kill her children in order to gain her father 's inheritance .
She marries her father 's attorney , Bart Winslow , later on and loses interest in her children and late husband .
* Bartholomew " Bart " Winslow : Second husband of Corrine .
He is a trophy husband and marries her thinking that she does n't have any children .
Cathy is shocked to discover that he is eight years younger than Corrine .
* Olivia Foxworth ( née Winfield ) : Wife of Malcolm Foxworth .
Grandmother of the Dollanganger children .
Cousin of John Amos .
Olivia and Malcolm are co - antagonists in this book .
* Malcolm Foxworth : Father of Corrine and grandfather of the Dollanganger children .
Husband of Olivia .
He is described both as having a heart condition and as heartless , a symbolic paradox .
He dies during the story , though Chris and Cathy do not learn this until the end .
He was also the older half - brother of the children 's father .
* Christopher Dollanganger , Sr . :
Corrine 's first husband ; father of the children .
He was Malcolm 's younger half - brother , making him Corrine 's half - uncle .
He is described as a wonderful father who could n't bear to be separated from his children for longer than five days .
He is killed in a car accident on his birthday at the beginning of the book .
* John Amos : A butler to the Foxworth family .
Chris overhears very horrible information from him during one of Chris ' expeditions to steal from his mother .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
In 1993 , Flowers in the Attic was awarded the Secondary BILBY Award .
In 2003 the book was listed on the BBC 's The Big Read poll of the UK 's 200 " best - loved novels . "
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
In 1987 , the book was adapted into a film of the same name starring Louise Fletcher , Victoria Tennant , Kristy Swanson , and Jeb Stuart Adams and directed by Jeffrey Bloom .
A second adaptation was released on January 18 , 2014 , on the Lifetime network starring Heather Graham as Corrine and Ellen Burstyn as the Grandmother , with Kiernan Shipka as Cathy , Mason Dye as Christopher , and directed by Deborah Chow .
The film received mixed reviews , but critics praised Ellen Burstyn 's performance .
The book was adapted into a stage play by V. C. Andrews 's ghost writer , Andrew Neiderman , in the form of an e - book and was published by Pocket Star .
The stage play was released in October 2014 and is 80 pages in length .
In August 2015 the stage play received its world premiere production in New Orleans , Louisiana .
The play , which received positive reviews , was produced by See ' Em On Stage : A Production Company and was directed by Christopher Bentivegna .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The book 's success was not without controversy .
The depiction of incest between an adolescent brother and sister in the novel has led to its being banned in certain areas at different times .
Chariho High School in Rhode Island removed it because it contained " offensive passages concerning incest and sexual intercourse .
"
In 1994 , it was removed from the Oconee County , Georgia school libraries due to " the filthiness of the material . "
The claim that the novel was based on a true story was disputed .
For many years , there was no evidence to support this claim , and the book was passed off as fiction .
Nonetheless , the official V. C. Andrews website claims to have contacted one of Andrews ' relatives .
This unidentified relative claimed Flowers in the Attic was loosely based on a faintly similar account .
While at the " University of Virginia hospital for treatment ... she developed a crush on her young doctor .
He and his siblings had been locked away in the attic for over 6 years to preserve the family wealth . "
REFERENCES