CENTER ( GRIDIRON FOOTBALL ) Center ( C ) is a position in American football and Canadian football ( in the latter the position is spelled centre , following Commonwealth spelling conventions ) .
The center is the innermost lineman of the offensive line on a football team 's offense .
The center is also the player who passes ( or " snaps " )
the ball between his legs to the quarterback at the start of each play .
In recent years , the importance of centers for a football team has increased , due to the re - emergence of 3–4 defenses .
According to Baltimore Ravens general manager Ozzie Newsome , " you need to have somebody who can neutralize that nose tackle .
If you do n't , everything can get screwed up .
Your running game wo n't be effective and you 'll also have somebody in your quarterback 's face on every play . "
ROLES Section::::Roles .
The center 's first and primary role is to pass the football to the quarterback .
This exchange is called a snap .
Most offensive schemes make adjustments based on how the defensive line and linebackers align themselves in relation to the offensive line , and what gaps they line up in .
Because the center has an ideal view of the defensive formation before the snap , he typically makes the first line call .
This call is typically based on the position of the defensive linemen or linebackers in his gaps ( 0i-1i ) , most subsequent adjustments are dependent on this call .
In some cases the center may call an adjustment for the entire offensive line .
This was taken to an extreme by the Indianapolis Colts in the early 21st century , with center Jeff Saturday having equal say with quarterback Peyton Manning in play calling , including audibles .
The center is therefore usually the most intelligent player on the offensive line , which is critical to a center 's success .
After the snap , the center performs blocking assignments .
The blocking assignments vary by offense but typically consist of the following : RUN BLOCKING Section::::Run blocking .
Run blocking assignments will vary based on the current play and the defensive formation when the ball is snapped .
Typically , these assignments consist of the following :
* Blocking middle or backside linebackers in certain formations , then moving up to secondary levels if no linebacker is present .
* Assisting guards in their blocking assignments .
This may be a center / guard double - team where the center and guard are assigned to the same target ( usually a defensive tackle ) to get extra push or drive .
Assistance may also be just a quick hit or " chip " to throw the defensive player off balance and help the guard to execute his block , while the center moves up to higher level targets .
* Backside blocking of defensive tackles for pulling guards .
In some offensive schemes , certain plays will involve " pulling " an offensive lineman to block for the ball carrier .
If a guard needs to pull for a block , the center will typically block the defensive tackle in order to fill the guard 's void .
PASS BLOCKING
*
Pass blocking for a center is similar to run blocking for a center .
The center will initially help guards based on the position of the defensive linemen .
In the case of a blitz , the center may need to pick up a rushing linebacker , safety or corner .
A good center also needs to stay vigilant during pass blocking to protect against defensive stunts and twists .
DURING THE PLAY Section::::During the play .
On most plays , the center will snap the ball directly into the quarterback 's hands .
In a shotgun formation , the center snaps the ball to the quarterback lined up several yards behind him .
In punt and field goal formations , the center also snaps the ball several yards behind him to the punter or holder on the field goal unit .
Because bad snaps can ruin special teams plays and cause turnovers , most teams have a center who is specifically trained for snapping the ball in punt and field goal formations .
This player is referred to as the team 's long snapper .
Also , the center does not have to snap the ball to the quarterback , holder , or punter .
He is allowed to snap the ball to anyone behind him .
Because of this , some plays involve snaps directly to running backs instead of the player generally expected to receive the snap , hoping to fool the defense .
In slang , the player receiving the snap is said to be " under center " if he receives the ball directly from the center ( not in shotgun ) .
This phrase is typically applied to quarterbacks , but has been used in reference to other positions as well .
SPECIAL TEAMS Section::::Special teams .
On all special teams formations , the center is a long snapper .
All NFL teams now have a specialized long snapper .
DRAWING PENALTIES
Section::::Drawing penalties .
Although the quarterback commands the ball , it is the center 's snap that renders the ball in play ; the defensive line may not cross the line of scrimmage until the center snaps the football .
An astute center can help draw an opposing team offside prior to the snap or potentially trick the other team into a penalty by quickly snapping the ball while the opposing team attempts to substitute players .
Under college and high school rules , the center , as a long snapper , may not be contacted until 1 second after the snap has been initiated .
This will result in " roughing the center . "
Additionally , a snap must be a continuous motion .
If a center halts the snap motion , this draws the penalty of " illegal snap . "
In college football , the Dave Rimington Trophy is awarded annually to the nation 's most outstanding center .
REFERENCES