SISTER , SISTER ( TV SERIES )
Sister , Sister is an American television sitcom starring identical twins Tia and Tamera Mowry .
It premiered on April 1 , 1994 , and concluded after airing six seasons on May 23 , 1999 .
The premise of the show was that the girls ( playing characters Tia Landry and Tamera Campbell ) were separated and adopted at birth .
One was adopted by a single mother while the other was adopted by a couple , although the mother died a short time later .
The two accidentally found each other fourteen years later and reunited .
Created by Kim Bass , Gary Gilbert and Fred Shafferman , the series was produced by de Passe Entertainment and Paramount Network Television .
The cast , along with Tia and Tamera Mowry , also featured Jackee Harry as Tia 's mother , Tim Reid as Tamera 's father , and Marques Houston as their annoying neighbor .
RonReaco Lee and Deon Richmond joined the main cast in the fifth season .
Sister , Sister was picked up by ABC as a midseason replacement and debuted on April 1 , 1994 , as part of the network 's TGIF comedy lineup .
The show later moved to a new timeslot for the 1994–95 season , but ABC announced that it was cancelling the program due to low ratings and its final episode aired April 28 , 1995 .
The WB , which was still in its infancy in 1995 , picked up Sister , Sister to replace the cancelled Muscle on its Wednesday night lineup of shows and the third season debuted on September 6 , 1995 .
The program found its niche as part of The WB 's lineup and aired for four additional seasons on the network , with the final episode airing on May 23 , 1999 .
In January 2018 , a revival of Sister , Sister was confirmed and is currently in the works .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
In the pilot , the twins are reunited during a chance encounter shopping at a clothing store at the mall with their adoptive parents .
The premise is similar to the movie The Parent Trap , in which a pair of separated - at - birth twins have a chance encounter at summer camp .
Tia Landry ( Tia Mowry ) is the intelligent twin from inner city Detroit , where her adoptive mother , Lisa ( Jackée Harry ) , works as a seamstress ; Tamera Campbell ( Tamera Mowry ) is the boy - crazy twin from the suburbs , where her adoptive father , Ray ( Tim Reid ) , owns a successful limousine service .
After their unexpected encounter in the department store , Ray reluctantly allows Tia and Lisa to move into the house because Lisa was about to take a job in St. Louis , which would have separated the girls .
The girls ' neighbor is nerdy Roger Evans ( Marques Houston ) , an annoying teenager who is infatuated with both of them , and who evolves into a perfect gentleman they both find attractive .
In the final season when the girls go off to college , Roger ceases to appear in the series because he was still in high school , though he does return as a guest in the final episode .
By the fifth season , Tia and Tamera ended up with steady boyfriends : Tia with a boy named Tyreke Scott ( RonReaco Lee ) and Tamera with a boy named Jordan Bennett ( Deon Richmond ) .
In the sixth - season episode " Father 's Day " , the twins meet their biological father , Matt Sullivan , and learn that he is white and a famous photojournalist .
Matt never married their mother , Racelle Gavin , because they never got the chance : she had been asked to paint a mural in Florida and he had been assigned " the opportunity of a lifetime " in the Middle East .
Also , Racelle told him that she would later join him in Tel Aviv without telling him of her pregnancy .
After six months , Racelle suddenly stopped writing .
When the girls ' mother died , Matt was not allowed to see them because he could n't prove he was their father .
When he searched for his twin daughters , he never found them because they had been adopted by two different people .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
For the first five seasons , the series would often have Tia and Tamera , either together or separately , breaking the fourth wall by talking directly to the viewer .
During the ABC run , Tia and Tamera would address the audience on some of the goings on in the storyline involving them and occasionally other main characters , usually Roger .
After the series moved to The WB , the breaking of the fourth wall was limited mainly to certain episodes and usually only in the teaser scenes and featured increasingly less often by the fourth season .
For some of the episodes in the fifth season , it was included but was dropped by the middle of the fifth season .
The sixth and final season was the only season that did not include it .
CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
* Tia Andrea Landry ( Tia Mowry ) – born on November 28 , 1979 , is honest , responsible , and mature .
Tia is a straight - A student .
She graduates from high school at the top of her class and she had aspirations to go to Harvard University , but was rejected from the college , and attended University of Michigan instead .
Tia 's main boyfriend is Ray 's mechanic , Tyreke Scott , who later joins University of Michigan and becomes a police escort at her college .
Tia and Tyreke 's relationship started in the fifth season , though they break up for a time in the sixth season , but eventually get back together in later episodes .
Tia is often involved in many of Tamera 's schemes , and Tamera sometimes has Tia to pose as her , usually to have Tia take a tough school exam in her place .
*
Tamera Ann Campbell ( Tamera Mowry ) – born on November 28 , 1979 , is Tia 's total opposite in terms of personality .
She is highly impulsive , and less intellectual than her sister , and a big fan of Coolio ( as evidenced in the season three episode " Paper or Plastic ?
" , when she threatens to quit her job as a scab worker at Food Boy when the store 's manager and Lisa 's ex - boyfriend Terrence denies her the night off on the night of a Coolio concert to which she got tickets , and in the season four episode " Slime Party " , in which Tamera answers all of the questions in a category on Coolio with ease while appearing on a teen - oriented game show ) .
She meets a guy named Jordan Bennett , editor of her school 's newspaper who she begins to date midway through the fifth season and their relationship grew stronger in the sixth season .
She has also voiced her penchant for the Hush Puppies shoe brand on several occasions .
Tamera is not afraid to speak her mind .
* Lisa Landry Sims ( Jackée Harry ) – a fashion designer by trade and Tia 's adoptive mother , though she is more aligned with Tamera 's personality , sometimes even being more impulsive , lustful , and reckless than Tamera .
Lisa has a good metabolism when she eats .
She often cracks jokes throughout the episodes , typically at Ray 's expense .
She is prone to bouts of depression , during which she consumes high quantities of food ( though it is also a running joke that Lisa has a hearty appetite even when she is not depressed ) .
Until season three , Lisa ran her fashion design business , " Fashions by Lisa " , out of Ray 's house .
In the third - season episode " History a la Carte " , Lisa moves her business to a cart in a local mall , which burns down because of a faulty popcorn machine in the season four episode " Sis - Boom - Bah " , after which her business is once again run out of Ray 's house .
Just like Ray she is strict disclipinarian on Tia and Tamera and both of them occasionally punish them .
She marries Victor Sims in the finale .
* Raymond Earl " Ray " Campbell ( Tim Reid ) –
Tamera 's widowed father .
He runs his own successful limousine service .
He is very strict disciplinarian to Tia and Tamera occasionally punish them and usually becomes a father figure to Tia .
His biggest weakness is attractive women , who often seduce him .
A recurring joke when he is being seduced is that he often accidentally says something about the woman 's body while talking to them , like saying " breast " while trying to say " rest " , or " chardonaked " instead of " chardonnay " .
He dated Lisa for a time during the fourth season , though he and Lisa once accidentally kissed while dancing in the season one episode " The Concert " ( only to find out that they were both thinking of their high school crushes while kissing ) .
Though Ray is Tamera 's adoptive father , he clearly aligns with Tia 's personality as they are both intellectual and have more dignified personalities than Tamera and Lisa .
In high school he was a male cheerleader and was nicknamed " Ra - Ra - Ray " by his classmates .
Ray is a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity , and the Republican Party .
Ray is conservative and sometimes very cheap .
* Roger Evans ( Marques Houston ) – is Tia and Tamera 's nerdy annoying neighbor and friend .
Try as he might , the girls frequently reject his advances ( which often included sexual innuendo ) , and the repeated chorus by the various members of the household was " Go Home , Roger ! "
Roger did , however , date Tia and/or Tamera on occasion ( only twice by their choice ) ; in the season four episode
" When a Man Loves Two Women " in particular , after going through a growth spurt , he asks out both Tia and Tamera , along with several other girls at Roosevelt High .
Roger eventually matures into the twins ' confidante .
Around the time the series began , Houston was also a member of the R&B group Immature ( later known as IMx ) ; Houston 's real life persona was written in as his character 's cousin in the season five episode " A Friend Indeed " .
For a number of episodes in season 5 , Roger appears infrequently with little to no explanation ( Marques Houston 's mother was suffering from cancer at the time ) .
At the end of season 5 , after Tia and Tamera graduate from high school , Roger is not seen or mentioned again ( it is presumed that he is still in high school while Tia and Tamera are in college , as it is made clear in earlier episodes that Roger is a year younger than them ) .
After a long absence , he was written back into the series as he appears in the final episode as a guest at Lisa 's wedding and sings a song for her .
So Roger still lived next door to the twins in season 6
he just was n't around as much as he was during the first five seasons .
At the twins ' high school graduation , Roger sings " Never Say Goodbye . "
It is explained that he left the show to tend to his ill mother and the fact that he was about to be written off of the show anyway due to his character being a year younger than the twins made it easier for him to leave .
* Tyreke Scott ( RonReaco Lee ) – is Tia 's boyfriend during the final two seasons of the series , though he and Tia briefly break up in the sixth season .
After realizing he 's still in love with Tia , he eventually gets back together with her .
A high school drop - out , after receiving his GED , he is permitted to graduate with the girls and Jordan , and later attends and gets a job as a security guard at the University of Michigan , where they attend college in the sixth season .
He appears in season 5 as a recurring cast member and is a series regular in season 6 .
*
Jordan Bennett ( Deon Richmond ) – is Tamera 's boyfriend during the final two seasons of the series .
He goes to college with the girls .
He is goofy at times , and is just as impulsive as Tamera .
He can be sexist at times .
Like Tyreke , he appears in season 5 as a recurring cast member and is a series regular in season 6 .
MINOR CHARACTERS
*
Tia and Tamera 's real life little brother , Tahj Mowry , has appeared in four episodes of the series .
He played Tia 's cousin , Tahj , in " Get a Job " , a kid visiting a " Mall Santa " in " Christmas " , and appeared in a crossover role in " Child 's Play " , in which he played T.J. Henderson , his character from fellow WB sitcom Smart Guy .
Lastly as a genius SAT tutor who is hired to help the girls prepare for their SAT in season 5 .
* Sarah ( Brittany Murphy ) – Sarah is Tia and Tamera 's best friend , one of a revolving door of friends Tia and Tamera would have during the series — who appears in the first season .
She seems to have less trouble than other people in knowing which twin was Tia and which was Tamera as seen in the season one episode " Cheater , Cheater " , in which she asks Tia why she was in Tamera 's class , when Tamera asked her to take the test for her .
The teacher was right behind her , and they get caught .
In one episode , she is seen smoking with her friends in her car in " Smoking in the Girl 's Room " .
After Season 2 , Sarah is n't seen or mentioned again .
* Terrence Winningham ( Dorien Wilson ) – Terrence is the manager of the local Food Boy supermarket who dated Lisa during season two and early season three and was very briefly engaged to her in the season
two episode "
I Do ?
" ; he is introduced in the episode " Joey 's Choice " .
Like Ray , many women are attracted to him , but unlike Ray , he seems to attract more pretty women .
One of the reasons he and Lisa broke up was because of his weakness for gorgeous women .
In " Field Trip " , she catches him flirting with a sexy clerk at a beauty shop .
The character is one of only two recurring characters from the show 's ABC run to appear on the show during the show 's run on The WB , Anna Slotky 's Denise Mondello is the other .
After the season three episode " Big Twin on Campus " , Terrence is never seen or mentioned again .
* " Stinky " Steve Peiser ( Victor Togunde ) – is the manager of Rocket Burger , the fast food restaurant Tia and Tamera work at during season two and early season three ; Steve appears only in the second season , however .
Tia and Tamera coin a song that is a play on the song " Whatta Man " by En Vogue and Salt - n - Pepa , that plays on the nickname given to him ( behind his back ) by Tia and Tamera and other Rocket Burger employees " Stinky Steve " .
In the episode " Dream Lover " in which that occurred , Tia has a recurring romantic dream about Steve that disturbs her .
* Rhonda Coley ( Bianca Lawson ) – Rhonda is the popular girl in Tia and Tamera 's high school who always made fun of Tia and Tamera , especially their fashion choices and on her last time on the show , over summer break her attitude changed and she became kinder , yet her physical appearance took a turn for the worst .
After the third season , with the exception of the season four premiere episode , " You Are So Beautiful " in which , the girls find out that to their disbelief that Rhonda " blew up " over the summer becoming burly and mannish in appearance ( the character was played by Larry Wrentz in that episode ) , Rhonda is not seen or mentioned again .
Bianca 's father , Richard Lawson appears in the final season as Lisa 's boyfriend , Victor Sims .
* Denise Mondello ( Anna Slotky ) – Denise is one of Tia and Tamera 's friends who appears in the show 's second and third seasons .
Denise , like Tia and Tamera , was employed at Rocket Burger .
In the season two episode " Single White Teenager " ( the character 's first appearance in production order , though she appeared in an earlier episode in season two ) , Denise was paired with Tamera as a science partner while Tia was sick , and later started to dress like Tia and Tamera as well , even claiming she was going to start being called by her middle name of Tonya in order to match theirs , causing panic by Tia and Tamera , only to find out that it was a joke .
The character is one of only two recurring characters from the show 's ABC run to appear on the show during the show 's run on The WB , Dorien Wilson 's Terrence Winningham is the other .
* Steve ( Steve Monroe ) – Steve is one of the twins ' guy friends in the third season , who is depicted as being not very bright and is revealed in the episode " The Tutor " to be a player on Roosevelt High 's basketball team .
*
Ernie ( Arvie Lowe , Jr. ) – Ernie is one of Tia and Tamera 's guy friends in the third season , and is revealed to be a drama club member in the episode " Private School " .
* Jimmy " Soupy " Campbell ( Sherman Hemsley ) – " Soupy " is Ray 's father , who was introduced in the season three episode " Grandpa Campbell " , who was often in shady dealings .
He states in that episode that he got the nickname " Soupy " not because his surname is Campbell ( which would be a play on the Campbell 's soup brand ) , but because of the tight situations he gets himself into , claiming " [ he is ] always in hot water " .
Ray did not have a good relationship with his father initially , and often disapproved of his decisions , but they started to have somewhat of an understanding by the end of his first appearance on the show .
" Soupy " appears in two additional season three episodes " Christmas " and " Summer Bummer " , and makes his final appearance in the season five episode " Shoeless " , with Soupy acting as " the fairy godfather " to Tamera 's Cinderella as she could n't go to Jordan 's graduation party .
* Carl Mitushka ( Fred Willard ) – Mr. Mitushka is the vice principal of Roosevelt High and the founder of a conservatory for young musicians .
In his last two appearances , he tries a bit hard to " be cool " with the students .
The character appears in the season three episodes " The Piano Lesson " , " The Candidate " and " The Audition " .
* Dave Barnes ( David Strickland)- A security guard at the mall where Lisa works .
He is often shown to be slightly incompetent and loses his job in one episode .
* Patrice ( Vernee Watson - Johnson ) – Patrice is Lisa 's best friend from the inner - city neighborhood that Lisa and Tia previously lived and is the mother of Tia 's childhood friend Darnell , who is introduced in the season four episode "
Boy from the Hood " .
Patrice , who has known Lisa since childhood , has a personality similar to Lisa , which sometimes irritates Ray as much as Lisa 's antics typically do .
* Mike ( Jamil Walker Smith ) – Mike is a student at Roosevelt High , seen only during the fourth season , who is also one of the very few male friends Roger is seen to have , presumably as he is most likely in the same year .
* Marlon Baker ( Aaron Lohr ) – Marlon is a student at Roosevelt High , seen only during the fourth season , who is a jock and plays on Roosevelt High 's hockey team as seen in the episode
" Some Like It Hockey " .
He often makes fun of various students , most often Tia and Tamera .
Marlon is shown as sexist in the episode " Some Like It Hockey " when he claims the job of class president is a " man 's job " and does n't allow Tia and Tamera ( who are girls ) to try out for the hockey team but the decision is later reversed when Tia and Tamera ( disguised as male hockey players ) beat and embarrass Marlon in a scrimmage match .
The character 's portrayer , Aaron Lohr , previously appeared on Sister , Sister as a different character , an older teenager whom Tia goes out on a double date with ( joined by Tamera and Roger ) in the season one episode " Wedding Bells and Box Boys " .
* Clark ( Christopher " Kid " Reid ) – Clark is the manager of the bookstore / coffeeshop Book ' Em , Joe and is Tia 's boss at the hangout during the fifth season , who is shown to be sarcastic .
* Diavian Johnson ( Alexis Fields ) – Diavian is the twins ' best friend in the seasons five and six .
*
Dot ( Senta Moses )
– Dot is a friend of Tia and Tamera 's during season five .
* Victor Sims ( Richard Lawson ) – Victor is one of Ray 's friends , who later becomes Lisa 's love interest and later her husband in the series finale .
Due to the series ending , we will never know if Victor adopted Tia .
Richard is the father of Bianca Lawson , who played Rhonda in the third season .
* Vivica Shaw ( Rolanda Watts ) – Vivica is Ray 's ex - girlfriend , who Ray broke up with because she was cheating on him .
Vivica was constantly trying to mess Ray up out of anger .
Because he made her lose her other date so she was dateless .
She was supposed to have moved to Chicago , but she started a limo business to get him back .
It is also obvious that Vivica and Lisa are rivals .
In the same episode where she started the limo business she was arrested , because none of her three drivers ( Kim , Mo'nique , and Chant'e ) had a license .
* Steven ( Chad Haywood ) – Diavian 's boyfriend in season five , who is shown not to be very bright .
* Vanessa ( Gabrielle Union )
- Vanessa is Tia and Tamera 's friend in the last half of the fourth season and the first half of the fifth season .
In one episode , Tamera finds out that Vanessa is a shoplifter .
* Matthew " Matt " Sullivan ( Tony Carreiro ) – Matt is Tia and Tamera 's birth father .
He appeared in one episode as their teacher and they came to his museum .
He started talking about Racelle Gavin and they said they knew her , and he showed them a picture of her .
Eventually , he figured out that Racelle Gavin was their mother which meant he was their father .
But Tamera did n't go for it because he was white
and she was mad that he was n't there for them .
But he tried to explain that he was trying to find them .
At the end , Tamera was really happy with him .
And in the end Matt accidentally took a wacky picture and Lisa said " Matt , you 'll fit into this family just fine . "
* Principal Gordon ( Eric Payne in Season 4 , Fitz Houston in Season 5 ) – The Principal of Roosevelt High during the Twins ' Junior and Senior Years , respectively .
* Little Ray – Little Ray is a stray Orange tabby Cat that Lisa adopted during the first season and named him after Ray .
Ray hates Little Ray .
Little Ray is shown in the second season , riding with Ray , then Ray tells him to get out and jumps out the window , but at the end of the episode he comes back .
Little Ray is not seen or mentioned again .
SPECIAL GUEST APPEARANCES
* 702
*
Tim Allen * Jon B. * Milton Berle * BLACKstreet * Johnny Brown
* Olivia Brown * Orlando Brown
* Kobe Bryant * Nikki Cox *
Cylk Cozart *
Terrell Davis
*
Ja'net Dubois *
Michael Clarke Duncan
* Donald Faison
* Kirk Franklin
* Tyrese * Nicci Gilbert *
La'Myia Good
*
Mýa
* Sherman Hemsley * Taraji P. Henson
* D. L. Hughley *
Immature * Shar Jackson * Wesley Jonathan * Montell Jordan * Khalil Kain
* Casey Kasem
* Lisa Leslie * Phill Lewis
*
Rebecca Lobo * RuPaul * Brian McKnight * Christina Milian
* Kel Mitchell
* Goodie Mob
* Mari Morrow *
Tahj Mowry * Brittany Murphy
*
Next
*
Mary - Kate Olsen
* Ashley Olsen *
Beverly Peele * Kyla Pratt
* John Ratzenberger
* Christopher " Kid " Reid *
Daphne Maxwell Reid * Reynaldo Rey * Ray Romano * Bob Saget * Jerry Seinfeld
* Molly Shannon *
Chaz Lamar Shepherd * Will Smith * Ethan Suplee * Kenan Thompson * Gabrielle Union * Barry Watson * Jason Weaver * Malinda Williams * Vesta Williams * Chuck Woolery
* WC * William Allen Young EPISODES Nielsen ratings THEME SONG AND OPENING SEQUENCES
THEME SONG Section::::Theme song and opening sequences .
Section::::Theme song .
The series ' original theme song was written and composed by Tim Heintz , Randy Petersen and Kevin Quinn .
Season one was the only season using the full version , with the short middle instrumental portion , vocalizations and the line " Living underneath one roof , no it wo n't be trouble - proof " dropped in season 2 , though the short instrumental and vocalizations were restored in season 3 .
An updated version of the theme song was used starting in Season 5 , composed by Heintz , Petersen , Quinn and Kurt Farquhar , who composed the music score for most of the series ( save for Season 3 , when the score was composed by Paul A. Kreiling ) , and performed by Tia and Tamera Mowry ; this version used the same tune , but a slower tempo and lyrics that emphasized the two characters ' differences and increased maturity .
The season 5 version of the theme began with the end of the original theme prior to the start of the theme song .
An instrumental version of the final theme was used as a closing theme for the final two seasons , though with the exception of the episode " Designer Genes " , it was generally played over a blooper reel during the closing credits .
OPENING TITLES
Section::::Opening titles .
The opening sequence used in the first two seasons , designed by Twin Art , opens with the sound of two spanks and crying babies over a black screen as animated crying babies appear with the word " separated " between them , then showing Ray and Lisa each holding babies representing Tamera and Tia with the word " adopted " appearing between both .
The main cast are shown in front of a white background with various animations around them , ending with Tia , Tamera , Ray and Lisa at a couch with an animated roof over it ( pushed overhead by Ray ) , which morphs into the title logo .
The sequence was shortened with the theme song in season two and modified to include Marques Houston as Roger , who became a contract cast member that season
( Houston , as Roger , is shown peeking from an animated door which Tia and Tamera promptly close on him ) .
Seasons 3 and 4 used a computer - animated sequence by Pittard - Sullivan , with the main cast 's video headshots in a stop - motion effect , opening with two babies drifting away from each other into two backgrounds : one , the city ( which is actually the pre - September 11 , 2001 Manhattan skyline , despite the fact the series was set in Detroit ) and the other , a country road with the word " separated " between them , then showing Ray and Lisa each holding babies in a similar manner as the previous sequence with a rotating " adopted " , then showing the cast in front of different backdrops ( some which include cutouts of objects ) .
It ends with the cast ( sans Marques Houston ) walking into each other , then getting themselves together over changing cloud backdrops , one which features two roadsigns , before the title logo appears .
The cast 's surnames are animated and in a variant of the show 's logotype .
This was the only time the intro remained exactly the same , though by season four , the intro became a bit outdated as Tia and Tamera dropped the wavy hair , tams and plaid outfits for straight hair and trendier fashions , and Roger stopped wearing braids .
The final two seasons used a music video - style sequence , designed by Paramount Digital Design ; Marques Houston remained in the sequence despite his appearances on the series decreasing midway through the fifth season , and Houston was replaced in the sequence by RonReaco Lee and Deon Richmond for the sixth season .
Because virtually the same sequence was used as the season before , viewers may notice that in the final part of the second version of the sequence before the title logo when the cast dances together that Richmond and Lee do not appear in the black - and - white shots and are digitally inserted in the regular shots with Tia and Tamera Mowry , Tim Reid and Jackée Harry .
SYNDICATION U.S. BROADCAST AND CABLE SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Section::::U.S. broadcast and cable syndication .
After being picked up by The WB in 1995 , reruns of the first two seasons of Sister , Sister were broadcast in early primetime as part of the network 's then - newly launched Sunday night lineup during the 1995–1996 season , in addition to the first - run episodes of the series that aired on the WB 's Wednesday night schedule .
The series has been aired on various broadcast television networks in the U.S. after the series finale on The WB Television Network .
From September 1998 to September 2002 , Paramount Domestic Television ( now CBS Television Distribution ) distributed the series to Fox , The WB and UPN network affiliates , such as WWOR - TV ( who aired the show reruns weeknights at 6:30pm in New York City ) around the United States , airing depending on market .
In some markets such as New York City ( 6:30pm ) , Philadelphia ( 5:30pm ) , Washington , D.C. ( 5 pm & 5:30pm ) , Atlanta ( 2:30pm ) , and Bakersfield ( 9 am & 9:30am ) , reruns of Sister , Sister were replaced by reruns of The Hughleys in September 2002 .
The series formerly aired reruns on The N , Disney Channel , ABC Family , BET , WGN America , Up ( formerly GMC TV ) , Centric , and Hub Network .
It currently airs reruns on Fuse .
Disney Channel airings had most episodes edited for content deemed by the channel as unsuitable for its pre - teen audience ; the edited Disney Channel versions were also the syndication package of the show that aired on sister network ABC Family , with the exception of the season two episode " Tattoo " that was omitted from Disney Channel airings .
GMC also airs episodes with content the channel deems inappropriate usually muted or removed entirely , ranging from mild suggestive dialogue said by Roger to tame phrases such as " shut up " , " butt " , " dumb " and " pervert " ; whereas the airings on other channels were the original syndicated prints .
INTERNATIONAL SYNDICATION
Section::::International syndication .
In Australia and New Zealand , the series was aired on Nickelodeon and the Seven Network ; in the United Kingdom , Sister , Sister was aired on Nickelodeon , and on Channel 4 between 1995 and 2000 as the channel had the terrestrial rights to the show .
In the UK , Nickelodeon aired Sister Sister again in 2009 but only showed episodes from the first four seasons .
It currently airs on The Vault in the UK , which has recently started showing classic Teenage comedies like Saved by the Bell and Sabrina the Teenage Witch .
It also aired in Ireland , on Nickelodeon and RTÉ Two .
It does not currently air in Ireland any more .
In Latin America , Sister , Sister used to air on Nickelodeon in the late 1990s and early 2000s .
On October 21 , 2009 it debuted on open television Rede Record , but was taken off on October 30 , 2009 , the cause for this is unknown .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
CBS DVD ( distributed by Paramount ) released the first and second seasons of Sister , Sister on DVD in Region 1 in 2008 and 2009 .
As of September 2014 , these releases have been discontinued and are out of print .
On May 4 , 2015 , it was announced that Visual Entertainment Inc. ( VEI ) had acquired the distribution rights to the series for Region 1 ( encompassing the United States and Canada ) .
It was subsequently announced on December 28 , 2015 , that VEI ( through its deal with CBS Television Distribution ) would release a complete DVD set of the series , Sister , Sister :
The Complete Collection ( which includes seasons three through six , which were not previously released individually ) , in Region 1 on January 19 , 2016 , the release date was then pushed back to March 18 , 2016 .
The Mowry twins 2000 television film Seventeen
Again is also included as a bonus disc on the Complete Collection set .
On May 26 , 2017 , VEI released separate Seasons 1–3 and Seasons 4–6 sets of the series .
REVIVAL
Section::::Revival .
In June 2012 interview with TV Guide , both Tia Mowry and Tamera Mowry have said they would like to reunite the cast for a reunion film .
They were thinking of doing a " Twins in the city " plot , like the twins in New York City .
In 2017 , rumors started developing about a potential continuation of Sister , Sister , both Tia and Tamera have confirmed that talks are ongoing and that a sequel series is very close to happening .
In October 2017 , Tia Mowry stated in an interview with Entertainment Tonight that a revival of the series was " definitely closer than ever " and that she is " getting excited " about the possibility .
She also said that she believed Jackée Harry and Tim Reid would be a part of the revival if it were to take place .
On January 16 , 2018 , while appearing on Steve , Harry confirmed the revival , stating that " it 's happening " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
* Emmy Awards
* Image Awards
* Kids ' Choice Awards
* Young Artist Awards
* Teen Choice Awards REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS