LAKE
COEUR
D'ALENE Lake Coeur d'Alene ( ) is a dam - controlled lake in northern Idaho , in the northwest United States .
Its northern end is in the city of Coeur d'Alene .
It spans in length and ranges from 1 to wide with over of shoreline .
The lake was named after the Coeur d'Alene people .
GEOLOGY AND GEOGRAPHY Section::::Geology and geography .
Lake Coeur d'Alene , like other lakes surrounding the Spokane Valley and Rathdrum Prairie , was formed by the Missoula Floods , most recently 12,000 to 15,000 years ago .
The Purcell Lobe of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet flowed south from Canada , carving the basin of present - day Lake Pend Oreille and damming the Clark Fork river .
The impounded river repeatedly filled to form Glacial Lake Missoula and broke through the ice dam , resulting in massive floods that filled the Rathdrum Prairie area with sand , gravel , and boulders .
Large eddy bars formed downstream from bedrock obstructions , thereby damming tributary valleys and creating lakes .
Lake Coeur d'Alene is fed primarily by two rivers , the Coeur d'Alene and the Saint Joe .
The outflow is via the Spokane River .
The lake 's elevation varies from above sea level in the summer to up to lower in the winter , controlled by the Post Falls Dam below the lake on the Spokane River .
The lake 's average surface temperature between June 1 and September 30 is .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first - recorded European to see the area was explorer David Thompson in 1807 .
Flooding as a result of the construction and operation of the Post Falls Dam drastically changed the shape and size of the lake , expanding it to combine several smaller lakes into one .
The lake has been used for transporting lumber by water in Kootenai County since the timber industry started in the region .
Prior to a fire in 1917 , Harrison was planned as the county seat of Kootenai County , as the swiftly growing lumber town was at an opportune junction of the St. Joe and Coeur d ' Alene rivers .
After the fire , the mills were moved mostly to the city of Coeur d'Alene , which developed more and was designated as the county seat .
A number of Ford Model T automobiles sitting on the bottom of the lake are the result of people in the early 1900s choosing to drive in winter across the frozen lake .
But they did not always judge how thick the ice was , and went through .
Steamboats on the bottom resulted from being burned and sunk as wrecks when they were no longer of use to ferry people around the lake .
Since the late 20th century , divers frequently visit these ruins on the bottom as part of their recreation .
The Coeur d'Alene Tribe owns the southern third of Lake Coeur d'Alene and its submerged lands as part of its reservation , in addition to miles of the Saint Joe River and its submerged lands , all of which the United States holds in trust for the tribe .
Its rights to the lake and river were established in the first executive order founding its reservation , which originally included all of the lake .
In United States v. Idaho ( 2001 ) , the United States Supreme Court held that an 1873 executive order issued by President Ulysses S. Grant formalized ownership by the tribe .
While the court holding has not affected usage and access to Lake Coeur d'Alene , the Environmental Protection Agency has ruled that the tribe may set its own water - quality standards on its portion of Lake Coeur d'Alene .
RECREATION Section::::Recreation .
Lake Coeur d'Alene is a popular tourist site for many people during the summer , offering great beaches and scenic views .
A seasonal hobby of some local residents is viewing the bald eagles as they feed on the kokanee in the lake , mainly from the Wolf Lodge Bay .
The North Idaho Centennial Trail , popular among cyclists , walkers , and joggers , follows along the lake 's north and northeastern shore .
The Trail of the Coeur d'Alenes also runs along the southern shores .
For a decade , the lake hosted unlimited hydroplane races for the Diamond Cup ( 1958–1966 , 1968 ) .
Idaho State Parks and public facilities
* Coeur d'Alene Parkway State Park
* Heyburn State Park
* Trail of the Coeur d'Alenes * Kootenai County Parks and Waterways Facilities Map IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The song " Coeur d'Alene " by the rock band Alter Bridge from their third album AB III is about this lake .
SEE ALSO
* Lake Pend Oreille
*
Liberty Lake * Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex
* Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho ( 1997 )
* Idaho v. United States ( 2001 ) REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Guide to Lake Coeur d'Alene * State of Idaho Parks and Recreation website
* Parks and Waterways Facilities Map * Current Lake Coeur d'Alene water temperature , elevation , and weather conditions .