COCKTAIL SAUCE Cocktail sauce is one of several types of cold or room temperature sauces often served as part of the dish(es ) referred to as seafood cocktail or as a condiment with other seafoods .
The sauce , and the dish for which it is named , are often credited to British celebrity chef Fanny Cradock , but seafood cocktails predate her 1967 recipe by some years ( for example , Constance Spry published a seafood cocktail using Dublin Bay Prawns in 1956 ) .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
Seafood cocktails originated in the 19th century in the United States , usually made with oyster or shrimp , and seafood with spiced , cold sauces were a well - established part of the 20th century culinary repertoire .
While cocktail sauce is most associated with the prawn cocktail , it can be served with any shellfish .
VARIETIES UNITED STATES Section::::Varieties .
Section::::United States .
In America it generally consists of , at a minimum , ketchup or chili sauce mixed with prepared horseradish .
Lemon juice , Worcestershire sauce and Tabasco sauce are common additives , often all three .
Some restaurants use chili sauce , a spicier tomato - based sauce in place of the ketchup .
ELSEWHERE
Section::::Elsewhere .
The common form of cocktail sauce in the United Kingdom , Ireland , Iceland , France , Belgium and The Netherlands , usually consists of mayonnaise mixed with a tomato sauce to the same pink colour as prawns , producing a result that could be compared to fry sauce .
It is similar to Thousand Island dressing , but the more usual British name is Marie ( or Mary )
Rose Sauce .
The origins of the name are unclear and it is variously credited to a 1980s dive team cook working at the site of the Tudor ship , the Mary Rose , and Fanny Cradock .
However , the term first appeared in the 1920s as a term for a garnish of shrimp , and was in use for cocktail sauce by at least 1963 .
The name was linked to the colour and Escoffier uses it to describe a pink iced pudding .
It was so ubiquitous in the 1960s and 1970s that is has since become something of a joke in Britain , along with its most commonly associated dish , the prawn cocktail .
In Belgium , a dash of whisky is often added to the sauce .
It is popularly served with steamed shrimp and seafood on the half shell .
In Australia , it is often provided in fish and chip shops .
IN OYSTER BARS Section::::In oyster bars .
In most American oyster bars , cocktail sauce is the standard accompaniment for raw oysters and patrons at an oyster bar expect to be able to mix their own .
The standard ingredients ( in roughly decreasing proportion ) are ketchup , horseradish , hot sauce ( Tabasco , Louisiana , or Crystal ) , Worcestershire sauce , and lemon juice .
A soufflé cup is usually set in the middle of the platter of oysters along with a cocktail fork and a lemon slice .
Often , the bottles of ketchup and other sauces are grouped together in stations every couple of feet along the counter , but in some oyster bars , patrons are served with their own ingredients .
SEE ALSO * Court - bouillon
* List of dips * List of sauces
* Squid cocktail
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Basic recipe from cdkitchen.com
* Recipe from southernfood.about.com * Recipe from recipezaar.com