PAID FAMILY LEAVE ( CALIFORNIA )
California 's Paid Family Leave ( PFL ) insurance program , which is also known as the Family Temporary Disability Insurance ( FTDI ) program , is a law enacted in 2002 that extends unemployment disability compensation to cover individuals who take time off work to care for a seriously ill family member or bond with a new minor child .
Benefits equal approximately 70 % of earnings and have a maximum per week , for a total of up to six weeks .
The Paid Family Leave program is administered by the State Disability Insurance ( SDI ) program of the Employment Development Department .
Benefits commenced on July 1 , 2004 .
The PFL insurance program is fully funded by employees ' contributions , similar to the SDI program .
The statute states that PFL must be taken concurrently with leave under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act ( FMLA ) and the California Family Rights Act ( CFRA ) , both of which provide for twelve weeks of unpaid leave in a twelve - month period .
In other words , the FMLA and CFRA offer job protection for up to twelve weeks of family leave whereas PFL offers compensation for up to six weeks .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2002 , after an extended campaign by the California Labor Federation , AFL - CIO and the Work and Family Coalition led by the Labor Project for Working Families , California was the first state to pass a law requiring the Paid Family Leave program .
As of mid-2008 , the only other states that had passed laws to offer paid family leave benefits were Washington and New Jersey .
In 2009 , five years after California 's paid family leave law first went into effect , Congresswoman Lynn Woolsey , a Democrat from the same state , introduced H.R. 2339 , the Family Income Responding to Significant Transitions ( FIRST ) Act , which would provide federal grants to states with existing paid family leave laws to implement and administer their paid family leave programs , and would encourage other states to develop their own paid family leave programs .
PROVISIONS Section::::Provisions .
In order to qualify for PFL , employees must participate in the State Disability Insurance ( SDI ) Program ( or a voluntary plan in lieu of SDI ) .
Benefits under the program include the following :
* PFL allows for up to six weeks of paid leave in a twelve - month period .
* PFL covers employees who take time off to bond with their own child or their registered domestic partner 's child , or a child placed for adoption or foster - care with them or their domestic partner .
Eligibility expires one year from the minor child 's date of birth , adoption , or foster care placement .
* PFL also covers employees who take time off to care for a seriously ill child , parent , spouse or domestic partner .
EXCLUSIONS Section::::Exclusions .
An employee may not receive PFL insurance benefits if he or she is also eligible for or already receiving State Disability Insurance , Unemployment Compensation Insurance , or Workers ' Compensation .
An employer may require employees to take up to two weeks earned , but unused , vacation prior to the employee 's initial receipt of PFL benefits .
JOB SECURITY Section::::Job security .
The PFL does not offer job security stipulations .
Instead , it relies on the limited job security already provided by federal and state laws : an employer is only required to grant time off and to hold a job for an employee if the employer is covered by the Family and Medical Leave Act ( FMLA ) or the California Family Rights Act ( CFRA ) .
The California Family Rights Act offers twelve weeks of unpaid leave for employees of firms with more than 20 workers .
BENEFIT RATES Section::::Benefit rates .
The California Employment Development Department offers a tool to help calculate benefit payment amounts .
Benefits are set at 70 % of income for low income earners and 60 % for middle and high income earners , however there is a maximum weekly benefit that is tied to the State Average Weekly Wage corresponding to the year of the claim .
For 2018 , this maximum is $ 1216 while the lower range of weekly benefits is $ 50 .
To qualify for the minimum weekly amount ( $ 50 ) , an individual must have at least $ 300 of wages ( or $ 75 per quarter ) in the base period , which covers 12 months and is divided into four quarters of three months each .
AWARENESS AND USAGE PATTERNS
Section::::Awareness and usage patterns .
In the first year of the program 's passage , only 138,000 people applied for benefits .
This was less than half of California 's estimate for number of benefit recipients , 300,000 .
Of those claims , 88 % were for bonding with a new child while 12 % were for caring for an ill family member .
Females dominated the claims , making up 83 % of new child claims and 70 % of care claims .
Although the low number of claims could have been due to the program being relatively unknown , benefits of the program being too low may also have had an impact .
In a study conducted in California and Illinois of parents of chronically ill children before ( 2003 - 2004 ) and after ( 2005 - 2006 )
the passage of PFL , no difference was observed in time taken off work to care for a sick or newly born child .
Of those parents surveyed , only 18 % had heard of the program and 5 % had used it .
In a survey of 253 employers and 500 employees , 89 % of employers said they experienced no noticeable effect or a positive effect from the program , with larger employers having a more favorable view than small employers , likely since they are likely to already provide paid family leave .
Sixty percent of employers reported saving on costs by coordinating their own sick leave with PFL .
In a 2007 survey of California adults , only 28.1 % were aware of the PFL program .
SEE ALSO * California State Disability Insurance ( SDI ) * Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
* United States state disability programs
*
Parental leave * Domestic partnerships in California
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Employment Development Department :
Paid Family Leave
* California 's Paid Family Leave Collaborative * California Department of Fair Employment & Housing
— Employment Bulletin , December 31 , 2003 .
Includes a " Comparison of Major Distinctions in the California Family Rights Act / Family Medical Leave Act and Paid Family Leave ( PFL ) also known as Family Temporary Disability Insurance ( FTDI ) . "