SUBSTITUTE ( ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL )
In association football , a substitute is a player who is brought on to the pitch during a match in exchange for an existing player .
Substitutions are generally made to replace a player who has become tired or injured , or who is performing poorly , or for tactical reasons ( such as bringing a striker on in place of a defender ) .
Unlike some sports ( such as American football , ice hockey or Kabaddi ) , a player who has been substituted during a match may take no further part in it .
Most competitions only allow each team to make a maximum of three substitutions during a game and a fourth substitute during extra time , although more substitutions are often permitted in non - competitive fixtures such as friendlies .
A fourth substitution in extra time was first implemented in recent tournaments , including the 2016 Summer Olympic Games , the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup and the 2017 CONCACAF Gold Cup final .
A fourth substitute in extra time has been approved for use in the elimination rounds at the 2018 FIFA World Cup , the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Europa League .
Each team nominates a number of players ( typically between five and seven , depending on the competition ) who may be used as substitutes ; these players typically sit in the technical area with the coaches , and are said to be " on the bench " .
When the substitute enters the field of play it is said they have come on or have been brought on , while the player they are substituting is coming off or being brought off .
A player who is noted for frequently making appearances , or scoring important goals , as a substitute is often informally known as a " super sub " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origin of football substitutes goes back to at least the early 1860s as part of English public school football games .
The original use of the term " substitute " in football was to describe the replacement of players who failed to turn up for matches .
For example , in 1863 , a match reports states : " The Charterhouse eleven played a match in cloisters against some old Carthusians but in consequence of the non - appearance of some of those who were expected it was necessary to provide three substitutes .
" The substitution of absent players happened as early as the 1850s , for example from Eton College where the term " emergencies " is used .
Numerous references to players acting as a " substitute " occur in matches in the mid-1860s where it is not indicated whether these were replacements of absent players or of players injured during the match .
The first use of a substitute in international football was on 15 April 1889 , in the match between Wales and Scotland at Wrexham .
Wales 's original goalkeeper , Jim Trainer , failed to arrive ; local amateur player Alf Pugh started the match and played for some 20 minutes until the arrival of Sam Gillam , who took over from him .
Substitution during games was first permitted in 1958 .
( Although as early as the qualifying phase for the 1954 World Cup , Horst Eckel of Germany is recorded as having been replaced by Richard Gottinger in their match with the Saarland on 11 October 1953 . )
The use of substitutes in World Cup Finals matches was not allowed until the 1970 tournament .
The number of substitutes usable in a competitive match has increased from zero — meaning teams were reduced if players ' injuries could not allow them to play on — to one ( plus another for an injured goalkeeper ) in 1958 ; to two out of a possible five in 1988 .
With the later increases in substitutions allowed , the number of potential substitute players increased to seven .
The number of substitutes increased to two plus one ( injured goalkeeper ) in 1994 , to three in 1995 ; and most recently to a fourth substitute in certain competitions in extra time .
ENGLISH AND SCOTTISH LEAGUES Section::::English and Scottish leagues .
Substitutions during matches in the English Football League were first permitted in the 1965–66 season .
During the first two seasons after the law was introduced , each side was permitted only one substitution during a game .
Moreover , the substitute could only replace an injured player .
From the 1967–68 season , this rule was relaxed to allow substitutions for tactical reasons .
On 21 August 1965 , Keith Peacock of Charlton Athletic became the first substitute used in the Football League when he replaced injured goalkeeper Mike Rose eleven minutes into their away match against Bolton Wanderers .
On the same day , Bobby Knox became the first ever substitute to score a goal when he scored for Barrow against Wrexham .
Archie Gemmill of St Mirren was the first substitute to come on in a Scottish first - class match , on 13 August 1966 in a League Cup tie against Clyde when he replaced Jim Clunie after 23 minutes .
The first official substitute in a Scottish League match was Paul Conn for Queen 's Park vs Albion Rovers in a Division 2 match on 24 August 1966 .
Previously , on 20 January 1917 , a player called Morgan came on for the injured Morrison of Partick Thistle after 5 minutes against Rangers at Firhill , but this was an isolated case and the Scottish League did not authorise substitutes until 1966 .
In later years , the number of substitutes permitted in Football League matches has gradually increased ; at present each team is permitted to name either five or seven substitutes depending on the country and competition , of which a maximum of three may be used .
In England , the Premier League increased the number of players on the bench to five in 1996 , and it was announced that the number available on the bench would be seven for the 2008–09 season .
RELEVANT LAWS
Section::::Relevant laws .
According to the Laws of the Game ( 2018/19 ) : A player may only be substituted during a stoppage in play and with the permission of the referee .
The player to be substituted ( outgoing player ) must have left the field of play before the substitute ( incoming player ) may enter the field of play ; at that point the substitute becomes a player and the person substituted ceases to be a player .
The incoming player may only enter the field at the half - way line .
Failure to comply with these provisions may be punished by a caution ( yellow card ) .
A player who has been substituted may take no further part in a match .
Unused substitutes still on the bench , as well as players who have been already substituted , remain under the authority of the referee .
These are liable for misconduct , though can not be said to have committed a foul .
For example , in the 2002 FIFA World Cup , Claudio Caniggia was shown the red card for cursing at the referee from the bench .
Under the Laws , the referee has no specific power to force a player to be substituted , even if the team manager or captain has ordered their player to be substituted .
If a player refuses to be substituted play may simply resume with that player on the field .
However , in some situations players may still be liable to punishment with a caution ( yellow card ) for time wasting or unsporting behaviour .
A player who has been sent off ( red card ) may not be substituted ; the team will have to make do with the remaining players .
In the case of a goalkeeper who is sent off , such as in the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final , when Arsenal midfielder Robert Pires was replaced by second - choice goalkeeper Manuel Almunia to replace Jens Lehmann , who received a red card less than 20 minutes into the match , the coach will usually ( but is not required to ) substitute an outfield player so that the backup goalkeeper can enter the game .
If all substitutions have been used , or if no goalkeeper is available , an outfield player will take up the role of the goalkeeper .
A famous example of this is when Chelsea goalkeepers Petr Čech and Carlo Cudicini were both injured in the same game , which led to defender John Terry spending the remainder of the match in goal wearing third - choice goalkeeper Hilário 's shirt .
According to the Laws of the Game , " up to a maximum of three substitutes may be used in any match played in an official competition organised under the auspices of FIFA , the confederations or the member associations . "
Also :
*
In national A team matches , up to a maximum of six substitutes may be used .
*
In all other matches , a greater number of substitutes may be used provided that : * the teams concerned reach agreement on a maximum number ; * the referee is informed before the match .
*
If the referee is not informed , or if no agreement is reached before the match , no more than six substitutes are allowed .
SUPER - SUB Section::::Super - sub .
The term " super - sub " refers to a substitution made by the manager that subsequently saves the game , generally by scoring a late equalising or winning goal .
Players regarded as " super - subs " include Tupãzinho and Dinei for Corinthians , Azar Karadas for Brann , Santiago Solari for Real Madrid , Jon Dahl Tomasson for AC Milan , Nwankwo Kanu for Arsenal , David Fairclough for Liverpool , Adam Le Fondre for Reading , Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Javier Hernández for Manchester United , Mikael Forssell for Chelsea , Leon Clarke for Wigan Athletic , Brendon Santalab for Western Sydney Wanderers Henrique for Brisbane Roar , Stevie Kirk for Motherwell , Archie Thompson , Joshua Kennedy and Tim Cahill for Australia .
REFERENCES