THE GENERAL 'S DAUGHTER ( FILM )
The General 's Daughter is a 1999 American crime film directed by Simon West and starring John Travolta .
The plot concerns the mysterious death of the daughter of a prominent Army general .
The film is based on the 1992 novel by the same name by Nelson DeMille .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Vietnam War veteran Paul Brenner is in Georgia , masquerading as First Sergeant Frank White , to broker an illegal arms trade with a self - proclaimed freedom fighter .
Brenner is actually an undercover agent of the United States Army Criminal Investigation Command .
While on a local army base , Brenner 's car gets a flat tire and a young officer helps him change it .
The officer is Elisabeth Campbell , the commanding general 's daughter and a captain in psychological operations .
The next evening , she is found murdered .
The base provost marshal , Colonel Kent , secures the crime scene .
Brenner and Sara Sunhill , a rape specialist , are brought in to investigate .
Brenner and Sunhill search Elisabeth 's home and find a room containing video and BDSM equipment .
Brenner is attacked by an intruder who removes the video tapes .
Brenner questions Elisabeth 's superior officer , Colonel Moore .
Moore is evasive and gives a false alibi , which leads Brenner to arrest him on charges of conduct unbecoming an officer .
Sunhill is knocked to the ground by four men who try to intimidate her and Brenner .
Sunhill notices that the main assailant is wearing a silver claddagh ring .
It turns out to be a Captain Elby .
At gunpoint , he confesses that Elisabeth was sexually promiscuous with the men on the base as part of an extensive " psychological warfare " campaign against her father .
Back at the jail , Colonel Kent releases Moore , confining him to quarters at his home on - base .
When Brenner , Sunhill , and Kent return to Moore 's home , they find him dead with an apparently self - inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
But Brenner is not convinced that Moore 's death was suicide .
General Campbell 's adjutant , Colonel Fowler , attempts to close the investigation , stating that Moore killed himself out of guilt , but Brenner refuses to accept this .
Brenner and Sunhill visit Colonel Slesinger , the Academy 's psychiatrist , who explains that Elisabeth had been brutally gang raped by fellow cadets at West Point , and left to die in an isolated area — staked down in exactly the same manner in which she was found murdered .
Elisabeth never knew the names of her assailants , but Sunhill tracks down one of the attackers and engineers a confession .
They then arrest the other assailants , all of whom face 20 years imprisonment for their crime .
The agents pay a visit to the general , who corroborates the story .
Fearing that the assailants would never be caught , Campbell had acted upon the advice of another general and decided to cover up the incident since such a scandal could have destroyed the United States Military Academy .
This denial of justice severely traumatized Elisabeth , causing her to partake in various violent sexual activities and wage a years - long war of psychological revenge against her father .
Campbell also reveals that he encountered his daughter the night of her murder and that , with the aid of Moore , she staged the reenactment of her West Point rape in an attempt to force him to face what he did .
But Campbell was unmoved , and left her tied to the stakes .
Realizing that Kent is the only suspect left , Brenner decides to question him .
He calls Sunhill but learns that she was returning to the murder scene with Kent , who also wants to see Brenner .
Brenner arrives and confronts Kent , who admits that he killed Elisabeth after she rejected him and threatened to tell his family about the affair .
He also admits he murdered Moore and made it appear as suicide in an attempt to get away with it .
Kent commits suicide by deliberately stepping on an anti - personnel mine .
As General Campbell prepares to get on the plane to accompany Elisabeth 's body to the funeral , he is confronted by Brenner , who lays the burden of his daughter 's death on the general .
Brenner tells Campbell that his betrayal of Elisabeth was what had killed her and that Kent had just put her out of her misery .
Though General Campbell threatens Brenner to keep silent or else be run out of the Army , Brenner has him court - martialed for conspiracy to conceal a crime , thus ruining the general 's public and military careers .
CAST
* John Travolta as Paul Brenner * Madeleine Stowe as Sarah Sunhill
* James Cromwell as General Campbell * Timothy Hutton as Colonel Kent * Leslie Stefanson as Elisabeth Campbell
* Daniel von Bargen as Chief Yardley * Clarence Williams III as Colonel Fowler * James Woods as Colonel Moore
* Mark Boone Jr. as Elkins
* John Beasley as Colonel Slesinger * Boyd Kestner as Captain Elby * Brad Beyer as Bransford * John Benjamin Hickey as Captain Goodson PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The General 's Daughter was directed by Simon West and produced by Mace Neufeld .
It was an adaptation of the best - selling book of the same name , written by Nelson DeMille and published in 1992 .
William Goldman did some work on the script .
Michael Douglas was originally attached to star .
Much of the film was filmed in various locations in and around Savannah , Georgia .
A love scene between Travolta and Stowe was cut from the final film .
Two key changes were made after test screenings : Travolta 's character made a stronger moral stand at the end , and it became clearer at the beginning that he was a military investigator working undercover .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
With a $ 95 million budget , the film grossed almost $ 103 million at the domestical box office and $ 150 million worldwide .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film had generally negative reviews with 22 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 89 reviews with an average rating of 4.3/10 .
The consensus is " Contrived performances and over - the - top sequences offer little real drama " .
Roger Ebert gave the film a mixed 2.5 stars out a possible 4 , describing The General 's Daughter as well - made and with credible performances , but marred by a death scene that was " so unnecessarily graphic and gruesome that by the end I felt sort of unclean . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS