CARD THROWING Card throwing is the art of throwing standard playing cards with great accuracy and/or force .
It is performed both as part of stage magic shows and as a competitive physical feat among magicians , with official records existing for longest distance thrown , fastest speed , highest throw , greatest accuracy and greatest number of cards in one minute .
HISTORY Section::::History .
First popularized in the West among stage magicians during the 1800s , the art of throwing cards is called scaling .
Techniques used among performers today are attributed to stage magicians in the late 19th Century .
The exact origins of " flying card " tricks are unknown , but Alexander Herrmann is widely attributed with first including card throwing in a major act .
He would use custom made cards , sign them , and then throw them into the audience as potential souvenirs .
The magician Howard Thurston also used card throwing as a major part of his act .
The cards that they used , however , were heavier than those commonly used today .
Many magicians commissioned specially printed cards , known as throwing cards , throwouts , scaling cards or souvenir cards to use for these purposes .
Generally , such cards featured the image and name of the magician , and often featured optical illusions , mystical images , and text and graphics from other advertisers .
Today , magicians all over the world use card throwing as parts of their act .
Ricky Jay and Rick Smith , Jr. are among the most well known people to frequently use card throwing during performance .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Playing cards and similar paper objects have very little mass and are not very aerodynamic except under certain circumstances .
Simply throwing a card with no technique ( that is , applying lateral speed only ) usually will result in it fluttering about and falling to the ground .
Achieving accuracy , distance and force with a card requires giving it both lateral speed and angular momentum ( i.e. " spin " ) along its z - axis .
The spin creates gyroscopic stabilization so that the card 's flat profile remains mostly parallel to the direction of travel and thus suffers the least possible air resistance .
There are multiple techniques for throwing cards in this manner .
The technique often attributed to Alexander Herrmann , and taught in Ricky Jay 's book Cards as Weapons ( 1977 ) , involves gripping the middle of the card horizontally between the thumb and the middle finger , while the index finger rests on the corner of the card
nearest the hand and away from the body .
The wrist is cocked inward at a 90 degree angle , then flicked briskly outward , propelling the card .
For distance and power , the technique adds motion of the forearm bending at the elbow straight outwards from a 90 degree angle simultaneous to the flicking motion of the wrist .
In another method created by Howard Thurston , the card is gripped between the first and second fingers , usually of the left hand and propelled in a similar manner .
There are also variations on both grips and throwing styles , some which depend on the type of flight the magician is attempting to achieve .
Forceful throws will usually spiral somewhat on the way to the target when thrown at long distance , since most cards are not perfectly flat .
With a given deck , the bend of the cards are usually similar enough to each other that this spiral is easily predictable , and a practiced magician can hit very small targets even at many yards away .
It is also possible to throw a card very flat at lower speeds to get the card to land in or on top of something .
Many tricks done with thrown cards are designed to not only impress with the magician 's dexterity , but work on a common theme in stage magic : the illusion of danger .
While the illusion of danger can be achieved by outright deception , another method is to play on people 's popular misconceptions .
In the case of card throwing , the magician achieves this effect by throwing the card at fragile targets such as newspaper , cigarettes , fruit , hot dogs , foam , or any other substance that the card will easily imbed in or break .
While none of these objects act like human tissue in terms of wound ballistics , the magician is counting on most audience members thinking they actually are comparable , and therefore believing he
or she has turned a harmless playing card into a deadly projectile .
RECORDS Section::::Records .
The current world record for farthest card thrown is held by Rick Smith , Jr. who threw a card 65.96 meters ( 216 feet , 4 inches ) on December 2 , 2002 .
This is also the current record for the fastest throw , clocked at 148 kilometers per hour ( 91.96 mph ) .
Previous world record holders are Ricky Jay and Jim Karol .
The current record for the highest throw is held by Rick Smith Jr. , who , on March 14 , 2015 , threw a single playing card to a height of 21.41 meters ( 70 feet , 3 inches ) at the Great Lake Science Centre in Cleveland , Ohio .
In October 2005 , Chris Linn broke the Guinness World Record for the " most one fingered playing card scales in one minute " .
To break the record , Linn had to hold a deck of playing cards in one hand and use his thumb to propel ( " scale " )
the cards from the deck a minimum distance of 12 feet .
Linn was able to scale 114 playing cards in one minute , beating the previous record of 104 playing cards set by magician Jeff McBride .
The record breaking attempt took place at Cedar Point Amusement Park in Sandusky , Ohio .
URBAN LEGEND ABOUT USE
AS
A WEAPON Section::::Urban legend about use as a weapon .
The impressive speed that magicians could throw the cards gave rise to a myth that a card could kill or seriously injure someone if thrown correctly by a person with enough force .
The book Cards as Weapons by Ricky Jay is believed to have propagated this myth even though it was originally intended to combine instruction with satire .
This myth was tested on the Discovery Channel program MythBusters , and subsequently debunked .
Mythbusters ' co - host Adam Savage was already quite familiar with the throwing card trick and was shown to be quite adept at performing it , with his maximum throwing speed being clocked at 25 miles per hour or 40 km / h .
The episode also featured Ricky Jay himself , who spoke of writing the book and admitted he is most likely responsible for the genesis of the myth .
The hosts were able to clock the speed of his throws at about 90 mph .
After failing to throw the cards into a ballistic gelatin target with enough force that would result in injury , they used an electric motor to mechanically launch a card at 150 mph .
Offering his own body as a target , host Jamie Hyneman allowed the launcher to be fired at his exposed skin from a few feet away , which only resulted in a superficial paper cut .
The hosts concluded that a playing card lacks enough mass to transfer sufficient energy to human tissue on impact .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In the video game Payday 2 , the player can select throwing cards as their throwable weapon .
* Batman 's nemesis
The Joker is known to employ weaponized playing cards , particularly in the 1992 animated TV series .
These card are usually not standard however , often shown to be made of razor sharpened steel and sometimes coated with deadly poison to increase lethality .
* Gambit ( X - Men ) is skilled in the art of card - throwing with great accuracy , which he combines with his mutant ability to " charge " objects with energy to turn the thrown cards into effective explosive weapons .
* Hisoka , a regular antagonist in the manga and anime series Hunter x Hunter , often throws razor - sharp playing cards in battle .
* Yuri of the Dirty Pair sometimes employs the " Bloody Card " – a technologically enhanced card – to attack multiple targets .
* City Hunter ( 1993 ) – features a gambling card thrower .
* Setzer , the gambling hero of Final Fantasy VI , uses a variety of card decks for weapons as well as darts and dice .
* – uses a specially designed throwing card , which appears to be bent , a possible enhancement .
* Oswald ( KOF XI ) – practices the card - throwing art called Karnöffel .
* Twisted Fate ( League of Legends ) – utilizes card throwing for all of his attacks .
* Hellsing , the Japanese horror manga , features a card - slinging sorcerer known as The Dandy Man .
* Sheena Fujibayashi ( Tales of Symphonia ) swings and strikes with tarot cards for all of her abilities and employs techniques where she empowers those cards with energy called " seals " .
*
Sneff , a playable character in Chrono Cross , is a magician who uses a deck of cards as his primary weapon .
* Seto Kaiba has been known to do this in the original Yu - Gi - Oh ! manga .
* Bullseye , from Marvel Comics , kills or injures several people ( including Elektra ) with a thrown Ace of Spades .
* Card throwing was one of the murder techniques used in the episode " " .
*
In Now You See Me ( 2013 ) , one of the magicians , Jack Wilder , proves to be a skilled card thrower .
During a show , using a playing card , he cuts in half a pencil held by an audience member and later uses the technique to distract the FBI agent pursuing him .
Also , in the movies ' sequel , Now You See Me 2 ( 2016 ) , The Four Horsemen , a group of magicians , steal a chip attached to a playing card in front of guards by throwing the card to each other while the guards are n't looking .
*
In Smokin ' Aces , stage magician Buddy " Aces " Israel manages to temporarily incapacitate his bodyguard Ivy by striking him in the eye with a thrown playing card .
*
In Jonathan Creek there is an episode where Jonathan uses his skills gained by reading the aforementioned book by Ricky Jay ; to incapacitate a potential shooter long enough for him to be apprehended by police SEE ALSO * Card manipulation REFERENCES