TAIL GUNNER
A tail gunner or rear gunner is a crewman on a military aircraft who functions as a gunner defending against enemy fighter attacks from the rear , or " tail " , of the plane .
The tail gunner operates a flexible machine gun emplacement in the tail end of the aircraft with an unobstructed view toward the rear of the aircraft .
While the term tail gunner is usually associated with a crewman inside a gun turret , the first tail guns were operated from open apertures within the aircraft 's fuselage , like in the Scarff ring mechanism used in the British Handley Page V/1500 ( a 1918 aircraft ) , and also , in the most evolved variants of this type of air - to - air anti - aircraft defense , they may also be operated by remote control from another part of the aircraft , like in the American B-52 bombers ( an aircraft first introduced in 1955 but still in service ) .
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Section::::General description .
The tail gun armament and arrangement varied between countries .
During World War II , most United States Army Air Forces heavy bomber designs such as the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and Boeing
B-29 Superfortress used a fixed gunner position with the guns themselves in a separate mounting covering an approximately 90-degree rear arc .
Typical armament was two 0.50 inch M2 Browning machine guns .
In contrast , Royal Air Force heavy bombers such as the Avro Lancaster and Handley Page Halifax used a powered turret capable of 180-degree rotation containing the tail gunner and four 0.303 inch Browning machine guns .
A similar arrangement was used in the American B-24 Liberator heavy bomber ( but with two 0.50 inch heavy machine guns . )
Most British turrets were manufactured by two companies Nash & Thompson and Boulton & Paul Ltd and the same turret model was fitted to a number of different aircraft .
In many German and Italian aircraft , and smaller ground attack aircraft and dive bombers , no tail gunner was used but a dorsal gun behind the cockpit or ventral gun along the belly of the aircraft replaced the tail gunner position covering the tail .
This position was blocked by the fuselage but allowed better weight distribution .
The tail gunner 's role was mainly as a lookout for attacking enemy fighters , particularly in British bombers operating at night .
As these aircraft operated individually instead of being part of a bombing formation , the bombers ' first reaction to an attacking night fighter was to engage in radical evasive maneuvers such as a corkscrew roll ; firing guns in defense was of secondary importance .
The British slang term for tail gunners was " Tail - end Charlies " , while in the Luftwaffe they were called Heckschwein ( " tail - end pigs " ) .
In the autumn of 1944 , the British began deploying Lancasters fitted with the Automatic Gun - Laying Turret , which was fitted with a 3 GHz ( 9.1 cm ) radar .
The image from the radar 's cathode ray tube was projected onto the turret 's gunsight , allowing the gunner to fire on targets in complete darkness , with corrections for lead and bullet drop being automatically computed .
Due to it having the frequency that it did , it might potentially be spotted by any Luftwaffe night fighter fitted with the Funk - Gerät 350 Naxos radar detection system , which was primarily used to home in on the earlier H2S bombing radar system 's emissions .
One important development for the Luftwaffe that never made it onto its larger night fighters or strategic bomber designs , would have been the Borsig firm 's " quadmount " , hydraulically - powered Hecklafette HL 131V manned tail turret , fitted with a quartet of the firm 's own MG 131 machine guns .
Prototype examples of the HL 131V were trialed in the late spring and summer of 1943 on a trio of He 177A-3 examples set aside as the V32 through V34 prototypes .
This innovative design never made it to production status , only existing as a series of engineering department mockups with Heinkel and Junkers , among others ( for their aircraft designs that were intended to mount them ) and as the aforementioned working prototypes .
The HL 131V turret 's design was advanced for a German - origin manned emplacement , using hydraulic drive to both elevate the turret 's side - mount gunmount elevation units through a + /- 60º vertical arc either side of level , with a capability for horizontal traverse ( of the entire turret ) of some 100º to either side , all at a top traverse angular speed of 60º per second .
FIRST AND LAST COMBAT USAGE Section::::First and last combat usage .
The first aircraft to ever have incorporated a tail gunner position was the Sikorsky Ilya Muromets bomber , during World War I and the last years of the Russian Empire .
The Ilya Muromets prototype flew for the first time in 1913 , with no guns on board and no rear position for the crew .
When the war broke out , in 1914 , only a few Ilya Muromets copies were built , but increasing numbers were required because of the war effort .
After having entered the mass - production phase and having seen combat all along the first year of war against the fighter planes of the German Empire , a rear - defending position appeared to the Imperial Russian Air Service to be more and more vital to protect both the plane and its crewmen .
This is how , on March 1916 , saw light of day the model S-25 ( variant Geh-2 ) of the Sikorsky Ilya Muromets bomber plane .
This aircraft was the first in history to include on its ending tail area a gunner position .
Mass - production of Ilya Muromets bombers , all in all variants included , lasted in 1918 with a total of more than 80 copies .
Those Ilya Muromets copies that served after the Russian Revolution , served with soviet red star insignias in the Red Air Force .
Another example of a World War I era aircraft equipped with a tail gunner position was the British Handley Page V/1500 , but it did enter service at the very end of the war , during the months of October and November 1918 , and finally never saw any kind of combat action .
After that , during the 1920s and 30s , a few more military aircraft designs came with a gunner position on their tails , like the 1920s British Vickers Virginia ( on service as of 1924 ) or the 1930s Japanese flying boat Kawanishi H3 K ( on service as of 1930 ) .
One of the first aircraft to operate a fully enclosed tail gun turret was the British Armstrong Whitworth Whitley .
After a first flight in 1936 , the British Whitleys were in service until the end of World War II ( 1939–1945 ) .
In the overall history of its use in combat , the tail gunner was most commonly used during that conflict , World War II , and in almost every aircraft model in which it was fitted , the tail gun position was constituted of an enclosed compartment inhabited by the gunner .
During World War II , this extreme tail compartment could consist , generally : * in an inside fixed gunner position , operating the articulated mount of autocannon or machine gun fire ( usually one or two weapons ) , like in the Japanese Mitsubishi G4 M bomber plane ( one Oerlikon 20 mm autocannon ) or the American B-17 and B-29 bombers ( a mount of two 0.50 Browning M2 machine guns ) , or ; * in a hydraulically or electrically powered and fully enclosed gun turret , usually rotating horizontally and mounting one , two or more automatic firearms , like in the advanced variants of the American B-24 bomber ( different turret models , all equipped with two 0.50 Browning M2 ) , or in the British bombers Avro Lancaster ( a Nash & Thompson FN-20 turret with four Browning .303
Mark II machine guns ) and Handley Page Halifax ( a Boulton & Paul Type E Mk III turret , also mounting four 0.50 Browning M2 ) .
In the last years of the war , the American B-29 bombers were equipped with a tail gun position in which the gunner still had a direct view on his target while operating his synchronized weapons , but some other gun positions of this particular model of Boeing bomber were , for the first time in an aircraft , operated from other parts of the plane , each one spotting the target by means of a periscopic viewing system .
In the years that followed the war , more and more subsequent tail gun positions in aircraft inherited this viewing and sight method , ending afterwards with added radar sights and radar targeting systems , which had been early tested during the World War II period ( like in the radar - aimed FN121 turret fitted to some Lancaster and Halifax bombers in 1944 , see above ) .
The tail gunner was mainly last used in combat during the Vietnam War , on large bombers .
At this point , the position has become largely obsolete due to advancements in long - range air combat weapons such as air - to - air missiles as well as modern detection and countermeasures against such armaments .
On 18 December 1972 , during Operation Linebacker II , USAF B-52 Stratofortresses of the Strategic Air Command conducted a major bombing campaign against North Vietnam .
As the bombers approached the target , SAMs ( Surface To Air Missiles ) exploded around the Stratofortresses .
After completing its bombing run , callsign Brown III was warned of Vietnam People 's Air Force ( NVAF - North Vietnamese Air Force ) MiGs .
Brown III 's tail gunner , SSGT Samuel O. Turner , shot down a MiG-21 interceptor , becoming the first tail gunner to shoot down an enemy aircraft since the Korean War .
On 24 December 1972 , during the same bombing campaign , B-52 Stratofortress Diamond Lil was attacking railroad yards at Thái Nguyên when the tail gunner detected a MiG-21 away climbing to intercept .
The aircraft took evasive action and dropped chaff and flares while the gunner fired around 800 rounds from 2,000 yards , causing the MiG-21 to fall , on fire .
That incident was the last tail gunner to shoot down an enemy aircraft with machine guns during wartime .
The last combat usage of tail gunners by the United States was in 1991 , during the Gulf War .
During the war , a missile struck a B-52 by locking onto the tail gunner 's radar .
It is disputed whether or not it was friendly fire by an F-4 Phantom or an enemy missile fired from a MiG-29 .
On 1 October 1991 , Master Sergeant Tom Lindsey became the last USAF tail gunner to serve on a B-52 sortie .
LIST OF AIRCRAFT WITH TAIL GUN POSITIONS Section::::List of aircraft with tail gun positions .
This is a list of aircraft with tail gun positions .
FRANCE
* Breguet Br.521 Bizerte – maritime patrol flying boat GERMANY
* Blohm und Voss Bv 238 – transport flying boat ( some versions only )
* Dornier Do 24 – maritime patrol flying boat
*
Gotha Go 242 – transport * Junkers Ju 290 –
long range patrol / transport
* Heinkel He 177 – heavy bomber JAPAN
* Kawanishi H3 K – patrol flying boat ( open tail gunner position )
* Kawanishi H6 K – patrol flying boat ( closed gun turret position , as all the following )
* Kawanishi H8 K – patrol flying boat
* Mitsubishi G4 M – medium bomber * Mitsubishi Ki-67 – medium bomber * Nakajima G8N – heavy bomber * Yokosuka H5Y –
patrol flying boat NETHERLANDS * Fokker
T.V
UNITED KINGDOM
*
Armstrong Whitworth Whitley ( introduced 1937 ) – medium bomber ; initially equipped with a manually operated tail turret featuring a single Lewis gun , it successively received 2- and then 4-gun Nash & Thompson turrets .
* Avro Lancaster ( introduced 1942 ) – heavy bomber ;
4-gun Nash & Thompson tail turrets : some late - war aircraft received Village Inn automatic radar aiming and others were fitted with a Rose turret .
* Avro Manchester ( introduced 1940 ) – heavy twin engine bomber .
* Blackburn Iris ( introduced 1929 ) –
patrol flying boat ; Lewis guns on a Scarff ring in the extreme tail
* Handley Page Halifax ( introduced 1940 ) – heavy bomber ; 4-gun
Boulton Paul tail turret *
Handley Page V/1500 ( introduced 1918 ) – heavy bomber ; Lewis guns on a Scarff ring in the extreme tail * Short Singapore ( introduced 1935 ) – patrol flying boat ; Lewis guns on a Scarff ring in the extreme tail * Supermarine Stranraer ( introduced 1937 ) – patrol flying boat * Short Sunderland ( introduced 1938 ) – maritime patrol and anti - submarine flying boat ; 4-gun Nash & Thompson tail turret * Vickers Virginia ( introduced 1924 ) – – heavy bomber ; Lewis guns on a Scarff ring in the extreme tail
* Vickers Wellington-
( introduced 1938 )
medium bomber fitted with two Browning M1919s in the tail turret
* Vickers Windsor ( first flew 1943 ) – prototype heavy bomber ; tail gun aiming position controlling barbette - mounted Hispano 20 mm cannon in the rear of the engine nacelles .
UNITED STATES
* Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress – heavy bomber ; fixed tailgun position from the B-17E version onwards
* Boeing B-29 Superfortress – heavy bomber
* Boeing B-47 Stratojet – Cold War heavy bomber
* Boeing B-50 Superfortress – Cold War heavy bomber
* Boeing B-52 Stratofortress – Cold War heavy bomber
* Consolidated B-24 Liberator – heavy bomber ; * Convair B-36 Peacemaker – Cold War
heavy bomber * Convair
B-58 Hustler – Cold War supersonic bomber
* Douglas XB-19 – heavy bomber * Douglas B-23 Dragon – medium bomber ; * Martin B-26 Marauder – medium bomber
* North American B-25 Mitchell – medium bomber
USSR / RUSSIA
* Sikorsky S-25 Ilya Muromets
* Antonov An-12 * Ilyushin
Il-28
*
Ilyushin Il-40 * Ilyushin Il-102 * Ilyushin Il-76 * Myasishchev M-4 * Petlyakov Pe-8
* Tupolev Tu-4 * Tupolev Tu-14
* Tupolev Tu-16
* Tupolev Tu-22 * Tupolev Tu-22 M
* Tupolev Tu-95 /
Tu-142
SEE ALSO * Ball turret * Joseph McCarthy ( " Tail - gunner Joe " )
* Wallace McIntosh REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* BBC People 's War – Bomber aircrew story