SUPER BOWL
XLV Super Bowl XLV was an American football game between the American Football Conference ( AFC ) champion Pittsburgh Steelers and the National Football Conference ( NFC ) champion Green Bay Packers to decide the National Football League ( NFL ) champion for the 2010 season .
The Packers defeated the Steelers by the score of 31–25 .
The game was played on February 6 , 2011 at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington , Texas , the first time the Super Bowl was played in the Dallas –
Fort Worth area .
Unlike most other Super Bowls , this game featured two title - abundant franchises : coming into the game , the Packers held the most NFL championships with 12 ( 9 league championships prior to the Super Bowl era and 3 Super Bowl championships ) , while the Steelers held the most Super Bowl championships with 6 .
The Packers entered their fifth Super Bowl in team history , and became the first number 6-seeded team in the NFC to compete in the Super Bowl , after posting a 10–6 regular season record .
The Steelers finished the regular season with a 12–4 record , and advanced to a league - tying 8th Super Bowl appearance .
Green Bay dominated most of the first half of Super Bowl XLV , jumping to a 21–3 lead before Pittsburgh cut it down to 21–10 just before halftime .
Then after the teams exchanged touchdowns , the Steelers pulled within 28–25 midway through the fourth quarter with wide receiver Mike Wallace 's 25-yard touchdown reception from quarterback Ben Roethlisberger and a two - point conversion .
But the Packers answered with Mason Crosby 's 23-yard field goal with 2:07 remaining , and then prevented the Steelers from scoring on their final drive of the game .
Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers was named Super Bowl MVP , completing 24 of 39 passes for 304 yards and three touchdowns .
The broadcast of Super Bowl XLV on Fox averaged about 111 million viewers , breaking the record for the most - watched program in American television history .
The game 's attendance was 103,219 , just short of the Super Bowl record 103,985 set in Super Bowl XIV at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , California .
The halftime show featured the American hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas , with additional performances by Usher and Slash .
BACKGROUND HOST
SELECTION PROCESS Section::::Background .
Section::::Host selection process .
Three NFL cities presented bids for the game :
*
In January 2007 , Super Bowl VI MVP Roger Staubach was named chairman of the North Texas Super Bowl Bid Committee , heading the Metroplex 's bid effort .
The bid gathered the support of the cities of Arlington and Dallas .
*
On January 31 , 2007 , the city of Indianapolis , led by Colts owner Jim Irsay and Indianapolis Mayor Bart Peterson , officially announced details about their intentions to bid for Super Bowl XLV .
The site would have been Lucas Oil Stadium , which opened in 2008 .
They were eventually awarded Super Bowl XLVI .
*
On February 21 , 2007 , the Glendale City Council came to a consensus to prepare a bid to host Super Bowl XLV .
University of Phoenix Stadium was already scheduled to host Super Bowl XLII in 2008 .
NFL owners voted to select the North Texas site on May 22 , 2007 .
TEAMS PITTSBURGH STEELERS Section::::Teams .
Section::::Pittsburgh Steelers .
The Pittsburgh Steelers finished the 2010 season with a 12–4 record .
They earned the AFC North division title , and the second seed in the AFC and advanced to their 8th Super Bowl , tying the Dallas Cowboys ' record of most Super Bowl appearances .
After missing the first four games of the year on suspension for violating the NFL 's personal conduct policy ( during which the Steelers went 3–1 ) , quarterback Ben Roethlisberger returned for his seventh season as the Steelers starting quarterback , finishing the season with 3,200 yards and 17 touchdowns , with just five interceptions , for a 97 passer rating .
He also rushed for 176 yards and two touchdowns .
The team 's top receiver was Mike Wallace who caught 60 passes for 1,257 yards and 10 touchdowns , giving him a 21 yards per catch average .
Other reliable options included 13-year veteran Hines Ward ( 59 receptions for 755 yards and 5 touchdowns ) , the Steelers all - time leading receiver , and tight end Heath Miller who caught 42 passes for 512 yards .
Halfback Rashard Mendenhall was the team 's leading rusher , gaining 1,273 yards and 13 touchdowns while also catching 23 passes .
The line was led by rookie center Maurkice Pouncey , the Steelers only pro bowl selection on offense .
However , Pouncey was injured in the AFC championship game and would be inactive for Super Bowl XLV .
The Steelers had one of the league 's top defenses , leading the NFL in sacks ( 48 ) , and fewest points ( 14.5 ) and rushing yards ( 62.8 ) allowed per game , while ranking second in fewest total yards ( 276.8 ) .
The line was anchored by pro bowl end Brett Keisel .
The Steelers also had four excellent linebackers : LaMarr Woodley , James Harrison , James Farrior , and Lawrence Timmons .
For the third consecutive year , Woodley and Harrison each recorded at least 10 sacks .
Woodley also forced three fumbles and Harrison forced six .
Farrior had 109 total tackles and six sacks .
Timmons led the team with 135 total tackles , while also recording three sacks and two interceptions .
The secondary was led by pro bowl safety Troy Polamalu , who won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award , tying his career - best seven interceptions and returning them for 101 yards and a touchdown .
Coach Mike Tomlin , already the youngest coach to ever win a Super Bowl , became the youngest coach ever to make it to the Super Bowl twice at age 38 .
The Pittsburgh Steelers had also accomplished going to the Super Bowl in five different decades ; and , in every decade since the post AFL - NFL merger .
1970s : 1975 , 1976 , and 1979 .
1980s : 1980 .
1990s : 1996 .
2000s
: 2006 and 2009 .
2010s : 2011 .
GREEN BAY PACKERS
Section::::Green Bay Packers .
The Green Bay Packers finished the season with a 10–6 record and became the first number 6-seeded team in the NFC to compete in the Super Bowl .
They are only the second number 6 seeded team to reach the Super Bowl , with the only other number 6 seed to accomplish this feat being the Pittsburgh Steelers , who won Super Bowl XL following the 2005 season .
Green Bay also joined the 2005 Steelers as the only teams ever to defeat the top three seeded teams on the road in the playoffs .
In order to secure their fifth Super Bowl bid they defeated their longtime rivals , the Chicago Bears , in the NFC Championship Game at Soldier Field .
The offense was led by quarterback Aaron Rodgers , who was in his third year as a starter after taking over for the team 's all - time leading passer Brett Favre .
Rodgers finished the season completing 65.7 % of his passes for 3,922 yards and 28 touchdowns , with only eleven interceptions , giving him his second consecutive season with a triple digit passer rating ( 101.2 ) .
He was also a good rusher , adding 356 yards and 4 touchdowns on the ground .
His top target was pro bowl receiver Greg Jennings , who caught 76 passes for 1,265 yards and 12 touchdowns , giving him a 16.6 yards per catch average while also ranking him fourth in the NFL in yards and second in touchdown catches .
Other reliable targets included receivers James Jones ( 50 receptions , 676 yards , 5 touchdowns ) , Donald Driver ( 51 receptions , 565 yards , 4 touchdowns ) , and Jordy Nelson ( 45 receptions , 582 yards , 496 kick return yards ) .
The Packers lost star tight end Jermichael Finley ( 21 receptions 301 yards , 1 touchdown ) to injury in week five who was their leading receiver at the time .
The Packers ground game was crippled by injuries , especially the Week 1 loss of Ryan Grant , who had rushed for over 1,200 yards in each of the last two seasons .
In his absence , the team relied prominently on Brandon Jackson , who rushed for 703 yards and caught 43 passes for 342 , and fullback John Kuhn , who added 281 yards on the ground .
The team 's offensive line was anchored by pro bowl tackle Chad Clifton , an 11-year veteran .
The Packers defense ranked second in the league in fewest points allowed per game ( 15 ) .
The line was led by Cullen Jenkins , who recorded seven sacks in just eleven games , and 338-pound defensive tackle B. J. Raji , who had 6.5 .
The linebackers were led by pro bowler Clay Matthews and A. J. Hawk .
Matthews ranked fourth in the NFL with 13.5 sacks , while Hawk led the team in combined tackles ( 111 ) and intercepted three passes .
Three of the Packers starters in the secondary had made the pro bowl .
Tramon Williams led the team with a career - high 6 interceptions , while adding 326 punt return yards .
Other pro bowl selections included safety Nick Collins ( 4 interceptions and 70 combined tackles ) and hard hitting 13-year veteran cornerback Charles Woodson , who recorded 92 total tackles and forced five fumbles , while also intercepting two passes .
The Packers entered the Super Bowl never having trailed by more than 7 points at any point during the season — a feat that had never been accomplished during a complete season in the Super Bowl era .
The last team to complete a season with this distinction was the Detroit Lions in 1962 .
In the Super Bowl game itself , the Packers never trailed .
Of note , this was Green Bay 's first Super Bowl against an AFC team that was not one of the " Original 8 " American Football League franchises .
The Packers had played Kansas City , Oakland , New England , and Denver in their four previous Super Bowl match - ups , winning against all but Denver .
The Steelers , like the Packers , predated the AFL 's launch , having begun play in 1933 ( 12 years after the Packers joined the NFL after two years as an independent team ) , and moved to the AFC in 1970 as a result of the AFL – NFL merger to even out the two conferences .
PLAYOFFS Section::::Playoffs .
Pittsburgh advanced to the Super Bowl with two close wins in the playoffs .
After a first - round bye , the Steelers defeated their division rival , the number 5 seeded Baltimore Ravens 31–24 , with Ben Roethlisberger 's 58-yard completion to Antonio Brown on third down and 19 setting up Rashard Mendenhall 's game winning 2-yard touchdown run with 1:33 left in the game .
Roethlisberger finished with 226 passing yards and two touchdowns , while the defense forced three turnovers and sacked Baltimore QB Joe Flacco five times , three by James Harrison .
Then the Steelers defeated the number 6
seeded New York Jets 24–19 in the AFC Championship Game .
Pittsburgh seemed to be in complete control at first , taking a 24–0 lead in the first half .
Jets quarterback Mark Sanchez rallied his team back , cutting the score to 24–10 going into the fourth quarter .
The Jets then drove to the Steelers 2-yard line on a 17-play drive , but the Pittsburgh defense made a key stand , keeping them out of the end zone on four consecutive plays near the goal - line to force a turnover .
New York subsequently forced a safety and scored a touchdown with just over three minutes left , but Roethlisberger 's 14-yard completions to Brown and Heath Miller allowed Pittsburgh to hang onto the ball until time expired .
Mendenhall finished with 121 rushing yards and a touchdown , along with 2 catches for 32 yards .
Green Bay started off their postseason with a 21–16 win over the number 3 seeded Philadelphia Eagles after Tramon Williams intercepted a pass from Michael Vick in the end zone with less than a minute left to play .
Aaron Rodgers threw for 180 yards and three touchdowns while James Starks , who only rushed for 101 yards during the season , rushed for 123 yards in the game .
The Packers then went to Georgia , where the top - seeded 13–3 Atlanta Falcons were waiting .
Although the Falcons took advantage of an early turnover and a kick return touchdown to build a 14–7 lead , Green Bay quickly buried the Falcons with 35 straight points .
By the end of the first half , the Packers held a 28–14 lead , and went on to win comfortably , 48–21 .
Rodgers was nearly perfect , completing 31 of 36 passes for 366 yards and three touchdowns , while adding another score on the ground .
Jordy Nelson and James Jones both had touchdown catches , while John Kuhn added scores by air and ground and Tramon Williams returned one of his two interceptions 70 yards for a touchdown .
Green Bay 's special teams unit never had to punt the ball , while Mason Crosby contributed two field goals .
Green Bay next faced the number 2 Chicago Bears in the NFC Championship Game , defeating them 21–14 .
This time Rodgers had a rougher day than his previous two games , throwing no touchdown passes and being intercepted twice .
But he still threw for 244 yards and scored a 1-yard touchdown run , while Starks added 74 rushing yards , including a touchdown run in the second quarter .
Meanwhile , Green Bay 's defense knocked Chicago quarterback Jay Cutler out of the game and intercepted three passes , one of which was returned 18 yards for a touchdown by B. J. Raji .
The other two were made by rookie Sam Shields , who recorded his second interception near his own end zone with 37 seconds left to put the game away .
SUPER BOWL PREGAME NOTES Section::::Super Bowl pregame notes .
Both teams are known to have sizable fanbases that often travel to away games , largely due to the home games themselves having decades - long waiting lists .
In August 2008 , ESPN.com ranked the two teams tied as having the best fans in the NFL .
ESPN 's own John Clayton , a Pittsburgh native , broke the tie in favor of the Steelers .
As the Packers were the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams , the team elected to wear their green jerseys .
Although both teams are known to wear their colored jerseys at home and have rarely worn white at home ( the Packers wore white at home for two games in 1989 ) , the Packers decision contrasted with the Steelers decision as the home team in Super Bowl XL to wear white jerseys .
Both the 2005 Steelers and 2010 Packers were number 6 seeded teams when they reached the Super Bowl , forcing them to play all of their postseason games on the road and wearing their respective white jerseys in those games .
The retractable roof at Cowboys Stadium was closed for the game .
A severe winter storm blanketed the Dallas - Fort Worth area in hard ice and snow the week before the game , threatening to disrupt game preparations .
Snow fell from the roof of Cowboys Stadium 's East end on February 4 , injuring six people .
Over 3,000 tickets were sold to watch the game in the stadium 's East Plaza , which experienced the falling ice tragedy earlier in the week .
However , the snow had melted by game time and fans who paid $ 200 per ticket were allowed to watch the game outside Cowboys Stadium , in the open air , as the weather turned from sleet to sun .
Since the Steelers and Packers were two of the six teams that did not have cheerleaders during the 2010 NFL season ( the others being the Chicago Bears , Detroit Lions , Cleveland Browns , and New York Giants ) , this marked the first Super Bowl without cheerleaders .
Packers lineman , Bryan Bulaga , became the youngest player to start in a Super Bowl , at the age of 21 years and 322 days old .
Steelers center Maurkice Pouncey would have been the youngest player ( 21 years , 197 days ) , but he could not play because of a high ankle sprain .
POSSIBLE PRESIDENTIAL APPEARANCE Section::::Possible Presidential appearance .
During a press conference on January 19 , 2011 , President Obama ( a longtime Chicago Bears fan ) said he would attend Super Bowl XLV if Chicago defeated Green Bay , saying " If Chicago wins , I 'm going no doubt " .
Chicago ended up losing the NFC Championship game a few days later on January 23 to Green Bay 21–14 .
In a post - game locker - room speech by Green Bay Packers corner Charles Woodson he poked fun at the President 's comment saying " The President do n't want to come watch us at the Super Bowl , guess what ?
We 'll go see him " ( implying that Green Bay would win the Super Bowl and visit the White House as the winning team does each year ; a statement that would come true ) .
Woodson then broke the Packers meeting with a team cheer of " White House ! " .
On January 26 President Obama visited Green Bay and was greeted by Mayor Jim Schmitt and Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker who presented the President with two Green Bay Packers Jerseys .
The first had Obama 's name on the back with the number 1 and the second was an autographed Charles Woodson jersey with the message
" See you at the White House .
Go Packers ! "
written on the back by Woodson .
On August 12 , 2011 , Woodson 's promise came true and Packers visited the White House and met with President Obama .
Their visit was delayed because of the NFL lockout and took place a day before the Packers first preseason game against the Cleveland Browns .
President Obama was presented with a Packers jersey with the number 1 and the words Commander - In - Chief on the back .
He was also presented with a stock share of the Packers organization , thus making him a part owner of the Packers .
When Obama jokingly asked if this meant he could trade Aaron Rodgers to the Bears , Woodson responded that Obama was just " a minority owner . "
Obama , who is also a Steelers fan and considers the team to be his second - favorite after the Bears , openly supported the Steelers two years earlier in Super Bowl XLIII after the Rooney family helped with his campaigning work and later appointed Steelers chairman Dan Rooney , an ethnic Irish Catholic , the U.S. Ambassador to Ireland .
He did not attend the game ; instead , he hosted a 100-person Super Bowl party at the White House .
Attendees included his family , elected leaders from Pennsylvania and Wisconsin , DNC member Andres Lopez of Puerto Rico , Buffalo , New York mayor Byron Brown ,
Buffalo deputy mayor Steve Casey , Newark , New Jersey mayor Cory Booker , Jennifer Lopez and her husband Marc Anthony , both actors / singers , ESPN columnist Michael Wilbon , and Tony Kornheiser .
Although the sitting president did not attend the game , former president and former Texas governor George W. Bush was present , along with his wife Laura and former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice .
LOCAL COMMEMORATION Section::::Local commemoration .
From June 15 , 2010 , through February 6 , 2011 , the 30-mile section of Interstate 30 between Dallas and Fort Worth along which
Cowboys Stadium is situated had been temporarily designated as the " Tom Landry Super Bowl Highway " in commemoration of Super Bowl XLV .
The former Dallas - Fort Worth Turnpike is normally known as the " Tom Landry Highway " in honor of former Dallas Cowboys coach Tom Landry .
LOGO Section::::Logo .
While past Super Bowl games used their own unique logo designs that changed yearly and featured imagery which reflected the host city , Super Bowl XLV introduced a new , generic design for the game 's logo .
It incorporates an image of the Vince Lombardi Trophy sitting atop the traditional Roman numerals used to denote each edition , with a stylized image of the host stadium shown in the background .
It was introduced as part of a new , standardized branding scheme for the NFL 's postseason games , which also saw the redesign of the conference championship trophies .
The only changes made to the logo for future Super Bowls have been to change the number and the stadium depicted .
Super Bowl 50 deviated slightly from the standard design to emphasize the game 's " golden anniversary " , featuring the number " 50 " in large gold numbering on each side of the trophy rather than below it in Roman numerals ; this modified layout , but with Roman numerals , has since been used for subsequent Super Bowl games .
BROADCASTING
TELEVISION
UNITED STATES
Section::::Broadcasting .
Section::::Television .
Section::::United States .
Fox Sports televised the game in the United States , with Joe Buck as the play - by - play announcer and Troy Aikman , himself a three - time Super Bowl winner as a Dallas Cowboys quarterback , as the color analyst .
Mike Pereira joined Buck and Aikman in the broadcast booth to comment on instant replay reviews , while Pam Oliver and Chris Myers served as sideline reporters .
The pre - game show featured the Fox NFL Sunday crew of host Curt Menefee and a group of analysts with extensive Super Bowl experiences of their own : Terry Bradshaw ( 4 time Super Bowl winning QB with the Pittsburgh Steelers ) , Howie Long ( one - time Super Bowl winning defensive end with the then - Los Angeles Raiders ) , Michael Strahan ( one - time Super Bowl winning defensive end with the NY Giants ) and Jimmy Johnson ( two - time Super Bowl winning head coach with the Cowboys ) .
They were joined by a variety of other commentators .
Five days prior to the game , Immigration and Customs Enforcement , along with the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York , seized and shut down several websites that had provided access to pirated Internet television feeds of NFL games .
With an average US audience of 111 million viewers , this was the most - watched Super Bowl as well as the most - watched program of any kind in American television history , beating the previous record of 106.5 million viewers for Super Bowl XLIV .
An estimated 162.9 million total viewers watched all or part of the game .
The game drew a national household Nielsen rating of 46.0 and a 69 share .
It drew a 59.7 local rating in both Milwaukee ( WITI ) and Pittsburgh ( WPGH ) , the second - highest local rating for a Super Bowl after the 63.0 that Super Bowl XX drew in Chicago .
In the host market of Dallas - Fort Worth ( KDFW ) , the game drew a 53.7 rating .
The Steelers also became the second team to appear on Super Bowls on all four major networks , after the Denver Broncos .
The Steelers appeared previously on four NBC - aired Super Bowls ( IX , XIII , XXX , XLIII ) , two CBS - aired Super Bowls ( X , XIV ) , and one ABC - aired Super Bowl ( XL ) .
Fox 's lead - out program was an episode of Glee titled " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " .
COMMERCIALS Section::::Commercials .
By September 15 , 2010 , Fox had sold 90 % of all available slots ; all slots were completely sold out by October .
The price of an advertisement began at US$ 3,000,000 .
Pepsi - Cola returned after a one - year retreat with three ads for their Pepsi Max drink , which has been named as the official soft drink of the NFL .
Pepsi 's Frito - Lay brand also advertised Doritos .
Both brands had their advertisements created by web users as part of the annual USA Today Super Bowl Ad Meter contest , which offers a prize of US $ 5 million .
In addition , regular purchasers Anheuser - Busch InBev , GoDaddy.com , Coca - Cola , CareerBuilder.com , and E*TRADE purchased advertisements ; InBev advertised Stella Artois imported beer for the first time in the Super Bowl in addition to its usual Budweiser and Bud Light advertisements .
Hyundai , Mercedes - Benz , Volkswagen and Audi also advertised , as did General Motors , who returned for the first time since their bankruptcy with advertisements for the Chevrolet Cruze , Camaro , Silverado and Volt .
Chrysler purchased a 2-minute - long advertisement for its Chrysler 200 featuring Eminem .
Advertisements for 15 films were shown during the Pre - Game , Game , and Post - Game .
INTERNATIONAL TELECASTS Section::::International telecasts .
NFL International provided television coverage for viewers outside of North America , with Bob Papa and Joe Theismann calling the English language feed .
The game was shown live on the following channels :
* Asia : All Sports Network .
DragonTV , G - Sports , GDTV Sports , BTV Sports , CNTV 5
+ ( online ) , Sina TV ( online ) , QQLive ( online ) , . One HD & Network Ten .
In addition it was also broadcast live on ESPN Australia .
CTV in English ( using the FOX feed ) and RDS in French .
As in past years , CTV exercised its simultaneous substitution rights over American stations carrying the game on Canadian cable and satellite providers .
ESPN America , in addition to the following local broadcasters : Puls 4 .
Prime Sport , BeTV .
TV3+/TV3 + HD .
Nelonen Pro 1 . W9 ( audience : 300,000 , share : 8.6 % ) .
ARD ( audience : 970,000 ) ,
Sport1
+ .
* ' and ' : Sport 1 .
* Stöð2Sport La7 , Dahlia TV .
Sport 5 .
NRK ( With the FOX feed and reactions from experts in studio during commercial breaks .
The Bridgestone Halftime Show was also broadcast . )
Polsat Sport .
SportTV .
NTV
Plus .
Šport TV 1 .
Canal+ .
TV10 .
SSF .
* '
and ' : BBC One
( audience : 1.01 m ) ,
BBC One HD , Sky Sports and Sky Sports HD .
* Latin America : ESPN Latin America and Fox Sports Latin America .
BandSports , Band and ESPN Brasil .
Azteca 7 and Canal 5 . ESPN .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
Westwood One
broadcast Super Bowl XLV across the United States and Canada , with play - by - play announcer Kevin Harlan ( calling his first Super Bowl for the network ) and color analyst Boomer Esiason .
Univision Radio carried a Spanish language feed for its stations throughout the US .
The flagship stations for each team also carried the game with their respective local announcers :
* The Packers Radio Network via WTAQ , WTAQ - FM and WIXX in Green Bay and WTMJ in Milwaukee , with Wayne Larrivee and Larry McCarren announcing .
*
The Pittsburgh Steelers Radio Network via WDVE and WBGG in Pittsburgh , with Bill Hillgrove and Tunch Ilkin announcing .
In the United Kingdom , BBC Radio 5 Live carried radio coverage with Darren Fletcher and Greg Brady announcing .
Sirius XM Satellite Radio carried 14 feeds in ten languages to Sirius subscribers , as well as to XM subscribers with the " Best of Sirius " package .
In addition to the Westwood One and local team broadcasts , Sirius carried the following international feeds : Eldorado ESPN ( Portuguese ) SMG ( Chinese ) Viasat Sport ( Danish ) W9 ( French ) ARD
( German ) Chello ( Hungarian ) NHK ( Japanese ) TV Azteca ( Spanish ) Prime Sport ( Dutch )
NTV Plus
( Russian ) Canal+
Spain ( Spanish ) BBC Radio 5 Live ( English ) FieldPass , the subscription Internet radio service provided by the league at NFL.com , also carried most of these feeds .
Due to contractual restrictions , only Sirius XM and FieldPass were permitted to carry the local team broadcasts along with WTAQ , WIXX , WTMJ , WDVE and WBGG , with the teams ' other network radio affiliates instead airing the Westwood One feed .
ATTENDANCE Section::::Attendance .
Cowboys Stadium installed 15,000 temporary seats and utilized its standing room to increase its capacity to over 105,000 fans .
If the stadium had been filled to capacity ( its record for an NFL game is 105,121 spectators ) , it would have set a record for Super Bowl attendance , breaking the previous record of 103,985 fans for Super Bowl XIV in the Rose Bowl ; however the actual attendance of 103,219 fell 766 fans short .
League officials had indicated that they would also count spectators watching the game on large television screens from outside the stadium in the tally , which generally is not allowed in official attendance counts .
However , Super Bowl XLV was the first Super Bowl game to break the 100,000 threshold in attendance since Super Bowl XXI in 1987 .
Due to numerous delays , 1,250 temporary seats were n't ready in time for the game .
According to a police officer standing near the affected area , the seats had n't been installed in time for the fire marshal to inspect them .
The NFL scrambled almost until kickoff to find replacement seats .
Eventually , 850 fans in four sections were relocated , while 400 fans in two sections were given a refund equivalent to three times the face value of their ticket .
The latter set of fans were later offered the chance to watch the game on monitors in the North Field Club behind the Steelers bench , but would still get the triple refund .
Some of these fans were still upset , since they had spent thousands on airfare and hotels .
NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy said that when the league decided to relocate the 850 fans , it lost any shot of setting the attendance record .
The NFL subsequently offered affected fans a ticket to the next Super Bowl in addition to the refund .
It also offered fans the option of a ticket to any future Super Bowl , along with round - trip airfare and hotel accommodations .
However , this was n't enough to mollify several fans , who on February 9 filed a $ 5 million class - action lawsuit against the NFL , the Cowboys and Jones .
In addition to Steelers and Packers fans left without seats , the suit includes Cowboys fans who paid $ 100,000 for personal seat licenses , only to have to watch the Super Bowl in metal folding chairs without a view of the stadium 's giant video replay board .
The NFL at first offered $ 2,400 to fans who did not receive a replacement seat , but later offered tickets to a future Super Bowl with airfare and hotels included .
Not all of the fans accepted the NFL 's settlement offer , so the case went to trial .
The final outcome of the lawsuit was a finding for the plaintiffs against the NFL in the matter of breach of contract , and not liable for fraudulent inducement .
The Cowboys and Jerry Jones were dismissed as parties to the lawsuit since the plaintiffs ' contracts were solely with the NFL .
The plaintiffs were awarded between $ 5,600 and $ 22,000 depending on the value of their tickets .
ENTERTAINMENT AND OTHER CEREMONIES PREGAME Section::::Entertainment and other ceremonies .
Section::::Pregame .
Keith Urban and Maroon 5 performed during the pregame .
The Texas Christian University Horned Frog Marching Band also performed during the pregame show .
22-year - old Candice Villesca of Lewisville
, Texas performed the national anthem and " America the Beautiful " in American Sign Language .
Lea Michele performed " America the Beautiful " supported by the Air Force Tops in Blue .
Pop singer Christina Aguilera sang the national anthem , but performed the wrong lyrics for the fourth line of the song , later issuing an apology .
The coin toss ceremony was the first to commemorate two anniversaries — the 25th anniversary of Super Bowl XX and 15th of Super Bowl XXX , which marked the Dallas Cowboys ' most recent Super Bowl championship .
In honor of those occasions , Super Bowl XX MVP Richard Dent and former Dallas Cowboys defensive back Deion Sanders , both of whom were inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2011 , joined the ceremonies .
They were joined by fellow Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees and past Super Bowl participants Marshall Faulk , Chris Hanburger and Shannon Sharpe .
HALFTIME Section::::Halftime .
The Black Eyed Peas performed a medley of their greatest hits : " I Got ta Feeling " , " Boom Boom Pow " , " Pump It " , " The Time ( Dirty Bit ) " , " Let 's Get It Started " , and " Where Is the Love ? "
Slash made a guest appearance , performing " Sweet Child o ' Mine " with Fergie , while Usher made an appearance to perform his song " OMG " with will.i.am .
The show also displayed a long list of other performers , including Prairie View A&M University 's " Marching Storm " Band .
Country music was originally in the planning until the Black Eyed Peas agreed to perform .
GAME SUMMARY
FIRST QUARTER Section::::Game summary .
Section::::First Quarter .
After the first three drives of the game ended with punts , Green Bay opened up the scoring with Aaron Rodgers 's 29-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Jordy Nelson , who managed to pull slightly ahead of cornerback William Gay enough to make a leaping catch and fall into the end zone .
Then on the first play after the ensuing kickoff , quarterback Ben Roethlisberger was hit by Howard Green as he threw a pass , causing the ball to go well short of his intended target near the left sideline where it was intercepted by Nick Collins and returned 37 yards for a touchdown , giving Green Bay a 14–0 lead .
This score continued the unbeaten streak of Super Bowl victories recorded by teams scoring on an interception runback , improving to 11–0 in such games .
It was also the third consecutive Super Bowl with an interception return for a touchdown , as well as the eighth such score in the last ten Super Bowls .
The Packers also tied the Miami Dolphins ' record which still stands for the largest Super Bowl lead ( 14 points ) at the end of the first quarter , set in Super Bowl VIII against the Minnesota Vikings and later tied by the Oakland Raiders against the Philadelphia Eagles in Super Bowl XV .
SECOND QUARTER Section::::Second Quarter .
This time Pittsburgh managed to respond , driving 49 yards in 13 plays including Roethlisberger 's 18-yard run on 3rd down and 9 .
Shaun Suisham finished the drive with a 33-yard field goal to cut the score to 14–3 .
Then after forcing a punt , the Steelers drove to midfield , but turned the ball over again when Roethlisberger 's pass was intercepted by defensive back Jarrett Bush at the 47 .
After the interception , Rodgers led the Packers to another score , completing two passes for 20 yards before James Starks 's 12-yard run moved the ball to the 21-yard line .
On the next play , Green Bay increased their lead to 21–3 with Rodgers ' 21-yard touchdown pass to Greg Jennings .
Taking the ball back with 2:24 left in the second quarter , Roethlisberger made a 37-yard completion to Antwaan Randle El on their first play .
After that , receiver Hines Ward caught three passes for 39 yards on the drive , the last one an 8-yard touchdown catch with 37 seconds left in the half , making the score 21–10 at halftime .
This was the fourth time in their four 2011 postseason games that the Packers finished the first half with a lead of at least 11 points .
The first half had taken a heavy toll on both teams .
The Steelers lost wide receiver Emmanuel Sanders to injury , while the Packers lost receiver Donald Driver along with defensive backs Charles Woodson and Sam Shields .
Shields would be the only player among them who would return .
The Black Eyed Peas played at halftime .
THIRD QUARTER Section::::Third Quarter .
Pittsburgh 's defense forced Green Bay to punt on the first drive of the second half , and got the ball at midfield after a facemask call on Tom Crabtree while tackling Antonio Brown on the punt return .
The offense then scored in five plays ( all runs ) .
First , Rashard Mendenhall broke free along with right sideline for a 17-yard run , then Isaac Redman rushed for 3 yards , and Roethlisberger ran for 6 , bringing up third down and 1 .
On the next play , Redman tried to run up the middle , but was held up at the line , so he backed away and ran to the outside for a 16-yard gain to the 8-yard line .
Then Mendenhall scored an 8-yard touchdown run on the next play , making the score 21–17 .
After forcing a punt , Pittsburgh mounted a drive to the Packers 29-yard line , but Green Bay 's defense made a stand .
First Roethlisberger 's pass was batted down behind the line by linebacker Clay Matthews , then Roethlisberger tried a screen pass to tight end Heath Miller , but Desmond Bishop tackled him for a 3-yard loss .
Then on third down Frank Zombo sacked Roethlisberger on the 34 , and Suisham 's ensuing 52-yard field goal attempt sailed wide left .
FOURTH QUARTER Section::::Fourth Quarter .
On the first play of the fourth quarter , the Steelers lost their third turnover of the game when Mendenhall fumbled the ball while being tackled behind the line by Matthews and Ryan Pickett .
Bishop recovered the ball and returned it 7 yards to the Packers 45 .
Five plays later on third down and 10 , Rodgers completed a 38-yard pass to Nelson at the Steelers 2-yard line .
Pittsburgh linebacker LaMarr Woodley sacked Rodgers for a 6-yard loss on the next play , but Rodgers threw an 8-yard touchdown pass to Jennings after that , increasing the Packers lead to 28–17 .
Roethlisberger led the Steelers right back with 6 of 7 completions .
After a 9-yard pass to tight end Matt Spaeth , he threw three completions to receiver Mike Wallace for 27 yards to the Green Bay 40-yard line .
Then after a 15-yard completion to Ward , he finished the drive with a 25-yard touchdown pass to Wallace .
On the two - point conversion play , Roethlisberger faked a handoff to Mendenhall and ran up to the line before pitching the ball to Randle El , who scored on an outside sweep , cutting the Steelers deficit to 3 points at 28–25 .
Green Bay took the ball back with just over 7 minutes left , and found themselves facing third down and 10 after two plays , but Rodgers kept the drive going with a 31-yard completion to Jennings over the middle .
Starks then ran 14 yards to the Steelers 30 .
Two plays later , James Jones caught a 21-yard pass at the 8 .
The Steelers defense kept Green Bay out of the end zone , forcing the Packers to settle for a 23-yard field goal by Mason Crosby that gave Green Bay a 31–25 lead with 2:07 left in regulation .
Pittsburgh got the ball back on their own 13-yard line following a penalty on the kickoff .
On their first play , Roethlisberger completed a 15-yard pass to Miller .
But after a 5-yard reception by Ward , his next three passes were incomplete , turning the ball over and allowing the Packers to run out the rest of the clock .
BOX SCORE STATISTICAL OVERVIEW Section::::Statistical overview .
Nelson was the top receiver of the game with 9 receptions for 140 yards ( both career highs ) and a touchdown , while also gaining 19 more yards on a kick return , all despite 3 dropped passes .
Jennings added 64 yards and 2 touchdowns .
Roethlisberger completed 25 of 40 passes for 263 yards and two touchdowns , with 2 interceptions , and ran for 31 yards .
His top target was Wallace , who caught 9 passes for 89 yards and a score .
Mendenhall was the top rusher of the game with 64 yards and a touchdown .
FINAL STATISTICS
Section::::Final statistics .
Sources :
NFL.com Super Bowl XLV , Super Bowl XLV Play Finder GB ,
Super Bowl XLV Play Finder Pit STATISTICAL
COMPARISON Section::::Statistical comparison . !
Pittsburgh Steelers !
Green Bay Packers First downs1915
First downs rushing84 First downs passing1111 First downs
penalty00 Third down efficiency7/136/13 Fourth down efficiency0/10/0
Net yards
rushing12650
Rushing attempts2313
Yards per rush5.53.8 Passing –
Completions - attempts25/4024/39 Times sacked - total yards1–23–16 Interceptions
thrown20
Net yards passing261288
Total net
yards387338
Punt returns - total
yards4–51–0
Kickoff returns - total yards6–1113–63 Interceptions - total return yards0–02–38 Punts - average yardage3–51.06–40.5 Fumbles - lost1–11–0
Penalties - yards6–557–67 Time of possession33:2526:35
Turnovers30 !
colspan=3Records set Fewest Rushing Attempts , Game ,
Both Teams 36 Green Bay ( 13 ) , Pittsburgh ( 23 ) !
colspan=3Records tied Most Super Bowl Games Played , Team 8 Pittsburgh Fewest Turnovers , Game , Team 0
Green Bay
Most Points , First Quarter , Team 14 Green Bay Largest Lead , End of First Quarter , Team 14 Green Bay , led 14–0
Fewest First Downs by Penalty , Both Teams 0 Green Bay 0 , Pittsburgh 0 Fewest Rushing Attempts , Game , Winning Team 13 Green Bay
Most 2-Point Conversions , Game 1 Antwaan Randle El , Pittsburgh INDIVIDUAL STATISTICS STARTING LINEUPS
OFFICIALS
* Referee – Walt Anderson
* Umpire – Chad Brown * Head Linesman – Kent Payne * Line Judge – John Hussey * Field Judge – Doug Rosenbaum * Side Judge – Mike Weatherford * Back Judge – Scott Helverson
* Alternate Referee – Jerome Boger * Alternate Umpire – Rich Hall
* Alternate Flank – Tom Symonette
* Alternate Deep – Gary Cavaletto
* Alternate Back Judge –
Dino Paganelli REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Super Bowl website
* Super Bowl XLV at ESPN * Host committee website
* Super Bowl XLV at NFL.com