WATER JET CUTTER
A water jet cutter , also known as a water jet or waterjet , is an industrial tool capable of cutting a wide variety of materials using a very high - pressure jet of water , or a mixture of water and an abrasive substance .
The term abrasive jet refers specifically to the use of a mixture of water and abrasive to cut hard materials such as metal or granite , while the terms pure waterjet and water - only cutting refer to waterjet cutting without the use of added abrasives , often used for softer materials such as wood or rubber .
Waterjet cutting is often used during fabrication of machine parts .
It is the preferred method when the materials being cut are sensitive to the high temperatures generated by other methods .
Waterjet cutting is used in various industries , including mining and aerospace , for cutting , shaping , and reaming .
HISTORY WATERJET Section::::History .
Section::::Waterjet .
While using high - pressure water for erosion dates back as far as the mid-1800s with hydraulic mining , it was not until the 1930s that narrow jets of water started to appear as an industrial cutting device .
In 1933 , the Paper Patents Company in Wisconsin developed a paper metering , cutting , and reeling machine that used a diagonally moving waterjet nozzle to cut a horizontally moving sheet of continuous paper .
These early applications were at a low pressure and restricted to soft materials like paper .
Waterjet technology evolved in the post - war era as researchers around the world searched for new methods of efficient cutting systems .
In 1956 , Carl Johnson of Durox International in Luxembourg developed a method for cutting plastic shapes using a thin stream high - pressure waterjet , but those materials , like paper , were soft materials .
In 1958 , Billie Schwacha of North American Aviation developed a system using ultra - high - pressure liquid to cut hard materials .
This system used a pump to deliver a hypersonic liquid jet that could cut high strength alloys such as PH15 - 7-MO stainless steel .
Used as a honeycomb laminate on the Mach 3 North American XB-70 Valkyrie , this cutting method resulted in delaminating at high speed , requiring changes to the manufacturing process .
While not effective for the XB-70 project , the concept was valid and further research continued to evolve waterjet cutting .
In 1962 , Philip Rice of Union Carbide explored using a pulsing waterjet at up to to cut metals , stone , and other materials .
Research by S.J. Leach and G.L. Walker in the mid-1960s expanded on traditional coal waterjet cutting to determine ideal nozzle shape for high - pressure waterjet cutting of stone , and Norman Franz in the late 1960s focused on waterjet cutting of soft materials by dissolving long chain polymers in the water to improve the cohesiveness of the jet stream .
In the early 1970s , the desire to improve the durability of the waterjet nozzle led Ray Chadwick , Michael Kurko , and Joseph Corriveau of the Bendix Corporation to come up with the idea of using corundum crystal to form a waterjet orifice , while Norman Franz expanded on this and created a waterjet nozzle with an orifice as small as that operated at pressures up to .
John Olsen , along with George Hurlburt and Louis Kapcsandy at Flow Research ( later Flow Industries ) , further improved the commercial potential of the waterjet by showing that treating the water beforehand could increase the operational life of the nozzle .
HIGH PRESSURE
Section::::High pressure .
High - pressure vessels and pumps became affordable and reliable with the advent of steam power .
By the mid-1800s , steam locomotives were common and the first efficient steam - driven fire engine was operational .
By the turn of the century , high - pressure reliability improved , with locomotive research leading to a sixfold increase in boiler pressure , some reaching .
Most high - pressure pumps at this time , though , operated around .
High - pressure systems were further shaped by the aviation , automotive , and oil industries .
Aircraft manufacturers such as Boeing developed seals for hydraulically boosted control systems in the 1940s , while automotive designers followed similar research for hydraulic suspension systems .
Higher pressures in hydraulic systems in the oil industry also led to the development of advanced seals and packing to prevent leaks .
These advances in seal technology , plus the rise of plastics in the post - war years , led to the development of the first reliable high - pressure pump .
The invention of Marlex by Robert Banks and John Paul Hogan of the Phillips Petroleum company required a catalyst to be injected into the polyethylene .
McCartney Manufacturing Company in Baxter Springs , Kansas , began manufacturing these high - pressure pumps in 1960 for the polyethylene industry .
Flow Industries in Kent , Washington set the groundwork for commercial viability of waterjets with John Olsen 's development of the high - pressure fluid intensifier in 1973 , a design that was further refined in 1976 .
Flow Industries then combined the high - pressure pump research with their waterjet nozzle research and brought waterjet cutting into the manufacturing world .
ABRASIVE WATERJET Section::::Abrasive waterjet .
While cutting with water is possible for soft materials , the addition of an abrasive turned the waterjet into a modern machining tool for all materials .
This began in 1935 when the idea of adding an abrasive to the water stream was developed by Elmo Smith for the liquid abrasive blasting .
Smith 's design was further refined by Leslie Tirrell of the Hydroblast Corporation in 1937 , resulting in a nozzle design that created a mix of high - pressure water and abrasive for the purpose of wet blasting .
The first publications on the modern Abrasive Waterjets ( AWJ ) cutting were published by Dr. Mohamed Hashish in the 1982 BHR proceedings showing , for the first time , that waterjets with relatively small amounts of abrasives are capable of cutting hard materials such as steel and concrete .
The March 1984 issue of the Mechanical Engineering magazine showed more details and materials cut with AWJ such as titanium , aluminum , glass , and stone .
Dr. Mohamed Hashish , was awarded a patent on forming AWJ in 1987 .
Dr. Hashish , who also coined the new term Abrasive Waterjet ( AWJ ) , and his team continued to develop and improve the AWJ technology and its hardware for many applications which is now in over 50 industries worldwide .
A most critical development was creating a durable mixing tube that could withstand the power of the high - pressure AWJ , and it was Boride Products ( now Kennametal ) development of their ROCTEC line of ceramic tungsten carbide composite tubes that significantly increased the operational life of the AWJ nozzle .
Current work on AWJ nozzles is on micro abrasive waterjet so cutting with jets smaller than in diameter can be commercialized .
Working with Ingersoll - Rand Waterjet Systems , Michael Dixon implemented the first production practical means of cutting titanium sheets — an abrasive waterjet system very similar to those in widespread use today .
By January 1989 , that system was being run 24 hours a day producing titanium parts for the B-1B largely at Rockwell 's North American Aviation facility in Newark , Ohio .
WATERJET CONTROL Section::::Waterjet control .
As waterjet cutting moved into traditional manufacturing shops , controlling the cutter reliably and accurately was essential .
Early waterjet cutting systems adapted traditional systems such as mechanical pantographs and CNC systems based on John Parsons ' 1952 NC milling machine and running G - code .
Challenges inherent to waterjet technology revealed the inadequacies of traditional G - Code , as accuracy depends on varying the speed of the nozzle as it approaches corners and details .
Creating motion control systems to incorporate those variables became a major innovation for leading waterjet manufacturers in the early 1990s , with Dr John Olsen of OMAX Corporation developing systems to precisely position the waterjet nozzle while accurately specifying the speed at every point along the path , and also utilizing common PCs as a controller .
The largest waterjet manufacturer , Flow International ( a spinoff of Flow Industries ) , recognized the benefits of that system and licensed the OMAX software , with the result that the vast majority of waterjet cutting machines worldwide are simple to use , fast , and accurate .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
All waterjets follow the same principle of using high pressure water focused into a beam by a nozzle .
Most machines accomplish this by first running the water through a high pressure pump .
There are two types of pumps used to create this high pressure ; an intensifier pump and a direct drive or crankshaft pump .
A direct drive pump works much like a car engine , forcing water through high pressure tubing using plungers attached to a crankshaft .
An intensifier pump creates pressure by using hydraulic oil to move a piston forcing the water through a tiny hole .
The water then travels along the high pressure tubing to the nozzle of the waterjet .
In the nozzle , the water is focused into a thin beam by a jewel orifice .
This beam of water is ejected from the nozzle , cutting through the material by spraying it with the jet of speed on the order of Mach 3 , around .
The process is the same for abrasive waterjets until the water reaches the nozzle .
Here abrasives such as garnet and aluminium oxide , are fed into the nozzle via an abrasive inlet .
The abrasive then mixes with the water in a mixing tube and is forced out the end at high pressure .
BENEFITS Section::::Benefits .
An important benefit of the water jet is the ability to cut material without interfering with its inherent structure , as there is no heat - affected zone ( HAZ ) .
Minimizing the effects of heat allows metals to be cut without harming or changing intrinsic properties .
Sharp corners , bevels , pierce holes , and shapes with minimal inner radii are all possible .
Water jet cutters are also capable of producing intricate cuts in material .
With specialized software and 3-D machining heads , complex shapes can be produced .
The kerf , or width , of the cut can be adjusted by swapping parts in the nozzle , as well as changing the type and size of abrasive .
Typical abrasive cuts have a kerf in the range of , but can be as narrow as .
Non - abrasive cuts are normally , but can be as small as , which is approximately that of a human hair .
These small jets can permit small details in a wide range of applications .
Water jets are capable of attaining accuracy down to and repeatability down to .
Due to its relatively narrow kerf , water jet cutting can reduce the amount of scrap material produced , by allowing uncut parts to be nested more closely together than traditional cutting methods .
Water jets use approximately per minute ( depending on the cutting head 's orifice size ) , and the water can be recycled using a closed - loop system .
Waste water usually is clean enough to filter and dispose of down a drain .
The garnet abrasive is a non - toxic material that can be mostly recycled for repeated use ; otherwise , it can usually be disposed in a landfill .
Water jets also produce fewer airborne dust particles , smoke , fumes , and contaminants , reducing operator exposure to hazardous materials .
Meatcutting using waterjet technology eliminates the risk of cross contamination since there is no contact medium ( namely , a blade ) .
VERSATILITY Section::::Versatility .
Because the nature of the cutting stream can be easily modified the water jet can be used in nearly every industry ; there are many different materials that the water jet can cut .
Some of them have unique characteristics that require special attention when cutting .
Materials commonly cut with a water jet
include textiles , rubber , foam , plastics , leather , composites , stone , tile , glass , metals , food , paper and much more .
"
Most ceramics can also be cut on an abrasive water jet as long as the material is softer than the abrasive being used ( between 7.5 and 8.5 on the Mohs scale ) " .
Examples of materials that can not be cut with a water jet are tempered glass and diamonds .
Water jets are capable of cutting up to of metals and of most materials , though in specialized coal mining applications , water jets are capable of cutting up to using a nozzle .
Specially designed water jet cutters are commonly used to remove excess bitumen from road surfaces that have become the subject of binder flushing .
Flushing is a natural occurrence caused during hot weather where the aggregate becomes level with the bituminous binder layer creating a hazardously smooth road surface during wet weather .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
Commercial water jet cutting systems are available from manufacturers all over the world , in a range of sizes , and with water pumps capable of a range of pressures .
Typical water jet cutting machines have a working envelope as small as a few square feet , or up to hundreds of square feet .
Ultra - high - pressure water pumps are available from as low as up to .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
There are six main process characteristics to water jet cutting :
* Uses a high velocity stream of Ultra High Pressure Water which is produced by a high pressure pump with possible abrasive particles suspended in the stream .
*
* Is used for machining a large array of materials , including heat - sensitive , delicate or very hard materials .
*
* Produces no heat damage to workpiece surface or edges .
*
* Nozzles are typically made of sintered boride or composite tungsten carbide .
*
* Produces a taper of less than 1 degree on most cuts , which can be reduced or eliminated entirely by slowing down the cut process or tilting the jet .
* * Distance of nozzle from workpiece affects the size of the kerf and the removal rate of material .
Typical distance is .
* Temperature is not as much of a factor .
EDGE QUALITY Section::::Edge quality .
Edge quality for water jet cut parts is defined with the quality numbers Q1 through Q5 .
Lower numbers indicate rougher edge finish ; higher numbers are smoother .
For thin materials , the difference in cutting speed for Q1 could be as much as 3 times faster than the speed for Q5 .
For thicker materials , Q1 could be 6 times faster than Q5 .
For example , thick aluminium Q5 would be and Q1 would be , 5.8 times faster .
MULTI - AXIS CUTTING Section::::Multi - axis cutting .
By 1987 , Ingersoll - Rand Waterjet Systems was offering a 5-axis pure - water waterjet cutting system called the Robotic Waterjet System .
The system was an overhead gantry design , similar in overall size to the HS-1000 .
With recent advances in control and motion technology , 5-axis water jet cutting ( abrasive and pure ) has become a reality .
Where the normal axes on a water jet are named Y ( back / forth ) ,
X ( left / right ) and Z ( up / down ) , a 5-axis system will typically add an A axis ( angle from perpendicular ) and C axis ( rotation around the Z - axis ) .
Depending on the cutting head , the maximum cutting angle for the A axis can be anywhere from 55 , 60 , or in some cases even 90 degrees from vertical .
As such , 5-axis cutting opens up a wide range of applications that can be machined on a water jet cutting machine .
A 5-axis cutting head can be used to cut 4-axis parts , where the bottom surface geometries are shifted a certain amount to produce the appropriate angle and the Z - axis remains at one height .
This can be useful for applications like weld preparation where a bevel angle needs to be cut on all sides of a part that will later be welded , or for taper compensation purposes where the kerf angle is transferred to the waste material – thus eliminating the taper commonly found on water jet - cut parts .
A 5-axis head can cut parts where the Z - axis is also moving along with all the other axes .
This full 5-axis cutting could be used for cutting contours on various surfaces of formed parts .
Because of the angles that can be cut , part programs may need to have additional cuts to free the part from the sheet .
Attempting to slide a complex part at a severe angle from a plate can be difficult without appropriate relief cuts .
SEE ALSO
* CryoJet *
Laser cutting
* Plasma cutting * Electrical discharge machining REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
How Water Jets Work , HowStuffWorks.com video * Fabric Cutting by Water Jet
Cutting Machine
* Waterjet Cutting –
How it Works ,
A look inside the physics of achieving high pressure water for waterjet cutting .
Section::::External links . http:/nimawaterjet.com