NORTH AND SOUTH ( GASKELL NOVEL )
North and South is a social novel published in 1855 by English writer Elizabeth Gaskell .
With Wives and Daughters ( 1865 ) and Cranford ( 1853 ) , it is one of her best - known novels and was adapted for television three times ( 1966 , 1975 and 2004 ) .
The later version renewed interest in the novel and attracted a wider readership .
Gaskell 's first novel , Mary Barton ( 1848 ) , focused on relations between employers and workers in Manchester from the perspective of the working poor ; North and South uses a protagonist from southern England to present and comment on the perspectives of mill owners and workers in an industrialising city .
The novel is set in the fictional industrial town of Milton in the north of England .
Forced to leave her home in the tranquil , rural south , Margaret Hale settles with her parents in Milton .
She witnesses the brutal world wrought by the Industrial Revolution , seeing employers and workers clashing in the first strikes .
Sympathetic to the poor ( whose courage and tenacity she admires and among whom she makes friends ) , she clashes with John Thornton : a nouveau riche cotton - mill owner who is contemptuous of his workers .
The novel traces her growing understanding of the complexity of labour relations and their impact on well - meaning mill owners and her conflicted relationship with John Thornton .
Gaskell based her depiction of Milton on Manchester , where she lived as the wife of a Unitarian minister .
PUBLICATION SERIALISATION Section::::Publication .
Section::::Serialisation .
North and South originally appeared in 20 weekly episodes from September 1854 to January 1855 in Household Words , edited by Charles Dickens .
During this period Dickens dealt with the same theme in Hard Times ( also a social novel ) , which was published in the same magazine from April to August 1854 ( Chapman , 1999 , p. 26 ; Ingham , 1995 , p. xii – xiii ) .
Hard Times , which shows Manchester ( the satirical Coketown ) in a negative light , challenged Gaskell and made the writing of her own novel more difficult ; she had to ascertain that Dickens would not write about a strike .
Gaskell found the time and technical constraints of serialised fiction particularly trying .
She had planned to write 22 episodes , but was " compelled to desperate compression " to limit the story to 20 .
North and South was less successful than Hard Times .
On 14 October 1854 , after six weeks , sales dropped so much that Dickens complained about what he called Gaskell 's " intractability " because she resisted his demands for conciseness .
He found the story " wearisome to the last degree " ( Chapman 1999 , p. 28 ) .
TITLE Section::::Title .
The novel 's title ( imposed by Dickens ) focuses on the difference in lifestyle between rural southern England , inhabited by the landed gentry and agricultural workers , and the industrial north , populated by capitalist manufacturers and poverty - stricken mill workers ; the north - south division was cultural and geographical .
The story centres on haughty Margaret Hale , who learns to overcome her prejudices against the North in general and charismatic manufacturer John Thornton in particular .
Gaskell would have preferred to call the novel Margaret Hale ( as she had done in 1848 for her novel Mary Barton ) , but Dickens prevailed .
He wrote in a 26 July 1854 letter that " North South " seemed better , encompassing more and emphasising the opposition between people who are forced by circumstances to meet face - to - face ( Ingham , 1995 , p. xii ) .
Working on the final chapters of the novel in December at Lea Hurst ( Florence Nightingale 's family home near Matlock in Derbyshire ) , Gaskell wrote that she would rather call her novel Death and Variations because " there are five dead , each beautifully consistent with the personality of the individual " .
This remark , although probably a joke , emphasises the importance of death in the story .
Death affects Margaret profoundly , gradually encouraging her independence ; this allows Gaskell to analyse the character 's deep emotions ( Matus , 2007 , p. 36 ) and focus on the social system 's harshness in the deaths of Boucher and Bessy .
BOOK Section::::Book . Chapman & Hall ( London ) first published the novel in 1855 as two volumes of 25 and 27 chapters each .
That year , Harper and Brothers published it in New York and Tauchnitz published the more - complete second edition in Leipzig as part of a Collection of English Writers .
Many editions were published during Gaskell 's lifetime ( Easson and Shuttleworth 1998 , p xxxvi ) .
The text in the book , particularly the ending , differs significantly from that of the serialised episodes .
Gaskell included a brief preface saying that due to the restrictive magazine format , she could not develop the story as she wished : " Various short passages have been inserted , and several new chapters added " .
She tried to eliminate the limitations of a serialised novel ( letter to Jameson cited by Alison Chapman , 1999 , p. 27 ) by elaborating on events after the death of Mr. Hale and adding four chapters : the first and last chapters and two chapters on the visits by Mr. Bell to London and by Margaret and Mr. Bell to Helstone .
This edition also adds chapter titles and epigraphs .
The preface concludes with a quotation from the conclusion of John Lydgate 's Middle - English fable , The Churl and the Bird ( spelling modernized ) .
Loreau and Mrs. H. of Lespine , " with the authorization of the Author , " translated the novel into French using the first revised edition .
It was published in Paris by Hachette in 1859 ( Easson and Shuttleworth 1998 , p. xxxvi ) , and reprinted at least twice : in 1860 as Marguerite Hale ( Nord et Sud ) and in 1865 as Nord et Sud .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Nineteen - year - old Margaret Hale lived for almost 10 years in London with her cousin Edith and her wealthy aunt Shaw , but when Edith marries Captain Lennox , Margaret happily returns home to the southern village of Helstone .
Margaret has refused an offer of marriage from the captain 's brother Henry , an up - and - coming barrister .
Her life is turned upside down when her father , the local pastor , leaves the Church of England and the rectory of Helstone as a matter of conscience ; his intellectual honesty has made him a dissenter .
At the suggestion of Mr. Bell , his old friend from Oxford , he settles with his wife and daughter in Milton - Northern ( where Mr. Bell was born and owns property ) .
The industrial town in Darkshire ( a textile - producing region ) manufactures cotton and is in the middle of the Industrial Revolution ; masters and workers are clashing in the first organised strikes .
Margaret initially finds the bustling , smoky town of Milton harsh and strange , and she is upset by its poverty .
Mr. Hale ( in reduced financial circumstances ) works as a tutor ; one of his pupils is the wealthy and influential manufacturer John Thornton , master of Marlborough Mills .
From the outset , Margaret and Thornton are at odds with each other ; she sees him as coarse and unfeeling , and he sees her as haughty .
He is attracted to her beauty and self - assurance , however , and she begins to admire how he has risen from poverty .
During the 18 months she spends in Milton , Margaret gradually learns to appreciate the city and its hard - working people , especially Nicholas Higgins ( a union representative ) and his daughter Bessy , whom she befriends .
Bessy is ill with byssinosis from inhaling cotton dust , which eventually kills her .
A workers ' strike ensues .
An outraged mob of workers breaks into Thornton 's compound , where he has his home and his factory , after he imports Irish workers as replacements .
Thornton sends for soldiers , but before they arrive , Margaret begs him to talk to the mob to try to avoid bloodshed .
When he appears to be in danger , Margaret rushes out and shields him ; she is struck by a stone .
The mob disperses , and Thornton carries the unconscious Margaret indoors .
Thornton proposes ; Margaret declines , unprepared for his unexpected declaration of love and offended by assumptions that her action in front of the mob meant that she cares for him .
Thornton 's mother , wary of Margaret 's haughty ways , is galled by Margaret 's rejection of her son .
Margaret 's brother Frederick ( who lives in exile as he is wanted for his part in a naval mutiny ) secretly visits their dying mother .
Thornton sees Margaret and Frederick together and assumes that he is her lover .
Leonards , Frederick 's shipmate , later recognises Frederick at the train station .
They argue ; Frederick pushes Leonards away , and Leonards dies shortly afterwards .
When the police question Margaret about the scuffle she lies and says she was not present .
Thornton knows that Margaret lied , but in his capacity as magistrate declares the case closed to save her from possible perjury .
Margaret is humbled by his deed on her behalf ; she no longer only looks down on Thornton as a hard master , and begins to recognise the depth of his character .
Nicholas , at Margaret 's prodding , approaches Thornton for a job and eventually obtains one .
Thornton and Higgins learn to appreciate and understand each other .
Mr. Hale visits his oldest friend , Mr. Bell , in Oxford .
He dies there , and Margaret returns to live in London with Aunt Shaw .
She visits Helstone with Mr. Bell and asks him to tell Thornton about Frederick , but Mr. Bell dies before he can do so .
He leaves Margaret a legacy which includes Marlborough Mills and the Thornton house .
Thornton faces bankruptcy due to market fluctuations and the strike .
He learns the truth about Margaret 's brother from Nicholas Higgins , and comes to London to settle his business affairs with Margaret , his new landlord .
When Margaret offers Thornton the loan of her money , he realises that her feelings toward him have changed , and he again proposes marriage .
Since she has learned to love him , she accepts .
CHARACTERS
* Margaret Hale :
The protagonist , she is proud and spirited and very fond of her parents ( especially her father ) .
She is 18 years old at the start of the story , before she returns to Helstone , and has been living mainly with her aunt ( Mrs. Shaw ) and her cousin Edith in London since she was nine years old .
* John Thornton : Owner of a local mill , a friend and student of Margaret 's father and Margaret 's love interest * Nicholas Higgins : An industrial worker whom Margaret befriends .
He has two daughters , Bessy and Mary .
* Hannah Thornton : John Thornton 's mother , who reveres her son and dislikes Margaret ( especially after Margaret rejects his proposal )
* Fanny Thornton : John 's younger sister * Bessy : Nicholas Higgins ' daughter , who is fatally ill from working in the mills
*
Mary : Nicholas Higgins ' youngest daughter
* Boucher : A worker and the father of six children , who has conflicted emotions during the strike * Richard Hale :
Margaret 's father , a dissenter who leaves his vicarage in Helstone to work as a private tutor in Milton
* Maria Hale : Margaret 's mother , from a respectable London family .
At Helstone she often complains that the air as too damp and " relaxing " , and not good for her health .
* Dixon : Servant of the Hales , who served Maria Hale before her marriage and is devoted to her .
Dixon disapproves of Richard Hale ( who is socially inferior to Maria ) , and regards her mistress 's marriage as her social downfall .
* Mr. Bell : Old friend of Richard Hale , godfather of Frederick Hale
* Mrs. Shaw :
Margaret 's aunt , Edith 's mother , and Maria Hale 's sister .
The widow of General Shaw , she lives in Harley Street in London .
Although she is well - off compared to Maria , she believes herself less fortunate since she did not marry for love .
* Edith : Margaret 's pretty cousin , her cousin 's intellectual inferior , feeble - minded , innocent and spoiled like a child , but not malicious and sees Margaret as a beloved sister .
She marries Captain Lennox early in the story .
* Henry Lennox : Young lawyer and the brother of Captain Lennox .
Meticulous and intelligent , he loves Margaret and considers her " queenly " .
Margaret sees him as a friend , and rebuffs his romantic interest early in the story .
* Frederick Hale : Margaret 's older brother , a fugitive living in Spain since his involvement in a mutiny while serving under a cruel officer in the British Navy
* Leonards : Frederick 's fellow sailor , who did not mutiny and wants to turn Frederick in for a reward CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
In her introduction to The Cambridge Companion to Elizabeth Gaskell ( 2007 ) , a collection of essays representing current Gaskell scholarship , Jill L. Matus stresses the author 's growing stature in Victorian literary studies and how her innovative , versatile storytelling addressed the rapid changes during her lifetime .
It was not always that way ; her reputation from her death to the 1950s was dominated by Lord David Cecil 's assessment in Early Victorian Novelists ( 1934 ) that she was " all woman " and " makes a creditable effort to overcome her natural deficiencies but all in vain " ( quoted in Stoneman , 1987 , from Cecil , p. 235 ) .
Contemporary reviews were critical , similar to those of Mary Barton .
A scathing , unsigned critique in The Leader accused Gaskell of making errors about Lancashire which a resident of Manchester would not make and said that a woman ( or clergymen and women ) could not " understand industrial problems " , would " know too little about the cotton industry " and had no " right to add to the confusion by writing about it " ( Chapman 1999 , p. 28 ) .
After reading the fifth episode , Charlotte Brontë believed that it was only about the church and " the defence of those who in conscience , disagree with it and consider it their duty to leave " .
However , Brontë acknowledged that her friend " understands the genius of the North " ( Chapman 1999 , p. 29 ) .
Although Richard Holt acknowledged some interest in the novel in The Critical Review , he complained that its plot is disjointed and the characters change by leaps and bounds " in the manner of kangaroos " ( Chapman 1999 , p. 29 ) .
George Sand said that the novel could interest a gentleman while being accessible to a young woman ( Chapman 1999 , p. 82 ) .
Gaskell 's novels , with the exception of Cranford , gradually slipped into obscurity during the late 19th century ; before 1950 , she was dismissed as a minor author with good judgment and feminine sensibilities .
Archie Stanton Whitfield wrote that her work was " like a nosegay of violets , honeysuckle , lavender , mignonette and sweet briar " in 1929 , and Cecil ( 1934 ) said that she lacked the " masculinity " necessary to properly deal with social problems ( Chapman 1999 , p. 39–40 ) .
However , the tide began to turn in Gaskell 's favour when , in the 1950s and 60s , socialist critics like Kathleen Tillotson , Arnold Kettle and Raymond Williams re - evaluated the description of social and industrial problems in her novels ( see Moore , 1999 for an elaboration ) , and — realising that her vision went against the prevailing views of the time — saw it as preparing the way for vocal feminist movements ( Stoneman 1987 , p. 118 ) .
In the early 21st century , with Gaskell 's work " enlisted in contemporary negotiations of nationhood as well as gender and class identities " ( Matus , 2007 , p. 9 ) , North and South – one of the first industrial novels describing conflict between employers and workers – is seen as depicting complex social conflicts and offering more satisfactory solutions through Margaret Hale : spokesperson for the author and Gaskell 's most mature creation .
THEMES MODERNITY VERSUS TRADITION Section::::Themes .
Section::::Modernity versus tradition .
The change in title of Gaskell 's fourth novel from Margaret Hale ( Ingham , 1995 , p xii ) to Dickens ' suggested North and South underscores its theme of modernity versus tradition .
Until the end of the 18th century , power in England was in the hands of the aristocracy and landed gentry based in the south .
The Industrial Revolution unsettled the centuries - old class structure , shifting wealth and power to manufacturers who mass - produced goods in the north .
Cities such as Manchester , on which Gaskell modelled her fictional Milton , were hastily developed to house workers who moved from the semi - feudal countryside to work in the new factories .
The south represents the past ( tradition ) : aristocratic landowners who inherited their property , collected rent from farmers and peasants , and assumed an obligation for their tenants ' welfare .
The north represents the future ( modernity ) ; its leaders were self - made men like Gaskell 's hero , John Thornton , who accumulated wealth as working , middle - class entrepreneurs .
In their view , philanthropy or charity – giving something for nothing – was a dangerous imbalance of the relationship between employers and employees ( which was based on the exchange of cash for labour ) .
AUTHORITY AND REBELLION Section::::Authority and rebellion .
Rebellion against an authority seen as unfair is woven throughout the story .
Established institutions are seen as inhumane or selfish , and therefore fallible ( Stoneman , 1987 ) ; Mr. Hale breaks with the church on a matter of conscience , and Frederick Hale participates in a mutiny against the navy and is forced into exile because the law would hang him for what he considered a just cause .
His rebellion parallels the strike by workers who take up the cause to feed their children ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 17 ) .
Both are impotent and engaged in a struggle ( a war , in the eyes of the workers ) whose terms are dictated by those who maintain their power by force : the law and the mill masters ( Stoneman , 1987 , pp 122–126 ) .
Margaret rebels in ways which express her liberty : ignoring social proprieties and challenging authority by lying to the police to protect her brother , from whom she learns that arbitrary , unjust and cruel power can be defied not for oneself but on behalf of the unfortunate .
Even Mrs. Hale rebels in her own way ; she is " prouder of Frederick standing up against injustice , than if he had been simply a good officer " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 14 ) .
The theme of power is also central .
Thornton represents three aspects of power and the authority of the ruling class : a manufacturer respected by his peers ( economic power ) , a magistrate ( judicial power ) and someone who can summon the army ( political power ) to quell the strike ( Stoneman , 1987 , pp .
124–126 ) .
There is energy , power and courage in the struggle for a better life by Milton 's residents .
Margaret demonstrates power in her verbal jousting with Thornton , forcing him to reflect on the validity of his beliefs ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 15 ) and eventually change his view of workers from mere providers of labour to individuals capable of intelligent thought .
When she reaches age 21 Margaret takes control of her life , resolves to live as she chooses and learns how to manage wealth inherited from Mr. Bell .
FEMININE AND MASCULINE
ROLES Section::::Feminine and masculine roles .
The notion of separate spheres dominated Victorian beliefs about gender roles , assuming that the roles of men and women are clearly delineated .
Public life ( including work ) is within the masculine domain , and private life ( domesticity ) is within the feminine .
The expression of feelings is considered feminine , and aggression is seen as masculine .
Resolving conflict with words is feminine , and men are likely to resort to physical resolution ( including war ) .
The mistress of the home is the guardian of morality and religion and " The Angel in the House " .
The public sphere is considered dangerously amoral and , in the work of authors such as Dickens , disasters ensue when characters do not conform to contemporary standards .
This notion is questioned in North and South .
In Margaret Hale the separation is blurred and she is forced by circumstances to assume a masculine role , organising the family 's departure from Helstone and assuming much of the responsibility for the family in Milton ( including encouraging her father ) .
She carries the load alone , behaving like a " Roman girl " because Mr. Hale is weak and irresolute .
When Higgins slips away and her father trembles with horror at Boucher 's death , Margaret goes to Mrs. Boucher , breaks the news of her husband 's death and cares for the family with dedication and efficiency .
She summons her brother Frederick , a naval officer who is crushed with grief at the death of his mother .
To protect her brother , Margaret later lies about their presence at the train station on the day of his departure ( Stoneman , 1987 , p. 127 ) .
Thornton and Higgins , while not denying their masculinity , demonstrate compassion .
Higgins in particular , whom Thornton considers among " mere demagogues , lovers of power , at whatever costs to others " , ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 38 ) assumes the responsibility for raising the Boucher children and embodies maternal tenderness ( lacking in Mrs. Thornton ) and strength ( not possessed by Mrs. Hale ) and dignity .
Gaskell endows John Thornton with tenderness ( a soft spot , according to Nicholas Higgins ) .
Although Thornton 's pride hides this capacity from public view , he shows it in his affection for his mother and his quiet attention to the Hales .
He expresses it more obviously when he later develops relations with his workers beyond the usual cash - for - labour , builds a canteen for the workers and sometimes shares meals with them .
Margaret and Thornton 's evolution eventually converges and , after learning humility , they are partially freed from the shackles of separate spheres ; he develops friendly relations at the mill , and she asserts her independence from her cousin 's life .
Margaret initiates their business meeting , which he interprets as a declaration of love ( Stoneman , 1987 , pp 137–138 ) .
In the final scene , she controls the financial situation and he reacts emotionally .
They now meet as man and woman , no longer the manufacturer from the north and the lady from the south ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 52 ) .
The blurring of roles is also evident among the workers , many of whom ( like Bessy ) are women .
OTHER THEMES SPECIAL AND CHANGING RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Other themes .
Section::::Special and changing relationships .
Certain family relationships are emphasised ( Margaret and her father , Higgins and Bessy , Mrs. Hale and Frederick ) , all interrupted by death .
The tie between Thornton and his mother is particularly deep and , on Mrs. Thornton 's side , exclusive and boundless ( Pollard 1967 , p 129 ) : " her son , her pride , her property " .
Ordinarily cold , she tells him : " Mother 's love is Given by God , John .
It holds fast for ever and ever " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 26 ) .
Parent - child relationships are often metaphors for relations between employers and workers in Victorian literature ( Stoneman 1987 , p 119 ) .
In chapter XV , " Men and Master " , Margaret rejects this paternalistic view ( expressed by Thornton ) as infantilising the worker .
She favours , instead , helping workers grow and become emancipated .
Friendships between people of different social classes , education and cultural backgrounds ( between Mr. Hale and Thornton , Margaret and Bessy , and Thornton and Higgins ) prefigure
Gaskell 's desired human relations which blur class distinctions .
Margaret performs " lowly " tasks and Dixon a confidante of Mrs. Hale , who develops a relationship of respect , affection and understanding with the maid ( Nash 2007 , p 108 ) .
RELIGIOUS CONTEXT Section::::Religious context .
Gaskell ( the daughter and wife of a pastor ) did not write a religious novel , although religion plays an important role in her work .
Unitarians interpreted biblical texts symbolically , rather than literally ( Toussaint - Thiriet , 2007 , in French ) .
They did not believe in original sin or that women were guiltier or weaker than men , and were more liberal than Methodists , Anglicans or Dissenters .
North and South presents a typical picture of Unitarian tolerance in one evening scene ( Matus , 2007 ) :
" Margaret the Churchwoman , her father the Dissenter , Higgins the Infidel , knelt down together "
( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 28 ) .
The Thorntons do not invoke religion as the Hales do , although Mrs. Thornton reads Matthew Henry 's Exposition of the Old and New Testaments .
Although the re - institution in 1850 by Pope Pius IX of a Roman Catholic hierarchy in England was generally strongly condemned , Gaskell has an open mind about Catholicism and Frederick Hale
converts to his Spanish wife 's religion ( Matus , 2007 , p 174 ) .
Biblical references appear in several forms .
Chapter VI cites the Book of Job , ii . 13 ) ; there is an allusion to the elder brother in the Parable of the Prodigal Son , and Margaret paraphrases the definition of charity ( " that spirit
which suffereth long and is kind and seeketh not her own " )
( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 15 ) from the First Epistle to the Corinthians .
However , Gaskell cautions against misuse ; Bessy Higgins reads the Apocalypse to cope with her condition and interprets the parable of Dives and Lazarus so simplistically that Margaret counters vigorously : " It wo n't be division enough , in that awful day , that some of us have been beggars here , and some of us have been rich — we shall not be judged by that poor accident , but by our faithful following of Christ " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 19 ) .
Margaret and John follow a path of conversion which leads to reconciliation , acknowledging their " unworthiness " ( Pollard , 1967 ) .
Margaret , who has the longest way to go , is crushed by guilt from her lie and by shame from being debased in Thornton 's eyes ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 39 ) .
Francis de Sales encourages her to seek " the way of humility " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 41 ) , despite Mr. Bell 's attempts to minimise and rationalise her lie as told in a panic .
Thornton , on the brink of ruin like Job , tries not to be outraged while his mother rebels against the injustice of his situation ( " Not for you , John !
God has seen fit to be very hard on you , very " ) and gives fervent thanks for the " great blessing "
his existence gives her ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 50 ) .
LITERARY ANALYSIS
CONSTRUCTION
AUSTEN 'S LEGACY Section::::Literary analysis .
Section::::Construction .
Section::::Austen 's legacy .
The influence of Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice on North and South is frequently noted .
In The Politic of Stories in Victorian Fiction ( 1988 ) , Rosemarie Bodenheimer writes that she prefers to study the novel 's relationship with Charlotte Brontë 's Shirley but sees in the " description of strong domestic qualities " and " social optimism " an industrial Pride and Prejudice .
Patricia Ingham ( Ingham 1996 , pp 56–58 ) also compares North and South to Shirley .
Ann Banfield compares North and South to Mansfield Park for two reasons : Margaret Hale ( like Fanny Price ) is transplanted in a place she conquers , and the novel is built on an opposition of places on a larger scale .
FALSE STARTS Section::::False starts .
The novel has three beginnings , two of them illusory : the first is the wedding preparation in London , the second the heroine 's return to Helstone and the third ( often considered the real start of the story )
narrates the departure for Milton in chapter seven .
The first chapters , according to Martin Dodsworth , are false leads of what the novel is about rather than the author 's clumsiness ; they tell the reader what the story is not about .
Bodenheimer ( p. 283 ) interprets the early chapters not as false starts but as demonstrating Gaskell 's theme of societal and personal " permanent state(s ) of change " and integral to the novel .
The early chapters in different places have been interpreted as presenting a theme of mobility .
In moving from one place to another Margaret better understands herself and the world , advancing Gaskell 's intention to place her in the public sphere .
The opening chapters of North and South indicate an apparent novel of manners in the style of Jane Austen ( Nash , 2007 ) , with preparations for the marriage in London of a silly bride and a lively , intelligent heroine ; in the country village of Hampshire , a bachelor in search of fortune ( Henry Lennox ) woos – and is rejected by – Margaret ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 58 ) .
Deirdre David , in Fictions of Resolution in Three Victorian Novels ( 1981 ) , suggests that Margaret 's abandonment of London society indicates that she is out of place in the south and her adjustment to the north is plausible ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 161 ) .
Gaskell 's novel of manners has the broader context of an industrial novel about the Black Country , where young girls ( like Bessy ) die of " cotton consumption " ; capitalists disregard legal obligations , and workers refuse prophylactic facilities , instigate strikes and foment riots ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 58 ) .
It can be criticised , as Martin Dodsworth did in 1970 , for giving the love affair precedence over the industrial context and for dwelling on the emotional conflict between Margaret and Thornton .
However , North and South is not simply an industrial Pride and Prejudice Margaret acquires stature and a public role , challenging the Victorian idea of separate spheres ( Stoneman , 1987 , p. 167 ) .
She befriends Bessy Higgins ( a young , working - class woman ) , gradually abandons her aversion " shoppy people " and – recognising Thornton 's qualities , crosses social classes to consider herself " not good enough " for him .
Although the novel ends in Harley Street ( where it began ) , Margaret 's estrangement from the vain , superficial world of her cousin Edith and Henry Lennox is emphasised by her choice of Thornton and Milton ( Pollard , 1967 , p. 111 ) .
BLUNDERS Section::::Blunders .
As the chapter titles " First Impressions " , " Mistakes " , " Mistakes Cleared Up " , " Mischances " and " Atonement " indicate , North and South is peppered with Margaret 's blunders and problematic situations with other characters which create misunderstandings ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p. 67 ) .
Some of Margaret 's blunders stem from ignoring customs , some from not understanding them and still others from rejecting Milton 's social customs ( such as a frank , familiar handshake ) .
Other characters fail to carry out important actions : Dixon does not tell Margaret that Thornton attended her mother 's funeral , and Mr. Bell dies before he can explain to Thornton why Margaret lied .
Margaret feels misunderstood , unable to take control of her life and explain a world she does not understand ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p. 67 ) .
Other gaffes are due to Margaret 's ignorance ; accustomed to London 's chic salons , she is unaware that she is seen as wearing her shawl " as an empress wears her drapery "
( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 7 ) and serving tea with " the air of a proud reluctant slave " .
She receives marriage proposals awkwardly : Henry Lennox ' declaration of love is " unpleasant " and makes her uncomfortable , and she feels " offended " and assaulted by John Thornton 's proposal .
Margaret naively believes that the rioters can be negotiated with and is unaware that she and her brother , Frederick , resemble a loving couple on a train - station platform ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p. 68 ) .
Bodenheimer ( 1979 ) sees this " mistakenness " as purposeful : " In its every situation , whether industrial politics or emotional life , traditional views and stances break down into confusing new ones , which are rendered in all the pain of mistakenness and conflict that real human change entails " ( Bodenheimer , 1979 p. 282 ) .
Perhaps this is why Margaret 's blunders do not always have negative consequences ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 163 ) ; when she admits she is disappointed that Thornton has refused to hire Higgins , she is ashamed that he hears her remark .
Thornton reconsiders , eventually offering Higgins a job .
In the final chapter , she does not seem to realize that a " simple proposition " to bail out the factory ( a business arrangement ) could hurt Thornton 's pride or be seen as shocking from a " lady " .
Bodenheimer interprets scenes like this as " deep confusion in a time of personal change and revision "
( Bodenheimer , 1979
p. 293 ) which brings the lovers together ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 163 ) .
STYLE AND NARRATIVE NARRATIVE TECHNIQUES Section::::Style and narrative .
Section::::Narrative techniques .
The first description of Marlborough Mills in Chapter XV is through Margaret 's eyes and thoughts , and the omniscient narrator delves into the inner thoughts of her main characters and occasionally interjects her observations ( Bodenheimer , 1979 , pp 293–300 ) .
Thornton " thought that he disliked seeing one who had mortified him so keenly ; but he was mistaken .
It was a stinging pleasure to be in the room with her ...
But he was no great analyser of his own motives , and was mistaken as I have said " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 29 ) .
The narrative sometimes slips into free indirect discourse ; Mrs. Thornton silently calls Margaret 's embroidery of a small piece of cambric " flimsy , useless work " when she visits the Hales ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 12 ) .
Bodenheimer ( 1979 , pp 299–300 ) believes that the narrator is interested in the psychology of her characters : their inner selves , how their contentious interactions with others subconsciously reveal their beliefs and how the changes they experience reflect their negotiation of the outside world .
Matus ( 2007 , pp .
35–43 ) also focuses on Gaskell 's depiction of " interiority " ( the psychic process ) , expressed in dreams and trances such as Thornton 's dream of Margaret as a temptress or the rioters ' " trance of passion " .
The phrase " as if " appears over 200 times , suggesting Gaskell 's reluctance to appear too definitive in her narration ( O'Farrell , 1997 , p 16 ) : " Bessy , who had sat down on the first chair , as if completely tired out with her walk " ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 11 ) and " [ Thornton ] spoke as if this consequence were so entirely logical " ( chapter 19 ) .
The phrase is primarily used when exploring the characters ' sensations and feelings : " As if she felt his look , she turned to him " ( chapter 22 ) ; " He had shaken off his emotion as if he was ashamed of ever giving way to it " ( chapter 28 ) , and " She lifted up her head , as if she took pride in any delicacy of feeling which Mr. Thornton had shown " ( chapter 39 ) .
Gaskell uses it when exploring the unconscious process that allows Thornton , whose suffering in love disturbs his composure and control of his feelings , to communicate with Higgins ( Matus , 2007 , p 40 ) : " ...
and then the conviction went in , as if by some spell , and touched the latent tenderness of his heart " ( chapter 39 ) .
STYLE AND LANGUAGE Section::::Style and language .
According to Rosemarie Bodenheimer , North and South narrative may sometimes appear melodramatic and sentimental ( "
But , for all that — for all his savage words , he could have thrown himself at her feet , and kissed the hem of her garment " in chapter 29)—particularly in the riot scene — but she sees Gaskell 's best writing as " done with the unjudging openness to experience " Which the author shares with D. H. Lawrence ( Bodenheimar 1979 , pp .
296–300 ) .
Jill L. Matus finds Gaskell 's vocabulary " Gothicized " in its descriptions of the characters ' agonised inner life — their responses to suffering and pain — which may appear melodramatic out of context .
However , " the language of shock and horror is absorbed into the realist texture of the novel 's narration " and is consistent with the extreme conditions of the novel 's external world ( Matus , 2007 , p. 39 ) .
A number of 19th - century authors were interested in native dialects : Scottish for Sir Walter Scott , Irish for Maria Edgeworth .
Gaskell , influenced by her husband 's work , did not hesitate to give her Milton workers Mancunian expressions and vocabulary without going as far as Emily Brontë 's transcription of Yorkshire pronunciation or Dickens ' Yarmouth fishermen in David Copperfield .
She developed a reputation for the skilful use of dialect to indicate status , age or intimacy between speakers ( Ingham , 1996 , p. 62 ) .
Margaret 's adaptation to the culture is demonstrated through language ( Ingham , 1996 , p 62 - 63 ) .
When her mother reproaches her for using Milton 's vulgar provincialisms ( such as " slack of work " ) , Margaret replies that since she lives in an industrial city , she must speak its language when called on to do so .
She cites a word which may be vulgar but which she finds expressive ( " knobstick " ) , and uses a local term ( " redding up " ; tidying ) to Boucher 's small children : " redding up the slatternly room " .
Gaskell begins each chapter with a poetic quote to accentuate a relevant theme , such as interior conflicts ( " My heart revolts within me , and two voices /
Make themselves audible within my bosom"—Wallenstein , chapter XVIII ) ,
duality ( " On earth is known to none /
The smile that is not sister to a tear . "
Elliott , chapter XXI ) , courtship , duty , suffering , steadfast courage , honesty , time and change .
SOCIAL CONDITIONS CONTEXT Section::::Social conditions .
Section::::Context .
Gaskell lived during the period of upheaval which followed the Industrial Revolution , and was aware of the difficult conditions of daily life and the health problems suffered by the workers of Manchester North and South has been interpreted by Roberto Dainotto as " a kind of apocalyptic journey into the inferno of the changing times — modern poverty , rage , desperation , militant trade unionism and class antagonism " .
The strike described in North and South resembles the Preston strike , which occurred the year before the novel was published .
The strike 's slogan was " ten per cent and no surrender " , and it was led by George Cowell and Mortimer Grimshaw .
Lasting nearly seven months ( from September 1853 to April 1854 ) , it was ultimately unsuccessful .
The strike is described in detail , with intelligent leaders like Higgins , the desperate violence and savagery of the rioters and the reactions of both sides ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 17 ) .
Through the eyes of Margaret ( a horrified , compassionate outsider ) , Gaskell illustrates the social misery of the slums Margaret visits , misery occasionally documented in parliamentary papers ( blue books ) with suggestive illustrations which resulted in the Factory Act of 1833 .
Gaskell uses a cause of conflict between masters and workers ( the installation of ventilators in the carding rooms ) to illustrate the greed of one and the ignorance of the other , making social progress difficult ( Navailles , 1983 ) , and calls attention to anti - Irish prejudice in a city where the Irish are a small minority .
She exposes the beliefs and reasoning of manufacturers in Thornton 's defence of a theory approaching social Darwinism : capitalism as naturally ( almost physically ) obeying immutable laws , a relentless race to progress in which humanity is sacrificed ; the weak die , whether they are masters or workers ( Gaskell , 1855 , chapter 15 ) .
Mrs. Thornton expresses the middle - class view of the working class as " a pack of ungrateful hounds " ( chapter 15 ) .
GASKELL 'S POSITION
Section::::Gaskell 's position .
North and South belongs to the canon of " condition of England " novels ( also known as social - problem , industrial or social novels ) which analyse Victorian social realities , offering " first - hand detailed observations of industrialism , urbanism , class , and gender conflicts " .
It attempts to answer questions posed by contemporary changes ( Nash , 2007 , p 96 ) positioning itself between the individual worker freedom championed by John Stuart Mill ( author of The Claims of Labor , published in the Edinburgh Review in 1845 ) and developed by Thornton in Chapter 15 and the responsibility of employers to their employees promoted by John Ruskin and Arthur Helps .
It represents a certain paternalism , challenging the cutoff between public and private spheres , freedom and responsibility , workplace and family life , trying to define a balance in relations between employers and workers ( Stoneman , 1987 , pp 118–138 ) .
Through Margaret and her father , Gaskell criticises the autocratic model which infantilises workers and is defended by Thornton ( who does not feel accountable to his workers for his actions or decisions ) .
She advocates for an authority which takes into account the needs of workers , a social and economic contract as advocated by John Locke in Two Treatises of Government , where masters and workers are in solidarity .
After the strike , Thornton finally acknowledges that " new forms of negotiation between management and labor are part of modern life " ( Bodenheimer , 1991 , p 61 ) ; the strike , which ruined him , was " respectable " because the workers depend on him for money and he depends on them to manufacture his product ( Nash , 2007 , p. 107 ) .
In the class struggle which victimises some ( such as Boucher and Bessy ) , Gaskell does not offer definitive conflict resolution ( Ingham , 1996 , p 71 ) ; Thornton 's hope for strikes , for instance , is that they no longer be " bitter and venomous " .
He and Higgins reach a level of understanding beyond a " cash nexus " through Margaret 's " ongoing involvement in the process of social change " ( Stoneman , 1987 , p. 137 ) by urging communication between masters and workers .
If the holders of economic power agree to talk to their workers , to consider them as human beings ( not tools of production ) , it may not eliminate social conflicts but will reduce their brutality ( Stoneman , 1987 , p 134 ) .
The protagonists experience personal transformations which unite them in the end ( Bodenheimer , 1979 ) – what Stoneman calls a " balanced emancipation " ( Stoneman , 1987 , p 138 ) .
According to Catherine Barnes Stevenson , Gaskell may have found women doing factory work problematic ; she often referred to " masters and men " and used one dying factory worker ( Bessy ) to represent women workers , who constituted more than half the factory workers at the time .
Stevenson wrote that Gaskell 's relative silence on female factory workers may reflect her struggle with the " triumph of the domestic ideology " by the middle class of the mid-1800s .
Gaskell hints at the difficulties families such as the Hales have keeping female domestic workers ( like Dixon ) in their proper – subordinate – place and becoming like members of the family ( blurring class differences ) , a scenario facing industrial workers as well
( Nash , 2007 ) .
ADAPTATIONS
TELEVISION AND LITERATURE Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Television and literature .
In the first television adaptation ( in 1975 ) , Patrick Stewart played Mr. Thornton and Rosalie Shanks played Margaret Hale .
Tim Pigott - Smith , who played Mr. Hale in the 2004 adaptation , played Frederick ( his son ) in the 1975 version .
In 2004 the BBC aired North & South , a four - episode serial with Daniela Denby - Ashe and Richard Armitage in the lead roles .
Sandy Welch wrote the screenplay , and Brian Percival directed .
A pastiche , Nice Work by David Lodge , was published in 1988 .
A Sunday Express Book of the Year winner , it was adapted as a television series by the BBC in 1989 .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Patsy Stoneman , Introduction and Notes to Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell , North and South ( Wordsworth Classics )
* * Patricia Ingham , North and South ( Introduction ) , Penguin Classics , 1995 , 450 p.
( ) Read excerpt online * * Patricia Ingham , ( 1996 ) .
The language of gender and class : transformation in the Victorian novel ( 1 .
publ .
ed . ) .
London :
Routledge .
pp .
197 .
( ) .
* * Alison Chapman , Elizabeth Gaskell : Mary Barton - North and South , Palgrave Macmillan , 1999 , 192 p.
( ) Read excerpt online * * Angus Easson and Sally Shuttleworth , North and South ( Introduction ) , Oxford University Press , 1998 , 452 p. ( )
* * Angus Easson , Elizabeth Gaskell , Routledge , 1979 , 278 p.
( ) * * Patsy Stoneman , Elizabeth Gaskell , Indiana University Press , 1987 , 224 p.
( ) * * Arthur Pollard , Mrs. Gaskell : novelist and biographer , Manchester University Press ND , 1967 , 268
p. Read excerpt online
* * Janine Barchas ( 2008 ) . "
Mrs. Gaskell 's North and South :
Austen 's early legacy " .
In Persuasions The Jane Austen Journal , Chicago , 30 : 53–66 .
*
* Rosemarie Bodenheimer ( 1979 ) . "
North and South : A Permanent State of Change " .
Nineteenth - Century Fiction 34 ( 3 ) .
*
* Rosemarie Bodenheimer ( 1991 ) .
The Politics of Story in Victorian Social Fiction , pages ; .
pp .
247 .
( ) Read excerpt online
*
* Mary Kuhlman ( 1996 ) .
" Education Through Experience in North and South " .
The Gaskell Journal 10 : 14–26 .
Read online * * Jill L. Matus , The Cambridge companion to Elizabeth Gaskell , Cambridge University Press , 2007 , 211 p.
( ) Read excerpt online
* * Julie Nash , Servants and paternalism in the works of Maria Edgeworth and Elizabeth Gaskell , Ashgate Publishing , 2007 , 130 p. ( )
Read excerpt online
*
* Mary Ann O'Farrell , Telling complexions : the nineteenth - century English novel and the blush , Duke University Press , 1997 , 182 p. ( ) Read excerpt online * * H. I. Dutton , John Edward King , ' Ten per cent and no surrender ' : the Preston strike , 1853–1854 , Cambridge University Press , 1981 ( ) * * Jean - Pierre Navailles ,
La famille ouvrière dans
l'Angleterre victorienne : des regards aux mentalités , Editions Champ Vallon , 1983 ,
335 p.
( )
* EXTERNAL LINKS * North and South – complete book in HTML one page for each chapter .
* North and South free ebook in PDF , PDB and LIT formats * in Mobipocket format *
North and South , the Musical – a new musical based on E. Gaskell 's novel * North and South 2004 ( unofficial ) Website