MATTER CREATION
Even restricting the discussion to physics , scientists do not have a unique definition of what matter is .
In the currently known particle physics , summarised by the standard model of elementary particles and interactions , it is possible to distinguish in an absolute sense particles of matter and particles of antimatter .
This is particularly easy for those particles that carry electric charge , such as electrons or protons or quarks .
In the standard model , it is not possible to create a net amount of matter particles — or more precisely , it is not possible to change the net number of leptons or of quarks in any perturbative reaction among particles .
This remark is consistent with all existing observations .
However , similar processes are not considered to be impossible and are expected in other models of the elementary particles , that extend the standard model .
They are necessary in speculative theories that aim to explain the cosmic excess of matter over antimatter , such as leptogenesis and baryogenesis and they could manifest themselves in laboratory as proton decay or as creations of electrons in the so - called neutrinoless double beta decay .
In a wider sense , one can use the word matter simply to refer to fermions .
In this sense , the process inverse to particle annihilation can be called matter creation ; more precisely , we are considering here the process obtained under time reversal of the annihilation process .
This process is also known as pair production , and can be described as the conversion of light particles ( i.e. , photons ) into one or more massive particles .
The most common and well - studied case is the one where two photons convert into an electron – positron pair .
PHOTON PAIR PRODUCTION Section::::Photon pair production .
Because of momentum conservation laws , the creation of a pair of fermions ( matter particles ) out of a single photon can not occur .
However , matter creation is allowed by these laws when in the presence of another particle ( another boson , or even a fermion ) which can share the primary photon 's momentum .
Thus , matter can be created out of two photons .
The law of conservation of energy sets a minimum photon energy required for the creation of a pair of fermions : this threshold energy must be greater than the total rest energy of the fermions created .
To create an electron - positron pair , the total energy of the photons , in the rest frame , must be at least 2mc = 2 × =
( m is the mass of one electron and c is the speed of light in vacuum ) , an energy value that corresponds to soft gamma ray photons .
The creation of a much more massive pair , like a proton and antiproton , requires photons with energy of more than ( hard gamma ray photons ) .
The first published calculations of the rate of e – e pair production in photon - photon collisions were done by Lev Landau in 1934 .
It was predicted that the process of e – e pair creation ( via collisions of photons ) dominates in collision of ultra - relativistic charged particles — because those photons are radiated in narrow cones along the direction of motion of the original particle , greatly increasing photon flux .
In high - energy particle colliders , matter creation events have yielded a wide variety of exotic heavy particles precipitating out of colliding photon jets ( see two - photon physics ) .
Currently , two - photon physics studies creation of various fermion pairs both theoretically and experimentally ( using particle accelerators , air showers , radioactive isotopes , etc . ) .
As shown above , to produce ordinary baryonic matter out of a photon gas , this gas must not only have a very high photon density , but also be very hot – the energy ( temperature ) of photons must obviously exceed the rest mass energy of the given matter particle pair .
The threshold temperature for production of electrons is about 10 K , 10 K for protons and neutrons , etc .
According to the Big Bang theory , in the early universe , mass - less photons and massive fermions would inter - convert freely .
As the photon gas expanded and cooled , some fermions would be left over ( in extremely small amounts ~10 ) because low energy photons could no longer break them apart .
Those left - over fermions would have become the matter we see today in the universe around us .
SEE ALSO * Annihilation * Available energy * Pair production
* Schwinger limit REFERENCES