ENROLLED AGENT Enrolled agent ( or EA ) is a tax advisor who is a federally authorized tax practitioner empowered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury .
Enrolled agents represent taxpayers before the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) for tax issues including audits , collections and appeals .
Enrolled agent status is the highest credential awarded by the IRS .
The EA credential is recognized across all 50 U.S. states .
Attorneys and certified public accountants ( CPAs ) are licensed on a state by state basis , and are also empowered by the Department of the Treasury to represent taxpayers before the IRS .
According to the National Association of Enrolled Agents , there are approximately 53,000 practicing EAs in the United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The position of enrolled agent was created as a reaction to fraudulent war loss claims in the wake of the American Civil War with roots tracing back to the General Deficiency Act of July 7 , 1884 , or General Deficiency Appropriation Bill ( H.R. 2735 ) , also known as the " Horse Act of 1884 " , which was signed into law by President Chester A. Arthur on July 7 , 1884 .
After the Civil War , many citizens faced difficulties in settling claims with the government for property confiscated for use in the war effort .
As a result , Congress endowed enrolled agents with the power of advocacy to prepare claims against the government .
From 1884 through the early 20th century , this statute remained largely unchanged .
When the Revenue Act of 1913 was passed , signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on October 3 , 1913 , the scope of the enrolled agent was expanded to include claims for monetary relief for citizens whose taxes had become inequitable .
As income , estate , gift and other sources of tax collections became more complex , the role of the enrolled agent increased to include the preparation of the many tax forms that were required .
As a result of this complexity , audits became more prevalent and the enrolled agent role evolved into taxpayer representation , promulgating a series of statutes which were combined into a single Treasury Department Circular in February 19 , 1921 , known as Circular 230 , to address " the laws and regulations governing the recognition of agents , attorneys , and other persons representing claimants before the Treasury Department and offices thereof . "
BECOMING
AN ENROLLED AGENT
Section::::Becoming an enrolled agent .
To become an enrolled agent , an applicant must obtain a PTIN and achieve passing scores on all three parts of the Special Enrollment Examination , which covers many aspects of the Internal Revenue Code , or must have worked at the IRS for five consecutive years in a position which regularly engaged in applying and interpreting the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations relating to income , estate , gift , employment , or excise taxes .
A background check , including a review of the applicant 's personal and business tax compliance , is conducted after an applicant files
Form 23 , Application for Enrollment to Practice Before the Internal Revenue Service , within one year of completing all three parts of the examination .
MAINTAINING ENROLLED
AGENT STATUS RENEWAL FOR ACTIVE ENROLLED
AGENTS
Section::::Maintaining enrolled agent status .
Section::::Renewal for active enrolled agents .
To qualify for renewal as an enrolled agent , an individual must complete 72 hours of continuing professional education ( CPE ) every three years , including two hours of ethics or professional conduct in each of the three years .
To prevent overloading of CPEs in any year of an enrollment cycle , the IRS requires a minimum of 16 hours of CPE every year .
Individuals must renew their PTIN between October 16 and December 31 of each year .
Individuals must file Form 8554 , Application for Renewal of Enrollment to Practice Before the Internal Revenue Service , within the applicable renewal period .
Renewal periods are based on the last digit of an enrolled agent 's Social Security number ( SSN ) or tax identification number RENEWAL
AFTER INITIAL ENROLLMENT CYCLE Section::::Renewal after initial enrollment cycle .
Individuals admitted to practice at any time during an enrollment cycle , " the three successive enrollment years preceding the effective date of renewal , " must complete two hours of continuing professional education for each month of enrollment , including two hours of ethics or professional conduct in each year .
If an individual receives initial enrollment between November 1 and April 1 of their applicable renewal period , they will not be required to renew until the expiration of the first full three - year enrollment cycle following their initial enrollment .
FAILURE TO RENEW
Section::::Failure to renew .
An individual who has not filed a timely application for renewal , who has not made a timely response to the notice of noncompliance , or who has not satisfied the requirements of eligibility for renewal , will be placed on a roster of inactive enrolled individuals .
During this time , the individual will be ineligible to practice before the Internal Revenue Service and may not state or imply that they are eligible to represent taxpayers , use the term enrolled agent , or use the EA designation .
PRACTICE
BEFORE THE IRS :
ENROLLED AGENTS AND OTHER PRACTITIONERS Section::::Practice before the IRS : Enrolled agents and other practitioners .
The right to practice before the Internal Revenue Service is regulated by Federal statute , and persons authorized to practice are known as " Federally Authorized Tax Practitioners " , or " FATPs " .
The FATP status is granted to attorneys , certified public accountants , and enrolled agents , each having unlimited representation rights before the Internal Revenue Service .
These practitioners may represent their clients on any matters including audits , collection actions , payment issues , tax refund matters , and appeals .
FATP status is also granted with limited representation rights to enrolled actuaries , enrolled retirement plan agents , and registered tax return preparers .
Enrolled agents , like other FATPs , are subject to a set of procedures and regulations described in Treasury Department Circular No . 230 , Regulations Governing the Practice of Attorneys , Certified Public Accountants , Enrolled Agents , Enrolled Actuaries , and Appraisers before the Internal Revenue Service .
When practicing before the Internal Revenue Service , enrolled agents may not use the term " certified " in describing their professional designation .
An enrolled agent admitted to practice before the Internal Revenue Service may not state or imply that an employer / employee relationship exists between the enrolled agent and the Internal Revenue Service .
PRACTICE IN FEDERAL COURTS Section::::Practice in federal courts .
Enrolled agent status does not authorize the enrollee to practice before the United States Tax Court or in any other court .
Practice in U.S. Tax Court is limited to members of the Bar of the Court .
The Internal Revenue Code states , " No qualified person shall be denied admission to practice before the Tax Court because of his failure to be a member of any profession or calling .
" Non - attorneys must pass a Tax Court exam for admission to the Bar of the Court .
Attorneys are admitted to the Bar of the Tax Court without having to take the Tax Court examination .
Practice in other federal courts is generally limited to persons licensed as attorneys .
SEE ALSO * National Society of Tax Professionals ( NSTP ) * American Society of Tax Problem Solvers
* National Association of Enrolled Agents ( NAEA ) * National Association of Tax Professionals ( NATP ) * National Society of Accountants ( NSA )
* Tax advisor NOTES
REFERENCES
* U.S. Internal Revenue Service .
Enrollment overview .
Retrieved January 30 , 2006 .
* National Association of Enrolled Agents NAEA
* Understanding Tax Return Preparer Credentials ( irs.gov )