HIGH - FRUCTOSE CORN SYRUP High - fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) ,
also known as glucose - fructose , isoglucose and glucose - fructose syrup , is a sweetener made from corn starch .
As in the production of conventional corn syrup , the starch is broken down into glucose by enzymes .
To make HFCS , the corn syrup is further processed by glucose isomerase to convert some of its glucose into fructose .
HFCS was first marketed in the early 1970s by the Clinton Corn Processing Company , together with the Japanese Agency of Industrial Science and Technology where the enzyme was discovered in 1965 .
As a sweetener , HFCS is often compared to granulated sugar , but manufacturing advantages of HFCS over sugar include that it is easier to handle and more cost - effective .
The United States Food and Drug Administration has determined that HFCS is a safe ingredient for food and beverage manufacturing , where " HFCS 42 " refers to 42 % and " HFCS 55 " to 55 % fructose composition in manufacturing , respectively .
HFCS 42 is mainly used for processed foods and breakfast cereals , whereas HFCS 55 is used mostly for production of soft drinks .
There is debate over whether HFCS presents greater health risks than other sweeteners .
The number of uses and exports of HFCS from American producers have grown steadily during the early 21st century .
FOOD Section::::Food .
In the U.S. , HFCS is among the sweeteners that mostly replaced sucrose ( table sugar ) in the food industry .
Factors in the rise of HFCS use include production quotas of domestic sugar , import tariff on foreign sugar , and subsidies of U.S. corn , raising the price of sucrose and lowering that of HFCS , making it cheapest for many sweetener applications .
The relative sweetness of HFCS 55 , used most commonly in soft drinks , is comparable to sucrose .
HFCS ( and/or standard corn syrup ) is the primary ingredient in most brands of commercial " pancake syrup " , as a less expensive substitute for maple syrup .
Because of its similar sugar profile and lower price , HFCS has been used illegally to " stretch " honey .
Assays to detect adulteration with HFCS use differential scanning calorimetry and other advanced testing methods .
PRODUCTION
PROCESS
Section::::Production .
Section::::Process .
In the contemporary process , corn is milled to extract corn starch and an " acid - enzyme " process is used , in which the corn - starch solution is acidified to begin breaking up the existing carbohydrates .
It is necessary to carry out the extraction process in the presence of mercuric chloride ( 0.01 M ) in order to inhibit endogenous starch - degrading enzymes .
High - temperature enzymes are added to further metabolize the starch and convert the resulting sugars to fructose .
The first enzyme added is alpha - amylase , which breaks the long chains down into shorter sugar chains – oligosaccharides .
Glucoamylase is mixed in and converts them to glucose ; the resulting solution is filtered to remove protein , then using activated carbon , and then demineralized using ion - exchange resins .
The purified solution is then run over immobilized xylose isomerase , which turns the sugars to ~50–52 % glucose with some unconverted oligosaccharides and 42 % fructose ( HFCS 42 ) , and again demineralized and again purified using activated carbon .
Some is processed into HFCS 90 by liquid chromatography , then mixed with HFCS 42 to form HFCS 55 .
The enzymes used in the process are made by microbial fermentation .
COMPOSITION AND VARIETIES Section::::Composition and varieties .
HFCS is 24 % water , the rest being mainly fructose and glucose with 0–5 % unprocessed glucose oligomers .
The most common forms of HFCS used for food and beverage manufacturing contain fructose in either 42 % ( " HFCS 42 " ) or 55 % ( " HFCS 55 " )
amounts , as described in the US Code of Federal Regulations ( 21 CFR 184.1866 ) .
* HFCS 42
( ≈42 % fructose if water were removed ) is used in beverages , processed foods , cereals , and baked goods .
*
HFCS 55 is mostly used in soft drinks .
*
HFCS 65 is used in soft drinks dispensed by Coca - Cola Freestyle machines .
*
HFCS 90 has some niche uses , but is mainly mixed with HFCS 42 to make HFCS 55 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Commercial production of corn syrup began in 1864 .
In the late 1950s , scientists at Clinton Corn Processing Company of Clinton , Iowa , tried to turn glucose from corn starch into fructose , but the process was not scalable .
In 1965–1970 Yoshiyuki Takasaki , at the Japanese National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology ( AIST ) developed a heat - stable xylose isomerase enzyme from yeast .
In 1967 , the Clinton Corn Processing Company obtained an exclusive license to a manufacture glucose isomerase derived from Streptomyces bacteria and began shipping an early version of HFCS in February 1967 .
In 1983 , the FDA approved HFCS as Generally Recognized as Safe ( GRAS ) , and that decision was reaffirmed in 1996 Prior to the development of the worldwide sugar industry , dietary fructose was limited to only a few items .
Milk , meats , and most vegetables , the staples of many early diets , have no fructose , and only 5–10 % fructose by weight is found in fruits such as grapes , apples , and blueberries .
Most traditional dried fruits , however , contain about 50 % fructose .
From 1970 to 2000 , there was a 25 % increase in " added sugars " in the U.S. After being classified as generally recognized as safe ( GRAS ) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1976 , HFCS began to replace sucrose as the main sweetener of soft drinks in the United States .
At the same time , rates of obesity rose .
That correlation , in combination with laboratory research and epidemiological studies that suggested a link between consuming large amounts of fructose and changes to various proxy health measures , including elevated blood triglycerides , size and type of low - density lipoproteins , uric acid levels , and weight , raised concerns about health effects of HFCS itself .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the U.S. , sugar tariffs and quotas keep imported sugar at up to twice the global price since 1797 , while subsidies to corn growers cheapen the primary ingredient in HFCS , corn .
Industrial users looking for cheaper replacements rapidly adopted HFCS in the 1970s .
HFCS is easier to handle than granulated sucrose , although some sucrose is transported as solution .
Unlike sucrose , HFCS can not be hydrolyzed , but the free fructose in HFCS may produce hydroxymethylfurfural when stored at high temperatures ; these differences are most prominent in acidic beverages .
Soft drink makers such as Coca - Cola and Pepsi continue to use sugar in other nations but transitioned to HFCS for U.S. markets in 1980 before completely switching over in 1984 .
Large corporations , such as Archer Daniels Midland , lobby for the continuation of government corn subsidies .
Consumption of HFCS in the U.S. has declined since it peaked at per person in 1999 .
The average American consumed approximately of HFCS in 2012 , versus of refined cane and beet sugar .
This decrease in domestic consumption of HFCS resulted in a push in exporting of the product .
In 2014 , exports of HFCS were valued at $ 436 million , a decrease of 21 % in one year , with Mexico receiving about 75 % of the export volume .
In 2010 , the Corn Refiners Association petitioned the FDA to call HFCS " corn sugar " , but the petition was denied .
EUROPEAN UNION Section::::European Union .
In the European Union ( EU ) , HFCS , known as isoglucose in sugar regime , is subject to a production quota .
In 2005 , this quota was set at 303,000 tonnes ; in comparison , the EU produced an average of 18.6 million tonnes of sugar annually between 1999 and 2001 .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Japan , HFCS is manufactured mostly from imported U.S. corn , and the output is regulated by the government .
For the period from 2007 to 2012 , HFCS had a 27–30 % share of the Japanese sweetener market .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Health concerns have been raised about a relationship between HFCS and metabolic disorders , and with regard to manufacturing contaminants .
In general , however , the United States Food and Drug Administration has declared HFCS as a safe ingredient in food manufacturing , and there is no evidence that retail HFCS products contain harmful compounds or cause diseases .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
HFCS is composed of 76 % carbohydrates and 24 % water , containing no fat , no protein , and no essential nutrients in significant amounts ( table ) .
In a 100 gram serving , it supplies 281 calories , while in one tablespoon of 19 grams , it supplies 53 calories ( table link ) .
OBESITY AND METABOLIC DISORDERS Section::::Obesity and metabolic disorders .
In the 1980s and 1990s there were publications cautioning consumption of sucrose and of HFCS .
In subsequent interviews , two of the study 's authors stated the article was distorted to place emphasis solely on HFCS when the actual issue was the overconsumption of any type of sugar .
While fructose absorption and modification by the intestines and liver does differ from glucose initially , the majority of the fructose molecules are converted to glucose or metabolized into byproducts identical to those produced by glucose metabolism .
Consumption of moderate amounts of fructose has also been linked to positive outcomes , including reducing appetite if consumed before a meal , lower blood sugar increases compared to glucose , and ( again compared to glucose ) delaying exhaustion if consumed during exercise .
In 2007 , an expert panel assembled by the University of Maryland 's Center for Food , Nutrition and Agriculture Policy reviewed the links between HFCS and obesity and concluded there was no ecological validity in the association between rising body mass indexes ( a measure of obesity ) and the consumption of HFCS .
The panel stated that since the ratio of fructose to glucose had not changed substantially in the United States since the 1960s when HFCS was introduced , the changes in obesity rates were probably not due to HFCS specifically , but rather a greater consumption of calories overall .
In 2009 the American Medical Association published a review article on HFCS and concluded it was unlikely that HFCS contributed more to obesity or other health conditions than sucrose , and there was insufficient evidence to suggest warning about or restricting use of HFCS or other fructose - containing sweeteners in foods .
The review did report that while some studies found direct associations between high intakes of fructose and other sugars and adverse health outcomes , including obesity and the metabolic syndrome , there was insufficient evidence to ban or restrict use of HFCS in the food supply or to require warning labels on products containing HFCS .
Epidemiological research has suggested that the increase in metabolic disorders like obesity and non - alcoholic fatty liver disease is linked to increased consumption of sugars and/or calories in general and not due to any special effect of HFCS .
A 2014 systematic review found little evidence for an association between HFCS consumption and liver diseases , enzyme levels or fat content .
A 2012 review found that fructose did not appear to cause weight gain when it replaced other carbohydrates in diets with similar calories .
One study investigating HFCS as a possible contributor to diabetes and obesity states that , " As many of the metabolic consequences of a diet high in fructose - containing sugars in humans can also be observed with high - fat or high - glucose feeding , it is possible that excess calories may be the main culprit in the development of the metabolic syndrome . "
Another study compared similar intakes of honey , white cane sugar , and HFCS , showing similar rises in both blood sugar level and triglycerides .
High fructose consumption has been linked to high levels of uric acid in the blood , though this is only thought to be a concern for patients with gout .
Numerous agencies in the United States recommend reducing the consumption of all sugars , including HFCS , without singling it out as presenting extra concerns .
The Mayo Clinic cites the American Heart Association 's recommendation that women limit the added sugar in their diet to 100 calories a day ( ~6 teaspoons ) and that men limit it to 150 calories a day ( ~9 teaspoons ) , noting that there is not enough evidence to support HFCS having more adverse health effects than excess consumption of any other type of sugar .
The United States departments of Agriculture and Health and Human Services recommendations for a healthy diet state that consumption of all types of added sugars be reduced .
People with fructose malabsorption should avoid foods containing HFCS .
SAFETY AND MANUFACTURING CONCERNS Section::::Safety and manufacturing concerns .
Since 2014 , the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) has declared HFCS to be safe as a food ingredient .
In 2015 , production of HFCS in the United States was 8.5 million tons from some 500 million bushels of corn .
One consumer concern about HFCS is that processing of corn is more complex than used for " simpler " or " more natural " sugars , such as fruit juice concentrates or agave nectar , but all sweetener products derived from raw materials involve similar processing steps of pulping , hydrolysis , enzyme treatment , and filtration , among other common steps of sweetener manufacturing from natural sources .
In the contemporary process to make HFCS , an " acid - enzyme " step is used in which the cornstarch solution is acidified to digest the existing carbohydrates , then enzymes are added to further metabolize the cornstarch and convert the resulting sugars to their constituents of fructose and glucose .
Analyses published in 2014 showed that HFCS content of fructose was consistent across samples from 80 randomly selected carbonated beverages sweetened with HFCS .
One prior concern in manufacturing was whether HFCS contains reactive carbonyl compounds or advanced glycation end - products evolved during processing .
This concern was dismissed , however , with evidence that HFCS poses no dietary risk from these compounds .
Through the early 21st Century , some factories manufacturing HFCS had used a chlor - alkali corn processing method which , in cases of applying mercury cell technology for digesting corn raw material , left trace residues of mercury in some batches of HFCS .
In a 2009 release , The Corn Refiners Association stated that all factories in the American industry for manufacturing HFCS had used mercury - free processing over several previous years , making the prior report outdated .
As of 2017 , the USDA , FDA and US Centers for Disease Control list HFCS as a safe food ingredient , and do not mention mercury as a safety concern in HFCS products .
OTHER TASTE DIFFERENCE Section::::Other .
Section::::Taste difference .
Most countries , including Mexico , use sucrose , or table sugar , in soft drinks .
In the U.S. , soft drinks , including Coca - Cola , are typically made with HFCS .
Some Americans seek out drinks such as Mexican Coca - Cola in ethnic groceries because they prefer the taste over that of HFCS - sweetened Coca - Cola .
Kosher Coca - Cola , sold in the U.S. around the Jewish holiday of Passover , also uses sucrose rather than HFCS and is highly sought after by people who prefer the original taste .
While these are simply opinions , a 2011 study further backed up the idea that people enjoy sucrose ( table sugar ) more than HFCS .
The study , conducted by Michigan State University , included a 99-member panel that evaluated yogurt sweetened with sucrose ( table sugar ) , HFCS , and different varieties of honey for likeness .
The results showed that , overall , the panel enjoyed the yogurt with sucrose ( table sugar ) added more than those that contained HFCS or honey .
BEEKEEPING
Section::::Beekeeping .
In apiculture in the United States , HFCS is a honey substitute for some managed honey bee colonies during times when nectar is in low supply .
However , when HFCS is heated to about , hydroxymethylfurfural , which is toxic to bees , can form from the breakdown of fructose .
Although some researchers cite honey substitution with HFCS as one factor among many for colony collapse disorder , there is no evidence that HFCS is the only cause .
Compared to hive honey , HFCS may be a deficiency in the diet for developing genes associated with protein metabolism and physiological benefits affecting bee health .
PUBLIC RELATIONS Section::::Public relations .
There are various public relations concerns with HFCS , including how HFCS products are advertised and labeled as " natural . "
As a consequence , several companies reverted to manufacturing with sucrose ( table sugar ) from products that had previously been made with HFCS .
In 2010 , the Corn Refiners Association ( CRA ) applied to allow HFCS to be renamed " corn sugar " , but that petition was rejected by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 2012 .
In August 2016 in a move to please consumers with health concerns , McDonald 's announced they would be replacing all HFCS in their buns with sucrose ( table sugar ) and would cut out preservatives and other artificial additives from their menu items .
Marion Gross , senior vice president of McDonald 's stated , " We know that they [ consumers ] do n't feel good about high - fructose corn syrup so we 're giving them what they 're looking for instead . "
Over the early 21st century , other companies such as Yoplait , Gatorade , and Hershey 's also phased out HFCS , replacing it with conventional sugar because consumers perceived sugar to be healthier .
Companies such as PepsiCo and Heinz have also released products that use sugar in lieu of HFCS , although they still sell HFCS - sweetened products .
SEE ALSO
* High - maltose corn syrup REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS