JAWS ( RIDE )
Jaws is a theme park attraction at Universal Studios Japan .
Based upon the films of the same name .
The attraction places guests aboard tour boats for what should be a leisurely tour of Amity Harbor but instead becomes a harrowing chase between the craft and a very determined great white shark .
Jaws is an expanded version of a famous miniature attraction on the long - running and world - famous Studio Tour at Universal Studios Hollywood , also inspired by the film , and can be found at Universal Studios Japan near Osaka , and formerly , at Universal Studios Florida in Orlando .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The original attraction at Universal Studios Florida was inspired by a small attraction on the long - running Studio Tour at Universal Studios Hollywood , in which the Studio Tour tram passed through several sets from the film and was then attacked by an animatronic shark known as Jaws while driving by the Amity Harbor shoreline .
This attraction opened in 1976 and continues to operate to this day .
For the Universal Studios Florida park / studio project , Universal sought to take the components of the Hollywood tram stop and turn it into its own ride .
The original ride was designed by MCA / Universal Planning and Development , in association with Ride & Show Engineering , Inc. , which designed the original tour scene .
Steven Spielberg , who directed the first film in the series , also served as a creative consultant for the ride .
Following the opening of Jaws within the park on June 7 , 1990 , it experienced extensive and persistent breakdowns as a result of the elaborate special effects involved , as did fellow original rides Kongfrontation and .
However , while Universal was able to eventually contain the technical bugs in the Kong and Earthquake rides at " utmost consistency " , the effects in the Jaws ride constantly refused to work at all , resulting in the ride having to be evacuated almost daily .
Following the Summer opening of the park , Universal temporarily shut down the ride in August 1990 and sued Ride & Show Engineering , Inc. for failing to properly design the ride .
Throughout 1991 and early 1992 , Universal attempted to refurbish the effects of the ride for an eventual re - opening , but with no success .
Some reports leaked that the high - tech electronics used in the sharks was damaged due to inadequate waterproofing .
Eventually , Universal collaborated with Totally Fun Company , ITEC Entertainment , Intamin and Oceaneering International , who together installed an entirely new ride system and special effects to create an almost entirely new version of the ride .
Some of the changes , which resulted in a re - design of the ride , included the replacement of two major ride scenes ; the first being where Jaws bit onto the tour boat and turned it by 180-degrees ( which was replaced with a Gas dock explosion scene ) ; and the second being the finale , which was originally loosely based on the first Jaws where the skipper shot a grenade into the shark 's mouth causing it to explode underwater ( which was replaced by a finale loosely based on the ending for Jaws 2 where the shark was electrocuted after biting onto an underwater cable attached to a high - voltage barge ) .
Oceaneering provided the animatronic shark for the redesigned ride , their first theme park - based project .
The ride was then officially re - opened by Roy Scheider , Lorraine Gary and Steven Spielberg in Spring of 1993 .
On March 31 , 2001 , Jaws officially opened at Universal Studios Japan .
The ride system for the attraction was developed by MTS Systems Corporation .
Following the hurricanes that struck Central Florida in 2004 , Universal was forced to temporarily close the ride in January 2005 due to the rising cost of petroleum , which was used to fuel the numerous pyrotechnical effects throughout the attraction as well as the tour boats .
The ride finally reopened in December 2005 , but was listed as " seasonal " and only open on busier days .
This lasted until February 2007 when the ride was finally opened full - time again after numerous guest complaints .
During the 2005 closure , several renovations were made to the ride .
The attraction was further refurbished every year from 2008 - 2011 .
On December 2 , 2011 , Universal Orlando Resort announced that the Jaws attraction along with the entire Amity area of Universal Studios Florida would close permanently on January 2 , 2012 , to " make room for an exciting , NEW , experience . "
( the second phase of The Wizarding World Of Harry Potter . )
severe backlash followed after the announcement .
The attraction officially closed on January 2 , 2012 , at 9:00 pm with Michael Skipper aka " Skip " giving the final voyage to the last lucky group of 48 guests .
By the next morning , the entire Amity area was walled off and completely demolished in the following months .
The hanging shark statue from the town square remains as a tribute to the ride and can be found in the Fisherman 's Wharf area of the San Francisco section of the park .
The attraction remains open at Universal Studios Japan as well as the original tram stop at Universal Studios Hollywood .
RIDE SYNOPSIS Section::::Ride synopsis .
After the shark nicknamed as Jaws was eventually destroyed by Chief Brody , Matt Hooper and Quint in 1974 , Brody became a legend in Amity Harbor , and the " Jaws " incident inspired Steven Spielberg 's big Hollywood movie .
However , the tourism on Amity Island strongly decreased following the incident due to a fear of sharks .
However , resident seaman Jake Grundy decided to open a new boat tour on the island which would take guests out to the historic areas where the shark attacks actually occurred , which ultimately brought back tourism to the island .
QUEUE Section::::Queue .
As guests enter Captain Jake 's Amity Boat Tours , they walk through a series of boathouses located near Amity Harbor , which hold various fishing supplies , nautical artifacts and feature numerous overhead television monitors that are tuned to Amity 's local TV station , WJWS13 :
The Station That BITES ( which also has the tagline " The station that plays the hits " ) .
The station features a low - budget local talk show entitled " Hey There , Amity ! " , children 's and news programming , ads for local businesses , and promos for classic movies and television shows , many of them from the Universal library .
Upon reaching the end of the queue , guests are loaded onto one of Captain Jake 's tour boats .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
After boarding the tour boat , guests learn that they are taking a guided scenic cruise to visit the actual locations of the shark attacks that occurred during that fateful summer of 1974 , which were made famous in a popular Hollywood movie that was made not long afterward .
The tour boat is piloted by one of Captain Jake 's skippers , and is protected by an army surplus 40 mm grenade launcher .
However , guests are reassured by their skipper that they wo n't need to use it because no one has seen a shark in the area since 1974 .
The tour begins in Amity Harbor as the tour boat passes the homes of Chief Brody , Mayor Larry Vaughn , and various harbor side businesses .
As the tour boat approaches a lighthouse situated on top of a rocky jetty , the tour is suddenly interrupted by a radio distress call from a fellow tour boat skipper named Gordon .
His call for help turns into screams of terror , followed by silence .
As the shipper contacts the home base in an attempt to find out what is going on with Gordon 's boat , the tour boat crosses the jetty to reveal the remains of Gordon 's tour boat , Amity 3 , sinking under the water .
Suddenly , a dorsal fin rises out of the water , the fin of what appears to be a great white shark .
The fin submerges and passes under the tour boat , rocking it back and forth .
Distressed , the skipper pulls out the grenade launcher as the dorsal fin rises out of the water on the starboard .
Not realizing that it is actually loaded , the skipper fires at the shark , but misses .
They try firing the second shot but miss again as the fin sinks back beneath the surface of the water .
The skipper then comes up with the idea to try to hide the tour boat in a nearby boathouse and wait for Chief Brody 's arrival .
As the skipper brings the tour boat to a stop inside the boathouse and looks for somewhere to tie it up , a sound is heard somewhere near the back of the boathouse .
As the stressed skipper tries to figure out what it was , a loud crashing noise breaks the silence as the walls of the boathouse begin to shake .
The skipper realizes that the shark is ramming itself into the outside of the boathouse trying to break in .
The skipper tries to drive off but is unable to get the tour boat to drop into gear .
After several seconds of fighting with the tour boat 's throttle , the skipper finally gets it to drop into gear just as the shark finally breaks a hole through the wall and surfaces inside of the boathouse , grazing the side of the tour boat .
As the tour boat leaves the boathouse , the skipper is informed by Chief Brody over the radio that he 'll be there in ten minutes .
The skipper replies with " we 'll be shark bait in ten minutes " and picks up the grenade launcher again , just as the shark reemerges and attacks the tour boat near Bridewell 's Gas Dock .
Unfortunately , the next grenade that the skipper fires hit the nearby gas dock , which erupts into flames , threatening to engulf the tour boat and its passengers .
However , the skipper manages to make a getaway before the flames reach the tour boat .
As a last resort , the skipper decides to unload everyone at an old fishing pier that happens to be located near a high voltage barge .
But just as they reach the pier , the shark 's fin reappears heading straight for the tour boat .
Suddenly , the shark emerges right next to the tour boat but instead accidentally bites down onto a submerged power cable from the barge and electrocutes itself .
The smell of roasted shark fills the air as the shark disappears into a cloud of steam that engulfs the tour boat .
As the steam cloud dissipates , the charred corpse of the shark resurfaces and makes one final lunge at the tour boat .
But the skipper quickly takes one last shot at it with the grenade launcher and finally hits it , destroying the shark .
The guests cheer on the skipper for bringing safety to Amity Island and destroying the shark .
SEE ALSO
* Jaws ( film )
* Studio Tour * List of amusement rides based on film franchises
* 2012 in amusement parks
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Jaws at Universal Studios Japan
* Video of the Jaws ride
*
Jaws ride information