CHARLIE AND LOLA Charlie and Lola are created by the English writer and illustrator Lauren Child in 2000 .
They were introduced in a series of picture books and later adapted as animated television characters .
Lola is an energetic , imaginative little girl ; Charlie is her patient and kind big brother who is always willing to help Lola learn and grow .
The first " Charlie and Lola " book was I Will Not Ever Never Eat a Tomato , published by Orchard Books in 2000 .
The U.S. edition was published in the same year by Candlewick Press , with the title : I Will Never NOT EVER Eat a Tomato .
Charlie and Lola 's parents , as well as their friends ' parents , are often mentioned , but never seen .
For that first book in the series , Child won the 2000 Kate Greenaway Medal from the Library Association , recognising the year 's best children 's book illustration by a British subject .
For the 50th anniversary of the Medal ( 1955–2005 ) it was named one of the top ten winning works , selected by a 2007 panel to compose the ballot for a public election of the all - time favourite .
PUBLICATIONS Original " Charlie and Lola " books by Lauren Child
* I Will Not Ever Never Eat A Tomato ( Orchard Books , 2000 )
* I Am Not Sleepy
and I Will Not Go to Bed ( 2001 )
* I Am Too Absolutely Small For School ( 2003 )
* Slightly Invisible ( 2010 ) Spin - off books based on the television series
*
I 've Won ,
No
I 've Won ,
No
I 've Won
*
Snow Is My Favourite and My Best * Excuse Me , But
That Is My Book ( TV episode title : But
That Is My Book ) "
*
We Honestly Can Look After Your Dog
( TV episode title : We Do Promise Honestly
We Can Look After Your Dog )
*
My Wobbly Tooth Must Not Ever Never Fall Out
( TV episode title :
I Do Not Ever Never Want My Wobbly Tooth to Fall Out )
*
Say Cheese
*
I 'm Just Not Keen on Spiders
* Whoops !
But It Was n't Me !
( TV episode title :
It Was n't Me ! )
*
This is Actually My Party
* I Can Do Anything That 's Everything all on my Own
* You Can Be My Friend *
You Wo n't Like This Present As Much As I Do
*
My School Play Sticker Book (
Based upon the episode There Is Only One Sun and That Is Me )
*
My Haircut Sticker Book ( Based upon the episode
I Like My Hair
Completely the Way It Is )
*
My Busy Sticker Book ( Based upon the episode
I 'm a For Too Extremely Busy )
*
My Wonderful Picnic Sticker Book ( Based upon the episode
The Most Wonderfullest Picnic in the Whole Wide World ) Section::::Publications .
Various colouring books and a magazine are also available in the UK .
The " Charlie and Lola " books have been translated into Welsh under the name Cai a Lois and into many other languages .
CHARACTERS OF CHARLIE AND LOLA
CHARLIE SONNOR Section::::Characters of Charlie and Lola .
Section::::Charlie Sonnor .
Charlie is the imaginative and helpful brother of Lola and is a hero .
He is 7 years old and has the same hair color as Lola .
Charlie is often asked to look after Lola , and he sometimes has to think of creative ways to keep her busy .
In the TV series , he breaks the fourth wall by talking about Lola to the viewers , and also narrates the episodes .
LOLA SONNOR Section::::Lola Sonnor .
Lola is an imaginative , quirky 5-year - old girl .
Lola is Charlie 's little sister ; and is best friends with Lotta .
She is described by her brother Charlie as " small and very funny " .
She likes playing and is full of character .
She normally wears blue butterfly hair clips .
She has black eyes and short blonde hair and is a drama queen .
She also has an imaginary friend called Soren Lorenson .
MARV LOWE Section::::Marv Lowe .
Marv is Charlie 's best friend .
He has a younger brother named Morten and an older brother named Marty .
Marv also has a sausage dog named Sizzles and a pet mouse named Squeak .
He is the same age as Charlie .
He resides at the third level in his flat like Charlie who resides on the third level too .
LOTTA ZEHYBE
Section::::Lotta Zehybe .
Lotta is Lola 's best friend .
She has black curly hair or puffy pigtails and she is the same age as Lola .
SOREN LORENSON Section::::Soren Lorenson .
Soren Lorenson is Lola 's imaginary friend , rendered as monochrome and translucent .
When Lola and Soren are playing , Soren is rather detailed ( has the look of a real person only grey and translucent ) when playing with Lola .
When someone interrupts them ( such as Charlie ) , Soren still has detail and he becomes more unknown .
MINOR OR BACKGROUND CHARACTERS Section::::Minor or background characters .
Marty Lowe Marty is Marv 's older brother .
He does not throw anything away .
Marty does not seem to like people in his room .
His voice is heard in Look After Your Planet .
He exclaims " Get out of my room , now ! "
and " Who 's been in my room ? "
Minnie Reader Minnie Reader is a classmate and friends with the girls including Lola and Lotta and is very clever .
She likes tap dancing , beads , ponies , patterns , coloring and knows a lot about guinea pigs and has one named Fluffy .
She is serious and does n't smile as much as the rest of the characters .
She has short brown hair with two green circle shaped hair clips in it .
She is usually seen with a bluish - green dress sweater dress , orange and pink socks and black shoes but , sometimes she is seen with a brown coat and the same shoes .
She has appeared on several episodes like " Look After Your Planet " , " How Many More Minutes Are There Until Christmas"etc .
She said she was going to be a Wicked Witch in " What Can I Wear For Halloween " but she went as a girly rabbit instead of a witch .
She had purple - rimmed - glasses with orange flowers on it on "
I Really Absolutely Must Have Glasses
" Sometimes she is seen with Evie .
Sometimes not .
Morten Lowe Morten is Marv 's younger brother and a friend of Lola 's .
He is quite shy but once he starts to play he 's a lot of fun .
Arnold Wolf Arnold is Lola 's neighbour .
Arnold is only featured in some episodes , and in one he did not stop being friends with Lola , after sharing his ice cream with Lola when she drops hers , but then Arnold and Lola are able to build their hero friendship when he let her and Charlie use his paddling pool .
Granny and Grandpa Granny and Grandpa are Charlie and Lola 's grandparents .
Granny paints for a hobby , while it appears that Grandpa is good with horses .
Like Charlie and Lola 's parents and other character 's parents , they are referred to but are n't shown .
Mum and Dad Mum and Dad are Charlie and Lola 's parents .
They are mentioned but are never seen .
Evie
Evie is ruddy girl in Lola and Lotta 's school .
She has red hair which she wears in pigtails .
She also wears a skirt , a long sleeve shirt and striped tights .
Jack Jack is Marv 's cousin who Lola and Lotta did not think he was Marv 's new best friend in the episode , " But Marv is Absolutely Charlie 's Best Friend " Macy Zehybe : Lotta 's older cousin .
Katsuki
A Japanese girl who has the same hair clips just like Lola , a cardigan and a skirt with two long bunches .
OTHER BACKGROUND CHARACTERS
PETS Section::::Other background characters .
Section::::Pets .
Sizzles - Marv 's dog .
Sizzles is a dachshund ( weiner dog ) .
Nibbles - Charlie and Lola 's short - lived mouse .
Squeak - Marv 's white mouse .
He can jump from one leg to another .
Bert - Lola 's class guinea pig .
Despite the name , Bert is a girl , because at first , Charlie and Lola thought Bert was a boy , until she had a litter of baby guinea pigs .
Tickles - Charlie and Lola 's second mouse .
He can easily tickle anyone , hence the name .
Casper - Charlie & Lola 's Grandparent 's cat who comes to stay with Charlie and Lola sometimes .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Bat Cat - A character from one of Charlie and Lola 's favourite comics .
He is grey / black upright cat that goes about doing heroic deeds , usually for other cats .
A pun on the superhero Batman .
And can defeat the dog .
Pirate Squidbones - Another of Charlie and Marv 's favourite comics and cartoons
, Pirate Squidbones tells of the adventures of a notorious one - eyed pirate and his motley crew and has a villain to beat known as the kraken TOYS Section::::Toys .
Foxie - Lola 's stuffed fox .
It is her favourite toy .
In the episode " What If I Get Lost In The Middle Of Nowhere ? " , after a long search for her lost toy , she later comes to find out that she simply left it under her pillow .
Ellie - Lola 's toy elephant .
Ellie is a china elephant with nice pink flowery designs all over it .
Frog - Lola 's springy frog that she keeps on her bed stand .
Apparently , this is also Soren Lorenson 's favourite toy ; he plays with it when Lola 's not around .
The Rocket - A class project of Charlie 's making , the rocket is a model space rocket that won Charlie a First Place prize in school ; he beat Marv and another boy named Harvey .
Unfortunately , Lola in her curiosity had a bit of a mishap with it and broke the rocket .
But Charlie , notwithstanding his crossness , was able to mend it like new .
Hyenas - A pair of unkind hyenas that were caught making fun of Ellie 's nose once .
Daisy - Lola 's rag doll , she is a blonde doll wearing a pink dress and a bow to match in its hair .
She has blue buttons for eyes .
Molly the Rabbit - An anthropomorphic female stuffed rabbit who 's all pink with a red bow on its head .
She is one of Lola 's stuffed animals .
Mr. Teddy - Charlie 's former teddy bear from when he was Lola 's current age .
He is yellow with green buttons for eyes and a blue bow tie .
He now belongs to Lola .
IN OTHER ADAPTATIONS TELEVISION SERIES Section::::In other adaptations .
Section::::Television series .
The books have been adapted by Tiger Aspect into a cartoon series , using a collage style of animation which accurately captures the style of the original books .
Directed by Kitty Taylor and Claudia Lloyd .
2D cel animation , paper cutout , fabric design , real textures , photomontage , and archive footage are all employed and subsequently animated in a software application called CelAction .
The cartoons are also notable for their use of children 's voices , rather than adult voice actors , a technique pioneered by the Peanuts television specials .
The first series of 26 episodes ( 11 minutes each ) was first broadcast on 7 November 2005 . .
The second series of 26 episodes ( again , 11 minutes each ) started broadcasting on CBeebies on 2 October 2006 ( with the morning broadcast also being shown on BBC Two )
a third series followed .
In the television series , Charlie is seven and Lola is four , and goes to school ( her teacher is called Mrs. Hansen ) .
In episodes of both the first and second series , Charlie celebrates his birthday ( in " It 's a Secret ... " and
" This Is Actually My Party " ) , although this does n't seem to affect his age in other episodes .
The third series , a final 26-episode run , was broadcast in the UK and the US in the 2007 - 2008 television season .
With two special episodes broadcast in 2006 and 2007 , a total of 80 episodes were produced .
THEATRE Section::::Theatre .
Charlie and Lola 's Best Bestest Play was first performed at Polka Theatre on 26 April 2008 and has subsequently been performed at the venue again in 2010 and 2012 .
It will be staged for the first time at Glow , the events and exhibition space at Bluewater in Kent , by Watershed Productions over the Christmas period of 2013 .
Charlie and Lola 's Best Bestest Play is based on the characters created by Lauren Child and adapted by Jonathan Lloyd , Artistic Director of Polka Theatre .
THE CHARLIE AND LOLA ALBUM Section::::The Charlie and Lola Album .
Charlie and Lola 's Favourite and Best Music Record was released on 19 March 2007 , aimed at parents as well as children .
The music is largely a development of existing interstitial and theme music taken from series 1 and 2 .
There are elements of easy listening , lounge , big band jazz , reggae , bluegrass , eastern European , sci - fi , Latin , classical and film music .
There are 17 tracks plus one hidden track , with the programme 's theme tune opening and closing the album .
Each track includes spoken word extracts from the series .
In many cases , these are manipulated to fit with the musical accompaniment .
" The Bestest in the Barn " was released as a single on 12 March 2007 .
It features Lola and Lotta teaching various animals on their farm how to sing , dance and play music .
This is the only track on the album which does not appear in any episode .
Lola and Lotta do however appear as farmers in " I Do Not Ever Never Want My Wobbly Tooth To Fall Out " .
They also have a tendency to imagine that animals are capable of developing impressive human skills , as seen in " We Do Promise Honestly
We Can Look After Your Dog " and " I Will Not Ever Never Forget You Nibbles " .
"
The Bestest in the Barn " now features on a playlist of CBeebies programme music played throughout CBeebies Land at the Alton Towers Resort .
The album is a collaboration between various composers and musicians who write and perform for the TV series .
Much of the music is programmed but many tracks feature performances by musicians from London - based bands – Menlo Park , Polar Bear and Acoustic Ladyland .
Four of the tracks have been animated by Tiger Aspect Productions : "
The Bestest in the Barn " , " Sizzles " , " Batcat " and " It 's Snowing " .
"
The Bestest in the Barn " video is encoded as an mpeg on the album CD , and all four videos are included as DVD extras on the series 2 DVD collection .
TRACK LISTING
* " Charlie and Lola Theme Tune "
* * " I Really Want To Play Music " * * " The Bestest in the Barn " * * " Boo ! "
* * " Sizzles " * *
" I Will Not Ever Never Eat A Tomato " * * " Milk Monkeys " * * " Germs " * * " Magic " * * " Bat Cat " * * " Lolaland " * * " Greendrops " * * " I Am Not Sleepy " * * " Martian Attack " * * " All Sleepy " * * " Can You Maybe Turn The Light on ? "
* * " Charlie and Lola Theme Tune " ( Extended Version )
* *
" ... It 's Snowing " ( secret track ) * MUSIC CREDITS Section::::Music credits .
Theme Tune written by Tom Dyson and Soren Munk Production & Arrangement with John Greswell All other tracks written by John Greswell and produced by Greswell / Taylor for
MPM London Ltd. Except : * 3 written by John Greswell , Christopher Taylor , Benjamin Nicholls
* 6 , 12 written by John Greswell , Christopher Taylor * 7 written by Tom Dyson , Soren Munk * 16 written and produced by David Schweitzer ADDITIONAL MUSICIANS * Andy Mellon – Trumpet / Flugel horn / Piano / Vocals / Clarinet * Benjamin Nicholls – Guitars / Banjo / Jews harp /
Double bass / Bass guitar
* Pete Wareham – Tenor saxophone /
Trumpet
* Sebastian Rochford - Drums / Percussion * Joe Bentley – Trombone Section::::Additional musicians .
Demon Music Group Ltd. BBC Worldwide Ltd.
All tracks published by Tiger Aspect / BMG Music Publishing Sleeve Package design by David Mackintosh
VOICES
* Charlie – Jethro Lundie - Brown , Daniel Mayers ( series 2 ) , Oriel Agranoff ( series 3 )
* Lola – Maisie Cowell , Clementine Cowell ( series 2 ) , Holly Callaway ( series 3 ) * Marv –
Ryan Harris
*
Lotta – Morgan Gayle
* Soren Lorenson – Stanley Street ANIMATION OF PROMOS Section::::Animation of promos .
" The Bestest in the Barn " , " Dancing Dogs " , " Batcat " and " It 's Snowing " promos animated by Tiger Aspect Productions .
Tom Beattie , Betti Doherty , Alistair Douglas , Catherine T. Elliot , Tim Fehrenbach , Claudia Lloyd , James O'Shea , Caroline Parkinson , Mark Patterson , Steve Perkins , Kitty Taylor , Clare Winkworth , Andrew Zein .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * CBeebies - Charlie and Lola at bbc.co.uk * Charlie and Lola theme tune
* Charlie and Lola on Playhouse Disney