IMMEDIATE FAMILY
The immediate family is a defined group of relations , used in rules or laws to determine which members of a person 's family are affected by those rules .
It normally includes a person 's parents , spouses , siblings , children , or an individual related by blood whose close association is an equivalent of a family relationship .
It can contain others connected by birth , adoption , marriage , civil partnership , or cohabitation , such as grandparents , great - grandparents , grandchildren , great - grandchildren , aunts , uncles , siblings - in - law , half - siblings , cousins , adopted children and step - parents / step - children , and cohabiting partners .
The term close relatives is used similarly .
The concept of " immediate family " acknowledges that a person has or may feel particular responsibilities towards family members , which may make it difficult to act fairly towards non - family ( hence the refusal of many companies to employ immediate family members of current employees ) , or which call for special allowance to recognise this responsibility ( such as compensation on death , or permission to leave work to attend a funeral ) .
It is used by travel insurance policies to determine a set of people on the basis of whose health someone might need to cancel a journey or return early .
The concept is used by some countries ' inheritance laws .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
The exact meaning of " immediate family " varies , and will sometimes be defined in legislation or rules for a particular purpose .
This can change over time : in 2005 the Scottish Government proposed to change the definition for purposes of compensation payments after deaths .
The definition was to be expanded from " a remaining spouse , sexual cohabitant , parent , step - parent or step - child , parent - in - law or child - in - law , or an individual related by blood whose close association is an equivalent of a family relationship who was accepted by the deceased as a child of his / her family " to include " any person who had accepted the deceased as a child of the family , the brother or sister of the deceased , any person brought up in the same household as a child and who was him
/ herself accepted as a child of the family , the same sex partner of the deceased , or any person who was the grandparent or grandchild of the deceased " .
In California , for purposes of subdivision of Labor Code Section 2066 , " immediate family member " means spouse , domestic partner , cohabitant , child , stepchild , grandchild , parent , stepparent , mother - in - law , father - in - law , son - in - law , daughter - in - law , grandparent , great grandparent , brother , sister , half - brother , half - sister , stepsibling , brother - in - law , sister - in - law , aunt , uncle , niece , nephew , or first cousin ( that is , a child of an aunt or uncle ) .
The Missouri Code of State Regulations,19 CSR 15 - 7.021 ( 18 ) ( H ) states that " an immediate family member is defined as a parent ; sibling ; child by blood , adoption , or marriage ; spouse ; grandparent or grandchild . "
The Australian Fair Work Act 2009 , Section 12 , defines immediate family as " a spouse , de facto partner , child , parent , grandparent , grandchild or sibling of the employee ; or a child , parent , grandparent or sibling of a spouse or de facto partner of the employee .
" , and " the definition of the term ' de facto partner ' includes a former de facto partner . "
A travel insurance policy which covers curtailment due to the death or illness of a member of the policy - holder 's " immediate family " uses a wide definition but adds residential requirements : " Immediate Family is your Partner , and : parents , children , stepchildren , fostered or adopted children , brothers , sisters , aunts , uncles , cousins , nephews , nieces , grandchildren , or grandparents , of either you or your Partner , who live in your Home Country . "
and " Partner is your spouse or someone of either sex with whom you have a permanent relationship , and who also lives with you at your Home . "
WILLS AND INHERITANCE Section::::Wills and inheritance .
In the United States , there are many rules and rights surrounding immediate family members in the wake of a family death .
If the will names a non - immediate family member to be the executor of the will , he or she can not have an " official role in these matters " .
Even if a person is not a joint owner , if they are an immediate family member a bank is likely to give them access to the deceased 's safety deposit box .
Some states that enforce no - contest provisions do not enforce them against immediate family members .
In some states , the immediate family may receive a family allowance - a court - ordered amount paid to them from estate funds to provide help for living expenses .
They may also entitled to homestead allowance - an amount of equity in the family home .
In many states , household goods ( sentimental but not expensive goods ) can be passed onto immediate family members without probate .
In France , beneficiaries are almost always immediate family members .
Generally , the distribution to the immediate family leaves the spouse with the third or a half of the property and the issue with the balance .
Usually , the pattern was to leave the entire estate to one 's immediate family or other relatives , thereby " preserving the family as a significant social unit " .
The willing to other people or institutions is associated with either a wealth or an absence of an immediate family .
If there is an absence of an immediate family , the testator is given the freedom to diverge from the usual distribution of property and wealth .
WORKFORCE Section::::Workforce .
In some cases , a company will not employ an immediate family member of a current employee .
Sometimes , " authorized " absence due to the death of one 's immediate family member allows an employee to still be eligible for an attendance bonus .
In these cases , the company the employee belongs to will acknowledge the significance of the absence and will , for example , be granted 3 working days off between the day of death and the day after the burial inclusive .
Full - time workers can apply for bereavement leave , and part - time or temporary employees can apply for leave without pay .
INDEPENDENCE Section::::Independence .
Rules may specify that a person may not hold a particular office if they , " or any member of their immediate family " do not meet particular criteria .
For example , a director of a NYSE company must be independent : neither they nor their family members may have been an executive officer of the company within the past 3 years , received more than $ 100,000 in direct compensation from the company in the past 3 years , or been employed as an executive officer of another firm within the past 3 years .
IN EGYPT Section::::In Egypt .
In articles 23–30 of the Law of Waqf of 1946 , one of the reforms provides " obligatory entitlements " for the immediate family in Egypt .
It enables a " man to make extra provisions for ... his immediate family " .
Also up to one - third of his estate can be diverted to the immediate family .
The Egyptian Law of Waqf aims to " protect the rights of a founder 's immediate family and to bring the law of waqf more into line with reforms in inheritance and testimony bequest " .
While Egypt has passed reform legislation allowing a person to bequeath one - third of their land to an immediate - family heir , such a law has not been passed in Pakistan .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Deep South : A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class