JOYCE RANDOLPH Joyce Randolph ( born October 21 , 1924 ) is an American actress , best known for playing Trixie Norton on the television sitcom The Honeymooners .
BIOGRAPHY EARLY LIFE AND CAREER Section::::Biography .
Section::::Early life and career .
Randolph was born as Joyce Sirola in Detroit , Michigan , and moved to New York City in 1943 to pursue an acting career .
She took roles on Broadway and landed various television roles .
In 1951 , she was seen in a Clorets commercial by Jackie Gleason and was asked to appear in a skit on Cavalcade of Stars , Gleason 's variety show on the DuMont Television Network .
Soon after , she was cast as Trixie in The Honeymooners .
Several New York columnists referred to her as the " Garbo of Detroit " .
" That 's still a mystery ...
I was a nobody in Detroit .
Why Garbo ?
Well , she was Scandinavian — and so was I " , responded Randolph .
THE HONEYMOONERS Section::::The Honeymooners .
Randolph is the only surviving member of the famous Honeymooners quartet , which included Jackie Gleason as Ralph Kramden , Art Carney as Ed Norton , Audrey Meadows as Alice Kramden ( after replacing a blacklisted Pert Kelton ) , and Randolph as Trixie Norton .
Randolph was not the first " Trixie Norton " ; Elaine Stritch appeared as a burlesque " Trixie " in 1951 in Cavalcade of Stars , where the premise for The Honeymooners first began .
Stritch played the role only once
and then Randolph took over .
Randolph had met her future Honeymooners co - star Meadows long before they did the television series , working together in a summer stock production of No , No , Nanette .
In a September 2015 interview , Randolph said that she did not portray Trixie Norton in Honeymooners revivals due to personal and geographic reasons ; in addition , Randolph stated that Gleason considered her to be " the quintessential Trixie . "
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Randolph married Richard Lincoln Charles , a wealthy marketing executive , on October 2 , 1955 , the day after The Honeymooners premiered .
Richard Charles died in 1997 at age 74 .
Their son , Randolph Richard Charles ( born 1960 ) , is a marketing executive in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
She is the grand aunt of former Major League Baseball pitcher Tim Redding .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Joyce Randolph , The Last - Surviving ' Honeymooner '