TRIAMCINOLONE ACETONIDE
Triamcinolone acetonide is a synthetic corticosteroid used topically to treat various skin conditions , to relieve the discomfort of mouth sores and intra - articularly by proceduralists to treat various joint conditions .
In nasal spray form , it is used to treat allergic rhinitis .
It is a more potent derivative of triamcinolone , and is about eight times as potent as prednisone .
It is also known under the brand names Kenalog ( topical ) and Volon A as an injection , to treat allergies , arthritis , eye diseases , intestinal problems , and skin diseases .
There are possible risks from an injection .
It has been known to cause fat and muscle loss at an injection site , leaving a large divot bone deep .
In 2014 , the FDA made triamcinolone acetonide an over - the - counter drug in the United States in nasal spray form under the brand name Nasacort .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Triamcinolone acetonide as an intra - articular injectable has been used to treat a variety of musculoskeletal conditions .
When applied as a topical ointment , applied to the skin , it is used to mitigate blistering from poison ivy , oak , and sumac .
When combined with Nystatin , it is used to treat skin infections with discomfort from fungus , though it should not be used on the eyes , mouth , or genital area .
It provides relatively immediate relief and is used before using oral prednisone .
Oral and dental paste preparations are used for treating aphthous ulcers .
As an intravitreal injection , triamcinolone acetonide has been used to treat various eye diseases and has been found useful in reducing macular edema .
Drug trials have found it to be as efficient as anti - VEGF drugs in eyes with artificial lenses over a two - year period .
A systematic review did not find any evidence of any benefit in preventing vision loss in eyes treated with triamcinolone acetonide over placebo , for patients with age - related macular degeneration .
Uncommonly , intramuscular injection of triamcinolone acetonide may be indicated for the control of severe or incapacitating allergic states for which conventional treatments have failed , such as asthma , atopic dermatitis , contact dermatitis , perennial or seasonal allergic rhinitis , serum sickness , and transfusion and drug hypersensitivity reactions .
CONTRAINDICATIONS Section::::Contraindications .
As with all immunosuppressant drugs , triamcinolone acetonide should not be taken by persons suffering from infectious diseases , either currently or in recuperation or soon thereafter .
Contact with infectious persons should be avoided during the entire course of treatment .
Users who contract an infection during their regimen should contact their doctors to discuss whether to discontinue triamcinolone acetonide .
Triamcinolone acetonide should not be taken if the patient is also taking any other steroid or immunosuppressant , or if they have recently undergone any medical procedures involving the administration of steroids ( e.g. nerve block ) .
Evidence suggests that usage of traimcinolone acetonide or other steroids to treat macular edema increases the risk of increasing intraocular pressure in patients .
Many drugs have been demonstrated to increase triamcinolone acetonide concentration in the blood to well above the intended level .
Patients should inform doctors about any other drugs they are taking .
Triamcinolone acetonide should not be used by those with tuberculosis or untreated fungal , bacterial , systemic viral or herpes simplex infections without consulting a doctor first .
PHARMACOLOGY PHARMACODYNAMICS Section::::Pharmacology . Section::::Pharmacodynamics .
Triamcinolone acetonide is a corticosteroid .
It is specifically a glucocorticoid , or an agonist of the glucocorticoid receptor .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Triamcinolone acetonide , also known as 9α - fluoro-16α - hydroxyprednisolone 16α,17α - acetonide or as 9α - fluoro-11β,16α-17α,21-tetrahydroxypregna-1,4-diene-3,20-dione cyclic 16,17-acetal with acetone , is a synthetic halogenated cyclic ketal pregnane corticosteroid .
It is the C16α,17α acetonide of triamcinolone .
VETERINARY USE
Section::::Veterinary use .
Triamcinolone acetonide is also used in veterinary medicine as an ingredient in topical ointments and in topical sprays for control of pruritus in dogs .
A series of injections with triamcinolone acetonide or another corticosteroid may reduce keloid size and irritation .
It is used as a preinductor and/or inductor of birth in cows .
It is also used in the horse racing industry , it being a banned substance if found in a horse 's system on race day .
SEE ALSO
*
Topical steroid relative strength groupings list REFERENCES