AGALYCHNIS CALLIDRYAS Agalychnis callidryas , known as the red - eyed treefrog , is an arboreal hylid native to Neotropical rainforests where it ranges from Mexico , through Central America , to Colombia .
It is sometimes kept in captivity .
The scientific name of the red - eyed treefrog , A. callidryas , comes from Greek words kalos ( beautiful ) and dryas ( a tree or wood nymph ) .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The species has red eyes with vertically narrowed pupils .
It has a vibrant green body with yellow and blue , vertically striped sides .
Its webbed feet and toes are orange or red .
The skin on the red - eyed treefrog 's belly is soft and fragile , whereas the back is thicker and rougher .
Red - eyed treefrogs have sticky pads on their toes .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Red - eyed treefrogs inhabit areas near rivers and ponds in rainforests and humid lowlands on the Atlantic slopes from southern Veracruz and northern Oaxaca in Mexico , to central Panama and northern Colombia .
They also live on the Pacific slope in southwestern Nicaragua and southwestern Costa Rica to eastern Panama .
The optimum temperature for red - eyed treefrogs is in the daytime , and at night .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Phyllomedusine treefrogs are arboreal , meaning they spend a majority of their lives in trees ; they are excellent jumpers .
Red - eyed treefrogs are not poisonous and rely on camouflage to protect themselves .
During the day , they remain motionless , cover their blue sides with their back legs , tuck their bright feet under their bellies , and shut their red eyes .
Thus , they appear almost completely green , and well hidden among the foliage .
The large red eyes serve as a defensive adaptation through deimatic behaviour .
When a red - eyed treefrog detects an approaching predator , it abruptly opens its eyes and stares at the predator .
The sudden appearance of the red eyes may startle the predator , giving the frog a chance to flee .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Red - eyed treefrogs are insectivores , eating crickets , moths , grasshoppers , flies , and other insects .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
During the mating season , the male frogs shake the branches where they are sitting to improve their chances of finding a mate by keeping rivals at bay .
This is the first evidence that tree - dwelling vertebrates use vibration to communicate .
When rainfall is at its highest , a male red - eyed treefrog calls " chack " to get the attention of the female .
During amplexus , the female carries the male on her back for several hours during the oviposition process .
The female chooses a leaf above a pond or large puddle on which to lay her clutch of roughly 40 eggs .
Since oviposition generally occurs on both sides of a leaf , red - eyed treefrogs may fold the leaf to hide the eggs from predators .
They also produce sticky jelly to glue the eggs together ; this may protect the eggs from splitting and dehydration .
The eggs develop into tadpoles , which hatch after six to seven days and fall into the water below .
Red - eyed treefrog eggs hatch early
( exhibiting phenotypic plasticity ) when a change in the environment signals a danger to their survival .
Dragonflies , fish , and water beetles prey on the tadpoles .
The tadpoles remain in the water from three weeks to several months , until they metamorphose into frogs .
The time of metamorphosis depends on duration of larval stage , which varies depending on environment .
After metamorphosis , the color of tadpoles ' torsos changes from green to brown , and their eyes , which are initially yellow , turn into deep red without much side patterning .
These changes mark maturity .
The lifespan of red - eyed treefrogs is about five years .
Young frogs that survive the first few weeks after metamorphosis move into the undergrowth and security of plants near their natal pools , often into the hollows of tubular plants such as bromeliads .
Young frogs prey on very small flies and other insects during the first months of their lives .
The young mature after two years and begin mating at the age of three to four years .
These treefrogs are known to live up to five years ( data from captive - breeding programs ) , depending on the health and conditions of their habitat ( when aided by abundant plant growth , plenty of fresh water , and an abundance of small and larger insects on which to prey ) .
They sometimes breed successfully in captivity if kept in high - humidity vivaria ( e.g. , by using misting equipment ) , tropical plants such as Bromelia and other epiphyte plants , together with well - aerated water pools .
Their captive habitat should have a light cycle with 11–12 hours of daylight and an average day temperature of 26–28 ° C ( and night - time averages of 22–35 ° C ) .
Simulating a rainy season once a year in November to December encourages reproduction .
PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY Section::::Phenotypic plasticity .
Red - eyed treefrogs ' embryos exhibit phenotypic plasticity , hatching early in response to disturbance to protect themselves .
Though embryos are bred synchronously , they normally hatch after 6 to 10 days from oviposition without disturbance .
However , a simultaneously early hatching in entire clutches is triggered when embryos are exposed to their predators or threatening environmental changes such as rainstorm and flood .
Predators are the major cause of this response .
Since these frogs usually lay eggs on both the upper and the undersides of leaves above ponds , clutches need to protect themselves against arboreal , aerial and aquatic predators , such as snakes , dragonflies , fish , monkeys , and pathogenic fungi .
When predators are close enough to produce detectable vibration , the embryos assess disturbance .
After a few seconds , embryos vigorously hatch out into tadpoles and spread out to escape .
Since eggs are usually laid above ponds , the response improves survival because tadpoles often fall into water on hatching .
When tadpoles fall onto dry ground , they can survive up to 20 hours without water .
However , vibration and disturbance caused by unthreatening environmental changes or other species do not induce early hatching .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
The species is classified as Least Concern by the IUCN due to its wide distribution and presumed large populations ; it is also present in a large number of protected areas throughout its range .
Pressures on the red - eyed treefrog include habitat loss through deforestation , and some collection for the pet trade .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Red - Eyed Tree Frog Facts
* Honolulu Zoo : Red - eyed Tree Frog
* Caring for Your Red - Eyed Tree Frogs * Red - Eyed Tree Frog Care Information at Caresheets.net * Red Eyed Tree Frog Care at RedEyedTreeFrog.org
* Article Road : List of All Frog Breeds : Things You Can Do to Ensure
Your Frog Has a Long , Happy and Healthy Life : Red Eyed Tree Frog
* Aqualand :
Keeping Your Red - Eyed Tree Frogs * Red Eyed Tree Frogs as pets
* A mass mating event of Red Eyed Green Frogs at La Selva Biological Field Station , Costa Rica