MD – PHD
The Doctorate of Medicine and of Philosophy ( MD – PhD ) is a dual doctoral degree for physician – scientists , combining the vocational training of the Doctor of Medicine degree with the research expertise of the Doctor of Philosophy degree .
The degree is granted by medical schools often through the Medical Scientist Training Program or other non - MSTP MD – PhD programs .
The National Institutes of Health currently provides 43 medical schools with Medical Scientist Training Program grants that support the training of students in MD – PhD programs at these institutions through tuition and stipend allowances .
These programs are often competitive , with some admitting as few as two students per academic year .
The MCAT score and GPA of MD –
PhD matriculants are often higher than MD only matriculants .
APPLICATION AND ADMISSIONS Section::::Application and admissions .
MD – PhD typically require or prefer candidates who have had a background in research , either under a professor as an undergraduate or have taken at least one gap year to work in a laboratory setting .
The application process in addition to a personal statement required for MD - only applications also require two additional essays to describe why an applicant wants to pursue an MD – PhD and an essay describing their research background .
TRAINING PROGRAMS
Section::::Training programs .
In the United States , MD – PhD degrees can be obtained through dual - degree programs offered at some medical schools .
The idea for an integrated training program began at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in 1956 and quickly spread to other research medical schools .
In 1964 , through the Chief of the Office of Program Planning and Evaluation Herbert H. Rosenberg , Ph.D. , the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) developed a grant to underwrite some universities ' MD – PhD programs .
This funding was distributed through the Medical Scientist Training Program ( MSTP ) .
There are also non - MSTP funded dual - degree programs ( e.g. , the Medical Scholars Program at the University of Illinois at Chicago , which receives funding through endowment funds , research assistantships , teaching assistantships , and extramural fellowships ) .
Non - MSTP funded dual degree programs have more flexibility and can extend to degrees other than the PhD ( e.g. , JD and MBA degrees ) .
Admission to a dual degree program is not a requirement to receive MD and PhD degrees .
An individual has the option to complete each degree separately through single - degree programs .
However , the student is responsible for all medical school tuition and does not receive a stipend during their MD education .
Furthermore , since the PhD training is not streamlined with the medical training , students will often take additional years to complete their PhD. A PhD may also be obtained by physicians during the residency training period .
This combined research and graduate - level medical education are offered by a minority of residency programs .
This additional education typically extends the residency period by three to four years .
TRAINING STRUCTURE PRE - DOCTORAL
Section::::Training structure .
Section::::Pre - doctoral .
Upon matriculating in an MD – PhD program , students will often follow a 2-PhD-2 plan .
In this system , students will complete the pre - clinical curriculum of their medical school ( 2 years ) , transition into PhD graduate training ( 3–5 years ) , and then finally complete clinical rotations ( 2 years ) .
POST - DOCTORAL Section::::Post - doctoral .
Upon receiving the MD – PhD dual degree , physician - scientists may choose a variety of career paths .
The most common continues to be residency training with additional laboratory training .
However , a physician – scientist may also elect to refuse residency training , thereby having a career essentially akin to a conventional PhD scientist .
A physician – scientist may also elect to work in the private sector with no further formal academic clinical nor research training .
BENEFITS OF THE DUAL DEGREE PROGRAM
FINANCIAL
COMPENSATION
Section::::Benefits of the dual degree program .
Section::::Financial compensation .
Some MD – PhD programs ( all MSTPs ) cover all medical school tuition , provide a stipend , and cover health insurance expenses .
RESIDENCY PROGRAMS Section::::Residency programs .
Candidates with MD – PhD dual degrees are favorably looked upon in most residency programs .
CAREER FLEXIBILITY Section::::Career flexibility .
Graduates with an MD – PhD degree are generally qualified for a variety of careers in medicine and medical research .
On top of graduating debt free , graduates generally have to stay in the medical field to pay off large debts if they decide to quit medicine and find work as a researcher or in academia .
Like residency , MD – PhD graduates are often given preference in any research or academia job applications .
CAREER PATHS Section::::Career paths .
The vast majority ( over 80 % ) of MD – PhD graduates eventually choose to enter academia , government , or industry where medical research is a central component of their duties .
According to a FASEB study conducted in 2000 , graduates of NIH - funded MSTPs make up just 2.5 % of medical school graduates each year , but after graduation , account for about one third of all NIH research grants awarded to physicians .
Many MD – PhD graduates also practice clinical medicine in their field of expertise .
NOTABLE MD – PHD PHYSICIAN – SCIENTISTS * Barry Blumberg – Recipient of the 1976 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with Daniel Gajdusek for their work on the human prion disease kuru * Francis Collins – Director of the National Institutes of Health and former leader of the Human Genome Project
* James DiCarlo – computational neuroscientist and Head of the MIT Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
* Alfred G. Gilman – Recipient of the 1994 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with Martin Rodbell for their discoveries regarding G - proteins * Robert Satcher – Physician , chemical engineer , and NASA astronaut who became the first orthopedic surgeon in space during STS-129 * Vilayanur S. Ramachandran – Renowned neuroscientist known for his work in the fields of behavioral neurology and visual psychophysics * David Satcher – 16th Surgeon General of the United States * Chi V. Dang – Director of the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania SEE
ALSO
* Tri - Institutional MD – PhD Program
* Doctor of Medicine * Doctor of Philosophy * Biomedical scientist
* DPT - MPH * Association of American Medical Colleges *
American Physician Scientists Association REFERENCES