QUARTER POUNDER
The Quarter Pounder is a hamburger sold by international fast food chain
McDonald 's , so named for containing a patty with a precooked weight of a quarter of a pound ( 113.4 g ) .
It was first introduced in 1971 .
In 2013 , the Quarter Pounder was expanded to represent a whole line of hamburgers that replaced the company 's discontinued Angus hamburger .
In 2015 , McDonald 's increased the precooked weight to 4.25 oz ( 120.5 g ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Quarter Pounder was created by Al Bernardin , a franchise owner and former McDonald 's Vice President of product development , in Fremont , California , in 1971 .
Bernardin had moved to Fremont in 1970 after purchasing two company - owned McDonald 's restaurants .
Bernardin began experimenting with new menu items for his McDonald 's franchises .
According to a 1991 interview , Bernardin noted that he " felt there was a void in our menu
vis - à - vis the adult who wanted a higher ratio of meat to bun . "
In 1971 , Bernardin introduced the first Quarter Pounders at his McDonald 's in Fremont using the slogan , " Today Fremont , tomorrow the world . "
The Quarter Pounder became a success and was added to the national American menu in 1973 .
Since May 2018 , McDonald 's is using fresh beef with no preservatives added for their Quarter Pounders at their continental U.S. locations .
On October 1 , 2018 , McDonalds announced that it would remove all artificial preservatives , flavors , and coloring from the Quarter Pounders .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In November 2008 , McDonald 's Japan ( which until then had never offered the Quarter Pounder as a regular item ) converted two Tokyo restaurants into " Quarter Pounder " branded restaurants which only sold Quarter Pounder meals .
These promotional branches closed on November 27 , 2008 coinciding with the re - introduction of the Quarter Pounder at regular McDonald 's branches throughout the Kantō ( Tokyo ) region from November 28 .
The Quarter Pounder was launched at one McDonald 's restaurant in the Kansai ( Osaka ) region on December 23 , 2008 .
It was later reported that 15,000 customers had visited the restaurant on the first day , generating a record 10.02 million yen in sales for a single restaurant in one day .
However , it was also revealed that McDonald 's had hired 1,000 " extras " to queue up on the first day .
McDonald 's Japan explained that the hirees were used for " product monitoring purposes " .
The Quarter Pounder was discontinued in Japan as of April 4 , 2017 .
McDonald 's Holdings Co. has to date given no official reason for the removal .
It was replaced by a line of three " Gran " ( グラン ) burgers around the same date .
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
Section::::Product description .
In most markets that do not use imperial measurements , the Quarter Pounder is known as the Hamburger Royale , Royal , McRoyal , or variants thereof .
In France , Belgium , Portugal and Cyprus the Quarter Pounder includes cheese as standard and is named Royal Cheese .
In Italy , formerly known as McRoyal DeLuxe , it goes by Deluxe , Cheese and Bacon variants .
In English - speaking countries such as Australia , Canada , Ireland and New Zealand that have adopted metrication or have partially adopted metric units such as the UK , the product retains the Quarter Pounder name ( although , in French - speaking Canada , it is known as Quart de livre ) .
The term Quarterão com Queijo is used in metric Brazil , Cuarto de Libra con Queso in Spain and in Latin America , and Quarter Pounder Cheese is used in Sweden and Finland .
In the United States and South Africa there are two variations : the Quarter Pounder with cheese , and the Quarter Pounder Deluxe .
In some Middle - Eastern countries such as Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates , McDonald 's provides both a Quarter Pounder and a McRoyale burger on its menu , the McRoyale having slightly different ingredients .
In Hong Kong , the Quarter Pounder is known as a " full three taels " ( ) in Chinese because three taels is approximately equal in weight to a quarter pound , while the English name Quarter Pounder is retained .
In Taiwan it is known as " four - ounces beef hamburger " ( ) .
The Quarter Pounder is unavailable in mainland China .
In Russia and Ukraine , it was known as Royal Cheeseburger , and since 2016 in Russia it is called Grand Cheeseburger .
In Japan , the name was a katakana representation of " Quarter Pounder " ( Japanese : クォーターパウンダー Kwōtā Paundā ) .
The burger comprises a beef patty weighing 4.25 oz .
( 120.5 g ) before cooking and 3 oz .
prepared , pickles , raw onion , ketchup , and mustard .
In all or much of the New York City area , it is served without mustard , as are burgers made with the smaller 1.6-ounce ( 45 g ) patties .
The nutritional content of the Quarter Pounder varies between countries and locations .
For example , in Australia , which uses local beef for its McDonald 's products , the average Quarter Pounder has 33.7 g of protein per serving , a higher value than that stated for the same burger in the United States .
OTHER QUARTER - POUND HAMBURGERS
Section::::Other quarter - pound hamburgers .
" Quarter Pounder " is a trademark in the United States , but restaurants in other countries have been able to use similar names for their own products , such as the British Wimpy chain 's " Quarterpounder . "
SEE ALSO
* Whopper * List of sandwiches REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* A McDonald 's timeline