BLANCHE DUBOIS Blanche DuBois
( married name Grey ) is a fictional character in Tennessee Williams ' 1947 Pulitzer Prize - winning play A Streetcar Named Desire .
The character was written for Tallulah Bankhead .
CHARACTER OVERVIEW Section::::Character overview .
Blanche DuBois arrives , penniless , in New Orleans to stay with her sister Stella and her brother - in - law Stanley Kowalski .
A former schoolteacher from a wealthy family , she has been evicted from her family home ,
" Belle Reve " , after the deaths of several family members wiped out her and Stella 's inheritance .
It is also later revealed that , years earlier , her husband , Allan Grey , committed suicide after she caught him having sex with another man .
She had a series of meaningless affairs to numb her grief , and was soon thrown out of her hometown of Laurel , Mississippi , as a " woman of loose morals " after sleeping with one of her high school English students .
Behind her veneer of social snobbery and sexual propriety , Blanche is deeply insecure , an aging Southern belle who lives in a state of perpetual panic about her fading beauty .
Her manner is dainty and frail , and she sports a wardrobe of showy but cheap evening clothes , as indicated in the stage directions for Scene 10 : "
She had decked herself out in a somewhat soiled and crumpled white satin evening gown and a pair of scuffed silver slippers with brilliants set in their heels . "
ROLE IN THE PLAY Section::::Role in the play .
From the start , Blanche is appalled by her sister 's poor living quarters and the coarseness of her brother - in - law .
She calls Stanley an ape , and shames Stella for marrying a man so violent and animalistic .
Blanche is not shy about expressing her contempt for Stanley and the life he has given her sister , which makes him proud .
For his part , Stanley resents Blanche 's superior attitude , and is convinced that she has squandered Stella 's portion of the money from the sisters ' ancestral home .
Blanche begins dating Stanley 's friend Harold " Mitch " Mitchell , who is distinct from Stanley in his courtesy and propriety , and sees in him a chance for happiness .
That hope is destroyed , however , when Stanley learns of Blanche 's past from a traveling salesman who knew her , and reveals it to Mitch , who ends the relationship .
Blanche begins drinking heavily and escapes into a fantasy world , conjuring up the notion that an old flame , a millionaire named Shep Huntleigh , is imminently planning to take her away .
The night Stella goes into labor , Stanley and Blanche are left alone in the apartment , and Stanley , drunk and powerful , rapes her .
This event , coupled with the fact that Stella does not believe her , sends Blanche over the edge into a nervous breakdown .
In the final scene , Blanche is led off to a mental hospital by a matron and a kind - hearted doctor .
After a brief struggle , Blanche smilingly acquiesces as she loses all contact with reality , addressing the doctor with the most famous line in the play : " Whoever you are ...
I have always depended on the kindness of strangers . "
PORTRAYALS Section::::Portrayals .
Blanche DuBois has been portrayed several times on stage and on screen .
Jessica Tandy received a Tony Award for her performance as Blanche in the original Broadway production .
Uta Hagen took over the role of Blanche for the national tour , which was directed by Harold Clurman .
Blanche was also portrayed by Vivien Leigh in the London stage production , which was directed by her then - husband Laurence Olivier , She reprised the role in the 1951 film adaptation .
The film was directed by Elia Kazan , and Leigh won her second Academy Award for this performance .
Tallulah Bankhead portrayed the role in 1956 .
Bankhead , a close friend of Williams , had been the inspiration for the role , and he wanted her to star in it .
However , she was initially uninterested and the producer thought she would overpower the character 's fragility .
When she played the role in 1956 , some critics agreed she was too strong in it , but Williams personally felt that she gave " a magnificent portrayal of the role " .
Blanche has been portrayed onstage by Kim Stanley , Ann - Margret , Arletty , Cate Blanchett , Claire Bloom , Faye Dunaway , Lois Nettleton , Jessica Lange ( who reprised the role in the 1995 television adaptation ) , Marin Mazzie , Natasha Richardson , Laila Robins , Rosemary Harris , Rachel Weisz , Amanda Drew , Nicole Ari Parker , Isabelle Huppert , Glenn Close , Gillian Anderson and Maxine Peake .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The character is reputedly named after theatre critic Blanche Marvin , a former actress and friend of Williams .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS