PORK RIBS Pork ribs are a cut of pork popular in Western and Asian cuisines .
The ribcage of a domestic pig , meat and bones together , is cut into usable pieces , prepared by smoking , grilling , or baking – usually with a sauce , often barbecue – and then served .
CUTS OF PORK RIBS Section::::Cuts of pork ribs .
Several different types of ribs are available , depending on the section of rib cage from which they are cut .
Variation in the thickness of the meat and bone , as well as levels of fat in each cut , can alter the flavor and texture of the prepared dish .
The inner surface of the rib cage is covered by a layer of connective tissue ( pleura ) that is difficult to cook tender ; it is usually removed before marinating or cooking .
BABY BACK RIBS Section::::Baby back ribs .
Baby back ribs ( also back ribs or loin ribs ) are taken from the top of the rib cage between the spine and the spare ribs , below the loin muscle .
They have meat between the bones and on top of the bones , and are shorter , curved , and sometimes meatier than spare ribs .
The rack is shorter at one end , due to the natural tapering of a pig 's rib cage .
The shortest bones are typically only about and the longest is usually about , depending on the size of the hog .
A pig side has 15 to 16 ribs ( depending on the breed ) , but usually two or three are left on the shoulder when it is separated from the loin .
So , a rack of back ribs contains a minimum of eight ribs ( some may be trimmed if damaged ) , but can include up to 13 ribs , depending on how it has been prepared by the butcher .
A typical commercial rack has 10–13 bones .
If fewer than 10 bones are present , butchers call them " cheater racks " .
SPARE RIBS * Spare ribs , also called " spareribs " or " side ribs " , are taken from the belly side of the rib cage , below the section of back ribs and above the sternum ( breast bone ) .
Spare ribs are flatter and contain more bone than meat , but more fat that can make the ribs more tender than back ribs .
The term " spare ribs " is a Middle English corruption ( via " sparrib " ) of " rippspeer " , a Low German term that referred to racks of meat being roasted on a turning spit .
* St. Louis style ribs ( or St. Louis cut spare ribs ) have had the sternum bone , cartilage , and rib tips ( see below ) removed .
The shape is almost rectangular .
* Kansas City style ribs are trimmed less closely than the St. Louis style ribs , and have the hard bone removed .
RIB TIPS Section::::Rib tips .
Rib tips are short , meaty sections of rib attached to the lower end of the spare ribs , between the ribs and the sternum .
Unlike back ribs or spare ribs , the structure of the rib is provided by dense costal cartilage , not bone .
Rib tips are cut away from the spare ribs when preparing St. Louis style spare ribs .
RIBLETS Section::::Riblets .
Riblets are prepared by butchers by cutting a full set of spare ribs approximately in half .
This produces a set of short , flat ribs where the curved part of the rib is removed and gives them a more uniform look .
Loin back ribs do n't always have this removed .
When not removed they have a rounded look to them and are often referred to as baby back ribs .
Another product ( imprecisely ) called riblets is actually the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae .
Riblets used to be thrown out by butchers , but have become popular due to their excellent flavor and lower cost .
Button ribs ( or feather bones ) are often confused with riblets mostly because Applebee 's sells these as " riblets " .
In fact , what Applebee 's sells is found just past the ribs near the back bone , just underneath the tenderloin .
This cut of meat actually has no bones , but instead has " buttons " of cartilaginous material with meat attached .
Rib tips ( or brisket ) are found at the bottom of the spare ribs by the sternum .
The rib tips have a high proportion of cartilage .
The rib tips give the spare ribs a rounded appearance .
In an attempt to give the meat a more uniform appearance and make it easier to eat , this piece is sometimes removed , and the remaining spare ribs are referred to as Saint Louis style ribs .
OTHER CUTS AND PREPARATIONS
* Button ribs are flat , circular - shaped bones located at the sirloin end of the loin .
They are not actually ribs , as they are not taken from the rib cage .
The button ribs consist of the last four to six bones on the backbone ; they do not have actual ribs connected to them .
The meat on the button ribs consists of meat that covers each button and connects them together .
* Country - style ribs are cut from the blade end of the loin close to the pork shoulder .
They are meatier than other rib cuts .
They contain no rib bones , but instead contain parts of the shoulder blade ( scapula ) .
* Rib roast ( or bone - in pork loin rib roast , bone - in loin rib roast , center cut rib roast , prime rib of pork , standing rib roast ) is a whole pork loin with the back ribs attached .
They can be up to 2 ft long and 6 in thick .
They are sold whole or in sections .
* Rib chops are pork steaks or chops that include a back rib bone and the loin meat attached .
They are lean and tender .
* Rib patties – The meat from the ribs is taken off the bone and ground to make rib patties .
McDonald 's McRib patties contain pork meat mostly from non - rib sections of the hog .
* Christmas ribs – About half of Norwegian families eat oven - cooked rib at Christmas Eve .
Normally , they are referred to as ribbe or juleribbe .
Traditional recipes include steaming half an hour before cooking in the oven to achieve a crisp surface .
SEE ALSO * Ribs ( food ) * Beef ribs *
Galbi
* Rack of lamb *
Pork belly REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS