GENE – ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION Gene – environment interaction ( or genotype – environment interaction or GxE or G×E ) is when two different genotypes respond to environmental variation in different ways .
A norm of reaction is a graph that shows the relationship between genes and environmental factors when phenotypic differences are continuous .
They can help illustrate GxE interactions .
When the norm of reaction is not parallel , as shown in the figure below , there is a gene by environment interaction .
This indicates that each genotype responds to environmental variation in a different way .
Environmental variation can be physical , chemical , biological , behavior patterns or life events .
Gene – environment interactions are studied to gain a better understanding of various phenomena .
In genetic epidemiology , gene – environment interactions are useful for understanding some diseases .
Sometimes , sensitivity to environmental risk factors for a disease are inherited rather than the disease itself being inherited .
Individuals with different genotypes are affected differently by exposure to the same environmental factors , and thus gene – environment interactions can result in different disease phenotypes .
For example , sunlight exposure has a stronger influence on skin cancer risk in fair - skinned humans than in individuals with darker skin .
These interactions are of particular interest to genetic epidemiologists for predicting disease rates and methods of prevention with respect to public health .
The term is also used amongst developmental psychobiologists to better understand individual and evolutionary development .
Nature versus nurture debates assume that variation in a trait is primarily due to either genetic differences or environmental differences .
However , the current scientific opinion holds that neither genetic differences nor environmental differences are solely responsible for producing phenotypic variation , and that virtually all traits are influenced by both genetic and environmental differences .
Statistical analysis of the genetic and environmental differences contributing to the phenotype would have to be used to confirm these as gene – environment interactions .
In developmental genetics , a causal interaction is enough to confirm gene – environment interactions .
HISTORY OF THE DEFINITION Section::::History of the definition .
The history of defining gene – environment interaction dates back to the 1930s and remains a topic of debate today .
The first instance of debate occurred between Ronald Fisher and Lancelot Hogben .
Fisher sought to eliminate interaction from statistical studies as it was a phenomenon that could be removed using a variation in scale .
Hogben believed that the interaction should be investigated instead of eliminated as it provided information on the causation of certain elements of development .
A similar argument faced multiple scientists in the 1970s .
Arthur Jensen published the study
" How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement ? " , which amongst much criticism also faced contention by scientists Richard Lewontin and David Layzer .
Lewontin and Layzer argued that in order to conclude causal mechanisms , the gene – environment interaction could not be ignored in the context of the study while Jensen defended that interaction was purely a statistical phenomenon and not related to development .
Around the same time , Kenneth J. Rothman supported the use of a statistical definition for interaction while researchers Kupper and Hogan believed the definition and existence of interaction was dependent on the model being used .
The most recent criticisms were spurred by Moffitt and Caspi 's studies on 5-HTTLPR and stress and its influence on depression .
In contrast to previous debates , Moffitt and Caspi were now using the statistical analysis to prove that interaction existed and could be used to uncover the mechanisms of a vulnerability trait .
Contention came from Zammit , Owen and Lewis who reiterated the concerns of Fisher in that the statistical effect was not related to the developmental process and would not be replicable with a difference of scale .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
There are two different conceptions of gene – environment interaction today .
Tabery has labeled them biometric and developmental interaction , while Sesardic uses the terms statistical and commonsense interaction .
The biometric ( or statistical ) conception has its origins in research programs that seek to measure the relative proportions of genetic and environmental contributions to phenotypic variation within populations .
Biometric gene –
environment interaction has particular currency in population genetics and behavioral genetics .
Any interaction results in the breakdown of the additivity of the main effects of heredity and environment , but whether such interaction is present in particular settings is an empirical question .
Biometric interaction is relevant in the context of research on individual differences rather than in the context of the development of a particular organism .
Developmental gene –
environment interaction is a concept more commonly used by developmental geneticists and developmental psychobiologists .
Developmental interaction is not seen merely as a statistical phenomenon .
Whether statistical interaction is present or not , developmental interaction is in any case manifested in the causal interaction of genes and environments in producing an individual 's phenotype .
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODELS OF GXE Section::::Epidemiological models of GxE.
In epidemiology , the following models can be used to group the different interactions between gene and environment .
Model A describes a genotype that increases the level of expression of a risk factor but does not cause the disease itself .
For example , the PKU gene results in higher levels of phenylalanine than normal which in turn causes mental retardation .
The risk factor in Model B in contrast has a direct effect on disease susceptibility which is amplified by the genetic susceptibility .
Model C depicts the inverse , where the genetic susceptibility directly effects disease while the risk factor amplifies this effect .
In each independent situation , the factor directly effecting the disease can cause disease by itself .
Model D differs as neither factor in this situation can effect disease risk , however , when both genetic susceptibility and risk factor are present the risk is increased .
For example , the G6PD deficiency gene when combined with fava bean consumption results in hemolytic anemia .
This disease does not arise in individuals that eat fava beans and lack G6PD deficiency nor in G6PD - deficient people who do not eat fava beans .
Lastly , Model E depicts a scenario where the environmental risk factor and genetic susceptibility can individually both influence disease risk .
When combined , however , the effect on disease risk differs .
The models are limited by the fact that the variables are binary and so do not consider polygenic or continuous scale variable scenarios .
METHODS OF ANALYSIS
TRADITIONAL GENETIC DESIGNS
ADOPTION STUDIES Section::::Methods of analysis .
Section::::Traditional genetic designs .
Section::::Adoption studies .
Adoption studies have been used to investigate how similar individuals that have been adopted are to their biological parents with whom they did not share the same environment with .
Additionally , adopted individuals are compared to their adoptive family due to the difference in genes but shared environment .
For example , an adoption study showed that Swedish men with disadvantaged adoptive environments and a genetic predisposition were more likely to abuse alcohol .
TWIN STUDIES Section::::Twin studies .
Using monozygotic twins , the effects of different environments on identical genotypes could be observed .
Later studies leverage biometrical modelling techniques to include the comparisons of dizygotic twins to ultimately determine the different levels of gene expression in different environments .
FAMILY STUDIES
Section::::Family studies .
Family - based research focuses on the comparison of low - risk controls to high risk children to determine the environmental effect on subjects with different levels of genetic risk .
For example , a Danish study on high - risk children with schizophrenic mothers depicted that children without a stable caregiver were associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia .
MOLECULAR ANALYSES
INTERACTION
WITH SINGLE GENES Section::::Molecular analyses .
Section::::Interaction with single genes .
The often used method to detect gene – environment interactions is by studying the effect a single gene variation ( candidate gene ) has with respect to a particular environment .
Single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNP 's ) are compared with single binary exposure factors to determine any effects .
Candidate studies such as these require strong biological hypotheses which are currently difficult to select given the little understanding of biological mechanisms that lead to higher risk .
These studies are also often difficult to replicate commonly due to small sample sizes which typically results in disputed results .
The polygenic nature of complex phenotypes suggests single candidate studies could be ineffective in determining the various smaller scale effects from the large number of influencing gene variants .
INTERACTION WITH MULTIPLE GENES Section::::Interaction with multiple genes .
Since the same environmental factor could interact with multiple genes , a polygenic approach can be taken to analyze GxE interactions .
A polygenic score is generated using the alleles associated with a trait and their respective weights based on effect and examined in combination with environmental exposure .
Though this method of research is still early , it is consistent with psychiatric disorders .
As a result of the overlap of endophenotypes amongst disorders this suggests that the outcomes of gene – environment interactions are applicable across various diagnoses .
GENOME - WIDE ASSOCIATION STUDIES AND GENOME WIDE
INTERACTION STUDIES Section::::Genome - wide association studies and genome wide interaction studies .
A genome wide interaction scan ( GEWIS ) approach examines the interaction between the environment and a large number of independent SNP 's .
An effective approach to this all - encompassing study occurs in two - steps where the genome is first filtered using gene - level tests and pathway based gene set analyses .
The second step uses the SNP 's with G – E association and tests for interaction .
The differential susceptibility hypothesis has been reaffirmed through genome wide approaches .
CONTROVERSIES LACK OF REPLICATION Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Lack of replication .
A particular concern with gene – environment interaction studies is the lack of reproducibility .
Specifically complex traits studies have come under scrutiny for producing results that can not be replicated .
For example , studies of the 5-HTTLPR gene and stress resulting in modified risk of depression have had conflicting results .
A possible explanation behind the inconsistent results is the heavy use of multiple testing .
Studies are suggested to produce inaccurate results due to the investigation of multiple phenotypes and environmental factors in individual experiments .
ADDITIVE VS MULTIPLICATIVE MODEL
Section::::Additive vs multiplicative model .
There are two different models for the scale of measurement that helps determine if gene – environment interaction exists in a statistical context .
There is disagreement on which scale should be used .
Under these analyses , if the combined variables fit either model then there is no interaction .
The combined effects must either be greater for synergistic or less than for an antagonistic outcome .
The additive model measures risk differences while the multiplicative model uses ratios to measure effects .
The additive model has been suggested to be a better fit for predicting disease risk in a population while a multiplicative model is more appropriate for disease etiology .
Epigenetics is an example of an underlying mechanism of gene – environment effects , however , it does not conclude whether environment effects are additive , multiplicative or interactive .
GENE × ENVIRONMENT ×
ENVIRONMENT INTERACTIONS Section::::Gene × environment × environment interactions .
New studies have also revealed the interactive effect of multiple environment factors .
For example , a child with a poor quality environment would be more sensitive to a poor environment as an adult which ultimately led to higher psychological distress scores .
This depicts a three way
interaction
Gene x Environment x Environment .
The same study suggests taking a life course approach to determining genetic sensitivity to environmental influences within the scope of mental illnesses .
MEDICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Medical significance .
Doctors are interested in knowing whether disease can be prevented by reducing exposure to environmental risks .
Some people carry genetic factors that confer susceptibility or resistance to a certain disorder in a particular environment .
The interaction between the genetic factors and environmental stimulus is what results in the disease phenotype .
There may be significant public health benefits in using gene by environment interactions to prevent or cure disease .
An individual 's response to a drug can result from various gene by environment interactions .
Therefore , the clinical importance of pharmacogenetics and gene by environment interactions comes from the possibility that genomic , along with environmental information , will allow more accurate predictions of an individual 's drug response .
This would allow doctors to more precisely select a certain drug and dosage to achieve therapeutic response in a patient while minimizing side effects and adverse drug reactions .
This information could also help to prevent the health care costs associated with adverse drug reactions and inconveniently prescribing drugs to patients who likely wo n't respond to them .
In a similar manner , an individual can respond to other environmental stimuli , factors or challenges differently according to specific genetic differences or alleles .
These other factors include the diet and specific nutrients within the diet , physical activity , alcohol and tobacco use , sleep ( bed time , duration ) , and any of a number of exposures ( or exposome ) , including toxins , pollutants , sunlight ( latitude north / south of the equator ) , among any number of others .
The diet , for example , is modifiable and has significant impact on a host of cardiometabolic diseases , including cardiovascular disease , coronary artery disease , coronary heart disease , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , stroke , myocardial infarction , and non - alcoholic fatty liver disease .
In the clinic , typically assessed risks of these conditions include blood lipids ( triglyceride , and HDL , LDL and total cholesterol ) , glycemic traits ( plasma glucose and insulin , HOMA - IR , beta cell function as HOMA - BC ) , obesity anthropometrics ( BMI / obesity , adiposity , body weight , waist circumference , waist - to - hip ratio ) , vascular measures ( diastolic and systolic blood pressure ) , and biomarkers of inflammation .
Gene – environment interactions can modulate the adverse effects of an allele that confers increased risk of disease , or can exacerbate the genotype – phenotype relationship and increase risk , in a manner often referred to as nutrigenetics .
A catalog of genetic variants that associate with these and related cardiometabolic phenotypes and modified by common environmental factors is available .
Conversely , a disease study using breast cancer , type 2 diabetes , and rheumatoid arthritis shows that including GxE interactions in a risk prediction model does not improve risk identification .
EXAMPLES
*
In Drosophila : A classic example of gene – environment interaction was performed on Drosophila by Gupta and Lewontin in 1981 .
In their experiment they demonstrated that the mean bristle number on Drosophila could vary with changing temperatures .
As seen in the graph to the right , different genotypes reacted differently to the changing environment .
Each line represents a given genotype , and the slope of the line reflects the changing phenotype ( bristle number ) with changing temperature .
Some individuals had an increase in bristle number with increasing temperature while others had a sharp decrease in bristle number with increasing temperature .
This showed that the norms of reaction were not parallel for these flies , proving that gene – environment interactions exist .
*
* In plants : Seven genetically distinct yarrow plants were collected and three cuttings taken from each plant .
One cutting of each genotype was planted at low , medium , and high elevations , respectively .
When the plants matured , no one genotype grew best at all altitudes , and at each altitude the seven genotypes fared differently .
For example , one genotype grew the tallest at the medium elevation but attained only middling height at the other two elevations .
The best growers at low and high elevation grew poorly at medium elevation .
The medium altitude produced the worst overall results , but still yielded one tall and two medium - tall samples .
Altitude had an effect on each genotype , but not to the same degree nor in the same way .
A sorghum bi - parental population was repeatedly grown in seven diverse geographic locations across years .
A group of genotypes requires similar growing degree - day ( GDD ) to flower across all environments , while another group of genotypes need less GDD in certain environments , but higher GDD in different environments to flower .
The complex flowering time patterns is attributed to the interaction of major flowering time genes ( Ma , Ma , FT , ELF3 ) and an explicit environmental factor , photothermal time ( PTT ) capturing the interaction between temperature and photoperiod .
*
* Phenylketonuria ( PKU ) is a human genetic condition caused by mutations to a gene coding for a particular liver enzyme .
In the absence of this enzyme , an amino acid known as phenylalanine does not get converted into the next amino acid in a biochemical pathway , and therefore too much phenylalanine passes into the blood and other tissues .
This disturbs brain development leading to mental retardation and other problems .
PKU affects approximately 1 out of every 15,000 infants in the U.S.
However , most affected infants do not grow up impaired because of a standard screening program used in the U.S. and other industrialized societies .
Newborns found to have high levels of phenylalanine in their blood can be put on a special , phenylalanine - free diet .
If they are put on this diet right away and stay on it , these children avoid the severe effects of PKU .
This example shows that a change in environment ( lowering Phenylalanine consumption ) can affect the phenotype of a particular trait , demonstrating a gene – environment interaction .
*
* A single nucleotide polymorphism rs1800566 in NAD(P)H Quinone Dehydrogenase 1 ( NQO1 ) alters the risk of asthma and general lung injury upon interaction with NOx pollutants , in individuals with this mutation .
*
* A functional polymorphism in the monoamine oxidase
A ( MAOA ) gene promoter can moderate the association between early life trauma and increased risk for violence and antisocial behavior .
Low MAOA activity is a significant risk factor for aggressive and antisocial behavior in adults who report victimization as children .
Persons who were abused as children but have a genotype conferring high levels of MAOA expression are less likely to develop symptoms of antisocial behavior .
These findings must be interpreted with caution , however , because gene association studies on complex traits are notorious for being very difficult to confirm .
*
*
In Drosophila eggs : Contrary to the aforementioned examples , length of egg development in Drosophila as a function of temperature demonstrates the lack of gene – environment interactions .
The attached graph shows parallel reaction norms for a variety of individual Drosophila flies , showing that there is not a gene – environment interaction present between the two variables .
In other words , each genotype responds similarly to the changing environment producing similar phenotypes .
For all individual genotypes , average egg development time decreases with increasing temperature .
The environment is influencing each of the genotypes in the same predictable manner .
* SEE ALSO * Biopsychosocial model * Diathesis – stress model
* Differential susceptibility * Envirome * Epidemiology
* Epigenetics * Evolutionary developmental psychology
* Exposome
* Gene – environment correlation *
Genetic epidemiology
* Genomics * Molecular epidemiology
* Molecular pathological epidemiology
* Molecular pathology REFERENCES