HAND LUGGAGE
The term hand luggage or cabin baggage ( also commonly referred to as carry - on in North America ) refers to the type of luggage that passengers are allowed to carry along in the passenger compartment of a vehicle instead of moving to the cargo compartment .
Passengers are allowed to carry a limited number of smaller bags with them in the vehicle and contain valuables and items needed during the journey .
There is normally storage space provided for hand luggage , either under seating , or in overhead lockers .
Trains usually have luggage racks above the seats and may also ( especially in the case of trains travelling longer distances ) have luggage space between the backs of seats facing opposite directions , or in extra luggage racks , for example , at the ends of the carriage near the doors .
COMMERCIAL AIR TRAVEL Section::::Commercial air travel .
Hand baggage allowance is a topic frequently discussed in context of commercial air travel .
On one hand , passengers may want to have more of their possessions at hand during flight , skip often time - consuming baggage claim process , and avoid the risk of having their checked baggage lost or damaged .
On the other hand , safety concerns , takeoff weight limitations and financial incentives cause airlines to impose limits on how much and what can a passenger take into the cabin of aircraft .
CABIN BAGGAGE ALLOWANCES Section::::Cabin baggage allowances .
The International Air Transport Association ( IATA ) sets guidelines for cabin baggage / hand luggage / carry - on luggage size .
They are not mandatory , however , and individual airlines can and do vary their requirements .
The IATA guideline at one time stated : Cabin baggage should have a maximum length of 56 cm ( 22 inches ) , width of 45 cm ( 18 inches ) and depth of 25 cm ( 10 inches ) including all handles , side pockets , wheels etc .
The actual size and weight limits of cabin baggage can differ widely , in some cases they are dependent on the aircraft model being used , in other cases it depends on the booking class .
Due to the lack of standardization a large number of different specifications were created by the airlines on the maximum permitted cabin luggage restrictions ( see below ) .
In 2015 the IATA made an effort to introduce a common smaller size for cabin luggage by introducing the " IATA Cabin OK " logo .
Major airlines have expressed their interest to accept luggage of that size on their flights .
This is specified as 55 x 35 x 20 cm ( or 21.5 x 13.5 x 7.5 inches ) .
There were news that the move was backed by nine airlines including Lufthansa , Emirates and Qatar Airlines .
The new size restrictions were criticised widely with the introduction program to be put on hold a few days later .
Consequently none of the mentioned airlines has introduced the new format ( by April 2016 ) . !
Dimensions Airlines and notes
40 cm
x 20
cm
x 25 cm Ryanair has introduced a smaller carry on size , valid for all new bookings and all flights from 2018 - 11 - 01 onwards .
It is possible to take also the previous bigger size carry on by booking Priority Boarding .
Dimensions are sometimes listed as " linear " , meaning the height , width , and length are not to exceed a certain total number .
Business Class , First class passengers and holders of high level mileage club members are often allowed to carry on a second bag of the same size and weight , or a smaller size and weight .
On smaller sized aircraft , sometimes the hand baggage can be carried to the aircraft door , where it is collected by baggage handlers for stowing in the cargo area and returned to the passenger right after landing .
SECURITY RESTRICTIONS Section::::Security restrictions .
Following the increase in restrictions imposed on flights from UK airports and to the USA after the events of August 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot , hand baggage on such flights was restricted to one cabin bag no bigger than 45 cm × 35 cm × 16 cm effective since 15 August .
On 21 September 2006 , the British Airports Authority advised that from the following day , the allowable size of the single item of hand baggage on outgoing flights from the UK would be increased to 56 cm × 45 cm × 25 cm ( approx .
22 in × 17.75 in × 9.85 in ) , the IATA guideline size .
Most UK airports remain to have a strict limit of one piece of cabin baggage per passenger , including business class ( allowed two pieces of cabin baggage within Europe , excluding flights to and from the UK ) .
EUROPEAN UNION Section::::European Union .
A common regulation for cabin baggage restrictions was introduced on 6 November 2006 in European Union and in Switzerland , Norway and Iceland .
* Restrictions on liquids : * only liquids with max 100 ml per piece *
all pieces assembled in a single zippable plastic bag of max 1000ml ( 1 liter )
* the plastic resealable bag must not exceed 20 cm by 20 cm
* maximum of 1 plastic bag per passenger * liquids include gels and lotions ( shampoo , tooth paste ) , lip sticks , moist paper tissue , contact lens solution
* Exceptions : * prescribed medicine of any size , non - prescribed medicine - only items * baby milk and other items for infants
* nutrition for diabetes diet * Restrictions on dangerous objects : * weaponry , including imitations and sports utilities ( e.g. archery ) * sharp objects , even small ones , including dart arrows and razor blades
*
The recommendation allows for light knives and scissors with blades up to 6 cm but some countries do not accept these either ( e.g. nail care items )
* blunt objects , clubs and all larger sticks , including sports utilities ( e.g. skateboard ) * inflammable objects , including ethanol , alcoholic beverage above 70 % , some match sticks
* toxic chemicals , including pepper spray , liquid batteries , blood samples UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The United States Transportation Security Administration ( TSA ) has introduced a series of restrictions effective since 26 September 2006 under the name " 3:1:1 " for liquids .
* Restrictions on liquids : * 3.4 ounce or smaller of containers for liquids and gels ( 100 ml )
* 1 quart - size clear plastic zip - top bag holding the liquid contents ( approx .
950 ml )
* 1 bag per traveler shown openly in the security bin * the TSA guidelines explicitly accept the metricized portions of 100 ml / 1 liter as defined later in the European Union *
the list of exceptions for liquids ( baby milk , diabetes diet ) is identical to EU guidelines .
The TSA has additional restrictions for security searches : for example , the baggage should not be locked ( except with a special luggage locks that TSA staff can open ) , gifts should not be wrapped , and shoes may be required to be taken off during body search with the metal detector .
Food items in the luggage may be mistaken for dangerous material triggering an intensive search .
SEE ALSO * Suitcase
* Checked baggage
* Baggage allowance REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Hand luggage size and weight restrictions by airline