MASS FLOW SENSOR
A mass ( air ) flow sensor ( MAF ) is a sensor used to determine the mass flow rate of air entering a fuel - injected internal combustion engine .
The air mass information is necessary for the engine control unit ( ECU ) to balance and deliver the correct fuel mass to the engine .
Air changes its density with temperature and pressure .
In automotive applications , air density varies with the ambient temperature , altitude and the use of forced induction , which means that mass flow sensors are more appropriate than volumetric flow sensors for determining the quantity of intake air in each cylinder .
There are two common types of mass airflow sensors in use on automotive engines .
These are the vane meter and the hot wire .
Neither design employs technology that measures air mass directly .
However , with additional sensors and inputs , an engine 's ECU can determine the mass flow rate of intake air .
Both approaches are used almost exclusively on electronic fuel injection ( EFI ) engines .
Both sensor designs output a 0.0–5.0 volt or a pulse - width modulation ( PWM )
signal that is proportional to the air mass flow rate , and both sensors have an intake air temperature ( IAT ) sensor incorporated into their housings for most post on - board diagnostics ( OBDII ) vehicles .
Vehicles prior to 1996 could have MAF without an IAT .
An example is 1994 Infiniti Q45 .
When a MAF sensor is used in conjunction with an oxygen sensor , the engine 's air / fuel ratio can be controlled very accurately .
The MAF sensor provides the open - loop controller predicted air flow information ( the measured air flow ) to the ECU , and the oxygen sensor provides closed - loop feedback in order to make minor corrections to the predicted air mass .
Also see manifold absolute pressure sensor ( MAP sensor ) .
MOVING VANE METER Section::::Moving vane meter .
The VAF ( volume air flow ) sensor measures the air flow into the engine with a spring - loaded air vane ( flap / door ) attached to a variable resistor ( potentiometer ) .
The vane moves in proportion to the airflow .
A voltage is applied to the potentiometer and a proportional voltage appears on the output terminal of the potentiometer in proportion to the angle the vane rotates , or the movement of the vane may directly regulate the amount of fuel injected , as in the K - Jetronic system .
Many VAF sensors have an air - fuel adjustment screw , which opens or closes a small air passage on the side of the VAF sensor .
This screw controls the air - fuel mixture by letting a metered amount of air flow past the air flap , thereby leaning or richening the mixture .
By turning the screw clockwise the mixture is enriched and counterclockwise the mixture is leaned .
The vane moves because of the drag force of the air flow against it ; it does not measure volume or mass directly .
The drag force depends on air density ( air density in turn depends on air temperature ) , air velocity and the shape of the vane , see drag equation .
Some VAF sensors include an additional intake air temperature sensor ( IAT sensor ) to allow the engines ECU to calculate the density of the air , and the fuel delivery accordingly .
The vane meter approach has some drawbacks :
* it restricts airflow which limits engine output * its moving electrical or mechanical contacts can wear * finding a suitable mounting location within a confined engine compartment is problematic * the vane has to be oriented with respect to gravity .
* in some manufacturers fuel pump control was also part on the VAF internal wiring .
HOT WIRE SENSOR ( MAF ) Section::::Hot wire sensor ( MAF ) .
A hot wire mass airflow sensor determines the mass of air flowing into the engine 's air intake system .
The theory of operation of the hot wire mass airflow sensor is similar to that of the hot wire anemometer ( which determines air velocity ) .
This is achieved by heating a wire suspended in the engine 's air stream , like a toaster wire , with either a constant voltage over the wire or a constant current through the wire .
The wire 's electrical resistance increases as the wire 's temperature increases , which varies the electrical current flowing through the circuit , according to Ohm 's law .
When air flows past the wire , the wire cools , decreasing its resistance , which in turn allows more current to flow through the circuit , since the supply voltage is a constant .
As more current flows , the wire 's temperature increases until the resistance reaches equilibrium again .
The current increase or decrease is proportional to the mass of air flowing past the wire .
The integrated electronic circuit converts the proportional measurement into a calibrated signal which is sent to the ECU .
If air density increases due to pressure increase or temperature drop , but the air volume remains constant , the denser air will remove more heat from the wire indicating a higher mass airflow .
Unlike the vane meter 's paddle sensing element , the hot wire responds directly to air density .
This sensor 's capabilities are well suited to support the gasoline combustion process which fundamentally responds to air mass , not air volume .
( See stoichiometry . )
This sensor sometimes employs a mixture screw , but this screw is fully electronic and uses a variable resistor ( potentiometer ) instead of an air bypass screw .
The screw needs more turns to achieve the desired results .
A hot wire burn - off cleaning circuit is employed on some of these sensors .
A burn - off relay applies a high current through the platinum hot wire after the vehicle is turned off for a second or so , thereby burning or vaporizing any contaminants that have stuck to the platinum hot wire element .
The hot film MAF sensor works somewhat similar to the hot wire MAF sensor , but instead it usually outputs a frequency signal .
This sensor uses a hot film - grid instead of a hot wire .
It is commonly found in late 80 's early 90 's fuel - injected vehicles .
The output frequency is directly proportional to the air mass entering the engine .
So as mass flow increases so does frequency .
These sensors tend to cause intermittent problems due to internal electrical failures .
The use of an oscilloscope is strongly recommended to check the output frequency of these sensors .
Frequency distortion is also common when the sensor starts to fail .
Many technicians in the field use a tap test with very conclusive results .
Not all HFM systems output a frequency .
In some cases , this sensor works by outputting a regular varying voltage signal .
Some of the benefits of a hot - wire MAF compared to the older style vane meter are :
* responds very quickly to changes in air flow
* low airflow restriction
* smaller overall package * less sensitive to mounting location and orientation * no moving parts improve its durability
* less expensive * separate temperature and pressure sensors are not required to determine air mass , even though the intake air temperature sensor is still sometimes included inside the MAF assembly .
There are some drawbacks : * dirt and oil can contaminate the hot - wire deteriorating its accuracy * installation requires a laminar flow across the hot - wire *
the sensor contains a thin platinum wire , which can break if handled incorrectly COLDWIRE SENSOR
Section::::Coldwire sensor .
The GM LS engine series ( as well as others ) use a coldwire MAF system ( produced by AC Delco ) that works similarly to the hot - wire MAF system ; however , it uses an additional " cold " resistor to measure the ambient air and provide a reference for the " hot " resistor element used to measure the air flow .
The mesh on the MAF is used to smooth out airflow to ensure the sensors have the best chance of a steady reading .
It is not used for measuring the air flow per se .
In situations where owners use oiled - gauze air filters , it is possible for excess oil to coat the MAF sensor and skew its readings .
Indeed , General Motors has issued a Technical Service Bulletin , indicating problems from rough idle all the way to possible transmission damage resulting from the contaminated sensors .
To clean the delicate MAF sensor components , a specific MAF sensor cleaner or electronics cleaner should be used , not carburetor or brake cleaners , which can be too aggressive chemically .
Instead , the liquid phase of MAF sensor cleaners and electronics cleaners is typically based on hexanes or heptanes with little to no alcohol content and use either carbon dioxide or HFC-152a as aerosol propellants .
The sensors should be gently sprayed from a careful distance to avoid physically damaging them and then allowed to thoroughly dry before reinstalling .
Manufacturers claim that a simple but extremely reliable test to ensure correct functionality is to tap the unit with the back of a screwdriver while the car is running , and if this causes any changes in the output frequency then the unit should be discarded and an OEM replacement installed .
KÁRMÁN VORTEX SENSOR Section::::Kármán vortex sensor .
A Kármán vortex sensor works by disrupting the air stream with a perpendicular bow .
Providing that the incoming flow is laminar , the wake consists of an oscillatory pattern of Kármán vortices .
The frequency of the resulting pattern is proportional to the air velocity .
These vortices can either be read directly as a pressure pulse against a sensor , or they can be made to collide with a mirror which will then interrupt or transmit a reflected light beam to generate the pulses in response to the vortices .
The first type can only be used in pull - thru air ( prior to a turbo- or supercharger ) , while the second type could theoretically be used push- or pull - thru air ( before or after a forced induction application like the previously mentioned super- or turbocharger ) .
Instead of outputting a constant voltage modified by a resistance factor , this type of MAF outputs a frequency which must then be interpreted by the ECU .
This type of MAF can be found on all DSMs ( Mitsubishi Eclipse , Eagle Talon , Plymouth Laser ) , many Mitsubishis , some Toyotas and Lexus , and some BMWs , among others .
MEMBRANE SENSOR Section::::Membrane sensor .
An emerging technology utilizes a very thin electronic membrane placed in the air stream .
The membrane has a thin film temperature sensor printed on the upstream side , and one on the downstream side .
A heater is integrated in the center of the membrane which maintains a constant temperature similar to the hot - wire approach .
Without any airflow , the temperature profile across the membrane is uniform .
When air flows across the membrane , the upstream side cools differently from the downstream side .
The difference between the upstream and downstream temperature indicates the mass airflow .
The thermal membrane sensor is also capable of measuring flow in both directions , which sometimes occur in pulsating situations .
Technological progress allows this kind of sensor to be manufactured on the microscopic scale as microsensors using microelectromechanical systems technology .
Such a microsensor reaches a significantly higher speed and sensitivity compared with macroscopic approaches .
See also MEMS sensor generations .
LAMINAR FLOW ELEMENTS Section::::Laminar flow elements .
Laminar flow elements measure the volumetric flow of gases directly .
They operate on the principle that , given laminar flow , the pressure difference across a pipe is linear to the flow rate .
Laminar flow conditions are present in a gas when the Reynolds number of the gas is below the critical figure .
The viscosity of the fluid must be compensated for in the result .
Laminar flow elements are usually constructed from a large number of parallel pipes to achieve the required flow rating .
SEE ALSO
* List of sensors
* Manifold absolute pressure ( MAP )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * A Hot Film sensor with theory of operation * A video example of cleaning a MAF sensor * An example of how to clean a MAF sensor ,
3 wire
* How To Test a MAF