S CORPORATION
An S corporation , for United States federal income tax purposes , is a closely held corporation ( or , in some cases , a limited liability company ( LLC ) or a partnership ) that makes a valid election to be taxed under Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code .
In general , S corporations do not pay any income taxes .
Instead , the corporation 's income or losses are divided among and passed through to its shareholders .
The shareholders must then report the income or loss on their own individual income tax returns .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
S corporations are ordinary business corporations that elect to pass corporate income , losses , deductions , and credits through to their shareholders for federal tax purposes .
The term " S corporation " means a " small business corporation " which has made an election under § 1362(a ) to be taxed as an S corporation .
The S corporation rules are contained in Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code ( sections 1361 through 1379 ) .
Congress , acting on the Department of Treasury 's suggestion of 1946 , created this chapter in 1958 as part of a larger package of miscellaneous tax items .
S status combines the legal environment of C corporations with U.S. federal income taxation similar to that of partnerships .
As with partnerships , the income , deductions , and tax credits of an S corporation flow through to shareholders annually , regardless of whether distributions are made .
Thus , income is taxed at the shareholder level and not at the corporate level .
Payments to S shareholders by the corporation are distributed tax - free to the extent that the distributed earnings were previously taxed .
S CORPORATIONS VS .
C CORPORATIONS Section::::S corporations vs. C corporations .
Like a C corporation , an S corporation is generally a corporation under the law of the state in which the entity is organized .
However , with modern incorporation statutes making the establishment of a corporation relatively easy , firms that might traditionally have been run as partnerships or sole proprietorships are often run as corporations with a small number of shareholders in order to take advantage of the beneficial features of the corporate form ; this is particularly true of firms established prior to the advent of the modern limited liability company .
Therefore , taxation of S corporations resembles that of partnerships .
Unlike a C corporation , an S corporation is not eligible for a dividends received deduction .
Unlike a C corporation , an S corporation is not subject to the 10 percent of taxable income limitation applicable to charitable contribution deductions .
ELIGIBILITY
Section::::Eligibility .
A corporation is " eligible " if it :
* Has no more than 100 shareholders ,
* Has shareholders who are all individuals ( exceptions are made for various tax exempt organizations , estates , and trusts )
* Has no nonresident aliens as shareholders , and * Has only one class of stock .
A limited liability company ( LLC ) is eligible to be taxed as an S corporation under the check - the - box regulations at § 301.7701 - 2 .
The LLC first elects to be taxed as a corporation , at which point it becomes a corporation for tax purposes ; then it makes the S corporation election under section 1362(a ) .
SHAREHOLDER REQUIREMENTS Section::::Shareholder requirements .
Shareholders must be U.S. citizens or residents ( not nonresident aliens ) , and must be natural persons , so corporations and partnerships are ineligible shareholders .
However , certain trusts , estates , and tax - exempt corporations , notably 501(c)(3 ) corporations , are permitted to be shareholders .
An S corporation may be a shareholder in another , subsidiary S corporation if the first S corporation owns 100 % of the stock of the subsidiary corporation , and an election is made to treat the subsidiary corporation as a " qualified subchapter S subsidiary " ( QSub ) .
After the election is made , the subsidiary corporation is not treated as a separate corporation for tax purposes , and all " assets , liabilities , and items of income , deduction , and credit " of the QSub are treated belonging to the parent S corporation .
Spouses ( and their estates ) are automatically treated as a single shareholder .
Families , defined as individuals descended from a common ancestor , plus spouses and former spouses of either the common ancestor or anyone lineally descended from that person , are considered a single shareholder as long as any family member elects such treatment .
STOCK REQUIREMENTS
Section::::Stock requirements .
An S corporation may only have one class of stock .
A single class of stock means that all outstanding shares of stock confer " identical rights to distribution and liquidation proceeds , " i.e. profits and losses are allocated to shareholders proportionately to each one 's interest in the business .
§ 1.1361 - 1(l)(1 ) .
Differences in voting rights are disregarded , which means that an S corporation may have voting and nonvoting stock .
If a corporation meets the foregoing requirements and wishes to be taxed under Subchapter S , its shareholders may file Form 2553 : " Election by a Small Business Corporation " with the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) .
The Form 2553 must be signed by all of the corporation 's shareholders .
If a shareholder resides in a community property state , the shareholder 's spouse generally must also sign the 2553 .
The S corporation election must typically be made by the fifteenth day of the third month of the tax year for which the election is intended to be effective , or at any time during the year immediately preceding the tax year .
Congress has directed the IRS to show leniency with regard to late S elections .
Accordingly , often , the IRS will accept a late S election .
If a corporation that has elected to be treated as an S corporation ceases to meet the requirements ( for example , if as a result of stock transfers , the number of shareholders exceeds 100 or an ineligible shareholder such as a nonresident alien acquires a share ) , the corporation will lose its S corporation status and revert to being a regular C corporation .
An S corporation 's election will also terminate if , for each of three consecutive years , ( i ) its passive investment income exceeds 25 % of gross receipts and ( ii ) it has accumulated earnings and profits .
§ 1362(d)(3 ) .
An S corporation will only have accumulated earnings and profits if it was a C corporation at some time , or acquired or merged with a C corporation .
TAXATION Section::::Taxation .
The S election affects the treatment of the corporation for Federal income tax purposes .
The election does not change the requirements for that corporation for other Federal taxes such as FICA and Federal unemployment taxes .
DISTRIBUTIONS Section::::Distributions .
While an S corporation is not taxed on its profits , the owners of an S corporation are taxed on their proportional shares of the S corporation 's profits .
Actual distributions of funds , as opposed to distributive shares , typically have no effect on shareholder tax liability .
The term " pass through " refers not to assets distributed by the corporation to the shareholder , but instead to the portion of the corporation 's income , losses , deductions or credits that are reported to the shareholder on Schedule K-1 and are shown by the shareholder on his or her own income tax return .
However , a distribution to a shareholder that is in excess of the shareholder 's basis in his or her stock is taxed to the shareholder as capital gain .
Quarterly estimated taxes must be paid by the individual to avoid tax penalties , even if this income is " phantom income " .
EXAMPLE Section::::Example .
Widgets Inc , an S - Corp , makes $ 10,000,000 in net income ( before payroll ) in 2006 and is owned 51 % by Bob and 49 % by John .
Keeping it simple , Bob and John both draw salaries of $ 94,200 ( which is the Social Security Wage Base for 2006 , after which no further Social Security tax is owed ) .
Employee salaries are subject to FICA tax ( Social Security & Medicare tax ) --currently
15.3 percent--(6.2 % Social Security paid by the employee ; 6.2 % Social Security paid by the employer ; 1.45 % employee medicare and 1.45 % employer medicare ) .
The distribution of the additional profits from the S corporation will be done without any further FICA tax liability .
If for some reason , Bob ( as the majority owner ) were to decide not to distribute the money , both Bob and John would still owe taxes on their pro - rata allocation of business income , even though neither received any cash distribution .
To avoid this " phantom income " scenario , S corporations commonly use shareholder agreements that stipulate at least enough distribution must be made for shareholders to pay the taxes on their distributive shares .
CONVERSION FROM C CORPORATION
Section::::Conversion from C corporation .
S corporations that have previously been C corporations may also , in certain circumstances , pay income taxes on untaxed profits that were generated when the corporation operated as a C corporation .
This is very common with uncollected accounts receivable or appreciated real estate .
For example , if an S corporation that was formerly a C corporation sells an appreciated asset ( such as real estate ) and the appreciation occurred during the time the corporation was a C corporation , the S corporation will probably pay C corporation taxes on the appreciation — even though the corporation is now an S corporation .
This Built In Gain ( BIG ) tax rate is 35 % on the appreciated property , but is only realized if the BIG property is sold within 10 years ( starting from the first day of the first tax year of conversion to S - Corp status . )
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 reduced that 10-year recognition period to 7 years ( if that 7th year precedes either 2009 or 2010 . )
The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 further reduced the recognition period to 5 years .
FEDERAL TAX TAXABLE INCOME TO SHAREHOLDERS Section::::Federal tax .
Section::::Taxable Income to Shareholders .
If a shareholder owns more than 2 % of the outstanding stock , amounts paid for group health insurance for that shareholder are included on their W-2 as " wages .
" The same applies to amounts contributed to Health Savings Accounts ( HSA ) . FILING FORM 1120S Section::::Filing Form
1120S. Form 1120S generally must be filed by March 15 of the year immediately following the calendar year covered by the return or , if a fiscal year ( a year ending on the last day of a month other than December ) is used , by the 15th day of the third month immediately following the last day of the fiscal year .
The corporation must complete a Schedule K-1 for each person who was a shareholder at any time during the tax year and file it with the IRS along with Form 1120S.
The second copy of the Schedule K-1 must be mailed to the shareholder .
FICA Section::::FICA .
As is the case for any other corporation , the FICA tax is imposed only with respect to employee wages and not on distributive shares of shareholders .
Although FICA tax is not owed on distributive shares , the IRS and equivalent state revenue agencies may recategorize distributions paid to shareholder - employees as wages if shareholder - employees are not paid a reasonable wage for the services they perform in their positions within the company .
REPORTING COMPLIANCE
Section::::Reporting compliance .
In 2005 , the IRS launched a study to assess the reporting compliance of S corporations The study began in late 2005 and examined 5,000 randomly selected S corporation returns from tax years 2003 and 2004 .
The IRS intends to use the results to measure compliance in recording of income , deductions and credits from S corporations , and to formulate future audit criteria to better target likely non - compliant returns .
This is part of a larger IRS effort to improve tax compliance and reduce the estimated $ 300 billion gap in gross reported figures each year .
A large portion of that gap is thought to come from small businesses , and particularly S corporations , which are now the most common corporate entity , numbering over 3 million in 2002 , up from about 750,000 in 1985 .
STATE TAX Section::::State tax .
States impose tax laws and regulations for corporate income and distributions , some of which may be directed specifically at S Corporations .
Some but not all states recognize a state tax law equivalent to an S corporation , so that the S corporation in certain states may be treated the same way for state income tax purposes as it is treated for Federal purposes .
A state taxing authority may require that a copy of the Form 1120S return be submitted to the state with the state income tax return .
Some states such as New York and New Jersey require a separate state - level S election in order for the corporation to be treated , for state tax purposes , as an S corporation .
CALIFORNIA Section::::California .
S corporations pay a franchise tax of 1.5 % of net income in the state of California ( minimum $ 800 ) .
This is one factor to be taken into consideration when choosing between a limited liability company and an S corporation in California .
For highly profitable enterprises , the LLC franchise tax fees ( minimum $ 800 ) , which are based on gross revenues , may be lower than the 1.5 % net income tax .
Conversely , for high - gross - revenue , low - profit - margin businesses , the LLC franchise tax fees may exceed the S corporation net income tax .
DELAWARE Section::::Delaware .
S Corporations operating in the City of Wilmington are not subject to the city 's 1.25 % net profits tax , however , S corporation employee wages are subject to the city 's 1.25 % wage tax .
NEW YORK CITY Section::::New York City .
In New York City , S corporations are subject to the full corporate income tax at an 8.85 % rate .
However , if the S corporation can demonstrate that a portion of its business was done outside the city , that portion will not be subject to the additional tax .
PHILADELPHIA
Section::::Philadelphia .
In Philadelphia , S corporations are subject to the city 's income tax ( 6.35 % ) and gross receipts tax ( 1.415 % ) , but not the net profits tax ( 3.8907 % ) .
S corporations also benefit from Pennsylvania 's flat personal income tax of 3.07 % instead of the high corporation tax rate of 9.99 % .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Choose a Business Structure , U. S. Small Business Administration * Instructions for Form 1120S , U.S. Internal Revenue Service * 26 CFR
1.1368 - 2 - Accumulated adjustments account ( AAA ) , Legal Information Institute