PINE VALLEY GOLF CLUB
Pine Valley Golf Club is a golf course in Pine Valley , Camden County , in southern New Jersey .
It was ranked the number one course in Golf Magazine 's 100 Top Courses in the U.S. and the World in 2012 , and 2015 .
It is a private club , and non - members can play only if invited and accompanied by a member .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Pine Valley was founded in 1913 by a group of amateur golfers from Philadelphia .
They purchased 184 acres ( 0.7 km² ) of rolling , sandy ground deep in the pinelands of southern New Jersey , and gave George Arthur Crump , who knew the area from hunting expeditions , the opportunity to design the course .
The site was challenging and the project became something of an obsession for Crump , who sold his hotel in Philadelphia and plowed his money into the course .
Marshlands had to be drained and 22,000 tree stumps had to be pulled with special steam - winches and horse - drawn cables .
This was all done at a time when many golf courses were still built with minimal earth moving , and the course was called " Crump 's Folly " by some .
This was Crump 's first and only golf course design , but he brought together celebrated architects such as A.W. Tillinghast , Hugh Wilson , George C. Thomas Jr. , Walter Travis , and H.S. Colt to help him create the course .
Crump set himself some idiosyncratic principles : no hole should be laid out parallel to the next ; no more than two consecutive holes should play in the same direction ; and players should n't be able to see any hole other than the one they were playing .
He also felt that a round of golf on his course should require a player to use every club in the bag .
The first eleven holes opened unofficially in 1914 .
In 1918 , when Crump died - reportedly penniless , four holes - # 12 , # 13 , # 14 , # 15 - were incomplete ; they were finished in 1922 .
Pine Valley later spread to 623 acres ( 2.5 km² ) , of which 416 acres ( 1.7 km² ) remain virgin woodland .
Since Crump 's death , alterations have been made by several other leading golf course designers .
The club also has a ten - hole short course designed by Tom Fazio and Ernest Ransome III .
THE CLUBHOUSE Section::::The Clubhouse .
Although it is rich in golf tradition , the clubhouse is plain , and simple .
The clubhouse consists of the great room and the bar .
There is also the pro shop , several dining rooms , the main dining room , the private board room , and the patio .
There are numerous pictures of Crump , as well as much history and antique golf memorabilia .
Upstairs are member 's lockers , several guest rooms , and a small lounge named the John Arthur Brown room .
AMENITIES Section::::Amenities .
The club offers shuttle service to and from the Philadelphia International Airport .
Camden County Airport ( 19N ) is also available to corporate aircraft located only one mile East with club shuttle service available .
There are several places to stay for out of town people , such as the six cottages , the annex , the dorm , the new lodge that was built in 2006 , the centennial house built in 2012 , as well as some older homes used for lodging .
THE COURSE Section::::The Course .
Pine Valley Slope , Rating , and Yardage
as of 2010 !
Tee ! !
Slope ! !
Rating ! !
Yardage ! !
Par
In " The Complete Golfer , " course architect Robert Trent Jones wrote that Pine Valley " is frequently alluded to as the most difficult course in the world , and this reputation is justified .
To my way of thinking , it also possesses more classic holes than any other course in the world . "
Johnny Miller wrote that " There are no weak holes .
Every single one is a masterpiece .
There is a surprise around every corner , 18 unique and beautiful challenges . "
Pine Valley is a difficult golf course ; every year at the Crump Cup , the best mid - amateur and senior players rarely match or break par in stroke play qualifying .
There are no rakes at Pine Valley ; the sandy areas and bunkers found throughout the course are true hazards .
There is no out of bounds at all , and structures including the clubhouse are considered " through the green " .
The course has a consistent level of challenge and conditioning on each hole , requiring thoughtful placement of the ball from tee to green , and more specifically correct placement on approach shots to the green due to significant swales and undulations .
Pine Valley has one of the best collections of par fives and par threes in the world .
The course prides itself in being one of the toughest challenges in all of golf , with a slope of 155 from the championship tees .
Pine Valley 's trademarks are the par three 5th hole , which requires a well - placed 220 yard slightly uphill drive over a lake into a small and sloped green , " Hell 's half acre " ( a barren wasteland on the par five 7th hole which is probably the largest non sea - side bunker in the world ) , " The devil 's asshole " ( an extremely deep bunker on the par three 10th hole ) , and the par four 18th , which incorporates many different elements of the golf course into a spectacular finishing hole .
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
Pine Valley Golf Club is a highly exclusive club .
Male - only membership is by invitation only from the board of directors .
The only way a guest is allowed into the club is if they are invited and accompanied by a member .
Women are permitted to play the course on Sunday afternoons .
There are about 930 members spread throughout the world , and the list is a closely guarded secret .
Notable members of the club have included George H. W. Bush , Sean Connery , Ben Crenshaw , Tom Fazio , Bob Hope , Robert Trent Jones Jr. , Connie Mack , Bob McNair , Jack Nicklaus , Arnold Palmer , Gary Player , Roger Goodell , Dan Quayle , Brian L. Roberts , Jay Sigel , George C. Thomas , Jr. , and A. W. Tillinghast .
TOURNAMENTS
AT
PINE VALLEY Section::::Tournaments at Pine Valley .
Although it is regarded as one of the greatest courses in the world , Pine Valley has not played host to any major professional golf tournaments , mostly because there is not enough room on the course to accommodate tens of thousands of spectators .
The club has stated that they have no intentions to remove trees or change the layout of the course in order to host a major tournament .
The only time Pine Valley ever had mainstream exposure was a 1962 Shell 's Wonderful World of Golf match between Gene Littler and Byron Nelson .
The club does allow the public in for one day in late September every year to watch the Crump Cup , a nationally recognized tournament featuring elite mid - amateur players .
Pine Valley also played host to the Walker Cup , an amateur competition between teams from the United States and Great Britain & Ireland , in 1936 and 1985 .
CRUMP CUP Section::::Crump Cup .
The Crump Cup is an invitational golf tournament for amateurs .
The first tournament was held in 1922 .
It is named for George Arthur Crump , and is played on the grounds of Pine Valley Golf Club , which Crump founded .
The format for the four days is two rounds of stroke play , qualifying , followed by four rounds of match play .
The final round has traditionally held on the last Sunday in September .
Jay Sigel has won the event the most times , with nine victories between 1975 and 1993 .
Since at least the 1970s , the public can , on the day of the final round , tour the golf course and view tournament play .
This is the only day each year on which the public has access to the grounds of the club .
Visitors park at the nearby Clementon Amusement Park , where a local youth athletic association charges $ 25 per car .
Yellow school buses then take fans on a five - minute ride down a secluded side road , away from amusement park , and unload in a gravel parking lot in the woods .
Visitors are not allowed to bring in cameras , video recorders , or cell phones .
AWARDS AND RANKINGS Section::::Awards and Rankings .
Pine Valley Awards and Rankings !
Year ! !
Source ! !
Award 2015
" Golf Digest " # 1 - World 's 100 Greatest Golf Courses 2017 - 18 " Golf Digest "
# 1 - America 's 100 Greatest Golf Courses
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Golf Club Atlas - a well illustrated course guide * Into Pine Valley - An account of the Crump Cup
* Aerial photos * Aerial view of Pine Valley , 1938 - From the Dallin Aerial Survey Company