FOREVER ( BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER )
" Forever " is the 17th episode of season 5 of the television show Buffy the Vampire Slayer .
The Scooby Gang attends Joyce 's funeral , and Angel visits to pay his respects .
The day after the funeral , Dawn attempts to bring her mother back to life .
Also , Glory learns that the Key is in human form .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Buffy selects a coffin for her mother with Giles and Dawn .
Dawn expresses her concern that their mother would not have appreciated Buffy 's choice .
Later , the gang gathers for dinner at the Summers residence and discusses plans for the funeral , excluding Dawn from any decision making .
Spike , while bringing a bouquet of flowers to the Summers home , runs into Willow and Xander .
A brief spat occurs when Xander misinterprets this as Spike taking advantage of the situation to get closer to Buffy , while Spike insists that he was attempting to pay his respects to Joyce , as she was the only one of Buffy 's " lot " that ever treated him decently .
When it becomes clear that Xander wo n't be convinced otherwise , an irritated Spike throws the bouquet down and storms off , and it is only after he departs that Willow and Xander discover that he had n't included a card with the flowers and recognize the sincerity of the gesture .
The next day , a group of people gather at a cemetery for Joyce 's funeral .
Dawn leaves with Tara and Willow while Buffy remains at the grave .
Hours later , after the sun has set , Angel appears beside her .
Inconsolable regarding the loss of her mother , Dawn reveals to Tara and Willow her intent to perform a resurrection spell .
After making love , Anya tells Xander how special it is to be able to create life , and how sex has become much more meaningful .
Tara tries to convince Dawn that magic ca n't be used to alter the natural order of things , such as life and death , and tells her that Wiccans took an oath disallowing resurrection .
In the graveyard , Angel does his best to comfort Buffy when she worries how she will continue without Joyce 's strength , and if there was any chance she could have saved her mother .
Angel offers to stay in town for as long as she needs him , and Buffy asks him to stay with her forever .
The two kiss sweetly but pull away , knowing nothing more can happen .
Buffy expresses her gratitude , and he stays with her until the sun rises .
Ben encounters Jinx , saying that he will not help Glory and he is tired of her games , but accidentally makes a comment that leads Jinx to conclude that the Key is human .
Not wanting Glory to learn this fact , Ben stabs the minion with his own knife .
The next morning , Dawn is sulking over Willow and Tara 's refusal to help her .
As she leaves , Willow magically pulls a book out from the bookshelf to make it noticeable .
Alone , Dawn retrieves the book , identifying the section about resurrection spells .
Later , at the Magic Box , Dawn sneaks up to the loft after Giles tells her that 's where he keeps his most dangerous books .
She slips several items into her backpack .
While collecting dirt from Joyce 's grave that night , Dawn is caught by Spike , who recognizes her actions , but shocks her by offering to help .
Meanwhile , Giles is seen drinking at home , reminiscing while listening to old records .
Spike , claiming to dislike seeing Summers women " take it so hard on the chin , " makes Dawn promise not to tell Buffy of his involvement in her plans .
Glory fumes about Ben after Jinx returns to her wounded , but quickly cheers up when he informs her that the Key is human .
In the home of a man named Doc , Dawn and Spike receive an incantation , but learn that they need a Ghora demon 's egg and a picture of Joyce .
Doc advises Dawn that the results might not be what she wants and that if she wishes to undo the spell , she must tear up the image .
Spike takes Dawn to a Ghora demon nest , where he plays interference with the three - headed demon while Dawn gets an egg , which she drops in her haste .
During their second attempt , Spike is bitten by the Ghora , but kills it in turn .
Tara realizes that A History of Witchcraft is missing from their shelf and after concluding that Dawn took it , she and Willow ( who is sheepishly feigning surprise ) decide to call Buffy .
Buffy hears about Dawn 's spell just as she is finishing it upstairs in her room .
When Buffy confronts her , the two girls get into a vicious argument about their different ways of dealing with their mother 's death .
Dawn accuses Buffy of being so busy arranging everything that she does n't care that their mother is dead , earning herself a slap across the face from her sister .
Buffy immediately regrets her action and admits that she 's keeping busy so she does n't have to deal with the situation , because when she stops then her mother is really gone .
During their argument , a figure emerges from Joyce 's grave and walks toward the house .
A shadow passes by the front window followed by a knocking on the door , and Buffy , hoping it 's Joyce , rushes to answer the door .
Dawn immediately realizes the inherent dangers of the spell and rips up the photo , and when Buffy answers the door all she finds is an empty step .
This is too much for Buffy and she starts to cry , finally facing the reality of her mother 's death .
A sobbing Dawn hugs her , and they collapse to the floor united in grief .
PRODUCTION DETAILS Section::::Production details .
Writer and director Marti Noxon says , " To me , the idea of wanting to defy death is just an inherent , almost mythological , iconic notion .
It 's something we can relate to ... a universal longing . "
She says the idea for this episode arose from the idea that Dawn would be in the bargaining stage of mourning , and " if you were in Sunnydale and someone you loved died , you would absolutely call on the forces of darkness to resurrect them . "
The magical - resurrection plot thread of this story bears a strong resemblance to the 1902 short story " The Monkey 's Paw " by W. W. Jacobs .
CULTURAL REFERENCES
* While searching for an incantation to give to Dawn and Spike , Doc hums a few bars from " Peter and the Wolf " .
*
The ending , where a knock on the door , then the opening to nothing is reminiscent of the ending to " The Monkey 's Paw " .
* The three headed Gorah demon is a reference to King Ghidorah a three headed Japanese Kaiju .
* Ben refers to Jinx and the other demons that worship Glory as Jawa rejects , a reference to the species of characters in Star Wars who wear similar robe attire and are also small in stature .
CONTINUITY
*
Willow magically pulls out the book that deals on Resurrection for Dawn , which shows Willow is willing to alter life to ease one 's pain .
This is crucial in Season 6 .
* Angel next appears in the last two episodes of season 7 .
*
This episode marks the first sign of Dawn 's kleptomania .
ARC SIGNIFICANCE
*
Dawn is shown thinking of and performing a Resurrection Spell .
Tara shows her fear and stern belief that it is wrong to mess with the natural selection of life , but Willow is shown to be a little more lenient .
This foreshadows Willow 's ever increasing abuse of magic and her resurrection of Buffy in the Season 6 opener .
*
Ben also reveals to Glory 's minions that the key is a human being .
In previous episodes Glory did n't know whether the key was a human or an inanimate object and
so this leads her closer to revealing Dawn 's identity .
* The record Giles is shown listening to ( Cream 's Disraeli Gears , specifically " Tales of Brave Ulysses " ) is the same record he played for Joyce in " Band Candy " .
*
This is the first appearance of the character Doc , who later featured in the season finale The Gift , where his interference prevents Spike from rescuing Dawn , and so leads directly to Buffy 's death .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Forever " at BuffyGuide.com