TRUMP INTERNATIONAL HOTEL LAS VEGAS
The Trump International Hotel Las Vegas is a 64-story luxury hotel , condominium , and timeshare located on Fashion Show Drive near Las Vegas Boulevard , just off the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise , Nevada , US , named for real estate developer and the 45th and current President of the United States Donald Trump .
It is located down the street from Wynn Las Vegas , behind the former site of the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on , near the Fashion Show Mall , and features both non - residential hotel condominiums and residential condominiums .
The exterior glass is infused with gold .
Tower 1 opened on March 31 , 2008 , with 1,282 rooms .
It has two restaurants : DJT , the developer 's initials , and a poolside restaurant , H2(eau ) .
Trump announced that a second , identical tower would be built next to the first tower , but the plan was suspended after the mid-2000s recession .
It is Las Vegas 's tallest residential building at .
In September 2012 , the Trump Organization announced that it sold roughly 300 condominium units in Trump International Hotel Las Vegas to Hilton Worldwide 's timeshare division , Hilton Grand Vacations .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In April 2002 , Phil Ruffin announced that he had partnered with Donald Trump to build Trump Tower Las Vegas , a $ 300 million 60-story condominium tower with 300 units and the possibility of a casino , to be constructed on Fashion Show Drive , near Ruffin 's New Frontier Hotel and Casino .
Trump had initially approached Ruffin two years earlier about developing a property on or near the Las Vegas Strip .
Construction on Trump Tower Las Vegas was to begin in six to seven months , and was expected to last approximately 18 months .
In August 2003 , Ruffin said the tower had been decreased to 43 stories and was expected to cost $ 272 million .
In November 2003 , Trump denied that the project had been delayed or that it was suffering from a lack of financing .
Trump also said he was considering " something on a larger scale " for the project .
In July 2004 , Ruffin said the project had been delayed up to that point because of other business ventures , including Trump 's reality television show , The Apprentice .
That month , Trump and Ruffin announced revised plans for Trump International Hotel and Tower , a $ 300 million condominium - hotel with over 1,000 units .
Although Trump held a Nevada gaming license , he chose not to include a casino on the property .
Donald Trump 's son Eric Trump later said , " We have no problem getting a gaming license , but we wanted to do something different here .
We wanted a true luxury resort experience .
It 's hard to have a high - quality product when you walk into ' ding , ding , ding ' and there are people walking around in Hawaiian shirts with big plastic drink mugs . "
Ruffin appeared in an October 2004 episode of The Apprentice to sign a $ 300 million deal with Trump regarding the project .
The project was referenced again in the show 's second - season finale , when winner Kelly Perdew was offered a job at the property .
Jack Wishna , who introduced Trump to Ruffin , was a minority partner in the project .
In January 2005 , the project was valued at $ 1 billion .
Groundbreaking was initially scheduled for May 2005 , with completion expected by the end of 2006 .
By May 2005 , all of the tower 's 1,282 condominium units had been reserved by prospective buyers .
Trump and Ruffin held a groundbreaking ceremony for the project on July 12 , 2005 .
The Las Vegas Review - Journal wrote that the event was " really a ribbon - cutting and photo opportunity " .
News programs such as Access Hollywood and Extra provided coverage of the event , which was attended by approximately 300 state and local government representatives , as well as Carolyn Goodman , showgirls , Steve Wynn and his wife Elaine Wynn , and Miss USA 2005 winner Chelsea Cooley .
Condominium units went on sale the same day with the opening of a $ 3 million temporary sales center at the corner of South Las Vegas Boulevard and Fashion Show Drive , in front of the New Frontier .
The building was , and featured a 10-foot replica of the tower .
That month , an NBA team was in negotiations to purchase an entire floor of the tower , while Trump was considering an alternative version of The Apprentice that would involve the tower .
Construction was expected to begin by the end of that summer , and was expected to last 24 to 30 months .
Construction began in November 2005 , when the building 's foundation was poured .
After the completion of a 36,000-square - foot recreational deck in March 2006 , an average of 800 workers constructed one new floor for the tower approximately every six days .
The tower was topped out on May 25 , 2007 .
The project was constructed at a cost of $ 500 million , on of land that was part of the rear parking lot for the New Frontier .
The project was designed by Bergman , Walls & Associates and built by Perini Building Company .
Trump Hotel Las Vegas opened on March 31 , 2008 .
An opening ceremony was held by Trump and Ruffin on April 11 , 2008 .
By October 2008 , only 21 percent of condo unit sales had closed , as potential buyers had trouble securing mortgages .
, Eric Trump oversees operations at the tower .
On December 4–5 , 2015 , employees voted in favor of unionizing the hotel property .
It was organized by the Culinary Workers Union .
Donald Trump owns a penthouse on the 61st floor .
SECOND TOWER Section::::Second tower .
By April 2005 , a second , identical 64-story tower was being planned , due to popular demand .
Sales of the second tower were planned to begin by the end of 2005 , with a 35 percent increase in prices from the first tower .
In November 2005 , the second tower was planned to open sometime in 2009 .
In April 2007 , the second tower was the subject of an episode of The Apprentice in which the show 's candidates were tasked with creating a marketing program for the new tower .
Condo units for the tower went on sale the next day .
Trump said the tower would be nearly identical to the first tower , and would also include 1,282 units .
Because of rising construction expenses , the second tower was expected to cost $ 625 million , which would have brought the total cost of Trump International Hotel and Tower to $ 1.1 billion .
This number was later reported to be $ 1.2 billion in February 2008 , at which point the second tower was expected to begin construction at the end of the year .
In April 2008 , Trump said he had not decided on a start date for the second tower , choosing to wait until all sales had closed on the first tower 's rooms .
At that time , reservations were still being accepted for the second tower 's units .
The second tower was ultimately put on hold because of bad credit markets .
In August 2015 , Eric Trump spoke of the potential for the second tower : " I think in time it 's a very good possibility . "
GALLERY DJT RESTAURANT Section::::DJT restaurant .
The DJT restaurant received one Michelin Star in 2008 and 2009 .
SEE ALSO
* Trump International Hotel and Tower REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Trump International Hotel Las Vegas - Official Hotel Website * Trump Las Vegas Condominiums - Official Real Estate Website