ICE PACK
An ice pack or gel pack is a portable plastic bag filled with water , refrigerant gel , or liquid .
For use the contents are frozen in a freezer .
Both ice and other non - toxic refrigerants ( mostly water ) can absorb a considerable amount of heat before they warm above 0 ° C , due to the high latent heat of fusion of water .
These packs are commonly used to keep food cool in portable coolers , or as a cold compress to alleviate the pain of minor injuries , or in insulated shipping containers to keep products cool during transport .
Ice packs are used in coolers to keep perishable foods ( especially meats , dairy products , eggs , etc . )
below the danger zone when outside a refrigerator or freezer , and to keep drinks pleasantly cool .
The amount of ice needed varies with the amount of food , its initial temperature , the thermal insulation of the cooler , and the ambient temperature and exposure to direct sunlight .
Ice initially well below freezing temperature will last a little longer .
Water has a much higher latent heat of fusion than most substances , and a melting temperature which is convenient and easily attained with , for example , a household freezer .
Additives to improve the properties of water are often used .
For example , substances can be added to prevent bacterial growth in the pack , or to prevent the water from solidifying so it remains a thick gel throughout use .
Gel packs are often made of non - toxic materials that will remain a slow - flowing gel , and therefore will not spill easily or cause contamination if the container breaks .
Gel packs may be made by adding hydroxyethyl cellulose ( Cellusize ) , sodium polyacrylate , or vinyl - coated silica gel .
INSTANT ICE PACKS Section::::Instant ice packs .
An instant cold pack is a device that consists of two bags ; one containing water , inside a bag containing ammonium nitrate , calcium ammonium nitrate or urea .
When the inner bag of water is broken by squeezing the package , it is allowed to dissolve the solid in an endothermic reaction .
This reaction absorbs heat from the surroundings , quickly lowering the pack 's temperature .
Instant cold packs are a convenient direct replacement for crushed ice used as first aid on sport injuries , and can be carried as first aid to remote or wilderness areas where ice is unavailable .
HOT - OR - COLD PACKS Section::::Hot - or - cold packs .
Unlike instant cold packs , that are stored at room temperature and quickly chill themselves when needed for one - time use , reusable hot cold packs are merely a material that holds its temperature well , so they are stored in a freezer or heated in water or a microwave oven to reach the desired temperature .
The first hot and cold pack was introduced in 1948 with the name Hot - R - Cold - Pak and could be chilled in a refrigerator or heated in hot water .
The first reusable hot cold pack that could be heated in boiling water or a microwave oven was first patented in 1973 .
SAFETY CONCERNS Section::::Safety concerns .
Gel packs have been made with diethylene glycol and ethylene glycol both of which can cause illness if ingested in large amounts , making them unsuitable for use with food .
The US Consumer Product Safety Commission recalled such packs .
SEE ALSO
* Cryotherapy * Hand warmer * Hilotherapy * Phase - change material * Enthalpy of fusion NOTES