FIDELITY BOND
A fidelity bond is a form of insurance protection that covers policyholders for losses that they incur as a result of fraudulent acts by specified individuals .
It usually insures a business for losses caused by the dishonest acts of its employees .
While called bonds , these obligations to protect an employer from employee - dishonesty losses are really insurance policies .
These insurance policies protect from losses of company monies , securities , and other property from employees who have a manifest intent to i ) cause the company to sustain a loss and ii )
obtain an improper financial benefit , either for themselves or another party .
There are also many other coverage extensions available through the purchase of additional insuring agreements .
These are common to most crime insurance policies ( burglary , fire , general theft , computer theft , disappearance , fraud , forgery , etc . ) and are designed to further protect specific company assets .
FIRST - PARTY VS .
THIRD - PARTY FIDELITY BONDS Section::::First - Party Vs .
Third - Party Fidelity Bonds .
There are two types of fidelity bonds : first - party and third - party .
First - party fidelity bonds protect businesses against intentionally wrongful acts ( fraud , theft , forgery , etc . )
committed by employees of that business .
Third - party fidelity bonds protect businesses against intentionally wrongful acts committed by people working for them on a contract basis ( e.g. , consultants or independent contractors ) .
In business partnerships , it is the responsibility of the business working as a contractor or subcontractor to carry third - party fidelity bond coverage , though it is typically the other party who requests or requires such coverage .
In many cases , businesses in finance or banking require their contractors to carry third - party fidelity bond coverage to prevent losses from theft .
COMMERCIAL CRIME VS .
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION BONDS Section::::Commercial Crime Vs .
Financial Institution Bonds .
The fidelity bond marketplace is , generally speaking , split into two main type of policies ; financial institution bonds ( to protect financial institutions such as banks , stock brokers , insurance companies etc . ) and commercial crime policies ( non - financial institutions ) .
Within each category there are different policy forms designed for specific types of institutions .
These include : * Financial Institution Bonds , Standard Form No . 14 for Brokers / Dealers * Financial Institution Bonds , Standard Form No . 15 for Mortgage Bankers and Finance Companies * Credit Union Blanket Bond , Standard Form No . 23 for Credit Unions
* Financial Institution Bonds , Standard Form No . 24 for Commercial Banks , Savings Banks and Savings and Loan Associations
* Financial Institution Bonds , Standard Form No . 25 for Insurance Companies * Commercial Crime Policy * Commercial Crime Policy for Public Entities EMERGING TRENDS Section::::Emerging Trends .
Fidelity insurers need to not only understand the threat posed to companies from traditional elements such as employee dishonesty , robbery or cheque forgery , they need to stay informed of emerging trends or evolving threat vectors .
SOCIAL ENGINEERING FRAUD Section::::Social Engineering Fraud .
Also known as Business Email Compromise or Impersonation Fraud ( and by a variety of other names ) , this fraud typically involves someone close to the insured company ( an employee , an executive , a vendor or a client ) being impersonated - often quite convincingly - and tricking the company into transferring funds to the fraudster .
These funds are often then quickly transferred offshore making recovery very challenging .
Despite the pervasiveness of this threat ( the FBI estimates that since January 2015 over $ 3 billion have been lost by companies around the world to this scam ) , most traditional insurance policies do not cover this type of loss .
Many policyholders have challenged insurance company 's assertions that this is not a covered loss in court , however a string of recent North American cases support the insurers ' positions , notably American Tooling Center , Inc. v. Travelers Casualty and Surety Company of America , The Brick Warehouse LP v. Chubb Insurance Company of Canada , and Taylor & Lieberman v. Federal Insurance Company .
The industry has responded to these events by making an extension of coverage available but they are typically subject to additional premium , robust underwriting questions , and are often sublimited .
BY
COUNTRY
AUSTRALIA Section::::By country .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , this type of employer protection is usually called employee dishonesty insurance coverage .
( Other names , such as " Fidelity Cover " may also be used by specific insurance agencies or brokers . )
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , this type of employee dishonesty insurance is called fidelity guarantee insurance coverage .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States of America , various service providers to pension plans governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( ERISA ) are required to obtain and maintain fidelity bond coverage in prescribed amounts .
REFERENCES