BRYTON JAMES Bryton Eric McClure ( born August 17 , 1986 ) , also credited as Bryton James and Bryton , is an American actor , voice artist and singer .
As a child actor , he played Richie Crawford on the ABC / CBS sitcom , Family Matters .
He currently plays Devon Hamilton on the CBS soap opera The Young and the Restless .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
James was born in Lakewood , California to Eric ( d. 2015 ) and Bette McClure , and raised in Fullerton , California .
Bryton was exposed to music very early through his father , a musician , songwriter , and music producer .
CAREER Section::::Career .
James started in show business when he was two years old .
He appeared in commercials and magazine ads , including one with singer Michael Jackson .
At the age of four , he began portraying Richie Crawford on the sitcom Family Matters , where he appeared from 1990 to 1997 in over 200 episodes .
He has portrayed Devon Hamilton on the CBS soap opera The Young and the Restless since June 2004 .
He won the 2007 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actor in a Drama Series , and earned nominations for the same award in 2006 and 2008 .
After being nominated for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actor in a Daytime Drama Series from 2005 through 2008 , James won the award in 2009 .
James was a guest star on the drama The Vampire Diaries during its second season as warlock Luka Martin .
He voices Jason James / Z - Strap on Nicktoons animated series Zevo-3 and Virgil Hawkins
/ Static in the Cartoon Network series .
He has also provided the voice of Mark Surge in Hero Factory .
His credits also include voice acting work as Freddie on the animated series The Kids From Room 402 , Mowgli on The Jungle Book CD - ROM , and Zare Leonis on Star Wars Rebels .
James was also a recording artist and performed on Disney Channel and other U.S. and international networks .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
James married Ashley Leisinger on March 16 , 2011 .
The ceremony was officiated by his The Young and the Restless co - star Christian LeBlanc .
In June 2014 , James confirmed that he and Leisinger have since divorced but said they are still close friends .
He is best friends with his The Young and the Restless co - star Christel Khalil .
Saying about their friendship : " Christel and I have practically grown up together and have experienced some of the same things in our adult lives .
We 've always had each other 's backs .
I 'm an only child and Christel is the closest thing I have to a sibling .
" James is the godfather to Khalil 's son , Michael Caden .
He is also godfather to his other The Young and the Restless co - star , Daniel Goddard 's eldest son , Ford .
James is a spokesperson for many charitable organizations and founded RADD ( Recording Artists , Actors and Athletes Against Drunk Driving ) in 1996 .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In 1998 , James was honored by the Young Artist Awards with the Michael Landon Award for charitable work through youth in entertainment . !
Year ! !
Association ! !
Category ! !
Nominated work ! !
Result REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Bryton James official Twitter on Twitter.com