MY SISTER 'S KEEPER ( NOVEL )
My Sister 's Keeper is a 2004 novel written by Jodi Picoult .
It tells the story of thirteen - year - old Anna Fitzgerald , who sues her parents for medical emancipation when she discovers she was supposed to donate a kidney to her elder sister Kate , who is gradually dying from acute leukemia .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The story takes place in the fictional town of Upper Darby , Rhode Island in 2004 .
Anna Fitzgerald 's older sister , Kate , suffers from acute promyelocytic leukemia , a blood and bone marrow cancer .
Anna was born as a savior sister specifically so she could save Kate 's life .
At first it is successful , but the cancer continues to relapse throughout Kate 's life .
Anna is usually willing to donate whatever Kate needs , but when she turns 13 , she is told that she will have to donate one of her kidneys due to Kate 's kidney failure .
The surgery required for both Kate and Anna would be major ; it is not guaranteed to work , as the stress of the operation may kill Kate anyway , and the loss of a kidney could have a serious impact on Anna 's life .
Anna petitions for medical emancipation with the help of lawyer Campbell Alexander , so she will be able to make her own decisions regarding her medical treatment and the donation of her kidney .
This is done on the advice of Julia Romano , the court - appointed guardian ad litem whose job it is to decide what would be best for Anna .
Julia was once romantically involved with Campbell when they went to high school together , but Campbell broke her heart when he left her .
Unbeknownst to Julia , Campbell left her because he discovered he had epilepsy and thought she deserved better .
Meanwhile , Anna 's older brother , Jesse , who has spent most of his life being ignored in favor of ill Kate or donor Anna , spends most of his time setting fire to abandoned buildings with homemade explosives and using illegal drugs .
He is a self - confessed juvenile delinquent , which leads to their father Brian eventually confronting Jesse for his behavior .
During the trial , it is revealed that Kate originally asked Anna to sue for emancipation because Kate did not want Anna to have to donate her kidney now that Kate has been ready to die , but their mom Sara can not seem to understand that ( she later comes to terms when Anna tells her ) , and because Kate believes she will die anyway .
The judge rules in Anna 's favor , and grants Campbell a medical power of attorney .
However , as Campbell drives her home after the trial , their car is hit by a pick - up .
The on - call firefighter ( who also happens to be Brian , Anna 's father ) who arrives at the scene , retrieves an unconscious and severely injured Anna from the wreckage of the crushed car .
She goes into cardiac arrest and is revived .
Both she and Campbell are rushed to the hospital .
At the hospital , the doctor informs Sara and Brian that Anna is brain - dead and asks them if they have considered organ donation .
An injured Campbell steps in and declares that he has the power of attorney and that " there is a girl upstairs who needs that kidney .
" Kate is prepared for surgery , and Anna 's kidney is successfully transplanted .
Anna 's life - support machines are then shut off by her family .
Kate survives the surgery and remains in remission .
Jesse has reformed and graduates from the police academy , despite his criminal record .
CHARACTERS
* Kate Fitzgerald , a frail teenage girl who was diagnosed with acute leukemia at a young age .
She is the older sister of Anna , and the middle child out of all three Fitzgerald siblings .
She sometimes finds all the attention on her stifling .
One of the few times she experiences being a typical teenaged girl is when she dates , and has her first kiss with , a boy named Taylor , whom she meets at the hospital while undergoing chemotherapy .
Taylor also has cancer , and Kate has some of her happiest times with him , as he 's one of the only people with whom she 's been able to fully relate , and to speak her deepest , true , feelings about being sick , with .
Kate also supports the feelings of her younger sister , Anna , and is thankful for the bodily donations Anna has been made to give her throughout her lifetime .
Near the end of the novel , she is the one revealed to have asked Anna to sue for medical emancipation because she was fed up with her mother 's behavior and wanted to die for years .
* Anna Fitzgerald , a girl who was scientifically engineered in order to be a " savior sibling " to her elder sister , and who therefore repeatedly has to donate blood , marrow , and eventually an organ , to her .
She is thirteen years old at the time the novel takes place , and seeks to be medically emancipated from her parents , so that she does not have to donate anything to Kate , namely a kidney , against her will , and would thereon have the rights to her own body .
She is the main protagonist of the novel .
* Jesse Fitzgerald , the oldest child , who is dyslexic .
Throughout most of the novel , he is a delinquent teenager , but , in young adulthood , after coming to terms with his inner emotions , he goes on to become a police officer , and is no longer rebellious , or desperate for attention , as he was in his teen years .
* Sara Fitzgerald , the overprotective and domineering " helicopter mom " of Kate , Anna , and Jesse .
She tries her hardest to keep her oldest , ill , daughter alive and well , and refuses to accept the idea that she is dying .
Before the novel 's end , Sara finally listens to Anna about Kate and comes to terms with her choice to die , expressing remorse for her behavior .
She is the one who feels insurmountable guilt over Anna 's death .
* Brian Fitzgerald , Sara 's husband , who understands Anna 's decision to not donate her kidney , but also feels compassion for his wife .
He becomes torn between his daughter(s ) , and his wife , during Anna 's emancipation trial , but ends up siding with his wife during his testimony in court , regardless of his conflicting feelings .
He also shows concern for his son , and is the one to confront him about his troubling behavior .
* Julia Romano , the court - appointed , guardian ad litem , whose job it is to decide what is best for Anna .
She also often advises Anna regarding medical emancipation .
She and Anna 's lawyer , Campbell Alexander , dated in young adulthood , before he broke her heart .
* Campbell Alexander , a lawyer who defends Anna as she tries to become medically emancipated from her parents .
He believes that she should have control over her own body , and eventually obtains medical power of attorney over her , when she wins her case .
He personally uses a service dog , which others find " mysterious " , because he does not tell anyone why ; It is later uncovered that he suffers from epilepsy , and that this diagnosis is the reason he broke up with Julia , as he did not believe she " deserved " an unwell mate , that she 'd have to look after .
* Suzanne , Jesse , Kate and Anna 's wealthy aunt , Brian 's sister - in - law and Sara 's older sister of 10 years whose relationship with her is strained due to her overzealousness in keeping Kate alive .
While coming to Sara 's aid occasionally due to her wealth , she is more supportive of Anna in suing for medical emancipation .
* Judge de Salvo , the presiding judge over Anna 's case in suing for medical emancipation DEVELOPMENT HISTORY PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Development history .
Section::::Publication history .
Picoult , Jodi .
My Sister 's Keeper .
Atria Books : New York , 2004 ; /. CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
In review for The Washington Post , Katherine Arie described some of the characters as unconvincing , such as Brian , who is " too good to be true " , Jesse , " a poster child for self - destructive behavior " , and Kate , who is " as weak and wispy on the page as she 's supposed to be in life " , but ultimately called the book " a thrill to read " .
In 2009 the American Library Association ( ALA ) and the office for Intellectual Freedom named My Sister 's Keeper the seventh out of ten most frequently challenged books in the US .
Schools and libraries attempted to ban the book for the following reasons : Sexism , Homosexuality , Sexual Explicitly , Offensive Language , Religious Viewpoint , Unsuitability to Age Group , Drugs , Suicide , Violence .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
New Line Cinema adapted My Sister 's Keeper into a feature film , which was directed by Nick Cassavetes and released on June 26 , 2009 .
It starred Cameron Diaz as Sara and Alec Baldwin as Campbell .
Kate and Anna were played respectively by Sofia Vassilieva and Abigail Breslin .
The film features an alternate ending and more emphasis on certain subplots while entirely eliminating others .
This was against the wishes of Picoult .
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NOVEL AND FILM
* The novel 's setting is in Rhode Island , while the film 's setting is in California .
* Julia Romano is a central character in the novel and is Anna 's guardian ad litem during the trial , while the film has written her out .
* Aunt Suzanne is also a central character in the novel and while she has come to the family 's aid due to her wealth , her relationship with Sara is strained due to her being overzealous in saving Kate 's life .
In the film , she is replaced with Aunt Kelly who follows a similar role to Suzanne .
* Campbell and Anna 's relationship is more detailed in the novel than in the film .
* Jesse is a juvenile delinquent in the novel .
However , his relationship with his parents improves when Brian finds out why he has been acting out and turning to a life of crime .
In the film , Jesse is more neglected by his parents .
He is stopped from going into a life of crime by Aunt Kelly , who talks to him .
*
In the novel Sara is a brunette with dark eyes and cares for the well being of all of her children .
In the film , she is blonde and more obsessed with saving Kate , neglecting Brian , Anna and Jesse 's needs .
*
Kate is a blonde in the novel and is 16 , while in the film , she 's a brunette and 15 .
* Jesse is a brunette in the novel and is 17 , while in the film , he 's 18 and a blond like his mom .
*
Anna is 13 and plays hockey in the novel , while in the film , she is 11 and plays soccer .
*
In the novel , Anna dies in a car accident with her usable organs being donated to Kate and she remains in remission for 6 years .
In the film , Kate dies instead of her .
*
In the novel 's epilogue , Kate explains how her family has been trying to cope with Anna 's death and their lives since the trial .
In the film , Anna mentions their family goes to Montana every year to honor Kate and that Sara is proud of her for standing up for her own rights .
*
In the novel , it was Judge 's barking that got Campbell to ask Anna about her reasons in suing for medical emancipation and
it leads to her confession .
In the film , it was Jesse who exposed Kate 's role in the lawsuit .
His exposure angered not only Anna because she was trying to protect their sister , but also Sara for interrupting them .
*
In the novel and before the verdict , Anna tells Sara about Kate 's plans to die .
While shocked at first , she comes to terms with it and wished Kate had told her sooner .
She even mentions that she understood why Anna tried to protect her sister .
In the film , Sara is in denial and accuses Jesse of lying to her .
When Brian comes to his defense by pointing out her own wrongdoing in not listening to their family as they knew Kate wanted death , Sara feels guilty for ignoring her family and finally accepts responsibility for her actions .
*
In the novel , Campbell never had an epilepsy relapse while in court and it was De Salvo who stopped it by wanting to have a personal talk to Kate .
*
In the novel and while awaiting the verdict , Campbell confesses to Julia about his epilepsy and the real reason he broke up with her .
In the film , Campbell left midway of the argument between Sara , Jesse and Brian and had a seizure from not being able to take his medication on time .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
My Sister 's Keeper at the author 's site