GLUCOSE SYRUP Glucose syrup , also known as confectioner 's glucose , is a syrup made from the hydrolysis of starch .
Glucose is a sugar .
Maize ( corn ) is commonly used as the source of the starch in the US , in which case the syrup is called " corn syrup " , but glucose syrup is also made from potatoes and wheat , and less often from barley , rice and cassava .
Glucose syrup containing over 90 % glucose is used in industrial fermentation , but syrups used in confectionery contain varying amounts of glucose , maltose and higher oligosaccharides , depending on the grade , and can typically contain 10 % to 43 % glucose .
Glucose syrup is used in foods to sweeten , soften texture and add volume .
By converting some of the glucose in corn syrup into fructose ( using an enzymatic process ) , a sweeter product , high fructose corn syrup can be produced .
It was first made in 1811 in Russia .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Depending on the method used to hydrolyse the starch and on the extent to which the hydrolysis reaction has been allowed to proceed , different grades of glucose syrup are produced , which have different characteristics and uses .
The syrups are broadly categorised according to their dextrose equivalent ( DE ) .
The further the hydrolysis process proceeds , the more reducing sugars are produced , and the higher the DE .
Depending on the process used , glucose syrups with different compositions , and hence different technical properties , can have the same DE .
CONFECTIONER 'S
SYRUP Section::::Confectioner 's syrup .
The original glucose syrups were manufactured by acid hydrolysis of corn starch at high temperature and pressure .
The typical product had a DE of 42 , but quality was variable due to the difficulty of controlling the reaction .
Higher DE syrups made by acid hydrolysis tend to have a bitter taste and a dark colour , due to the production of hydroxymethylfurfural and other byproducts .
This type of product is now manufactured using a continuous process and is still widely used due to the low cost of acid hydrolysis .
The sugar profile of a confectioner 's syrup can also be mimicked by enzyme hydrolysis .
A typical confectioner 's syrup contains 19 % glucose , 14 % maltose , 11 % maltotriose and 56 % higher molecular mass carbohydrates .
A typical 42 DE syrup has about half the sweetness of sugar , and increasing DE leads to increased sweetness , with a 63 DE syrup being about 70 % , and pure dextrose ( 100 DE ) about 80 % as sweet as sugar .
HIGH - MALTOSE GLUCOSE SYRUPS Section::::High - maltose glucose syrups .
By using β - amylase or fungal α - amylase , glucose syrups containing over 50 % maltose , or even over 70 % maltose ( extra - high - maltose syrup ) can be produced .
This is possible because these enzymes remove two glucose units ( i.e. one maltose molecule ) at a time from the end of the starch molecule .
High - maltose glucose syrup has a great advantage in the production of hard candy : at a given moisture level and temperature , a maltose solution has a lower viscosity than a glucose solution , but will still set to a hard product .
Maltose is also less humectant than glucose , so candy produced with high - maltose syrup will not become sticky as easily as candy produced with a standard glucose syrup .
COMMERCIAL PREPARATION Section::::Commercial preparation .
Irrespective of the feedstock or the method used for hydrolysis , certain steps are common to the production of glucose syrup : PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Before conversion of starch to glucose can begin , the starch must be separated from the plant material .
This includes removing fibre and protein ( which can be valuable by - products , for example wheat or maize gluten ) .
Protein produces off - flavours and colours due to the Maillard reaction , and fibre is insoluble and has to be removed to allow the starch to become hydrated .
The plant material also needs to be ground as part of this process to expose the starch to the water .
SOAKING
Section::::Soaking .
The starch needs to be swelled to allow the enzymes or acid to act upon it .
When grain is used , sulfur dioxide is added to prevent spoilage .
GELATINIZATION Section::::Gelatinization .
By heating the ground , cleaned feedstock , starch gelatinization takes place : the intermolecular bonds of the starch molecules are broken down , allowing the hydrogen bonding sites to engage more water .
This irreversibly dissolves the starch granule , so the chains begin to separate into an amorphous form .
This prepares the starch for hydrolysis .
HYDROLYSIS
Section::::Hydrolysis .
Glucose syrup can be produced by acid hydrolysis , enzyme hydrolysis , or a combination of the two .
Currently , however , a variety of options are available .
Formerly , glucose syrup was only produced by combining corn starch with dilute hydrochloric acid , and then heating the mixture under pressure .
Currently , glucose syrup is mainly produced by first adding the enzyme α - amylase to a mixture of corn starch and water .
α - amylase is secreted by various species of the bacterium Bacillus ; the enzyme is isolated from the liquid in which the bacteria are grown .
The enzyme breaks the starch into oligosaccharides , which are then broken into glucose molecules by adding the enzyme glucoamylase , known also as " γ - amylase " .
Glucoamylase is secreted by various species of the fungus Aspergillus ; the enzyme is isolated from the liquid in which the fungus is grown .
The glucose can then be transformed into fructose by passing the glucose through a column that is loaded with the enzyme D - xylose isomerase , an enzyme that is isolated from the growth medium of any of several bacteria .
CLARIFICATION Section::::Clarification .
After hydrolysis , the dilute syrup can be passed through columns to remove impurities , improving its colour and stability .
EVAPORATION Section::::Evaporation .
The dilute glucose syrup is finally evaporated under vacuum to raise the solids concentration .
USES Section::::Uses .
Its major uses in commercially prepared food products are as a thickener , sweetener , and humectant ( an ingredient that retains moisture and thus maintains a food 's freshness ) .
Glucose syrup is also widely used in the manufacture of a variety of candy products .
In the United States , domestically produced corn syrup and high - fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) are often used in American - made processed and mass - produced foods , candies , soft drinks and fruit drinks to increase profit margins .
Glucose syrup was the primary corn sweetener in the United States prior to the expanded use of HFCS production .
HFCS is a variant in which other enzymes are used to convert some of the glucose into fructose .
The resulting syrup is sweeter and more soluble .
Corn syrup is also available as a retail product .
Glucose syrup is often used as part of the mixture that goes into creating fake blood for films and television .
Blood mixtures that contain glucose syrup are very popular among independent films and film makers , as it is cheap and easy to obtain .
SEE ALSO
* High - fructose corn syrup
* Mizuame * Molasses REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How corn is turned into corn syrup .
* Oregon State University Food Resource : Corn Syrup