34TH STREET – PENN STATION ( IND EIGHTH AVENUE LINE )
34th Street –
Penn Station is an express station on the IND Eighth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway , located at the intersection of 34th Street and Eighth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan .
It is served by the ' and ' trains at all times , and by the train at all times except late nights .
The station is adjacent to Pennsylvania Station , the busiest railroad station in the United States as well as a major transfer point to Amtrak , New Jersey Transit , and the Long Island Rail Road .
STATION LAYOUT Section::::Station layout .
This underground station was one of the 28 stations opened on September 10 , 1932 , as part of the initial segment of the Independent Subway System , at the time comprising what is now the IND Eighth Avenue Line from Chambers Street to 207th Street .
There are four tracks , two side platforms , and one island platform .
Atlantic Avenue – Barclays Center on the IRT Eastern Parkway Line and 34th Street – Penn Station on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line are the only other stations in the system with this configuration .
South of the station , an additional track begins at a bumper block between the two express tracks with a connection to both at both ends ( about 25th Street on the south end and 33rd Street on the north end ) .
This allows for various extra movements of trains including storage or removal of a train with mechanical problems to be sent back in the other direction .
It could also be used if 34th Street functioned as a terminal station .
Under the 2015–2019 MTA Capital Plan , the station , along with thirty other New York City Subway stations , will undergo a complete overhaul as part of the Enhanced Station Initiative .
Updates would include cellular service , Wi - Fi , charging stations , improved signage , and improved station lighting .
Unlike other stations that will be renovated under the initiative , 34th Street –
Penn Station will not be completely closed during construction .
In January 2018 , the NYCT and Bus Committee recommended that Judlau Contracting receive the $ 125 million contract for the renovations of 57th and 23rd Streets on the IND Sixth Avenue Line ; 28th Street on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line , and 34th Street – Penn Station on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line and IND Eighth Avenue Line .
However , the MTA Board temporarily deferred the vote for these packages after city representatives refused to vote to award the contracts .
The contract was put back for a vote in February , where it was ultimately approved .
EXITS Section::::Exits .
34th Street – Penn Station spans three streets ( 33rd , 34th , and 35th Streets ) with a set of entrances / exits at all of these streets .
For the purposes of this article , entrance and exit are interchangeable .
* 35th Street : This is a part - time booth entrance .
Each local platform has its own fare control .
On the local platforms , there are High Entry - Exit Turnstiles for these exits at platform level .
There is a narrow underpass connecting the platforms inside fare control .
The northbound platform has two street stairs to the northeast corner of 35th Street and Eighth Avenue , and one to the southeast corner .
The southbound platform has two street stairs to the northwest corner of 35th Street and Eighth Avenue , and one to the southwest corner .
* 34th Street : This is a part - time booth entrance .
Each local platform has its own fare control .
There is an underpass connecting the platforms inside fare control , and it leads to the LIRR West Side Concourse outside of fare control .
There is also a passageway providing out - of - system access to the station of the same name on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line .
The northbound platform has one street stair to each eastern corner of 34th Street and Eighth Avenue .
The southbound platform has one street stair to each western corner of 34th Street and Eighth Avenue .
There is a single elevator to the northbound platform at the southeastern corner of the intersection , connecting to that platform 's fare control .
Inside fare control , three elevators from each platform go down to the underpass .
* 33rd Street : This is the full - time entrance , with token booths on both sides ; the full - time booth is on the northbound platform .
All three platforms have their own fare control .
The underpass connecting the platforms is outside fare control .
The northbound local platform 's fare control leads to a street stair to the northeast corner of 33rd Street and 8th Avenue , as well as a direct passageway to the basement of Penn Station / Madison Square Garden .
The southbound local platform 's fare control leads to a street stair to the northwest corner of 33rd Street and 8th Avenue , as well as a double - wide granite staircase at the southwest corner ( in a plaza outside the James A. Farley Post Office Building ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* nycsubway.org — Garden of Circus Delights Artwork by Eric Fischl ( 2001 )
* Station Reporter —
A Lefferts
* Station Reporter —
A Rockaway
* Station Reporter —
C Train
* Station Reporter —
E Train * MTA 's Arts For Transit — 34th Street –
Penn Station ( IND Eighth Avenue Line ) * 34th Street entrance from Google Maps Street View * 35th Street entrance from Google Maps Street View * 33rd Street entrance from Google Maps Street View
* Platforms from Google Maps Street View