FRUIT ROLL - UPS Fruit Roll - Ups is a brand of fruit snack that debuted in grocery stores across America in 1983 .
The snack is a flat , pectin - based fruit - flavored snack , wrapped around a piece of cellophane for easier removal .
Fruit Roll - Ups are manufactured by General Mills and distributed under the Betty Crocker brand in the American market and under the Uncle Tobys brand in Australia .
Several similar products have been marketed by General Mills and by other companies .
ADVERTISING
Section::::Advertising .
Fruit Corners Fruit Roll - Ups were heavily marketed on television in America throughout the early 1980s .
Most spots featured the tag line " Fruit Corners Fruit Roll - Ups : Real fruit and fun , rolled up in one . "
Later spots featured children innovating in the " Fruit Roll - Up Fun Factory " .
The overall marketing theme is that parents can feed their children " fun " processed foods that are based on real fruit .
Studies of American mothers have shown that the mothers are surprised at how sweet Fruit Roll - Ups are and how little fruit is present in them .
For example , the strawberry flavor contains no strawberries , and the only ingredient derived from fruit is the sugar present in concentrated pear juice .
HISTORY Section::::History .
General Mills ' research for the product began in 1975 .
Joray Fruit Rolls are a round , fruit leather product from New York that predates Fruit Roll - Ups .
Fruit Roll - Ups have a more rubbery texture than the natural rolls and though were originally round in shape , they are now shaped like a parallelogram .
Fruit Roll - Ups have featured variants on the original plain sheets such as punch out shapes on the rolls and temporary tattoos for tongues .
*
Berry Lemonade / Cherry Slushie
* Crazy Pix Cool Chix Berry Wave
* Crazy Pix Wild Ones Blastin ' Berry * Electric Blue Raspberry * Flavor Wave *
Rainbow * Little Banana
* Strawberry Kiwi Kick * Amazing Cherry * Sunberry Burst
* Electric Yellow
* Screamin ' Green * Lemon Lime * Pink Lemonade *
SpongeBob SquarePants : Tropical Punch * Franken Berry and Boo Berry ( Sold seasonally at Halloween )
Betty Crocker sells Fruit Roll - Ups in single - flavor boxes and flavor variety packs .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
The main ingredient is sugar , and Fruit Roll - Ups contain five different types of sugar : sugar from pear juice concentrate , corn syrup , dried corn syrup , sugar , and a small amount of dextrose .
They also contain small amounts of partially hydrogenated cottonseed oil , citric acid , sodium citrate , acetylated monoglycerides , fruit pectin , malic acid , ascorbic acid , natural flavors , and artificial colors .
LAWSUIT
OVER HEALTH CLAIMS Section::::Lawsuit over health claims .
In 2011 , the Center for Science in the Public Interest sued General Mills over Fruit Roll - Ups , saying that their packaging and marketing was misleading because it presented the product as a nutritious , healthful , fruit - filled snack , despite having approximately the same nutritional profile as gummy bear candies .
The lawsuit was settled out of court with General Mills agreeing not to put pictures of fruits on the labels , unless that fruit was actually present in that flavor of the Fruit Roll - Up , and to either stop claiming that the product is " made with real fruit " , or to include in that potentially misleading statement the percentage of the Fruit Roll - Up that is made from real fruit .
These changes took place in 2014 .
SEE ALSO
* Fruit by the Foot
*
Black sesame roll
* Fruit Gushers
* Sunkist Fun Fruits
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* New York Times * General Mills brand history
* Fruit Corners brand history ( General Mills )
- Archive.org mirror