SOYBEAN OIL Soybean oil is a vegetable oil extracted from the seeds of the soybean ( Glycine max ) .
It is one of the most widely consumed cooking oils .
As a drying oil , processed soybean oil is also used as a base for printing inks ( soy ink ) and oil paints .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Chinese records dating prior to 2000 B.C. mention use of cultivated soybeans to produce edible soy oil .
Ancient Chinese literature reveals that soybeans were extensively cultivated and highly valued as a use for the soybean oil production process before written records were kept .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
To produce soybean oil , the soybeans are cracked , adjusted for moisture content , heated to between 60 and 88 ° C ( 140–190 ° F ) , rolled into flakes , and solvent - extracted with hexanes .
The oil is then refined , blended for different applications , and sometimes hydrogenated .
Soybean oils , both liquid and partially hydrogenated are sold as " vegetable oil , " or are ingredients in a wide variety of processed foods .
Most of the remaining residue ( soybean meal ) is used as animal feed .
In the 2002–2003 growing season , 30.6 million tons of soybean oil were produced worldwide , constituting about half of worldwide edible vegetable oil production , and thirty percent of all fats and oils produced , including animal fats and oils derived from tropical plants .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Per 100 g , soybean oil has 16 g of saturated fat , 23 g of monounsaturated fat , and 58 g of polyunsaturated fat .
The major unsaturated fatty acids in soybean oil triglycerides are the polyunsaturates alpha - linolenic acid ( C-18:3 ) , 7 - 10 % , and linoleic acid ( C-18:2 ) , 51 % ; and the monounsaturate oleic acid ( C-18:1 ) , 23 % .
It also contains the saturated fatty acids stearic acid ( C-18:0 ) , 4 % , and palmitic acid ( C-16:0 ) , 10 % .
The high - proportion of oxidation - prone linolenic acid is undesirable for some uses , such as cooking oils .
Three companies , Monsanto Company , DuPont / Bunge , and Asoyia in 2004 introduced low linolenic Roundup Ready soybeans .
Hydrogenation may be used to reduce the unsaturation in linolenic acid .
The resulting oil is called hydrogenated soybean oil .
If the hydrogenation is only partially complete , the oil may contain small amounts of trans fat .
COMPARISON TO OTHER VEGETABLE OILS APPLICATIONS FOOD Section::::Applications .
Section::::Food .
Soybean oil is mostly used for frying and baking .
It is also used as a condiment for salads .
DRYING OILS
Section::::Drying oils .
Soybean oil is one of many drying oils , which means that it will slowly harden ( due to free - radical based polymerization ) upon exposure to air , forming a flexible , transparent , and waterproof solid .
Because of this property , it is used in some printing ink and oil paint formulations .
However , other oils ( such as linseed oil ) may be superior for some drying oil applications .
FIXATIVE FOR INSECT REPELLENTS Section::::Fixative for insect repellents .
While soybean oil has no direct insect repellent activity , it is used as a fixative to extend the short duration of action of essential oils such as geranium oil in several commercial products .
TRADING Section::::Trading .
Soybean oil is traded at the Chicago Board of Trade in contracts of 60,000 pounds at a time .
Prices are listed in cents and hundredths of a cent per pound .
REFERENCES