SAUSAGE MAKING
The origins of meat preservation are lost to the ages but probably began when humans began to realize the preservative value of salt .
Sausage making originally developed as a means to preserve and transport meat .
Primitive societies learned that dried berries and spices could be added to dried meat .
By 600 - 500 BC there is mention of sausages from China , Rome and Greece .
The procedure of stuffing meat into casings remains basically the same today , but sausage recipes have been greatly refined and sausage making has become a highly respected culinary art .
Sausages come in two main types : fresh and cured .
Cured sausages may be either cooked or dried .
Most cured sausages are smoked , but this is not mandatory .
The curing process itself changes the meat and imparts its own flavors .
An example is the difference in taste between a pork roast and a ham .
All smoked sausages are cured .
The reason is the threat of botulism .
The bacterium responsible , Clostridium botulinum , is ubiquitous in the environment , grows in the anaerobic conditions created in the interior of the sausage , and thrives in the to temperature range common in the smoke house and subsequent ambient storage .
Thus , for safety reasons , sausages are cured before smoking .
TYPES OF SAUSAGES AND THEIR STORAGE
Section::::Types of sausages and their storage .
+
Sausage Classifications !
Classification ! !
Examples ! !
Storage and Handling FRESH
SAUSAGES Section::::Fresh sausages .
Fresh sausages are simply seasoned ground meats that are cooked before serving .
Fresh sausages normally do not use cure ( Prague powder # 1 ) although cure can be used if desired .
In addition fresh sausages typically do not use smoke flavors , although liquid smoke can be used .
Fresh sausages are never smoked in a cold smoker because of the danger of botulism .
The primary seasoning agents in fresh sausages are salt and sugar along with various savory herbs and spices , and often vegetables , including onion and garlic .
A British fresh sausage typically contains around 10 % butcher 's rusk , 10 % water , 2.5 % seasoning , and 77.5 % meat .
At the point of sale , British sausages will often be labelled as " actual meat content X% " .
As meat can be fatty or lean , the X% is calculated using reference tables with the intention to give a fairer representation of the " visual lean " meat content .
CURED COOKED SAUSAGES
Section::::Cured cooked sausages .
Cured sausages differ from fresh sausages by including 2 teaspoons of cure (
Prague powder # 1 ) per 10 pounds of finished product .
This is usually interpreted per 10 pounds of meat .
This works out to 4 ounces of cure for 100 pounds of sausage .
Next the product is typically hot smoked .
However , similar effects can be achieved by incorporating liquid smoke in the recipe .
Smoking temperatures vary and are typically less than .
At a temperature of 152 ° F ( 67 ° C )
these sausages are fully cooked .
In some cases cold smoke is used .
If so , then the sausage may have been previously cooked in a water bath held at the proper temperature .
An example of this process is the preparation of Braunschweiger .
In this style of sausage , after stuffing into to hog buns or fiberous casings , the sausage is submerged in water for 2 to 2½ hours until the internal temperature reaches .
At this point the sausage should be chilled in ice water , then cold smoked at a temperature of for 2–3 hours .
CURED DRY SAUSAGES Section::::Cured dry sausages .
Cured dry sausages are prepared in a fashion similar to cured cooked sausages .
The major difference is that Prague powder # 2 will be used in place of Prague powder # 1 .
In addition , certified meats must be used .
Since these products are never heated to a temperature that can kill trichinella parasites , it is necessary to accomplish this by other methods .
The usual method is via freezing .
Pork may be rendered acceptable for use in dry sausages by freezing it using the following guidelines :
* 20–30 days * 10–20 days
* 6–12 days The specific regulations are quite complex .
They depend on the thickness of the cuts of meat , the packaging method , and other factors .
In addition there are very specific requirements as to the times in the drying rooms and the temperatures in the smoke rooms .
While it is quite feasible for the small sausage kitchen or hobbyist to produce excellent cured dry sausages , a great deal of technical information is required .
Alternatively , certified pork can be simply purchased .
EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
Equipment depends on scale , a small home grinder and some basic measuring tools may be all that is required .
In a larger scale commercial operation , more high volume equipment will be required .
Regarded as the three most important pieces of equipment , regardless of the amount of sausage being made are an accurate thermometer , a calibrated scale , and a meat grinder .
Smoked or smoke / cooked sausages require a smoker ( small batches ) or a commercial smokehouse .
Emulsion - type cooked sausages , such as frankfurters or bologna , use a bowl chopper to make finely ground meat batter that is put into casings and cooked or smoked .
MEATS AND OTHER INGREDIENTS Section::::Meats and other ingredients .
A variety of fresh meats may be used for making sausage , the most common are from beef , pork , lamb , chicken , turkey , and game .
Meat should be fresh , high quality , have the proper lean - to - fat ratio and good binding qualities .
The meat should not be contaminated with bacteria or other microorganisms .
Combining spices and seasonings in amounts that complement each other is important .
CURING SALTS
Section::::Curing salts .
Making dry sausages involves curing salts , which contain sodium nitrite and sodium nitrate .
Nitrites are used for all types of sausages and are the most common .
Nitrates are used only in the preparation of the cured dry style of sausages .
Over a period of time the nitrates are converted into nitrites by endogenous or added bacteria .
The human digestive system manufactures nitrites , which is thought to be what prevents botulism , which would thrive in the anaerobic conditions and temperature range of the digestive system ( gut ) .
Cured meat products typically contain less than 40 ppm nitrites .
Potassium nitrite and potassium nitrate additions allow the production of sausages with lower levels of sodium .
When using the potassium form , it is necessary to include other ingredients to mask the bitter flavours it imparts .
Old recipes use saltpetre which is not recommended .
The primary reason is that often these old recipes contain many times more curing ingredients than are appropriate .
Modern techniques are readily available and do a much better job .
In the sausage industry the nitrites and nitrates are pre - formulated into products called Prague powder # 1 and Prague powder # 2 .
Prague powder # 1 contains 6.25 % sodium nitrite and 93.75 % sodium chloride and is used for the preparation of all cured meats and sausages other than the dry type .
Prague powder # 2 contains 1 ounce of sodium nitrite ( 6.25 % ) and 0.64 ounces sodium nitrate ( 4.0 % ) per pound of finished product ( the remaining 14.36 ounces is sodium chloride ) and is used for the preparation of cured dry sausages .
Prague powder # 2 should never be used on any product that will be fried at high temperature ( e.g. bacon ) because of the resulting formation of nitrosamines .
When using cure , it is very important to never exceed the recommended amount of 2.5 grams of Prague powder # 1 in 1 kilogram of meat ( 4 ounces/100 pounds ) .
Equivalently this is 10 mL for 4.5 kg ( 2 teaspoons for 10 pounds ) .
Note that the maximum allowable amount of sodium nitrite and potassium nitrite is governed by regulations and is limited to 7 grams per 45 kg ( 0.25 ounces per 100 pounds ) of chopped meat .
Since Prague powder # 1 is a 1:15 dilution ( in 0.45 kg of Prague powder # 1 30 grams is sodium nitrite and 425 grams are common table salt ) , we get the proper amount at a rate of 114 grams added to of meat .
Sodium nitrate and potassium nitrate are limited to 1.7 gram per kilogram ( 2.75 ounces per 100 pounds ) .
Sodium and potassium nitrite are quite toxic to humans with the lethal dose being about 4 grams .
As little as 22 mg / kg of body weight can cause death .
This is about 2.2 grams for a body mass of 100 kg .
Thus , there is enough sodium nitrite in 2 ounces of Prague powder # 1 to kill a person .
Morton 's Tenderquick is the brand name of another formulation of sodium nitrite , with salt and sugars added .
It is not the same concentration as either " Prague powder # 1 or # 2 " .
Since certainty about the amount of nitrite present in a recipe is essential for safety , one can not take a recipe designed for Prague powder and simply substitute like amounts of such products as Morton 's Tenderquick .
To do so would invite the risk of botulism poisoning .
Similarly , one can not just substitute Prague powder # 1 in place of Morton 's Tenderquick .
For any such substitutions , one must calculate the exact amount of nitrite required and make the proper adjustments .
+ Spices Used in Processed Meats !
Common Name !
Form !
Volume / Weight
ml / g ( teaspoons / ounce ) !
Usage Note : The volume - to - weight ratio applies to the herbs and spices only .
This in no way indicates the particular amount for a given recipe .
SEE ALSO
* List of dried foods * List of sausages * List of smoked foods REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * The Art and Practice of Sausage Making