DUPLEX ( BUILDING )
A duplex house plan has two living units attached to each other , either next to each other via townhouses or above each other like apartments By contrast , a building comprising two attached units on two distinct properties is typically considered semi - detached or twin homes but is also called a duplex in parts of the Northeastern United States .
The term " duplex " is not extended to three - unit and four - unit buildings , as they would be referred to with specific terms such as triplex and fourplex or quadplex / quadruplex .
Because of the flexibility of the term , the line between an apartment building and a duplex is somewhat blurred , with apartment buildings tending to be bigger , while duplexes are usually the size of a normal house .
British English usage refers simply to the number of levels within an apartment unit with duplex indicating two storeys ( traditionally this was referred to as a maisonette ) and triplex for three .
A semi - detached house would never be referred to as duplex in the United Kingdom .
The word " duplex " is occasionally mispronounced with the last letter silent due to multiple misperceptions : ( 1 ) that the English word came from French , ( 2 )
that an English word naturalized from French needs to retain the French pronunciation , and ( 3 ) that the terminal -x would be silent in French .
But ( 1 ) this English word came straight from educated English speakers ' use of Latin ( not by way of French ) , ( 2 ) most English words that came from French words use naturalized pronunciation , and ( 3 ) the French pronunciation of the French cognate ends in /ɛks/ anyway .
VARIANTS BIG CITIES Section::::Variants .
Section::::Big cities .
In dense areas like Manhattan and downtown Chicago , a duplex or duplex apartment refers to a maisonette , a single dwelling unit spread over two floors connected by an indoor staircase .
Similarly , a triplex apartment refers to an apartment spread out over three floors .
These properties can be quite expensive and include the most expensive property in Manhattan as of 2006 ( according to Forbes Magazine ) , a triplex atop The Pierre hotel .
In this context , an apartment locating on one floor only may be called a simplex .
UK Section::::UK .
In the United Kingdom , the term duplex is more often used by property professionals such as architects and estate agents and refers only to a flat or apartment on two floors connected by an inner staircase though many newer apartments have open - plan designs including mezzanines .
The traditional layout is normally called a maisonette , indicating a ' house - like dwelling ' raised above the ground or street .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australia , a duplex is often considered a residential building containing two homes that share a common central wall .
As such they are usually a mirror image of each other in layout .
Also referred to as a maisonette in South Australia .
PAIRED HOME
Section::::Paired home .
A paired home is two homes that share a wall and have opposite side entries .
The whole building is designed to look like one single larger home .
Unlike a front to front duplex , the paired home helps provide more privacy for the homeowners .
URBAN PLANNING
Section::::Urban planning .
In urban planning , the term duplex is used more specifically .
Major Canadian cities sometimes use the term duplex to refer specifically to a building with one unit built above another .
Edmonton defines ' Duplex Housing ' as " development consisting of a building containing only two Dwellings , with one Dwelling placed over the other in whole or in part with individual and separate access to each Dwelling " .
Calgary defines Duplex Dwelling as " a building which contains two Dwelling Units , one located above the other , with each having a separate entrance " .
Toronto proposes in their new Zoning Bylaw to define ' Duplex Building ' as a building that has only two dwelling units , and one dwelling unit is entirely or partially on top of the other dwelling unit .
Halifax defines Duplex Dwelling as " the whole of a dwelling that is divided horizontally into two separate dwelling units , each of which has an independent entrance " .
Other major cities use the term duplex , but for dwelling units .
Dallas defines the term duplex as " two dwelling units located on a lot " .
Philadelphia defines a duplex dwelling as " a dwelling occupied as the home or residence of two ( 2 ) families , under one ( 1 ) roof , each family occupying a single unit " , a definition that excludes a pair of twin ( semi - detached ) houses , two dwellings separated by a firewall that extends above the roofline .
Other major cities do not use the term duplex in their zoning or land - use bylaws .
San Francisco and Vancouver use the term Two - family dwelling .
Winnipeg uses the term Dwelling , two - family .
The definitions of these terms do not specify the physical relationship between the two dwelling units in the building .
In cities such as Buffalo , Detroit and Chicago the term Two - flat is used and defines it as a " residential building that contains 2 dwelling units located on a single lot .
The dwelling units must share a common wall or common floor / ceiling . "
Where cities do not define the relationship of the dwelling units to one another , units may be built one on top of the other , or one beside the other .
The latter arrangement is more specifically referred to as a semi - detached building .
SEE ALSO
* Polish flat * Semi - detached * Split - level home * Triple decker
* Tyneside flat
*
Apartment
* Condominium * List of house types REFERENCES