NON - COMPETITIVE INHIBITION Non - competitive inhibition is a type of enzyme inhibition where the inhibitor reduces the activity of the enzyme and binds equally well to the enzyme whether or not it has already bound the substrate .
The inhibitor may bind to the enzyme whether or not the substrate has already been bound , but if it has a higher affinity for binding the enzyme in one state or the other , it is called a mixed inhibitor .
HISTORY Section::::History .
During his years working as a physician Michaelis and a friend ( Peter Rona ) built a compact lab , in the hospital , and over the course of five years – Michaelis successfully became published over 100 times .
During his research in the hospital , he was the first to view the different types of inhibition ; specifically using fructose and glucose as inhibitors of maltase activity .
Maltase breaks maltose into two units of either glucose or fructose .
Findings from that experiment allowed for the divergence of non - competitive and competitive inhibition .
Non - competitive inhibition effects
the k value ( but not the K ) on any given graph ; this inhibitor binds to a site that has specificity for the certain molecule .
Michaelis determined that when the inhibitor is bound , the enzyme would become inactivated .
Like many other scientists of their time , Leonor Michaelis and Maud Menten worked on a reaction that was used to change the conformation of sucrose and make it lyse into two products – fructose and glucose .
The enzyme involved in this reaction is called invertase , and it is the enzyme the kinetics of which have been supported by Michaelis and Menten to be revolutionary for the kinetics of other enzymes .
While expressing the rate of the reaction studied , they derived an equation that described the rate in a way which suggested that it is mostly dependent on the enzyme concentration , as well as on presence of the substrate , but only to a certain extent .
Adrian Brown and Victor Henri laid the groundwork for the discoveries in enzyme kinetics that Michaelis and Menten are known for .
Brown theoretically envisioned the mechanism now accepted for enzyme kinetics , but did not have the quantitative data to make a claim .
Victor Henri made significant contributions to enzyme kinetics during his doctoral thesis , however he lacked noting the importance of hydrogen ion concentration and mutarotation of glucose .
The goal of Henri 's thesis was to compare his knowledge of enzyme - catalysed reactions to the recognized laws of physical chemistry .
Henri is credited with being the first to write the equation that is now known as the Michaelis - Menten equation .
Using glucose and fructose in the catalytic reactions controlled by maltase and invertase , Leonor Michaelis was the first scientist to distinguish the different types of inhibition by using the pH scale which did not exist in Henri 's time .
Particularly during their work on describing the rate of this reaction they also tested and extrapolated on the idea of another scientist , Victor Henri , that enzyme they were using had some affinity for both products of this reaction – fructose and glucose .
Using Henri 's methods , Michaelis and Menten nearly perfected this concept of initial - rate method for steady - state experiments .
They were studying inhibition when they found that non - competitive ( mixed ) inhibition is characterized by its effect on k ( catalyst rate ) while competitive is characterized by its effect on velocity ( V ) .
In the Michaelis and Menten experiments they heavily focused on pH effects of invertase using hydrogen ions .
Invertase is an enzyme found in extracellular yeast and catalyzed reactions by hydrolysis or inverting a sucrose ( mixture of sucrose and fructose ) to " invert sugar .
" The main reason for using invertase was that it could be easily assayed and experiments could be done in quicker manner .
Sucrose rotates in polarimeter as dextroratatory - D
whereas invert sugar is levorotatory -
L. This made tracking the inversion of sugar relatively simple .
They also found that α - D - glucose is released in reactions catalyzed by invertase which is very unstable and spontaneously changes to β - D - glucose .
Although , these are both in the dextroratatory form , this is where they noted that glucose can change spontaneously , also known as mutarotation .
Failing to take this into consideration was one of the main reasons Henri 's experiments fell short .
Using invertase to catalyze sucrose inversion , they could see how fast the enzyme was reacting by polarimetry ; therefore , non - competitive inhibition was found to occur in the reaction where sucrose was inverted with invertase .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
It is important to note that while all non - competitive inhibitors bind the enzyme at allosteric sites ( i.e. locations other than its active site)—not all inhibitors that bind at allosteric sites are non - competitive inhibitors .
In fact , allosteric inhibitors may act as competitive , non - competitive , or uncompetitive inhibitors .
Many sources continue to conflate these two terms , or state the definition of allosteric inhibition as the definition for non - competitive inhibition .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
Non - competitive inhibition models a system where the inhibitor and the substrate may both be bound to the enzyme at any given time .
When both the substrate and the inhibitor are bound , the enzyme - substrate - inhibitor complex can not form product and can only be converted back to the enzyme - substrate complex or the enzyme - inhibitor complex .
Non - competitive inhibition is distinguished from general mixed inhibition in that the inhibitor has an equal affinity for the enzyme and the enzyme - substrate complex .
For example , in the enzyme - catalyzed reactions of glycolysis , accumulation phosphoenol is catalyzed by pyruvate kinase into pyruvate .
Alanine is an amino acid which is synthesized from pyruvate also inhibits the enzyme pyruvate kinase during glycolysis .
Alanine is a non - competitive inhibitor , therefore it binds away from the active site to the substrate in order for it to still be the final product .
Another example of non - competitive inhibition is given by glucose-6-phosphate inhibiting hexokinase in the brain .
Carbons 2 and 4 on glucose-6-phosphate contain hydroxyl groups that attach along with the phosphate at carbon 6 to the enzyme - inhibitor complex .
The substrate and enzyme are different in their group combinations that an inhibitor attaches to .
The ability of glucose-6-phosphate to bind at different places at the same time makes it a non - competitive inhibitor .
The most common mechanism of non - competitive inhibition involves reversible binding of the inhibitor to an allosteric site , but it is possible for the inhibitor to operate via other means including direct binding to the active site .
It differs from competitive inhibition in that the binding of the inhibitor does not prevent binding of substrate , and vice versa , it simply prevents product formation for a limited time .
This type of inhibition reduces the maximum rate of a chemical reaction without changing the apparent binding affinity of the catalyst for the substrate ( K – see Michaelis - Menten kinetics ) .
When a non - competitive inhibitor is added the Vmax is changed , while the Km remains unchanged .
According to the Lineweaver - Burk plot the Vmax is reduced during the addition of a non - competitive inhibitor .
Which is shown in the plot by a change in both the slope and y - intercept when a non - competitive inhibitor is added .
The primary difference between competitive and non - competitive is that competitive inhibition affects the substrate 's ability to bind by binding an inhibitor in place of a substrate , this lowers the affinity of the enzyme for the substrate .
In non - competitive inhibition the inhibitor binds to an allosteric site and prevents the enzyme - substrate complex from performing a chemical reaction .
This does not affect the Km ( affinity ) of the enzyme ( for the substrate ) .
Non - competitive inhibition differs from uncompetitive inhibition in that it still allows for the substrate to bind to the enzyme - inhibitor complex and form an enzyme - substrate - inhibitor complex , this is not true in uncompetitive inhibition , it prevents the substrate from binding to the enzyme inhibitor through conformational change upon allosteric binding .
EQUATION Section::::Equation .
In the presence of a non - competitive inhibitor , the apparent enzyme affinity is equivalent to the actual affinity .
In terms of Michaelis - Menten kinetics , K = K.
This can be seen as a consequence of Le Chatelier 's principle because the inhibitor binds to both the enzyme and the enzyme - substrate complex equally so that the equilibrium is maintained .
However , since some enzyme is always inhibited from converting the substrate to product , the effective enzyme concentration is lowered .
Mathematically , EXAMPLE : NONCOMPETITIVE INHIBITORS OF CYP2C9
ENZYME Section::::Example : noncompetitive inhibitors of CYP2C9
enzyme .
Noncompetitive inhibitors of CYP2C9 enzyme include nifedipine , tranylcypromine , phenethyl isothiocyanate , and 6-hydroxyflavone .
Computer docking simulation and constructed mutants substituted indicate that the noncompetitive binding site of 6-hydroxyflavone is the reported allosteric binding site of CYP2C9 enzyme .
REFERENCES