THE WAY YOU MAKE ME FEEL
" The Way You Make Me Feel " is a song by American recording artist Michael Jackson .
It was released by Epic Records on November 9 , 1987 as the third single from his seventh studio album , Bad ( 1987 ) .
It was written and composed by Jackson , and produced by Quincy Jones and Jackson .
Aside from appearing on Jackson 's Bad album , the song has also been featured on the first disc of Jackson 's compilation album in 1995 , Number Ones in 2003 , The Ultimate Collection in 2004 ,
The Essential Michael Jackson in 2005 , in 2006
and This Is It in 2009 .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " has been covered by multiple recording artists .
The song received positive reviews from contemporary critics .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " became Bad 's third consecutive single to peak at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and charted mainly within the top ten and twenty internationally .
A music video for " The Way You Make Me Feel " was released at the time showing Jackson pursuing and dancing with former model Tatiana Thumbtzen .
Since the music video 's release , it has become influential on other artists ' material .
The song has been performed on all of Jackson 's world concert tours as a solo artist , and was planned to have been performed during the This
Is It concerts from 2009 to 2010 .
Notable live performances of the song by Jackson include a performance at the 1988 Grammy Awards ceremony .
BACKGROUND AND COMPOSITION Section::::Background and composition .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " was recorded by Michael Jackson in 1987 for his seventh studio album Bad , which was released the same year it was recorded .
Epic Records released the song as the third single from the album in November that year .
"
The Way You Make Me Feel " was written and co - produced by Jackson , and produced by Quincy Jones .
Before the recording of Bad , Jackson had written over sixty songs for the album , with plans of releasing a three disc album , but after Jones convinced Jackson to make Bad a one disc LP , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , as well as ten other songs were selected for the album .
According to Bad 25 , the song and subsequent video was intended to show another aspect to public 's perception of Michael Jackson in addition to his reputation as a lover "
( I Just Ca n't Stop Loving You ) " and being streetwise ( " Bad " )
they wanted to show him as a flirt or able to pick up girls .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " has been featured on multiple greatest hits and compilation albums by Jackson since the song 's release , including the first disc of Jackson 's two disc compilation album in 1995 , Jackson 's greatest hits album , Number Ones in 2003 and
the This Is It compilation album in 2009 .
Musically , " The Way You Make Me Feel " is a pop and rhythm and blues song composed of blues harmonies .
The song 's opening lyrics are " Hey , pretty baby with the high heels on " .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " 's lyrics pertain to being in love , as well as the feeling of loving someone .
Throughout the song Jackson 's vocal range spans from B to A.
The song is played in the key of E major .
"
The Way You Make Me Feel " has a mid - tempo of medium rock and has a metronome of 120 beats per minute .
The song follows in the chord progression of C — E ♭ /C — C — C / E ♭ in the first line , when Jackson sings " Hee - hee !
Ooh Go on ! "
and continues on the same progression in the second line , when Jackson sings " Girl !
Aaow ! " .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " generally received positive reviews from contemporary music critics .
AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine listed " The Way You May Me Feel " as well as the album 's title track , " I Just Ca n't Stop Loving You " and " Man In The Mirror " as being a ' track picks ' from Bad .
Erlewine commented that out of all of Bad 's songs , " only three can stand alongside album tracks from its predecessor " which were " Bad " , " The Way You Make Me Feel , " and " I Just Ca n't Stop Loving You " .
Jon Pareles , a writer for The New York Times , commented that Jackson 's songs , " The Way You Make Me Feel " and " I Just Ca n't Stop Loving You " , " say nothing more personalized than their titles " .
Richard Cromelin , from the Los Angeles Times , described " The Way You Make Me Feel " as being a " loping shuffle " .
Rolling Stone David Sigerson commented that " The Way You Make Me Feel " was " nearly as good " as being the third best song on Bad .
Greg Quill , who writes for the Toronto Star , commented that " The Way You Make Me Feel " was to a " lesser extent in the love songs " because the song dealt " more with surrender than conquest or self - gratification . "
The Washington Post Rickard Harrington commented that on songs like " The Way You Make Me Feel , " Jackson " sings the way he dances " .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " tied at number 22 on The Village Voices Pazz & Jop critics ' poll of 1987 .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " generally charted within the top ten and top twenty positions on music charts worldwide .
The song climbed to number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 on the chart 's issue date of December 26 , 1987 .
After charting within the top ten for five weeks , the song peaked at number one on the Hot 100 on January 23 , 1988 .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " became the album 's third consecutive single to reach number one on the Hot 100 .
"
The Way You Make Me Feel " also charted on Billboard 's Adult Contemporary chart , peaking at number nine , and on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi Single Sales chart at the peak of number three .
The song also charted at number one on the Billboard Hot Black Singles chart and Dance Club Play Singles chart .
The song entered the United Kingdom singles charts at number sixteen on December 5 , 1987 .
The following week the song moved up thirteen spaces to number three , which was the song 's peak position .
The song stayed at its peak position for two consecutive weeks , and remained on the country 's chart for ten weeks , before falling out of the top 100 positions , only to re - enter the charts two weeks later .
The song peaked at number two on New Zealand music charts on January 17 , 1988 , and remained on the chart for a total of eleven weeks in 1987 and 1988 .
In the Netherlands , the song debuted on the chart at number twenty on November 28 , 1987 .
Two weeks later the song charted at its peak position , at number six .
"
The Way You Make Me Feel " debuted at number fourteen on Switzerland charts on December 13 , 1987 ; the following week , the song charted at its peak position at number eight .
The song charted within the top thirty positions for ten consecutive weeks from 1987 to 1988 .
The song debuted on French music charts on December 26 , 1987 at number 47 , and eventually peaked within the top thirty positions at number 29 .
The song charted within the top 50 positions for ten consecutive weeks on the country 's chart .
The song has sold over 2 million digital copies as of August 2018 .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " re - entered music charts worldwide after Jackson 's music was re - issued for the Visionary album .
The song debuted on the Spanish Singles Chart at number one on April 9 , 2006 .
The song remained on the country 's chart for ten weeks .
In Italy , the song debuted within the top ten , peaking at number seven , on April 6 , 2006 ; after two weeks , the song charted out of the top 100 positions .
"
The Way You Make Me Feel " re - entered Dutch charts on April 1 , 2006 at number 24 .
The song re - entered French music charts on April 1 , 2006 at number 59 ; the song remained within the top 100 positions for two consecutive weeks .
Following Jackson 's death , his music experienced a surge in popularity .
The song re - entered Dutch charts for the third time on July 4 , 2009 , at its peak position at number 40 ; the song remained on the chart for four consecutive weeks in 2009 .
The song charted within the top ten , peaking at number six , on the Billboard Hot Digital Songs on July 11 , due to digital download sales .
The song debuted on Swedish charts at number 30 on July 3 , and peaked at number 24 the following week .
On July 4 , the song re - entered the United Kingdom charts at number 47 , and peaked at number 34 the following week .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for " The Way You Make Me Feel " was directed by Joe Pytka and produced by Michael Nesmith .
It was choreographed by Jackson and Vincent Paterson .
The short version of the video is seven minutes and fifty - four seconds long and the full version is nine minutes and thirty - three seconds long .
The video begins with a group of men trying to pick up women , but failing .
One of the men ( Michael Jackson ) is told to go home and not to hang around with the other guys anymore .
When the man walks home , an elderly man ( played by Joe Seneca ) , who is sitting on the steps of his house , tells him to just be himself .
The man notices a woman , played by model / dancer Tatiana Thumbtzen , walking down the streets alone .
Shortly after the man walks out of an alley and stands in front of the woman while she 's walking down the street , although she ignores him and keeps walking .
He gets her attention by shouting , and then begins singing " The Way You Make Me Feel " to her while also dancing .
Uninterested , she walks away .
He follows her , having been cheered on by his friends to pursue her .
Another dance routine begins , involving the man 's friends , which leads to the man pursuing the woman throughout the neighborhood .
The video ends with the man eventually winning the woman over , and embracing her , while a fire hydrant sprays out water .
The videoclip also features an appearance by his sister La Toya as one of Thumbtzen 's friends .
The music video was released on October 31 , 1987 , and received one nomination at the 1988 MTV Video Music Awards Ceremony .
The video , alongside Jackson 's ' " Bad " video , was nominated for Best Choreography , but lost to Jackson 's younger sister Janet 's video " The Pleasure Principle " .
The music video was included on the video albums :
Video Greatest Hits – HIStory ( long version on DVD and short version on VHS ) , Number Ones ( short version ) , Michael Jackson 's Vision ( long version ) and the Target version DVD of Bad 25 ( long version ) .
The introduction of the full version of the video also samples the Roy Ayers 1985 song " Hot " ( written by Binky Brice , Philip Hunter Field and James Mtume ) from his You Might Be Surprised album .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " was performed by Jackson on all three of his world concert series tours as a solo artist as well as during award shows .
For a majority of the songs performances , Jackson would wear a blue dress shirt with a white T - shirt and black pants with a white belt .
The song was first performed in concert by Jackson during the encore of the second leg of his Bad World Tour from 1987 to 1989 .
A live version of the song is available on the DVD Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 .
He performed " The Way You Make Me Feel " at the 1988 Grammy Awards Ceremony , during which Jackson wore his signature outfit and his signature black fedora , while doing a dance routine with four other dancers , and performed the song along with another one of his songs , " Man in the Mirror " .
This performance was staged and choreographed by Vincent Paterson .
Tatiana Thumbtzen , who appeared in the short film for The Way
You Make Me Feel , joined Jackson in some concerts of his Bad World Tour , and performed the song with him , strutting across the stage whilst he pursued her .
However , she was fired from the tour by Jackson 's manager after an incident during one of the performances in which she approached Jackson and kissed him onstage .
" The Way You Make Me Feel " was also performed during the first leg of Jackson 's Dangerous World Tour from June 1992 to November 1993 .
The tour was supposed to be longer , but was canceled due to Jackson 's health concerns and stress from the child sexual abuse accusations made against him .
The next performance of the song was during select dates of Jackson 's world concert series tour , HIStory .
The song was performed during selected concerts from September 1996 to June 1997 .
The last performance of the song was at the in 2001 at Madison Square Garden on September 7 and September 10 , 2001 .
The video footage from the performance ( which included Britney Spears ) was featured on CBS in November 2001 , as a two - hour television special .
Since March 2009 , Jackson was preparing to perform " The Way You Make Me Feel " during his This
Is It concert series from 2009 to 2010 .
Following Jackson 's death in June of the same year , video footage of Jackson rehearsing the song was featured in the 2009 concert documentary film , Michael Jackson 's This Is It .
The video rehearsal footage was also featured on the films DVD in January 2010 .
COVER VERSIONS AND INFLUENCES
Section::::Cover versions and influences .
In 1989 , German comedian Otto Waalkes parodies the music video in his film Otto –
Der Außerfriesische .
In 2003 , the music group Shakaya covered " The Way You Make Me Feel " and released their version as a non - album single .
The song only charted on Australian charts , peaking at number 21 on the country 's music charts .
In December 2009 , Stacey Solomon , a contestant on the X Factor in the United Kingdom , performed a cover of the song during the show 's semi - finals , which received mixed opinions from the show 's judges .
In January 2010 , Nick Jonas performed the song during a concert at the Warner Theatre .
In February 2010 , Whitney Houston performed " The Way You Make Me Feel " , along with Jackson 's " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin' " , during her
I Look to You Tour .
In October 2016 , Olympic gymnast Laurie Hernandez and Dancing with the Stars pro dancer Valentin Chmerkovskiy , the eventual winners of the 23rd season , performed a jazz routine dance to the song during the reality dance competition 's Cirque du Soleil - themed episode .
TRACK LISTINGS AND FORMATS 7
"
single *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( 7 " Version ) – 4:25
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Instrumental ) – 4:25 * UK 12
" single *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Extended Dance Mix ) –
7:53
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Dub Version ) – 5:06
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( A Cappella ) – 4:30 * US 12
" Single *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Dance Extended Mix ) –
7:53
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Dance Remix Radio Edit ) – 5:20 * *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Dub Version ) – 5:06
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( A Cappella ) – 4:30 * Visionary single CD side *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( 7 " Version ) – 4:25
* * " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Extended Dance Mix ) – 7:53 * DVD side *
" The Way You Make Me Feel " ( Music video ) – 6:43 * OFFICIAL VERSIONS
* Album Version – 4:59 * Album Version # 2 – 4:58 – Full - length version of the single remix sans the finger snap after the second verse .
* 7
" Re - Mix – 4:25 * Album Version # 2 ( Edit ) – 4:26 – Attempt at re - creating the original 7 " version .
* Instrumental – 4:25 * Dance Extended Mix – 7:52 * Dance Remix Radio Edit – 5:22 * Dub Version – 5:02 * A Cappella – 4:29 CREDITS AND PERSONNEL
* Written and composed by Michael Jackson * Produced by Quincy Jones * Co - Produced by Michael Jackson
* Michael Jackson : lead and background vocals , finger snaps
* John Robinson : drums * Douglas Getschal : drum programming
* Eric Gale , David Williams : guitars * Kim Hutchcroft , Larry Williams : saxophones * Gary Grant , Jerry
Hey : trumpets * Ollie E. Brown , Paulinho Da Costa : percussion * Christopher Currell : Synclavier , finger snaps
* John Barnes , Michael Boddicker , Greg Phillinganes : synthesizers
* Larry Williams : synthesizer programming
* Rhythm and vocal arrangements by Michael Jackson * Horn arrangement by Jerry Hey
* Engineered and Mixed by Bruce Swedien CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1987–1988 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( Kent Music Report )
align="center"5 Italy ( FIMI )
align="center"4 South Africa ( Springbok Radio ) align="center"16 Spain ( AFYVE )
align="center"2 US Billboard Adult Contemporary align="center"9 US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"1 US Billboard Hot Black Singles
align="center"1
US Billboard Hot Dance Club Play
align="center"1
US Billboard Hot Dance Music / Maxi - Singles Sales align="center"3 US Cash Box
align="center"1 !
Chart ( 2006 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( Kent Music Report )
align="center"79 !
Chart ( 2009–2010 ) !
Peakposition Belgium ( Back Catalogue Singles Flanders )
align="center"9
Canada ( Hot Canadian Digital Singles ) align="center"13 US Billboard Hot Digital Songs align="center"6 !
Chart ( 2017 ) !
Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1987 ) !
Position Belgium ( Ultratop 50 Flanders ) align="center"92 !
Chart ( 1988 ) !
Position Australia ( Kent Music Report )
align="center"86 Italy ( FIMI ) align="center"43 US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"36 CERTIFICATIONS
SEE ALSO
* List of number - one R&B singles of 1987 ( U.S. )
* List of number - one singles of 1987
( Ireland ) * List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 1988
* List of Cash Box Top 100 number - one singles of 1988
* List of number - one dance singles of 1988 ( U.S. )
* List of number - one singles of 2006 ( Spain ) REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY