FIVE GUYS
Five Guys Enterprises LLC ( doing business as Five Guys Burgers and Fries ) is an American fast casual restaurant chain focused on hamburgers , hot dogs , and French fries , and headquartered in Lorton , Virginia , an unincorporated part of Fairfax County .
The first Five Guys restaurant opened in 1986 in Arlington County , Virginia , and by 2001 , the chain had expanded to five locations throughout the Washington , D.C. metro area .
In early 2003 , the chain began franchising , beginning a period of rapid expansion .
In a year and a half , permits had been sold for over 300 franchised locations .
As of 2016 , Five Guys had over 1,500 locations open worldwide , with 1,500 locations under development .
The company was the fastest - growing fast food chain in the United States , with a 32.8 % sales increase from 2010 to 2011 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Five Guys was founded in 1986 by Janie and Jerry Murrell ; Jerry and the couple 's sons , Jim , Matt , Chad , and Ben , were the original " Five Guys . "
The Murrells had a fifth son , Tyler , two years later .
Today , all five sons , the current " Five Guys " , are involved :
Matt and Jim travel the country visiting stores , Chad oversees training , Ben selects the franchisees , and Tyler runs the bakery .
The first Five Guys was in Arlington 's Westmont Shopping Center .
Buns were baked in the same center by Brenner 's Bakery .
This location closed , in favor of another in Alexandria , at the intersection of King and North Beauregard Streets , which closed on September 21 , 2013 .
More followed in Old Town Alexandria and Springfield , Virginia , making five by 2001 .
Their success encouraged the Murrells to franchise their concept the following year , engaging Fransmart , a franchise sales organization .
Former Washington Redskins kicker Mark Moseley , who had gone to work for Fransmart after his football career , played a key role in Five Guys ' expansion and went on to become the company 's director of franchise development after it ended its business relationship with Fransmart .
In early 2003 the chain began franchising , opening the doors to rapid expansion which caught the attention of national restaurant trade organizations and the national press .
The expansion started in Virginia and Maryland , and by the end of 2004 , over 300 units were in development through the Northeast .
Over the next few years the chain rapidly expanded across the entire United States and into Canada , reaching over 1,000 locations by 2012 .
The first location outside North America opened in the United Kingdom in July 2013 , in London on Long Acre in Covent Garden , one day before the opening of Shake Shack 's first UK outlet just 300 m away .
The second location was in Reading , Berkshire .
The chain now has 27 restaurants open across the UK .
Five Guys also has locations in the Middle East and has continued to expand in Europe .
In March 2017 a location opened at Disneyland Paris ' Disney Village , about 25 miles east of the Five Guys located on the Champs - Élysées .
In late 2017 , Five Guys opened its first restaurants in Germany , one in Frankfurt and one in Essen ; two additional locations are scheduled to open autumn 2018 in Berlin and Munich .
Five Guys Enterprises has several affiliated companies that are not part of a consolidated group , but are under common ownership .
Five Guys Operations was founded in 2012 , and as of 2016 , had an estimated $ 12.3 million in yearly revenue and approximately 259 employees .
Five Guys Holdings was founded in 2007 .
Five Guys Foods UK Limited was incorporated on 12 March 2013 .
FGE International , FGO International BV , and
FG Coöperatief U.A. are based in Amsterdam .
FGH International C.V. is located in Bermuda .
The company has a 39,900 square foot headquarters in Lorton , Virginia , overlooking the Occoquan and Potomac Rivers , that was specially designed to convey the corporate brand .
According to the architect , " The lobby mimics the typical Five Guys restaurant with red and white tile , tall tables , Freestyle Coke machine and signature peanut boxes . " MENU Section::::Menu .
The Five Guys menu is centered on hamburgers offered with American cheese or bacon , kosher style hot dogs , grilled cheese and vegetable sandwiches .
Five Guys uses buns that are sweeter and " eggier " than normal buns .
Fresh - cut French fries are the sole side item , available salted only in " Five Guys style " or seasoned " Cajun style " .
Complimentary roasted in - shell peanuts are offered for on - site consumption at most locations , with signage alerting potential customers who may have a peanut allergy .
Customers are not allowed to take peanuts outside the restaurant .
For dessert , the chain sells milkshakes available with 10 different mix - ins .
Customers can mix and match multiple flavors , and even add bacon to the shake .
The company experimented with offering coffee , but this was discontinued due to quality concerns .
Like other breakfast items , such as the BLT sandwich and bacon , egg and cheese sandwich , coffee is currently only offered in Five Guys 's airport locations and its location near McPherson Square station .
RESTAURANTS Section::::Restaurants .
Bags of potatoes are sometimes stacked in customer spaces due to an occasional lack of storage space , or , in some franchises , for aesthetic reasons .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Five Guys has received numerous awards in D.C. area publications , including " Number 1 Burger " by Washingtonian Magazine for seven years .
Former US President Barack Obama is reportedly a fan , buying lunch for himself and his colleagues at the Washington Five Guys branch in 2011 .
Since franchising , it has also received awards in other cities , including Amherst , Dubai , New York ; Redlands , California ; Annapolis , Maryland ; Charlotte , North Carolina ; Richmond , Virginia ; Huntington , New York ; Charlottesville , Virginia ; St. Louis , Missouri ; Houston , Texas ; Austin , Texas ; Johnstown , Pennsylvania ; State College , Pennsylvania ; Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ; Virginia Beach , Virginia ; Jacksonville , Florida ; Youngstown , Ohio ; Schererville , Indiana ; Tucson , Arizona ; Newburgh , New York and Hampton , Virginia .
The chain has something of a cult following and remarkable brand loyalty .
Five Guys has been rated one of the most talked - about burger brands online .
As Five Guys continues to expand into the West Coast comparisons have been made with In - N - Out Burger , another generally similar fast food chain .
Comparing the two chains in 2011 , the Los Angeles Times noted that Five Guys ' menu items are generally more expensive than In - N - Out 's , they lack drive - throughs that In - N - Out is famous for , and are most often found inside shopping malls .
The newspaper still conceded that by pricing its products higher , offering bigger burgers and building larger dining rooms , Five Guys could capitalize on the recent trend of mid - level places that offer more expensive products than fast food but cheaper than fancy restaurants .
In 2012 , Market Force Information , Inc. polled 7,600 fast - food consumers , and Five Guys ranked No . 1 in food quality and taste , service , cleanliness , and atmosphere .
In 2011 , Five Guys was ranked first in " Fast Food - Large Chains " and " Best Burger " in Zagat 's annual Fast Food Survey .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Men 's Health magazine stated on their web site that Five Guys ' meals are generally considered unhealthy .
They state that a standard double patty burger , for example , contains 700 calories and 20 grams of saturated fat .
Men 's Health also rated Five Guys ' french fries as some of the most unhealthy food in America , saying that a standard large order of fries contains almost 1,500 calories .
The Center for Science in the Public Interest placed Five Guys ' bacon cheeseburger , which it claims contains 920 calories , among its 2010 list of most unhealthy meals available at U.S. chain restaurants .
In 2015 , the Five Guys site stated that a bacon cheeseburger contains 930 calories and a large order of fries contains 1,314 calories .
Time Magazine added an order of Five Guys ' french fries , which contains 1,464 calories to their list of " Top 10 Worst Fast Food Meals . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Five Guys US
* Five Guys UK