ODE TO
BILLY JOE ( FILM ) Ode to Billy Joe is a 1976 film with a screenplay by Herman Raucher , inspired by the 1967 hit song by Bobbie Gentry , titled " Ode to Billie Joe " .
The film was directed and produced by Max Baer , Jr. and stars Robby Benson and Glynnis O'Connor .
Made for $ 1.1 million , it grossed $ 27 million at the box office , plus earnings in excess of $ 2.65 million in the foreign market , $ 4.75 million from television , and $ 2.5 million from video .
Gentry 's song recounts the day when Billie Joe McAllister committed suicide by jumping off the Tallahatchie Bridge on Choctaw Ridge , Mississippi .
When Gentry and Raucher got together to work on the screenplay , she explained she had no idea why the real person who inspired the character of Billie Joe had killed himself .
Raucher thus had a free hand to pick one .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set in 1953 , the film explores the budding relationship between teenagers Billy Joe McAllister ( Benson ) and Bobbie Lee Hartley ( O'Connor ) ( who corresponds to the unnamed narrator of the original song ) , despite resistance from Hartley 's family , who contend she is too young to date .
One night at a jamboree , McAllister gets drunk and seems nauseated and confused when entering a makeshift brothel behind the gathering .
It turns out that in his inebriated state , he had sex with another man , later revealed to be his sawmill boss , Dewey Barksdale ( James Best ) .
After his intimate encounter with Barksdale , Billy Joe disappears for several days .
He then returns , and Bobbie Lee finally submits to her passions at a secluded spot near the bridge , and she encourages him to make love to her .
Billy Joe , however , is unable to consummate their relationship owing to his guilt .
He tells Bobbie Lee that he has been with a man , bids her an enigmatic goodbye , and subsequently kills himself by jumping off the bridge spanning the Tallahatchie River .
The local preacher , who had seen Billy Joe and Bobbie Lee together , and other townsfolk spread the false story that Billy Joe had impregnated Bobbie Lee out of wedlock and had committed suicide for that reason .
For the sake of the family , Bobbie Lee 's brother insists that she either quietly pursue an abortion or , if she insists upon having the baby , leave town .
Knowing that no one will ever believe that she and Billy Joe had not had sex and that she was never pregnant , Bobbie Lee decides to leave home .
Very early one morning , with suitcase in hand , she walks to town to get a bus .
On the way she meets Barksdale on the bridge , where he tells her that he is headed to her house to confess to her father and clear her name .
She advises him against doing so , noting that revealing the truth would forever tarnish Billy Joe 's reputation .
He initially holds fast to his desire to confess , but Bobbie Lee calmly stresses that the news would further devastate Billy Joe 's family and leave Barksdale himself subject to criminal prosecution .
She also assures him that she does not mind her fate and then adds , " Oh , I 'll be back before long ; I 'm only 15 .
What do I know of the world ? "
Finally agreeing with the girl 's logic , he offers Bobbie Lee a ride to the bus station , which she graciously accepts .
The film ends with the two of them walking off the bridge together .
CAST
* Robby Benson as Billy Joe McAllister
* Glynnis O'Connor as Bobbie Lee Hartley
* Joan Hotchkis as Anna ' Mama ' Hartley * Sandy McPeak as Glenn ' Papa ' Hartley
*
James Best as Dewey Barksdale * Terence Goodman as James Hartley * Becky Bowen as Becky Thompson * Simpson Hemphill as Brother Taylor
* Ed Shelnut as Coleman Stroud * Eddie Talr as Tom Hargitay
* William Hallberg as Dan McAllister PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The June 12 , 1975 issue of the Hollywood Reporter announced the completion of a $ 3.5 million deal between Max Baer , Jr. and
Warner Bros. Pictures for a film based on Bobbie Gentry 's hit song , " Ode To Billie Joe .
"
Baer offered Gentry and her publisher a large percentage of the film 's receipts , and paid Herman Raucher $ 250,000 and a share of the profits to write the screenplay .
Raucher was chosen to write the screenplay based on his script for Summer of ' 42 .
Baer had intended to cast unknown actors int the lead roles of " Bobbie Lee Hartley " and " Billy Joe McAllister . "
The July 2 , 1975 , issue of Variety announced that the locations for the film would include Gentry 's hometown of Greenwood , MS , along other local communities .
Scenes at the old sawmill were filmed at Cross Lumber Company in Vaiden , Mississippi .
The bridge featured in the film crossed the Yazoo River on County Road 512 near Sidon , Mississippi .
It has since been demolished and replaced by a modern concrete span in 1987 , with plaques at both the eastern and western ends commemorating the film .
RELEASE DATE Section::::Release date .
The film was premiered at the Paramount Theatre in Jackson , MS , on June 2 , 1976 , as a benefit for the Mississippi Film Foundation .
The premiere was attended by numerous dignitaries , including Mississippi Lieutenant Governor Evelyn Gandy .
In honor of Gentry being the first woman to be inducted into the Mississippi Hall of Fame and the film 's release in 550 theaters across the Southern United States , June 3 , 1976 was declared " Billy Joe Day " by Mississippi Governor Cliff Finch .
The placement of a bronze tablet on the Tallahatchie Bridge near Rising Sun , MS was officiated by Gandy .
The celebration was attended by stars Robby Benson and Glynnis O'Connor and producer Roger Camras .
A similar event was held in Los Angeles , CA , on the same day to commerate the opening of the film .
Burbank Mayor Leland Ayers dedicated a sixteen - foot - long replica of the Tallahatchie Bridge , constructed twenty - five feet above Olive Avenue .
Director Max Baer ,
Jr. was in attendance at the event .
The film opened nationwide on June 4 , 1976 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Ode to Billy Joe
( Sound Track from Max Baer 's Motion Picture ) is the soundtrack album to the 1976 film Ode to Billy Joe .
It was released on May 10 , 1976 , by Warner Bros. Records .
The album was issued on CD for the first time in 2017 by California based label Kritzerland .
Bobbie Gentry re - recorded her iconic hit song , " Ode to Billie Joe " , for the film , with the spelling of the title character 's name changed to " Billy " .
Gentry stated that the original spelling had been a typo , this is corroborated by her original hand - written lyrics of the song .
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
" Ode to Billy Joe - Main Title " was issued as a single in April 1976 .
It peaked at No . 65 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart .
Capitol Records , Gentry 's label when the original 1967 recording was released , reissued it as a single in June 1976 to capitalize on the film 's success .
The original recording reached a peak position of No . 54 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart .
The album did not chart .
TRACK LISTING REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS