MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL DRAFT
The first - year player draft is Major League Baseball 's primary mechanism for assigning amateur baseball players from high schools , colleges , and other amateur baseball clubs to its teams .
The draft order is determined based on the previous season 's standings , with the team possessing the worst record receiving the first pick .
The most recent draft was held on June 4–6 , 2018 .
The first amateur draft was held in 1965 .
Unlike most sports drafts , the first - year player draft is held mid - season , in June .
Another distinguishing feature of this draft in comparison with those of other North American major professional sports leagues is its sheer size : under the current collective bargaining agreement the draft lasts 40 rounds , plus compensatory picks .
In contrast , the NFL draft lasts for seven rounds ( a maximum of 256 selections ) , the NHL entry draft lasts seven rounds and roughly 215 picks , and the NBA draft lasts for only two rounds ( 60 selections ) .
BEFORE THE DRAFT Section::::Before the draft .
Major League Baseball has used a draft to assign minor league players to teams since 1921 .
In 1936 , the National Football League held the first amateur draft in professional sports .
A decade later , the National Basketball Association instituted a similar method of player distribution .
However , the player draft was controversial .
Congressman Emanuel Celler questioned the legality of drafts during a series of hearings on the business practice of professional sports leagues in the 1950s .
Successful clubs saw the draft as anti - competitive .
Yankees executive Johnny Johnson equated it with communism .
At the same time , Pulitzer Prize - winning sports columnist Arthur Daley compared the system to a " slave market . "
Prior to the implementation of the first - year player draft , amateurs were free to sign with any Major League team that offered them a contract .
As a result , wealthier teams such as the New York Yankees and St. Louis Cardinals were able to stockpile young talent , while poorer clubs were left to sign less desirable prospects .
In 1947 , Major League Baseball implemented the bonus rule , a restriction aimed at reducing player salaries , as well as keeping wealthier teams from monopolizing the player market .
In its most restrictive form , it forbade any team which gave an amateur a signing bonus of more than $ 4,000 from assigning that player to a minor league affiliate for two seasons .
If the player was removed from the major league roster , he became a free agent .
The controversial legislation was repealed twice , only to be re - instituted .
The bonus rule was largely ineffective .
There were accusations that teams were signing players to smaller bonuses , only to supplement them with under - the - table payments .
In one famous incident , the Kansas City Athletics signed Clete Boyer , kept him on their roster for two years , then traded him to the Yankees just as he became eligible to be sent to the minor leagues .
Other clubs accused the Yankees of using the Athletics as a de facto farm team , and the A 's later admitted to signing Boyer on their behalf .
Finally , it was the bidding war for Rick Reichardt , who signed with the Los Angeles Angels for the then outrageous bonus of $ 200,000 , that led to the implementation of the draft .
Major League clubs voted on the draft during the 1964 Winter Meetings .
Four teams — the New York Yankees , St. Louis Cardinals , Los Angeles Dodgers , and New York Mets — attempted to defeat the proposal , but they failed to convince a majority of teams , and in the end only the Cardinals voted against it .
THE DRAFT Section::::The Draft .
Major League Baseball 's first amateur draft was held on June 8–9 , 1965 , in New York City .
Teams chose players in reverse order of the previous season 's standings , with picks alternating between the National and American Leagues .
With the first pick , the Kansas City Athletics took Rick Monday , an outfielder from Arizona State University .
Originally , three separate drafts were held each year .
The June draft , which was by far the largest , involved new high school graduates , as well as college seniors who had just finished their seasons .
Another draft was held in January , which typically involved high school players who graduated in the winter , junior college players , and players who had dropped out of four - year colleges .
Junior college players were required to wait until their current season was completed before they could sign .
Finally , there was a draft in August for players who participated in amateur summer leagues .
The August draft was eliminated after only two years , while the January draft lasted until 1986 .
INFLUENCE OF THE DRAFTEE 'S AGE Section::::Influence of the draftee 's age .
Early on , the majority of players drafted came directly from high school .
Between 1967 and 1971 , only seven college players were chosen in the first round of the June draft .
However , the college players who were drafted outperformed their high school counterparts by what statistician Bill James called " a laughably huge margin . "
By 1978 , a majority of draftees had played college baseball , and by 2002 , the number rose above sixty percent .
While the number of high school players drafted has dropped , those picked have been more successful than their predecessors .
In a study of drafts from 1984 to 1999 , Baseball Prospectus writer Rany Jazayerli concluded that , by the 1990s , the gap in production between the two groups had nearly disappeared .
In October 2011 , Dr. Jazayerli presented another research study which included an analysis of those players drafted since 1965 , but instead of breaking them into college or high school draftees , he segregated them by their age on draft day .
In the study published in Baseball Prospectus , which included a follow up article of the financial benefits , Jazayerli concluded that the very young players return more value than expected by their draft slots .
In Jazayerli 's study he looked at the statistics and broke draftees into 5 distinctive groups based on their age and being drafted in the early rounds .
Dr. Jazayerli 's defined a " very young " player as those who are younger than 17 years and 296 days on draft day .
Since the inception of the draft , the youngest player ever drafted in an early round is Alfredo Escalera .
Escalera was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the 8th round of the 2012 First Year Players Draft at 17 years and 114 days .
Dr. Jazayerli 's study does not clearly demonstrate the influence of the player 's age when drafted in a late round .
ECONOMIC IMPACT Section::::Economic impact .
Initially , the draft succeeded in reducing the value of signing bonuses .
In 1964 , a year before the first draft , University of Wisconsin outfielder Rick Reichardt was given a record bonus of $ 205,000 ( $ today ) by the Los Angeles Angels .
Without competition from other clubs , the Athletics were able to sign Rick Monday for a bonus of only $ 104,000 .
It would take until 1979 for a drafted player to receive a bonus higher than Reichardt 's .
Player salaries continued to escalate through the 1980s .
In 1986 , Bo Jackson became the first draftee to sign a total contract ( signing bonus and salary ) worth over $ 1 million ( $ today ) .
Jackson , a Heisman Trophy - winning football player for Auburn University , was also the first overall choice in the National Football League draft , and was offered a $ 7 million ( $ today ) contract to play football for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers .
High school players possessed additional leverage , as they had the option of attending college and re - entering the draft the next year .
Agent Scott Boras routinely exploited this advantage to increase the contracts of his clients .
In 1990 , Boras client Todd Van Poppel signed a $ 1.2 million ( $ today ) contract with Oakland Athletics , after committing to play for the University of Texas .
The following year , Boras negotiated a $ 1.55 million ( $ today ) contract for Yankees first round pick Brien Taylor , who had said he would attend junior college if he did not receive a contract equal to Van Poppel 's .
By June 2009 , a figure as high as $ 15 million was floated for collegian pitcher Stephen Strasburg .
Increasingly , teams drafted based on whether or not a player was likely to sign for a particular amount of money , rather than on his talent .
This became known as a " signability pick .
"
Before the 1992 draft , team owners unilaterally decided to extend the period of time a team retained negotiating rights to a player from one year to five .
In effect , the rule prohibited a high school draftee from attending college and re - entering the draft after his junior or senior seasons .
The Major League Baseball Players Association filed a legal challenge , but Major League Baseball argued that , since the Players Association did not represent amateur players , it was not necessary for the union to agree to the change .
An arbitrator ultimately decided that any change to draft articles must be negotiated with the Players Association .
MEDIA EXPOSURE Section::::Media exposure .
The first - year player draft has historically had far less media exposure than its counterparts in the other leagues for three primary reasons :
* High school and college baseball , the primary sources of MLB draftees , are not nearly as popular as college football , college basketball , and , in Canada and certain parts of the U.S. , college and junior hockey .
Consequently , most prospective top draft picks were unknown to the casual sports observer at the time of their draft .
However , this is slowly changing : NCAA baseball has enjoyed a spike in popularity in the 2000s and top collegiate baseball players have enjoyed greater media exposure , though still far below that of their basketball and football counterparts .
*
Unlike top draft picks in the NHL , NBA , and NFL , all of whom are expected to make immediate impacts , top MLB draftees are nearly always assigned to the minor leagues for several years to hone their skills , usually at low levels ( Rookie or Class A ) initially .
Due to this , fans can not see the newly drafted players perform immediately , causing them to forget or lose interest in them .
The entire 2007 first round ( 64 players ) totaled one inning of major league playing time as of the end of the 2008 season ; as of the 2009 season , the vast majority of 2008 first - rounders were still assigned to minor league organizations .
In contrast , every first - round pick in the 2008 NFL draft had played in the league by the end of the 2008 season .
* While many NHL , NBA , and NFL draftees will eventually reach their respective leagues , the vast majority of players selected in the first - year player draft will never play in a single MLB game , including many first - rounders .
For example , only 31 of 52 first - round draft picks in the 1997 draft eventually made a big - league appearance , and only 13 of those 31 appeared in more than 100 games as of .
In 1997 's sixth round , only five of the 30 players selected eventually made a big league appearance , and only two of those five ( Tim Hudson and Matt Wise ) played more than 40 innings in the majors .
Further illustrating the unpredictability of the draft 's middle and later rounds , none of the 30 players selected in the 18th round ever reached the major leagues , but the 19th round eventually produced an all - star and World Series MVP , David Eckstein .
The 2007 draft was the first to be televised live , on June 7 , 2007 .
The draft coverage took place at Disney 's Wide World of Sports Complex at Walt Disney World near Orlando , Florida .
Since the 2009 draft , the first round of the draft has been broadcast annually on MLB Network live and in prime time from its studios in Secaucus , New Jersey .
PROCEDURES AND RULES ELIGIBILITY Section::::Procedures and rules .
Section::::Eligibility .
To be drafted , a player must fit the following criteria :
* Be a resident of , or have attended an educational institution in , the United States , Canada , or a U.S. territory such as Puerto Rico .
Players from other countries are not subject to the draft , and can be signed by any team unless they have attended an educational institution in the aforementioned areas .
* Have never signed a major or minor league contract .
* High school players are eligible only after graduation , and if they have not attended college .
* Players at four - year colleges and universities are eligible three years after first enrolling in such an institution , or after their 21st birthdays ( whichever occurs first ) .
* Junior and community college players are eligible to be drafted at any time .
DRAFT ORDER Section::::Draft order .
The general draft order is the reverse order of the previous year 's standings .
If two teams finish with identical records , the previous year 's standings of the two teams is the tiebreaker , with the team having a worse record receiving the higher pick .
NEGOTIATING RIGHTS
Section::::Negotiating rights .
Prior to 2007 , a team retained the rights to sign a selected player until one week prior to the next draft , or until the player enters , or returns to , a four - year college on a full - time basis .
This was known as the " draft - and - follow " procedure .
Starting in 2012 , the deadline for signing a drafted player is July 15 .
A selected player who enters a junior college can not be signed until the conclusion of the school 's baseball season .
A player who is drafted and does not sign with the club that selected him may be drafted again at a future year 's draft , so long as the player is eligible for that year 's draft .
A club may not select a player again in a subsequent year , unless the player has consented to the re - selection .
A player who is eligible to be selected and is passed over by every club becomes a free agent and may sign with any club , up until one week before the next draft , or until the player enters , or returns to , a four - year college full - time or enters , or returns to , a junior college .
In the one - week period before any draft , which is called the " closed period " , the general rule is that no club may sign a new player .
COMPENSATORY PICKS
Section::::Compensatory picks .
Currently , teams can earn compensatory picks in the draft based on departing free agents who reject a Qualifying Offer from their respective team .
A qualifying offer is defined as a one - year contract worth the average value of the top 120 player contracts for that year ( in 2015 , the value of the qualifying offer was $ 15.8 million ) .
The 2013 draft saw major changes to the compensation rules .
This was implemented as part of the most recent collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) between MLB and its players ' union , which took effect with the 2012 season .
PRE-2013 RULES Section::::Pre-2013 rules .
Before the 2013 draft , free agents were ranked by the Elias Sports Bureau based on their previous two years of playing , and against players of similar positions .
Players were categorized as either Type A or Type B , or fell into the category of all other players .
Below is a description of each free agent class and the compensation the free agent 's former team received when the player signed with a different team .
•
A Type A free agent was ranked in the top 20 percent of players at his position .
A team that signed a Type A player gave its top draft pick to the club that the player left ; that club also received a supplemental pick in the " sandwich " round between the first and second rounds .
•
A Type B free agent was ranked below the top 20 percent but in the top 40 percent of players at his position .
A team that lost a Type B player received a supplemental pick , but the signing team did not lose a pick .
•
All other players carried no compensation at all .
There had previously been a third class of " Type C " players , but that was eliminated in the 2007 CBA .
To earn a compensatory pick , a free agent must have been either signed before the arbitration deadline in early December , or offered arbitration by their former team but still signed with another team .
Compensatory picks that one team gave another via this method were the highest available pick that team had , with the exception of picks in the top half of the first round .
These picks were protected from being used as compensation .
If a team that picked in the top half of the first draft signed a Type A free agent , they would give up their second - round pick .
If a team owed two other teams draft picks via
Type A free agents , the team whose departing player had a higher score got the higher - ranked pick .
A team could not lose picks it earned via compensation .
The post-2012 rules for this aspect of the draft are similar , except that the " Type A " and " Type B " designations no longer exist ( see below ) .
The order of the supplemental round between the first and second rounds , a feature that will remain in place in 2013 and beyond , is determined by inverse order of the previous year 's standings .
Under pre-2013 rules , Type A picks were made first , and then the order reset for all the Type B compensation picks .
In a feature that did not change with the most recent CBA in 2012 , teams can also earn compensation for unsigned picks from the previous year 's draft .
If a team does n't sign a first or second round pick , they will get to pick at the same slot plus one the following year .
For example , if the team with the # 5 pick does not sign that player , they would have the # 6 pick the following year .
The regular draft order would continue around those picks .
For compensation for not signing a third round pick , teams would get a pick in a supplemental round between the third and fourth rounds .
If a team fails to sign a player with one of these compensated picks , there is no compensation the following year .
CURRENT RULES Section::::Current rules .
For the 2012 draft , the previous " Type A " and " Type B " designations remained in place , but the CBA included special provisions that modified the statuses of 11 players who were Type A free agents under the 2007 CBA .
Six of these were " Modified Type A"—meaning that the signing team did not forfeit a draft pick , but the player 's former team received a compensatory pick in the same position it would have earned under regular Type A rules .
The remaining five were " Modified Type B " , with compensation identical to that for other Type B free agents .
Starting with the 2013 draft , free agents are no longer classified by " type " .
Instead , a team is only able to receive compensation if it makes its former player an offer at least equal to the average of the 125 richest contracts .
However , if a player is traded during the final season of his contract , his new team will be ineligible to receive any compensation .
OTHER CHANGES FROM 2012
Section::::Other changes from 2012 .
The new CBA introduced other significant changes to the draft .
BONUS POOL Section::::Bonus pool .
From the 2012 draft on , each team is allocated a " bonus pool " from which it can offer initial contracts to its drafted players .
Each team 's pool is based on its draft position and number of picks , plus the amount spent in the previous year 's draft .
For the 2012 draft , these pools ranged from $ 4.5 million to $ 11.5 million .
If a team goes over its threshold by 5 percent or less , it must pay a " luxury tax " of 75 % on the amount over the threshold .
Teams that go 5 to 10 percent over must pay a 100 % tax on the excess , and will lose their next first - round pick .
A team that goes 15 percent over can lose its next two first - round picks , in addition to the " luxury tax " .
These excess picks will go to smaller - revenue teams via a yet - to - be - reported formula .
Uniquely , these compensatory picks can be traded — marking the first time MLB has allowed trading of draft picks .
However , all previous rules against trading of regular picks , or picks awarded as free agent compensation , remain in force .
NEW SIGNING RULES Section::::New signing rules .
Teams can no longer offer major league contracts to their draft choices — only minor league contracts are available .
The only exception is for drafted players who have scholarships in other sports .
Also , the date for signing new picks has moved from mid - August to mid - July .
SEE ALSO
* List of first overall Major League Baseball draft picks
* Rule 5 draft
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* MLB.com official website
* MLB.com – Draft history
* MLB.com – Draft rules