LANGUAGES OF HONG KONG
The Basic Law of Hong Kong stipulates that Chinese and English are the two official languages of Hong Kong .
During the British colonial era , English was the sole official language until 1974 .
As the majority of the population in Hong Kong are descendants of migrants from China 's Canton Province , the vast majority speak standard Cantonese or other
Yue Chinese varieties as a first language , with smaller numbers of speakers of Hakka Language or the Teochew dialect of Southern Min .
In addition , immigrants and expatriates from the West and other Asian countries have contributed much to Hong Kong 's linguistic and demographic diversity .
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES Section::::Official languages .
Chinese and English are both official languages of Hong Kong under the Hong Kong Basic Law ( article 9 ) and the Official Languages Ordinance ( chapter 5 of the Laws of Hong Kong ) .
No law stipulates choice of spoken Chinese dialect .
Historically , English was the sole official language of Hong Kong from 1883 to 1974 .
Only after demonstrations and petitions from Hong Kong people demanding equal status for Chinese did the language become official in Hong Kong from 1974 onward .
In March 1987 , the Official Languages Ordinance was amended to require all new legislation to be enacted bilingually in both English and Chinese .
In 1990 , the Hong Kong Basic Law declared English 's co - official language status with Chinese after the 1997 handover .
SINITIC LANGUAGES Section::::Sinitic languages .
As a result of immigration into Hong Kong from Canton Province , Cantonese is the dominant Chinese variant spoken in the territory with smaller numbers of speakers from other dialects .
There are also numerous sinitic languages spoken by the native peoples of the New Territories , many of which are mutually unintelligible .
Cantonese is a vernacular and when reduced to writing is normally converted to a standard written Chinese quite dissimilar to the spoken word .
There is also a written language based on the vocabulary and grammar of spoken Cantonese known as written Cantonese .
Although the " biliterate and trilingual " policy implies an absence of support for written Cantonese , it has gained popularity in news media where entertainment and local news are related .
Written Cantonese is unintelligible to non - Cantonese speakers and is considered nonstandard by educators despite its widespread usage in Hong Kong .
Some have also credited written Cantonese for solving the challenges that standard written Chinese had faced in popular culture .
Traditional Chinese characters are widely used , and are the de facto writing standard in Hong Kong .
Simplified Chinese is seen in some posters , leaflets , flyers and signs in the tourist areas .
CANTONESE Section::::Cantonese .
The principal language of Hong Kong is standard Cantonese ( 粵語 , 廣州話 , 廣東話 , 廣府話 , 白話 , 本地話 ) , spoken by 88.9 % of the population at home daily .
As an official language , it is used in education , broadcasting , government administration , legislation and judiciary , as well as for daily communication .
As a result of its predominance throughout the community , Cantonese is virtually the exclusive language of official discourse at all levels of the executive , legislature and courts of Hong Kong .
NATIVE
YUE DIALECTS Section::::Native Yue dialects .
A few closely related dialects to standard Cantonese continue to be spoken in Hong Kong .
Most notable is the Weitou dialect ( 圍頭話 ) , which is mostly spoken by the older generation living in walled villages in New Territories .
Additionally , the Tanka people ( 蜑家人/疍家人/水上人 ) from the fishing villages on outlying islands speak their own variant of Cantonese .
However , this dialect is now largely limited to those middle aged and above .
HAKKA
Section::::Hakka .
Hakka is indigenous to many villages in the New Territories and within Hakka communities in Hong Kong .
Nowadays , outside these rural villages and older populations , younger Hakka Chinese populations communicate primarily in Cantonese .
MINNAN CHINESE
Section::::Minnan Chinese .
Teochew , Hokkien , and Taiwanese are the Minnan ( Southern Min )
Chinese dialects commonly found in Hong Kong .
However , their usage is largely limited to recent migrants from Taiwan or Fujian and middle aged descendants of immigrants from native Chinese regions of these variants .
LANGUAGES OF MAINLAND CHINESE ORIGIN
TAISHANESE
Section::::Languages of mainland Chinese origin .
Section::::Taishanese .
Taishanese originates from migrants from Taishan County in Mainland China .
The variant can still be found in some areas in Hong Kong where migrants concentrated , such as Sai Wan .
SHANGHAINESE
Section::::Shanghainese .
Shanghainese is commonly spoken by migrants who escaped Shanghai after the communist takeover of China in 1949 .
Their descendants seldom speak the language nowadays .
MANDARIN Section::::Mandarin .
When Hong Kong was a colony of the United Kingdom , Mandarin Chinese ( 普通話/現代標準漢語/國語/北方話 ) was not widely used in Hong Kong .
Since the 1997 Handover , the huge increase in inbound tourism from the mainland has led to much more widespread use of Mandarin , particularly in tourism - related commerce , though little impact has been seen in locally based commerce or public services .
In addition , the large number of shuangfei ( Traditional:雙非 , Simplified:双非 ) children ( children born in Hong Kong whose parents are both from the Mainland ) has increased the number of Mandarin speaking people , particularly in districts close to the border , such that Mandarin speaking children make up large proportions or even the majority of primary school students in those districts , causing the beginnings of a language shift in those areas .
ENGLISH Section::::English .
English is a major working language in Hong Kong , and is widely used in commercial activities and legal matters .
Although the sovereignty of Hong Kong was transferred to the PRC by the United Kingdom in 1997 , English remains one of the official languages of Hong Kong as enshrined in the Basic Law .
CODE - SWITCHING BETWEEN CANTONESE AND ENGLISH Section::::Code - switching between Cantonese and English .
Many Hong Kong people use both Cantonese and English , or " code - switch " , in the same sentence when speaking .
For example , " make sense ! "
( " Wow , it does not make sense ! " ) .
The code - switching can freely mix English words and Chinese grammar , for instance " un understand ?
" ( " Do you understand ? " ) which follows the Chinese grammar syntax ' verb - not - verb ' to ask " Do you ( verb ) ? " .
Some code - switched words are used so often that they have become loanwords in Cantonese , for example , * " like " , pronounced " lai - kee " /laːikʰi/.
* " Partner " , pronounced " pat - la " /pʰaːt̚laː/.
* " File " , pronounced " fai - lo " /faːilou/. * " Number " , pronounced " lum - ba " /lɐmpa/. * " Case " , pronounced " kei - see " /kʰeisi/. OTHER EUROPEAN LANGUAGES
FRENCH
Section::::Other European languages .
Section::::French .
In Hong Kong , French is the second most studied foreign language after Japanese .
Many institutions in Hong Kong , like Alliance française , provide French courses .
Local universities , such as the University of Hong Kong , the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Hong Kong Baptist University , offer programmes which aim at developing proficiency in French language and culture .
The language is included as a subject in the HKCEE , but not in HKALE with accordance to British International General Certificate of Secondary Education ( IGCSE ) standards .
The IGCSE French syllabus used by the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate ( UCLES ) is adopted in the examination .
The only French book store , Librairie Parentheses , in Hong Kong is located on Wellington Street , Central .
Real estate developers in Hong Kong often give their buildings French names , such as Bel - Air , Les Saisons and Belle Mer .
This kind of foreign branding is also used in boutiques and restaurants .
An example is Yucca de Lac in Ma Liu Shui .
Sometimes only French elements such as articles and prepositions are added to the name , as in the case of the restaurant chain Café de Coral .
Similar mixing of English and French can be seen on the menu of Délifrance , a French - style restaurant chain in Hong Kong .
GERMAN Section::::German .
The number of German speakers in Hong Kong is about 5000 , significant enough for the establishment of the German Swiss International School ( Deutsch - Schweizerische Internationale Schule ) , which claims to number more than 1,000 students , at The Peak of Hong Kong Island .
Many institutions in Hong Kong provide German courses .
The most well - known one is the Goethe - Institut , which is located in Wan Chai .
After spending a certain period in learning German , students can take the German Test as a Foreign Language ( Test Deutsch als Fremdsprache ; TestDaF for short ) and Start German A1-C2 .
There are currently two test centres for TestDaF in Hong Kong : the Goethe - Institut and the Hong Kong Baptist University .
The latter one also offers a European Studies degree course of German Stream , Bachelor of Social Science in European Studies ( German Stream ) , in parallel with the French stream .
A minor program of German is offered at the Language Centre of HKBU .
The Hong Kong University offers a Major in German after 4 years of study .
The Chinese University offers a Minor in German and popular summer courses .
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology offers German for science and technology .
OTHER EAST ASIAN LANGUAGES
JAPANESE
Section::::Other East Asian languages .
Section::::Japanese .
There are over 25,000 Japanese people in Hong Kong , so it is not uncommon to hear Japanese conversations .
More than 10,000 people in Hong Kong had taken the JLPT in 2005 .
Hong Kong - based R by R Production produces a television travel show set in Japan , which , as of April 2016 , is broadcast on ViuTV .
However , the language is often misused .
Japanese culture , especially the popular culture , has been popular in Hong Kong for decades .
Hong Kong people occasionally replace Chinese characters with Japanese .
In addition , the Companies Registry also permits the hiragana ' no ' in Chinese business names that are registered in Hong Kong .
The hiragana の is usually used in place of the Chinese character ( zi1 ) and read as such in Hong Kong .
In fact , Aji Ichiban has adopted の in their company name ( ) .
There are also borrowings from Japanese shinjitai kanji ' eki ' to substitute ( ) ( both 站 and 駅 mean " station " in their respective languages ) , as in Nu Front ( ) , a shopping mall for Hong Kong youngsters in Causeway Bay .
There are also some private estates named with the kanji .
These loanwords are pronounced by Hong Kong people as if they were their Chinese counterparts ( i.e. as , and as ) .
The Japanese is the shinjitai of the hanzi ( ) .
However , 驛 has fallen out of usage to in modern Chinese and became obsolete .
Therefore , it is not uncommon to mispronounce as its phonetic compound ( ) ) .
KOREAN Section::::Korean .
Koreans in Hong Kong only make up a small minority while Korean culture has gained popularity since the early 2000s .
Korean pop music was the first Korean media to enter Hong Kong 's market .
Since then , several Korean TV series such as Dae Jang Geum have been broadcast to numerous audiences .
There are roughly 1,000 students that took Korean courses at the Chinese University of Hong Kong each year , including undergraduates as well as professionals who enrolled in continuing education programs .
Roughly 3,000 people have taken the Test of Proficiency in Korean since its introduction to Hong Kong in 2003 .
Surveys and statistics from course enrollments have shown that nine - tenths of the students studying Korean in Hong Kong are female .
SOUTHEAST ASIAN LANGUAGES
FILIPINO Section::::Southeast Asian languages .
Section::::Filipino .
Filipino and other Philippine languages are used by Filipinos in Hong Kong , most of whom are employed as foreign domestic workers .
Newspapers and magazines in Filipino can also be easily bought in Central , Hong Kong .
There are also a small number of churches in Hong Kong that have masses or services in Filipino , for example the afternoon masses provided by the St. John 's Cathedral in Central .
INDONESIAN Section::::Indonesian .
Indonesian is the common language for the significant number of Indonesians working in Hong Kong , though Javanese is also widely spoken .
Most are domestic workers ; on their days off , they often gather at Victoria Park in Causeway Bay to socialise and the language can be heard .
THAI Section::::Thai .
Thai prevails among the Thai population in Hong Kong , who mostly work as domestic workers .
The Thai language is found in many shops and restaurants opened by Thais in Kowloon City .
A number of Thai movies have been imported since the early 2000s , such as The Wheel in the medley
Three ,
Jan Dara , the Iron Ladies , My Little Girl , and and Tom - Yum - Goong starring Tony Jaa .
VIETNAMESE Section::::Vietnamese .
Vietnamese is used in Hong Kong among the ethnic Chinese from Vietnam who had initially settled in Vietnam and returned to Hong Kong .
Vietnamese refugees who left their home during the Vietnam War are another group .
SOUTH ASIAN
LANGUAGES
Section::::South Asian languages .
In 2006 , there were at least 44,744 persons of South Asian descent in Hong Kong .
Signboards written in Hindi or Urdu can be seen , and conversation in South Asian languages including Nepali , Sindhi and Punjabi , as well as Urdu , Hindi and Tamil can be heard .
Hong Kong has two Nepalese newspapers , The Everest and the Sunrise Weekly Hong Kong .
In 2004 , the Home Affairs Bureau and Metro Plus AM 1044 jointly launched radio shows
Hong Kong - Pak Tonight in Urdu and Harmo Sagarmatha in Nepalese .
HINDI Section::::Hindi .
The history of Indians in Hong Kong can be traced back to the early days of British Hong Kong .
When the Union flag of the United Kingdom was hoisted on 26 January 1841 , there were around 2,700 Indian troops that participated , and they played an important role in the development of Hong Kong in the early days .
The most prominent contributions were the founding of the University of Hong Kong ( HKU ) , the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation ( HSBC ) and the Star Ferry .
Although nearly all of the Indian people who live in Hong Kong speak and write Indian English , some have maintained the usage of Hindi as a second language .
MIDDLE EASTERN
LANGUAGES
ARABIC
Section::::Middle Eastern languages .
Section::::Arabic .
Arabic is used frequently among members of Muslim communities in Hong Kong .
Some Islamic organisations do teach the language as well , but the current status can best be described as up - and - coming .
SIGN
LANGUAGE SEE ALSO * Bilingualism in Hong Kong
* Code - switching in Hong Kong
* Debate on traditional and simplified Chinese characters
* Hong Kong Cantonese * Hong Kong
English
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Bruce , Nigel ( 1996 ) .
Language in Hong Kong Education & Society : A Bibliography * Pennington , Martha C. ed .
( 1998 ) .
Language in Hong Kong at Century 's End .
Hong Kong : Hong Kong University Press . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Website of Official Languages Division , Civil Service Bureau .
* The British Council , Hong Kong .
* Alliance Française , Hong Kong .
* French at The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong * Goethe - Institut , Hong Kong .