EVERY ROSE HAS ITS THORN
"
Every Rose Has Its Thorn " is the title of a power ballad song by American glam metal band Poison .
It was released in October 1988 as the third single from Poison 's second album Open Up
and Say ...
Ahh ! .
The band 's signature song , it is also their only number - one hit in the U.S. , reaching the top spot on December 24 , 1988 , for three weeks ( carrying over into 1989 ) and it also charted at # 11 on the Mainstream Rock chart .
It was a number 13 hit in the UK .
"
Every Rose Has Its Thorn " was named number 34 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Songs of the 80s " , # 100 on their " 100 Greatest Love Songs " and # 7 on MTV and VH1 " Top 25 Power Ballads " .
BACKGROUND AND WRITING Section::::Background and writing .
In an interview with VH1 's Behind the Music , Bret Michaels said the inspiration for the song came from a night when he was in a laundromat waiting for his clothes to dry , and called his girlfriend on a pay phone .
Michaels said he heard a male voice in the background and was devastated ; he said he went into the laundromat and wrote " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " as a result .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video to " Every Rose " was directed by Marty Callner .
It starts out with a forlorn Bret Michaels in bed with a young woman , they both look unhappy .
He gets up , does the heavy sigh that is at the start of the song and walks away to play the acoustic guitar , the video then goes into video clips of the band 's tour .
The same young woman is seen driving a Thunderbird in the rain , ( two different times ) listening to " Every Rose " on the car 's radio .
The rest of the video is interspersed with various clips from the band 's 1988 tour .
The video ends with Bret Michaels playing the last of the song on his acoustic guitar and walking away .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
"
Every Rose Has Its Thorn " became the group 's first ( and only to date )
number - one single on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it climbed to the top during the last two weeks of 1988 and the first week of 1989 .
Billboard ranked it as the No . 3 song for 1989 .
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1988–1989 ) !
Peakposition
Canada Top Singles ( RPM ) Ireland ( IRMA ) United Kingdom ( The Official Charts Company ) YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
align="left"Chart ( 1989 ) !
align="center"Position
Canada Top Singles ( RPM )
ALBUMS Section::::Albums .
The song originally appeared on the album Open Up
and Say ...
Ahh ! .
It was later included in greatest hits compilations such as , or Best of Ballads & Blues .
Live versions of the song appeared on the following albums : *
Live , Raw & Uncut CD
* Power to the People
*
Seven Days Live CD
* Swallow This Live
An acoustic version appeared as a bonus track on Poison 's 2000 album Crack a Smile ... and More ! Bret Michaels re - recorded the song in 2001 for his solo album Ballads , Blues & Stories .
A country version by Bret Michaels appears on * Freedom of Sound ( 2005 ) * Custom Built ( 2010 ) PERSONNEL ( POISON VERSION )
* Bret Michaels – Lead Vocals , Acoustic Guitar
* C.C. DeVille – Lead Guitar , Keyboards , Backing Vocals
* Rikki Rockett – Drums , Backing Vocals
* Bobby Dall – Bass ,
Backing Vocals
ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL
* John Purdell – Horns
* Tom Werman – Strings Arrangement , Production , Arrangement USES IN MEDIA Section::::Uses in media .
The song appeared in the films : * Beerfest * Bill and Ted 's Bogus Journey
*
Cop Out ( 2012 ) * Fubar II
*
Hop ( 2011 )
* Run Ronnie Run
* Rock of Ages ( 2012 )
The song appeared in one or more episodes of the following TV shows :
* The Simpsons ( " It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad Marge " )
*
Yes , Dear ( " Greg 's Big Day " )
* The O.C. ( " The Rager " )
* October Road ( " The Pros and Cons of Upsetting the Apple Cart " ) .
* Neighbours * One Tree Hill
* Rock of Love with Bret Michaels ( several episodes )
The song was made available to download on February 12 , 2012 for play in Rock Band 3 Basic and PRO mode utilizing real guitar / bass guitar , and MIDI compatible electronic drum kits / keyboards plus vocal harmonies .
The song appeared in 2009 music game Band Hero .
COVER VERSIONS
* American recording artist Miley Cyrus recorded a version of the song for her 2010 album Ca n't Be Tamed .
*
In early 2013 , composer Bret Michaels recorded yet another version .
This time , it was as a duet with the country music singer Loretta Lynn and can be found on his album Jammin ' with Friends .
He performed an acoustic version in the episode " Happy Endings " of TV series Revolution .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS