THE HOLLY AND THE IVY
" The Holly and the Ivy " is a traditional British folk Christmas carol .
The song is catalogued as Roud Folk Song Index No . 514 .
WORDS
Section::::Words .
The following are taken from Sharp 's English Folk - Carols ( 1911 ) , the publication that first established the current words and melody : 1 2 3 4 5 6 ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The words of the carol occur in three broadsides published in Birmingham in the early nineteenth century .
An early mention of the carol 's title occurs in William Hone 's 1823 work Ancient Mysteries Described , which includes " The holly and the ivy
, now are both well grown " among an alphabetical list of " Christmas Carols , now annually printed " that were in the author 's possession .
The complete words of the carol are found in a book review dating from 1849 , in which the reviewer suggested using the text of " The Holly and the Ivy " in place of one of the readings found in the book under discussion .
The anonymous reviewer introduced the lyrics of carol thus : The words of the carol were included in Sylvester 's 1861 collection A Garland of Christmas Carols where it is claimed to originate from " an old broadside , printed a century and a half since " [ i.e. around 1711 ] :
Husk 's 1864 Songs of the Nativity also includes the carol , stating :
Early English Lyrics by Chambers and Sidgwick , published in 1907 , repeats Husk 's statement .
VARIANTS MUSIC Section::::Music .
The usual melody for the carol was first published in Cecil Sharp 's 1911 collection English Folk - Carols .
Sharp states that he heard the tune sung by " Mrs. Mary Clayton , at Chipping Camden " .
Sharp 's manuscript transcription of Clayton 's singing of the third verse , dated " Jan 13th 1909 " , is archived in the Cecil Sharp Manuscript Collection at Clare College , Cambridge and viewable online .
The melody is notable in being confined to the notes of the hexachord .
The words have also been sung to other folk melodies , with three further tunes having been collected in Gloucestershire alone .
The early nineteenth - century sources do not provide music for the carol .
Several late nineteenth - century collections set the words to " old French carol " in D minor .
CULTURAL BACKGROUND Section::::Cultural background .
Holly , especially the variety found in Europe , is commonly referenced at Christmastime , and is often referred to by the name Christ 's thorn .
Since medieval times the plant has carried a Christian symbolism , as expressed in this popular Christmas carol " The Holly and the Ivy " , in which the holly represents Jesus and the ivy represents His mother , the Virgin Mary .
Angie Mostellar discusses the Christian use of holly at Christmas , stating that : Holly and ivy figure in the lyrics of the " Sans Day Carol " .
The music was first published by Cecil Sharp .
Sir Henry Walford Davies wrote a popular choral arrangement that is often performed at the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols and by choirs around the world Henry VIII wrote a love song Green Groweth the Holly which alludes to holly and ivy resisting winter blasts and not changing their green hue
So I am and ever hath been Unto my lady true .
Hone 's 1823 Ancient Mysteries Described , which lists the carol 's title as mentioned above , also describes ( p 94 )
a British Museum manuscript : The same volume contains a song on the Holly and the Ivy which I mention because there is an old Carol on the same subject still printed .
The MS begins with , The Holly and the Ivy is also related to an older carol described by Sharp as : " The Contest of the Ivy and the Holly " , a contest between the traditional emblems of woman and man respectively .
RECORDED VERSIONS ( PARTIAL LIST ) * 1958 : Petula Clark for one of the first British stereo releases , on the EP
A Christmas Carol * 1969
: The Young Tradition on The Holly Bears the Crown , not released until 1995 * 1972 :
Steeleye Span , originally as the B - side of the Christmas single Gaudete * 1982 : George Winston ( instrumental ) on December * 1985 : Yes vocalist Jon Anderson on 3 Ships * 1986 : Choir of St John 's College , Cambridge on Christmas Carols from St. John 's * 1987 :
Maddy Prior with The Carnival Band on A Tapestry of Carols * 1988 : Mannheim Steamroller ( instrumental ) on A Fresh Aire Christmas * 1994 : Natalie Cole -
" Holly & Ivy " * 2003 :
Mediaeval Baebes on their 2003 compilation Mistletoe and Wine and a re - recorded version on the 2013 Christmas album " Of Kings And Angels * 2004 :
Andrew Peterson Instrumental version on Behold the Lamb of God
* 2008 :
Loreena Mckennit on A Midwinter Night 's Dream * 2008 : Kate Rusby on Sweet Bells * 2010 : Annie Lennox on A Christmas Cornucopia * 2011 :
Hawk Nelson on the EP Christmas * 2014 : Deborah Voigt and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir -
Let
The Season In * 2014 : Los Campesinos !
on their Christmas EP A Los Campesinos !
Christmas * 2017 :
Ola Gjeilo performed by Choir of Royal Holloway on their album Winter Songs REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Free sheet music for piano from Cantorion.org
* Hymns Without Words free recording for download suitable for services
* Steve Roud on superstitions
* " Notes on ' The Contest of the Holy and the Ivy ' " * Hymns and Carols of Christmas
* Ancient Mysteries Described Especially the English Miracle Plays , Founded on Apocryphal New Testament Story , Extant Among the Unpublished Manuscripts in the British Museum , Including Notices of Ecclesiastical Shows , the Festivals of Fools and Asses , the English Boy - bishop , the Descent Into Hell , the Lord Mayor 's Show , the Guildhall Giants , Christmas Carols ,
Etc
By William Hone , George Cruikshank
* Holly and Ivy Songs