HANGER STEAK
A hanger steak , also known as butcher 's steak , is a cut of beef steak prized for its flavor .
Derived from the diaphragm of a steer or heifer , it typically weighs about .
This cut is taken from the plate , which is the lower belly of the animal .
In the past it was sometimes known as " butcher 's steak " , because butchers would often keep it for themselves rather than offer it for sale .
Hanger steak resembles flank steak in texture and flavor .
It is a vaguely V - shaped pair of muscles with a long , inedible membrane running down the middle .
The hanger steak is usually the tenderest cut on an animal .
Anatomically speaking , the hanger steak is the crura , or legs , of the diaphragm .
The steak is said to " hang " from the diaphragm of the heifer or steer .
The diaphragm is one muscle , commonly cut into two separate cuts of meat : the hanger steak , traditionally considered more flavorful , and the outer skirt steak , composed of tougher muscle from the dome of the diaphragm .
The hanger is attached to the last rib and to the front of several of the lumbar vertebrae .
The right side is larger and stronger than the left .
Occasionally seen on menus as a " bistro steak " , hanger steak is also very traditional in Mexican cuisine , particularly in the north where it is known as arrachera , and is generally marinated , grilled and served with a squeeze of lime juice , guacamole , salsa , scallions and tortillas to roll tacos .
In South Texas this cut of beef is known as fajitas arracheras .
It is sometimes incorrectly referred to as flap steak or flap meat , which is a distinctly different cut .
The hanger steak has historically been more popular in Europe .
In Britain it is referred to as " skirt " , which is not to be confused with the American skirt steak .
In French it is known as the onglet , in Italian the lombatello , in Flanders the longhaas , and in Spanish the solomillo de pulmón .
Its U.S. meat - cutting classification is NAMP 140 .
REFERENCES