FLYING PIG MARATHON
The Cincinnati Flying Pig Marathon is an annual race run the first Sunday of May in Cincinnati , Ohio .
Its first run was in 1999 .
It is the 3rd - largest first - time marathon in the United States and had nearly 5000 finishers in 2008 .
An official time from the Flying Pig Marathon can be used to qualify for the Boston Marathon .
In recent years , the Flying Pig has included a 5 K race , a 10 K race , and a half marathon in addition to the traditional marathon race .
Added in 2014 , there is a 2-mile " Flying Fur " event for dogs and humans to participate in .
The 5 K and 10 K run on the day before the marathon .
The half marathon starts and finishes at the same locations as the full marathon , and runs on the same day as the full marathon .
Total participation for all weekend events exceeded 30,408 in 2011 .
The race course starts in downtown Cincinnati and crosses the Taylor - Southgate Bridge over the Ohio River into Northern Kentucky , where it travels through Newport and crosses westward over the Licking River via the Fourth Street Bridge into Covington .
From Covington , the route takes the Clay Wade Bailey Bridge back over the Ohio River into Cincinnati .
After looping westward the first leg ends east of downtown in Eden Park , a distance of .
The race course then makes its way east through East Walnut Hills , O'Bryonville , and Hyde Park and ends after at Richards Industries on Wasson Road .
The third leg goes east to the village of Mariemont before looping back to head towards the river ; it ends in Linwood , having traversed .
The final leg is to the finish line downtown .
The last of the fourth leg follow the Ohio River Scenic Byway ( US 52 ) along the Ohio River , heading downtown toward the finish line .
The 2006 overall male winner was Cecil Franke with a course record time of 2:20:25 .
The 2002 overall female winner was Tatyana Pozdnyakova with a course record time 2:34:35 .
The 2011 race was notable for a blind runner winning the women 's division .
To run in the Flying Pig Full Marathon , one must be eighteen years or older on the date of the marathon or have a permission slip signed by one 's parents , as well as a signed waiver .
SEE ALSO
* Big Pig Gig * Flying pig REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site
* Past results and reviews