TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER
A Taxpayer Identification Number ( TIN ) is an identifying number used for tax purposes in the United States .
It is also known as a Tax Identification Number or Federal Taxpayer Identification Number .
A TIN may be assigned by the Social Security Administration or by the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) .
TYPES OF TINS Section::::Types of TINs .
A Taxpayer Identification Number is not itself given out under that name , but instead is the term used to describe any of the governmentally provided numbers that can be used in the US as a unique identifier when interacting with the IRS .
A TIN may be : * a Social Security number(SSN )
* an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number ( ITIN ) * an Employer Identification Number ( EIN ) , also known as a FEIN ( Federal Employer Identification Number )
* an Adoption Taxpayer Identification Number , used as a temporary number for a child for whom the adopting parents can not obtain an SSN * a Preparer Tax Identification Number , used by paid preparers of U.S. tax returns SSNS Section::::SSNs .
SSNs are used by individuals who have ( or had ) the right to work in the United States .
ITNS Section::::ITNs .
ITNs are used by aliens who may or may not have the right to work in the US , such as aliens on temporary visas and non - resident aliens with US income .
Often people need the identification number because they have been advised by a bank that no account will be opened without a number , even if the account is being opened by a non - profit organization .
EINS Section::::EINs .
EINs are used by employers , sole proprietors , corporations , LLCs , partnerships , non - profit associations , trusts , estates of decedents , government agencies , certain individuals , and other business entities .
RELEVANT INTERNAL REVENUE
CODE SECTIONS Section::::Relevant Internal Revenue Code sections .
Section 6109(a ) of the Internal Revenue 26957
Code provides ( in part )
that " When required by regulations prescribed by the Secretary [ of the Treasury or his delegate ] [ . . . ]
Any person required under the authority of this title [ i.e. , under the Internal Revenue Code ] to make a return , statement , or other document shall include in such return , statement or other document such identifying number as may be prescribed for securing proper identification of such person . "
Internal Revenue Code section
6109(d ) provides : " The social security account number issued to an individual for purposes of section 205(c)(2)(A ) of the Social Security Act [ codified as ] shall , except as shall otherwise be specified under regulations of the Secretary [ of the Treasury or his delegate ] , be used as the identifying number for such individual for purposes of this title [ the Internal Revenue Code , title 26 of the United States Code ] . "
SEE ALSO US TAXATION * Federal government of the United States
* Taxation in the United States NUMBER USE
* Personal identification number ( PIN )
* Primary key * Serial number * Single version of the truth
*
Surrogate key * Transaction authentication number * Unique identifier ( UID ) * UID ( disambiguation )
ยง Identifying numbers
* VAT identification number REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* IRS : Taxpayer Identification Numbers ( TIN )