NOTHING COMPARES 2
U " Nothing Compares 2 U " is a song written and composed by Prince for one of his side projects , The Family , for the eponymous album The Family .
It was later made famous by Irish recording artist Sinead O'Connor , whose arrangement was released as the second single from her second studio album ,
I Do Not Want What I Have n't Got .
This version , which O'Connor co - produced with Nellee Hooper , became a worldwide hit in 1990 .
Its music video received heavy rotation on MTV .
Its lyrics explore feelings of longing from the point of view of an abandoned lover .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In 1985 , The Family , a funk band created as an outlet to release more of Prince 's music , released their first and only album , the self - titled The Family .
" Nothing Compares 2 U " appeared on the album
but it was not released as a single , and received little recognition .
Prince performed the song as a live duet with Rosie Gaines , subsequently released on his 1993 compilations
The Hits / The B - Sides and The Hits 1 , and the 2006 Ultimate Prince compilation .
Prince also recorded a solo version of the song for his concert film , Rave Un2
the Year 2000 , as well as for his 2002 live album , One
Nite Alone ...
Live ! CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Dave Sholin from the Gavin Report wrote about the song : COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
O'Connor 's power ballad version of the song became a worldwide hit , topping charts in O'Connor 's native Ireland , Australia , Austria , Canada , Germany , Mexico , Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland , the United Kingdom , and the United States .
It also became a top - five single in France and a top-20 in Denmark .
The single was certified platinum in Austria and the United Kingdom , and gold in Germany and Sweden .
In the United States it spent four weeks at the top of the Billboard Hot 100 , keeping Jane Child 's " Do n't Wanna Fall In Love " from reaching the top spot for three of them ; in addition , it was a number - one in Billboard Alternative Songs chart , and reached number two on Billboard Adult Contemporary chart ( held off the top position by " This Old Heart of Mine " by Rod Stewart for three weeks ) .
It became the third best - selling single of 1990 , the 82nd best - selling single of the 1990s , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in April 1990 .
The song 's popularity sent
I Do Not Want What I Have n't Got to the top of the Billboard 200 where it stayed for six consecutive weeks .
MUSIC VIDEO
CONCEPT Section::::Music video .
Section::::Concept .
Directed by John Maybury , the clip consists mostly of a closeup on Sinéad O'Connor 's face and her different stages of sadness and even anger as she sings the lyrics ; the rest consists of her walking through an area of Paris known as the Parc de Saint - Cloud .
Toward the end of the video , two tears roll down her face , one on each cheek .
O'Connor has stated that her tears were real .
She did not intend to cry but then thought " I should let this happen .
"
She explained that the tears were triggered by thoughts of her mother who died in a car accident in 1985 .
She said she learned to channel her emotions with the " bel canto " singing style , which she compares to extreme acting methods .
In the middle and at the very end of the video there is a shot from O'Connor 's photo session for the
I Do Not Want What I Have n't Got album cover .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The clip won three " Moonmen " at the 1990 MTV Video Music Awards : Video of the Year ( O'Connor became the first female artist to be awarded with it ) , Best Female Video and Best Post - Modern Video .
It was nominated for Breakthrough Video , Viewer 's Choice and International Viewer 's Choice during the ceremony .
The video also became the subject for many parodies and spoofs , such as Gina Riley 's parody "
Nothing Is There " on Fast Forward , referring to the fact that O'Connor tended to shave her head bald .
O'CONNOR 'S RELATIONSHIP WITH PRINCE Section::::O'Connor 's relationship with Prince .
Speaking about her relationship with Prince in an interview with Norwegian station NRK in November 2014
O'Connor said , PRINCE VERSION Section::::Prince version .
Prince released his own rendition of " Nothing Compares 2 U " , with Rosie Gaines on guest vocals .
This live version of the song was included on his 1993 compilation album , The Hits / The B - Sides .
His version reached # 62 on the R&B chart in early 1994 .
Prince 's original 1984 recording of the song was not released until 2018 , when it was issued as a single by Warner Bros. Records in conjunction with his estate .
In addition , the Prince version was given its own music video , released in conjunction with the studio recording on April 19 , 2018 ;
the video consists of edited rehearsal footage shot in the summer of 1984 .
LEGACY
*
In 2007 , VH1 ranked O'Connor 's rendition number 10 of the " 100 Greatest Songs of the 90s " .
*
In September 2010 Pitchfork Media included the song at number 37 on their Top 200 Tracks of the 90s .
*
The song was listed at number 77 on Billboard 's " Greatest Songs of All Time " .
* TIME magazine included " Nothing Compares 2 U " in its 2011 ( unranked ) list of " All - TIME 100 Songs " .
*
The song was simulcasted on radio stations throughout the United States to commemorate Prince 13 days after his death .
The simulcast was timed to line up with the opening lyrics of Prince 's version of the song , " It 's been 7 hours and 13 days , since you took your love away . "
* Chris Cornell posted a link to his version on the day after Prince 's death .
In an accompanying message , he wrote : " Prince 's music is the soundtrack to the soulful and beautiful universe he created , and we have all been privileged to be part of that amazing world .
I performed his song '
Nothing Compares 2 U ' for the first time a couple months ago .
It has a timeless relevance for me and practically everyone I know .
Sadly , now his own lyrics in this song could not be more relevant than at this moment , and I sing them now in reverence as I pay tribute to this unequaled artist who has given all of our lives so much inspiration and made the world so much more interesting .
We will miss you Prince ! ! !
"
On Father 's Day in 2018 , Cornell 's daughter Toni released a version of the song she recorded with her dad before his death in 2017 .
TRACK LISTINGS 7 " single *
" Nothing Compares 2 U " – 5:09 * * " Jump in the River " – 4:13 * CD maxi
*
" Nothing Compares 2 U " – 5:09 * * " Jump in the River " – 4:13
* * " Jump in the River " ( instrumental ) –
4:04 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Nothing Compares 2 U * Sinéad O'Connor – lead vocals , background vocals , producer , mixing * Prince – music and lyrics * Nellee Hooper – producing * Chris Birkett – engineering , mixing
* Fachtna O ' Ceallaigh – mixing Jump in the River * Sinéad O'Connor – music and lyrics , lead vocals , producer , mixing
* Marco Pirroni – music and lyrics * Chris Birkett – engineering , mixing
* Fachtna O ' Ceallaigh – mixing CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1990 ) !
Peakposition Canadian Adult Contemporary ( RPM )
Canadian Top Singles ( RPM ) Denmark ( IFPI )
Finland ( Suomen virallinen lista ) Germany ( Media Control AG )
Iceland ( Íslenski Listinn ) Ireland ( IRMA ) Portugal ( AFP ) !
Chart ( 2011 ) !
Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1990 ) !
Position Australian Singles Chart Austrian Singles Chart align="left"Canada
Top Singles ( RPM )
align="center"3 Dutch Top 40 align="left"German
Singles Chart align="center"2 Irish Singles Chart align="left"New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ )
align="center"11 Swiss Singles Chart
UK Singles Chart US Billboard Hot 100 DECADE - END CHARTS Section::::Decade - end charts . !
Chart ( 1990–1999 ) !
Position CERTIFICATIONS RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history . !
Country !
Release date United Kingdom
Worldwide United States REFERENCES