FREESAT Freesat is a British free - to - air satellite television service , provided by joint venture between the BBC and ITV plc .
The service was formed as a memorandum in 2007 and has been marketed since 6 May 2008 .
Freesat offers a satellite alternative to the Freeview service on digital terrestrial television , with a broadly similar selection of channels available without subscription for users purchasing a receiver .
The service also makes use of the additional capacity available on satellite broadcasting to offer a selection of 17 ( ) high - definition channels from the BBC , ITV , Channel 5 , Arirang TV , Bloomberg , Daystar , Discovery Networks , France 24 , NHK , RT UK and TRT World .
Freesat 's main competitors are Freeview , Freesat from Sky , Virgin Media and BT .
TalkTalk also offer a YouView service ( with Channel 4HD and All 4 catch up ) .
HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
The BBC and ITV , the two biggest free - to - air broadcasters in the UK , make their services available digitally through three routes : free - to - air via digital terrestrial and digital satellite , and subscription - only via digital cable .
On digital terrestrial , the channels have always been available free - to - air with the appropriate equipment .
In 2007 Freeview was available to only 73 % of the population .
After analogue TV services were replaced in the digital switchover , this increased to 98.5 % for the public service channels and 90 % for the full ' Freeview ' service .
To provide more widespread coverage and a larger number of channels , a digital satellite alternative was felt necessary .
Initially , both the BBC 's and ITV 's channels were encrypted since the original Astra satellites used for Sky broadcast to most of Europe but the broadcasters ' rights for premium content such as films and sports typically covered the UK only .
The use of encryption meant that anyone wishing to view the channels had to purchase equipment from Sky and pay for a free - to - view viewing card to decrypt the channels .
Similarly , to use the Videoguard encryption , the broadcasters needed to pay a fee to NDS Group .
MOVE TO FREE - TO - AIR Section::::Move to free - to - air .
In May 2003 the BBC moved most of its channels from the Astra 2A satellite to Astra 2D , which has a footprint that focuses more tightly on the UK .
This move allowed the BBC to stop encrypting its broadcasts while continuing to meet its rights obligations .
It dropped the encryption two months later .
Two months later , ITV , whose channels had already been located on the Astra 2D satellite since launching on the Sky platform some years earlier , also made their channels free - to - air .
On 18 November 2008 , Channel 5 commenced broadcasting a single channel via Freesat , eventually adding its ancillary services 5USA and 5 *
( now known as 5STAR )
three years later in December 2011 .
It later added Channel 5 HD to Freesat following the removal of BBC Three ( BBC iii ) as an SD & HD TV channel ( when it moved to on line and BBC i - player only ) .
Viva moved from free - to - view to free - to - air on satellite on 19 March 2013 , before launching on Freesat on 2 April 2013 .
On 2 April 2013 , all seven of Box Television 's channels left Sky 's subscription package , with six becoming free - to - air on satellite ; on 15 April four of the channels – The Box , Kerrang !
TV , Kiss TV and Smash Hits – were added to the Freesat EPG .
This was followed by Heat and Magic on 29 April .
The free - to - air channels can be received using any standard digital satellite ( DVB - S ) receiver , although those not licensed by Freesat will need to be re - tuned manually if / when channel frequencies are changed .
( See next section . )
MANAGED SERVICE Section::::Managed service .
The Freesat project aims to provide a managed service with an Electronic Programme Guide and interactive features similar to the Freeview service launched three years earlier .
Unlike Freeview , however , these features are only available on approved receivers manufactured under licence from Freesat .
The initial plan was to launch the service in early 2006 .
This was postponed to Autumn 2007 as approval from the BBC Trust was only received in April 2007 .
However , the service was further delayed and was officially launched on 6 May 2008 .
LAUNCH CHANNELS Section::::Launch channels .
The service launched officially on 6 May 2008 .
From the launch , Freesat advertised all national television channels from the BBC and ITV as being available on the platform ( excluding ITV2 +1 ) , as well as all national BBC radio networks .
Channel 4 also managed to make most of its channels free - to - air in preparation for the launch .
In addition some channels from other broadcasters such as Chello Zone , CSC Media Group , Al Jazeera English , Zee Live , Zee News , RIA Novosti and Euronews were included on the channel list .
HIGH - DEFINITION Section::::High - definition .
BBC HD was the only high - definition channel available on Freesat from launch day , with ITV HD added as a " red - button " interactive service from 7 June 2008 .
On 2 April 2010 ITV HD changed from an interactive service to a full - time channel called ITV1 HD , simulcasting the main ITV1 channel .
The name was changed back to ITV HD on 14 January 2013 .
BBC One HD , a high - definition simulcast of BBC One , was made available on Freesat and other platforms on 3 November 2010 .
Channel 4 HD also became available on the platform on 19 April 2011 , but will be withdrawn from 22 February 2018 .
NHK World HD was added to Freesat on 9 May 2011 ; it shared its channel number with its standard definition counterpart and was therefore only listed on high definition receivers , which were unable to access the standard definition channel via the EPG .
( The SD channel ceased transmission on 1 October 2011 . )
On 23 July 2012 , the BBC added 24 temporary channels to cover the 2012 Summer Olympics , the channels share their EPG slot with their standard definition counterpart .
On 29 August 2012 , Channel 4 added three temporary channels covering the 2012 Summer Paralympics in high definition from the following day ; the three channels also share their EPG slots .
On 14 February 2013 , RT HD was added to Freesat , sharing its channel number with its standard definition simulcast .
On 26 March 2013 , BBC HD was replaced by a high - definition simulcast of BBC Two .
On 13 June 2013 , an HD stream of the BBC Red Button was temporarily made available on the EPG .
On 16 July 2013 , the BBC announced they would be launching five new HD channels in early 2014 .
The five channels ( HD simulcasts of BBC Three , BBC Four , CBBC , CBeebies and BBC News ) were in fact launched early – on 10 December 2013 .
BBC Three and BBC
Three HD have been rebranded as BBC iii and now only available on the BBC i player , but in HD if your television is HD ready and can be connected to the internet either directly ( using an Ethernet cable ) or via wi - fi or via your computer online .
You now have to pay a licence fee to receive all BBC TV channels legally on all devices .
Channel 4 pulled its 4HD service from Freesat on 22 February 2018 , along with its catch up on demand ALL4 service .
It is claiming Freesat has significantly increased Channel 4 's fee for the Freesat platform .
Freesat claim however that they have not increased their fee for the ALL4 catch up service .
Channel 5 HD and S4C HD are continuing to broadcast on Freesat , along with all the Channel 4 SD ( standard definition ) channels including Channel 4 SD , Film 4 , E4 , 4Seven 4 Music and the +1 channels .
The Channel 4HD programme guide was also withdrawn on this date .
The Channel 4 SD channels remain on Freesat ( inc .
Channel 4 SD and the SD versions of E4 , Film 4 and 4Seven and 4 Music and all the +1 channels ) and the programme guide can still be seen on the Channel 4 SD channel .
REGIONAL VARIATIONS
Section::::Regional variations .
Some channels ( notably BBC One and ITV ) are transmitted in regional variations and the appropriate services are selected by the Freesat receiver from the user 's postcode .
In March 2010 , ITV altered several of their regions from free - to - air transmission to free - to - view ( because they were moved to a satellite from which transmission covers a much larger area than just the UK and content licensing means that they had to be encrypted ) .
As a result , a few Freesat viewers ( who can not receive free - to - view , encrypted content ) were moved to regional variations not corresponding to their actual location .
Other available regions may be chosen by putting a different post code into your box for your preferred TV region .
BBC English Regional content is only available in SD , whereas Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland programmes are in HD on BBC One only .
FUTURE CHANNELS AND RECENT LAUNCHES Section::::Future channels and recent launches .
On 12 September 2017 the FreeSports channel launched on Freesat , broadcasting on channel 252 with football games and highlights ( from Germany , Spain , Portugal , Belgium , and Argentina ) , motorsport , ice hockey , rugby league , boxing and more .
On October 9 , 2018 Sony Movie Channel ( UK ) launched on Freesat following periods of free - to - view and then free - to - air transmission .
The channel offers blockbuster films from the 1980s , 1990s and 2000s .
VIDEO ON DEMAND Section::::Video on demand .
The BBC began to roll out a beta version of BBC iPlayer for Freesat devices in early 2010 .
BBC iPlayer is an internet based service with around 2500 hours of television being available on demand .
ITV Hub is available for Humax increased to a 30 day catch up service from the original 7 day service but with a larger ITV ident / logo in the top left of the screen ] , Manhattan , and some Sagemcom devices , however it is not available on 2nd Generation Humax devices to viewers using DG and TD postcodes .
It is not clear why this is the case .
In 2010 , Freesat also indicated an intent to launch a receiver featuring the YouView service ( then called ' Project Canvas ' ) and said that the video on demand services 4oD now ALL4 and Demand 5 were under consideration On 28 July 2011 , the BBC Trust approved proposals to introduce the listing of pay content delivered on - demand via broadband .
The trust will allow the BBC to continue to play a part in Freesat as the plans did not represent a significant change to the approval previously given in 2007 .
There was no need for a Public Value Test or for further regulatory process .
Under the plans some pay content , such as films , would be added to the Freesat EPG alongside the existing free - to - air content .
However , there would be no adult material or live streamed sports coverage .
Freesat itself will not supply any of the on demand content , but will allow third parties to do so through its EPG .
Some content will also be made available through existing channels using an on - screen prompt that would take viewers to an on demand environment .
Pay - TV sales would be handled by a third party , with Freesat operating the conditional access system that would underpin it .
The plan is to use the upcoming launch of G2 spec receivers to add support for Digital Rights Management and where technically possible on existing receivers .
On 29 November 2011 , a beta trial for the subscription based on demand movie service BoxOffice365 was added to the Freesat EPG .
On 11 March 2013 , BoxOffice365 withdrew from Freesat .
The Freetime guide also features a backwards EPG and a Showcase section offering recommendations .
HTML versions of iPlayer and ITV Player will also launch , both services use MHEG-5 on first generation devices .
YouTube launched on Freetime receivers on 7 March 2013 , the first deployment of YouTube 's HTML app in a Western European TV service .
4oD
launched on Freesat 's Freetime receivers on 27 June 2013 , making Freesat the first UK TV platform to host the HTML5 version of 4oD.
Demand 5 arrived on Freesat on 6 August 2013 .
In December 2015 , Freesat announced the availability of an application for the Netflix subscription TV streaming service on the Humax HDR-1000S , HDR-1010S , HDR-1100S and HB-1000S Freetime receivers .
Netflix is expected to be available on other Freetime receivers in the future .
In January 2016 , Saorview , the Irish free TV service announced it would be launching an online catch - up and on - demand TV service using the commercial version of the Freetime software , including EPG roll - back and remote recording , with Freesat providing a fully managed service .
In September 2016 the BBC closed the MHEG version of the BBC iPlayer ( V2 ) used on some older connected TVs and receivers ( manufactured between 2008 and 2014 ) .
Freesat Freetime equipment using the HbbTV version was unaffected .
The BBC recommended that consumers should purchase replacement receivers to continue to receive iPlayer .
In October 2016 STV Player was made available to Freesat viewers .
The online live streaming and catch - up service operated by STV shows ITV programmes and content from its own archive .
All4 ( formerly 4OD ) was added to the [ Humax ] Freesat service soon after its launch online ; however , due to fee increases at start of 2018 , Channel 4 have withdrawn the All4 on - demand service from all boxes that carry the Freesat Freetime service , from 22 February 2018 as well as taking Channel 4HD from all HD - capable Freesat devices .
RECEPTION EQUIPMENT RECEIVERS Section::::Reception equipment .
Section::::Receivers .
At the launch of the service , there were two types of Freesat receivers available — standard definition - only receivers and high definition - capable receivers .
As of July 2010 there are eleven companies licensed to produce Freesat boxes and televisions .
Humax launched a Freesat recorder , Freesat+ , which became available to the public in November 2008 .
On 17 October 2012 , Humax released the first Freetime receiver , the Humax HDR-1000S. TELEVISIONS Section::::Televisions .
Following the initial launch , Panasonic introduced three plasma televisions with integrated HD Freesat receivers .
At the end of October 2008 , Panasonic brought out 2 more sizes which are the 32 " and 37 " .
In April 2009 LG launched 4 LCD TVs with built - in Freesat receivers .
The LG series is the LF7700 ( discontinued mid-2010 ) , with screen sizes of 32 " , 37 " , 42 " and 47 " .
Sony have released two televisions with Freesat receivers , the W5810 and Z5800 series , available from sizes 32 " up to 52 " and in 100 Hz and 200 Hz alternatives .
SATELLITE DISH Section::::Satellite dish .
The service makes use of the same group of Astra satellites at 28.2 ° E as the Sky subscription satellite service .
This means that a satellite dish which is positioned to receive these services will be capable of receiving Freesat , with the addition of a suitable receiver ( or Television with receiver built in ) .
Provided that the LNB has sufficient outputs , a single dish may be used to receive multiple services ( i.e. Sky and Freesat ) .
However , a dish with an LNB for the Sky Q service can not be used with a Freesat receiver because Sky Q uses a wideband LNB which is incompatible with Freesat receivers .
A " Hybrid " Sky Q LNB can be used as it has both wideband outputs for Sky Q and conventional universal LNB outputs for non - Sky Q receivers , including Freesat .
For users who do not currently have a satellite dish , Freesat offers an installation service which is made available through retailers and which is advertised in a leaflet included with Freesat receivers .
A suitable dish may also be installed by the user or a non - Freesat - affiliated installer .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
While Freesat systems work in Ireland , official branded Freesat receivers are not widely or officially marketed in the country .
On 23 October 2008 several Irish retail chains including Maplin , Tesco Ireland and PowerCity began offering modified Freesat systems from Grundig and Alba that had their Freesat branding replaced with a Sat4free brand name .
The requirement to enter a UK postcode was removed ; the systems were instead set to use the version of the electronic programme guide appropriate for Northern Ireland through a hard - coded Belfast postcode .
Sat4free was permanently closed down shortly after .
OUTSIDE THE UK AND IRELAND Section::::Outside the UK and Ireland .
Although not intended for reception outside of the UK , it is possible to receive Freesat outside of the British Isles , although a larger dish may be required as the footprint of Astra 2E and Astra 2F ( who carry all the channels from the BBC , ITV , Channel 4 and Channel 5 ) is mainly focused on the UK and Ireland .
Even residents of Eastern European countries , however , ( who generally have giant dishes ) can often have access to the Freesat UK services .
Freesat receivers , however , ask for a UK postcode during installation , to determine where regional services are placed in the EPG and channel list .
TECHNICAL DETAILS
Section::::Technical details .
Freesat broadcasts from the same fleet of satellites ( Astra 28.2 ° E ) as Sky .
Channels are broadcast using DVB - S. Freesat 's role is not broadcasting or availability of channels ( although the BBC and ITV are substantial broadcasters in their own right ) but instead providing a platform for receiving the channels and the EPG .
All of the standard definition channels on Freesat are broadcast using DVB - S ; ITV HD , NHK World HD and RT HD also use DVB - S. BBC One HD and BBC HD used DVB - S until 6 June 2011 when the satellite transponder carrying them was upgraded to DVB - S2 .
Channel 4 HD had launched using DVB - S2 but the transponder was downgraded to DVB - S on 28 March 2012 .
Standard definition channels are broadcast using MPEG-2 , while high definition channels are broadcast using MPEG-4 .
Interactive television is done using MHEG-5 rather than the proprietary OpenTV platform used by Sky .
Channel 4HD will no longer be available from 22nd March 2018 .
Since the channels are broadcast in - the - clear , they can also be received by non - Freesat receivers , including Sky Digiboxes .
The specification for Freesat boxes includes having an Ethernet port .
This is to allow on demand programming from services such as BBC iPlayer or ITV Player to be viewed directly on the customer 's television .
Open standards and technologies form the basis of Freesat 's second generation Freetime receivers , including those from the Open IPTV Forum ( OIPF ) , the Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV ( HbbTV ) project and HTML5 browser technology , with the majority of the Freetime user interface built using the latter .
The Freetime spec also includes features such as : DiSEqC 1.2 support ; MoCA ( Multimedia over Coax Alliance ) support including single cable routing ; HTML , JavaScript and CSS internet technologies for broadband - delivered interactive services ; DRM for online content ; and payment mechanisms for broadband services like LoveFilm .
James Strickland , Freesat 's director of product and technology development , explained that Freetime is a hybrid between HbbTV and MHEG-5 .
ADOPTION Section::::Adoption .
The table below shows the quarterly and cumulative sales of Freesat equipment in the first years of the service . !
Quarter !
Quarterly Sales !
Cumulative Sales !
Quarterly HD Sales !
Cumulative HD Sales !
Quarterly HD Proportion !
Reference
In the Q4 2009 report ( from the table above ) , Ofcom reported that Freesat had announced the 1 million mark had been hit by the end of February 2010 .
*
Note :
Ofcom stopped reporting Freesat Penetration Cumulatively with the Q3 2010 Report , and stopped quarterly reports at the end of 2010 .
Indications are that Freesat penetration largely plateaued in late 2010 .
In May 2017 , Freesat announced that 904,000 devices capable of receiving the platform were sold in 2016 , with the installed base increasing 58,000 year - on - year and passing 2 million during the course of the year .
SEE ALSO * Freesat from Sky
* Freeview
* Saorsat – a free - to - air satellite service for Ireland
* List of free - to - air channels at 28 ° E * Astra – satellites carrying Freesat REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* BBC News : Q&A on Freesat * List of Freesat ( UK )
Channels * Radio and Telly : Freesat guide * Freesat Section at Astra 2