EGG TOOTH
In some egg - laying animals , the egg tooth is a small , sharp , cranial protuberance used by offspring to break or tear through the egg 's surface during hatching .
It is present in most reptiles , and similar structures exist in monotremes , Eleutherodactyl frogs , and spiders .
Some lizards develop a true tooth that is shed after use ; other reptiles and birds generally develop an analogous epidermal horn that is reabsorbed or falls off .
BIRDS
Section::::Birds .
A mother bird delivers her young encased in an eggshell ; an external protective covering consisting of calcium carbonate ( CaCO ) .
The shell protects the chick until it is ready to survive in the outside world .
The chick breaks open the shell when it is strong enough and ready .
Since the beak and the claws of the bird are not fully developed and can not penetrate the eggshell , the " egg tooth " is the unusual structure that helps the bird break through the shell .
It is only found in emerging chicks and lost soon after hatching , after it is used to penetrate the hard shell that once protected the embryo .
In birds , the process of breaking open the eggshell is commonly referred to as pipping .
Chicks have a pipping muscle on the back of their necks .
It is this muscle which gives them the strength to force the egg tooth through the inner membrane of the eggshell .
When a chick becomes too large to absorb oxygen through the pores of its eggshell , it uses its egg tooth to peck a hole in the air sac located at the flat end of the egg .
This sac provides a few hours ' worth of air , during which the chick breaks through the eggshell to the outside .
The egg tooth falls off several days after hatching .
Kiwis lack an egg tooth , instead using their legs and beak to break through a relatively thin eggshell .
The superprecocial megapodes possess an egg tooth in their early embryonic development , but instead use their claws during hatching .
SNAKES AND LIZARDS Section::::Snakes and Lizards .
Most squamates ( lizards & snakes ) also lay eggs , and similarly need an egg tooth .
Unlike other amniotes , the eggtooth of squamates is an actual tooth which develops from the premaxilla .
CROCODILIANS
Section::::Crocodilians .
A baby crocodile has an egg tooth on the end of its snout .
It is a tough piece of skin which is resorbed less than two months after hatching .
Crocodile eggs are similar to those of birds in that they have an inner membrane and an outer one .
The egg tooth is used to tear open the inner membrane ; the baby crocodile can then push its way through the outer shell .
If conditions are particularly dry that year , the inner membrane may be too tough for the crocodile to break through , and without assistance it will simply die inside the egg .
Generally , however , the mother crocodile is there to help free it .
REFERENCES