SMILE TRAIN Smile Train is a nonprofit organization and charity providing corrective surgery for children with cleft lips and palates .
Headquartered in New York City and founded in 1999 , Smile Train provides free corrective cleft surgery in 87 countries , training local doctors and providing hospital funding for the procedures .
According to Forbes magazine , Smile Train is the 72nd largest charity in America .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Smile Train was created in 1998 by Brian Mullaney and Charles Wang , who had previously worked with Operation Smile , another charity focused on correcting cleft lips and palates .
They felt the most efficient way to provide cleft surgery was to train and support local doctors rather than to fly in Western doctors to provide surgeries in poor , developing countries .
Local doctors would also be able to provide care year - round rather than the limited engagements of the " mission - based " model .
In 1999 , Smile Train began providing corrective surgeries in China .
The charity worked with the then - American and Chinese presidents , George H.W. Bush and Jiang Zemin , in the planning of Smile Train 's first operation in China .
As of 2013 , the charity had provided approximately 300,000 corrective surgeries in partnership with 397 local hospitals within China .
Smile Train began working in India in 2000 .
In 2011 , Aishwarya Rai , a Bollywood actress and former Miss World , became Smile Train 's first goodwill ambassador .
By 2013 , Smile Train was conducting 50,000 corrective surgeries in India annually .
In 2006 , Smile Train co - founded the Pan African Congress on Cleft Lip and Palate .
The charity also funded the 2008 Pan African Anaesthesia Symposium .
In October 2010 , Smile Train experienced a major leadership change which included the departure of Mullaney and other top executives .
Smile Train unveiled a new advertising campaign , " The Power of a Smile " , in April 2014 .
The campaign featured work from Kátia Lund and photojournalist Alex Webb , and coincided with the release of a new organizational logo .
That same month , Smile Train also held an event at the Barclays Center to celebrate its millionth cleft operation .
SMILE TRAIN AND OPERATION SMILE Section::::Smile Train and Operation Smile .
In early 2011 , Smile Train and Operation Smile announced the two charities would merge , followed three weeks later by announcements the merger had been aborted , Smile Train having canceled the union .
Smile Train 's board also named Priscilla Ma the executive director of the organization , while other board members and directors stepped down .
In 2009 , Smile Train initiated an advertising campaign in the Richmond Times - Dispatch highlighting Smile Train 's attempts between 2006 and 2009 to donate nearly $ 9 million to Operation Smile , the organization Brian Mullaney had split from in 1998 in what Mullaney described as a " messy divorce " .
In the ad , Mullaney contended Operation Smile was refusing money that could benefit children , later calling the situation " shameful " ; Mullaney also noted that he respects that in some countries need overwhelms available doctors and he had " a newfound respect for what Operation Smile does " .
The Virginian Pilot outlined the history and differences between the two organizations and indicated Mullaney wanted the two organizations to reconcile .
At the time , Dr. Magee of Operation Smile declined a newspaper interview , and Operation Smile formally responded to the ad campaign , saying the two organizations " have different operating philosophies and business ethics " , and that Operation Smile would continue foregoing donations from an " unproductive relationship " .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
In 1999 , Smile Train approached Dr. Court B. Cutting of New York University 's Virtual Research Laboratory to create training videos , which could be used to train local doctors on how to perform advanced cleft surgery techniques .
The 3D models used in the videos were based on the CT scan of two Chinese patients .
Smile Train distributes the DVDs to local doctors worldwide .
The DVDs are available in English , Spanish , and Mandarin .
Smile Train later used the 3D models of the two Chinese patients to build the first 3D open access virtual surgical simulator , which teaches cleft palate and lip surgery to doctors in developing countries .
The simulator , which was created in partnership with BioDigital Systems , is web - based , open source and available for free .
It does not require any special hardware to use .
A mobile application is under development .
In September 2014 , Smile Train showcased a 3D virtual surgery simulator at TEDMED 2014 in Washington , D.C. Smile Train maintains Smile Train Express ( STX ) , an internet - based , digital patient record database .
STX enables Smile Train to have outside medical experts review patient records and quality of care .
The charity also boasts a large medical research library with more than 1,000 articles related to clefts accessible online for free .
PARTNERSHIPS AND SUPPORTERS Section::::Partnerships and supporters .
Smile Train helps the cause of cleft care through its funding of 1,000 +
active partners representing nearly 1,200 hospitals and 2,300 partner surgeons in the world 's poorest nations ; through these local partnerships , the organization is able to provide free surgery for children any day of the year , with more than one million total surgeries performed as of 2016 .
In addition to partnerships with cleft care organizations , Smile Train has partnered with other individuals organizations in an effort to improve safety and quality at their partner hospitals , such as Dr. Atul Gawande , World Health Organization , World Federation of Societies of Anesthesiologists and Lifebox .
Smile Train has a number of corporate partnerships , including Artisanal Cheese , Dubai Duty Free , Estée Lauder , FedEx , QBE
The Queens Flowers , Mars Retail Group and Vertu .
These partnerships , in addition to those in partnership with donors on grassroots efforts , serve to both raise money and spread awareness .
Current and former supporters include : Tatyana Ali , John Bishop , Christie Brinkley , Dean Cain , Stephen Colbert , Kevin Connolly , Walter Cronkite , Erik Estrada , Lucy Hale , Sammi Hanratty , Rebecca Herbst , Jane Kaczmarek , Howie Mandel , Mary McCartney , Reba McEntire , Bette Midler , Jimmy Pardo , General Colin Powell , Aishwarya Rai Bachchan , Carly Simon and Hilary Swank .
RECOGNITION Section::::Recognition .
In a 2008 New York Times article , economist Steven Levitt of Freakonomics fame indicated that the organization 's model and its technological innovations " likely make Smile Train one of the most productive charities , dollar for deed , in the world . "
In 2008 , Smile Train was the runner - up in the Health - Care IT category of the Wall Street Journal Technology Innovation Awards in recognition for their surgical technique training videos .
The Virtual Surgery Simulator was recognized in 2013 by the National Training Simulation Association ( NTSA ) , a subsidiary of the National Defense Industrial Association ( NDIA ) , receiving an award in the " training " category .
In 2009 , the documentary Smile Pinki , which was sponsored by Smile Train and directed by Megan Mylan , won the 2008 Oscar for Best Documentary ( Short Subject ) .
The film shows the story of a poor girl in rural India whose life is transformed when she receives free surgery to correct her cleft lip .
Free copies of the film are available through Smile Train 's website .
In 2013 , the documentary Dzachuka 's Smile , which was co - produced by China Central Television Documentary Channel ( CCTV ) and Smile Train , received the Gold Panda Award for Best Documentary in Society for Asian Production at the 2013 Sichuan TV Festival .
The documentary follows the Lamu Sisters ' efforts to help children with clefts living on the Dzachuka Plateau .
In 2016 , World Journal of Surgery published the comprehensive independent study " Economic Valuation of the Global Burden of Cleft Disease Averted by a Large Cleft Charity " , which was conducted using data from 547,769 Smile Train patient records of primary cleft procedures ( 58 percent cleft lip repairs , 42 percent cleft palate repairs ) .
The study measured the economic impact of cleft repair surgery over a ten - year period ( 2001–2011 ) and " [ quantified ] the burden of disease averted through the global surgical work of a large cleft charity " .
It concluded that for each $ 250 cleft repair surgery , as much as $ 50,000 is returned to the local economy as patients contribute to productivity .
The total economic impact achieved as a result of their cleft repair surgeries in 83 countries between 2001 and 2011 amounts to as much as $ 27 billion .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
In 2008 , Charity Watch criticized then - president Brian Mullaney 's $ 420,209 salary and questioned the 2007 company 's tax form , which said Mullaney 's salary came from temporary restricted funds designed to go toward overhead .
In 2009 , Givewell could not assess the impact of Smile Train 's activities based on the charity 's 2008 tax form and other publicly accessible information .
Smile Train Canada 's charity status was revoked on July 4 , 2015 after 6 years of operation by Canada 's Charities Directorate for failure to allocate donations towards charity purposes , failure to carry out its charity work , failure to file accurate information and other serious deficiencies .
KEY PERSONNEL Section::::Key personnel .
The organizations key personnel are : * Charles B. Wang , founder and chairman , Smile Train * Susannah Schaefer , executive vice chair and chief executive officer , Smile Train
* Robert T. Bell , executive director , Charles B. Wang International Foundation
* Michael J. Dowling , president and chief executive officer , Northwell Health
* Ed Goren , founder and chief executive officer , Goren Media Group * Arthur J. McCarthy , chief financial officer , NeuLion * Roy E. Reichbach , general counsel , NeuLion * Richard A. Ruderman , president and CEO , Krieger Ruderman & Co. ,
LLC FINANCIALS Section::::Financials .
Smile Train complies with the 20 Standards for Charity Accountability established by the Better Business Bureau
Wise Giving Alliance .
The alliance was developed to " assist donors in making sound giving decisions and to foster public confidence in charitable organizations " .
According to Smile Train 's 2012 annual report , management and general expenses account for $ 1.9 million ( 1.2 % ) of total expenses .
$ 132.4 million ( 81.8 % ) went to program services and $ 27.6 million ( 17 % ) to fundraising .
Total support and revenue for 2012 was $ 175 million .
SEE ALSO
* List of cleft lip and palate organisations
* List of non - governmental organizations in the People 's Republic of China REFERENCES