FOOTBALL HELMET
The football helmet is a piece of protective equipment used mainly in American football and Canadian football .
It consists of a hard plastic shell with thick padding on the inside , a face mask made of one or more plastic - coated metal bars , and a chinstrap .
Each position has a different type of face mask to balance protection and visibility , and some players add polycarbonate visors to their helmets , which are used to protect their eyes from glare and impacts .
Helmets are a requirement at all levels of organized football , except for non - tackle variations such as flag football .
Although they are protective , players can and do still suffer head injuries such as concussions .
HISTORY INVENTION Section::::History .
Section::::Invention .
One of the first instances of football headgear dates to 1896 when Lafayette College halfback George " Rose " Barclay began to use straps and earpieces to protect his ears .
It is not certain who invented the football helmet .
Many sources give credit for the creation of the helmet to James Naismith , while other sources credit U.S. Naval Academy Midshipman Joseph M. Reeves ( later to become the " Father of Carrier Aviation " ) , who had a protective device for his head made out of mole skin to allow him to play in the 1893 Army - Navy game .
Reeves had been advised by a Navy doctor that another kick to his head would result in " instant insanity " or even death , so he commissioned an Annapolis shoemaker to make him a helmet out of leather .
Later , helmets were made of padded leather and resembled aviators ' helmets or modern day scrum caps .
At least in professional football , they were optional .
Some National Football League players , notably Hall - of - Famer Bill Hewitt , played all or most of their careers without a helmet .
EARLY YEARS
Section::::Early years .
One innovation from the early 1900s period was hardened leather .
1917 marked the first time helmets were raised above the head in an attempt to direct blows away from the top of the head .
Ear flaps also had their downfall during this period as they had little ventilation and made it difficult for players to hear .
The 1920s marked the first time that helmets were widely used in the sport of football .
These helmets were made of leather and had some padding on the inside , but the padding was insufficient and provided little protection .
In addition , they lacked face masks .
As a result , injuries were very common .
Early helmets also absorbed a lot of heat , making them very uncomfortable to wear .
In 1939 , the Riddell Company of Chicago , Illinois started manufacturing plastic helmets because it felt that plastic helmets would be safer than those made of leather .
Plastic was found to be more effective because it held its shape when full collision contact occurred on a play .
These helmets were also much more comfortable and had more padding to cushion the head in an impact .
Included with the plastic helmet came plastic face mask , which allowed the helmet to protect the entire head .
By the mid-1940s , helmets were required in the NFL .
They were still made of leather , but with improved manufacturing techniques had assumed their more familiar spherical shape .
The NFL initially allowed either plastic or leather helmets , but in 1948 the league outlawed the plastic helmet , considering the hard - plastic material to be an injury risk .
The NFL repealed this rule in 1949 , and by 1950 , the plastic helmet had become universal in that league .
INTRODUCTION OF ADVANCED MATERIALS Section::::Introduction of advanced materials .
By the 1950s , the introduction of polymers ended the leather helmet era .
The last leather helmet manufacturer , MacGregor , ceased production of leather helmets in the mid-1960s .
The NFL also recommended face masks for players in 1955 , reducing the number of broken noses and teeth , but also necessitating new rules prohibiting opposing players from grabbing the face mask .
By varying accounts , either Pat Studstill or Garo Yepremian was the last to forgo the facemask ; among non - kickers , Tommy McDonald was the last to do so .
MODERN HELMET COMPONENTS
INFLATABLE PADDING Section::::Modern helmet components .
Section::::Inflatable padding .
According to Andrew Tucker , football helmets adequately protected players from catastrophic brain injuries , but helmet manufacturers were motivated to design helmets that decrease the risk of concussions .
Vin Ferrara , a former Harvard quarterback , accidentally discovered a new way to cushion football helmets .
One night , Ferrara was looking for an aspirin when he saw a squirt bottle in his medicine cabinet .
As he pumped it and then punched it , he realized that the bottle withstood the blows of different forces .
Ferrara immediately came up with the idea to encase football helmets with a number of inflatable pockets in order to cushion the blows a football player receives and reduce concussions .
More recently , in 2003 Schutt sports introduced their football helmets which contained TPU , or thermoplastic urethane .
They would argue that this helps cushion the head more than any other helmet in the market .
Schutt also believes that TPU makes the helmet less prone to mold and easier overall to clean and keep sanitary .
VISORS Section::::Visors .
A more recent addition to the football helmet is the visor or eye shield , which is affixed to the face mask to protect players from glare or eye injuries , such as pokes .
It is believed that the first player to use a protective visor was Mark Mullaney of the NFL 's Minnesota Vikings in 1984 , in order to protect a healing eye injury .
Top manufacturers of visors are Nike , Oakley , and Under Armour , with Leader being the first to come out with a visor / shield for former Chicago Bears quarterback Jim McMahon ( who needed the visor because of a childhood eye injury ) .
While Mullaney and McMahon 's visors were tinted , most of the earlier visors were clear or smoked , but they are now offered in a variety of styles ranging from blue , gold , black , rainbow , silver , or amber .
High - school and pee - wee leagues prohibit all but clear visors .
This rule was enacted so that training staff and coaches can easily view a player 's face and eyes in the case of a serious injury , to discern if the player is conscious .
The NCAA banned the use of tinted visors for the same reason , and the NFL has followed suit as well .
However , players with eye problems may still obtain special permission to wear tinted visors , some notable examples being LaDainian Tomlinson and Chris Canty .
SENSORS Section::::Sensors .
Helmet shock data loggers and shock detectors monitor impacts a player receives , such as the force and direction of the impact .
If the force recorded by the sensors is over 100 Gs , it signals a possible concussion . {
} Some players will experience up to 2,000 of these potential concussion blows each season .
This data is then analyzed by doctors .
New rules have been implemented which instruct that any player who has a particularly high reading of force needs to be taken off the field and examined before they can play another down .
HEADSETS Section::::Headsets .
Two Ohio inventors devised a headset for Cleveland Browns coach Paul Brown so he could radio plays to his quarterback .
It was banned shortly after its first use in 1956 .
The NFL approved use of headsets for all NFL teams in 1994 .
NFL rules state that all helmets equipped with headsets must have a visible green dot on the back .
A few times in 2006 , the holder on the field goal attempt was told to pull up and throw or run at the last second because of a change the coaches saw on the field .
According to the NFL , this gave teams an " unfair advantage .
" The new rules let each team know who is wearing a headset and hearing the plays being called .
ONE - BAR FACE MASKS Section::::One - bar face masks .
The one - bar face mask was once common but its use has been supplanted in professional and amateur sport .
For example , it has been illegal in the National Football League since 2004 , but a grandfather clause allowed players who wore the mask prior to 2004 to continue to do so for the remainder of their careers .
No current professional player currently wears such a face mask ; the last player to do so was Scott Player , who last played professionally in 2009 .
Typically , by the mid-1980s only placekickers and punters in professional football in Canada and the United States wore the one - bar face mask , a notable exception being quarterback Joe Theismann .
The one - bar had two different variations .
The standard one - bar was made from nylon or other hard plastic and was bolted to both side of the helmet just in front of the earholes .
There was a " snub " version that did not extend as far out in front of the helmet as the standard .
Face masks for football helmets today are multibar .
The multibar facemasks are typically constructed out of metal , such as titanium , stainless steel , or most commonly carbon steel .
Each facemask is coated with Polyarmor G17 , a powder coating that is resistant to impact and corrosion .
The Polyarmor is a thermoplastic coating used on a number of surfaces .
While some organizations purchase new face masks every season , others have their equipment reconditioned .
RECENT DESIGNS Section::::Recent designs .
In 2002 , American football equipment manufacturer Riddell released a new design of helmet called the Revolution .
The newer design was released in response to a study on concussions .
In addition , Riddell has recently come out with a new design of helmets , the Riddell Speed Flex .
This helmet came out in 2014 .
This new helmet uses elements of Riddell 's older helmets , the 360 and the Revolution , such as Side Impact Protection and All Points Quick Release face mask attachment system .
In 2007 , Schutt Sports announced the arrival of a next generation helmet , the Schutt ION 4D.
This next generation design was in response to the demand for a safer football helmet .
The design includes an integrated face guard .
This new face guard design features shock absorbing " Energy Wedges " that reduce the force of impacts to the face guard .
College teams wearing the helmet include Air Force , Penn State and Virginia .
Schutt has also distinguished between their varsity helmets and youth helmets .
The varsity helmets from Schutt are made with polycarbonate , which is a very strong polymer designed to take bigger hits .
The Schutt youth helmets however ; are made from ABS , which is a lighter material , meant for kids who do not take as powerful of hits .
Recently , a brand new type of helmet has come into play .
Vicis is a new company that is producing helmets that have a softer outer layer .
The softer layer absorbs more energy from impacts .
In addition , the inside of the helmet also has a foam like substance which absorbs energy and improves comfort .
SAFETY RESEARCH AND TESTING
NOCSAE CERTIFICATION Section::::Safety research and testing .
Section::::NOCSAE certification .
Rules in place for NFL , NCAA , and high school football require that all helmets be certified by the National Operating Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment .
Reliance on NOCSAE certification has been criticized on numerous grounds , including that organization 's control by equipment manufacturers causes a conflict of interest , testing data that focuses on skull fractures instead of concussions , and failure to take into account new research .
The most common NOCSAE test is the drop test .
This test uses a 13-pound dummy head full of sensors and a gelatin material .
The head and helmet is dropped from a height of 60 at one of the six NOCSAE specified locations on the helmet .
These locations include the front , rear , left side , right side , right boss , and left boss .
The sensors in the dummy head measure the amount of force that the head experiences .
The NOCSAE has certain regulations such as the peak severity index can never more than1200 SI .
If a helmet fails to meet these requirements , they do not pass the NOCSAE drop test .
CURRENT RESEARCH
Section::::Current research .
There has been significant study / research regarding head injuries in football , as well as football helmet design in recent years .
Kevin Guskiewicz , a professor at The University of North Carolina and a MacArthur Fellow , has for many years been researching concussions in football of all age groups .
He has been equipping UNC football helmets with accelerometers to measure impacts and concussions .
Also , the NFL has awarded over $ 1.6 million in sports medical research , almost $ 1 million of which has been toward concussion prevention .
All this concussion prevention research has led football helmet manufacturers to develop safer products .
A joint effort between Virginia Tech and Wake Forest has been testing current football helmets and giving them yearly ratings since 2011 .
On a scale out of 5 stars , only one helmet was awarded a 5 in 2011 .
In 2012 , two additional helmet designs were awarded 5 stars .
Controversies revolving around football helmets always regard their ability to decrease head / brain injury rates , including concussions .
However , recent research has begun to assess the tests specifically employed to create the safest football equipment .
In 2015 , David Camarillo at Stanford conducted a study that suggested football helmet tests did not account for the delay between injury - causing brain movement and stress impact .
OTHER RESEARCH
Section::::Other research .
Neuroscientists at Ohio State University launched baseballs from air cannons at football helmets in order to simulate a kick or blow to the head such as a tackle .
It was found that the helmets could withstand 2,500 Newtons or about 562 pounds of force .
Vijay Gupta , a professor at UCLA , has done research and produced a special polymer that if added as a layer on the inside of football helmets can produce up to a 25 % decrease in the g - forces a player would experience .
This reduction of forces would produce a similar amount of reduction of the probability of a player suffering a concussion from the same hits .
LOGO DISPLAY NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE Section::::Logo display .
Section::::National Football League .
In 1948 , the Los Angeles Rams were the first NFL team to put logos on their helmets ; the basic " ram 's horn " logo on the helmet has remained mostly the same , except for color , ever since .
the Cleveland Browns are the last remaining NFL teams not using any form of primary logo on its helmets .
The Pittsburgh Steelers are the only NFL team that puts its logo on only one side of the helmet ( the right side ) , while the Cincinnati Bengals , after using a wordmark for a helmet logo into the 1980s , use a striping pattern instead of a logo .
SEE ALSO
* The Helmet Project * History of the football helmet REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Sources
* Albergotti , Reed and Wang , Shirley S. " Is it time to retire the football helmet ? "
The Wall Street Journal ( November 11 , 2009 )
* Bhattacharji , Alex .
"
Helmet History " " Sports Illustrated for Kids ( October 1996 )
* Copeland , Michael V. " Crash Pad " Fortune International ( February 8 , 2010 )
p.8
* Schwartz , Alan . " Concussion-
New Football Helmet Design " The New York Times ( October 27 , 2007 )
* Tucker , Andrew M. " Football players head injuries " House Judiciary FDCH Congressional Testimony ( October 28 , 2009 )
* Zarda , Brett . "
Butting Heads " Popular Science ( September 2007 ) EXTERNAL LINKS * The Official History of the Winged Helmet