LAUREN CONRAD
Lauren Katherine Tell ( née Conrad ; born February 1 , 1986 ) is an American television personality , fashion designer , and author .
In September 2004 , an 18-year - old Conrad came to prominence after being cast in the reality television series , which documented her and her friends ' lives in their hometown of Laguna Beach , California .
Conrad later moved to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the fashion industry , and received her own spin - off series The Hills in May 2006 .
It followed the personal and professional lives of her and friends Heidi Montag , Audrina Patridge , and Whitney Port .
As the series progressed , a widely publicized feud between Conrad , Montag , and Montag 's boyfriend
Spencer Pratt became the central focus of the series , and was carried through each subsequent season in which Conrad was featured .
During its production , she also attended the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising and worked for Teen Vogue and Kelly Cutrone 's PR firm People 's Revolution .
Conrad left The Hills after five seasons , and was replaced by former Laguna Beach co - star Kristin Cavallari in May 2009 .
She filmed an alternate ending for the series finale in July 2010 , which was broadcast in August 2013 .
Conrad is the founder of the fashion lines LC Lauren Conrad and Paper Crown , and the co - founder of the fair trade online store The Little Market .
She has published nine books , including L.A. Candy and The Fame Game trilogies .
Conrad married former musician and law school graduate William Tell in September 2014 ; they have one child together .
LIFE AND CAREER
1986–2005 :
EARLY LIFE AND LAGUNA
BEACH Section::::Life and career .
Section::::1986–2005 :
Early life and Laguna Beach .
Conrad was born in Laguna Beach , California on February 1 , 1986 to Jim , an architect , and Kathy ( née Lawrence ) .
She has two younger siblings , a sister named Breanna , also a television personality , and a brother , Brandon .
Conrad first expressed an interest in a career in the fashion industry when she was in the sixth grade .
Her father added that Conrad " was n't a great student [ and ] was n't that interested " during her childhood , although noted that " we figured out along the way that she was an artist and her real love was fashion . "
Alongside eventual castmates Lo Bosworth , Kristin Cavallari , and Stephen Colletti , Conrad was educated at Laguna Beach High School .
In 2004 , they starred in , an MTV reality television series which documented their lives during high school .
During its production , she was often referred to by the initialism " L.C. " , although she has since expressed her distaste for the nickname .
The series proved successful for the network ; she described the lifestyle it imposed on her as being " definitely a different way to grow up " .
The first season notably focused on the love triangle between Conrad , Cavallari , and Colletti , and the subsequent feud between the former two .
Upon the conclusion of the first season , Conrad appeared on an episode of MTV Cribs .
After graduating from high school in 2004 , Conrad attended the Academy of Art University in San Francisco for one semester , where she met Heidi Montag .
Conrad left the series after the second season , during which period she moved back home and transferred to the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in Los Angeles .
After her sister Breanna became a primary cast member , Conrad made a guest appearance on the series during the third season in 2006 .
2006–2009 :
THE HILLS
Section::::2006–2009 :
The Hills .
After moving to Los Angeles in May 2006 , the spin - off series The Hills was developed to chronicle the lives of Conrad , her housemate Montag , and their friends Audrina Patridge and Whitney Port .
During production of the first season , Conrad and Port held internships with Teen Vogue under the direction of West Coast Vogue editor Lisa Love ; she stated that they had to interview successfully for the positions , " regardless of what the cameras wanted " .
By the second season , their friendship had deteriorated after Montag began dating Spencer Pratt .
After Montag moved in with Pratt , Patridge and Lo Bosworth later became roommates with Conrad .
During the third season , Conrad ended her friendship with Montag after she suspected that Montag and Pratt were responsible for rumors of a sex tape involving herself and her former boyfriend Jason Wahler ; the ensuing feud carried through each subsequent season in which Conrad appeared .
Conrad briefly dated fellow castmate Brody Jenner , which she commented had been subject to " editing to drag it out " during the series .
In January 2007 , Conrad was announced as the inaugural spokeswoman of Avon Products 's " mark .
" line , marketed towards young women ; she was succeeded by actress Ashley Greene in June 2010 .
Later in 2007 , Conrad appeared as a satirical version of herself in the comedy film Epic Movie .
In 2008 , Conrad and Port began employment with Kelly Cutrone 's PR firm , People 's Revolution .
Conrad later made a cameo appearance in an episode of Greek and provided her voice for a cartoon version of herself in an episode of Family Guy .
In March , she premiered her first fashion line The Lauren Conrad Collection .
After underwhelming sales figures , Conrad ended the line the following year to further familiarize herself with the industry .
In 2008 , Conrad began dating actor Kyle Howard .
Howard expressed concern that appearing on reality television would interfere with his acting career ; consequently , their relationship was not documented on The Hills .
( After three years together , Conrad and Howard ended their relationship in 2011 . )
Upon the conclusion of the fourth season of the series that December , Conrad wished to leave the series to pursue other career opportunities .
However , per the producers ' requests , she filmed ten episodes for the following season , in which she closed her storylines .
Conrad made her final appearance on the series in May 2009 , attending Montag and Pratt 's wedding after much deliberation during the mid - season finale of the fifth season .
However , in the July 2009 issue of Cosmopolitan , she stated that producers had pressured her into a reconciliation with Montag throughout the season , adding that she was displeased when they would not allow otherwise .
Conrad was replaced by former Laguna Beach castmate Kristin Cavallari until the series ' conclusion in July 2010 .
2009–2012 :
EXPANSION INTO FASHION AND RETAIL INDUSTRIES
Section::::2009–2012 : Expansion into fashion and retail industries .
Conrad 's first novel L.A. Candy was released in June 2009 , and became a bestseller on The New York Times .
It was inspired by her life , focusing on a woman named Jane Roberts who moves to Los Angeles .
It was followed by sequels Sweet Little Lies and Sugar and Spice in 2010 .
Conrad also released the fashion guide Lauren Conrad Style in 2010 .
She later made appearances on the syndicated game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , playing for her charity " m.powerment by mark " and , and also served as a guest judge on the thirteenth cycle of America 's Next Top Model .
In fall 2009 , Conrad collaborated with Kohl 's to launch her second fashion line LC Lauren Conrad , and was later expanded to include a bedding collection .
In September 2010 , Conrad was to star in an MTV series that would have focused on her career endeavors , though the network chose not to pick up the program after Conrad preferred not to film her private life .
In April 2011 , Conrad launched The Beauty Department with her hairstylist , Kristin Ess , and her makeup artist , Amy Nadine ; she later announced plans to expand the brand to include a line of cosmetics .
Looking to target a more upscale audience , Conrad released her third fashion line Paper Crown that August ; Conrad released her fourth novel
The Fame Game as a spin - off to the L.A. Candy series in April 2012 .
she has since established an account with Nordstrom for the line .
In July , she collaborated with BlueAvocado to launch XO(eco ) , an environmentally - friendly collection of bags .
In October 2012 , Conrad released The Fame Game continuation novel Starstruck and the style guide Lauren Conrad Beauty .
The final novel of the trilogy , Infamous , was released in June 2013 .
2013–PRESENT :
MARRIAGE AND CONTINUED CAREER
Section::::2013–present : Marriage and continued career .
In September 2010 , Conrad revealed that she had filmed an alternate ending for The Hills with Jenner .
Upon the conclusion of their month - long morning marathon of the series , titled " RetroMTV Brunch " , MTV aired the footage in August 2013 .
The scene depicts Jenner returning to his apartment after seeing Cavallari 's limousine off to Europe .
Conrad is revealed to be sitting on his couch , and comforts him that " it 's hard to say goodbye " to a " friend of [ his ] " , before the camera focuses on a smiling Conrad .
That month , she also expressed interest in participating in a potential reunion film .
In December 2013 , Montag stated that she and Conrad have " talked a few times " since the series ' conclusion , elaborating that " it 's unfortunate things happened the way that it did , but we 're both different people now , older and more mature . "
Having begun dating in February 2012 , Conrad and law student and former Something Corporate guitarist William Tell , moved into a shared residence in Westwood , Los Angeles in September 2013 , and announced their engagement the following month .
That October , Conrad and her friend Hannah Skvarla opened the online store The Little Market , which distributes handmade pieces from women of varying cultural backgrounds .
Conrad and Tell got married on September 13 , 2014 in California .
On January 1 , 2017 , Conrad announced via instagram that she and Tell were expecting their first child .
Their son , William " Liam " James Tell , was born on July 5 , 2017 .
Conrad released limited - run Cinderella , Minnie Mouse , and Bambi - inspired collections for LC Lauren Conrad in February , May , and October 2015 , respectively .
She also introduced an upscale runway collection for the line during New York Fashion Week that September .
In 2017 , Conrad launched an affordable swim line at Kohl 's to expand her brand .
PUBLIC IMAGE
Section::::Public image .
Since appearing on , Conrad has been recognized as being among the first individuals to benefit from the popularity of reality television in the early to mid-2000s .
In 2009 , Thomas Rogers from Salon described her as " one of the dullest major characters in reality television history " , but opined that her normalcy compared to her co - stars on The Hills made her " vaguely likable " .
An editor from People stated that Conrad " became a full - blown TV phenom " during its third season , which notably introduced the conflict with Montag and Pratt , in addition to controversy regarding scripting allegations .
In 2013 , Misty White Sidell from The Daily Beast noted that Conrad established a following based on her respectability instead of " bitch - slaps and drunken sex - capades " , further commenting that her more relatable image made her an " anomaly " among television personalities .
Conrad herself commented that The Hills was intended to be an " aspirational " program despite being " laced with scandal and catfights " , stating that the storyline differed from the " shock value " emphasized in recent programming .
Conrad has additionally been recognized for originating several now - famous quotes on The Hills , including " He 's a sucky person ! "
when criticizing Spencer Pratt during the second season , and " You know what you did ! "
when arguing with Heidi Montag over her alleged involvement with sex tape rumors involving herself in the third season .
Conrad has been featured on the covers of several magazine 's best - selling issues , including those of People StyleWatch and Cosmopolitan .
She appeared on the May 2012 issue of Glamour , which sold approximately 500,000 copies and became the magazine 's strongest - selling issue of the year , and was featured on the covers of the second highest - selling issues of Lucky and Marie Claire in 2013 .
Lauren Sherman from Fashionista credited Conrad 's success to " her knack for entrepreneurship , her easy style , and her friendliness " .
Jim Higgins from Milwaukee Journal Sentinel complimented her pursuit of several different career endeavors , and compared her to a " young Martha Stewart " .
However , in August 2012 , Conrad was criticized for destroying a collection of A Series of Unfortunate Events novels for a crafting tutorial posted to YouTube .
During its production , Conrad was the highest - paid cast member on The Hills , earning an annual salary of $ 2.5 million .
In 2008 , her endeavors earned her an additional $ 1.5 million .
In 2010 , Conrad was named the second highest - paid reality television personality , ranking behind Kim Kardashian .
Conrad is a registered member of the Republican Party .
She has stated that she has " done several things to ... encourage people to vote " , but respects the private ballot and " [ does n't ] want to ever influence someone 's vote or have [ her ] vote change someone 's opinion of [ her ] " .
Conrad collaborated with Seventeen magazine to film a public service announcement for Declare Yourself , a campaign which encouraged young adults to register themselves to vote during the 2008 presidential election .
She has additionally expressed her support for same - sex marriage , and on one occasion left a Mexican restaurant after learning of its disapproval of marriage equality .
In 2019 , MTV will screen a revival of The Hills , calling it and Conrad 's old co - stars Heidi Montag , Spencer Pratt , Stephanie Pratt , Audrina Partridge , Justin Bobby Brescia , Brody Jenner , Jason Wahler and Whitney Port are set to return to the revival series .
A source had said Conrad declined the offer because she felt she was in a different place in life with raising her son , Liam , and working on her line for Khol 's .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
"
Notes !
colspan="4 "
Television !
colspan="4
" Film PUBLISHED WORKS
* L.A. Candy ( 2009 )
*
Sweet Little Lies ( 2010 )
* Sugar and Spice ( 2010 )
* Lauren Conrad Style ( 2010 )
*
The Fame Game ( 2012 )
* Lauren Conrad Beauty ( 2012 )
* Starstruck ( 2012 )
* Infamous ( 2013 )
* Lauren Conrad Celebrate ( 2016 ) AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Series !
Result !
Ref .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS