FREEPOST Freepost is a postal service provided by various postal administrations , whereby a person sends mail without affixing postage , and the recipient pays the postage when collecting the mail .
Freepost differs from self - addressed stamped envelopes , courtesy reply mail , and metered reply mail in that the recipient of the freepost pays only for those items that are actually received , rather than for all that are distributed .
USES Section::::Uses .
In one typical use of freepost , a business sends bulk mail to potential customers , the bulk mail including envelopes or postcards that potential customers can return to the business by freepost .
In another typical use , magazines include subscription cards that potential subscribers can return by freepost .
In yet another typical use , a seller can provide a merchandise return label bearing the appropriate freepost indicia ( as described below ) to a customer so that the customer can return the item to the seller by freepost upon issuance of a Return Merchandise Authorization .
A non - commercial usecase would be to return lost items belonging to some business : the item will have printed on the back " if found please return by freepost to " .
For example , UK 's NHS worker 's RFID access cards can be returned by freepost if lost & found .
BY
COUNTRY
AUSTRALIA Section::::By country .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , freepost is called Reply Paid .
Specially printed envelopes are used , with the permit holder 's address , the words " Reply Paid " with an authorization number .
The stamp is replaced by three black stripes .
The permit holder pays the postage plus a fee to the postal authority .
The customer may write the Reply Paid envelope out by hand .
An important customer like the Taxation Office would have an RP number the same as the post code , to minimize errors even more .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
To coordinate service with the United States , Canada Post uses the same terminology and the same standards as the USPS ( as explained below ) , with the exception of the use of Canadian Postal codes .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , the United States Postal Service refers to freepost as business reply mail .
A mailer wishing to receive mail by freepost must obtain a business reply permit and design the envelopes , postcards , or labels according to the standards specified by the USPS , including the use of an appropriate FIM B or C code .
The address on the envelope , postcard , or label is the same as the address for regular mail , except that the ZIP+4 code is different .
In some large cities , business reply mail has its own five - digit ZIP code or codes ( e.g. , 20077 and 20078 in Washington , D.C. ) .
The envelope or postcard also includes space for the business reply permit number .
UNITED KINGDOM AND NEW ZEALAND Section::::United Kingdom and New Zealand .
In the UK and NZ , freepost envelopes can be hand addressed by the sender ; this simply requires including the word ' FREEPOST ' and the recipient 's permit number as part of the address .
( This technique can not be used to send mail to merely anyone , who would then have to pay for it ; the permit number and the recipient address must match for the recipient to be billed . )
THE NETHERLANDS Section::::The Netherlands .
In the Netherlands , freepost is addressed exactly the same as normal mail .
The recipient needs a special address : an answering number ( antwoordnummer in Dutch ) .
The sender can distinguish these addresses because they include the word ' antwoordnummer ' and may choose whether or not to use a stamp .
When no stamp is used , the recipient pays the costs plus a fee , but when the sender uses a stamp , no extra costs are made .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
In Finland , there are two types of freepost .
In the first one , that is used on order that company has sent and customer wants to return it ( for example , an order from an e - commerce store ) , the customer can use the same envelope the company sent and simply write ' PALAUTUS ' or ' ASIAKASPALAUTUS ' ( ' RETURN ' or ' CUSTOMER RETURN ' in English ) .
The company must have a contract with the Finnish postal service Itella .
The other option is to use following form : Where ' tunnus ' means ' code ' and ' vastauslähetys ' means ' return delivery ' .
Postal code is always same for these deliveries .
There is usually some text indicating that postage is paid on the upper - right corner .
( where stamp would be located )
Companies can , however design this text , or image , themselves to match the company logo instead of using the standard one .
The company must also have contract with Itella .
The address may be handwritten by the customer .
MORE GENERALLY Section::::More generally .
Other countries use freepost as well , although the envelope designs required by those countries ' postal authorities differ widely from that described above .
A freepost address may have a special freepost number for use along with , or instead of , the address for regular mail .
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS REPLY SERVICE ( IBRS ) Section::::International Business Reply Service ( IBRS ) .
International freepost also exists and is known variously as ' International Business Reply Service ' , ' International Business Reply Mail ' , ' International Business Response Service ' , ' IBRS ' and , in French , " Correspondance Commerciale - Réponse Internationale " ( CCRI ) .
Like USPS business reply mail , international business reply mail must conform to certain format requirements , including the prominent notice " REPONSE PAYEE " ( French for " reply paid " ) , and a number indicating the account that will pay for the postage .
International Business Reply Service is a convenient way for international customers to reply to the sender with pre - paid cards and envelopes , at no cost to them .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Information on reply paid from Australia Post
* Information on business reply mail from the USPS
* Return and Reply Mail
( Mailpiece Quality Control Program , chapter 9 ) , a USPS document showing the design of business reply mail in the United States