RYE BREAD
Rye bread is a type of bread made with various proportions of flour from rye grain .
It can be light or dark in color , depending on the type of flour used and the addition of coloring agents , and is typically denser than bread made from wheat flour .
It is higher in fiber than white bread and is often darker in color and stronger in flavor .
Dark rye bread was considered a staple through the Middle Ages .
Many different types of rye grain have come from north - central and western and eastern Europe such as Scandinavia , Finland , Baltic countries , Poland , Ukraine , Russia , the Netherlands , Belgium , France , Czech Republic , Germany and is also a speciality in the canton of Valais in Switzerland .
Around 500 AD , the Saxons and Danes settled in Britain and introduced rye , which was well suited to its temperate climates .
BIOCHEMISTRY Section::::Biochemistry .
While rye and wheat are genetically similar enough to interbreed ( resulting in hybrids known as triticale ) , their biochemistries differ enough that they affect the breadmaking process .
The key issue is differing amylases , the enzyme which breaks starch down into sugar .
While wheat amylases are generally not heat - stable and thus do not affect stronger wheat gluten that gives wheat bread its structure , rye amylase remains active at substantially higher temperatures .
Since rye gluten ( secalin ) is not particularly strong , rye dough structure is based on complex polysaccharides , including rye starch and pentosans .
As a result , amylases in rye flour can break down dough structure , inhibiting it from rising .
There are two common solutions : The traditional manner , developed where obtaining wheat was traditionally impractical because of marginal growing conditions or supply difficulties , uses dough acidification to impede the function of rye amylases .
Lowering dough pH , however , compromises the use of relatively acid - intolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae - based " baker 's yeast " .
Instead , addition of naturally acidic Lactobacillus " sourdough " cultures lowers bread pH , facilitating growth of an acid - tolerant yeast strain , and helping gelatinize starches in the dough matrix .
The byproduct of this approach is lighter breads .
In areas where high - gluten hard wheat is readily available the need for a complex polyculture of bacteria and yeast can often be reduced or removed by adding a large proportion of hard wheat flour to the rye flour .
Its added gluten compensates for amylase activity on the starch in the dough , allowing the bread to retain its structure as it bakes .
The " deli rye " tradition in the United States is based upon this mixing of grains .
Use of high - gluten wheat flour also makes possible multigrain breads , such as the " rye and Indian " bread of the American colonies , which combined rye and wheat with cornmeal in one loaf .
Rye bread contains phenolic acids and ferulic acid dehydrodimers .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Pure rye bread contains only rye flour , without any wheat .
German - style pumpernickel , a dark , dense , and close - textured loaf , is made from crushed or ground whole rye grains , usually without wheat flour , baked for long periods at low temperature in a covered tin .
Rye and wheat flours are often used to produce a rye bread with a lighter texture , color and flavor than pumpernickel .
" Light " or " dark " rye flour can be used to make rye bread ; the flour is classified according to the amount of bran left in the flour after milling .
Caramel or molasses for coloring and caraway seeds are often added to rye bread .
In the United States , breads labeled as " rye " nearly always contain caraway unless explicitly labeled as " unseeded . "
In Canada ( especially Montreal ) , breads labeled as " rye " often have no seeds , whereas breads labeled as " kimmel " are usually rye with caraway seeds .
Some unique rye bread recipes include ground spices such as fennel , coriander , aniseed , cardamom , or citrus peel .
In addition to caramel and molasses , ingredients such as coffee , cocoa , or toasted bread crumbs are sometimes used for both color and flavor in very dark breads like pumpernickels .
The addition of caraway seeds to rye bread is to counter the bloating that can be caused by the high fiber content of rye .
Caraway has well - known anti - flatulence properties ; however , the association is so long - standing that the flavor combination is now almost inseparable .
STRAIGHT
Section::::Straight .
A simple , all - rye bread can be made using a sourdough starter and rye meal ; it will not rise as high as a wheat bread , but will be more moist with a substantially longer keeping time .
Such bread is often known as " black bread " ( Schwarzbrot in German , chyorniy khleb in Russian ) from their darker color than wheat breads ( enhanced by long baking times , creating Maillard reactions in the crumb ) .
The German Vollkornbrot ( whole - grain bread ) is something of an archetypical example , containing both rye meal and cracked whole rye grains ( which are generally soaked overnight before incorporating into the dough ) .
It is used both as an appetizer substrate for such things as smoked fish and caviar and as a sandwich bread .
A very similar , but darker , bread , German - style pumpernickel , has an even darker color derived from toasted leftover bread and other agents .
Due to the density of the bread , the yeast in the starter is used at least as much for the fermentation character in the bread itself as it is for leavening .
Danish rugbrød ( rye bread ) , another archetypical example , is typically made with sour dough , with either straight rye flour or mixed with whole and/or cracked rye kernels .
Any breads containing wheat flour are not considered rugbrød , but white bread .
A variety of seeds , such as pumpkin , poppy and caraway , may be added for taste .
Rugbrød is a staple lunch food , typically eaten topped with cold or warm fish and meats , cheese or any other cold cut .
As stated above , all - rye breads may have very long keeping times , measured in months rather than days , and are popular as storage rations for long boat trips and outdoors expeditions .
Such breads are usually sliced very thin because of their density , sometimes only a few millimeters thick , and are sometimes sold sliced in this manner .
MULTIGRAIN Section::::Multigrain .
It is fairly common to combine rye with other grains and seeds .
In southern Germany and Switzerland , for example , it is not uncommon to find a variant of Vollkornbrot with sunflower seeds instead of the rye seeds , and some traditional recipes also substitute whole wheat grains for the rye grains .
In the colonial era in North America , particularly in the United States , it became common to mix rye and cornmeal in what was known as " rye and Indian " or , if wheat flour was added , " thirded " bread ; the resulting bread , though less dense than a whole - rye bread , was still heavier than the more expensive wheat - only breads that later became commonplace .
In medieval Europe , a mixed rye and wheat bread known as " maslin " ( or variants of the name ) was the bread of the better - off peasants for hundreds of years , in contrast to the white manchet bread eaten by the rich , and the horsebread eaten by the poorer peasants , which was made of cheaper grains including oats , barley and pulses .
Wheat - rye breads , particularly light rye ( sissel ) and American pumpernickel , but also a combination known as " marble rye " , are very closely associated with Jewish - American cuisine , particularly the delicatessen .
The bulk of the flour is white wheat flour ( often a less - refined form known as " first clear " ) , with a substantial portion of rye mixed in for color and flavor .
The dough is often , but not necessarily , leavened , in whole or in part , with sourdough , but sometimes uses a small addition of citric acid or vinegar to achieve the lowered pH needed to neutralize the rye amylases ; so - called " Jewish rye " is further seasoned with whole caraway seeds and glazed with an egg wash , and is traditionally associated with salted meats such as corned beef , pastrami , and ( outside kosher circles ) ham .
High - gluten wheat flour can be used with rye flour to make a dough suitable for bagels , as well .
Jewish - style American rye bread is sometimes referred to as " corn rye " ; the term comes from the use of cornmeal as a coating and handling aid and does not necessarily imply the use of cornmeal within the dough itself as in rye and Indian .
The Jewish - American variety has Eastern European antecedents , including Russian - style brown bread , Polish - style rye bread and Riga - style rye bread .
In Scandinavia , similar breads are made , some of which ( in Swedish , called limpa ) also include sweeteners and/or citrus peel , as well as spices such as anise , fennel or cardamom , sometimes reserved for festive occasions .
In Canada , Winnipeg - style rye bread does not actually contain much , if any , rye flour .
Instead , this Jewish- and Slavic - influenced bread is made from cracked rye or coarse rye meal , added to wheat flour .
Winnipeg - style rye bread does not contain caraway seeds .
FLATBREADS
Section::::Flatbreads .
There are three different types of rye crisp bread :
yeast fermented , sourdough fermented and cold bread crisp bread .
Most of the crisp bread produced in Scandinavia is baked following three to four hours of fermentation .
Sourdough crisp breads are used in Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Germany and India .
The third type of crisp bread is the so - called cold bread crisp bread , essentially a type of hardtack ( known in Sweden particularly as knäckebröd and in Finland as näkkileipä ) , which is baked without the addition of any leavening .
The dough gets the right texture from a foaming process , where air is incorporated into the cooled dough , which also leads to the sometimes - almost - white color of the finished bread , although not all types are light in color .
Crisp bread owes its long shelf life to its very low water content ( 5–7 % ) .
One of the largest producers of rye flatbreads , and one of the most prominent in overseas markets , is the Swedish - founded company Wasabröd .
QUICK BREADS Section::::Quick breads .
Rye flour is sometimes used in chemically leavened quick bread recipes as well , either batter - type or dough - type ( similar to Irish soda bread ) .
In such cases , it can be used in similar applications as whole wheat flour , since an egg matrix often provides the bread structure rather than the grain 's gluten .
HEALTH BENEFITS
Section::::Health benefits .
Rye bread contains a large amount of fiber and a small amount of fat .
Compared to some breads such as white bread , rye bread has a lower glycemic index , which means it causes a slower increase in blood sugar than white bread after being eaten .
Nonetheless , it consists mostly of carbohydrates , making its glycemic load high .
SEE ALSO
* Ruisleipä
* Borodinsky
bread * Ryvita REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS