TRAVELING ( BASKETBALL )
In basketball , traveling is a violation of the rules that occurs when a player holding the ball moves one or both of their feet illegally .
Traveling is also called , predominantly in a streetball game , " walking " or " steps " .
When a player has taken three or more steps without the ball being dribbled , a traveling violation is called .
A travel can also be called via carrying or an unestablished pivot foot .
If the pivot foot of a player changes or moves , it is considered a travel and the ball handler will be penalized .
The only times traveling is acceptable is during the NBA Slam Dunk Contest , which is n't a game , or if the defender fouls the ball carrier .
In the latter case , the ball carrier retains possession of the ball and the opposing team gains a foul .
IN BASKETBALL DEFINITIONS NCAA Section::::In basketball .
Section::::Definitions .
Section::::NCAA . Section 72 .
Traveling Art . 1 .
A player who catches the ball with both feet on the playing court may pivot , using either foot .
Art .
2 .
A player who catches the ball while moving or dribbling may stop and establish a pivot foot as follows : Art .
3 .
After coming to a stop and establishing the pivot foot : Art .
4 .
After coming to a stop when neither foot can be the pivot foot : Art .
5 .
It is traveling when a player falls to the playing court while holding the ball without maintaining a pivot foot .
NFHS ( NATIONAL FEDERATION OF STATE HIGH SCHOOL ASSOCIATIONS )
Section::::NFHS ( National Federation of State High School Associations ) .
The NFHS traveling rule is almost identical to the NCAA rule , with an additional article clarifying restrictions regarding a player holding the ball while on the floor .
NBA Section::::NBA .
Rule 10 , Section XIII —
Traveling
a. A player who receives the ball while standing still may pivot , using either foot as the pivot foot .
b. A player who receives the ball while he is progressing or upon completion of a dribble , may take two steps in coming to a stop , passing or shooting the ball .
A player who receives the ball while he is progressing must release the ball to start his dribble before his second step .
The first step occurs when a foot , or both feet , touch the floor after gaining control of the ball .
The second step occurs after the first step when the other foot touches the floor , or both feet touch the floor simultaneously .
A player who comes to a stop on step one when both feet are on the floor or touch the floor simultaneously may pivot using either foot as his pivot .
If he jumps with both feet he must release the ball before either foot touches the floor .
A player who lands with one foot first may only pivot using that foot .
A progressing player who jumps off one foot on the first step may land with both feet simultaneously for the second step .
In this situation , the player may not pivot with either foot and if one or both feet leave the floor the ball must be released before either returns to the floor .
c.
In starting a dribble after ( 1 ) receiving the ball while standing still , or ( 2 ) coming to a legal stop , the ball must be out of the player 's hand before the pivot foot is raised off the floor .
d.
If a player , with the ball in his possession , raises his pivot foot off the floor , he must pass or shoot before his pivot foot returns to the floor .
If he drops the ball while in the air , he may not be the first to touch the ball .
e. A player who falls to the floor while holding the ball , or while coming to a stop , may not gain an advantage by sliding .
f. A player who attempts a field goal may not be the first to touch the ball if it fails to touch the backboard , basket ring or another player .
g. A player is not allowed be the first to touch his own pass unless the ball touches his backboard , basket ring or another player .
h. Upon ending his dribble or gaining control of the ball , a player may not touch the floor consecutively with the same foot ( hop ) .
FIBA
Section::::FIBA .
Article 25 of the FIBA Official Basketball Rules 2014 : 25.1 Definition 25.1.1 .
Traveling is the illegal movement of one foot or both feet beyond the limits outlined in this article , in any direction , while holding a live ball on the playing court .
25.1.2 .
A pivot is the legal movement in which a player who is holding a live ball on the playing court steps once or more than once in any direction with the same foot , while the other foot , called the pivot foot , is kept at its point of contact with the floor .
25.2 .
Rule 25.2.1 .
Establishing a pivot foot by a player who catches a live ball on the playing court :
* While standing with both feet on the floor : * The moment one foot is lifted , the other foot becomes the pivot foot .
*
While moving : * If one foot is touching the floor , that foot becomes the pivot foot .
* If both feet are off the floor and the player lands on both feet simultaneously , the moment one foot is lifted , the other foot becomes the pivot foot .
* If both feet are off the floor and the player lands on one foot , then that foot becomes the pivot foot .
If a player jumps off that foot and comes to a stop landing on both feet simultaneously , then neither foot is a pivot foot .
25.2.2 .
Progressing with the ball by a player who has established a pivot foot while having control of a live ball on the playing court :
* While standing with both feet on the floor : * To start a dribble , the pivot foot may not be lifted before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
* To pass or shoot for a field goal , the player may jump off a pivot foot , but neither foot may be returned to the floor before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
*
While moving : * To pass or shoot for a field goal , the player may jump off a pivot foot and land on one foot or both feet simultaneously .
After that , one foot or both feet may be lifted from the floor but neither foot may be returned to the floor before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
*
To start a dribble , the pivot foot may not be lifted before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
*
While coming to a stop when neither foot is the pivot foot :
* To start a dribble , neither foot may be lifted before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
* To pass or shoot for a field goal , one foot or both feet may be lifted but may not be returned to the floor before the ball is released from the hand(s ) .
25.2.3 .
A player falling , lying or sitting on the floor :
*
It is legal when a player falls and slides on the floor while holding the ball or , while lying or sitting on the floor , gains control of the ball .
*
It is a violation if the player then rolls or attempts to stand up while holding the ball .
PENALTY Section::::Penalty .
The ball becomes dead and a throw - in is awarded to the opposing team out of bounds nearest the point where the violation took place under NCAA and NFHS rules .
Under NBA rules , the ball is awarded to the opposing team at the nearest spot but no closer to the baseline than the free throw line extended .
EXAMPLE
*
Any action where the pivot foot is lifted and returned to the floor , or dragged along the floor .
* Lifting the pivot foot , taking multiple steps , or shuffling the feet before starting a dribble .
See example videos .
*
While holding the ball , jumping and returning to the floor without releasing the ball .
* NCAA and NFHS
only : Falling to the floor while holding the ball , even if it was caught while airborne .
CLARIFICATIONS
*
It is impossible to travel while dribbling .
The height of the dribble or number of steps taken per dribble is irrelevant .
*
It is impossible to travel during a throw - in .
While there are space restrictions for a throw - in , the thrower is not required to maintain a pivot foot or observe any of the other restrictions of the traveling rule .
A referee who signals traveling on a throw - in violation is in error .
* A player must have control of the ball to travel .
For instance , a player who bobbles a pass may well take several steps legally — the traveling rule is not in effect until he has secured control of the ball .
* A player who dives and catches a loose ball on the floor may legally slide as far as his momentum carries him .
This is not a travel .
However , once he stops he may not roll over or attempt to stand .
* Lifting the pivot foot alone does not constitute a travel ; a player may pass , shoot , or request a timeout in that position .
It is a travel once the foot is returned to the floor , or if a dribble is started .
*
In the NBA , a player who attempts a field goal may not be the first to touch the ball if it fails to touch the backboard , basket ring or another player .
In college ( NCAA ) rules , there is no longer possession or team control once the ball is in flight for a shot attempt .
It is up to the referee 's discretion as to whether or not a legitimate field goal attempt was made .
In high school ( NFHS ) rules being the first to touch the ball in one of the previously described situations is not specifically defined as a traveling violation .
Alternatively , such action is not specifically described as being legal play .
Thus , while the NBA has defined this action as traveling , and NCAA rules have language that may be interpreted as the opposite , NFHS rules do not comment on such action , leaving any ruling completely to the discretion of the official judges .
IN NETBALL Section::::In netball .
Netball rules do not permit players to let their landing foot touch the ground again if it is lifted at all while in possession of the ball , so players can take 1.5 steps while holding the ball .
Pivoting does not count as a step .
Players are entitled to balance on the other foot if the landing foot is lifted .
An infraction of this rule is usually called traveling ( or steps ) as in basketball .
IFNA Rule 14.3 states : A free pass is awarded to the opposing team where the infringement occurred .
IN KORFBALL Section::::In korfball .
In korfball , either foot can be used as pivot , no matter which foot touches the ground first .
This means that in practice , one can take 2.5 steps , e.g. landing on the right foot , putting down the left and displacing the right .
The left foot is the pivot in this case .
The left foot can then be lifted , but may not be repositioned .
SEE ALSO
* Euro step REFERENCES