HIGH COURT ENFORCEMENT OFFICER A High Court enforcement officer ( HCEO ) is an officer of the High Court of England and Wales responsible for enforcing judgements of the High Court , often by seizing goods or repossessing property .
Prior to 2004 , HCEOs were known as sheriff 's officers and were responsible for enforcing High Court writs on behalf of the high sheriff for each county , but they are now directly responsible for such writs .
HCEOs operate only in England and Wales .
High Court enforcement officers are authorised by the Lord Chancellor , and assigned to one of a number of enforcement districts .
Historically they would be assigned to the shrieval county ( roughly the historic shire ) of the corresponding high sheriff , but under the Courts Act 2003 , this connection is severed and the districts are not necessarily coterminous with the shrievalty .
The officers retain the common law powers of a sheriff , and , like the sheriff previously , can delegate this authority to others acting in their presence and on their behalf ; every constable is obliged , upon their request , to assist them in executing a writ .
Unlike a bailiff , who is an officer of a lower court , an HCEO is an officer of the High Court , and consequently has much greater power .
No notice is required to the party on which the writ is executed ; commercial premises can be broken into by the officer by any means they choose ; and once present in a property they can not be forcibly removed .
Obstructing an HCEO in the execution of a writ is considered to amount to a contempt of court , as was historically the case with sheriff 's officers .
WRITS
Section::::Writs .
The most common writ is the writ of control , known until 2014 as a writ of fieri facias .
This writ is essentially for debt collection , but it actually takes the form of an order to the officers to seize goods from the judgment debtor worth a particular amount of money ; the HCEO will attend the debtor 's premises , seize the goods , and then sell them at auction .
Once the writ is awarded , the judgment debtor can avoid the removal and sale of assets by either paying in full or agreeing a repayment plan .
If they take this action , the assets will still technically remain seized and belong to the court until the debt is fully cleared , but are normally left in situ under a walking - possession agreement .
Any proposed repayment schedule will have to be agreed by the claimant .
Should the judgment debtor subsequently default on a payment , the claimant can instruct the HCEO to attend to remove and sell the seized assets ; if the debtor disposes of the assets , they are committing contempt of court .
The debt does not need to be argued in the High Court ; provided the amount owed is at least £ 600 ( in 2014 ) , the debt did not arise in a matter covered by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 , and payment has not been made within the specified time , a County Court judgment can be transferred to the High Court for enforcement .
The High Court fee for issuing a writ of control is just £ 66 ; together with the HCEO 's fees , this £ 66 court fee is added by the writ to the amount to be recovered from the debtor .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ministry of Justice Website