LEFTY - RIGHTY SWITCH
In baseball , the lefty - righty switch is a maneuver by which a player that struggles against left- or right - handed players is replaced by a player who excels in the situation , usually only for the duration of the situation in question .
For instance , a right - handed pitcher who is weak against left - handed hitting and is facing a left - handed hitter would be replaced with a pitcher , usually left - handed , who does a superior job of getting a left - handed hitter out .
Similarly , a batter who has difficulty hitting against a left - handed pitcher will sometimes be pinch hit for by a batter who does well , even if the original player is superior in other respects .
Conventional baseball wisdom suggests that , when a pitcher and a hitter pitch or bat with the same hand , the pitcher typically has the advantage .
This especially holds true for left - handed pitchers , as lefties are less common in a major - league lineup than righties .
As a result , the most common use of the lefty - righty switch is when a right - handed pitcher is facing a left - handed batter .
The manager of the defensive team will sometimes go to the bullpen , especially in close games where a reliever has already entered the game , and pull out a left - handed specialist to face the left - handed batter .
The new pitcher will then attempt to get the batter out .
Whether he succeeds or fails , the pitcher will often be replaced after the at - bat .
The lefty - righty switch can also be used against switch hitters who are noticeably poorer from one side of the plate than the other , or in the somewhat rarer instance of a batter who does poorly against opposite - handed pitchers .
The basic principle in these cases remains the same .
It is less common , although still frequent , for a batter to be replaced to gain a handedness advantage over a pitcher .
For instance , with a left - handed pitcher in and a left - handed batter due up , a right - handed bat may be called in from the bench .
The righty may not be as strong an all - round player as the player he replaced ( thus , his absence from the everyday lineup ) , but he is a superior tactical choice for the purpose of getting on base in one at bat with a favorable matchup .
Such a batter can be pinch run for if he gets on , replaced with a better defensive player for the next half - inning , or simply left in for the duration of the game .
The two maneuvers sometimes occur in sequence .
For instance , a manager may be faced with the situation of a right - handed reliever facing a strong left - handed bat late in a close game .
In such a situation , the manager will often call for his left - handed specialist .
However , if the opposing manager has an adequate right - handed bat on his bench , he may pinch hit for the left - handed batter , thus restoring his matchup advantage .
The rules of baseball dictate that a pitcher must face at least one batter once he has entered a game , therefore the defensive manager will find himself in the unpleasant situation of having his left - handed specialist ( who likely seldom sees right - handers in game action and may struggle badly against them ) against a right - handed hitter .
The defensive manager , however , may consider this an acceptable tradeoff versus facing the original left - handed batter with his right - handed pitcher .
Starting pitchers , and sometimes long relievers , will often face batters who hit from both sides of the plate as a matter of course .
This is considered a part of their job , and the ability to retire batters from either side of the plate is an important asset for any starting pitcher .
Most starters , especially those who rely on ball movement rather than power , are still stronger throwing against one side of the plate , however , the difference is often less pronounced than that for pitchers in the bullpen .
Late in close games , when the starter is tiring and baserunners become more important , a starter may be lifted for a specialist , but a starting pitcher is very seldom replaced with a specialist without having first worked deep into a close ballgame .
Similarly , position players must accept facing both left - handed and right - handed pitching as part of their job .
Managers will usually juggle batters who are exceptionally weak against one sort of pitcher so that they only face starting pitchers who offer favorable matchups , but it is impossible to shield a batter from every instance in which he will face a pitcher who has him at a disadvantage .
As a result , a position player must be prepared at all times to face a lefty - righty switch in a situation where his team can not afford to pinch hit for him .
This tactical maneuvering has led to the statistical oddity of a pitcher pitching in a game without throwing a single pitch .
On June 29 , 2018 , the Cleveland Indians visited the Oakland Athletics .
In the bottom of the seventh inning with two outs and two runners on base , the A 's were leading 2 - 0 with left - handed hitters Dustin Fowler and Matt Joyce coming up .
Indians manager Terry Francona replaced his right - handed starter Trevor Bauer with left - handed specialist Oliver Perez .
The A 's countered by pinch - hitting Mark Canha for Fowler , whom Perez intentionally walked by holding out four fingers to the home plate umpire ( a newly implemented option for the 2018 season ) .
But this loaded the bases for Chad Pinder , who pinch - hit for Joyce .
Francona did not want Perez to face a righty and had no base to put the batter onto , so he removed Perez in favor of right - handed reliever Zach McAllister .
Perez was therefore credited with zero innings pitched , one batter faced , one walk , and zero pitches thrown .
SEE ALSO * Platoon system