MCDONALD 'S NO . 1 STORE MUSEUM
The McDonald 's # 1 Store Museum is housed in a replica of the former McDonald 's restaurant in Des Plaines , Illinois , opened by Ray Kroc in April 1955 .
The company usually refers to this as The Original McDonald 's , although it is not the first McDonald 's restaurant but the ninth ; the first was opened by Richard and Maurice McDonald in San Bernardino , California in 1940 , while the oldest McDonald 's still in operation is the third one built , in Downey , California , which opened in 1953 .
However , the Des Plaines restaurant marked the beginning of future CEO Kroc 's involvement with the firm .
It opened under the aegis of his franchising company McDonald 's Systems , Inc. , which became McDonald 's Corporation after Kroc purchased the McDonald brothers ' stake in the firm .
The actual Des Plaines restaurant was demolished in 1984 , but McDonald 's realized they had a history to preserve , so they built a replica .
With golden arches placed over a glass and metal , red - and - white tiled exterior , the building largely follows the McDonald brothers ' original blueprints , which they had introduced when they began franchising in 1953 ; a Phoenix , Arizona , restaurant was the first built in this manner .
Kroc 's restaurant was the first McDonald 's built in a colder climate , and some adaptations were made to the design , including a basement and a furnace .
McDonald 's announced that the building would be torn down as early as the end of 2017 due to repeated flooding of the site , though the Volo Auto Museum of Volo , Illinois is exploring the possibility of moving it to their location .
The entrance sign is original , with early cartoon mascot " Speedee , " representing the innovative Speedee Service System , inspired by assembly - line production which the McDonald brothers had introduced in 1948 .
It has , however , been moved from its original location at the south end of the property .
The sign boasts " We have sold over 1 million . "
The replica museum offers irregular summer hours and is often closed ; tours are by appointment .
The ground floor exhibits original fry vats , milkshake Multimixers ( which Kroc had sold when he first encountered the San Bernardino McDonald 's restaurant ) , soda barrels , and grills , attended to by a crew of male mannequins in 1950s uniforms .
Visitors can walk in through the back or look through the order windows in front ( there was no sit - down restaurant section in 1955 ) .
In the basement is a collection of vintage ads , photos , and a video about McDonald 's history .
A new , modern McDonald 's was built across the street , replacing a Howard Johnson 's restaurant ( then Ground Round ) .
At this McDonald 's there are a half dozen glass - enclosed exhibits arrayed around the tables , including red and white tiles from the original restaurant and string ties worn by employees from the 1950s to the early 1970s .
The Big Mac Museum Restaurant , another McDonald 's museum , opened on August 23 , 2007 , in Irwin , Pennsylvania , on Route 30 Lincoln Hwy .
A museum also exists at the original McDonald 's site in San Bernardino on U.S. Route 66 in California .
It is a reconstruction operated by the owner of the Juan Pollo chain and is not affiliated with McDonald 's Corporation .
SEE ALSO
* List of food and beverage museums
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* McDonald 's # 1 Store Museum * Big Mac Museum - official site * Big Mac Museum information