PICKEREL FROG
The pickerel frog ( Lithobates palustris , formerly Rana palustris ) is a small North American frog , characterized by the appearance of seemingly " hand - drawn " squares on its dorsal surface .
DISTINGUISHING FEATURES
Section::::Distinguishing features .
The pickerel frog is a medium sized gray or tan frog marked with seven to twenty - one irregular rectangular dark brown spots which are oriented in two columns down its back .
The distinctive rectangular spots of the pickerel frog may blend together to form a long rectangle along the back .
All leopard frogs have circular spots .
In addition , pickerel frogs have prominent dorsolateral ridges that are unbroken .
Another important distinguishing mark is the orange or yellow flash pattern found on the inner surface of the hind legs of pickerel frogs .
The frog must be picked up to examine this , as the legs cover the coloration otherwise .
The plains leopard frog ( Lithobates blairi ) exhibits this coloration as well , but the dorsolateral ridges are interrupted and inset medially in that species .
The front toes of pickerel frogs are not webbed , a morphological characteristic for some frogs of the genus Rana and some frogs of the genus Lithobates .
This allows pickerel frogs to be fit for terrestrial life .
SEXUAL DIMORPHISM
Section::::Sexual dimorphism .
Pickerel frogs display sexual dimorphism ; the females are typically larger and darker in color than the males .
During the summer and breeding season males can be recognized by their swollen thumbs .
Males also have internal vocal sacs located between the tympanum and the foreleg .
In general , secondary sexual characteristic are not typically evident outside of the breeding season ; therefore , pickerel frogs can be rather difficult to sex .
RANGE Section::::Range .
The pickerel frog ranges in the west from much of Wisconsin , southeast Minnesota , eastern Iowa , through Missouri and down to eastern Texas .
To the east they extend through northern Louisiana , most of Mississippi , northern Alabama , Georgia , and South Carolina to the coast .
Their northern range extends into Canada in the southern reaches of Ontario , Quebec , New Brunswick , and Nova Scotia .
The range is spotty through the midwestern states and a field guide should be obtained for the specifics on ranges in a particular area .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Pickerel frogs have varied habitats , the northern specimen prefers to live near cold , clear water .
They prefer rocky ravines , bogs and meadow streams , but can be found around lakes and rivers that are heavily wooded .
The southern specimen prefer warmer waters , like those of the Coastal Plain and floodplain swamps .
They are seen most often along the edges of streams , lakes , rivers , and even flooded ditches .
During the winter months they will hibernate under the silt and debris in their aquatic environments ; they are usually only active from April to October .
BREEDING HABITAT
Section::::Breeding habitat .
Pickerel frogs prefer cool clear water .
They breed in both temporary ponds and permanent ponds but appear to favor ponds with long to permanent hydroperiods .
In Rhode Island specifically , pickerel frog tadpoles and eggmasses were found in permanent manmade rural ponds , farm ponds , and urban ponds surrounded by roads ; all of the mentioned habitats were well - vegetated .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Pickerel frogs typically emerge from hibernation around mid April with the majority of the frogs arriving at breeding ponds by early May.
At the ponds , pickerel frogs are usually observed in large groups in the water .
Mating behavior is not much different from other ranids .
The males initiate breeding by emitting their low pitched call ; this call is usually so low pitched that it is often not heard during calling surveys .
Males are known to call while submerged .
Frogs reproduce using a method called Amplexus , a type of external fertilization ; sometimes it will last more than a day or two , even after the female has deposited the eggs .
EGG MASS Section::::Egg mass .
Egg masses are typically laid in well - vegetated areas and are often difficult to locate .
The masses superficially resemble those of wood frogs but at close inspection one can usually distinguish between the two .
Pickerel frog egg masses are spherical and about the same size of a wood frog egg mass roughly 5–10 cm in diameter ; however , pickerel frog egg masses contain more eggs , about 2000 - 3000 eggs .
Pickerel frog eggs are multicolored , they are dark brown on top and cream colored on the bottom .
The egg masses adhere to woody or herbaceous vegetation , varying in depth from a few centimeters below the surface to 4 feet deep .
Like most amphibious eggs development is temperature dependent , but pickerel frog eggs usually hatch in 11–21 days .
LARVAE Section::::Larvae .
The tadpole stage lasts roughly 3 months .
Small pickerel tadpoles are yellowish to yellowish brown in color ; as they grow their color changes to an olive green , which eventually changes to gray brown on top and cream colored underneath .
Larger tadpole are often mistaken as green frogs .
There are a few characteristics to aid in distinguishing between pickerel and green tadpoles .
The nose of the pickerel frog tadpole is more pointed , the eyes are closer together , and the nostrils are closer to the edge of the nose .
METAMORPHS Section::::Metamorphs .
This is the stage where frogs have all four limbs and are able to walk on land , but still have their tails .
They are not quite juvenile frogs .
Metamorphs are roughly 2.6 cm long , but they are nearly as agile as the adult and juvenile when they emerge from the ponds .
They are often mistaken for the closely related leopard frog .
DIET Section::::Diet .
The pickerel frog 's diet consists of ants , spiders , various bugs , beetles , sawfly larvae , and other invertebrates .
In order to catch their prey pickerel frogs will often search grassy areas next to bodies of water .
DEFENSE MECHANISM Section::::Defense mechanism .
In case of attack , pickerel frogs have an excellent defense mechanism : they emit skin secretions which are irritating to people and toxic to some predators ; making the pickerel frog the only poisonous frog native to the United States .
Due to its poison , most mammals , birds , snakes and other frogs will leave the pickerel frog alone .
The skin secretions of a stressed pickerel frog are known to be toxic to other frogs , as many a novice frog catcher has found when he finds only the pickerel frog still alive in his bucket .
These secretions can also be moderately irritating if they come in contact with the eyes , mucous membranes , or broken skin .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
The pickerel frog 's poisonous secretions can not stop all creatures ; green frogs , bull frogs , northern water snakes , eastern ribbon snakes , and common garter snakes are their usual predators .
When threatened , pickerel frogs will jump into the water and dive to the bottom to escape predators like birds and snakes .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Arnold , K. ( 2000 ) .
Lithobates palustris Pickerel Frog ( On - line ) , Animal Diversity Web .
Accessed August 29 , 2014 .
* Leconte , John .
( 1825 ) .
" Remarks on the American species of the genera Hyla and Rana " .
Ann .
Lyceum .
Nat .
Hist .
New - York [ sic ]
1 : 278 - 282 .
( Rana palustris , new species , p. 282 ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Comparison of pickerel frog vs. leopard frog species
* Species information from the USGS .
* Very detailed biology of the pickerel frog on The Frogs & Toads of Georgia .
* Pickerel Frog , Natural Resources Canada