CRUEL INTENTIONS 2 Cruel Intentions 2 ( also known as Cruel Intentions 2 : Manchester Prep or simply as Manchester Prep ) is the 2001 American comedy - drama film .
It was written and directed by Roger Kumble and starring Robin Dunne , Sarah Thompson , Keri Lynn Pratt and Amy Adams .
It is a prequel to Cruel Intentions ( 1999 ) and was released direct - to - video on March 13 , 2001 .
Both films are based on Les Liaisons dangereuses by Choderlos de Laclos .
Originally planned as a television series called Manchester Prep , a re - imagined prequel series to the first film , it was picked up by Fox , however , it was cancelled prior to broadcast in September 1999 .
Due to the cancellation , the three completed episodes were edited together into film re - titled Cruel Intentions 2 , sexual content scenes involving nudity were added for the DVD release .
This film is about how Sebastian Valmont and Kathryn Merteuil met and how they started their reign of terror .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Troublemaker student Sebastian Valmont ( Robin Dunne ) is transferring to Manchester Prep following his father 's new marriage to a wealthy divorcee .
His current principal is insistent on having Sebastian 's permanent record relayed to his new school , thereby hampering his chance for a fresh start , but Sebastian already retaliated by pulling a cruel stunt on his wife .
Following his arrival in New York , Sebastian discovers the wealth of his new family and first meets his deceitful and determined step - sister Kathryn Merteuil ( Amy Adams ) .
Sebastian quickly proves to be able to better her both at piano and vocabulary .
This leads to a confrontation between Kathryn and Sebastian whereby she states that she has a comfortable lifestyle and that he " better not interfere " .
Sebastian begins school .
While waiting to see his new headmaster , he encounters Danielle Sherman ( Sarah Thompson ) , who is , unbeknownst to him , Headmaster Sherman 's daughter .
Luckily , Sebastian swapped his permanent record for an excelling one before it was sent to the headmaster 's office , and he can now start over with a clean slate .
A school assembly follows , showing Kathryn delivering a speech to her classmates , but being persistently interrupted by uncontrollable hiccups coming from a student , who then begins to choke on the gum that she was chewing in a bid to stop her hiccups .
She is saved by the quick action of Danielle who performs the Heimlich maneuver , allowing the student to expel the gum , which ends up flying into Kathryn 's hair .
A meeting of a secret society of student elites presided by Kathryn takes place , deciding upon the fate of the new students .
This leads them to Cherie , the student with the hiccups , as well as the discovery that Cherie 's family is wealthier than that of Kathryn ; this , along with the events of the assembly , causes Kathryn to seek a vendetta against Cherie .
Sebastian , coming from a more humble upbringing , wishes to befriend his house staff .
Doing so angers
Kathryn , whose day is interrupted by not being able to contact her driver .
This , combined with Kathryn 's jealousy of Sebastian , causes her to admit that she is unhappy with her life .
Sebastian attempts to woo Danielle : first , asking her for coffee at her work ; then later , conversing with her over the telephone .
Eventually , this evolves into a relationship , but Kathryn , seeing this , uses it as a way to get back at Sebastian .
She tries to lure him away from Danielle by tempting him with identical twins , who confide to Sebastian that Danielle is the only virgin at Manchester .
Kathryn 's attempt to sabotage Cherie backfires , as Kathryn 's mother tells her to become best friends with Cherie , in an attempt to encourage Cherie 's mother to donate a large amount of money to the school .
In the end , Sebastian stays with Danielle ; he professes his love for her , only to find that she does not reciprocate .
It turns out that Danielle is actually working alongside Kathryn in a secret plan to dupe Sebastian .
Defeated by Kathryn 's manipulation , Sebastian states " if you ca n't beat them , join them " , thus leading to a threesome with Danielle and Kathryn , followed by an alliance of the three to dominate and manipulate others .
In the last scene , Cherie is seen riding her bike , which is run over by Sebastian 's car .
Sebastian offers to give her a ride , and has sex with her .
Kathryn and Danielle are seen , in the front of the car , pleased with the results .
CAST * Robin Dunne as Sebastian Valmont
* Sarah Thompson as Danielle Sherman * Keri Lynn Pratt as Cherie Claymon
* Amy Adams as Kathryn Merteuil * Barry Flatman as Headmaster Sherman * Mimi Rogers as Tiffany Merteuil * Teresa Hill as Lilly
* Barclay Hope as Mr. Felder * Tane McClure as Bunny Claymon
* David McIlwraith as Edward Valmont * Jonathan Potts as Assistant Headmaster Steve Muller
* Caley Wilson as Blaine Tuttle
* Deanna Wright as Penny Cartwright
* Clement von Franckenstein as Henry * Shuko Akune as Min Lin * Andrew Kraulis as Court Reynolds * Jeannette Sousa as Saleswoman * Annie Sorell as Gretchen
* Alicia Lorén as Sarah
* William Lasselle as Teacher
* Janaya Stephens as Cab Driver SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
In the film credits , Edward Shearmur 's music from Cruel Intentions and Stephen Endelman 's music from Jawbreaker are listed as being used in the film .
Other songs used in the film include : * Thin Lizard Dawn - Weed
* Thin Lizard Dawn -
" Under the Wing " * Jessica Theely - " In Good Time " * The Julie Band - " Bad Day " * Cupcakes - " Blood Thirsty " * Treble Charger - " Left Feeling
Odd " * Gearwhore - " Passion " * Jessica Sheely
- " No Regrets " * Bernie Barlow - " I Wanna Know Where Nowhere Is " * Thin Lizard Dawn -
" Turn Yourself In " * Michael Greenspan -
" I Want You " * Lorna Vallings - " Taste " *
Shelly O'Neil - " Best Friend " * Shelly Peiken -
" Good to Me " * Shelly O'Neil -
" Make It Happen " * The Julie Band - " Julie Goes Home Now
" * Jessica Sheely - " Feel Something " * The Smithereens - " All Revved Up " * The Smithereens - " The Last Good Time " SEE ALSO
* List of television series canceled before airing an episode
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS