SOUP BEANS Soup beans is a term common in the Southern United States , particularly the regions around the Appalachian Mountains .
Soup beans are usually served with cornbread , greens ( such as boiled cabbage , cauliflower , or sauerkraut and sausage ) , and potatoes ( stewed or fried ) and may be topped with raw chopped onions or ramps ( Allium tricoccum ) .
Soup beans are considered a main course , but also serve as a side dish .
In rural areas , where food was scarce during the winter , these dried beans were a staple food .
TYPES OF SOUP BEANS Section::::Types of soup beans .
While soup beans are traditionally pinto beans ( called brown beans in the mountain region ) , other types of beans are also used .
* White beans — Great northern beans and Navy beans are often used to make a soup bean dish .
This became more common as residents of rural areas began to rely more on store - bought beans and could afford more variety .
This dish is typically referred to as " white beans " although it is occasionally called soup beans .
Along with the beans , white beans are typically cooked in the juice of a country ham , often with the ham bone or ham included in the dish .
As such , this dish is a prized part of holiday meals , when hams are baked .
White beans are sometimes cooked with pork fat like brown soup beans , although this is less common .
White beans carried an air of sophistication because they were first available in towns to people who could afford more than one type of bean and ham , as opposed to poorer rural people who often raised only brown beans .
* Butter beans — butter beans are used to make the soup bean dish called butter beans .
These dried limas are cooked with smoked pork and/or ham until the sauce starts to thicken , hence the name " butter " beans .
Like white beans , butter beans represented prosperity and were often prized dishes when served .
Butter beans only refers to dried limas .
Fresh or canned limas are called " lima beans " .
* Black - eyed peas — While these peas are almost never referred to as " soup beans " , the preparation in the Appalachian region is almost identical .
Black - eyed peas , sometimes called blackeye peas , are most common where Appalachian culture intersects with lowland soul - food and coastal food cultures .
Like Hoppin ' John , black - eyed peas became common as a dish served on New Year 's Day .
However , since rice was not a part of mountain culture , the peas were cooked with pork ( usually hog jowls ) like soup beans and served with stewed tomatoes and collard greens .
This dish becomes less common as one moves into more isolated mountain communities .
SERVICE Section::::Service .
While soup beans might be served with any meal , they were typically the main course in a meatless supper .
Traditionally , soup beans would be served with other home grown vegetables and homemade breads :
* Corn bread — Prior to the availability of milled flour , thin , crispy fried yellow cornbread cakes called hoecakes or baked cornbread are sometimes served with a soup - bean supper .
Often the beans are served atop a bed of crumbled cornbread , or cornbread may be crumbled into a bowl of beans , almost like adding crackers to chili .
* Potatoes — Irish white potatoes were typically served , especially during the winter months , boiled , mashed or fried ( boiled then pan fried ) .
In lowland areas , sweet potatoes are commonly served .
* Greens — Most commonly collard or turnip greens in the cold - weather months , prepared by slow cooking the greens with smoked pork or bacon grease .
In the spring - time , kilt greens are available for preparation and service .
Kil't greens are made by boiling tender garden lettuces and the nascent leaves of wild local plants , dressed with a hot bacon and onion vinaigrette , and served hot .
* Ramps or onions — Strong native onions called ramps were often served raw .
They were often cut up onto the beans as seasonings other than salt and local herbs were not consistently available .
Ramps are sometimes replaced by cultivated onions .
* Chow - chow - a relish - like condiment similar to British piccalilli , chow chow could be preserved and served with beans year - round .
Modern additions :
Modern supermarkets and processed foods have led to two additions to soup bean suppers which are not traditional .
* Salmon croquettes — The availability of canned salmon led to salmon croquettes or salmon patties being included with soup beans .
The tastes are complementary and salmon , like any purchased meat , would be considered a luxury and not cooked in large quantities .
* Sauerkraut and sausage ( also known as sauerkraut and weenies or mountain choucroute garnie ) —
Frankfurters and/or smoked sausage are sliced and pan - fried with sauerkraut for this common soup bean dinner dish .
* Macaroni and tomatoes — Macaroni and tomatoes is a common mountain - region side dish .
Although there are many variations , the dish typically consists of cooked macaroni and canned tomatoes .
* Macaroni and cheese —
In the latter part of the 20th century , supermarkets in mountain towns made processed cheese and pasta available , as well as boxed dinners .
Macaroni and cheese was inexpensive and easy to add to a soup bean meal .
SEE ALSO
* List of bean soups * List of legume dishes REFERENCES