TRANSFER WINDOW
The transfer window is the period during the year in which a football club can transfer players from other playing staff into their playing staff .
Such a transfer is completed by registering the player into the new club through FIFA .
" Transfer window " is the unofficial term commonly used by the media for the concept of " registration period " as described in the FIFA Regulations on the Status and Transfer of Player .
According to the rules , each national football association decides on the time ( such as the dates ) of the ' window ' but it may not exceed 12 weeks .
The second registration period occurs during the season and may not exceed four weeks .
The transfer window of a given football association governs only international transfers into that football association .
International transfers out of an association are always possible to those associations that have an open window .
The transfer window of the association that the player is leaving does not have to be open .
The window was introduced in response to negotiations with the European Commission .
The system has been used in many European leagues before being brought into compulsory effect by FIFA during the 2002–03 season .
English football was initially behind the plans when they were proposed in the early 1990s , in the hope that it would improve teams ' stability and prevent agents from searching for deals all year around , but by the time it was eventually introduced they had to be persuaded that it would work .
However , the exact regulations and possible exceptions are established by each competition 's governing body rather than by the national football association .
CURRENT SCHEDULES AND EXCEPTIONS Section::::Current schedules and exceptions .
FIFA regulates in general that there shall be two windows , a longer one ( max .
twelve weeks )
in the break between seasons and a shorter one ( max . one month )
in the middle of a season .
The specific periods depend on the league 's season cycle and are determined by the national football authorities .
Most major European leagues commence in the second half of the year ( e.g. August or September ) and stretch over two calendar years to the first half of the next year ( e.g. May ) , resulting in a close season window in the Summer ending in August , and a mid - season window in January .
The periods are different when a league runs throughout a single calendar year , as in most Nordic countries due to weather constraints , Major League Soccer due to both weather and competition from other locally popular sports ( notably basketball and American football ) , or as the traditional season in the Southern Hemisphere .
The first window generally opens from 1 March until midnight of 30 April , followed by the in - season window from 1 to 31 August . !
Pre - season window !
Mid - season window !
Associations Premier League clubs in England voted to end the summer window on the Thursday before the start of the season - on August 9 in 2018 , instead of August 31 .
Because FIFA demands the window must be open for 12 weeks , the window will open around May 17 , shortly after the final games of the season on May 13 .
Clubs will be able to sell players until August 31 but not buy replacements after the deadline of August 9 .
Although , in England , transfers between clubs in the same league can take place as soon as the last competitive fixtures for the season have been played , many transfers will not be completed until 1 July because many players ' contracts expire on 30 June .
International transfers into the English leagues ( including the Premier League ) can not be made until the window has opened on
17 May. Outside the transfer window , a club may still sign players on an emergency basis , usually if they have no goalkeeper available .
Special dispensation from their competition 's governing body , for example the Premier League , is required .
The transfer window restriction does not apply to clubs in or below the National League division .
If the last day of a transfer window is on a weekend , the deadline can be extended to the following Monday at the request of those involved for business reasons .
The first shift of the deadline since its inception took place in summer 2008 , when the deadline was extended by 24 hours to fall on Monday 1 September at midnight .
The transfer deadline in England was similarly extended to 5 pm 1 September 2009 , due to the August Bank Holiday .
The German football league announced an extension of the January 2009 deadline to 2 February .
Free agents can be signed by a club at any time during the season , if they had been released by their previous club before the end of the transfer window .
A club can request to sign a player on emergency basis , e.g. if several goalkeepers are injured at the same time .
Outside the transfer window in England , once seven days have passed following the end of a transfer window , clubs from the English Football League ( Regulation 53.3.4 ) and ( provided the player is not registered with a club from any league below the National League division ) National League division ( Rule 6.6.4 )
can loan in players i ) in the first half of the season , until 5.00pm on the fourth Thursday in November and ii ) in the second half of the season , until 5.00pm on the fourth Thursday in March .
An existing loan deal can be made permanent at any time outside the transfer window .
The day upon which a window closes is known as transfer deadline day , and is usually one of the busiest days of the window , generating a flurry of transfers , often because a number of interdependent transfers are completed resembling a housing chain , generating much media interest .
CALLS TO END THE TRANSFER WINDOW Section::::Calls to end the transfer window .
Steve Coppell , former manager of Reading in England 's Premier League , and others have called for the transfer window to be scrapped in favour of the previous system , where deals could be struck throughout the season until the closing weeks .
Coppell said that the transfer window breeds panic and encourages " scurrilous " transfer activity adding that " I can not see the logic in a transfer window .
It brings on a fire - sale mentality , causes unrest via the media and means clubs buy too many players " adding that " The old system , where if you had a problem you could look at loans or make a short - term purchase , was far better than this system we have at the moment " .
Former England Manager Sven - Göran Eriksson has also questioned the value of the transfer window , commenting : " You do wonder at times if it is right to have a window , it was easier when it was open all the time and perhaps fairer for the players .
I am sure much of the business being done on the last day is a little bit desperate and that is not right .
I think it was better before , but then I am old " .
In January 2013 Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger asked for the January transfer window to be limited to two transfers per window and claimed it is " unfair " in its current form .
He cited Newcastle United transfer activity as an example .
The following year , Wenger hit out at Manchester United 's £ 37 m purchase of Juan Mata from rivals Chelsea .
Wenger argued that the transfer was unfair because United and Chelsea had already played each other twice during the season , but United would still have to play Arsenal , and said that " the rules should be adapted more for fairness " .
Manchester City manager Manuel Pellegrini backed the sentiment of Wenger , disagreeing that a player " can go from one team to another team in the same league at this part of the year " and also said that the winter transfer window was unbalanced in favour of big clubs , saying " a club with money can take the best players from the other teams " .
Former Crystal Palace manager Alan Pardew questioned why the Premier League transfer window remains open after the start of the season after Arsenal made a bid for midfielder Yohan Cabaye during his time as Newcastle United manager in August 2013 .
In January 2015 , FIFPro said that the current transfer window system is " failing football and its players " , one of the main issues being that players are released from clubs without explanation or compensation .
SEE ALSO
* Trade deadline REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * fifatms.com