URSID HYBRID
An ursid hybrid is an animal with parents from two different species or subspecies of the Ursidae ( bear ) family .
Species and subspecies of bear known to have produced offspring with another bear species or subspecies include brown bears , black bears , grizzly bears and polar bears , all of which are members of the Ursus genus .
Bears not included in Ursus , such as the giant panda , are probably unable to produce hybrids .
Note all of the confirmed hybrids listed here have been in captivity ( except grizzly / polar bear ) , but there have been hybrids in the wild .
A recent study found genetic evidence of multiple instances and species combinations where genetic material has passed the species boundary in bears ( a process called introgression by geneticists ) .
Specifically , species with evidence of past intermingling were ( 1 ) brown bear and American black bear , ( 2 ) brown bear and polar bear , ( 3 ) American black bear and Asian black bear , ( 4 ) bears currently distributed in Asia ( sloth bear , sun bear and Asian black bear ) .
Overall , this study shows that evolution in the bear family ( Ursidae ) has not been strictly bifurcating , but instead showed complex evolutionary relationships .
BROWN BEAR / AMERICAN BLACK BEAR
HYBRIDS
Section::::Brown bear
/ American black bear hybrids .
In 1859 , a black bear and a European brown bear were bred together in the London Zoological Gardens , but the three cubs did not reach maturity .
In The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication Charles Darwin noted : In the nine - year Report it is stated that the bears had been seen in the Zoological Gardens to couple freely , but previously to 1848 most had rarely conceived .
In the Reports published since this date three species have produced young ( hybrids in one case ) ...
INTERCONTINENTAL BROWN BEAR HYBRIDS Section::::Intercontinental brown bear hybrids .
Hybrids between the European brown bear and the grizzly bear ( now considered to be a North American variety of brown bear rather than a separate species ) have been bred in Cologne , Germany .
See grizzly bear for taxonomy .
BROWN BEAR / POLAR BEAR HYBRIDS
*
Since 1874 , at Halle , a series of successful matings of polar bears and brown bears were made .
Some of the hybrid offspring were exhibited by the London Zoological Society .
The Halle hybrid bears proved to be fertile , both with one of the parent species and with one another .
Polar bear / brown bear hybrids are white at birth but later turn blue - brown or yellow - white .
* An adult polar bear / brown bear hybrid bred in the 19th century is now displayed at the Rothschild Zoological Museum , Tring , England
* Crandall reported the first polar bear / brown bear crosses as occurring at a small zoo in Stuttgart , Germany in 1876 rather than Halle in 1874 .
A female European brown bear mated with a male polar bear resulting in twin cubs in 1876 .
Three further births were recorded .
The young were fertile among themselves and when mated back to European brown bears and to polar bears .
* DNA studies indicate that some brown bears are more closely related to polar bears than they are to other brown bears .
All the Ursinae species ( i.e. , all bears except the giant panda and the spectacled bear ) appear able to crossbreed .
KODIAK BEAR / POLAR
BEAR HYBRIDS Section::::Brown bear / polar bear hybrids .
Section::::Kodiak bear / polar bear hybrids .
" Kodiak " or " Kodiak brown " is a term now applied to brown bears found in coastal regions of North America .
In the far north these bears feed on salmon and often attain especially large size . "
Alaskan brown " is sometimes used for Alaskan bears , but the main distinction is how far the bear is found from the coast .
Grizzly bear is the term used for the brown bear of the North American interior .
*
In 1936 , a male polar bear accidentally got into an enclosure with a female Kodiak ( Alaskan brown ) bear at the U.S. National Zoo , resulting in three hybrid offspring .
The hybrid offspring were fertile and able to breed successfully with each other , indicating that the two species of bear are closely related .
The Kodiak is also considered by many to be a variant or subspecies of the basic Arctic brown bear .
*
In 1943 , Clara Helgason described a bear shot by hunters during her childhood .
This was a large , off - white bear with hair all over his paws .
The presence of hair on the bottom of the feet suggests it was not an unusually colored Kodiak brown bear , but a natural hybrid with a polar bear .
*
In a 1970 National Geographic article Elizabeth C. Reed mentions being foster mother to 4 hybrid bear cubs from the National Zoological Park in Washington , where her husband was director .
GRIZZLY BEAR / POLAR
BEAR HYBRIDS Section::::Grizzly bear / polar bear hybrids .
The grizzly bear is now regarded by most taxonomists as a variety of brown bear , Ursus arctos horribilis .
* Clinton Hart Merriam , taxonomist of grizzly bears , described an animal killed in 1864 at Rendezvous Lake , Barren Grounds , Canada as " buffy whitish " with a golden brown muzzle .
This is considered to be a natural hybrid between a grizzly bear and polar bear .
On April 16 , 2006 , a polar bear of unusual appearance was shot by a sports hunter on Banks Island in the Northwest Territories .
DNA testing released May 11 , 2006 , proved the kill was a grizzly / polar bear hybrid .
This is thought to be the first recorded case of interbreeding in the wild .
The bear was proven to have a polar mother and a grizzly father .
The DNA testing also spared the hunter the C$ 1000 fine for killing a grizzly bear , as well as the risk of being imprisoned for up to a year .
The hunter had bought a license to hunt polar bears ; he did not have a license to hunt grizzly at that time .
The animal had dark rings around its eyes , similar to a panda 's but not as wide .
It also had remarkably long claws , a slight hump on its back , brown spots in its white coat , and a slightly indented face — the nasal " stop " between the eyes which polar bears lack .
The guide leading the hunt , Roger Kuptana of Sachs Harbour in the Northwest Territories , was the first to note the oddities .
Several names were suggested for this specimen .
The Idaho hunter who killed it , Jim Martell , suggested polargrizz .
The biologists of the Canadian Wildlife Service suggested grolar or pizzly , as well as nanulak , an elision of the Inuit nanuk ( polar bear ) and aklak ( grizzly or brown bear ) .
Both grolar and pizzly were used by the Canadian Broadcast Corporation in widely distributed stories .
Presently , though the mating seasons overlap , the polar bear 's season begins slightly earlier than the grizzly bear 's .
A blog columnist for the Seattle Post - Intelligencer suggested that more hybrids may be seen as global warming progresses and alters normal mating periods .
The Canadian Wildlife Service noted that grizzly - polar hybrids born of zoo matings have proven fertile .
Grizzly bears have been sighted in what is usually polar bear territory in the Western Arctic near the Beaufort Sea , Banks Island , Victoria Island , and Melville Island .
A " light chocolate colored " bear , possibly a hybrid , is reported to have been seen with polar bears near Kugluktuk in western Nunavut .
ASIATIC BLACK BEAR HYBRIDS Section::::Asiatic black bear hybrids .
In 1975 , within Venezuela 's " Las Delicias " Zoo , a female Asian black bear shared its enclosure with a spectacled bear , and produced several hybrid descendants .
In 2005 , a possible black bear / sun bear hybrid cub was captured in the Mekong River watershed of eastern Cambodia .
The hybrid 's mane was relatively slight , forming a crest on each side of the neck , as is typical in sun bears and some black bears .
The appearance of its face was intermediate between that of the sun bear and the black bear , though its ears and large stout canines closely resembled those of the sun bear .
Overall , the hybrid resembled an Asiatic black bear with an unusually glossy pelage and an unusual head .
In 2010 , a male hybrid between an Asiatic black bear and a brown bear named Emma was taken from a bile farm and into the Animals Asia Foundation 's China Moon Bear Rescue SLOTH BEAR HYBRIDS Section::::Sloth bear hybrids .
Hybrids have been produced between the sloth bear ( Melursus ursinus ) and the Malayan sun bear ( Helarctos malayanus ) at Tama Zoo in Tokyo , and also between the sloth bear ( Melursus ursinus ) and the Asiatic black bear ( Ursus thibetanus , or Selenarctos thibetanus ) .
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Martin , P.L. 1876 . "
Ursus arctos and Ursus maritimus .
On bastards between these species born in Nill 's menagerie at Stuttgart . " Zoologische Garten , 1876:20 - 22 . [ Zoologische Garten , 1877:135 - 136 .
* W. Stendell and E. von Martens , tom .
cit . , pp .
401–402 . ]
* ------ . 1882 .
" On a hybrid between a male Ursus maritimus and a female Ursus arctos . " Zoologische Garten , 1882 : xxiii , 370 .
* Kowalska , Z. 1962 .
"
Intergeneric crossbreed of the brown bear Ursus arctos L. , and the polar bear Thalarctos maritimus ( Phipps ) . "
Przeglad Zoologiczny , 6:230 , 1 pl .
[ Polish with English summary . ]
* ------ . 1965 .
"
Cross breeding between a female European brown bear and a male polar bear in Łódź Zoo . "
Przeglad Zoologiczny , 9:313 - 319 .
[ Polish with English summary . ]
* Wurster - Hill , D.H. and Bush , M. 1980 :
The interrelationship of chromosome banding patterns in the giant panda ( Ailuropoda melanoleuca ) , hybrid bear ( Ursus middendorfi x Thalarctos maritimus ) , and other carnivores .
Cytogenet .
Cell Genet .
27:147 - 154 .