CHARLES B. MCVAY III Charles B. McVay III
( July 30 , 1898 – November 6 , 1968 ) was an American naval officer and the commanding officer of when it was lost in action in 1945 , resulting in a massive loss of life .
Of all captains in the history of the United States Navy , he is the only one to have been subjected to court - martial for losing a ship sunk by an act of war , despite the fact that he was on a top secret mission maintaining radio silence ( the testimony of the Japanese commander who sank his ship also seemed to exonerate McVay ) .
After years of mental health problems , he took his own life aged 70 years .
Following years of efforts by some survivors and others to clear his name , McVay was posthumously exonerated by the 106th United States Congress and President Bill Clinton on October 30 , 2000 .
EDUCATION AND CAREER Section::::Education and career .
Charles Butler McVay III was born in Ephrata , Pennsylvania on July 30 , 1898 to a Navy family .
His father , Charles Butler McVay Jr. ( September 9 , 1868 – October 28 , 1949 ) , who had commanded the tender during the cruise of the Great White Fleet ( 1907–1909 ) , was an admiral in the United States Navy during World War I , and served as Commander - in - Chief of the Asiatic Fleet in the early 1930s .
Charles III was a 1920 graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland .
Before taking command of Indianapolis in November 1944 , McVay was chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee of the Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington , D.C. , the Allies ' highest intelligence unit .
Earlier in World War II , he was awarded the Silver Star for displaying courage under fire .
McVay led the ship through the invasion of Iwo Jima , then the bombardment of Okinawa in the spring of 1945 , during which Indianapolis anti - aircraft guns shot down seven enemy planes before the ship was struck by a kamikaze on March 31 , inflicting heavy casualties , including 13 dead , and penetrating the ship 's hull .
McVay returned the ship safely to Mare Island in California for repairs .
SINKING OF INDIANAPOLIS Section::::Sinking of Indianapolis .
Later that year , Indianapolis received orders to carry parts and nuclear material to Tinian to be used in the atomic bombs which were soon to be dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
After delivering his top secret cargo , the ship was en route to report for further duty off Okinawa .
Early in the morning of July 30 , 1945 , she was attacked by the under Commander Mochitsura Hashimoto .
Hashimoto launched six torpedoes and hit Indianapolis twice , the first removing over forty feet of her bow , the second hitting the starboard side at frame forty ( below the bridge ) .
Indianapolis immediately took a fifteen degree list , capsized and sank within 12 minutes .
Of the crew of 1,196 men , 879 men died .
DELAYED RESCUE Section::::Delayed rescue .
About 300 of the 1,196 men on board died in the initial attack .
The rest of the crew , 900 men , were left floating in the water without lifeboats until the rescue was completed four days ( 100 hours ) later .
Because of Navy protocol regarding secret missions , the ship was not reported " overdue " and the rescue came only after survivors were spotted by pilot Lieutenant Wilber ( Chuck ) Gwinn and co - pilot Lieutenant Warren Colwell on a routine patrol flight .
Most of the casualties of the survivors in the water were due to injuries sustained aboard the ship , dehydration , exhaustion , drinking salt water and shark attacks
The seas had been moderate , but visibility was not good .
Indianapolis had been steaming at 15.7 knots ( 29 km / h ) .
When the ship did not reach Leyte on the 31st , as scheduled , no report was made that she was overdue .
This omission was officially recorded later as " due to a misunderstanding of the Movement Report System " .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
McVay was wounded but survived , and was among those rescued .
He repeatedly asked the Navy why it took four days to rescue his men but never received an answer .
The Navy long claimed that SOS messages were never received because the ship was operating under a policy of radio silence ; declassified records show that three SOS messages were received separately , but none were acted upon because one commander was drunk , another thought it was a Japanese ruse , while the third had given orders not to be disturbed .
After a Navy Court of Inquiry recommended that McVay be court - martialed for the loss of Indianapolis , Admiral Chester Nimitz disagreed and instead issued the captain a letter of reprimand .
Admiral Ernest King overturned Nimitz 's decision and recommended a court - martial , which Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal later convened .
McVay was charged with failing to zigzag and failure to order abandon ship in a timely manner .
He was convicted on the former .
Prior knowledge of Japanese submarines being identified in the area was withheld from the court and from McVay , prior to sailing , as well .
Following McVay 's conviction for hazarding Indianapolis by failing to zigzag , Admiral King recommended setting aside the punishment .
Hashimoto , the Japanese submarine commander who had sunk the Indianapolis , was on record as describing visibility at the time as fair ( which is corroborated by the fact that he was able to target and sink the Indianapolis in the first place ) .
American submarine experts testified that " zigzagging " was a technique of negligible value in eluding enemy submarines .
Hashimoto also testified to this effect .
Despite that testimony , the official ruling was that visibility was good , and the court held McVay responsible for failing to zigzag .
An additional point of controversy is evidence that the admirals in the United States Navy were primarily responsible for placing the ship in harm 's way .
For instance , McVay requested a destroyer escort for the Indianapolis , but his request was denied because the priority for destroyers at the time was escorting transports to Okinawa and picking up downed pilots in B-29 raids on Japan .
Also , naval command assumed McVay 's route would be safe at that point in the war .
Many ships , including most destroyers , were equipped with submarine detection equipment , but the Indianapolis was not so equipped , which casts the decision to deny McVay 's request for an escort as military incompetence .
On 24 July 1945 , just six days prior to the sinking of the Indianapolis , the destroyer had been attacked and sunk in the area by Japanese submarines .
Yet McVay was never informed of this event , and several others , in part due to issues of classified intelligence .
McVay was warned of the potential presence of Japanese subs , but not of the actual confirmed activity .
Although about 380 ships of the U.S. Navy were lost in combat in World War II , McVay was the only captain to be court - martialed for the loss of his ship .
It was widely felt that he had been a fall guy for the Navy .
The conviction effectively ended McVay 's career as he lost seniority , although the sentence was overturned by Secretary James Forrestal owing to McVay 's bravery prior to the sinking , and McVay was finally promoted to rear admiral when he retired from the navy in 1949 , although he apparently never got over his treatment .
In his book Abandon Ship , author Richard F. Newcomb posits a motive for Admiral King 's ordering McVay 's court - martial .
According to Captain McVay III 's father , Admiral Charles B McVay Jr. , " ' King never forgot a grudge , " he exploded .
King had been a junior officer under the old man 's command when King and other officers sneaked some women aboard a ship .
Admiral McVay had a letter of reprimand placed in King 's record .
"
Now , " he raged , " King 's used you to get back at me . ' " SUICIDE Section::::Suicide .
On 6 November 1968 , McVay took his own life by shooting himself with his service pistol at his home in Litchfield , Connecticut , holding in his hand a toy sailor he had received as a boy for a good luck charm .
He was found in his back porch by his gardener .
Though a note was not left , McVay was known by those close to him to have suffered from loneliness , particularly after losing his wife to cancer .
McVay also struggled throughout his life from vitriolic letters and phone calls he periodically received from grief - stricken relatives of dead crewmen who served aboard the Indianapolis .
EXONERATION
Section::::Exoneration . survivors organized , and many spent years attempting to clear their skipper 's name .
Many people , from McVay 's son Charles McVay IV ( 1925–2012 ) to author Dan Kurzman , who chronicled the Indianapolis incident in Fatal Voyage , to members of Congress , long believed McVay was unfairly convicted .
Paul Murphy , president of the USS Indianapolis Survivors Organization , said : " Captain McVay 's court - martial was simply to divert attention from the terrible loss of life caused by procedural mistakes which never alerted anyone that we were missing . "
Over fifty years after the incident , a 12-year - old student in Pensacola , Florida , Hunter Scott , was instrumental in raising awareness of the miscarriage of justice carried out at the captain 's court - martial .
As part of a school project for the National History Day program , the young man interviewed nearly 150 survivors of the Indianapolis sinking and reviewed 800 documents .
His testimony before the U.S.
Congress brought national attention to the situation .
In October 2000 , the United States Congress passed a resolution that McVay 's record should reflect that " he is exonerated for the loss of the USS Indianapolis . "
President Clinton also signed the resolution .
Commander Hashimoto died five days before the exoneration ( on 25 October ) .
In July 2001 , Secretary of the Navy Gordon R. England ordered McVay 's official Navy record purged of all wrongdoing .
AWARDS AND DECORATIONS Section::::Awards and decorations .
Silver Star IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
McVay 's ship , but not McVay himself , is mentioned in the 1975 blockbuster movie Jaws , in which the character of Quint is portrayed as a survivor of the incident .
In 1978 , the events surrounding McVay 's court - martial were dramatized in The Failure to ZigZag by playwright John B. Ferzacca .
The 1991 made - for - television movie Mission of the Shark : The Saga of the U.S.S. Indianapolis depicts the ordeal of the men of the Indianapolis during her last voyage ( with McVay portrayed by Stacy Keach ) , as does the 2016 film ( with McVay portrayed by Nicolas Cage ) .
Also in 2016 , USS Indianapolis : The Legacy was released .
It is an in - depth film where the survivors tell the story of what really happened and they speak about the aftermath of the tragic event .
SEE ALSO
* W. Graham Claytor Jr. * List of U.S. Navy losses in World War II for other Navy ships lost in World War II REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * USS Indianapolis — Still at sea * Photographs of Indianapolis
* Allied Warships : USS Indianapolis ( CA 35 ) , Heavy cruiser of the Portland class * USS INDIANAPOLIS Collection , 1898–1991 , collection guide for an " artificially - created " collection of materials regarding the history of the heavy cruiser USS Indianapolis (
CA 35 ) at the Indiana Historical Society .