DWARF GOURAMI
The dwarf gourami ( Trichogaster lalius ) is a species of gourami native to South Asia .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The dwarf gourami is native to Pakistan , India and Bangladesh .
However , it has also been widely distributed outside of its native range .
It inhabits slow - moving waters in rivulets , streams and lakes , occurring in areas with plentiful vegetation .
APPEARANCE AND ANATOMY Section::::Appearance and anatomy .
This species can reach a length of TL .
Male dwarf gouramis in the wild have diagonal stripes of alternating blue and red colors ; females are a silvery color .
Besides the difference in color , the sex can be determined by the dorsal fin .
The male 's dorsal fin is pointed , while the female 's is rounded or curved .
They carry touch - sensitive cells on their thread - like pelvic fins .
Dwarf gouramis sold in fish stores may also be solid colors ( e.g. , powder blue dwarf gourami or red flame variety ) which are nothing but captive bred color morphs of the same species .
IN THE AQUARIUM Section::::In the aquarium .
Most dwarf gouramis live for about four years ; with proper care , they can live longer .
Dwarf gouramis are generally peaceful fish — unlike the much larger standard gourami , which can become aggressive .
Dwarf gouramis do well in most community aquariums and are compatible with most fish , such as Platies , Mollies , Plecostomus , Ghost Catfish , Tetras , and other docile fish .
They require a tank that can hold at least ten gallons .
They are usually found swimming in the middle or top regions of the aquarium , because Gouramis are labyrinth fish and make use of their labyrinth organ if necessary .
Dwarf gouramis do not do well with large , aggressive fish .
Dwarf gouramis are so docile that they will allow themselves to be bullied to death rather than fight back .
Males of other gourami species , as well as male Siamese fighting fish , may attack dwarf gouramis .
If a Dwarf gourami is put with faster swimming top swimmers like guppies , you should drop the fish food in a more spread out area so that the Dwarf gourami has a higher chance to snatch the food before the other fish do for as mentioned earlier , Dwarf gourami 's are timid fish .
Dwarf gouramis tolerate fairly high temperatures .
Temperatures of are easily tolerated .
Dwarf gouramis raised for aquarium trade in Singapore may carry dwarf gourami iridovirus .
Recent research has shown that 22 % of Singapore Trichogaster lalius carry this virus .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
A varied diet is very important to the dwarf gourami , which is an omnivore that prefers both algae - based foods and meaty foods .
An algae - based flake food , along with freeze - dried bloodworms , tubifex , and brine shrimp , will provide these fish with proper nutrition .
SIGNS OF STRESS AND
/ OR SICKNESS Section::::Signs of Stress and/or Sickness .
Usually when a Dwarf gourami is stressed or sick , then it will sulk around at the bottom of your tanks , and will refuse food as most other types of fish .
Also the Dwarf gourami will not be as colorful as if it were healthy .
BREEDING Section::::Breeding .
The male builds a floating bubble nest in which the eggs are laid .
Unlike other bubble nest builders , males will incorporate bits of plants , twigs , and other debris , which hold the nest together better .
The water level should be reduced to during spawning , and the temperature should be approximately 28- .
Vegetation is essential , as males build their bubble nest using plant material , which they bind together with bubbles .
Nests are very elaborate and sturdy , reaching several inches across and an inch deep .
Limnophila aquatica , Riccia fluitans , Ceratopteris thalictroides , and Vesicularia dubyana , are good choices for the breeding tank .
Peat fiber may also be offered as building material .
Once the nest has been built the male will begin courting the female , usually in the afternoon or evening .
He signals his intentions by swimming around the female with flared fins , attempting to draw her to the nest where he will continue his courting display .
If the female accepts the male she will begin swimming in circles with the male beneath the bubble nest .
When she is ready to spawn she touches the male on either the back or the tail with her mouth .
Upon this signal the male will embrace the female , turning her first on her side and finally on her back .
At this point the female will release approximately five dozen clear eggs , which are immediately fertilized by the male .
Most of the eggs will float up into the bubble nest .
Eggs that stray are collected by the male and placed in the nest .
Once all the eggs are secured in the nest , the pair will spawn again .
If more than one female is present in the breeding tank , the male may spawn with all of them .
The spawning sessions will continue for two to four hours , and produce between 300 and 800 eggs .
Dwarf gouramis have a fecundity of about 600 eggs.[1 ]
Upon completion , the male will place a fine layer of bubbles beneath the eggs , assuring that they remain in the bubble nest .
The male will protect the eggs and fry .
In 12 to 24 hours the fry will hatch , and continue developing within the protection of the bubble nest .
After three days they are sufficiently developed to be free swimming and leave the nest .
When the fry are two to three days old the male should also be removed or he may consume the young .
After spawning the female should be moved to a different tank .
The male will now take sole responsibility for the eggs , aggressively defending the nest and surrounding territory .
When first hatched , the tiny fry should be fed infusoria , and later , brine shrimp and finely ground flakes .
Freeze - dried tablets may also be fed to older fry .
COLOUR VARIATIONS Section::::Colour variations .
Breeders have created different colour variations , principally varying proportions of red and blue colouring .
The powder blue variant is almost entirely bright blue .
The reddest variety ( flame red ) can be confused with the red variety of honey gouramis ( Trichogaster chuna ) .
One of the most common color morphs is the turquoise / neon blue , featuring stripes of dark red and bright blue .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Dwarf Gourami Fact Sheet * http://gourami-fish.com/species-dwarf/