FIRE WHIRL
A fire whirl , also commonly known as a fire devil , or , ( in many cases erroneously ) as a fire tornado , firenado , fire swirl , or fire twister , is a whirlwind induced by a fire and often ( at least partially ) composed of flame or ash .
They usually start with a whirl of wind or smoke , and may occur when intense rising heat and turbulent wind conditions combine to form whirling eddies of air .
These eddies can contract into a tornado - like vortex that sucks in burning debris and combustible gases .
Fire whirls are sometimes colloquially called fire tornadoes , but are not usually classifiable as tornadoes as the vortex in most cases does not extend from the surface to cloud base .
Also , even in such cases , even those fire whirls are not classic tornadoes , in that their vorticity derives from surface winds and heat - induced lifting , rather than a tornadic mesocyclone aloft .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
A fire whirl consists of a burning core and a rotating pocket of air .
A fire whirl can reach up to .
Often , fire whirls are created when a wildfire or firestorm creates its own wind , which can turn into a vortex of fire .
This causes the tall and skinny appearance of a fire whirl 's core .
Most of the largest fire whirls are spawned from wildfires .
They form when a warm updraft and convergence from the wildfire are present .
They are usually tall , a few meters ( several feet ) wide , and last only a few minutes .
Some , however , can be more than tall , contain wind speeds over , and persist for more than 20 minutes .
Fire whirls can uproot trees that are tall or more .
These can also aid the ' spotting ' ability of wildfires to propagate and start new fires as they lift burning materials such as tree bark .
These burning embers can be blown away from the fireground by the stronger winds aloft .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
An extreme example of a fire whirl is the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake in Japan , which ignited a large city - sized firestorm and produced a gigantic fire whirl that killed 38,000 people in fifteen minutes in the Hifukusho - Ato region of Tokyo .
Another example is the numerous large fire whirls ( some tornadic ) that developed after lightning struck an oil storage facility near San Luis Obispo , California , on 7 April 1926 , several of which produced significant structural damage well away from the fire , killing two .
Many whirlwinds were produced by the four - day - long firestorm coincident with conditions that produced severe thunderstorms , in which the larger fire whirls carried debris away .
During the 2003 Canberra bushfires in Canberra , Australia a violent firewhirl was documented .
It was calculated to have horizontal winds of and vertical air speed of , causing the flashover of in 0.04 seconds .
It was the first known firewhirl in Australia to have EF3 wind speeds on the Enhanced Fujita scale .
A fire whirl , of reportedly uncommon size for New Zealand wildfires , formed on day three of the 2017 Port Hills fires in Christchurch .
Pilots estimated the fire column to be high .
Residents in the city of Redding , California , while evacuating the area from the massive Carr Fire in late July 2018 , reported seeing pyrocumulonimbus clouds and tornado - like behaviour from the firestorm , resulting in uprooted trees , cars , structures and other wind related damages in addition to the fire itself .
As of August 2nd , 2018 , a preliminary damage survey , led by the National Weather Service in Sacramento , California , rated the July 26th fire whirl as an EF3 tornado with winds in excess of .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
There are currently three known types of fire whirls : * Type 1 : Stable and centered over burning area .
* Type 2 : Stable or transient , downwind of burning area .
* Type 3 : Steady or transient , centered over an open area adjacent to an asymmetric burning area with wind .
There is evidence suggesting that the fire whirl in the Hifukusho - ato area , during the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake , was of type 3 .
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* photo fire whirl outback
Australia * Fire tornado video ( whirl )
11 September 2012
Alice Springs Australia
* Photo
* www.abc.net.au/news Australian researchers document world - first fire tornado ( Canberra ) .
And https://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/11/21/australian_fire_tornado/ * 2013 ' Fire Tornado ' video .
Canberra 2003 groundtrack , lee side spread , weather .
11:08
* Catalyst story :
Fire Tornado *
Another photo * www.youtube.com Video of a Fire whirl ( 0:30 ) , Brazil .
* Video of a Fire Tornado in San Diego country * Fire Whirl Simulations * 1923
Great Kanto
Earthquake - Fire Tornado Video - Check123