I WRITE THE SONGS
" I Write the Songs " is a popular song written by Bruce Johnston in 1975 and made famous by Barry Manilow .
Manilow 's version reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in January 1976 after spending two weeks atop the Billboard adult contemporary chart in December 1975 .
It won a Grammy Award for Song of the Year and was nominated for Record of the Year in 1977 .
Billboard ranked it as the No . 13 song of 1976 .
The original version was recorded by The Captain & Tennille , who worked with Johnston in the early 1970s with The Beach Boys .
It appears on their 1975 album , Love Will Keep Us Together .
The first release of I Write the Songs as a single was by then teen - idol David Cassidy from his 1975 solo album
The Higher They Climb , which was also produced by Bruce Johnston .
Cassidy 's version reached # 11 on the UK Singles Chart in August of that year .
Johnston has stated that , for him , the " I " in the song is God , and that songs come from the spirit of creativity in all of us .
He has said that the song is not about
his Beach Boys bandmate Brian Wilson .
Manilow was initially reluctant to record the song , stating in his autobiography Sweet Life : " The problem with the song was that if you did n't listen carefully to the lyric , you would think that the singer was singing about himself .
It could be misinterpreted as a monumental ego trip . "
After persuasion by Clive Davis , then president of Arista Records , Manilow recorded the song , and his version of " I Write the Songs " was the first single taken from the album Tryin ' to Get the Feeling .
It first charted on the Billboard Hot 100 on November 15 , 1975 , reaching the top of the chart nine weeks later , on January 17 , 1976 .
CHART PERFORMANCE
WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
align="left"Chart
( 1975–76 ) !
align="left"Peakposition align="left"Australia New Zealand
YEAR - END CHARTS
COVER VERSIONS
Section::::Cover versions .
This song has also been recorded by Johnny Mathis , Frank Chacksfield , Mantovani , Ray Conniff , Richard Clayderman , Tom Jones , Dinah Shore , as well as Bruce Johnston himself on his 1977 album , Going Public .
Frank Sinatra sang it as " I Sing the Songs " from 1976 ( leaving out the line " and I wrote some rock and roll so you could move " ) .
In 1979 , Sammy Davis , Jr. performed it as part of his live show .
At the Forum de Montréal in 1976 for the Bob Hope Olympic Benefit Event , Quebec popular singer René Simard performed it live in a French - English two - verse version .
In 1975 , French singer Claude François performed a French adaptation named " Je Chante des Chansons " ( I Sing Songs ) .
In 1976 , Filipino singer Rico J. Puno also covered this song with the Tagalog verse in second line as the Manila Sound version .
In 2008 , Me First and the Gimme Gimmes recorded it on their album Have Another Ball .
On August 16 , 2016 , it was covered by the members of Calle Siete and Eat Bulaga ! 's
That s
My Bae Grand Winner Kenneth Medrano for the album Made for You , released on June 22 , 2016 , after the song
" I 'll Never Go " .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
Manilow performed a parody duet entitled
" I Write the Songs
/ I Wreck the Songs " with Rosie O'Donnell on her talk show on April 18 , 1997 .
Manilow performed another shortened version of this song with Stephen Colbert when he was a guest on The Colbert Report on October 30 , 2006 .
After his version reached number one , Manilow himself composed a novelty song based on this song which he recorded under the title
" I really do write the songs " in which he sings about how he composes each part of a song and the line
" sometimes I really do write the songs " at the end of each verse .
In the finale he sings , " sometimes ... ah , what the hell ...
I write the songs .
"
Unreleased at the time , it was included as a bonus track on the reissue of his album
This One 's for You in 2006 .
SEE ALSO
* List of number - one adult contemporary singles of 1975
( U.S. ) * List of Hot 100 number - one singles of 1976 ( U.S. ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS