BELLY LANDING
A belly landing , pancake landing or gear - up landing occurs when an aircraft lands without its landing gear fully extended and uses its underside , or belly , as its primary landing device .
Normally the term gear - up landing refers to incidents in which the pilot forgets to extend the landing gear , while belly landing refers to incidents where a mechanical malfunction prevents the pilot from extending the landing gear .
During a belly landing , there is normally extensive damage to the airplane .
Belly landings carry the risk that the aircraft may flip over , disintegrate , or catch fire if it lands too fast or too hard .
Extreme precision is needed to ensure that the plane lands as straight and level as possible while maintaining enough airspeed to maintain control .
Strong crosswinds , low visibility , damage to the airplane , or unresponsive instruments or controls greatly increase the danger of performing a belly landing .
Still , belly landings are one of the most common types of aircraft accidents , and are normally not fatal if executed carefully .
CAUSES AND PREVENTION PILOT ERROR Section::::Causes and prevention .
Section::::Pilot error .
The most common cause of gear - up landings is the pilot simply forgetting to extend the landing gear before touchdown .
On any retractable gear aircraft , lowering the landing gear is part of the pilot 's landing checklist , which also includes items such as setting the flaps , propeller and mixture controls for landing .
Pilots who ritually perform such checklists before landing are less likely to land gear - up .
However , some pilots neglect these checklists and perform the tasks by memory , increasing the chances of forgetting to lower the landing gear .
Even careful pilots are at risk , because they may be distracted and forget to perform the checklist or be interrupted in the middle of it by other duties such as collision avoidance or another emergency .
In the picture shown above , the B-17 Dutchess ' Daughter had landed normally , when the copilot inadvertently flipped the landing gear switch to retract .
The gear collapsed near the end of the landing roll .
All aircraft with retractable landing gear are required to have a way to indicate the status of the landing gear , which is normally a set of lights that change colors from red to amber to green depending on whether the gear are up , in transit , or down .
However , a distracted pilot may forget to look at these lights .
This has led to aircraft designers building extra safety systems in the aircraft to reduce the possibility of human error .
In small aircraft this most commonly takes the form of a warning light and horn which operate when any of the landing gear is not locked down and any of the engine throttles are retarded below a cruise power setting .
However , the horn has been useless in situations when the pilot was unfamiliar with the aircraft and did not know what the horn sounding was meant to indicate .
Pilots have sometimes confused the landing gear warning horn with the stall warning horn .
In other cases , pilots can not hear the horn on older aircraft due to wearing a modern noise - canceling headset .
In larger aircraft , the warning system usually excludes the engine power setting and instead warns the pilot when the flaps are set for landing but the landing gear is not .
An alternative system uses the ground proximity warning system or radar altimeter to engage a warning when the airplane is close to the ground and descending with the gear not down .
Most airliners incorporate a voice message system which eliminates the ambiguity of a horn or buzzer and instead gives the pilot a clear verbal indication : " GEAR NOT DOWN " .
In addition , large aircraft are designed to be operated by two pilots working as a team .
One flies the aircraft and handles communications and collision avoidance , while the other operates the aircraft systems .
This provides a sort of human redundancy which reduces the workload placed on any one crew member , and provides for one crew member to be able to check the work of the other .
The combination of advanced warning systems and effective crew training has made gear - up landing accidents in large aircraft extremely rare .
In some cases , the pilot may be warned of an unsafe gear condition by the aircraft 's flying characteristics .
Often very sleek , high - performance airplanes will be very difficult to slow to a safe landing speed without the aerodynamic drag of the extended landing gear .
MECHANICAL FAILURE Section::::Mechanical failure .
Mechanical failure is another cause of belly landings .
Most landing gear are operated by electric motors or hydraulic actuators .
Multiple redundancies are usually provided to prevent a single failure from failing the entire landing gear extension process .
Whether electrically or hydraulically operated , the landing gear can usually be powered from multiple sources .
In case the power system fails , an emergency extension system is always available .
This may take the form of a manually operated crank or pump , or a mechanical free - fall mechanism which disengages the uplocks and allows the landing gear to fall and lock due to gravity and/or airflow .
In cases where only one landing gear leg fails to extend , the pilot may choose to retract all the gear and perform a belly landing because he or she may believe it to be easier to control the aircraft during rollout with no gear at all than with one gear missing .
Some aircraft , like the A-10 Thunderbolt II , are specifically designed to make belly landings safer .
In the A-10 's case , the retracted main wheels protrude out of their nacelles , so the plane virtually rolls on belly landings .
UNMANNED BELLY LANDINGS
Section::::Unmanned belly landings .
There have been a handful of examples of aircraft making comparatively successful belly landings after being abandoned by their crew in flight .
The most well known is a United States Airforce Convair F-106 Delta Dart , tail number 58 - 0787 .
In February 1970 , the aircraft entered a flat spin over Montana .
Following the pilot ejecting , the aircraft 's spin stabilised , and the Delta Dart proceeded to fly for several miles until it came down in a field near Big Sandy , Montana .
The aircraft ( later nicknamed the Cornfield Bomber ) was repaired and returned to service .
After the F-106 was withdrawn from service , the aircraft was presented to the National Museum of the United States Air Force .
Another example is a German Junkers 88 bomber which , after an attack on Soviet shipping in April 1942 , was abandoned by its crew and came down on a hillside at Garddevarre in Finnmark in the far north of Norway .
It was recovered in 1988 and is currently displayed at the Norsk Luftfartsmuseum , the Norwegian Aviation Museum at Bodø Airport .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
On 4 July 2000 , Malév Flight 262 , a Tupolev Tu-154 , accidentally performed a gear - up touchdown during the landing and skidded on the runway , but was able to take off and land normally after a go - around .
No injuries were reported .
On 8 May 2006 , a United States Air Force B-1 Lancer strategic bomber landed on the atoll of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean without lowering its undercarriage .
A fire ensued , but was extinguished with only minor personnel injuries .
The pilots had reportedly switched off the warning system that would have warned them of the oversight and overlooked the red warning light on the instrument panel throughout the landing .
The aircraft , after nearly $ 8 million in repairs , was returned to service the following year .
On 1 November 2011 , LOT Polish Airlines Flight 016 , a Boeing 767 , Captain Tadeusz Wrona declared an emergency with a loss of landing gear en route from Newark Liberty International Airport to Warsaw Chopin Airport .
The aircraft involved was the newest 767 airframe in the fleet .
It made a belly landing ( see video ) in Warsaw with a small fire , but all passengers and crew were evacuated with no injuries .
The airport was closed for over a day afterwards .
REFERENCES