MANIAC MAGEE Maniac Magee is a novel written by American author Jerry Spinelli and published in 1990 .
Exploring themes of racism and homelessness , it follows the story of an orphan boy looking for a home in the fictional Pennsylvania town of Two Mills .
He becomes a local legend for feats of athleticism and fearlessness , and his ignorance of sharp racial boundaries in the town .
It is popular in elementary school curricula , and has been used in scholarly studies on the relationship of children to racial identity and reading .
A film adaptation was released in 2003 .
MAJOR CHARACTERS
* Jeffrey Lionel " Maniac " Magee is an orphan and finds himself in Two Mills , where he becomes a local legend while trying to find a home .
He has astonishing athletic abilities , runs everywhere he goes , can untie any knot , is allergic to pizza , and crosses the barrier between the East End and West End as if blind to racial distinction .
He has done many heroic feats such as running for a long period of time , hitting many home runs in a row , and entering Finsterwald 's backyard .
He lived in many temporary homes , even once with buffaloes .
* Amanda Beale is the first person Jeffrey meets in Two Mills .
She carries her books in a suitcase so they are n't ruined by her younger siblings , Hester and Lester .
She defends Jeffrey from Mars Bar and eventually provides him with a home .
* Mars Bar Thompson is the worst kid in the East End .
He dislikes Jeffrey 's presence in the East End , which is exacerbated when Jeffrey beats him in a race .
However , he eventually rescues Russell McNab from the trolley truss , and offers Jeffrey a place for a while .
As his nickname implies , he is known for eating Mars Bars .
His real first name is never revealed .
*
John McNab is infuriated when he can not strike out Jeffrey with his ball .
After acting as a bully , he welcomes him into his home when he brings back John 's younger brothers , Piper and Russell , after their attempt to run away to Mexico .
He remains convinced that the black East Enders are planning a rebellion .
* Piper and Russell McNab are John McNab 's younger brothers who play hookey , steal , and constantly try to run away from home .
In their house , they use toy machine guns to shoot the " rebels " from the East End .
Piper also had a party at the end of the book .
* Earl Grayson is the groundskeeper at the zoo and resident of the YMCA , though he was once a minor league baseball pitcher who struck out Willie Mays .
He becomes friends with Jeffrey , who listens to his stories and Jeffrey teaches him to read .
They end up living together in a house , which makes him responsible .
He is very kind and cares about Jeffrey .
Tragically , Grayson , as he is called in the book , passes away shortly after Christmas , leaving Jeffrey all alone and an orphan once again .
* Mrs. Beale is the kind and caring mother of Amanda , Hester , and Lester .
She is very sweet and thoughtful to Maniac as well .
* Hester and Lester are the brother and sister of Amanda Beale , and the son and daughter of Mrs. Beale .
They are very hyperactive , and will mess up anything that they can get their hands on by drawing on things .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Jeffrey Lionel Magee 's parents were killed in a trolley accident when a drunk driver crashed and sunk it into the river in Bridgeport , Pennsylvania , orphaning him at age three .
After living with his Aunt Dot and Uncle Dan in Hollidaysburg and enduring their mutual hatred and silence for eight years , he runs away during a school musical performance .
Over a year and
200 miles later , he finds himself across the river from Bridgeport in Two Mills , where Hector Street divides .
He meets Amanda Beale , an East Ender who carries her suitcase full of books to keep them away from her little brother and sister , Hester and Lester , who crayon everything in sight , and borrows one before continuing his dash through town .
Along the way , he intercepts a football pass made to local football star
James " Hands " Down , infuriates gigantic little leaguer John McNab by hitting home runs off his fastball , and saves an unlucky child from Finsterwald 's backyard , which is full of negative energy .
Because of these acts , he earned the nickname " Maniac " and started a local legend .
When " Mars Bar " Thompson corners Jeffrey and rips a page from Amanda 's book , he is rescued by Amanda .
He finds a home with her and her family , helping Mr. and Mrs. Beale with the chores and pacifying Hester and Lester .
Soon though , a few East Enders make it clear to him that they do n't want him in there anymore by writing racist graffiti on the Beales ' front door , " Fishbelly go home " to be exact .
His final effort to gain acceptance is by untying the famous Cobble 's Knot .
After finishing the task he is praised by everyone as confetti is thrown into the air .
Amanda realizes , too late , that it was made from the pages of her favorite book ,
an Encyclopedia A. Jeffrey runs away , taking shelter at the buffalo pen at the zoo .
At the zoo , Jeffrey meets Earl Grayson , a minor - league baseball pitcher who turns out to be a groundskeeper , who never learned to read , and who insists he has no stories to tell .
For a few months , Jeffrey has a home again with him , helping him at work , celebrating holidays with him , and teaching him to read .
Grayson winds up passing away in his sleep 5 days after Christmas , and Jeffrey runs off again .
On the verge of death , he encounters Piper and Russell , child ruffians that turn out to be John McNab 's brothers .
He leads them back home , bribing them with free pizza , and stays at their cockroach - infested , waste - filled house .
Here , he finds the worst that the West End has to offer , as he learns that the McNabs are making a bunker because they believe the East End is planning a rebellion .
He endures the coarseness and squalor of their home in hopes of keeping Piper and Russell in school and under control , but he is kicked out when he crushes Piper and Russell 's toy guns .
After beating Mars Bar in a foot race and goading him into crashing Piper 's birthday party at the McNabs ' house , Jeffrey is homeless again .
He moves back into the buffalo pen and runs for miles every morning before Two Mills wakes up .
Before long , Mars Bar starts running with him as if by coincidence , and they never say a word to each other .
One day they come across a hysterical Piper McNab , who frantically leads them to Russell , stuck on the trolley trestle where Jeffrey 's parents died .
He walks away silently , nearly unconscious and stunned by fear , while Mars Bar rescues Russell , becoming a hero in his eyes .
Jeffrey retreats once again to the buffalo pen , where Mars Bar leads Amanda to it .
She brings him to her house in a huff , with Jeffrey and Mars Bar following her .
The imaginary town of Two Mills is based on Jerry Spinelli 's childhood town of Norristown , PA .
Spinelli has said that material from the story was inspired by his childhood experiences there , and a number of geographical correspondences confirm this .
Norristown , like Two Mills , is across the Schuylkill River from Bridgeport , and neighboring towns include Conshohocken , Jeffersonville and Worcester , all of which are mentioned in the novel .
The Elmwood Park Zoo is in Norristown , and Valley Forge , where Maniac wanders , is nearby as well .
There is also a street named Hector Street in Conshohocken .
RECEPTION CRITICAL REVIEWS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reviews .
The book was well - received upon publication , variously lauded in reviews as " always affecting , " having " broad appeal , " and being full of " pathos and compassion . "
Booklist reviewer Deborah Abbot says , " ...
this unusual novel magically weaves timely issues of homelessness , racial prejudice , and illiteracy into a complicated story rich in characters and details ...
an energetic piece of writing that bursts with creativity , enthusiasm , and hope . "
Reviewers noted that the theme of racism was uncommon for " middle readers " .
Criticism concentrated on Spinelli 's choice of framing it as a legend , which Shoemaker calls a " cop - out , " which frees him from having to make it real or possible .
It has also been called " long - winded , " and seeming like a " chalkboard lesson . " AWARDS AND HONORS Section::::Awards and honors .
Awards and honors for the book include : * 1990 :
Boston Globe / Horn Book Award * 1991 : Carolyn Field Award , Newbery Medal ( American Library Association ) * 1992 : Charlotte Award , Dorothy Canfield Fisher Award , Flicker Tale Award , Indian Paintbrush Book Award , Rhode Island Children 's Book Award * 1993 : Buckeye Children 's Book Award , Land of Enchantment Award , Mark Twain Award , Massachusetts Children 's Book Award , Nevada Young Readers ' Award , Pacific Northwest Library Association Young Reader 's Choice Award , Rebecca Caudill Young Reader 's Book Award , West Virginia Children 's Book Award , William Allen White Award The U.S. National Education Association named Maniac Magee one of " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " based on a 2007 online poll .
In 2012 it was ranked number 40 among all - time children 's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal , a monthly with primarily U.S. audience .
USE FOR EDUCATIONAL AND RESEARCH
PURPOSES Section::::Use for educational and research purposes .
The book is popular in elementary schools as a historical - fiction novel .
Many study units and teaching guides are available .
including a study guide by the author .
It has been used as a tool in scholarly work on childhood education and development .
Fondrie cites it as an example in a discussion of how to bring up and discuss issues of race and class among young students .
McGinley and Kamberlis use it in a study of how children use reading and writing as " vehicles for personal , social , and political exploration .
"
Along the same lines , Lehr and Thompson examine classroom discussions as a reflection of the teacher 's role as cultural mediator and the response of children to moral dilemmas , and Enciso studies expressions of social identity in the responses of children to Maniac Magee .
In a less pedagogical vein , Roberts uses the character of Amanda Beale as an archetypal " female rescuer " in a study of Newbery books , and Sullivan suggests the book as being useful in discussions of reading attitudes and difficulties .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The book was adapted as an audiobook by Listening Library in 2005 ( ) and as a TV movie in 2003 , which was nominated for the Humanitas prize in the children 's live action category .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Author Jerry Spinelli 's homepage