CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA Central Bank of India , a government - owned bank , is one of the oldest and largest commercial banks in India .
It is based in Mumbai which is the financial capital of India and capital city of state of Maharashtra .
Central Bank of India has a joint venture with Bank of India , Bank of Baroda , and the Zambian government .
The Zambian government holds 40 per cent stake and each of the banks has 20 per cent .
Central bank of India is one of 20 Public Sector banks in India to get recapitalisation Central Bank of India has approached the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) for permission to open representative offices in five more locations - Singapore , Dubai , Doha and London .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Central Bank of India was established on 21 December 1911 by Sir Sorabji Pochkhanawala with Sir Pherozeshah Mehta as Chairman , and claims to have been the first commercial Indian bank completely owned and managed by Indians .
EARLY-20TH CENTURY Section::::Early-20th century .
By 1918 it had established a branch in Hyderabad .
A branch in nearby Secunderabad followed in 1925 .
In 1923 , it acquired the Tata Industrial Bank in the wake of the failure of the Alliance Bank of Simla .
The Tata bank , established in 1917 , had opened a branch in Madras in 1920 that became the Central Bank of India , Madras .
Central Bank of India was instrumental in the creation of the first Indian exchange bank , the Central Exchange Bank of India , which opened in London in 1936 .
However , Barclays Bank acquired Central Exchange Bank of India in 1938 .
Also before World War II , Central Bank of India established a branch in Rangoon .
The branch 's operations concentrated on business between Burma and India , and especially money transmission via telegraphic transfer .
Profits derived primarily from foreign exchange and margins .
The bank also lent against land , produce , and other assets , mostly to Indian businesses .
POST - WORLD WAR II Section::::Post - World War II .
In 1963 , the revolutionary government in Burma nationalized Central Bank of India 's operations there , which became People 's Bank No . 1 .
In 1969 , the Indian Government nationalized the bank on 19 July , together with 13 others .
In the 1980s the managers of the London branches of Central Bank of India , Punjab National Bank , and Union Bank of India were caught up in a fraud in which they made dubious loans to the Bangladeshi jute trader Rajender Singh Sethia .
The regulatory authorities in England and India forced all three Indian banks to close their London branches .
Central Bank of India was one of the first banks in India to issue credit cards in the year 1980 in collaboration with MasterCard .
SEE ALSO * Indian banking * List of banks in India CITATIONS AND REFERENCES Section::::Citations and references .
Citations
References
* Raychaudhuri , Tappan , Irfan Habib , & Dharma Kumar , eds .
( 1983 )
The Cambridge Economic History of India : Volume 2 , c.1751-c.1970 .
( CUP Archive ) .
*
Turnell , Sean ( 2009 )
Fiery Dragons : Banks , Moneylenders and Microfinnance in Burma .
( NAIS Press ) .