ALIVE AND SCHTICKING " Alive and Schticking " is the season premiere of the American television series Will & Graces eighth season .
It was written by Bill Wrubel and directed by series producer James Burrows .
The episode was broadcast live on NBC in the United States on September 29 , 2005 , and was performed twice by the actors that evening for the East and West coasts .
Alec Baldwin guest starred in " Alive and Schticking " and received an Emmy Award nomination for his performance .
In the episode , Grace ( Debra Messing ) contemplates having an affair with a married man , while Jack ( Sean Hayes ) begins a new career as the host of his new talk show Jack Talk .
Meanwhile , Will ( Eric McCormack ) tries to hide from Karen ( Megan Mullally ) the fact that her husband , Stan , is alive and faked his death due to troubles with the mob .
Will also tries to stop his former boss , Malcolm ( Baldwin ) , from dating Karen .
Will & Grace creators and executive producers David Kohan and Max Mutchnick were in favor of doing a live episode , and Kevin Reilly , who at the time served as NBC Entertainment President , thought it would be a good way to inaugurate the ( at the time ) final season of the show .
Since airing , " Alive and Schticking " has received mostly positive reviews from television critics , who enjoyed watching the mistakes made by the actors and their attempts to hide their laughter during the live broadcast .
The episode acquired a Nielsen rating of 9.81 and garnered the series ' highest rating in the 18–49 demographic since February 17 , 2005 , and biggest overall viewer total since February 24 , 2005 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Will ( Eric McCormack ) reveals to Grace ( Debra Messing ) that Karen 's ( Megan Mullally ) husband Stan is still alive .
He learned this from his former boss , Malcolm ( Alec Baldwin ) , a secret agent , who told him that Stan is now living under seclusion and faked his death because of troubles with the mob .
Will makes Grace promise that she keep this information to herself , but she breaks the promise and tells Jack ( Sean Hayes ) .
When Malcolm later visits Will at his apartment and warns him to not to tell people about Stan 's predicament , Karen and Rosario ( Shelley Morrison ) also arrive .
At meeting Karen , Malcolm becomes fond of her , as does Karen of him , even asking him out on a date , to which he accepts .
Will , however , tells Malcolm that he can not date Karen because Malcolm is still protecting Stan from the mob .
Meanwhile , Grace and Jack are discussing their own problems .
Grace uses Jack 's promiscuous history with married men as a legitimate reason to have an affair with a married man , but Jack tells her to forget about it as both of them are the moral role models to their friends .
After being honest with her , Jack confesses that the reason he is wearing an eye patch is not because he got glitter in his eye , as he told his friends .
When he refused to stop his singing performance during the debut of his new talk show , Jack Talk , even though the entire set had accidentally been set on fire , his eyebrow was burnt off .
Later , Will , Grace , and Jack all decide that it would be for the best to let Karen know the truth about Stan .
Will breaks the news to her , but Karen believes he is joking .
Rosario tells Karen that Stan is not dead , as she has been giving him reports on Karen .
At the admission , Karen fires Rosario and leaves Will 's apartment with Malcolm , explaining that Stan may be alive , but that he is still dead to her .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
" Alive and Schticking " was written by Bill Wrubel and directed by series producer James Burrows .
In July 2005 , it was announced by the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) that Will & Grace 's season premiere for season eight would be performed live .
It was also confirmed that actor Alec Baldwin would appear in the episode .
This was Baldwin 's third appearance , as he guest starred in two episodes from season seven , playing Will 's boss .
His initial decision to do the show was to work with Megan Mullally , who plays Karen ; " I just love Megan .
And so I said , ' Well , if you let me do it with Megan . '
And they said ' You got it . '
So I went and did that with them for four [ episodes ] .
It was fun .
For me now , it 's about who I work with . "
Will & Grace creators and executive producers David Kohan and Max Mutchnick were in favor of doing a live episode ; " We love the idea of a live episode because we get to show the audience of Will & Grace what we 've known from day one — we work with the best cast in network television , " said Mutchnick .
He noted that the live element would allow the writers to make changes in the script right up until the airing of the episode .
Kevin Reilly , who at the time served as NBC Entertainment President , said the " challenging live platform launch " for Will & Grace would be a good way for the show to inaugurate its final season .
In discussion of the episode , Burrows , the director of all Will & Grace episodes , commented : " This will be like the classic golden era of television that I was weaned on , where the audience sees everything .
Directing a live broadcast will be a first for me , and as long as I have been in the business , there are very few firsts . "
Upon learning about the live telecast , the cast had mixed emotions .
Sean Hayes , who plays Jack , was nervous about the episode and hoped there would be cue cards .
Debra Messing ( Grace ) " gasped loudly " when it was revealed that the technical demands of live television would mean that Burrows would not be directing on the stage floor , but would be up in a booth instead .
Messing noted that she had never done live television , but in regards to the live broadcast , said , " It starts out our final season in a real special way . "
Eric McCormack ( Will ) was intrigued about the idea and seemed to be ready for whatever happened ; " It keeps it interesting for us .
It stirs it up .
It gives us a new way to do it . "
Mullally revealed that the show 's writing team was " notorious for tinkering with the script 's laugh lines " , even during the actual taping of the episodes .
She hoped they would resist that urge for the live episode .
Messing , however , was sure that the writers would interfere during the broadcasts ; " I have a gut feeling that , like , 10 minutes before we go they 'll be like , ' Oh , no , no , you know what ?
Change this line to this .
Now we 're locked – go . ' "
Prior to the live episode , the cast had shot the second , third and fourth episodes of the season .
Shortly before this episode , Mullally injured her foot and was unable to walk without crutches .
The writers therefore had to put Mullally 's character , Karen , in a cast and a motorized scooter , ostensibly because the character was recovering from an operation to correct a webbed toe .
" Alive and Schticking " was performed live twice for viewers in the East and West coasts , with different jokes for each broadcast .
The first show was broadcast at 8:30 p.m. ( ET ) for the East ( this feed also aired live at 7:30 p.m. in the Central Time Zone ) and the second three hours later at 11:30 p.m. ET ( 8:30pm PT ) for the West .
During the two performances , Messing and Hayes had " attacks of the giggles " .
An audience member who was in attendance commented that Messing and Hayes " were so bad at keeping a straight face " during a dress rehearsal that Burrows had to get on the show 's PA system to yell at them .
After both telecasts were aired , Burrows revealed that McCormack , Messing , Hayes , Mullally , and Baldwin " had a ball , but they also dreaded it . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In its original American broadcast , " Alive and Schticking " was watched by 9.81 million households , according to Nielsen ratings .
The episode received a 4.4 rating/11 share among viewers in the 18–49 demographic .
It also scored the series ' highest 18–49 rating since February 17 , 2005 , and biggest overall viewer total since February 24 , 2005 . "
Alive and Schticking " finished 21st in the weekly ratings for the week of September 26–October 2 , 2005 .
In 2006 , Baldwin was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series " category for this episode .
" Alive and Schticking " received positive reviews .
Fort Worth Star - Telegram contributor Robert Philpot , who gave the episode a B+ rating , thought it was a pleasant surprise and an indication that there " might be some life " left in the show .
He added that the episode feels fresher because of the " rapid - fire dialogue , farcical situations and ubiquitous double - entendres .
And although this live edition was inarguably a stunt , it did prove that real people — and not mere machines — laugh at the characters and the jokes . "
Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine also noted that the episode showed that Will & Grace still had a bit of life left .
He added that McCormack seemed to flourish under the pressure , and that Hayes and Mullally " were given free rein to flex their Jack and Karen [ ... ] " .
Dana Stevens of Slate magazine reported that " Alive and Schticking " offered a chance to punch up the show with some " unusually broad sight gags .
"
She wrote that the real reason to watch the episode were the mistakes made by the actors .
Philpot continued that moments like Will and his boss making out recalled the show 's " glory days " , and Messing 's trouble keeping a straight face " brought back fond memories of Tim Conway cracking up Harvey Korman on The Carol Burnett Show . "
Knoxville News Sentinel 's writer Terry Morrow also commented that the episode reminded him of The Carol Burnett Show because of its " goofiness and by - the - seat - of - its - pants style . "
Morrow added that the episode made him laugh more than any other sitcom on network television .
Jeffrey Kauffman of DVD Talk praised Baldwin for his performance and commented that " Alive and Schticking " helped " jumpstart the series creatively after a couple of seasons " and " It 's fun [ ... ] to see the actors momentarily break character , a la
The Carol Burnett Show , where the absurdity of certain situations ( usually involving Jack and/or Karen ) makes giggling all but impossible . "
Entertainment Weekly television critic Gary Susman gave " Alive and Schticking " four stars , while Frazier Moore of the Associated Press lauded it as a " fun , and attention - grabbing , note . "
The Hollywood Reporter 's Ray Richmond said " In hindsight , this live thing proved a good idea . "
" Alive and Schticking " received less positive reviews as well .
Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch wrote that the live episode " proved once and for all that Will & Grace should have been buried before now , " and Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk pointed out that its underlying storyline " is a little too over - the - top . "
Jessica Banov of The Fayetteville Observer wrote , " The first live show ... was so - so .
The lighting was weird , and I 'm not sure what was up with Debra Messing 's hair .
But it was funny to see Messing and Sean Hayes break from their scripts to giggle . "
Cinquemani commented that Baldwin 's " absurd " role as Malcolm " is proving to be one of Will & Grace 's most enduring guest stars . "
David Blum of The New York Sun reported that the producers of Will & Grace wasted Baldwin 's " prodigious talents on a supporting role this past season , when it 's clear he could effortlessly carry his own network series . "
Kauffman concluded that Grace 's joke about George Bush being brain dead " just falls amazingly flat " .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Alive and Schticking " at the Internet Movie Database * " Alive and Schticking " at TV.com * " Alive and Schticking " Alternative versions at the Internet Movie Database