DENAILING
Denailing is the extraction of the nails from the fingers and/or toes , either as a medical procedure to treat severe nail infections , or as a method of torture .
The United Nations Istanbul Protocol describes nail removal and the insertion of objects such as wire under the nail as forms of torture .
Removed nails are capable of growing back normally over several months if the nail matrix is left intact through surgical extraction .
However , if the matrix is damaged by trauma , it can result in an overgrowth of tissue from the proximal nail fold , resulting in the formation of pterygium .
Particularly , if the nail matrix is burnt by a heated instrument , subsequent growth may produce nails which are striped , thin , or broken into longitudinal segments .
Medieval sources described the denailing interrogation process as conducted by laying the prisoner on a tabletop — securing the hands by chains around the wrists and the bare feet by chains around the ankles — and using a metal forceps or pliers — often heated red - hot — to individually grasp each nail in turn and slowly pry it from the nail bed before tearing it off the finger or toe .
A more painful variant used in medieval Spain was performed by introducing a sharp wedge of wood or metal between the flesh and each nail and slowly hammering the wedge under the nail until it was torn free .
Another cruel variant involved using rough skewers of wood or bone dipped in boiling sulfur .
A number of such skewers were slowly driven into the flesh under the prisoner 's toenails .
Alternately , the skewer was dipped in boiling oil , which served a dual purpose of both burning the incredibly sensitive flesh and lubricating the needle so that the torturer could freely explore a wide surface area beneath the toenail .
When enough skewers had been driven home to pry each nail loose from its bed , the nail was torn out at the root with a pair of pliers .
This was a favorite technique of torture in the German witch - hunter 's arsenal , being extremely inexpensive , portable , and easy to inflict .
It is also recorded that , in more recent times — particularly , during the Armenian genocide of the 1910s — phonograph needles were driven under fingernails and toenails to torture the prisoner before his nails were torn out with pliers .
In the aftermath of Italy 's republican referendum after World War II , efforts to prosecute former officials in the Fascist government for collaborationism and war crimes resulted in the legal differentiation between the concepts of normal brutality , cruel brutality , and particularly cruel brutality .
Only in the case of particularly cruel brutality would the accused be rejected for amnesty .
Denailing was generally considered to fall under the first two categories , as for a brutality to be considered particularly cruel , it had to " horrify even those who are familiar with torture . "
SEE
ALSO * Nail ( anatomy ) * List of methods of torture NOTES FURTHER READING
* M. Donnelly and D. Diehl , The Big Book of Pain ( Scroud , Gloucestershire , U.K. :
The History Press , 2011 ) .