COACH ERNIE PANTUSSO Ernie Pantusso ( or Pantuso ) , commonly known as " Coach " , is a fictional character on the American television show Cheers , portrayed by Nicholas Colasanto between 1982 and 1985 .
Coach was originally Sam Malone 's baseball coach before the show 's pilot episode .
He later became a bartender of Cheers , while Sam became its owner and another bartender .
He is not " worldly wise " but has some shred of wit .
He also has a daughter named Lisa , who solely appeared in " Coach 's Daughter " ( 1982 ) , from his late wife Angela .
While he technically last appeared in the cold opening of " Rescue Me " , Colasanto 's last filmed appearance as Coach was an episode " Cheerio , Cheers " .
When Colasanto died in 1985 , Coach was written out as deceased without explanation .
Since then , Colasanto 's replacement Woody Harrelson joined the cast as Woody Boyd in the fourth season of Cheers .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Former umpire Ron Luciano auditioned for Coach Ernie Pantusso , but he failed to get the part because producers " wanted an experienced actor " .
Robert Prosky , who later appeared in the eleventh - season episode " Daddy 's Little Middle - Aged Girl " ( 1992 ) as the character Rebecca Howe 's Navy father , was offered the role of Coach , but he turned down the role .
Therefore , the role was given to Nicholas Colasanto .
According to Colasanto , Coach was nearly " child - like " and more of a surrogate " son " than a surrogate " father " to Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) , while Sam was more of a " father " to Coach for dependency on Sam 's " moral support " .
Moreover , Coach was beloved by everyone and a good " lovable man " .
According to director and producer James Burrows , the character of Coach was much different from the actor Nick :
Coach was slow , while Nick was sharp .
ROLE Section::::Role .
Ernie " Coach " Pantusso is a slow , forgetful bartender with a gravel voice , caring personality , shred of intelligence , and warm heart .
" The Coach does n't have any worldly ambitions — he 's very happy to make his paycheck , and drink with the boys , " said portrayer Colasanto .
Moreover , he listens to people and their problems very well .
Ernie was nicknamed " Coach " because he was a baseball coach with the Boston Red Sox and other teams , like the minor league baseball team Pawtucket Red Sox ( discovered in " The Tortelli Tort , " episode 3 [ 1982 ] ) .
When Sam succumbed to alcoholism , leading to the end of his baseball career , Sam bought the bar Cheers and hired Coach as a co - bartender .
He is still nicknamed " Coach " by everyone , although he has been retired from coaching for years .
As a young man , Ernie attended Catholic School , but dropped out of high school and joined the Navy .
He has a sister and two brothers ; the younger brother has a daughter Joyce ( Cady McClain ) , who appears in only " The Godfather , Part III " ( episode 117 , 1987 ) .
As learned in " An American Family " ( season 3 , episode 9 ) , he served in the Vietnam War .
Coach is a widower since his wife Angela died before the show debuted .
They have a daughter , Lisa ( Allyce Beasley ) , who only appears in " Coach 's Daughter " ( 1982 ) .
He has numerous love interests , like the widow Irene Blanchard in two - episode " Coach in Love " , who breaks off the engagement after winning the lottery and later marries a millionaire .
He alongside Sam later earns a high school diploma for passing a geography class in " Teacher 's Pet " ( 1985 ) .
In the two - part episode " Rebound " ( 1984 ) , after Sam and Diane ended their on - and - off relationship , Coach goes to Diane Chambers 's ( Shelley Long ) apartment to inform her about Sam 's relapse into alcoholism , so she brings in her love interest , a psychiatrist Frasier Crane , to help Sam cope with his alcoholism .
Coach cunningly convinces the trio reasons to rehire Diane as a waitress again , such as preventing Sam 's relapse , Diane from losing her mind again , and Sam and Diane from thinking about each other .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Colasanto , who played Coach , had heart disease since the mid-1970s exacerbated by alcoholism .
After years of sobriety , during production his heart disease worsened .
Castmates noticed his weight loss , although the actor kept the severity of his illness a secret .
Shortly after Christmas 1984 , Colasanto was admitted to a local hospital with water in his lungs .
Co - star Ted Danson later said that the veteran actor had difficulty remembering his lines during production that season .
After he was released from the hospital , Colasanto 's doctor recommended that he not return to work .
Although he appeared in the cold opening of the third - season finale ( " Rescue Me " ) , his last full episode was " Cheerio Cheers " ( filmed in late November 1984 ) .
Following Colasanto 's death by heart attack on February 12 , 1985 , the show 's creators decided not to recast Coach 's role , so Coach is written out of the show as deceased without explanation and is replaced since " Birth , Death , Love and Rice " ( episode 70 , 1985 ) by a co - bartender Woody Boyd , portrayed by Woody Harrelson .
Apparently Coach and Woody were " Pen Pals " exchanging pens in the mail .
Sam explains to Woody that Coach died recently .
When Sam visits Diane , she expresses sympathy about Coach 's death .
Coach was referenced occasionally after that , including the time that his niece Joyce appears in only one episode , " The Godfather , Part III " ( 1987 ) .
In the series finale , " One for the Road " , Sam straightens a photograph of Geronimo , used by the late Colasanto as part of his dressing room while he was alive .
The photo was hanging at the bar wall of the stage set " as a remembrance . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Since 1983 , Nicholas Colasanto was Emmy - nominated three times as an Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for his role of Coach , including his posthumous award nomination in 1985 , but he did not win .
On April 19 , 1985 , Colasanto was awarded posthumously the Best Supporting Actor by Viewers for Quality Television , a defunct non - profit organization that determined what was considered high - quality on television , for this role .
Michael Hill from The Baltimore Evening Sun called Coach " the brilliant character " .
Robert Bianco praised Coach as the " heart " of the show , an ensemble 's father figure , and Diane Chambers ' " dependable ally " .
Bianco praised Coach for giving heart to the " Sam and Diane " story and for making the show a " classic " .
He was devastated that the actor and the character himself died , and he was disappointed that the show was not as great without him .
Even with Coach 's replacement Woody Boyd , Bianco considered Coach irreplaceable .
Ted Danson , who played Sam Malone on Cheers , felt that the show lost its " heart and soul " following Colasanto 's death .
Bill Simmons , previous writer of ESPN , praised Coach for making the show a " show " , yet he felt that his death transformed the show into a " sitcom " .
A writer under a pseudonymous name , Joe Sixpack , from Philadelphia Daily News , named Coach his second most - favorite " complete professional " bartender with a warm heart to customers , despite his limited range of intelligence .
Columnist Amber Lee from the Bleacher Report website called Coach one of " 25 funniest coaches of film and television " .
Jeffrey Robinson of the DVD Talk website praised Colasanto 's performance for executing many dimensions to his character Coach , as opposed to his replacement Woody Boyd , whom he found one - dimensional and clueless .
Adam Arseneau disdained the show for improperly honoring the memory of Colasanto by poorly handling his character Coach 's disappearance in the third season and death in the fourth .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes