TWO - STROKE OIL Two - stroke oil ( also referred to as two - cycle oil , 2-cycle oil , 2 T oil , 2-stroke oil or petroil ) is a special type of motor oil intended for use in crankcase compression two - stroke engines .
Unlike a four - stroke engine , whose crankcase is closed except for its ventilation system , a two - stroke engine uses the crankcase as part of the induction tract , and therefore , oil must be mixed with gasoline to be distributed throughout the engine for lubrication .
The resultant mix is referred to as petroil .
This oil is ultimately burned along with the fuel as a total - loss oiling system .
This results in increased exhaust emissions , sometimes with excess smoke and/or a distinctive odor .
The oil - base stock can be petroleum , castor oil , semi - synthetic or synthetic oil and is mixed ( or metered by injection ) with petrol / gasoline at a volumetric fuel - to - oil ratio ranging from 16:1 to as low as 100:1 .
To avoid the high emissions and oily deposits on spark plugs , modern two - strokes , especially for small engines such as garden equipment and chainsaws , may now demand a synthetic oil and can suffer from oiling problems otherwise .
Engine original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ) introduced pre - injection systems ( sometimes known as " auto - lube " ) to engines to operate from a 32:1 to 100:1 ratio .
Oils must meet or exceed the following typical specifications : TC - W3TM , NMMA , [ API ] TC , JASO FC , ISO - L - EGC .
Comparing regular lubricating oil with two - stroke oil , the relevant difference is that two - stroke oil must have a much lower ash content .
This is required to minimize deposits that tend to form if ash is present in the oil which is burned in the engine 's combustion chamber .
Additionally a non-2T - specific oil can turn to gum in a matter of days if mixed with gasoline and not immediately consumed .
Another important factor is that 4-stroke engines have a different requirement for ' stickiness ' than 2-strokes do .
Since the 1980s different types of two - stroke oil have been developed for specialized uses such as outboard motor two - strokes , premix two - stroke oil , as well as the more standard auto lube ( motorcycle ) two - stroke oil .
As a rule of thumb , most containers of oil commercially offered will have somewhere on the label printed that it is compatible with ' Autolube ' or injector pumps .
Those bottles tend to have the consistency of liquid dish soap if shaken .
A more viscous oil can not reliably be passed through an injection system , although a premix machine can be run on either type .
" Racing " oil or castor - based does offer excellent lubricity - at the expense of premature coking .
For the average moped / scooter / trail rider it will not garner an appreciable increase in performance and will require very frequent teardowns .
ADDITIVE INGREDIENTS Section::::Additive ingredients .
Additives for two - stroke oils fall into several general categories : Detergent / Dispersants , Antiwear agents , Biodegradability components and antioxidants
( Zinc compounds ) .
Some of the higher quality include a fuel stabilizer as well .
SEE ALSO * API - TC REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How Two - stroke Engines Work