TOOHEYS NEW
Tooheys New is a standard Australian lager and the most popular of the Tooheys ' beers owned by the New Zealand Lion Nathan beverages company .
It can be found on tap at almost any bar in New South Wales .
HISTORY Section::::History .
It was first brewed in 1931 and was marketed under the name Tooheys New Special .
In the 1970s , the beer began being marketed as Tooheys New Special Draught when sold in cans and bottles , later shortened to Tooheys Draught .
Tap beer was still sold as Tooheys New , however .
In 1998 , the company decided to sell the beer under one name across all modes as Tooheys New .
Currently Tooheys New is official sponsor of the New South Wales Rugby Union 's club competition ( the Tooheys New Cup ) , is the official beer of the Wallabies and sponsors the Melbourne Cup .
Through 2006 , it was also naming sponsor of the Australian section of the Super 14 Rugby Competition , but was replaced by Investec Bank after their sponsorship contract expired .
In the mid-1970s the beer was successfully promoted with a jingle ' I feel like a Tooheys or two ' , one of the more successful campaigns in Australian advertising .
The jingle 's ubiquitous presence registered such that when school children were tested and asked to complete the following : ' I feel like … ' For the vast majority there was only one right answer : '
A Tooheys ' The jingle also made an impression on touring rocker David Bowie who sang it during the encore of his final Australian concert in 1978 .
Around 2008/09 , Tooheys New began a marketing campaign , to have only 5 ingredients .
Malt , hops , barley , yeast and sugar to break away from previous brew with many additives .
WHITE STAG
Section::::White Stag .
In September 2008 , Tooheys came out with a low - carbohydrate beer product called Tooheys New White Stag .
It is a full strength beer with the claim of " only one third of the carbs of standard full strength beers " .
The name has been re - used from Tooheys
Stag lager released in 1930 .
Toohey 's advertising blurb claims that New is equivalent to the old Stag lager .
SEE ALSO
* Australian pub * Beer in Australia
* List of breweries in Australia REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Tooheys New product site *
Tooheys New tasting notes