WE WILL ROCK YOU ( MUSICAL )
We Will Rock
You ( often abbreviated as WWRY ) is a rock musical based on the songs of British rock band Queen with a book by Ben Elton .
The musical tells the story of a group of Bohemians who struggle to restore the free exchange of thought , fashion , and live music in a distant future where everyone dresses , thinks and acts the same .
Musical instruments and composers are forbidden , and rock music is all but unknown .
Directed by Christopher Renshaw and choreographed by Arlene Phillips , the original West End production opened at the Dominion Theatre on 14 May 2002 , with Tony Vincent , Hannah Jane Fox , Sharon D. Clarke and Kerry Ellis in principal roles .
Although the musical was at first panned by critics , it has become an audience favourite , becoming the longest - running musical at the Dominion Theatre , celebrating its tenth anniversary on 14 May 2012 .
The fifteenth longest - running musical in West End history , the London production closed on 31 May 2014 after a final performance in which Brian May and Roger Taylor both performed .
A number of international productions have since followed the original , and We Will Rock
You has been seen in six of the world 's continents .
Many productions are still active globally .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
According to Brian May , Queen 's manager Jim Beach had spoken with the band about creating a jukebox musical with Queen 's songs since the mid-1990s .
Initially , the intent was to create a biographical story of Freddie Mercury .
About this time , Robert De Niro 's production company Tribeca expressed interest in a Queen musical , but it found the original idea difficult to work with .
In 2000 , Ben Elton was approached to start talks with May and Taylor on the project .
He suggested taking the musical down a different path than initially imagined , creating an original story that would capture the spirit of much of their music .
He worked closely with May and Taylor to incorporate Queen 's songs into the story .
Elton has also stated that he was in part inspired by the computer - controlled dystopia of the science - fiction film The Matrix .
The script was eventually completed midway through 2001 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
London 's critics almost uniformly panned the show , criticising the concept and direction .
The Guardian wrote that the premise " really is as sixth form as it sounds " , called the production " ruthlessly packaged and manufactured " and opined that the " sometimes funny " libretto exists mainly to " devise more unlikely ways to wring out another Queen song .
"
The Daily Mirror wrote that " Ben Elton should be shot for this risible story .
"
The Daily Telegraph described it as " guaranteed to bore you rigid " and " prolefeed at its worst . "
However , some individual performances received praise and the production remains a popular success .
PRODUCTIONS WEST END AND UK TOUR
Section::::Productions .
Section::::West End and UK tour .
The original production of We
Will Rock
You opened on 12 May 2002 at the Dominion Theatre , London , with previews beginning on 26 April .
Tony Vincent played the lead role of Galileo , with Hannah Jane Fox as Scaramouche , Sharon D. Clarke as Killer Queen , Nigel Planer as Pop , Nigel Clauzel as Brit and Kerry Ellis as Meat .
For her performance , Clarke was nominated for " Best Performance in a Supporting Role in a Musical or Entertainment " at the 2003 Olivier Awards .
On 17 August 2005
We Will Rock
You became the longest running musical at that venue , surpassing the previous record - holder Grease .
This is a notable achievement because the Dominion Theatre is one of the largest theatrical venues in West End , with a seating a capacity of 2,163 patrons .
At the 2011 Laurence Olivier Awards , the show won the Audience Award for Most Popular Show .
Notable cast replacements include Mig Ayesa , who played Galileo , taking over from Tony Vincent .
Mazz Murray took over the role of Killer Queen after Sharon D. Clarke 's departure in April 2004 .
Murray left the production in August 2011 , which made her the longest running principal cast member , although she left the production briefly in September 2010 for maternity leave .
Brenda Edwards , who was an X - Factor semi - finalist in 2005 , is currently performing the role of Killer Queen .
On 22 September 2008 I 'd Do Anything semi - finalist , Rachel Tucker , began performing in the role of Meat .
She left the production on 19 September 2009 .
The role was then taken on by Irish born performer Louise Bowden , who had already performed in several prolific musicals including Mamma Mia ! , Guys and Dolls and Mary Poppins .
Bowden unexpectedly quit the production in May 2010 .
It was then left to Amanda Coutts to perform the role Meat .
Coutts was originally Bowden 's understudy .
The West End production featured a nine piece live band under the musical direction of Stuart Morley .
A national UK tour was launched in 2009 at the Palace Theatre , Manchester .
The 2009 tour cast initially included , Alex Gaumond as Galileo , Sarah French - Ellis as Scaramouche , Brenda Edwards as Killer Queen , Georgina Hagen as Meat , Jonathan Wilkes as Khashoggi , Kevin Kennedy as Pop .
Gaumond and French - Ellis returned to play their characters in the West End and were Galileo and Scaramouche .
A second UK tour launched in December 2010 at the Palace Theatre , Manchester .
On 11 March 2014 it was announced the West End production would close on 31 May 2014 , shortly after its 12th Anniversary , and after 4600 performances at the Dominion Theatre .
AUSTRALIA AND JAPAN Section::::Australia and Japan .
The first international production premiered at the Regent Theatre in Melbourne , Australia on 7 August 2003 .
The cast included Michael Falzon as Galileo , Kate Hoolihan as Scaramouche and Annie Crummer as Killer Queen .
Amanda Harrison , who originated Oz in this Melbourne production , had previously been in the ensemble of the original London production .
The production closed at this venue on 4 March 2004 to make way for Australian tour stops at Burswood Theatre , Perth ( 27 April to June 2004 ) , Queensland Performing Arts Centre , Brisbane ( 27 July to 25 September 2004 ) , and Star City Lyric Theatre , Sydney ( 9 October 2004 to 13 March 2005 ) .
The same production then made an international tour stop at the Shinjuku Koma Theater in Tokyo , Japan where it ran from 27 May to 24 August 2005 .
Due to the success of the Japan tour stop , another Australian tour group was put together in 2006 .
They performed at the same venue : the Shinjuku Koma Theatre in Tokyo , from 14 November to 17 December 2006 .
Some of the actors of the 2005 tour returned for the 2006 tour , including Peter Murphy as Galileo , Daniel Fletcher as Brit , Ross Givern as Khashoggi and Robert Grubb as Pop .
Kate Hoolihan , who had played Scaramouche in the 2005 tour , chose to switch to the role of Oz in the 2006 tour .
The tour group then performed in Osaka from 5 January 2007 at the Umeda Arts Theater .
A new tour of Australia was announced on 17 August 2015 .
The tour is commenced in Sydney , NSW on 30 April 2016 .
In 2018 , Platinum Entertainment Perth will present
Western Australia 's first PRO / AM production of We Will Rock You , commencing 23 March 2018 at His Majesty 's Theatre , Perth .
The PRO / AM production stars Normie Rowe , Chris Murphy , Courtney Murphy , Dean Misdale , and introduces Blake Williams in the role of Galileo , with Holly Denton as Scaramouche .
Ryan Dawson joins the cast in the role of Khashoggi , following his stint in the role of Madonna in London 's West End .
In November 2018 , Canberra based production company Peewee Productions launched an elaborate PRO / AM stage production at the AIS arena , running for three nights .
It was incredible .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
A Spanish production ran from 1 October 2003 ( official opening on 3 November ) to 30 May 2004 at Teatro Calderón , Madrid .
The lead role of Galileo was shared by Momo Cortés and Miquel Fernández .
The rest of the cast included María Blanco as Scaramouche , Sheilah Cuffy as Killer Queen , Javier Navares as Khashoggi , Ángel Padilla as Brit , Eva María Cortés ( sister of Momo Cortés ) as Meat , and José María Guzmán and Juanjo Pardo
sharing the role of Pop .
The Madrid production had all spoken dialogue and the lyrics translated into Spanish , except for the songs
" We Will Rock You " , "
We Are the Champions " and " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which retained their English lyrics .
After closing at Teatro Calderón , the show began a tour through Spain with stops at Barcelona , Bilbao , Valencia , and Seville .
In 2007 the production returned to Teatro Calderón , Madrid with previews from 23 January and an official opening on 12 February .
This stage featured an entirely new cast , with Julián Fontalvo and Daniel Diges sharing the role of Galileo , Ruth Calvo and Elena Medina sharing the role of Scaramouche , Nieves Val León and Tessa Bodí sharing the role of Killer Queen , Carlos Fernández as Khashoggi , Juán Félix Bejarano as Brit , María López y Lara Alcázar sharing the role of Meat , and Diego Falcón as Pop .
The production finally closed on 6 January 2008 .
LAS VEGAS Section::::Las Vegas .
A US tour had originally been planned for 2004 , with initially announced stops in Connecticut and Washington state .
However , due to scheduling conflicts of the creative team , the US tour was scrapped and replaced with a production housed at the Paris Las Vegas hotel and casino in Las Vegas , Nevada , which is the musical 's first North American venue .
The Las Vegas production had previews from 4 August and officially opened on 8 September 2004 .
Tony Vincent , who had originated the role of Galileo in the London production , reprised the role , which he alternated with Jason Wooten .
Aspen Miller and Kacie Sheik shared the role of Scaramouche , Patti Russo was Killer Queen , and Ty Taylor was Brit .
The Las Vegas production " trimmed " down the book into a single act show .
This production closed on 27 November 2005 .
NORTH AMERICAN TOUR
Section::::North American tour .
On 15 October 2013 , a North American tour began at the Hippodrome Theatre in Baltimore , Maryland .
The original cast included Brian Justin Crum ( Broadway 's Next to Normal ) as Galileo , PJ Griffith ( Broadway 's American Idiot and Mamma Mia ! ) as Khashoggi , Jacqueline Arnold ( Broadway 's Priscilla Queen of the Desert ) as Killer Queen , Jared Zirilli ( Broadway 's Lysistrata Jones ) as Britney , Ruby Lewis ( Grease , Desperate Housewives ) as Scaramouche , Ryan Knowles ( Newsical , Radio City Music Hall ) as Buddy and Erica Peck ( We Will Rock You Toronto Cast ) as Oz .
The North American leg on the We
Will Rock
You tour covered nearly the whole of the US , corners of Canada and a sold out run in Mexico City at the Auditiorio Nacional .
In all , the North American leg of the WWRY World tour included 298 performances , 30 cities , 23 States / Territories , 3 Countries , over 30,000 miles traveled and over a half - a - million people in attendance .
RUSSIA
Section::::Russia .
A Russian production opened in the Estrada Theatre , Moscow on 17 October 2004 .
The production 's dialogue and all songs but three were translated into Russian , by Evgeny Margulis of Mashina Vremeni .
This production closed only four months after its opening due to disagreements between the show 's producers , despite fan protests to keep the show going .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
A German production opened in the Musical Dome , Cologne on 12 December 2004 .
The Cologne production had the spoken dialogue translated to German , but the musical numbers consisted of a mix of translated German language lyrics and the original English language lyrics .
According to Brian May , the language combination was intentional by writer Ben Elton , with German representing the show 's " present day " and English representing the distant past .
The production closed at this venue on 30 September 2008 to be transferred to Stuttgart .
The Stuttgart transfer opened at the Apollo Theatre on 13 November 2008 after previews from 7 November 2008 .
The production opened in Berlin on 21 October 2010 and closed for good on 21 October 2011 .
A follow up tour version started in December 2012 in Basel and closed in June 2013 in Essen .
It is going to restart in September 2014 in Munich followed by Frankfurt and Vienna .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
A South African production opened at the Civic Theatre in Johannesburg on 9 May 2006 .
The production starred Francois Schreuder as Galileo , Helen Burger as Scaramouche , Vicky Sampson as Killer Queen , and Helen Goldberg as Oz .
This production made tour stops at the Artscape in Cape Town ( from 25 July ) and the Playhouse Opera in Durban ( 29 September to 29 October 2006 ) before closing .
SWITZERLAND AND AUSTRIA Section::::Switzerland and Austria .
A German - language production opened in Zürich , Switzerland on 3 December 2006 at Theatre Stadthof 11 , Oerlikon using the book of the bilingual Cologne production .
The Swiss production starred Jessica Kessler as Scaramouche , Brigitte Oelke as Killer Queen and Rachel Fischer as Ozzy .
This production closed at the end of 2007 to be transferred to Vienna .
The transfer opened in Vienna , Austria on 24 January 2008 , at the Raimund Theatre where it ran until 13 July 2008 .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
A Canadian production began previews on 14 March and officially opened on 10 April 2007 at the Canon Theatre , Toronto .
Mig Ayesa , who played the lead role in the London production , had been offered the role in the Canadian production by Brian May and Ben Elton , but the Canadian producers wanted an all - Canadian cast and Quebec native Yvan Pednault was given the role .
The rest of the cast included Erica Peck as Scaramouche , Alana Bridgewater as Killer Queen , Suzie McNeil as Oz and Evan Buliung as Khashoggi .
McNeil had been a participant of the reality show , in which she had competed against Ayesa and former Las Vegas
We Will Rock
You cast member Ty Taylor .
This production closed at the Canon Theatre on 11 May 2008 to be transferred to the Panasonic Theatre , where it opened on 16 July 2008 .
The new Toronto production underwent major rewrites in order to trim the show before its reopening .
Changes include : there is no longer any dialogue between " Ga - Ga " and " I Want to Break Free " ; " One Vision " has been cut ; the Act Two song sequence is now " Fat Bottomed Girls " , " Who Wants to Live Forever " , " Seven Seas of Rhye " , " Hammer to Fall " and then " Another One Bites the Dust " before leading to the finale .
In October 2008 , Camilla Scott took over the role of Khashoggi , a character that had previously been portrayed as a male , though her understudies remain male .
Erica Peck , who originated the role of Scaramouche in this production , was scheduled to reprise her role from 29 May to the closing date .
This production closed on 28 June 2009 .
NORTH AMERICAN REGIONAL THEATRE PREMIERE Section::::North American Regional Theatre Premiere .
The North American Regional Theatre Premiere production , directed by Thom Currie , opened at Thunder Bay , Ontario 's Magnus Theatre on 8 September 2017 .
The production was choreographed by Julie Tomaino with assistant choreography by Robert Allan .
Set design was by Joe Pagnan and lighting design was by Rebecca Miller .
Costumes were designed by Mervi Agombar , with musical direction by Danny Johnson .
The cast featured Adam Charles ( Galileo ) , Jessie Cox ( Scaramouche ) , Gabi Epstein ( Killer Queen ) , Spencer Hari ( Khashoggi ) , Ryan G. Hinds ( Brit ) , Amy Sellors ( Oz ) , Jeremy LaPalme ( Buddy ) , with Dean Deffett , Jade Percival , Matthew Pinkerton , Chelsea Preston , and Alyssa Smith .
With sold out audiences during its initial scheduled run and due to popular demand , the production was held over .
It closed 30 September 2017 .
AUSTRALASIAN TOUR
Section::::Australasian tour .
An Australasian tour was launched at the end of 2007 in New Zealand , in which previous We Will Rock
You cast members MiG Ayesa ( London cast ) , Annie Crummer ( original Australian cast ) , Neels Clasen ( original South African cast ) and Malcolm Terry ( original South African cast )
reprise their roles as Galileo , Killer Queen , Khashoggi and Pop respectively .
Talia Kodesh , who had played Oz in the South African production , played the role of Scaramouche in the New Zealand tour stop .
After the tour left New Zealand , the role was taken over by Sivan Raphaely , who had been in the ensemble of the original South African production .
The tour performed in Auckland , New Zealand at The Civic , The Edge ( 26 October to 2 December 2007 ) , in Seoul , South Korea at the Seongnam Arts Centre ( 2 to 24 February 2008 ) , in Singapore at the Esplanade Theatre ( 28 March to 27 April 2008 ) , in Hong Kong at The Lyric Theatre of The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts ( 16 May to 22 June 2008 ) and in Bangkok , Thailand at the Muangthai Ratchadalai Theatre ( 12 to 27 July 2008 ) .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
An Italian production opened on 4 December 2009 at the Allianz Teatro in Milan , Italy .
Starring Gianluca Merolli and Salvo Vinci as Galileo , Marta Rossi and Martina Ciabatti as Scaramouche , Valentina Ferrari as Killer Queen , Salvo Bruno and Carlo Spano as Khashoggi , Paolo Barillari as Brit , Loredana Fadda and Mary Dima as Oz and Massimiliano Colonna as Pop .
WWRY Italy is produced by Barley Arts and directed by Maurizio Colombi .
The musical director is Roberto Zanaboni followed by Davide Magnabosco ( keyboard ) , Giovanni Maria Lori ( keyboard ) , Linda Pinelli ( bass ) , Alex Polifrone ( drums ) , Marco Scazzetta ( percussions ) , Andrea Cervetto ( guitar ) and the lead guitarist is Tristan Avakian , who had a successful run with WWRY Toronto .
All the dialogues are in Italian and almost all the songs are in English , except for " Radio Ga Ga " and " No One But You " .
The translation and adaptation of the Italian script were made by Raffaella Rolla with the co - operation of Alice Mistroni .
The show is scheduled to tour across Italy over the year , so far visiting Milan , Bologna , Trieste and Rome .
The second season is due to start in Bergamo on 4 November and it will be on tour until March 2011 .
The double cast has been dropped therefore
this year the leading roles are : Galileo ( Salvo Vinci ) , Scaramouche ( Martha Rossi ) , Oz ( Loredana Fadda ) , Brit ( Paolo Barillari ) , Khashoggi ( Salvo Bruno ) , Killer Queen ( Valentina ) ,
Pop ( Massimiliano Colonna ) .
The new lead guitarist is Marco Gerace .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
12 September through 18 December 2010 a big production of WWRY were played in Stockholm , Sweden at the venue Cirkus .
The spoken dialogue is translated to Swedish by Anders Albien .
Cast :
Killer Queen :
Tina Lejonberg , Galileo :
Bruno Mitsogiannis , Scaramouche : Marie Haugen Smistad , Ozzy :
Anna Lidman , Brit : Henrik Orwander , Khashoggi : Daniel Engman ,
Peps : Simon Bengtsson Tibblin , Teacher : Linda Holmgren ,
Christer : Tomas Marcotte .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
January 2011 , the Stockholm Production of WWRY moved to Oslo , Norway .
The production opened 23 January at Folketeateret .
The spoken dialogue ( and some of the songs ) was translated to Norwegian by Kjetil Indregard .
Cast :
Killer Queen : Reidun Sæther , Galileo :
Espen Grjotheim , Scaramouche : Marie Haugen Smistad , Ozzy :
Anna Lidman , Brit : Eivind Dundas , Khashoggi : Daniel Engman , Oddi ( Pop ) : Mads Henning Jørgensen , Big Macca :
Håvard Bakke , Teacher : Linda Holmgren .
The production closed 16 April 2011 .
BELGIUM Section::::Belgium .
On 1 September 2011 , the Netherlands production was transferred to Antwerp .
Many of the cast members had already played the musical in the Netherlands , but the challenge was that they had to learn the ' Belgian language ' : Cast * Galileo – Tim Driesen
* Scaramouche – Marjolein Teepen * Killer Queen – Goele De Raedt
* Khashoggi – Paul Dreisan * Brit – Martin van der Starre
* Ozzy – Floortje Smit
* Arno – Karel Deruwe Marjolein Teepen has won the Flemish Musical Award on 18 June 2012 .
Marjolein has won the award for " Best Female Lead " for her role as Scaramouche in the Belgian version of the musical We Will Rock You .
She was also nominated in the Netherlands .
ROYAL CARIBBEAN SHIP - ANTHEM OF THE SEAS Section::::Royal Caribbean Ship - Anthem of the Seas .
A production of the show opened on 23 April 2015 on board the new Royal Caribbean cruise ship , Anthem of the Seas .
All passengers on the ship have the option of attending , provided they book a particular performance in advance .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
Open on March 2016 in São Paulo , Brazil .
Cast * Alírio Netto ( Galileo )
* Beto Sargentelli ( Galileo alternate )
* Lívia Dabarian ( Scaramouche ) * Felipe de Carolis ( Toca / POP ) * Fred Silveira ( Khashoggi ) * Andrezza Massei ( Killer Queen ) * Nicholas Maia ( Brit ) * Thais Piza ( Ozzy ) * Letícia Soares ( Teacher )
Raquel Quarterone ( Ensemble ) Fernanda Belinatti ( Ensemble )
Mariana Hidemi ( Ensemble )
Carol Isolani ( Ensemble ) Bárbara Guerra Xavier ( Ensemble ) Marisol Marcondes ( Ensemble ) Amanda Doring ( Ensemble ) Jefferson Ferreira ( Ensemble )
Fernando Marianno ( Ensemble ) Daniel Caldini ( Ensemble )
Renato Bellini ( Ensemble ) Thiago Machado ( Ensemble )
Fernando Lourenção ( Ensemble ) Leo Rommano ( Ensemble )
Anelita Gallo ( Swing e Dance Captain )
Clara Camargo ( Swing ) Gabriel Conrad ( Swing e Dance Captain Assistante )
Danilo Barbieri ( Swing ) 2016
AUSTRALIAN TOUR Section::::2016
Australian Tour .
A tour of the show in Australia started in April 2016 in Sydney , before touring to Brisbane and finishing up in Melbourne .
OTHER PRODUCTIONS
Section::::Other productions .
From 2006 , the show has been licensed for amateur productions in the UK , with proceeds going to the Mercury Phoenix Trust .
This license also extends to school performances , under the title
" Schools Will Rock You " .
In late 2007 The show was performered for the first time outside of the Dominion Theatre in London for a short period , it played Radlett , Hitchin , Watford , Chesham and Harlow : the cast included Peter Eldridge as Galileo , Dawn Travell as Scaramouche , David Adams ( making history as the first male to play the role ) as Killer Queen , Colin McLeod as Khashoggi and Steve Leigh as Pop .
Replacements include Steve Anderson as Galileo , Caroline Fitch and Monique Perks as Scaramouche , Debbie Marsh and Charlie Taylor as Killer Queen , David Adams ( swapping roles ) as Khashoggi ( also understudy for Galileo ) and Mark Morton , Colin McLeod and Chris Wilson as Pop , the show enjoyed sellout performances at all venues and received great critical acclaim .
In early 2007 Queen Theatrical granted the rights for a non - equity production of We
Will Rock You at the Jedlicka Performing Art Centre in Chicago from April , making it the first North American production since the Las Vegas show closed .
An externally licensed production was staged in Varberg , Sweden from February to July 2007 .
A Dutch production was opened at 4 September[Premiere ] 2010 .
From 2017 , the show has been licensed for amateur productions in Australia , with the amateur premiere being performed by Townsville Choral Society at the Townsville Entertainment Centre in February 2018 .
A high school production of the show ran in March 2018 , performed by the students of The King 's School in collaboration with students from the Tara Anglican School for Girls , both in Parramatta , New South Wales , Australia .
Similarly , another high school production of the show ran later in July 2018 , performed by the students of John Paul College , Logan City , Queensland , Australia .
In France , a French production opened on September 28 , 2018 at the Casino de Paris in Paris for a limited engagement .
CASTS SUMMARY :
ORIGINAL LONDON PRODUCTION ACT ONE
Section::::Summary :
Original London production .
Section::::Act One .
The story is set exactly 300 years in the future in a vaguely Orwellian world .
Earth has been renamed as the " iPlanet " ( Planet Mall in older and school productions ) and is controlled by the Globalsoft Corporation .
( " Innuendo " )
On the iPlanet , mainstream commercial conformity reigns , in which Ga Ga Kids watch the same movies , listen to computer - generated music , wear the same clothes and hold the same thoughts and opinions .
Musical instruments are forbidden , and rock music is unknown .
( " Radio Ga Ga " )
In the newest graduating class is black sheep , Galileo , who has dreams and hears strange words in his head , most of which are lyrics of songs long since lost , though he does not understand their significance .
Despite his teacher 's advice , Galileo refuses to conform like the rest of his classmates .
( " I Want to Break Free " )
Galileo is captured by Khashoggi , commander of Globalsoft 's police .
The teacher also reveals a second anomaly , a young , goth woman named Scaramouche who is openly mocked and derided by her peers ( " Somebody to Love " ) .
She too is arrested by Khashoggi .
Ruling Globalsoft Corporation is Killer Queen .
( " Killer Queen " )
She has heard of a prophecy that instruments have been hidden somewhere on the iPlanet in the " place of living rock " , and a " bright star " will show the way to them .
She orders Khashoggi to get to the bottom of the matter and crush the rebel Bohemians who believe in the prophecy .
Killer Queen then basks in her power over the iPlanet .
( " Play the Game " ( in some productions
" Now I 'm Here " ) )
Galileo and Scaramouche wake up in a hospital .
They realise that they are kindred spirits , feared by the rest of their society .
( " Under Pressure " ) They flee together from the hospital .
Khashoggi has blown up all the rocks on the iPlanet , but can not find any supposed hidden instruments .
Killer queen insists that they have won , and the prophecy will not come to pass .
( " A Kind of Magic " ) On the streets , Bohemian couple Britney and Meat climb out of the sewers , where they have been gathering materials to make musical instruments .
Britney is a believer in the Dreamer who will fulfil the prophecy , and insists to the cynical Meat that it 's the key to bringing real music back into the world .
( " I Want It All " ) Brit and Meat hear footsteps approaching , and hide .
Galileo and Scaramouche arrive , with Galileo talking about his belief that he has a destiny .
He says that he dreamt a name for the woman : " Scaramouche " .
Britney and Meat reveal themselves , and accuse Galileo and Scaramouche of being spies , because Galileo keeps spouting words of the " sacred text " .
Galileo insists that he only hears those words in his head .
Britney tests Galileo , singing the first few lines of " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
Galileo responds correctly with the subsequent lines , and Britney realises that he is the Dreamer of the prophecy .
They bring Galileo and Scaramouche to the Heartbreak Hotel , which is located at the ruins of the Tottenham Court Road tube station , where the Bohemians have made their home .
( " Headlong " )
Of note , the original London production is staged at the Dominion Theatre , which is located above the real Tottenham Court Road tube station .
The Bohemians explain to Galileo that they take their names after singers long gone , and mourn the deaths of those who died young .
( " No One
But You " )
The group then celebrate the reason rock bands started playing music in the first place , which was for love .
( " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " ) Khashoggi and his police suddenly arrive at the Heartbreak Hotel , where they round up the Bohemians for capture .
Britney breaks free and battles the police in order to enable Galileo and Scaramouche to escape , but in the process is killed .
ACT TWO Section::::Act Two .
The Ga Ga Kids of the iPlanet move on in their regular fashion .
( " One Vision " ) Galileo and Scaramouche have escaped the Heartbreak Hotel , and realise that back at the hospital , tracking devices were installed in their heads .
They remove them , and upon realising that they are all that 's left of the rebels , they confess their love for each other .
( " Who Wants to Live Forever " )
The surviving Bohemians have been rounded up by Khashoggi to be tortured .
( " Flash " )
When he can not get any information from them about the prophecy , he has them brain - drained .
( " Seven Seas of Rhye"—interpolating " Lazing on a Sunday Afternoon " ) Galileo wakes up , and tells Scaramouche that he had a dream that the Bohemians were sent to the Seven Seas of Rhye .
Scaramouche agrees they have to go there , but then Galileo insists that she stay because she 's a " chick " , to which Scaramouche takes offence .
They argue , and decide that both of them will go to the Seven Seas of Rhye , but their relationship will be purely professional .
Back at Globalsoft headquarters ( " Fat Bottomed Girls " )
Khashoggi reports that the Bohemians are no longer a problem .
Killer Queen prematurely starts to celebrate .
( " Do n't Stop Me Now " )
Khashoggi interrupts her , explaining that Galileo and Scaramouche escaped .
Killer Queen declares this is the last time Khashoggi has disappointed her , and has him brain - drained .
( " Another One Bites the Dust " )
Galileo and Scaramouche are making their way to the Seven Seas of Rhye , arguing all the way .
( " Hammer to Fall " )
At the Seven Seas of Rhye pub in Montreaux , Pop the librarian is serving drinks to the lifeless Bohemians .
( " These Are the Days of Our Lives " )
When Galileo and Scaramouche arrive , Pop explains the full nature of the prophecy to them as inscribed by the three remaining members of the band Queen just before they were sentenced to death ( Brian May , his last request being a final guitar solo , apparently delayed his execution for three and a half days ) .
Scaramouche figures out that the bright shining star of the prophecy is rock star Freddie Mercury 's statue , and that it 's pointing to Wembley Stadium , the " place of living rock " .
After initially preparing to travel by bicycle , ( opening of " Bicycle Race " ) Scaramouche protests that the method " is n't very cool " , and so they travel there by motorcycle .
( " Headlong ( reprise ) " )
Wembley Stadium is in ruins , with no instruments to be found .
Reconciling and their love for each other rekindled ( " Love of My Life " ) , Scaramouche inspires Galileo to perform the opening of " We Will Rock You " , and an electric guitar is revealed .
Galileo can not play it , but Scaramouche can .
( " Brighton Rock solo " )
Pop hacks into Globalsoft 's network so their music can be heard by everyone on the iPlanet , and Killer Queen is defeated .
( " Tie Your Mother Down " , " We Will Rock You /
We Are the Champions " )
After the curtain calls ( " We Will Rock You ")
, the entire company performs " Bohemian Rhapsody " as an encore .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
International productions of the musical feature changes in the story and song line - up in order to better reach target audiences .
All the main characters retain their general personalities across productions , but the names vary depending on the production .
( See characters section below ) .
The dialogue contains many references to popular culture , with lyrics from numerous non - Queen songs and albums inserted into the text .
These references are constantly changing , and according to writer Elton , this is to keep the show " fresh " .
Songs that have been referenced include The Beatles ' " Help ! " , " Strawberry Fields
Forever " , " Penny Lane " , " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " , "
I Am the Walrus " and " Hello , Goodbye " , Little Richard 's " Tutti Fruitti " and " Long Tall Sally " , the theme from The Wombles , The Goodies ' " Funky Gibbon " , Bruce Springsteen 's " Born to Run " , David Bowie 's " Rebel Rebel " and " Space Oddity " ,
The Wild Ones ' " Wild Thing " , Rolling Stones ' " Honky Tonk Women " , Bob Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " , ABBA 's " Dancing Queen " and " Fernando " , Oasis ' " ( What 's the Story )
Morning Glory ?
" , Eminem 's " The Real Slim Shady " , Spice Girls ' " Wannabe " , Elton John 's " Goodbye Yellow Brick Road " , Black Lace 's " Agadoo " , The Clash 's " Complete Control " , Teletubbies and songs by Amy Winehouse and Michael Jackson .
May often performs with the London production on special occasions such as anniversaries and Freddie Mercury 's birthday .
Hannah Jane Fox , who originated Scaramouche , was the last original principal cast member to remain with the show .
She gave her final performance on 28 January 2006 , four years after the musical opened at the Dominion Theatre , and the event was celebrated with May appearing on stage to perform the guitar solo during the " Bohemian Rhapsody " encore .
On 5 September 2006 , the London show celebrated what would have been Freddie Mercury 's 60th birthday .
During the song " Do n't Stop Me Now " , ordinarily sung by Killer Queen , the band " McFly " ( who were at No . 1 with the song on the singles charts the previous week ) emerged onto the stage to sing it instead .
Brian May and Roger Taylor joined the encore , performing Taylor 's " Say It 's Not True " as a duo .
Ben Elton also addressed the audience on this special occasion .
The following week , tickets to the London show were sold from £ 19.46 , Mercury 's birth year .
On 14 May 2007 , the London show celebrated its fifth anniversary with a special show featuring both May and Taylor playing in the final section of the show .
Writer Ben Elton also made an appearance to present a special plaque to the cast , May and Taylor .
During the portion of the show based in Pop 's bar , the line " But the Pub Landlord has a Bike " was followed by a cameo appearance of British comedian Al Murray , who came up through the stage on a motorcycle .
The London show 's sixth anniversary performance was held on 21 May 2008 , a week after its actual anniversary due to the unavailability of
Brian May. For the first time since the show opened , the Killer Queen character performed the entire song " Do n't Stop Me Now " , a musical number which is normally interrupted by the Khashoggi character .
This unique performance is acknowledged by Killer Queen 's dialogue : " No , you did n't let me finish , you never let me finish .
For six long years , night after night , week after week , year after year .
Well , tonight , I 'm going to finish . "
To which Khashoggi replied : " It 's not in the script ! "
The Killer Queen proceeded to yell " Screw the script ! "
before continuing the song .
Additionally , May joined Killer Queen and the dancers on stage for the performance .
After the encore , Elton made a thank you speech , after which the entire cast performed " The Show Must Go On " , accompanied by May on guitar .
The seventh anniversary of the London Show was celebrated on Monday 18 May 2009 .
The show contained a special appearance from Brian May and Ben Elton who emerged together in a cloud of smoke during the encore rendition of " Bohemian Rhapsody " with May playing guitar .
As with the year before , Elton gave a thank you speech and the entire cast performed "
The Show Must Go On " , accompanied by May on guitar .
On Saturday 12 September 2009 at the early matinee performance Brian May again emerged in a cloud of smoke playing the guitar in " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
What was the occasion for this appearance is not clear .
He did the same again on Saturday 14 November 2009 at the matinee .
On Sunday 31 January 2010 in The O2 Dublin , Brian May once again played Bohemian Rhapsody with the company during the finale of both the matinee and evening shows to celebrate the end of their year - long tour .
On Saturday 5 September 2010 Brian also appeared though a cloud of smoke , again to play " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
This was due to the annual cast change , as well as a celebration of what would have been Freddie Mercury 's 64th birthday , and afterwards Brian gave a farewell speech to the cast that were leaving .
On Saturday 5 October 2013 , Brian appeared through the cloud of smoke to play Bohemian Rhapsody once more .
This was because it was cast change and some of the cast were leaving .
Brian appeared to be very emotional when he was giving his speech .
SHOWS WITH QUEEN Section::::Shows with Queen .
Queen guitarist Brian May and drummer Roger Taylor often perform at premieres and special events .
Bassist John Deacon left Queen in 1997 , and has n't performed with May or Taylor since .
When Bohemian Rhapsody is performed with Brian and Roger , Brian comes up from a trap in the stage with a lot of smoke ( only at Dominion Theatre .
Elsewhere he is walking from the Wembley gate in the back , to the front of stage . )
He performs the solo right before the opera section .
Then the opera section begins , he walks off stage .
Doing the headbanging section Roger comes up on the Heartbreak Hotel platform and Brian runs back on stage ( only at Dominion Theatre .
Elsewhere Roger 's drum kit is being pushed by stage crew and Brian runs on stage . )
They perform the headbanging section with the cast and the low key section .
They end it all with a big ending before the stage goes into blackout .
2002
( 3 )
" We Will Rock You "
( 4 )
" We Are the Champions "
Parkinson 3 June Buckingham Palace rowspan="3"(1 )
" Bohemian Rhapsody " Party at the Palace
12 November
Dominion Theatre
Brian 16 November BBC Television Centre Brian & Roger Children in Need 2003 2004
( 2 ) " Tie Your Mother Down " Madrid 's 100th
We Will Rock You performance .
31
January
rowspan="2"London rowspan="2"Dominion Theatre ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " Matinee and Evening performances .
5 April ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " 3
May
Madrid Teatro Calderón ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Press launch for the cast album .
11
May
London
Dominion Theatre ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " BBC Sport Relief Charity special .
30
May
Madrid Teatro Calderón
( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Final
We Will Rock You performance .
11 December Nuremberg Television Studio Brian & Roger ( 1 )
" We Will Rock You " ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " Wetten , dass .. ?
Q+PR tour announcement .
18 December Paris Hotel Las Vegas
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " Brighton Rock " ( 3 )
"
The Show Must Go On " Matinee and Evening performances 2005 2006 ( 2 )
"
The Show Must Go On " 4th anniversary .
5 September
London Dominion Theatre Brian & Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 )
" Love of My Life " ( 3 ) "
Say It 's Not True " ( 4 )
"
The Show Must Go On " Marking Freddie Mercury 's 60th birthday .
McFly performed " Do n't Stop Me Now " . 7 October London Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Matinee and Evening performances .
Originally West End 's final show .
Brian announced an extension .
2007
( 2 )
"
The Show Must Go On " 5th anniversary .
1
August
Toronto
Canon Theatre
Brian & Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " The Show Must Go On "
The Show Must Go On was performed with Canadian Idol Top 7 finalists .
29
September London Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Matinee and Evening performances .
29
December London Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Matinee and Evening performances .
2008
Theater
Brian
( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " We Will Rock You Austria 21
May
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Do n't Stop Me Now " ( 2 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 3 )
"
The Show Must Go On " Technical faults stopped Brian performing onstage during " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
2009
Theatre Brian & Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody "
We Will Rock You
UK Tour 18
May
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " The Show Must Go On " 7th anniversary .
11
June Sunderland Empire
Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 2 July
Birmingham
The Hippodrome Brian & Roger ( 1 ) "
Bohemian Rhapsody " Brian fell into Roger 's drum kit but recovered and finished the song .
12 September
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian May ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " The Show Must Go On " Matinee and Evening performances .
17
September Bristol
The Hippodrome
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Rufus Taylor played drums on " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
9
November Edinburgh
The Playhouse Brian & Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Edinburgh premiere .
12 November
Stuttgart Apollo Theater
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " The Show Must Go On "
We Will Rock You Stuttgart 1st anniversary .
4 December Milan Allianz Teatro
Brian
( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 2010 ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " The Late Late Show 31 January Dublin
The O
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Matinee and Evening performances .
Roger attended but did not perform .
10
May
London Dominion Theatre Brian & Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 8th anniversary .
3
September Utrecht
Beatrix Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 4 September
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Matinee and Evening performances
12 September
Stockholm
Cirkus Arena Restaurang
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 21 October
Berlin
Theater des Westens
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 2011 not play .
27 January
Oslo
Folketeatret
Brian ( 1 )
" Bohemian Rhapsody " Roger attended the performance but did not play .
23 February
Copenhagen Forum København
Roger ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody "
Brian attended the performance but could not play due to a hand injury .
22 March Cardiff Millennium Centre
Brian ( 1 )
" Bohemian Rhapsody " Roger attended the performance but did not play .
31
May
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " ( 2 ) " The Show Must Go On " 9th anniversary 8 June
Aberdeen
His Majesty 's Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 7 July
Birmingham
The Hippodrome
Brian
( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 20 August
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Mazz Murray 's final performance .
13
September London Dominion Theatre
Brian ( 1 )
" We Will Rock You " ( 2 )
" We Are the Champions " Children
In Need : Pop Goes The Musical .
With Mel C. 13 October Bristol The Hippodrome
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " 1 December
Edinburgh
The Playhouse
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Gala performance in aid of the Mercury Phoenix Trust .
2012
( 2 )
"
The Show Must Go On
" Technical fault prevented Roger appearing onstage until the final minute of " The Show Must Go On " .
2013
Arena
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Roger attended but did not perform .
5 October
London
Dominion Theatre
Brian
( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Cast change with Rachel John and Wayne Robinson leaving 16 October Baltimore France - Merrick P.A.C.
Brian ( 1 ) " Bohemian Rhapsody " Roger attended but did not perform .
2014
( 2 )
"
The Show Must Go On "
Performed at both shows due to show closing at the Dominion Theatre CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Galileo Figaro – The central character of the musical ; a dreamer who hears strange words in his head .
He is eventually revealed to be a reincarnation of Freddie Mercury .
The character 's name is a reference to the lyrics in the Queen song " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
Scaramouche – A sarcastic , cynical character and Galileo 's love interest .
In the finale she shows talent playing the electric guitar , and Galileo declares that she is a reincarnation of Brian May , only this time " he 's a babe " .
The character 's name is a reference to the lyrics in the Queen song " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
Killer Queen – The villain of the musical
, she rules over iPlanet with an iron fist .
The character 's name is a reference to the Queen song " Killer Queen " .
Brit ( alternately Paris , Duff , Vic and J.B. ) – Brit , short for Britney Spears , is the main male Bohemian rebel .
In other productions , his name is either Paris ( short for Paris Hilton ) , Duff ( short for Hilary Duff ) , Vic ( short for Victoria Beckham ) or J.B. ( short for Jeanette Biedermann ) .
Meat ( alternately Oz , Ozzy ) – Meat , short for Meat Loaf , is the main female Bohemian .
In some productions , the character is named Oz after Ozzy Osbourne .
Commander Khashoggi –
Killer Queen 's second - in - command , he is head of Globalsoft 's police and carries out Killer Queen 's dirty work .
The character 's name is a reference to the Queen song " Khashoggi 's Ship " ( which is about the real life Saudi arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi ) .
Pop ( alternately Polo , Bap , DJ , Buddy ) – An elderly librarian trying to figure out the " exact date the music died " , in some productions in love with Scaramouche , believed to be named after the creation of reality television talent shows ( the example given varies depending on the production , but includes Popstars , Pop Idol , The X Factor , or the relevant regional variant ) .
Probably named for Iggy Pop or simply a diminutive for " Grandfather " .
In the German production his full name is " Bap Niedecken " .
The name refers to the German band " Bap " ( Cologne dialect for " Papa " = " Father " ) and the singer Wolfgang Niedecken .
In the Brazillian production his name is " Toca Raul " , a reference to Raul Seixas , and to a popular expression associated with him ( Toca Raul = Play Raul ) but that is also said during many rock concerts in Brazil , regardless of the singer .
Other Bohemians – The other Bohemians have constantly changing names following media trends .
These are usually music - related , and have included Paul McCartney , Bruce Springsteen , Robbie Williams , Beyoncé , Madonna , Amy Winehouse , Bob the Builder , Boy George , Cliff Richard , Spice Girls , Elton John , Jackson Five , Prince , Burton Cummings , John Farnham , Charlotte Church , Crazy Frog , Eddie Cochran , Avril Lavigne , Shania Twain , Lily Allen , Kelly Osbourne and Clay Aiken , Cheeky Girls , Kurt Cobain and recently Michael Jackson , Whitney Houston , Gary Barlow , Lady Gaga , Justin Bieber , Katy Perry , Britney Spears , Jay Z and Frankie Valli .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
As a jukebox musical , the show 's music consists entirely of Queen material .
The musical numbers of the original London production are as follows .
Act
I
* " Innuendo " –
* * " Radio Ga Ga " – * *
" I Want to Break Free " –
* * " I Want to Break Free " ( reprise ) – * * " Somebody to Love " – * * " Killer Queen " – * * " Play the Game " – * * " Death on Two Legs " * ( instrumental )
* * " Under Pressure " – * * " A Kind of Magic " – * * " I Want It All
" – * * " Headlong " – * *
" No - One but You ( Only the Good Die Young ) " – * * " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " * – * * " Ogre Battle " ( instrumental ) * Act II
* " One Vision " / " Radio Ga Ga " ( reprise ) – * *
" Who Wants to Live Forever " –
* * " Flash " – * * " Seven Seas of Rhye " –
* * " Fat Bottomed Girls " * –
* * " Do n't Stop Me Now " –
* * " Another One Bites the Dust " –
* * " Hammer to Fall " –
* * " These Are the Days of Our Lives " – * * " Bicycle Race " * – * * " Headlong " ( reprise ) * – * * " Brighton Rock " solo * ( instrumental ) * *
" Tie Your Mother Down " * ( instrumental )
* * " We Will Rock You " –
* *
" We Are the Champions " – * Encore
* " We Will Rock You " ( fast version ) – *
* " Bohemian Rhapsody " – * Later in the London production , the " One Vision " sequence was changed to include Freddie Mercury 's recorded vocals for the bridge .
Previously , the bridge had been sung by the ensemble .
In the original London production , " Fat - Bottomed Girls " was a short instrumental interlude prior to " Another One Bites the Dust " .
Subsequent international productions expanded the song into a full song and dance sequence .
Due to the positive response , the change was transferred back to the London production .
For the single - act Las Vegas production , " Who Wants to Live Forever " is replaced by "
You 're My Best Friend " .
In the 2013 - 2014 North American tour , " You 're My Best Friend " is added after
" I Want It All . "
" Who Wants To Live Forever " is reinstated , after " Flash " and " Seven Seas of Rhye . "
For the Australasian tour , Canadian production and the 2013 - 14 North American tour , " Play the Game " is replaced by
" Now I 'm Here " .
For the revamped Canadian production and the 2013 - 14 North American tour , " One Vision " is removed .
" Flash " and " Seven Seas Of Rhye " are repositioned to the start of Act Two .
On special occasions , " The Show Must Go On " is added to the encore .
OTHER MEDIA
RECORDINGS
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Recordings .
A cast recording of the original London production was released in November 2002 .
Not all songs in the show were included in the album , the omitted tracks have been marked * in the above list .
In August 2003 , the London cast recording was given an Australian edition re - release , containing a bonus track of the original Australian Killer Queen , Annie Crummer , singing a studio version of " Another One Bites the Dust " .
In 2004 , Kerry Ellis , who was the original Meat in the London production , worked with Brian May to record an instrumental studio version of " No One but You ( Only the Good Die Young ) " .
This version is available through the official Queen website and in Ellis ' limited - release CD single titled Wicked in Rock .
A Madrid cast recording was released in 2004 .
The recording includes a bonus second disc containing an extended Spanish - translated studio version of " No - One
But You " ( " Solo Por Ti " ) sung by the original Meat , Eva María Cortés , and video clips of the original Madrid production .
A Cologne cast recording was released in 2005 .
It is the only We Will Rock
You cast recording to contain " Fat Bottomed Girls " .
In 2012 , a 10th Anniversary Edition of the London Cast Recording was issued , comprising the original cast recording album , along with a CD with bonus material .
DISCOGRAPHY
CertificationsUKAUSAUTFRAGERIRENLUS 2002 align="left
" We Will Rock You rowspan="2 " Album align="left " align="left
"
2003 align="left " align="left " align="left
" 2003 align="left " " Another One Bites The Dust " align="left
" align="left
" 2004 align="left
" We Will Rock You :
Spanish Cast align="left
" align="left " 2004 align="left
" " Solo Por Ti ( No One But You ) " align="left " align="left"We Will Rock You : Spanish Cast 2005 align="left
" We Will Rock You : German Cast rowspan="3
"
Album align="left
" align="left " 22011 align="left
" We Will Rock You :
Italian Cast align="left " align="left"Only sold during the first Italian performances in 2011 and published by Barley Arts .
Recorded during the 2009 tour in Milan .
2012
align="left
" We Will Rock You 10th Anniversary align="left " align="left "
* Alana Bridgewater recorded version of Fat Bottomed Girls on her debut album " Horizon " .
*
The 10th Anniversary album including the original 2002 album , along with a bonus CD with the following tracks : *
Another One Bites The Dust ( 2003 Remix ) –
Annie Crummer , Queen * * Sólo Por Ti ( No One
But You )
( In Spanish ) ( Short Version ) – Eva Maria Cortes , Queen * * Sin Control ( Headlong ) (
In Spanish ) – The Spanish Cast * * Algo Loco Es El Amor ( Crazy Little Thing Called Love )
( In Spanish ) –
The Spanish Cast *
* Killer Queen ( In German ) – The German Cast
*
* Play The Game ( In German ) –
The German Cast * * Bohemian Rhapsody ( ' Party at the Palace ' Live At Buckingham Palace , 2002 ) -
The London Cast , Queen * * Radio Ga Ga [ "
Wetten , dass .. ?
" German TV Live Performance , 2004 ] –
The German Cast * * Somebody
To Love [ " Wetten , dass .. ?
" German TV Live Performance , 2004 ] -
The German Cast ,
Queen * * We Will Rock You
[ " Wetten , dass .. ?
" German TV Live Performance , 2004 ] -
The German Cast ,
Queen * *
We Are The Champions [ " Wetten , dass .. ?
" German TV Live Performance , 2004 ] -
The German Cast , Queen * PROPOSED FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Proposed film adaptation .
At the time of launching the musical , Robert De Niro referred to the possibility of a film version .
In a 2009 interview with the BBC , Brian May said that a film version was proposed , and that Ben Elton had written a full script with a " grittier " storyline .
He emphasised that a lot more action can be included during the songs in a film than in a stage musical .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS ORIGINAL LONDON
PRODUCTION Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Original London production .
Year ORIGINAL AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTION Section::::Original Australian production .
Year ORIGINAL SOUTH
AFRICAN PRODUCTION Section::::Original South African production .
Year ORIGINAL
TORONTO PRODUCTION Section::::Original Toronto production .
Year ORIGINAL DUTCH PRODUCTION Section::::Original Dutch production .
Year ORIGINAL BELGIUM PRODUCTION Section::::Original Belgium production .
Year SEE ALSO * Rock of Ages
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Video :
Brian May speaks about We Will Rock You(requires RealPlayer )