VENTRAL BODY CAVITY
The ventral body cavity is a human body cavity that is in the anterior ( front ) aspect of the human body .
It is made up of the thoracic cavity , and the abdominopelvic cavity .
The abdominopelvic cavity is further divided into the abdominal cavity and pelvic cavity , but there is no physical barrier between the two .
The abdominal cavity contains digestive organs , the pelvic cavity contains the urinary bladder , internal reproductive organs , and rectum .
There are two methods for dividing the abdominopelvic cavity .
The clinical method , used by physicians and nurses , utilizes four sections called quadrants .
They are the right upper quadrant , the left upper quadrant , the right lower quadrant , and the left lower quadrant .
The directional terms refer to the model 's right and left , not the viewer 's .
Clinicians use the quadrant method because in reality , organs are mobile and move around when the patient is in different positions .
The second method for dividing the abdominopelvic cavity is preferred by anatomists .
This method divides the cavity into nine regions .
The regions are the left and right hypochondriac regions , so named because they lie under the ribs ; the epigastric region which is approximately where the stomach is located between the hypochondriac regions ; the right and left lumbar regions which flank the umbilical region ( which surrounds the umbilicus , or belly button ) , the right and left iliac and inguinal regions which are where the hips are , and the hypogastric / pubic region , which lies between the hips .
The thoracic cavity is separated from the abdominopelvic cavity by the diaphragm .
The thoracic cavity is further separated into the pleural cavity which contains the lungs and the superior mediastinum which includes the pericardial ( heart ) cavity .
The organs within the ventral body cavity are called the viscera .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO * Dorsal body cavity
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* SEER 's Web - based Training Modules , for a picture of the ventral body cavity