SNAKES ON
A PLANE Snakes on a Plane is a 2006 American action thriller film directed by David R. Ellis and starring Samuel L. Jackson .
It was released by New Line Cinema on August 18 , 2006 , in North America .
The film was written by David Dalessandro , John Heffernan , and Sebastian Gutierrez and follows the events of hundreds of snakes being released on a passenger plane in an attempt to kill a trial witness .
The film gained a considerable amount of attention before its release , forming large fanbases online and becoming an Internet phenomenon , due to the film 's title , casting , and premise .
In response to the Internet fan base , New Line Cinema incorporated feedback from online users into its production , and added five days of reshooting .
Before and after the film was released , it was parodied and alluded to on television shows and films , fan - made videos , video games , and various forms of literature .
Released in the United States and United Kingdom on August 18 , 2006 , the film received mixed to positive reviews .
Despite the immense Internet buzz , the film 's gross revenue did not live up to expectations , earning US$ 15.25 million in its opening weekend .
The film grossed US$ 62 million worldwide before its release on home video on January 2 , 2007 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After witnessing California - based gang boss Eddie Kim brutally beat U.S. Prosecutor Daniel Hayes to death in Hawaii , Sean Jones is escorted by FBI agents Neville Flynn and John Sanders on a Boeing 747 - 400 to testify in a trial in Los Angeles .
Despite increased security for the flight , Kim arranges for a time - release crate full of venomous snakes to be placed in the cargo hold in an attempt to bring down the plane before it reaches Los Angeles International Airport ( LAX ) .
To ensure the snakes attack the passengers without the need for provocation , he has one of his henchmen disguised as an airport ground employee spray the passengers ' leis with a special pheromone which makes the snakes highly aggressive .
The crate opens midway through the flight and the snakes make their way through the cabin .
A couple having sex in a bathroom , and a man using another bathroom are the first killed .
The plane 's captain , Sam McKeon , investigates and fixes an electrical short , but is killed by the viper that caused it .
Co - pilot Rick , unaware of the snake , believes Sam has suffered a heart attack and continues toward LAX .
Some of the snakes attack Rick , and while fending them off he accidentally releases the oxygen masks throughout the plane , causing several snakes to drop into the cabin with them .
Numerous passengers , including Agent Sanders , are killed when the snakes invade the cabin .
The surviving passengers , who have made their way to the front of the plane , put up blockades of luggage in a desperate attempt to stop the snakes .
Rick is attacked and the plane starts to dip downwards , causing a food trolley to crash through the luggage blockade .
The passengers flee to the upstairs first class cabin before blocking the stairwell with an inflatable liferaft .
Agent Flynn and Flight Attendant Claire regain control of the plane .
Rick retakes the controls and has Flynn go into the cargo hold to restore the air conditioning / ventilation system .
Agent Flynn contacts FBI Special Agent Hank Harris on the ground , who gets in touch with ophiologist Dr. Steven Price , Customs ' main source for animal smuggling cases .
Based on pictures of the reptiles emailed to him via a passenger 's mobile phone , Price believes a Los Angeles snake dealer known for illegally importing exotic and highly dangerous snakes to be responsible .
After a shootout , the dealer is bitten by one of his snakes and Harris withholds the antivenom if he does not give them details .
The dealer finally reveals that Kim hired him to obtain the snakes and adds how the latter managed to smuggle them on board the plane .
Price injects the injured dealer with the antivenom and commandeers his supply of antivenom for the victims on the plane based on the list given to him , while Harris gives orders to have Eddie Kim arrested on multiple counts of murder and attempted murder .
Harris contacts Flynn , telling him that antivenom will be ready for the passengers when they land .
However , Flynn discovers that the cockpit is filled with snakes and Rick
is dead .
After a brief discussion , Troy , Three Gs ' bodyguard , agrees to land the plane based on prior flight experience .
After everyone gets prepared , Flynn shoots out two windows with his pistol , causing the plane to depressurize .
The snakes are blown out of the cockpit and the lower floor of the plane .
Flynn and Troy take the controls of the plane and Troy reveals that his flight experience was from a video game flight simulator .
Despite his lack of real - world experience , after Troy makes an emergency landing , the plane makes it to the terminal .
The passengers leave the plane and antivenom is given to those who need it .
Just as Flynn and Sean are about to disembark the plane , a final snake jumps out and bites Sean in the chest .
Flynn draws his gun and shoots the snake , and paramedics rush to Sean , who is unharmed due to his wearing a ballistic vest .
As a token of gratitude , Sean later takes Flynn to Bali and teaches him how to surf .
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The story is credited to David Dalessandro , a University of Pittsburgh administrator and first - time Hollywood writer .
He developed the concept in 1992 after reading a nature magazine article about Indonesian brown tree snakes climbing onto planes in cargo during World War II .
He originally wrote the screenplay about the brown tree snake loose on a plane , titling the film Venom .
He soon revised it , expanding upon the premise to include a plague of assorted venomous snakes , then — crediting the film Aliens — revised it once again to include " lots of them loose in the fuselage of a plane .
" Dalessandro 's third draft of Venom was turned down by more than 30 Hollywood studios in 1995 .
In 1999 , a producer for MTV / Paramount showed interest in the script , followed up by New Line Studios , which took over the rights for production .
Originally , the film , under the working title " Snakes on a Plane " , was going to be directed by Hong Kong action director Ronny Yu .
Jackson , who had previously worked with Yu on The 51st State , learned about the announced project in the Hollywood trade newspapers and , after talking to Yu , agreed to sign on without reading the script based on the director , storyline , and the title .
Initially New Line did not believe that Jackson had actually signed on to the project and had to call his agent to clarify .
Jackson would later defend his choice of starring in the movie by stating " it was the kind of movie I would have gone to see when I was a kid " further clarifying "
I feel sorry for all those people that are going through that whole trip of ' Why would Samuel Jackson do something like this ? '
and ' It 's lowbrow . '
It 's a movie .
People go to movies on Saturday to get away from the war in Iraq and taxes and election news and pedophiles online and just go and have some fun
and I like doing movies that are fun . "
The film 's B movie - esque title generated a lot of pre - release interest on the Internet .
One journalist wrote that Snakes on a Plane is " perhaps the most internet - hyped film of all time " .
Much of the initial publicity came from a blog entry made by screenwriter Josh Friedman , who had been offered a chance to work on the script .
The casting of Samuel L. Jackson further increased anticipation .
At one point , the film was given the title Pacific Air Flight 121 , only to have it changed back to the working title at Samuel Jackson 's request .
In August 2005 , Samuel Jackson told an interviewer , " We 're totally changing that back .
That 's the only reason I took the job : I read the title .
"
On March 2 , 2006 , the studio reverted the title to Snakes on a Plane .
New Line hired two additional writers to smooth out the screenplay .
Taking advantage of the Internet buzz for what had been a minor film in their 2006 line - up , New Line Cinema ordered five days of additional shooting in early March 2006 ( principal photography had wrapped in September 2005 ) .
While re - shoots normally imply problems with a film , the producers opted to add new scenes to the film to change the MPAA rating from PG-13 to R and bring it in line with growing fan expectations .
The most notable addition was a revision of a catchphrase from the film that was parodied on the Internet by fans of the film , capitalizing on Samuel L. Jackson 's typically foul - mouthed and violent film persona : " Enough is enough !
I have had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane ! " .
Subsequently , the public responded favorably to this creative change and marketing strategy , leading some members of the press to speculate that " the movie has grown from something of a joke into a phenomenon " .
More than 450 snakes were used for filming to represent thirty different species of snakes .
The different species include a 19-foot Burmese python named Kitty ( which the crew called Kong for film purposes ) , a scarlet kingsnake ( the non - venomous double for the coral snake ) , a milk snake to fill in for the taipan ( which attacks the couple having sex ) , corn snakes , rattlesnakes , and mangrove snakes .
About two - thirds of the snakes seen throughout the film were either animatronic or CGI .
The snakes that were real were mostly the non - venomous ones that are never seen attacking anyone .
The scenes where someone is clearly bitten were often done with animation .
According to the DVD , all the snakes had production names , but only Scarface ( an animated pit viper ) , Peanut ( a cobra ) , and Kong are mentioned by name in the audio commentary .
During filming , Samuel Jackson did not come into contact with any live snakes , due to a contract clause preventing snakes from being within ( 25 ft ) of the actor .
When the film was released in theaters , two live western diamondback rattlesnakes were released at a showing of the film on August 22 , 2006 , in Phoenix , Arizona .
One snake had made its way into the lobby of the theater on its own , and another had been found in the parking lot .
Nobody was harmed and the snakes were released back into the desert .
MEDIA COVERAGE PRINT Section::::Media coverage .
Section::::Print .
An illustrated book from Thunder 's Mouth Press , Snakes on a Plane : The Guide to the Internet Ssssssensation by David Waldon , details the Internet phenomenon and was published July 28 , 2006 .
Waldon details various viral videos relating to the film 's craze , and interviewed their producers to find out what about the film captured their attention .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On March 16 , 2006 , New Line Cinema announced a contest on TagWorld and a website promoting the film .
The contest allowed artists on TagWorld to have their music featured in the film .
A flood of SoaP - themed songs were submitted by artists such as Captain Ahab ( who ultimately won the contest ) , Louden Swain , the Former Fat Boys , Nispy , and others .
In addition , a music video for the film , " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " by Cobra Starship , was released on July 10 , 2006 on MTV2 's Unleashed .
The music video appeared on the film 's soundtrack as well as during the film 's closing credits .
In October 2005 , Nathanial Perry and Chris Rohan recorded an audio trailer spoof , which helped fuel the Internet buzz .
Perry and Rohan recorded the " motherfucking snakes " line in the audio trailer which was added to the film during the week of re - shoots .
In July 2006 , New Line Cinema signed a worldwide licensing agreement with the Cutting Corporation to produce an audiobook of the film .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Beginning in May 2006 , episodes of The Daily Show with Jon Stewart and its sister show The Colbert Report contained references to Snakes on a Planes title , the catchphrase , and general premise .
On August 15 , 2006 , Samuel L. Jackson guest featured on The Daily Show , opening with the film 's catchphrase .
Keith Olbermann featured stories about the film and Internet buzz several times on his MSNBC news program Countdown .
In addition , G4 's Attack of the Show ! featured a semi - regular segment entitled " Snakes on a Plane : An Attack of the Show Investigation " , and had a week dedicated to the film which included interviews and the appearance of hundreds of snakes on set .
INTERNET
Section::::Internet .
Snakes on a Plane generated considerable buzz on the Internet after Josh Friedman 's blog entry and mentions on several Internet portals .
The title inspired bloggers to create songs , apparel , poster art , pages of fan fiction , parody films , mock movie trailers , and short film parody competitions .
On July 6 , 2006 , the official Snakes on a Plane website started a promotional sweepstakes called " The # 1 Fan King Cobra Sweepstakes " .
The contest made innovative use of the publicity - generating potential of the Internet , requiring contestants to post links on forums , blogs , and websites and collecting votes from the users of those sites .
Many of the early fan - made trailers and later other viral videos and commercials circulated via YouTube , and captured media attention there with such titles as : Cats on a Plane ( which was featured in Joel Siegel 's review of Snakes on a Plane on Good Morning America ) , Snakes Who Missed the Plane , All Your Snakes Are Belong To Us
( a spoof of the All your base are belong to us phenomenon ) , Steaks on a Train , and Badgers on a Plane ( a spoof of " Badger Badger Badger " ) .
Several websites also held contests about the film in fan - submitted short films and posters .
In August 2006 , Varitalk launched an advertising campaign in which fans could send a semi - personalized message in Samuel Jackson 's voice to telephone numbers of their choosing .
Within the first week , over 1.5 million calls were sent to participants .
PREVIEWS Section::::Previews .
In June 2006 , New Line commissioned famed UK audio - visual film remixers and chop - up artists Addictive TV to cut and sample Snakes on a Plane to create trailers for the U.S. television networks .
The official teaser trailer premiered before , and the first official trailer appeared online on June 26 , 2006 .
Another trailer circulated in July 2006 , showing several of the snake attacks and a missing pilot and co - pilot .
Rotten Tomatoes had video clips of the official trailers , as well as fan - made trailers .
During a July 21 , 2006 panel discussion at the Comic - Con Convention in San Diego , California , a preview clip from the film was shown to a crowd of more than 6,500 people .
The panel included actors Samuel L. Jackson and Kenan Thompson , director David R. Ellis , and snake - handler Jules Sylvester .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Snakes on a Plane debuted on August 18 , 2006 .
The film opened in 3,555 theaters and had some late - night screenings on August 17 .
In a move meant to exploit the attention from the film , a straight - to - DVD Z - movie horror film with a supernatural twist , Snakes on a Train , was released on August 15 , 2006 , three days before the film 's theatrical release .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
In mid - July 2006 , New Line Cinema announced that it would not be showing any advance screenings for critics .
After the film opened , the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 69 % based reviews from 173 critics , with the consensus : " Snakes on a Plane lives up to its title , featuring snakes on a plane .
It is n't perfect , but then again , it does n't need to be .
"
At the website Metacritic , which uses a weighted average rating system , the film earned a mixed rating of 58 % based on 31 reviews by mainstream critics .
Reviewers reported audiences cheering , applauding , and engaging in " call and response " , noting that audience participation was an important part of the film 's appeal .
The Arizona Republic 's Randy Cordova gave the film a positive review , calling the film " ...
an exploitation flick that knows what it wants to do , and it gets the job done expertly . " and a " ... Mecca for B - movie lovers . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle enjoyed the film , asking his readers " ... if you can find a better time at the movies this year than this wild comic thriller , let me in on it . "
Boston Globe reviewer
Ty Burr reacted to Samuel L. Jackson 's performance by saying he " ...
bestrides this film with the authority of someone who knows the value of honest bilge .
He 's as much the auteur of this baby as the director and screenwriters , and that fierce glimmer in his eye is partly joy . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film one and a half stars out of four , saying that " after all the Internet hype about those motherfuckin ' snakes on that motherfuckin ' plane , the flick itself is a murky stew of shock effects repeated so often that the suspense quickly droops along with your eyelids . "
David Denby of The New Yorker claimed that the film " ... may mark a new participatory style in marketing , but it still gulls an allegedly knowing audience with the pseudo - morality of yesteryear . "
Film critic and radio host Michael Medved criticized New Line Cinema for agreeing to re - shoot scenes so that the film would receive an R rating from the Motion Picture Association of America to match fan expectations .
He argued that the film would have grossed more revenue at the box office with a PG-13 rating , stating that the demographic most likely to be drawn to a movie titled Snakes on a Plane is males between the ages of 12 and 15 .
" My fourteen - year - old son , Danny , for instance , felt a powerful inclination to go out and see the movie with his two sleep - over friends this Sunday night , " he explained , " but I would n't permit it .
It 's rated R for good reason .
" Medved ultimately awarded the film 2 1/2 stars out of 4 in a radio review , but said that he did so " grudgingly . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Due to the Internet hype surrounding the film , industry analysts estimated that the film 's opening box office would be between US$ 20 - 30 million .
While Snakes on a Plane did narrowly beat for the number one position during its opening weekend , it did not meet these estimates and grossed only $ 15.25 million in its opening days , a disappointment for New Line Cinema .
In its second weekend , the film fell to sixth place with $ 6.4 million , a more than fifty percent drop from its opening weekend revenue .
By the end of its theatrical run , the film grossed $ 62,022,014 worldwide .
Robert K. Shaye , the founder of New Line , stated that he was " disappointed " that Snakes on a Plane was a " dud " despite " higher expectations " .
The press declared that Snakes on a Plane was a " box office disappointment " , with The New York Times reporting that after all the " hype online , Snakes on a Plane is letdown at box office " and Entertainment Weekly reporting that the film was an " internet - only phenomenon . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Snakes on a Plane released on DVD December 26 , 2006 in Region 2 ; December 28 , 2006 in Region 4 ; and January 2 , 2007 in Region 1 .
The DVD features commentaries , deleted and extended scenes , several featurettes , Cobra Starship 's music video , and trailers .
The U.S. Blu - ray was released on September 29 , 2009 .
TV VERSION Section::::TV version .
The film received further attention when fans noticed the U.S. TV edit of the film purposely dubbed over foul language , replacing it with nonsense words , for family audiences .
An example is Samuel L. Jackson 's line toward the end of the film , " I have had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane ! " , which is replaced with " I have had it with these monkey - fighting snakes on this Monday - to - Friday plane ! " .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Black Flame published the novelization of the film , written by Christa Faust .
The 405–page novel contains significant backstories for the characters and introduces other characters that were not featured in the film .
Comic book writer Chuck Dixon wrote a comic book adaptation of the film .
DC Comics released the two - issue miniseries on August 16 , 2006 and September 27 , 2006 under their Wildstorm imprint .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack for the film was released on August 15 , 2006 .
The enhanced portion of the CD contains what was considered the " best of the best " of the amateur Internet creations inspired by the film , including the songs " Snakes on the Brain " by Captain Ahab and " Here Come the Snakes ( Seeing Is Believing ) " by Louden Swain .
The single " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " peaked at the 32nd position of Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks in 2006 .
* " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " by Cobra Starship , William Beckett , Maja Ivarsson , Travie McCoy
* * " The Only Difference Between Martyrdom and Suicide Is Press Coverage " ( Tommie Sunshine Brooklyn Fire Remix ) by Panic !
at the Disco * * " Black Mamba " ( Teddybears Remix ) by The Academy Is ... * * " Ophidiophobia " by Cee - Lo Green
* * " Ca n't Take It " ( The Baldwin Brothers " El Camino Prom Wagon " Remix ) by The All - American Rejects * * " Queen of Apology " ( Patrick Stump Remix ) by The Sounds
* *
" Of All the Gin Joints in All the World " ( Tommie Sunshine 's Brooklyn Fire Retouch ) by Fall Out
Boy *
* " New Friend Request " ( Hi - Tek Remix ) by Gym Class Heroes
* *
" Around the Horn " ( Louis XIV Remix ) by The Bronx
*
* " Remember to Feel Real " ( Machine Shop Remix ) by Armor for Sleep
* * " Wine Red " ( Tommie Sunshine 's Brooklyn Fire Retouch ) by The Hush Sound * * " Bruised " ( Remix ) by Jack 's Mannequin
* * " Final Snakes " by Shranky Drank
*
* " Wake Up " ( Acoustic ) by Coheed and Cambria
* * " Lovely Day " by Donavon Frankenreiter
*
*
"
Hey Now Now " by Michael Franti & Spearhead * *
" Snakes on a Plane - The Theme " ( Score ) by Trevor Rabin * SEE ALSO * List of killer snake films
* Flight of the Living Dead REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * ( archived version )
Section::::External links .