STRAIT OF GIBRALTAR CROSSING
The Strait of Gibraltar crossing is a hypothetical bridge or tunnel spanning the Strait of Gibraltar ( about 14 km or 9 miles at its narrowest point ) that would connect Europe and Africa .
The governments of Spain and Morocco appointed a joint committee to investigate the feasibility of linking the two continents in 1979 , which resulted in the much broader Euromed Transport project .
BRIDGE Section::::Bridge .
Several engineers have designed bridges on various alignments and with differing structural configurations .
Professor T.Y. Lin 's proposal for a crossing between Point Oliveros and Point Cirse featured deep piers , a length of , towers , and a span , more than twice the length of the current longest bridge span .
In 2004 , architect Eugene Tsui published his concept for a floating and submerged bridge , connected at a three - mile wide island in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea .
In 2004 , the Science Museum , London published an image of the proposed Gibraltar Straits road bridge .
TUNNEL Section::::Tunnel .
Various tunnels have been proposed .
Spain first proposed a modern tunnel under the Strait of Gibraltar in 1930 .
A major problem arose when the engineers hired by the Spanish government discovered that the material under the Strait was extremely hard rock , making tunnelling impossible with the available technology .
One engineering solution was to fix , using cables , a prefabricated concrete tunnel to the floor of the Strait .
This tunnel would handle automotive and train traffic .
Nothing came of this proposed solution .
A 2008 geological study cast doubt on the tunnel 's practicality .
In March 2009 , a contract was issued for a joint system linking the Moroccan Société Nationale d'Etudes du Détroit de Gibraltar ( SNED ) with its Spanish counterpart ,
Sociedad española de estudios para la comunicación fija a través del Estrecho de Gibraltar S.A ( SECEGSA ) .
A three - year study for a railway tunnel was announced in 2003 .
SNED and SECEGSA commissioned several seabed surveys .
The Strait depth extends to on the shortest route , although it is only about 300 metres deep slightly further west , where the European and African tectonic plates meet .
The shortest crossing is .
The proposed route of is west of Tarifa and to the east of Tangier .
The tunnel is likely to be about in all .
It is proposed that a connection would have to be made to the Spanish high speed railway network , which has a line projected to be built from Cádiz to Málaga via Algeciras .
A report on the feasibility of the tunnel was presented to the EU in 2009 .
A further project study is under development by a group of specialist consultants from SYSTRA , Amberg and COWI .
PLANNING
Section::::Planning .
The political origins of the project arise from the Common Hispanic - Moroccan Declaration of Fez , of 16 June 1979 , and signed by the kings of Spain and Morocco .
One consequence of the Declaration was the creation in of SECEGSA , the Spanish government - funded corporation whose job is to " study " and " promote " the crossing .
In December 2003 , Spain and Morocco agreed to explore the construction of an underwater rail tunnel to connect their rail systems .
The tunnel would have linked Cape Malabata near Tangier with Punta Paloma in the El Estrecho Natural Park west of Gibraltar .
In late 2006 , Lombardi Engineering Ltd , a Swiss engineering and design company , was retained to draft a design for a railway tunnel .
According to the company , the main differences between the construction of this tunnel and that of the Channel Tunnel , linking France and Great Britain , are the depth of the sea and the geological conditions .
The area under the Strait is less stable than that under the English Channel .
An active major geologic fault , the Azores – Gibraltar Transform Fault , bisects the Strait , and severe earthquakes have occurred in the area .
The presence of two deep Quaternary clay channels in the middle of the Strait makes construction complex , causing doubts about the feasibility of the project and proposals for an exploratory tunnel .
No official figures about the cost of the project had been announced by 2007 , but previous estimates exceeded € 5 billion .
TECHNICAL ASPECT Section::::Technical aspect .
The proposed rail tunnel 's length is , deep , and its construction would take 15 years .
An earlier plan was to link the two continents via the narrowest part of the strait , but this idea was dismissed as the tunnel would be below sea level .
For comparison , the deepest undersea tunnel , the Eiksund Tunnel , is below sea level .
The construction of terminals , such as the Eurotunnel Folkestone Terminal and Eurotunnel Calais Terminal at either end of the Channel Tunnel , might be required for trans - shipment of road vehicles .
SEE ALSO
* Atlantropa * Bridge of the Horns * Extreme Engineering
* Marmaray * Transport in Morocco
* Transport in Spain * Intercontinental and transoceanic fixed links
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* SNED * SECEGSA