DESERT ISLAND
A deserted island or uninhabited island is an island that is not permanently populated by humans .
Uninhabited islands are often used in movies or stories about shipwrecked people , and are also used as stereotypes for the idea of " paradise " .
Some uninhabited islands are protected as nature reserves and some are privately owned .
Devon Island in Canada is claimed to be the largest uninhabited island in the world .
Small coral atolls or islands usually have no source of fresh water , but at times a fresh water lens ( Ghyben – Herzberg lens ) can be reached with a well .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Uninhabited islands are sometimes also called " deserted islands " or " desert islands " .
In the latter , the adjective " desert " connotes not desert climate conditions , but rather " desolate and sparsely occupied or unoccupied " .
The word " desert " has been " formerly applied more widely to any wild , uninhabited region , including forest - land " , and it is this archaic meaning that appears in the phrase " desert island " .
Similarly , the term " deserted island " does not imply that the island was previously inhabited and later deserted .
The term " desert island " is also commonly used figuratively to refer to objects or behavior in conditions of social isolation and limited material means .
Behavior on a desert island is common thought experiment , for example , " desert island morality " .
LIST OF SOME CURRENTLY UNINHABITED ISLANDS * Appat Island , Greenland * Kermadec Islands in the South Pacific , part of New Zealand * Astola Island , Pakistan * Auckland Islands , New Zealand * Blasket Islands , County Kerry , Ireland * Devon Island , 55,247 km , largest uninhabited island in the world .
* Many small islands off the coast of Greece * A majority of the Barra Isles , the Outer Hebrides , Scotland .
The most famous of these is Barra Head .
* Ball 's Pyramid , a tall volcanic mountain located far from other islands in the Pacific Ocean
* Most of the Bonin Islands in Japan
* Caquorobert , Guernsey * Chacachacare , Trinidad and Tobago * Coral Sea Islands off the northeastern coast of Australia
*
De Long Islands in the Arctic Ocean , part of Russia
* Most of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago
* Clipperton Island *
Many islands in the Maldives * Ogurchinsky Island , Caspian Sea * Korzhin Island , Lake Balkhash
*
Most of the Phoenix Islands , part of Kiribati * Heard Island and McDonald Islands , Australia *
Some of the Orkney Islands
*
Many islands off the coast of Labrador * Many islands in Lake Nipigon
* Some of the San Juan Islands
* Santa Luzia , Cape Verde
* Skellig Michael * Kaffeklubben Island , Greenland
*
Surtsey
*
Lítla Dímun , Faroe Islands
* Tetepare Island * Groais Island , Newfoundland
* Some cays of the Turks and Caicos Islands
*
Most of the United States Minor Outlying Islands
* Several entire atolls of The Marshall Islands
* Many small islands in Georgian Bay , Lake Huron , Canada * Michipicoten Island , Lake Superior , Canada * Mona Island , in Puerto Rico
* Several Alaskan islands
* Isle Royale , Lake Superior
* Many islands within the waters of Hong Kong
* Most small islands in the fractured archipelagoes in Kvarken , Åland and the Archipelago Sea , e.g. Märket * Senkaku Islands
* Klein Curaçao , Curaçao
* Some islands of Lakshadweep
* Skjoldungen , Greenland * Gotska Sandön , Sweden * South Sentinel Island , India IN LITERATURE AND POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In literature and popular culture .
The first known novels to be set on a desert island were Philosophus Autodidactus written by Ibn Tufail ( 1105–1185 ) , followed by Theologus Autodidactus written by Ibn al - Nafis ( 1213–1288 ) .
The protagonists in both ( Hayy in Philosophus Autodidactus and Kamil in Theologus Autodidactus ) are feral children living in seclusion on a deserted island , until they eventually come in contact with castaways from the outside world who are stranded on the island .
The story of Theologus Autodidactus , however , extends beyond the deserted island setting when the castaways take Kamil back to civilization with them .
William Shakespeare 's 1610–11 play , The Tempest , uses the idea of being stranded on a desert island as a pretext for the action of the play .
Prospero and his daughter Miranda are set adrift by Prospero 's treacherous brother Antonio , seeking to become Duke of Milan , and Prospero in turn shipwrecks his brother and other men of sin onto the island .
A Latin translation of Ibn Tufail 's Philosophus Autodidactus appeared in 1671 , prepared by Edward Pococke the Younger , followed by an English translation by Simon Ockley in 1708 , as well as German and Dutch translations .
In the late 17th century , Philosophus Autodidactus inspired Robert Boyle , an acquaintance of Pococke , to write his own philosophical novel set on a deserted island , The Aspiring Naturalist .
Ibn al - Nafis ' Theologus Autodidactus was also eventually translated into English in the early 20th century .
Published in 1719 , Daniel Defoe 's novel Robinson Crusoe about a castaway on a desert island has spawned so many imitations in film , television and radio that its name was used to define a genre , Robinsonade .
The novel features Man Friday , Crusoe 's personal assistant .
It is likely that Defoe took inspiration for Crusoe from a Scottish sailor named Alexander Selkirk , who was rescued in 1709 after four years on the otherwise uninhabited Juan Fernández Islands ; Defoe usually made use of current events for his plots .
It is also likely that he was inspired by the Latin or English translations of Ibn Tufail 's Philosophus Autodidactus .
Tom Neale was a New Zealander who voluntarily spent 16 years in three sessions in the 1950s and 1960s living alone on the island of Suwarrow in the northern Cook Islands group .
His time there is documented in his autobiography , An Island To Oneself .
Significant novels set on deserted islands include The Swiss Family Robinson , The Coral Island , The Mysterious Island , Lord of the Flies , The Cay and The Beach .
Juana Maria , a Native American woman , was stranded for 18 years on San Nicolas Island off California in the 19th century .
The theme of being stranded on a desert island has inspired films , such as Cast Away , and TV series , like Lost and the comedy Gilligan 's Island .
It is also the driving force behind reality shows like
Survivor and the Discovery Kids show Flight 29 Down .
In the popular conception , such islands are often located in the Pacific , tropical , uninhabited and usually uncharted .
They are remote locales that offer escape and force people marooned or stranded as castaways to become self - sufficient and essentially create a new society .
This society can either be utopian , based on an ingenious re - creation of society 's comforts ( as in Swiss Family Robinson and , in a humorous form , Gilligan 's Island ) or a regression into savagery ( the major theme of both Lord of the Flies and The Beach ) .
In reality , small coral atolls or islands usually have no source of fresh water ( thus precluding any long - term human survival ) , but at times a fresh water lens ( Ghyben – Herzberg lens ) can be reached with a well .
During the apocalyptic war depicted in H.G. Wells 's The War in the Air , Goat Island in the middle of the Niagara Falls becomes abruptly a desert island
when all bridges linking it to the mainland are destroyed - marooning a few survivors who embark on a bitter struggle for survival .
The BBC Radio 4 program Desert Island Discs asks well - known people what items they would take with them to a deserted island .
The program has inspired many similar articles , contests , and projects , including " desert island books , " " desert island movies , " and so on .
Some songs mention about desert islands , including one sung by Noel Paul Stookey from Peter , Paul and Mary .
Desert islands are also a hugely popular image for gag cartoons , the island being conventionally depicted as just a few yards across with a single palm tree ( probably due to the visual constraints of the medium ) .
17 such cartoons appeared in The New Yorker in 1957 alone .
A message in a bottle is a form of communication often associated with people stranded on a deserted island attempting to be rescued .
The top " dream vacation " for heterosexual men surveyed by Psychology Today " marooned on a tropical island with several members of the opposite sex . " HISTORICAL CASTAWAYS Section::::Historical castaways .
Another story has to do with a Dutch seaman who was left alone on the island of Saint Helena as punishment .
He fell into such despair that he disinterred the body of a buried comrade and set out to sea in the coffin .
Another castaway , the Spaniard Pedro Serrano , was rescued after seven and a half years of solitude .
In 1820 , the crew of the whaler Essex spent time on uninhabited Henderson Island .
There they gorged on birds , fish , and vegetation and found a small freshwater spring .
After one week , they had depleted the island 's resources and most of the crew left on three whaleboats , while three of the men decided to remain on the island and survived there for four months until their rescue .
SEE ALSO
* Castaway
* Castaway depot * Desert Island Discs
* List of uninhabited regions
* Marooning * Shipwreck REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Straight Dope : Are there actual cases of castaways who have been rescued ?
* Russian islomaniac