CHICAGO PICASSO The Chicago Picasso ( often just The Picasso ) is an untitled monumental sculpture by Pablo Picasso in Chicago , Illinois .
The sculpture , dedicated on August 15 , 1967 , in Daley Plaza in the Chicago Loop , is tall and weighs .
The Cubist sculpture by Picasso was the first such major public artwork in Downtown Chicago , and has become a well - known landmark .
Publicly accessible , it is known for its inviting jungle gym - like characteristics .
Visitors to Daley Plaza can often be seen climbing on and sliding down the base of the sculpture .
The sculpture was commissioned by the architects of the Richard J. Daley Center in 1963 .
The commission was facilitated by the architect William Hartmann of the architectural firm of Skidmore , Owings & Merrill .
Picasso completed a maquette of the sculpture in 1965 , and approved a final model of the sculpture in 1966 .
The cost of constructing the sculpture was $ 351,959.17 ( equivalent to $ 2.7 million in 2018 ) , paid mostly by three charitable foundations :
the Woods Charitable Fund , the Chauncey and Marion Deering McCormick Foundation , and the Field Foundation of Illinois .
Picasso himself was offered payment of $ 100,000 but refused , stating that he wanted to make his work a gift .
HISTORY Section::::History .
An architect who worked on the Daley Center project , Richard Bennett , wrote Picasso a poem asking him to make the sculpture .
Picasso accepted saying " You know I never accept commissions to do any sort of work , but in this case I am involved in projects for the two great gangster cities " ( the other being Marseille , France ) .
Picasso refused the $ 100,000 payment , considering his work a gift to the people of Chicago .
The sculpture was fabricated by the American Bridge Company division of the United States Steel Corporation in Gary , Indiana using COR - TEN steel , before being disassembled and relocated to Chicago .
The steel for this statue was rolled in the USS Gary Works 160/210 " plate mill , then the largest rolling mill of its kind in the world .
Before fabrication of the final steel sculpture was started , a 3.5 meter ( ~12 feet )
tall wooden model was constructed for Picasso to approve , this was eventually sent to the Gary Career Center .
Ground was broken in Daley Plaza for the construction of the sculpture on May 25 , 1967 .
The efforts of the City of Chicago to publicize the sculpture — staging a number of press events before the sculpture was completed , and displaying the maquette without a copyright notice — were cited as evidence in a 1970 U.S. District Court case where the judge ruled that the city 's actions had resulted in the sculpture being dedicated to the public domain .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The sculpture was initially met with controversy .
Before the Picasso sculpture , public sculptural artwork in Chicago was mainly of historical figures .
One derisive Chicago City Council alderman , John Hoellen , immediately proposed replacing it with a statue of Ernie Banks , and Chicago publicist and science fiction writer Algis Budrys erected a giant pickle on the proposed site .
There was speculation on the subject , which has ranged from a bird , or aardvark to Picasso 's pet Afghan Hound , a baboon head , the Egyptian deity Anubis , or Sylvette David , one of his models .
Newspaper columnist Mike Royko , covering the unveiling of the sculpture , wrote : " Interesting design , I 'm sure .
But the fact is , it has a long stupid face and looks like some giant insect that is about to eat a smaller , weaker insect . "
Royko did credit Picasso with understanding the soul of Chicago .
" Its eyes are like the eyes of every slum owner who made a buck off the small and weak .
And of every building inspector who took a wad from a slum owner to make it all possible ... You 'd think he 'd been riding the L all his life . "
INSPIRATION
Section::::Inspiration .
Although Picasso never explained what the sculpture was intended to represent , it may have been inspired by a French woman , Sylvette David , now known as Lydia Corbett , who posed for Picasso in 1954 .
Then 19 years old and living in Vallauris , France , Corbett would accompany her artist boyfriend as he delivered chairs made of metal , wood and rope .
One of those deliveries was to Picasso , who was struck by her high ponytail and long neck . "
He made many portraits of her .
At the time , most people thought he was drawing the actress Brigitte Bardot .
But in fact , he was inspired by [ Corbett ] ,
" Picasso 's grandson Olivier Widmaier Picasso told the Chicago Sun - Times in 2004 .
" I think the Chicago Sculpture was inspired by her , " said the grandson , author of Picasso , the Real Family Story .
Picasso made 40 works inspired by her , said the grandson , including The Girl Who Said No , reflecting their platonic relationship .
The quality of the Picasso sculpture inspired other artists such as Alexander Calder , Marc Chagall , Joan Miró , Claes Oldenburg and Henry Moore .
This sculpture is also seen as an abstract replica of an Afghan Hound dog .
Picasso had a Dachshund dog , Lump , which was the former companion to an Afghan Hound dog owned by Picasso 's friend David Douglas Duncan .
In the 1970s Jacqueline Picasso explained to Neil Thomas , an Australian lady , it was simply a male baboon viewed from head - on . "
Picasso loved the way the creature changed as you viewed it from different angles " ; it was part of a continuation of his lifelong inspiration from Africa .
There was an ongoing dialogue between Picasso 's sculpture and his painting .
A further possible influence could lie in his portraits of Jacqueline herself , made in the early 1960s , specifically Bust of a Woman ( Jacqueline ) from May 1962 ( Zervos XX , 243 , Private Collection ) .
LOCAL AND POP CULTURE
Section::::Local and pop culture .
The Picasso was the site of an August 23 , 1968 press conference in which Yippies Jerry Rubin , Phil Ochs , and others were arrested after nominating a pig — Pigasus — for president of the United States .
This event was held just before the opening of the 1968 Democratic National Convention , which became known for its anti - Vietnam war protests .
The sculpture was mentioned ( and appears ) in the 1980 film The Blues Brothers during the chase scene leading to the Richard J. Daley Center .
It can also be seen briefly in the 1993 film The Fugitive , as Harrison Ford , playing Richard Kimble , and his pursuers run across the plaza , and in the 1986 film Ferris Bueller 's Day Off as people in and under a reviewing stand dance to a song sung by Matthew Broderick , who plays Bueller .
The sculpture also makes an appearance in the 1988 film Switching Channels starring Kathleen Turner , Burt Reynolds and Christopher Reeve .
Today , the Chicago Picasso has become a well - known meeting spot for Chicagoans .
Depending on the season and time of the month , there are musical performances , farmers ' markets , a Christkindlmarkt , and other Chicago affairs which are held around the Picasso statue in front of Daley Plaza .
SEE ALSO
* List of public art in Chicago NOTES
REFERENCES
* Herrmann , Andrew , " The Woman Who Inspired City 's Picasso " , Chicago Sun - Times ( Nov. 11 , 2004 )
* Artner , Alan G. , " Chicago 's Picasso sculpture : The unveiling of the puzzling sculpture changes the public art landscape " .
Chicago Tribune ( Aug. 15 , 1967 )