DEXRON DEXRON is the trade name for a group of technical specifications of automatic transmission fluid created by General Motors ( GM ) .
The name is a registered trademark ( later becoming a brand ) of GM , which licenses the name and specifications to companies which manufacture the fluid and sell it under their own brand names .
Originally the DEXRON name was associated exclusively with automatic transmission fluids , later GM released DEXRON gear oils and other lubricants under the DEXRON brand .
AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION FLUIDS Section::::Automatic transmission fluids .
The original Dexron transmission fluid was introduced in 1968 .
Over the years , the original Dexron was supplanted by Dexron - II , Dexron - IIE , Dexron - III , and Dexron - VI , which is the current fluid .
GM has upgraded the Dexron specifications over the years ; newer fluids are generally but not always backward compatible with previous fluids .
Because there are still applications for which Dexron - VI either has not been proved suitable or deemed to be not necessary , there remains a market for fluids that claim to meet the earlier specifications .
DEXRON
Section::::DEXRON .
The original Dexron fluid , like its predecessor Type - A / Suffix - A , used sperm whale oil as a friction modifier .
The U.S. Endangered Species Act banned the import of sperm whale oil , so the fluid had to be reformulated .
DEXRON - II , IID , AND IIE Section::::DEXRON - II , IID , and IIE .
Dexron - II was introduced in 1972 with alternative friction modifiers such as Jojoba oil .
However , it caused problems with corrosion - prone solder in GM 's transmission fluid coolers ; accordingly , corrosion inhibitors were added to the product .
The resultant fluid , released in 1975 , was called Dexron - IID .
However , the corrosion inhibitor made the new fluid hygroscopic , which while it was not a major problem in automatic transmissions , made Dexron IID unsuitable for other hydraulic systems in which it was commonly used .
A further reformulation , to address excessive hygroscopicity , but primarily to improve low temperature performance ( 20,000cP @
-40C
vs 50,000cP@-40C for Dexron - IID ) was named Dexron - IIE
( GM Spec GM6137 M ) .
DEXRON - III Section::::DEXRON - III .
In 1993 , GM released new Dexron - III fluid ( GM Spec GM6417 M and later GMN10055 ) .
It is generally backward - compatible with transmissions using earlier Dexron fluids or Type - A / Suffix - A fluid .
However this specification failed to address a number of issues concerning long term durability such as shear stability and fluid oxidation .
Dexron - III underwent a number of iterations in an attempt to address various shortcomings but was eventually replaced by new thinking i.e. DEXRON - VI .
DEXRON
III G
Section::::DEXRON III G. Dexron III G was a synthetic automatic transmission fluid , especially developed for new ( after 1997 ) and older ( automatic ) transmissions build by Ford and GM , as well as for many other brands .
It is also suitable for power steering systems , some hydraulic systems and for rotary air compressors where an excellent low temperature fluidity is required .
DEXRON
III H
Section::::DEXRON III H.
Introduced in 2003 , replaced III G.
The H is an additive package for an updated friction modifier , and with an oxidatively stable base oil ( group 2 or group 3 ) .
Oils according to this specification have longer maintenance of friction properties and anti - shudder properties , better foam control and a longer fluid life .
Universal for all automatic transmission with and without controlled torque converter lockup clutch , the so called GKÜB for gear - clutch - lock . DEXRON - IV
An attempt to introduce an ' upgrade ' that was not fully accepted by GM management for a number of reasons including the way that it was promoted internally and cost .
It was therefore abandoned in favour of making further incremental upgrades to the existing DEXRON - III specification .
DEXRON - VI Section::::DEXRON - VI .
The fluid specification for Dexron - VI was introduced in 2005 , and was first used as the GM factory - fill automatic transmission fluid for model year 2006 .
All Dexron - III licenses expired permanently at the end of 2006 , and GM now supports only Dexron - VI fluids for use in their automatic transmissions , although fluids asserted by their manufacturers to meet Dexron - III standards continue to be sold under names such as Dex / Merc .
These fluids are not regulated or endorsed by GM .
Dexron VI is of a slightly lower viscosity when new compared to the prior Dexron fluids ( a maximum of 6.4 cSt at 100 ° C for Dexron VI and 7.5 cSt for Dexron III ) , but the allowed viscosity loss from shearing of the ATF during use is lower for Dexron VI , resulting in the same lowest allowed final viscosity for both Dexron III and VI ( 5.5 cSt ) in test .
In reality most of the DEXRON - III fluids typically sheared to about 4.2 cSt in use .
The lower , more stable viscosity improved pumping efficiency within the transmission and fluid stability over life .
Since Dexron VI is not allowed to thin out ( lower its viscosity ) as much as Dexron III during use , it requires the use of higher - quality , more shear - stable ( less prone to thinning while in use ) formulations .
The current GM specification that defines the fluid is GMW16444 , which superseded the original specification , GMN10060 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* GM Rolls Out Dexron VI
* GM Launches More Fuel - Saving Six - Speed Automatic Transmissions
* GM DEXRON ™ Official website