GOPHER ( WINNIE - THE - POOH )
Gopher is a fictional grey anthropomorphic gopher character who first appeared in the 1966 Disney animated film Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree , introducing himself as Samuel J. Gopher .
He has a habit of whistling out his sibilant consonants , one of various traits he has in common with the beaver in Lady and the Tramp , by whom he may have been inspired .
While he never made appearances in any episodes of Welcome to Pooh Corner , Gopher was fleshed out a bit further in the television series
The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh .
He is portrayed as generally hard - working , especially in his tunnels ( which he inevitably falls into at least once ) .
He does not appear in the original books Winnie the Pooh and The House at Pooh Corner by A. A. Milne ( a fact that is regularly pointed out in Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree , when he breaks the fourth wall by saying he 's " not in the book , y'know " , also trying to say that he would not be in a phone book ) .
Gopher 's voice was originally done by Howard Morris , who retired from the role and was replaced by Michael Gough .
Gopher 's most recent appearances were in A Winnie the Pooh Thanksgiving and Winnie the Pooh : A Valentine for You .
He also made minor appearances in A Very Merry Pooh Year , House of Mouse and appeared in Boo to You Too !
Winnie the Pooh , which was included as part of Pooh 's Heffalump Halloween Movie .
To date , this is Gopher 's last appearance in any form of Winnie the Pooh media .
Gopher was notably absent for the 2011 film , Winnie the Pooh .
Gopher did not appear in the 2018 live action film Christopher Robin , either .
CHARACTER CREATION Section::::Character .
Section::::Creation .
Gopher was the only character in the original shorts that was an original character and not based on a character from the A.A. Milne books , a fact he notes in his first appearance when he says " I 'm not in the book , you know ! "
Instead , he was initially developed by Disney as a replacement for Piglet .
Apparently , the proposed character of Gopher was thought to have a more " folksy , all - American , grass - roots image " than Piglet .
While American audiences loved the character , British audiences were less than pleased .
Like most Winnie the Pooh characters , Gopher is named after his own species .
Gopher is also known for his unique voice characterization .
He tends to whistle his consonants , particularly his S 's .
This is lampshaded in his debut ; when Pooh mimics Gopher while asking for honey , Gopher tells Pooh he should do something about his speech impediment .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
Gopher has a very plain personality ; he is rarely seen outside of his burrow so not much is known about him socially .
He is generally a hard - worker , especially in his mine shafts ( tunnels ) and spends most of his time tediously working on them .
Despite his low social life , Gopher is not a silent character , while talking to the other animals he has a habit of whistling out his sibilant consonants .
TRIVIA
* The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh episode " Lights Out " revealed that Gopher has a fear of the dark , although he loses this fear at the end of the episode .
*
Gopher is mentioned in the My Friends Tigger and Pooh episode " Tigger and Pooh and a Musical Too " .
After Beaver ( a similar character that first appeared in " Lady and the Tramp " ) correctly guesses the password to Tigger 's territory of the Hundred Acre Wood , Tigger turns to Pooh and says " I miss Gopher " .
*
In the new interactive queue of The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh ride at Walt Disney World , Gopher can be seen popping in and out of Rabbit 's garden .
* Gopher also has a spell card in the Sorcerers of the Magic Kingdom game , " Gopher 's Demolition Dynamite " .
* Gopher makes a speaking cameo appearance in the Goof Troop episode " Terminal Pete " .
* Gopher had a large notable absence in any media since around 2006 until the release of Kingdom Hearts III which is scheduled for 25th January 2019 in Japan and 29th January 2019 worldwide .
REFERENCES