NEW BALANCE New Balance
Athletics , Inc. ( NB ) , best known as simply New Balance , is an American multinational corporation based in the Boston , Massachusetts area .
The company was founded in 1906 as the " New Balance Arch Support Company " and is one of the world 's major sports footwear manufacturers .
New Balance maintains a manufacturing presence in the United States , as well as in the United Kingdom for the European market , where they produce some of their most popular models such as the 990 model — in contrast to its competitors , which often manufacture exclusively outside the USA and Europe .
As a result , New Balance shoes tend to be more expensive than those of many other manufacturers .
To offset this pricing difference , New Balance claims to differentiate their products with technical features , such as blended gel inserts , heel counters and a greater selection of sizes , particularly for very narrow or very wide widths .
The company has made total profits of approximately $ 69 billion since 1992 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1906 , William J. Riley , British emigrant , founded the New Balance Arch Support Company in the Boston area , manufacturing arch supports and other accessories designed to improve shoe fit .
His first product , a flexible arch support , was designed with three support points to provide greater balance and comfort in the shoe .
It is believed that Riley came up with the name " New Balance " by observing chickens in his yard and demonstrated the way his arch supports worked by keeping a chicken foot on his office desk .
He explained to customers that the chicken 's three - pronged foot resulted in perfect balance .
In 1927 , Riley hired Arthur Hall to be a salesman .
In 1934 , Hall became a business partner and found his niche by marketing to people whose jobs required them to spend a lot of time standing .
In 1956 , Hall sold the business to his daughter Eleanor and her husband Paul Kidd .
Eleanor and Paul Kidd continued to sell mainly arch supports until 1960 , when they designed and manufactured the " Trackster " , the world 's first running shoe made with a ripple sole .
It was also the first running shoe to come in varying widths .
The " Trackster " was given a big boost through the YMCA programs in which it became the unofficial shoe .
College track teams such as Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , Tufts University and Boston University adopted the New Balance Trackster for their cross - country teams , soon to be followed by other colleges and private high schools around the country .
Marketing was mostly word - of - mouth or local sports fairs .
Sales languished until 1972 , when current Chairman Jim Davis bought the company on the day of that year 's Boston Marathon .
At the time , the company consisted of six people making 30 pairs of shoes daily and selling products mostly through mail - order with a few U.S. retailers .
Jim committed himself to uphold the company 's traditional commitment to individual preferences , customer service and quality products .
His future wife Anne , who joined the company in 1978 , focused on building a distinct culture for New Balance employees and customers .
Their timing was perfect , as the Boston area became a center for the running boom that struck the U.S. in the 1970s .
Their product line expanded and sales grew rapidly once the shoes made its way to Washington , DC in the late 1970s and early 1980s .
It was at this time that the shoe became a staple in shoe stores sold around the city for track runners and Moes alike .
The company prospered , and the Davises looked to expand New Balance into a global company .
The company is now run by Rob DeMartini .
DeMartini 's background includes Procter & Gamble and Gillette Shave Company .
Today , 30 percent of the New Balance shoes sold in the European market are manufactured at the New Balance facility in Flimby , England .
In February 2015 , the company announced its entry into the global soccer ( association football ) market .
New Balance had started its soccer business through its subsidiary Warrior Sports in 2012 , punctuated by a $ 40 million - a - year sponsorship deal with Liverpool , but made the move to rebrand based on the global reach of the parent brand .
During 2016 , New Balance opposed the Trans Pacific Partnership and condemned the Obama administration 's support for it , arguing that it would hurt their domestic shoe manufacturing ( while Nike , which does not manufacture in the US , supported the TPP ) .
Matt Lebretton , the company 's Vice President of public affairs said in April 2016 " I would say that when Hillary Clinton , Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump all agree on something , then it has to be given a closer look ; and they all agree that TPP is not the right policy . "
After Donald Trump won the 2016 U.S. presidential election , Lebretton told a reporter "
The Obama administration turned a deaf ear to us [ about trade ] and frankly , with President - elect Trump , we feel things are going to move in the right direction . "
Some news outlets reported that an ad - hoc boycott campaign was created out of an interpretation of Lebretton 's remarks as supportive of Trump .
Owner and Chairman Davis donated almost $ 400,000 to the Trump Victory Committee in September 2016 .
NEW BALANCE NUMERIC Section::::New Balance Numeric .
In 2013 , New Balance launched a skateboarding shoe brand dubbed " New Balance Numeric " that is distributed by Black Box Distribution , a company founded by professional skateboarder Jamie Thomas .
Following the announcement of the partnership in December 2012 , Thomas stated in an interview with the TransWorld Business publication , " I am most hyped about the positive energy this partnership creates for the future of our distribution as well as how this partnership enables us to further support skate retailers with a new brand they can trust and depend on . "
The Numeric brand is overseen by Brand Manager Sebastian Palmer , who was formerly with skate shoe brand eS , while Mike West , of Westlife Distribution and snowboarding brand 686 , is Creative Director .
West explained at the launch event , " I myself was a sponsored skateboarder back in the late eighties , so , for me , skateboarding is always at my heart , it 's something that I bleed in .
Same with running , before skateboarding , so it kind of just all came to what we are today , which is New Balance Numeric skateboarding .
" Palmer explained further at the same event : New Balance is about doing things right .
They are about doing things they wanna do , and following those through .
We saw the chance to do something really authentic in a youthful culture that they [ New Balance ] had n't really had a presence in before .
More than that , they saw an authentic culture that they wanted to be a part of .
The brand also consists of a sponsored team that is co - ordinated by professional skateboarder John Rattray .
TEAM
* PJ Ladd * Arto Saari
* Levi Brown
* Tom Karengelov * Jordan Taylor
* Tyler Surrey
* Tom Knox * Brandon Westgate SPONSORSHIPS OLYMPIC COMMITTEES Section::::Sponsorships . Section::::Olympic Committees .
The company debut on the Olympics stage , dressing the Olympic Council of Ireland and the Chilean Olympic Committee at Rio 2016 .
FOOTBALL NATIONAL TEAMS UEFA CONCACAF FOOTBALL CLUB
TEAMS ASIA * Melbourne Football Club
* Sagan Tosu * FC Gifu * Montedio Yamagata * Seoul E - Land FC
* Al - Wasl
* Al - Nassr
EUROPE *
Standard
Liège * Liverpool F.C. * FC Nantes
* Lille OSC
* Shamrock Rovers F.C.
* Odds BK * Lechia Gdańsk * FC
Porto * Celtic F.C. * Athletic Bilbao * FC Dynamo
Kyiv
NORTH AMERICA
*
Tulsa Roughnecks FC
* Muskegon Risers SC
OCEANIA SOUTH AMERICA
* Estudiantes de La Plata * Atlético Junior * Barranquilla F.C.
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
From 2013 , New Balance has considerably increased the number of athletes it sponsors .
Noticeable athletes signed by the company include Olympian Stephanie Twell and since 2015 , they have sponsored the young rising star Trayvon Bromell .
New Balance also sponsors athletics teams such as New Zealand and the Antigua and Barbuda national team .
* Harry Aikines - Aryeetey
* Michel Butter *
Trayvon
Bromell
* Lisanne de Witte
*
Richard Douma * Kawhi Leonard
* Sydney McLaughlin
* Jenny Simpson
*
Dave Wesseling * Owen Westerhout BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
The company previously partnered with Matt Bonner of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) 's San Antonio Spurs , providing him with shoes over a period of several years .
James Worthy from the Los Angeles Lakers also used New Balance shoes .
During the 2010–11 NBA season , Bonner was sent a prototype for a signature shoe that he was developing with the brand , but the shoes fell apart at the beginning of the game that he first wore them in .
After Bonner was informed that the prototype shoes were not meant to be worn , a representative informed him that New Balance was ceasing its sponsorship of basketball .
In 2018 New Balance signed Kawhi Leonard .
CRICKET
Section::::Cricket .
Following the 2015 ICC Cricket World Cup , New Balance signed a deal with Cricket South Africa that includes the national cricket teams of South Africa .
From 2017 , New Balance signed a deal with the England & Wales Cricket Board , to become kit supplier to the England teams .
New Balance also sponsor international cricketers Pat Cummins , Steve Smith , Adam Zampa , Matthew Wade , Joe Root , Grant Elliott , David Miller , Nic Maddinson , Gary Ballance , Aaron Finch , Jason Roy , Mitchell Santner , Wahab Riaz , Yasir Shah , Dale Steyn , and Colin Munro .
CYCLING Section::::Cycling .
Following the official launch in July 2011 , New Balance is the primary sponsor of Boston 's bike share system , the New Balance Hubway .
New Balance began a partnership with American professional cycling team in 2011 , providing the team kits as well as their " exclusive off bike athletic footwear " sponsor .
RUGBY Section::::Rugby .
New Balance produce playing kits for many rugby league teams .
TENNIS
*
Jordan Thompson *
Matt Reid *
Chris Guccione *
Milos Raonic * Heather Watson * Misaki Doi * Sorana Cîrstea * Nicole Gibbs * Christian Garin TONING FOOTWEAR
Section::::Toning footwear .
A class action lawsuit against New Balance filed in 2011 alleges that the company 's toning footwear touts unproven benefits .
In support of its claim of false advertising , it cites a University of Wisconsin – La Crosse research study on toning shoes that was funded and published by the American Council on Exercise .
Researchers reported that there were no " statistically significant increases in either exercise response or muscle activation " as a result of wearing the toning shoes .
There was no statistically significant difference between participants wearing special " toning shoes " and controls wearing normal sneakers .
The researchers concluded that there is " simply no evidence to support the claims that these shoes will help wearers exercise more intensely , burn more calories or improve muscle strength and tone . "
However , it was noted that " These shoes may be encouraging a fair number of people who probably would n't put on a normal pair of walking shoes and go out and walk . "
SEE ALSO * Warrior Sports , an affiliated sports equipment firm of New Balance based in the Greater Boston area
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * FTC " Complying with the Made
In the USA Standard " site
* FAQ answer on New Balance UK manufacturing