UNCAUGHT
THIRD STRIKE
In baseball and softball , an uncaught third strike ( sometimes referred to as dropped third strike or non - caught third strike ) occurs when the catcher fails to cleanly catch a pitch for the third strike .
In Major League Baseball , the specific rules concerning the uncaught third strike are addressed in Rules 5.05 and 5.09 of the Official Baseball Rules :
On an uncaught third strike with ( 1 ) no runner on first base , or ( 2 ) with a runner on first base and two outs , the batter immediately becomes a runner .
The strike is called , but the umpire does not call the batter out .
The umpire may also signal that there is " no catch " of the pitch .
The batter may then attempt to reach first base and must be tagged or forced out .
With two outs and the bases loaded , the catcher who fails to catch the third strike may , upon picking up the ball , step on home plate for a force - out or make a throw to any other base in an effort to force out a runner .
An " uncaught " strike includes not only pitches dropped by the catcher , but also pitches that hit the ground before the catcher attempts to catch it .
The purpose of the " no runner on first base or two outs " qualification is to prevent the catcher from deliberately dropping a third strike pitch and then initiating an unfair double or triple play with possible force plays at second base , third base , or home plate , in addition to putting the batter out at first base .
The logic of the situation is similar to that which led to the infield fly rule .
Regardless of the outcome of an uncaught third strike , the pitcher is statistically credited with a strikeout , and the batter is statistically charged with one .
Because of the uncaught third strike rule , it is possible for a pitcher to register more than three strikeouts in an inning .
Numerous pitchers have recorded more than three strikeouts in an inning in a Major League Baseball game , though no five - strikeout innings have ever occurred .
In Little League , in the Tee - Ball and Minor League divisions , the batter is out after the third strike regardless of whether the pitched ball is caught cleanly by the catcher .
In Little League ( or the Major Division ) , Junior , Senior , and Big League divisions , a batter may attempt to advance to first base on an uncaught third strike .
Little League Major Division Softball and many other youth baseball leagues ( such as the USSSA ) also follow the rule .
RECENT CHANGES Section::::Recent changes .
Following a controversial play involving this rule in the ninth inning of Game 2 of the 2005 American League Championship Series , the application of the rule was changed when a comment was added in 2006 to Rule 6.09(b )
( After rule numbering changes , Rule 5.09(a)(2 ) Comment ) : Rule 5.09(a)(2 ) Comment : A batter who does not realize his situation on a third strike not caught , and who is not in the process of running to first base , shall be declared out once he leaves the dirt circle surrounding home plate .
This comment represents the official interpretation of the application of the rule .
Prior to this rule change , a batter was able to try for first at any time before entering the dugout .
The new rule would not have affected the controversial play referenced above , as the batter had not left the dirt circle .
REFERENCES