PRE - ORDER
A pre - order is an order placed for an item that has not yet been released .
The idea for pre - orders came because people found it hard to get popular items in stores because of their popularity .
Companies then had the idea to allow customers to reserve their own personal copy before its release , which has been a huge success .
Pre - orders allow consumers to guarantee immediate shipment on release , manufacturers can gauge how much demand there will be and thus the size of initial production runs , and sellers can be assured of minimum sales .
Additionally , high pre - order rates can be used to increase sales further .
PRE - ORDER INCENTIVE Section::::Pre - order incentive .
Pre - order incentive , also known as pre - order bonus , is a marketing tactic in which a retailer or manufacturer / publisher of a product ( usually a book or video game ) encourages buyers to reserve a copy of the product at the store prior to its release .
Reasons vary , but typically , publishers wish to ensure strong initial sales for a product , and the offered incentive is used to induce shoppers who might otherwise wait for positive reviews or a specific shopping period , like the holiday season , to commit to a purchase .
Having paid for part or all of the purchase when placing the order , the consumers will usually complete the transaction shortly after the product 's release , often on its first day in stores .
Individual stores or retail chains may also offer bonuses for a popularly anticipated product to ensure that the customer chooses to buy at that location , rather than from a competitor .
The pre - order bonus may be as simple as a discount on the item 's purchase price or other related merchandise , another marketing strategy , or it may be an actual item or set of items .
The items may be related merchandise or exclusive items available only through the pre - order program .
IN VIDEO GAMING Section::::In video gaming .
Until around 2000 , the primary distribution method for video games were through physical media such as CD - ROMs , DVDs , or game cartridges , including packaging and instruction manuals .
Preparing enough copies for vendors to purchase and sell to consumers on the release day required a significant amount of market forecasting .
Episodes in the industry 's past , such as the 1983 video game crash , had made publishers wary of producing in great excess to avoid the situation that led to the Atari video game burial .
On the other hand , having too few copies available at the game 's launch can lead to consumer dissatisfaction .
Retailers like GameStop and Amazon.com discovered in the early 2000s that the pre - ordering mechanism helped with forecasts , as they could order a reasonable number of copies of new games based on pre - order interest , which , in turn , helped publishers to determine how many physical units to create .
Then , pre - orders were usually placed by providing the vendor with a small percentage of the game 's cost to hold their reservation ( such as $ 5 or $ 10 on a $ 50 game ) , with assurances they would receive their copy on release day after paying the remaining balance .
Retailers would be able to use pre - order money towards other investments , effectively accruing some interest on the pre - order fee .
As the video game market grew with some widely popular series like Call of Duty and Grand Theft Auto , publishers would prepare by printing large runs of the games and having them ready to ship to retailers so that even consumers who failed to pre - order would likely be able to get a copy within a day or two of release , negating the primary drivers to pre - order .
Furthermore , digital distribution eliminated the need for retail versions started to take off , as there is effectively no fixed volume of digital copies .
Then , publishers and retails started to turn to other methods to encourage pre - orders .
Publishers created limited edition packages that would include additional physical items with the game , such as art books , soundtrack CDs , or figurines of the game 's characters .
Such editions would be published only in limited numbers encouraging consumers to pre - order early to reserve one .
Retails made dealers with publishers to allow for unique content for the game that could be obtained only by pre - orders through that vendor .
Pre - ordering is a part of most major releases but is now a significant point of contention .
Some consumers believe pre - ordering to be a waste and do not believe that any kind of incentive is truly worth a marked up price of sometimes over twice the original price for certain digital in - game pre - order bonuses , which may be released as free downloadable content sometime later after the game 's original release .
Others have pointed out that with the pre - ordering process , publishers can effectively assure a sale of the game to those consumers and so can release the game in an unfinished state or missing certain features to that captive audience , but without pre - orders , critical reviews of a game released in such a state would have harmed their sales .
That itself then leads to issues of promotion and marketing of how to sell a game as to gain pre - orders , which can lead to some potentially deceptive practices .
In some cases , a game can be significantly delayed or even canceled , making the pre - ordering process useless .
SEE ALSO
* Crowdfunding REFERENCES