BOSTON PIZZA Boston Pizza ( also known as BP and , in the United States and Mexico , as Boston 's ) is a Canadian - based restaurant chain that owns and franchises locations in Canada , the United States and Mexico .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Boston Pizza began in Edmonton , Alberta , on August 12 , 1964 , when a Greek immigrant , Gus Agioritis , opened Boston Pizza and Spaghetti House .
By 1970 , Boston Pizza had 17 locations in Western Canada , 15 of which were franchised .
One of the first franchisees was Jim Treliving , a Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer .
In 1968 , he noticed the growing popularity of Boston Pizza and purchased the rights to open a restaurant in Penticton , British Columbia .
While in Penticton , he met George Melville , a chartered accountant .
He acted as Treliving 's business consultant for four years , and , in 1973 , became Treliving 's business partner .
Over 10 years , they opened 16 restaurants in British Columbia .
In 1983 , Treliving and Melville acquired the Boston Pizza chain from Ron Coyle , who had acquired the company from Agioritis in 1978 .
The two divested 15 of their restaurants to other franchisees , converted one restaurant to a corporate training restaurant and set about establishing systems and operating standards to standardize company operations .
In the early 1980s , Boston Pizza expanded into Eastern Canada but by late 1985 most , if not all restaurants in Ontario were closed .
In 1986 , Boston Pizza became the official pizza supplier for Expo 86 in Vancouver .
This major success for the company led to expansion in Eastern Canada .
In the next two years , it led to another 17 franchises .
By 1995 , the chain had grown to 95 restaurants in Western Canada with sales in excess of $ 110 million ( CAD ) .
Over the many years the restaurants had become a success , more sports bars had been established as an integral part of the business .
In 1997 , Mark Pacinda was hired to bring the chain to more eastern areas of Canada .
Once an Eastern Office was opened in Mississauga , another restaurant was opened in Ottawa in September 1998 .
The company later opened a regional office in Laval , Quebec , in April 2004 .
, there are 348 Boston Pizza restaurants in Canada , and over 40 in the U.S. and Mexico .
BOSTON 'S
Section::::Boston 's .
Boston 's was the U.S. and Mexican version of the Boston Pizza franchise .
In 1998 , a U.S. headquarters was set up in Dallas , Texas .
The Boston Pizza name was changed to Boston 's The Gourmet Pizza .
Boston 's had over 30 stores in the U.S. and four in Mexico .
PROMOTIONAL BRANDING
Section::::Promotional branding .
As part of an advertising campaign created by ZIP communication , during the first round of the 2011 Stanley Cup playoffs , when the Boston Bruins played the Montreal Canadiens , the company temporarily rebranded its Montreal locations as " Montreal Pizza " .
In the final round of the playoffs , when the Bruins played the Vancouver Canucks , the company temporarily rebranded its British Columbia locations as " Vancouver Pizza " .
TRADEMARK DISPUTE Section::::Trademark dispute .
In 2002 , Boston Pizza commenced a lawsuit against Boston Market in the Federal Court of Canada over the trademark use of the word " Boston " in Canada .
In its defence , Boston Market alleged that Boston Pizza 's trademarks were invalid because they described a style of pizza from a specific area .
The dispute continued after Boston Market ceased operations in Canada in 2004 .
The parties settled the dispute in 2008 under an agreement that Boston Market would not use the words " Boston " or " Boston Market " in Canada for five years for restaurants or any food or drink products ( other than pre - packaged food products , but not including pizza and lasagna ) .
Boston Market also agreed that it would not challenge Boston Pizza 's use in Canada of any trademark that uses the words " Boston " or " Boston Pizza " ( with certain exceptions ) .
SEE ALSO
* List of Canadian restaurant chains * List of Canadian pizza chains
* Pizza cake , a Boston Pizza product which later went viral REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS