WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE ( FILM )
Why Do Fools Fall in Love is a 1998 American romantic drama film , directed by Gregory Nava and released by Warner Bros. Pictures .
The film is a biographical film of R&B / Rock and roll singer Frankie Lymon , lead singer of the pioneering rock and roll group Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers for one year .
Moreover , the film highlights the three women in his life , each of whom claim to have married Lymon and lay claim to his estate .
Written by Tina Andrews
, Why Do Fools Fall in Love stars Halle Berry ,
Vivica A. Fox , Lela Rochon , and Larenz Tate , who portrays Lymon .
Little Richard also appears in the film as himself .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lymon was 13 years old when the teenage group Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers erupted from radios and jukeboxes with their 1956 hit " Why Do Fools Fall in Love ? " and appeared in the movie Rock , Rock , Rock ( 1956 ) .
After Mr. Rock and Roll ( 1957 ) , Lymon started a solo singing career , but it all fell apart .
Lymon 's career was over by the time he was 18 years old , and he died of a heroin overdose seven years later .
Jumping from the 1950s to the 1960s , the film traces the rise and fall of Lymon ( Larenz Tate ) in a series of flashbacks as courtroom claims on Lymon 's royalties are outlined by three women : Zola Taylor ( Halle Berry ) of the R&B group
The Platters ; Elizabeth Waters ( Vivica A. Fox ) , a petty thief from Philadelphia ; and schoolteacher Emira Eagle ( Lela Rochon ) .
Ending credits shows the real Frankie Lymon singing his song " Goody Goody . "
Little Richard also makes a courtroom appearance , while Miguel A. Nunez Jr. portrays Little Richard in scenes set in the 1950s .
The film ends with Emira winning Frankie 's estate , although Elizabeth was named the legal surviving spouse of Frankie Lymon .
CAST
* Halle Berry as Zola Taylor * Vivica A. Fox as Elizabeth " Mickey " Waters * Lela Rochon as Emira Eagle * Larenz Tate as Frankie Lymon
* Paul Mazursky as Morris Levy
* Pamela Reed as Judge Lambrey * Alexis Cruz as Herman Santiago * Jon Huertas as Joe Negroni
* David Barry Gray as Peter Markowitz
* Miguel A. Nunez Jr. as Young Little Richard * Clifton Powell as Lawrence Roberts * Lane Smith as Ezra Grahme * Ben Vereen as Richard Barrett
* Paula Jai Parker as Paula King * Marcello Thedford as Drug Dealer * Norris Young as Jimmy * Little Richard as Himself
* Aries Spears as Redd Foxx
* J. August Richards as Sherman * Shirley Caesar as minister / singer at funeral BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The screenplay of the film , written by actress - turned - screenwriter Tina Andrews , took fifteen years to be produced .
Director Gregory Nava used most of the technical staff from his prior film Selena .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
Filming locations include : Jacksonville , Florida ; Los Angeles , California ; and Starke , Florida .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
The film was first presented at the Urbanworld Film Festival , New York on August 8 , 1998 .
The film opened in wide release on August 28 , 1998 ( 1,369 theaters ) and sales the opening weekend were $ 3,946,382 .
Why Do Fools Fall in Love ran for 8 weeks domestically ( 56 days ) and eventually grossed $ 12,506,676 in the United States .
At its widest release the film was shown in 1,377 screens .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
It currently holds a 54 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Roger Ebert , film critic for the Chicago Sun - Times , was disappointed in the screenplay and ultimately Nava 's direction of the film , and wrote , " There are several angles this material might have been approached from , and director Gregory Nava tries several without hitting on one that works .
By the end of the film , we 're not even left with anyone to root for ; we realize with a little astonishment , waiting for the court verdict , that we do n't care who wins . "
Yet , film critic Peter Stack liked the film and believes director Nava smartly juggles a lot of elements in the picture .
He wrote , " Why Do Fools Fall in Love is a fresh , enlightening example of how to take a tragic American show - business story and make it funny , warm and terrifically entertaining ...
[it ] brims with joyful spirit and raucous comedy ...
[and the film ] deftly juggles a surprising number of elements , but they all work . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Wins
* ALMA Award : Outstanding Latino Director of a Feature Film , Gregory Nava , 1999 .
* American Black Film Festival : Black Film Award ; Best Actor , Larenz Tate , 1999 .
Nominations
* ALMA Awards : Outstanding Actor in a Feature Film in a Crossover Role , Miguel A. Núñez Jr. ; Outstanding Actor in a Supporting Role in a Feature Film , Alexis Cruz , 1999 .
* American Black Film Festival : Black Film Award ; Best Screenplay , Tina Andrews ; Best Soundtrack , 1999 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Two soundtrack albums were released for Why Do Fools Fall in Love by Warner Music Group .
Why Do Fools Fall in Love :
Original Versions from the Movie , released on September 8 , 1998 by Rhino Records , contained fourteen songs , including five of Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers ' original recordings .
Also included are original hits by Little Richard , The Platters , The Shirelles , Otis Redding and others .
Why Do Fools Fall in Love :
Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture was released on the same day as Original Versions from the Movie , but on Warner 's East West Records label .
Save for one vintage Little Richard song , it features new hip - hop and contemporary R&B recordings more or less unrelated to the actual film ( one track , Gina Thompson 's " Why Do Fools Fall in Love " , interpolates the Teenagers ' hit and is featured over the end credits of the film ) .
Primarily produced by Missy Elliott and Timbaland , this soundtrack album features songs by artists such as Elliott , Busta Rhymes , En Vogue , Destiny 's Child , Coko and , making her solo debut , Spice Girls member Melanie B. REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS