SPOUSAL PRIVILEGE
In the common law , spousal privilege ( also called marital privilege or husband - wife privilege ) is a term used in the law of evidence to describe two separate privileges that apply to spouses : the spousal communications privilege and the spousal testimonial privilege .
Both types of privilege are based on the policy of encouraging spousal harmony and preventing spouses from having to condemn , or be condemned by , their spouses : the spousal communications privilege or confidences privilege is a form of privileged communication that protects the contents of confidential communications between spouses during their marriage from testimonial disclosure , while spousal testimonial privilege ( also called spousal incompetency and spousal immunity ) protects the individual holding the privilege from being called to testify in proceedings relating to his / her spouse .
However , the spousal privileges have their roots in the legal fiction that a husband and wife were one person .
AROUND
THE WORLD UNITED STATES
Section::::Around the world .
Section::::United States .
In the United States , federal case law dictates the privileges ' permissible and prohibited invocation in federal trials , while state case law outlines their scope in state courts .
COMMUNICATIONS PRIVILEGE Section::::Communications privilege .
A spousal communications privilege applies in civil and criminal cases .
Both the witness - spouse and the party - spouse hold the spousal communications privilege , so either may invoke it to prevent the witness - spouse from testifying about a confidential communication made during marriage .
The communications privilege begins on marriage .
It covers communications made during the marriage , and can not be invoked to protect confidential communications between now - married spouses that occurred prior to their marriage .
Unlike testimonial privilege , the communications privilege survives the end of a marriage , and may be asserted by a spouse to protect confidential communications that were made during the marriage — even after divorce or death .
The spousal communications privilege may not be invoked if the spouses are suing each other or each other 's estates in a civil case ; if one of the spouses has initiated a criminal proceeding against the other ; or in a competency proceeding regarding one of the spouses .
These three scenarios are identical to the limitations which also apply to limit the spousal testimonial privilege .
Two further scenarios apply to defeat the attachment of the spousal communications privilege : if the confidential communication was made in order to plan or commit crime or fraud , or if a defendant - spouse wishes , in a criminal trial , to testify in their own defense , about a confidential marital communication .
In these five cases , a court will not allow either spouse to assert the privilege to block the testimony .
TESTIMONIAL PRIVILEGE Section::::Testimonial privilege .
A minority of states apply testimonial privilege in both criminal and civil cases .
For example , under California Evidence Code ( " CEC " ) § 970 , California permits the application of testimonial privilege to both civil and criminal cases , and includes both the privilege not to testify as well as the privilege not to be called as a witness by the party adverse to the interests of the spouse in the trial .
Under U.S. federal common law , the spousal testimonial privilege is held by the witness - spouse , not the party - spouse , and therefore does not prevent a spouse who wishes to testify from doing so .
The rationale of this rule is that if a witness - spouse desires to testify against the party - spouse , there is no marital harmony left to protect through the obstruction of such testimony .
This common law principle is the view in a minority of U.S. states .
A majority of U.S. jurisdictions , however , do not follow U.S. federal common law ; in most states , the party - spouse , and not the witness - spouse , is the holder of spousal testimonial privilege .
Spousal testimonial privilege covers observations , such as the color of the clothing
the party - spouse was wearing on a certain day , as well as communications , such as the content of a telephone conversation with the party - spouse .
The witness - spouse may invoke testimonial privilege regarding events which occurred ( 1 ) during the marriage , if the spouses are still married ; and ( 2 ) prior to the marriage if he is married to his spouse in court proceedings at the time of trial .
If , by the time the trial occurs , the spouses are no longer married , the former spouse - witness may testify freely about any events which occurred prior to , after , or even during the marriage .
Spousal testimonial privilege , in other words , only lasts as long as the marriage does .
Spousal testimonial privilege may not be invoked if the spouses are suing each other or each other 's estates in a civil case ; if one of the spouses has initiated a criminal proceeding against the other ; or in a competency proceeding regarding one of the spouses .
Both rules may be suspended depending on the jurisdiction in the case of divorce proceedings or child custody disputes , but are suspended in cases where one spouse is accused of a crime against the other spouse or the spouse 's child .
Courts generally do not permit an adverse spouse to invoke either privilege during a trial initiated by the other spouse , or in the case of domestic abuse .
The privileges may also be suspended where both spouses are joint participants in a crime , depending on the law of the jurisdiction .
ENGLAND AND WALES TESTIMONIAL PRIVILEGE Section::::England and Wales .
Section::::Testimonial privilege .
Spouses are , in general , both competent to give evidence in civil cases , and can be compelled to do so .
This was established in section 1 of the Evidence Amendment Act 1853 and extended in the Evidence Further Amendment Act 1869 to proceedings instituted in consequence of adultery , the position on compulsion being clarified in Tilley v Tilley ( 1949 ) .
In criminal cases , however , the common law long held that wives were not in general competent to give evidence against their husbands ( i.e. for the prosecution ) .
This derived from a view of husbands and wives as one person , which extended the defendant 's protection against self - incrimination to their wife .
A wife could however give evidence for the prosecution where her husband was accused of personal violence against her .
Section 4(1 ) of the Criminal Evidence Act 1898 made spouses competent witnesses in many more circumstances , including giving evidence for the defence .
It was initially assumed that the Act also meant spouses could be compelled to give evidence , but the House of Lords disagreed in Leach v R ( 1912 ) .
Distinguishing Leach , the Court of Criminal Appeal held in R v Lapworth ( 1930 ) that spouses were nevertheless compellable witnesses for the prosecution in cases of personal violence , on the basis that the common law position prior to the 1898 Act had not been unaffected by its entry into law .
However , in Hoskyn v Metropolitan Police Commissioner ( 1978 ) the House of Lords overruled Lapworth , ending the personal violence exception in favour of spouses being competent but not compellable witnesses for the prosecution in all cases .
In reaching this view , judges were swayed by the special status of marriage , and the " natural repugnance " that the public would feel at seeing a wife give evidence against her husband in a wide range of scenarios .
This lasted only until the entry into force of section 80 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 , which restored the ability of the prosecution to compel the testimony of the husband or wife of the accused ( later amended to include civil partners ) where the defendant has been charged with " assault on , or injury or a threat of injury to " the spouse or a person under 16 , or a sexual offence toward a persons under 16 .
In addition , under the 1984 Act , the defence can almost always compel testimony , and as set out in section 53 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 , spouses will generally be competent to offer their testimony voluntarily .
However , where the spouse or civil partner is an active co - defendant to the charges , they may only testify for the defence ( and can not be compelled to testify by either side ) .
No privilege extends to couples who are neither married nor in a civil partnership , a source of major criticism .
COMMUNICATIONS PRIVILEGE Section::::Communications privilege .
The existence of a communications privilege in the common law is disputed .
Its existence was assumed by late nineteenth century writers , but Sir Wilfred Greene noted in Shenton v Tyler [ 1941 ] that having researched the subject he found no evidence to support this view .
Rather , any such privilege was the result of statute , and , in particular , section 3 of the Evidence Amendment Act 1853 which provided that " no husband shall be compellable to disclose any communication made to him by his wife during the marriage , and no wife shall be compellable to disclose any communication made to her by her husband during the marriage " .
This provision was based on the Second Report of the Commissioners on Common Law Procedure , who referenced the " inviolability of domestic confidence " .
It was then repeated in section 1 of the Criminal Evidence Act 1898 , which served to confirm its applicability to the criminal law .
The provision made in the 1853 Act was both limited – it did not extend to third party disclosure or prevent voluntary disclosure – and asymmetric , as it did not stop the speaker from being compelled to disclosure any communications , only the listener .
As a result , in its Report on Privilege in Civil Proceedings published in December 1967 the English Law Reform Committee recommended its abolition in civil cases , which was done in the Civil Evidence Act 1968 and for criminal cases in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 .
The 1984 Act also repealed section 43(1 ) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1965 ( evidence as to marital intercourse ) .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australian law , both the common law privilege of confidentiality between married people and the privilege of spouses not to testify against each other were assumed to have continued with the " reception " of English law .
On 30 November 2011 , the High Court of Australia decided that neither privilege existed in common law .
However , a form of spousal privilege in regards to criminal trials is preserved by the Evidence Acts .
SEE
ALSO * Edmunds – Tucker Act – an 1887 U.S. law that denied spousal privilege to polygamists REFERENCES