PRIVATE EQUITY FUND
A private equity fund is a collective investment scheme used for making investments in various equity ( and to a lesser extent debt ) securities according to one of the investment strategies associated with private equity .
Private equity funds are typically limited partnerships with a fixed term of 10 years ( often with annual extensions ) .
At inception , institutional investors make an unfunded commitment to the limited partnership , which is then drawn over the term of the fund .
From the investors ' point of view , funds can be traditional ( where all the investors invest with equal terms ) or asymmetric ( where different investors have different terms ) .
A private equity fund is raised and managed by investment professionals of a specific private equity firm ( the general partner and investment advisor ) .
Typically , a single private equity firm will manage a series of distinct private equity funds and will attempt to raise a new fund every 3 to 5 years as the previous fund is fully invested .
LEGAL STRUCTURE AND TERMS
Section::::Legal structure and terms .
Most private equity funds are structured as limited partnerships and are governed by the terms set forth in the limited partnership agreement or LPA .
Such funds have a general partner ( GP ) , which raises capital from cash - rich institutional investors , such as pension plans , universities , insurance companies , foundations , endowments , and high - net - worth individuals , which invest as limited partners ( LPs ) in the fund .
Among the terms set forth in the limited partnership agreement are the following :
* Term of the partnership : The partnership is usually a fixed - life investment vehicle that is typically 10 years plus some number of extensions .
* Management fees :
An annual payment made by the investors in the fund to the fund 's manager to pay for the private equity firm 's investment operations ( typically 1 to 2 % of the committed capital of the fund .
* Distribution Waterfall : The process by which the returned capital will be distributed to the investor , and allocated between Limited and General Partner .
This waterfall includes the preferred return : a minimum rate of return ( e.g. 8 % ) which must be achieved before the General Partner can receive any carried interest , and the Carried interest , the share of the profits paid the General Partner above the preferred return ( e.g. 20 % ) .
* Transfer of an interest in the fund : Private equity funds are not intended to be transferred or traded ; however , they can be transferred to another investor .
Typically , such a transfer must receive the consent of and is at the discretion of the fund 's manager .
* Restrictions on the General Partner : The fund 's manager has significant discretion to make investments and control the affairs of the fund .
However , the LPA does have certain restrictions and controls and is often limited in the type , size , or geographic focus of investments permitted , and how long the manager is permitted to make new investments .
The following is an illustration of the difference between a private equity fund and a private equity firm : !
Private equity firm !
Private equity fund !
Private equity portfolio investments ( partial list ) INVESTMENTS AND FINANCING Section::::Investments and financing .
A private equity fund typically makes investments in companies ( known as portfolio companies ) .
These portfolio company investments are funded with the capital raised from LPs , and may be partially or substantially financed by debt .
Some private equity investment transactions can be highly leveraged with debt financing — hence the acronym LBO for " leveraged buy - out " .
The cash flow from the portfolio company usually provides the source for the repayment of such debt .
While billion dollar private equity investments make the headlines , private equity funds also play a large role in middle market businesses .
Such LBO financing most often comes from commercial banks , although other financial institutions , such as hedge funds and mezzanine funds , may also provide financing .
Since mid-2007 , debt financing has become much more difficult to obtain for private equity funds than in previous years .
LBO funds commonly acquire most of the equity interests or assets of the portfolio company through a newly created special purpose acquisition subsidiary controlled by the fund , and sometimes as a consortium of several like - minded funds .
MULTIPLES AND PRICES Section::::Multiples and prices .
The acquisition price of a portfolio company is usually based on a multiple of the company 's historical income , most often based on the measure of earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation , and amortization ( EBITDA ) .
Private equity multiples are highly dependent on the portfolio company 's industry , the size of the company , and the availability of LBO financing .
PORTFOLIO COMPANY SALES ( EXITS ) Section::::Portfolio company sales ( exits ) .
A private equity fund 's ultimate goal is to sell or exit its investments in portfolio companies for a return , known as internal rate of return ( IRR ) in excess of the price paid .
These exit scenarios historically have been an IPO of the portfolio company or a sale of the company to a strategic acquirer through a merger or acquisition ( M&A ) , also known as a trade sale .
A sale of the portfolio company to another private equity firm , also known as a secondary , has become common feature of developed private equity markets .
In prior years , another exit strategy has been a preferred dividend by the portfolio company to the private equity fund to repay the capital investment , sometimes financed with additional debt .
INVESTMENT FEATURES AND CONSIDERATIONS Section::::Investment features and considerations .
Considerations for investing in private equity funds relative to other forms of investment include : * Substantial entry requirements :
With most private equity funds requiring significant initial commitment ( usually upwards of $ 1,000,000 ) , which can be drawn at the manager 's discretion over the first few years of the fund .
* Limited liquidity : Investments in limited partnership interests ( the dominant legal form of private equity investments ) are referred to as " illiquid " investments , which should earn a premium over traditional securities , such as stocks and bonds .
Once invested , liquidity of invested funds may be very difficult to achieve before the manager realizes the investments in the portfolio because an investor 's capital may be locked - up in long - term investments for as long as twelve years .
Distributions may be made only as investments are converted to cash with limited partners typically having no right to demand that sales be made .
* Investment Control : Nearly all investors in private equity are passive and rely on the manager to make investments and generate liquidity from those investments .
Typically , governance rights for limited partners in private equity funds are minimal .
However , in some cases , Limited Partners with substantial investment enjoy special rights and terms of investment .
* Unfunded Commitments : An investor 's commitment to a private equity fund is satisfied over time as the general partner makes capital calls on the investor .
If a private equity firm can not find suitable investment opportunities , it will not draw on an investor 's commitment , and an investor may potentially invest less than expected or committed .
* Investment Risks :
Given the risks associated with private equity investments , an investor can lose all of its investment .
The risk of loss of capital is typically higher in venture capital funds , which invest in companies during the earliest phases of their development or in companies with high amounts of financial leverage .
By their nature , investments in privately held companies tend to be riskier than investments in publicly traded companies .
* High returns : Consistent with the risks outlined above , private equity can provide high returns , with the best private equity managers significantly outperforming the public markets .
For the above - mentioned reasons , private equity fund investment is for investors who can afford to have capital locked up for long periods and who can risk losing significant amounts of money .
These disadvantages are offset by the potential benefits of annual returns , which may range up to 30 % per annum for successful funds .
SEE ALSO * Real estate fund
* Special purpose private equity fund * History of private equity and venture capital * List of private equity firms for a list of the largest active private equity investment firms .
* Taxation of private equity and hedge funds
* Distribution waterfall
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Krüger Andersen , Thomas .
Legal Structure of Private Equity Funds .
Private Equity and Hedge Funds 2007 .
* Prowse , Stephen D.
The Economics of the Private Equity Market .
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas , 1998 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Economics of Private Equity Funds ( University of Pennsylvania , The Wharton School , Department of Finance )
* CalPERS Private Equity Industry Dictionary * VC Experts Glossary ( Glossary of Private Equity Terms ) * Guide on Private Equity and Venture Capital for Entrepreneurs ( European Venture Capital Association , 2007 ) * UK Venture Capital and Private Equity as an Asset Class ( British Venture Capital Association )
* Note on Limited Partnership Agreements ( Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth , 2003 )
* Private equity – a guide for pension fund trustees .
Pensions Investment Research Consultants ( PIRC ) for the Trades Union Congress .