BED OF NAILS
A bed of nails is an oblong piece of wood , the size of a bed , with nails pointing upwards out of it .
It appears to the spectator that anyone lying on this " bed " would be injured by the nails , but this is not so .
Assuming the nails are numerous enough , the weight is distributed among them so that the pressure exerted by each nail is not enough to puncture the person 's skin .
USES Section::::Uses .
One use of such a device is for magic tricks or physics demonstrations .
A famous example requires a volunteer to lie on a bed of several thousand nails , with a board on top of him .
Cinder blocks are placed on the board and then smashed with a sledgehammer .
Despite the seemingly unavoidable force , the volunteer is not harmed : the force from the blow is spread among the thousands of nails , resulting in reduced pressure ; the breaking of the blocks also dissipates much of the energy from the hammer .
This demonstration of the principles of weight distribution requires that the weight of the volunteer be spread over as many nails as possible .
The most dangerous part is the moment of lying down or getting up , when one 's weight may briefly be supported on only a few nails .
Some " beds " have rails mounted at the sides to help users lie down and get up safely .
The bed of nails is used by some for meditation , particularly in Asia , and for certain alleged health benefits , such as back pain relief , see acupressure mat .
Less traditional settings , such as science centers , may use an electronic retractable bed of nails , where the user lies on a flat plastic bed with holes in it , and can then activate the machine to have nails rise up all at once .
The nails should retract before getting off the bed .
This retraction eliminates the most dangerous part of a traditional bed of nails , getting on and off the bed .
GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS Section::::Guinness World Records .
'
Most motorcycles driven over the body while lying on a bed of nails ' - was achieved by Simone Calati ( Italy ) on 12 May 2013 when he had 31 motorbikes driven over him in two minutes while lying on a bed of nails .
' Heaviest concrete block break on a bed of nails ' - was achieved by Neal Hardy ( Australia ) on 12 February 2012 when he had 15 blocks weighing 774.99 kg ( 1708 lb 8 oz ) placed on his chest and broken .
' The most melons chopped in half on somebody 's stomach ( with a samurai sword while they lay on a bed of nails ) ' - was achieved by Johnny Strange ( UK ) on 13 October 2013 when he chopped 10 watermelons in half on the stomach of his assistant in 30 seconds .
' Most - layered bed of nails sandwich ' - was achieved by Vispi and his Team ( all India ) on 23 February 2011 when they performed a five - layer bed of nails sandwich .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The bed of nails in use as a school physics demonstration .
Darylscience.com