HOT WATER BOTTLE
A hot - water bottle is a bottle filled with hot water and sealed with a stopper , used to provide warmth , typically while in bed , but also for the application of heat to a specific part of the body .
EARLY HISTORY
Section::::Early history .
Containers for warmth in bed were in use as early as the 16th century .
The earliest versions contained hot coals from the dying embers of the fire , and these bed warmers were used to warm the bed before getting into it .
Containers using hot water were soon also used , with the advantage that they could remain in the bed with the sleeper .
Prior to the invention of rubber that could withstand sufficient heat , these early hot - water bottles were made of a variety of materials , such as zinc , copper , brass , glass , earthenware or wood .
To prevent burning , the metal hot water flasks were wrapped in a soft cloth bag .
RUBBER BOTTLES Section::::Rubber bottles .
" India rubber " hot - water bottles were in use in Britain at least by 1875 .
Modern conventional hot - water bottles were patented in 1903 and are manufactured in natural rubber or PVC , to a design patented by the Croatian inventor Eduard Penkala .
They are now commonly covered in fabric , sometimes with a novelty design .
By the late 20th century , the use of hot - water bottles had markedly declined around most of the world .
Not only were homes better heated , but newer items such as electric blankets were competing with hot - water bottles as a source of night - time heat .
However the hot - water bottle remains a popular alternative in Australia , Ireland , United Kingdom , developing countries and rural areas .
For example , it is widely used in Chile , where it is called a " guatero " .
There has been a recent surge in popularity in Japan where it is seen as an ecologically friendly and thrifty way to keep warm .
Some newer products function like the older bottles , but use a polymer gel or wax in a heat pad .
The pads can be heated in a microwave oven , and they are marketed as safer than liquid - filled bottles or electrically - heated devices .
Some newer bottles now use a silicone - based material instead of rubber , which resists very hot water better , and does not deteriorate as much as rubber .
Although the stopper size in Ireland and the UK has been largely standard for many decades , the newer bottles ( notably those from German manufacturer Fashy ) use a wider mouth which is easier to fill ( and a larger stopper to fit it ) .
While generally used for keeping warm , conventional hot - water bottles can be used to some effect for the local application of heat as a medical treatment , for example for pain relief , but newer items such as purpose - designed heating pads are often used now .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
Hot - water bottles are meant to contain very hot fluids and also supposed to be in contact with human skin .
It is therefore of the utmost importance to ensure , mainly through standards and regulations , that the closing and welding is stable enough to prevent burns , but also to make sure that the bottle 's chemical components are not dangerous for human health .
More generally , it is crucial to certify and assure that hot - water bottles , whether manufactured , sold or imported , are safe .
For instance , the United Kingdom defined British Standards for hot - water bottles to regulate their manufacture and sale as well as to ensure their compliance with all safety standards .
The British Standards BS 1970 and BS 1970:2012 ( updated version ) define , for instance , the bottles ' filling characteristics , safety instructions , allowed materials and components as well as testing methods such as tensile tests for PVC bottles .
Most regulations applied to a country are generally harmonized in order to be applied and applicable in a larger area , such as a trade zone .
PROBLEMS Section::::Problems .
There have been problems with premature failure of rubber hot - water bottles due to faulty manufacture .
The rubber may fail strength or fitness tests , or become brittle if manufacturing is not controlled closely .
Natural rubber filled with calcium carbonate is the most common material used , but is susceptible to oxidation and polymer degradation at the high temperatures used in shaping the product .
Even though the brittle cracks may not be visible externally , the bottle can fracture suddenly after filling with hot water , and can scald the user — sometimes requiring hospitalization for severe burn cases .
Boiling water is not recommended for use in hot - water bottles .
This is due to risks of the rubber being degraded from high - temperature water , and the risk of injury in case of breakage .
IN
FICTION Section::::In fiction .
Alfred , the cantankerous hot - water bottle , is a character from Johnson and Friends , a popular Australian children 's television series from the 1990s .
This character has gained a cult following in recent years , particularly among those who grew up with the series , due to the odd character choice .
Alfred is believed to be the only anthropomorphised hot - water bottle in existence .
SEE ALSO
* Electric blanket
* Bed warmer * Heating pad * Hot water bottle blowing REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS