SCHOOL BUS TRAFFIC STOP LAWS School bus stop laws are laws dictating what a motorist must do in the vicinity of a bus stop being used by a school bus or other bus , coach or minibus providing school transport .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
Jurisdictions in the United States ( including overseas territories )
and Canada have adopted various school bus stop laws that require drivers to stop and wait for a stopped school bus loading or unloading , so as to protect school children boarding or alighting .
Generally , if a stopped school bus is displaying a flashing , alternating red lamp , a driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking the stopped bus from either direction ( front or back ) must stop and wait until the bus moves again or the red light is off .
Police officers , school crossing guards , and even school bus drivers themselves may have the power to wave traffic on , even when a red light is flashing .
On divided highways , most American and Canadian jurisdictions do not require vehicular drivers to stop when on the opposite side of the road from a stopped school bus .
Those that do require vehicles to stop are : * West Virginia upon a non - controlled - access highway{ยง17C-12 - 7 } * Arkansas in case a divider has less than 20 feet ( 6 m ) in width ( narrow divider ) .
* New York State
* American Samoa *
Guam * British Columbia * Nova Scotia * Prince Edward Island
* Northwest Territories * Nunavut American and Canadian jurisdictions have sought to deter illegal passing stopped school buses by increased enforcement and heavy penalties , including fines , application of demerit points against a driver 's license or even license suspension .
Nevertheless , violations are common .
An officer must witness the violation , and even when citations issued , getting convictions is often difficult ; sometimes traffic courts consider the evidence insufficient , or reduce the charge because the penalty for a first offense seems excessive .
There are , however , exceptions .
Missouri has Jessica 's Law , which grants the right of a school bus driver to report the offense , in which case the driver is automatically cited .
Cobb County , an urban county in Metro Atlanta , has added bus cameras , as a deterrent , which can detect and automatically report vehicles passing a bus .
EXCEPTIONS Section::::Exceptions .
Drivers in Washington state are not required to stop for a school bus on any highway ( Under Washington law , any public road is defined as a highway ) with three or more lanes when traveling in the opposite direction .
This has been interpreted to mean that when approaching a bus from the opposite direction on a normal road with a turn lane , or a road with two lanes in each direction , etc . , a driver is not required to stop their vehicle .
This is an unusual law , but arguably leads to a higher safety level for children , as they are then required to be picked up or dropped on the same side of the road as the bus exit on anything greater than a two - lane road as provided by RCW 46.61.370 .
Ohio has a similar exception for roads with four or more lanes .
Drivers in Idaho and Kentucky are not required to stop for a school bus on any highway with four or more lanes when traveling in the opposite direction .
Drivers in California do not have to stop on any highway that is divided or is multi - lane ( 2 or more lanes of travel in each direction ) when traveling in the opposite direction .
In Pennsylvania , the only vehicle that may pass a stopped school bus with the red lights flashing is an emergency vehicle with its flashing lights and siren activated , but only after the emergency vehicle has come to a complete stop and proceeds with due caution for any students embarking or disembarking .
ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
In New York State , an official estimate is that 50,000 vehicles pass stopped school buses illegally every day .
However , as New York State requires traffic to stop for a school bus stopped on the opposing roadway of a divided highway , the estimate may include " New York violations " that would be legal in other states .
The New York State Department of Transportation once recommended that the State Legislature exempt traffic from stopping for a school bus stopped on the opposing roadway of a divided highway , but this has not been done .
On a national basis , school bus drivers in the United States have reported a decrease in passing violators in recent years with improved warning devices .
Despite an increase in traffic and school bus ridership , annual fatalities and injuries to children struck by other vehicles has decreased as well .
However , it is unclear whether having reported a decrease in passing violators is due to difficulty to report or better compliance by motorists .
When and where enforcement against violators becomes too hard , some residential streets may prohibit entry of vehicles other than school buses at certain times to effectively eliminate passing stopped school buses illegally .
Bus drivers are prohibited to turn around at intersections with students on the bus .
If laws are broken , the bus driver may be charged with including but not limited to : child endangerment and disobeying laws .
This section may not include all laws or bylaws .
OTHER COUNTRIES OUTSIDE
NORTH AMERICA
Section::::Other countries outside North America .
Traffic laws in other countries do not require vehicles to stop
The speed limit is in Australia and in New Zealand when passing a stopped school bus .
In New Zealand , the New Zealand Transport Agency decided that the speed limit passing a stopped school bus should not be raised based on probabilities of pedestrian deaths if hit at different speeds , nor has it supported requiring fully stopping and waiting for school buses loading and unloading children as in the United States and Canada .
In Belgium and Germany , traffic is required to pass stopped school buses at very slow speeds that allow for quick stopping .
While in South Korea , Japan , Taiwan , and the United Kingdom , drivers are directed to drive carefully past stopped school buses .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S , Bureau of Transportation Statistics
* STN 100 Years of the School Bus * National Association of State Directors of Pupil Transportation Services * National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and
Ordinances * School Bus Stop Laws in the United States , Canada and Other Countries