EASTERN GREEN MAMBA
The eastern green mamba ( Dendroaspis angusticeps ) , also known as the common mamba , East African green mamba , green mamba , or white - mouthed mamba , is a large , tree - dwelling , highly venomous snake species of the mamba genus Dendroaspis .
This species of mamba was first described by a Scottish surgeon and zoologist in 1849 .
This snake mostly inhabits the coastal regions of southern East Africa .
Adult females average approximately in length , and males are slightly smaller .
Eastern green mambas prey on birds , eggs , bats , and rodents such as mice , rats , and gerbils .
They are shy and elusive snakes which are rarely seen , making them somewhat unusual among mambas , and elapids in general .
This elusiveness is usually attributed to the species ' green colouration which blends with its environment , and its arboreal lifestyle .
However , eastern green mambas have also been observed to use " sit - and - wait " or ambush predation like many vipers , unlike the active foraging style typical of other elapids , which may be a factor in the rarity of sightings .
Like other mambas the eastern green mamba is a highly venomous snake .
The venom consists of both neurotoxins and cardiotoxins .
The toxicity of individual specimens can vary greatly based on several factors including geographical region , age , seasonal variation , diet , and so on .
Symptoms of envenomation by this species include swelling of the bite site , dizziness and nausea , accompanied by difficulty breathing and swallowing , irregular heartbeat and convulsions progressing to respiratory paralysis .
Bites that produce severe envenomation can be rapidly fatal .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The eastern green mamba is classified under the genus Dendroaspis of the family Elapidae .
Dendroaspis angusticeps was first described by a Scottish surgeon and zoologist , Andrew Smith in 1849 .
The generic name , Dendroaspis , derives from Ancient Greek dendro ( δένδρον ) , meaning " tree " , and ἀσπίς ( ασπίς ) , which is understood to mean " shield " , but also denotes " cobra " or simply " snake " , in particular " snake with hood ( shield ) " .
Via
Latin aspis , it is the source of the English word " asp " .
In ancient texts , aspis or asp often referred to the Egyptian cobra ( Naja haje ) , in reference to its shield - like hood .
Thus , " Dendroaspis " literally means tree asp , reflecting the arboreal nature of most of the species within the genus .
The genus was first described by the German ornithologist and herpetologist Hermann Schlegel in 1848 .
Slowinski et al .
( 1997 ) pointed out that the relationships of the African genus Dendroaspis are problematical .
However , evidence suggests that Dendroaspis , Ophiophagus , Bungarus , and Hemibungarus form a solid non - coral snake Afro - Asiatic clade .
The specific name angusticeps is derived from the Latin word angustus , which means " narrow " and caput is also Latin and means " head " , calling attention to the long narrow head of this species .
In addition to being called the eastern green mamba , this species is also commonly known as the common green mamba , East African green mamba , white - mouthed mamba , or just simply the green mamba .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The eastern green mamba is a large , with a slightly compressed , and very slender bodied snake with a medium to moderately long tapering tail .
Adult males average around in total length , while females average in total length .
This species rarely exceeds lengths of .
In general , the total length is 4 - 4.3 times the length of the tail .
The head is narrow , elongate , and coffin - shaped , with a distinct canthus which is slightly distinct from the neck .
When threatened or otherwise aroused in some way , this species is capable of flattening its neck area , though no real hood is formed .
The eastern green mamba has relatively long front fangs which are located at the proscenium end of the maxillary bone at the very front of the maxilla .
These fangs can rotate on their axis with the prefrontal bone , giving this species more control over the movements of its fangs than in the case of other elapids .
The maxillary bone has no other solid teeth ; however , a pair of long , recurved , fang - like solid teeth , followed by a distinct interspace and numerous small teeth , are on the front of the lower jaw .
The eyes are medium in size and the pupils round , in common with other elapids .
SCALATION Section::::Scalation .
Dorsal scales are oblique , smooth and narrow .
Coloration in this species is bright green dorsally and yellow - green ventrally , with a few bright yellow scales scattered on the flanks in some specimens .
Juveniles are blue - green , and develop the brighter green adult coloration anteriorly to posteriorly in successive sheddings of the skin .
Most individuals over in total length have the full adult coloration , but even some adults may return to a darker bluish green just before shedding .
The border of the pupil may have a narrow bright ochre to golden yellow edge , and the posterior border of the iris may become bright green .
The inside of the mouth may be white or bluish white .
The males of this species usually have fewer ventral scales than the females .
The head , body , and tail scalation of the eastern green mamba : * Dorsal at midbody : 17 - 21
( 19 ) * Ventral : 201 - 232 * Subcaudal : 99–126 ( paired ) * Anal plate : Divided * Upper labials : 7 - 9 * Upper labials to eye : 4th
* Preoculars : 3 * Postoculars : 3 - 5
* Lower labials : 9 - 11
*
Temporal : 2 + 3 ( variable ) REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
The eastern green mamba is solitary , except during breeding season , when they are most active and males engage in combat .
Gravid females tend to be sedentary , but males will actively search out and court females during the long rainy season , which is between the months of April and June .
Males have been observed engaging in agonistic behaviour and may fight each other over potential mating opportunities , or possibly to establish a dominance hierarchy .
Typically , a male initiates a fight by moving on top of the other 's body and tongue - flicking , after which the two snakes " intertwine their necks and bodies , and push against each other " in an attempt to pin each other 's head repeatedly to the ground .
Male - male combat can last for several hours , but combat between males of this species do n't ever include biting and the nature of the combat is never as aggressive and/or vicious as commonly seen among the eastern green mamba 's much larger cousin , the black mamba .
Males locate females by following a scent trail .
The male courts the female by aligning his body along the female 's while rapidly tongue - flicking .
Depending on whether the female is receptive to mating , she will lift her tail and cloacal juxtaposition will follow shortly .
Courtship and mating take place in the trees , after which the female lays anywhere between 4 - 17 eggs ( average of 10 to 15 eggs are laid ) , which occurs in the summer months of October and November .
The eggs are white and elongated , usually measuring 65x35 millimetres .
The eggs are usually laid in a hollow tree , among decaying vegetation , or leaf litter .
The incubation period is 10 to 12 weeks .
When the young emerge from the eggs , they are approximately or around an average of in length , and they 're highly venomous right at birth .
Individuals of this species usually reach adult coloration at a length of Hatchlings tend to grow in length in the first year of life .
As the hatchlings age , their growth rates decrease but they never stop completely growing .
LIFESPAN Section::::Lifespan .
The longest living eastern green mamba was a captive specimen which lived for 18.8 years .
Another captive specimen lived for 14 years .
However , while it may be possible for wild specimens to live that long , they are thought to have shorter lifespans in general due to the threats of predation , habitat loss , disease , and other biological and environmental factors .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
This species is indigenous to more coastal regions of southern Africa and east Africa .
The eastern green mamba 's range extends from Kenya south through Tanzania , Mozambique , Malawi , eastern Zimbabwe , eastern Zambia into South Africa as far as southern Natal and northern Pondoland .
It can also be found in Zanzibar .
The distribution of this species is assumed to be continuous , but reports seem to be scarce in regions within the species ' range .
In South Africa , its range is restricted to low altitude forests along the KwaZulu - Natal coastline , extending as far south as the extreme northeastern part of the Eastern Cape .
The South African population , together with one locality in southern Mozambique , is considered as an isolated unit .
The eastern green mamba is primarily arboreal ( living in trees ) , only rarely descending to the ground .
An elusive snake due to its coloration , it is usually well camouflaged in trees or bushes .
It is believed by some herpetologists that this species is limited to tropical rainforests in coastal lowlands , however , according to other experts , this species can also be found in coastal bush , and dune and montane forest .
Unlike its close relative the black mamba ( D. polylepis ) , this species is rarely found in open terrain and prefers relatively dense , well - shaded vegetation .
In addition to wild forest habitats , this species is also commonly found in thickets and farm trees ( such as citrus , mango , coconut , and cashew ) .
In coastal east Africa they are known to enter houses and may even shelter in thatched roof dwellings .
Specimens of this species have been found at elevations up to above sea level .
CONSERVATION STATUS Section::::Conservation status .
As of 26 June 2011 , the conservation status of Dendroaspis angusticeps has not been assessed by the IUCN .
The eastern green mamba is , however , a fairly common species of snake throughout its geographical range , and populations are believed to be stable .
Large concentrations of two to three individuals per hectare have been documented in coastal Kenya and southern Tanzania , and in one instance a group of five eastern green mambas were seen in a single tree .
Although populations of this species are stable , habitat destruction and deforestation may pose a possible threat to this species .
BEHAVIOUR AND ECOLOGY Section::::Behaviour and ecology .
The eastern green mamba is a diurnal , arboreal , and secretive species of snake , and it tends to spend most of its time above the ground in relatively dense brush , where it is well camouflaged .
This species is not commonly found on land unless motivated by thirst , prey , or the need to bask in the sun ( thermoregulation ) .
It is an alert , nervous , excellent climber and extremely agile snake .
It sleeps at night in a tree coiled up in leafy clumps rather than seeking a tree hollow ( although sometimes found in them ) .
In a study of the movement patterns of two adult specimens of this species over a 27-day period , the researcher found that their activity range areas to be very low , comparable to other predators who ambush prey rather than actively hunt them .
This is in contrast to most elapid species , including other mambas , who tend to actively hunt or forage for prey .
The study 's preliminary evidence sheds some light on this species ' method of hunting prey and suggests that it may be an ambush predator due to the sit - and - wait behavior displayed .
However , this evidence does not preclude active foraging by this species .
A specimen systematically hunting a sleeping bat was observed by William York .
There is no evidence that the eastern green mamba migrates ; in fact , this species is thought to be relatively sedentary .
It can remain in the same location for days at a time , apparently moving most commonly to find food or mates .
On average , individuals of this species move only about per day .
Unlike its much larger cousin the black mamba , this mamba is more shy and not as aggressive or fearsome .
It will avoid confrontation with humans or any other potential predators when possible , and will rather rely on its camouflage , or flee , than alert a potential threat of its presence .
They are fast snakes , capable of moving 7 mph .
They do n't always strike , but under continuous harassment and provocation and especially if cornered , they may suddenly strike repeatedly in quick succession , often leading to severe envenomation .
DIET Section::::Diet .
This mamba preys primarily on adult birds , eggs and rodents .
This species has also been documented to prey on bats .
It is also believed that this species eats arboreal lizards as well , but this has not been documented .
The preliminary evidence suggests that this species displays a sit - and - wait strategy of foraging .
However , this evidence does not preclude active foraging by this species .
One witness observed a specimen systematically hunt sleeping bats ( J. Ashe , pers .
comm .
1991 ) .
They have also been known to raid the nests of young birds .
Sit - and - wait tactics may be successful with highly mobile prey , such as adult birds or rodents .
Documented prey include the sombre greenbul , which occur in dense portions of natural and cultivated vegetation along Kenya 's coastline .
Ionides and Pitman ( 1965 ) reported a large Bushveld gerbil in the stomach of a green mamba in Tanzania .
Although the Bushveld gerbil does not occur in Kenya , green mambas will prey on any of the seven species of gerbil that inhabit various portions of its range .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
The eastern green mamba has a few natural predators .
Humans , mongooses , snake eagles , and genets commonly prey on this species of mamba .
Hornbills and other snakes tend to prey on juvenile green mambas .
VENOM Section::::Venom .
The eastern green mamba is a highly venomous snake .
The venom consists of both pre - synaptic and postsynaptic neurotoxins ( dendrotoxins ) , cardiotoxins , calcicludine , and fasciculins .
The average venom yield per bite is 80 mg according to Engelmann and Obst ( 1981 ) , while Minton ( 1974 ) gives it a range of 60–95 mg ( dry weight ) .
The subcutaneous LD is 1.3 mg / kg .
The LD in mice through the IV route is 0.45 mg / kg .
Like all other mamba species , the toxicity of individual specimens within the same species can vary greatly based on several factors including geographical region , age , seasonal variation , diet , and so on .
Local swelling is variable and sometimes absent after mamba bites .
However , patients bitten by the eastern green mamba develop swelling of the entire bitten limb and also show mild haemostatic disturbances ( Warrell DA ; MacKay et al . 1966 ) .
The rare cases of local tissue damage usually resulted from bites on the fingers or the use of a tight tourniquet .
This species has caused bites to humans and many of the bites attributed to this species have often resulted in fatalities .
The mortality rate of untreated bites is unknown but is thought to be quite high .
Symptoms of envenomation by this species include swelling of the bite site , dizziness , and nausea , accompanied by difficulty breathing and swallowing , irregular heartbeat , convulsions , rapid progression to respiratory paralysis .
Bites that produce severe envenomation can be rapidly fatal .
Case reports of rapidly fatal outcomes , in as little as 30 minutes , have been recorded for this species .
SEE ALSO
* Western green mamba
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Clinical Toxinology Resource
* RedTox - Eastern Green Mamba