DOLLARS TRILOGY
The Dollars Trilogy ( ) , also known as the Man with No Name Trilogy , is an Italian film series consisting of three Spaghetti Western films directed by Sergio Leone .
The films are titled A Fistful of Dollars ( 1964 ) , For a Few Dollars More ( 1965 ) and The Good , the Bad and the Ugly ( 1966 ) .
They were distributed by United Artists .
The series has become known for establishing the Spaghetti Western genre , and inspiring the creation of many more Spaghetti Western films .
The three films are consistently listed among the best rated Western films in history .
Although it was not Leone 's intention , the three movies came to be considered a trilogy following the exploits of the same so - called " Man with No Name " ( portrayed by Clint Eastwood , wearing the same clothes and acting with the same mannerisms ) .
The " Man with No Name " concept was invented by the American distributor United Artists , looking for a strong angle to sell the movies as a trilogy .
Eastwood 's character does indeed have a name ( albeit a nickname ) and a different one in each film : " Joe " , " Monco " and " Blondie " , respectively .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
A Fistful of Dollars is an unofficial remake of Akira Kurosawa 's 1961 film Yojimbo starring Toshiro Mifune , which resulted in a successful lawsuit by Toho .
The Good , the Bad and the Ugly is considered a prequel , since it depicts Eastwood 's character gradually acquiring the clothing he wears throughout the first two films and because it takes place during the American Civil War ( 1861–1865 ) , whereas the other two films feature comparatively more modern firearms and other props .
For example , Lee Van Cleef 's character in For a Few Dollars More appears to be a Confederate veteran who has come down in the world , and a graveyard scene in A Fistful of Dollars features a gravestone dated 1873 .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The only actors to appear in all three movies besides Eastwood are Mario Brega , Aldo Sambrell , Benito Stefanelli and Lorenzo Robledo .
Four other actors each appear twice in the trilogy , playing different characters : Lee Van Cleef , Gian Maria Volontè , Luigi Pistilli , and Joseph Egger .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Ennio Morricone provided original music score for all three films , although in A Fistful of Dollars he was credited as " Dan Savio . "
PRINCIPAL CAST
A Fistful of DollarsFor
a Few Dollars
MoreThe Good , the Bad and the Ugly(1966 ) !
Clint Eastwood !
Mario Brega !
Aldo Sambrell !
Benito Stefanelli !
Lorenzo Robledo !
Joseph Egger !
Gian Maria Volontè !
Lee Van Cleef !
Luigi Pistilli !
Eli Wallach CREW
A Fistful of DollarsFor
a Few Dollars
MoreThe Good , the Bad and the Ugly(1966 ) !
colspan="2 " Director !
colspan="2 " Producer !
rowspan="3 " Writer !
Screenplay !
Story !
English Dialogue !
rowspan="2 " Music !
Composer !
Director !
colspan="2 "
Cinematographer !
colspan="2 " Editor !
colspan="2 " Set and costume designer RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception . Section::::Critical reception . !
Film !
Rotten Tomatoes !
Metacritic BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE Section::::Box office performance . !
Film !
Release date !
Revenue !
Budget !
colspan=2 Total !
$ 54,600,000 !
$ 2,000,000–$2,025,000 ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Film !
Award !
Category !
Recipients !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The 1999 DVD , plus the 2010 and 2014 Blu - ray box set releases by MGM , make specific reference to the set of films as " The Man With No Name Trilogy . "
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY