PRACTICE SQUAD
In sports , the practice squad , also called the taxi squad or practice roster , is a group of players signed by a team but not part of their main roster .
Frequently used in American and Canadian football , they serve as extra players during the team 's practices , often as part of the scout team by emulating an upcoming opponent 's play style .
Because the players on the practice squad are familiar with the team 's plays and formations , the practice squad serves as a way to develop inexperienced players for promotion to the main roster .
In addition , it provides replacement players for the main roster when players are needed as the result of injuries or other roster moves , such as bereavement leave .
HISTORY Section::::History .
During the 1940s , Cleveland Browns coach Paul Brown invented the " taxi squad , " a group of promising scouted players who did not make the roster but were kept on reserve .
The team owner , Arthur " Mickey " McBride , put them on the payroll of his taxi company , although they did not drive cabs .
The name stuck , and the practice of retaining a squad of ready reserves spread throughout professional football .
However , the NFL did not officially recognize the existence of taxi squads until February 18 , 1965 .
On that date , the NFL team owners formally adopted a 40-man active roster supplemented by a taxi squad of unregulated size , which was officially termed the " future list .
" Over the next few seasons , the NFL gradually limited the allowable number of inactive players to seven , and regulations were established in relation to injured reserve and waiver practices .
In 1974 , the NFL eliminated the taxi squad altogether , moving the seven inactive spots into an expanded 47-man active roster .
Beginning in 1977 , a more limited inactive system was introduced ( often consisting of either two or four players , depending on the season ) , and these players were sometimes referred to as taxi squad members .
The NFL has since reintroduced larger reserve squads , now known as " practice squads . "
NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE Section::::National Football League .
Starting in 2017 , each NFL team may keep up to ten members on its practice squad in addition to the 53-member main roster .
A majority of those on a practice squad are rookie draft picks and undrafted free agents who were released prior to the regular season .
A practice squad also includes veterans , up to four as of the season .
Players may be signed to a practice squad for several reasons : for lack of space on the team , due to injury , or because they require more development .
Practice squad players can be signed to any team 's 53-man active roster without compensation at any time during the season .
A player can not participate on the practice squad for more than three seasons ; he is eligible for a third season only if the team has at least 53 players on its active / inactive list for the duration of that player 's employment , or have no prior accrued seasons in the NFL ( an accrued season is six or more games on the active roster ) ; or if he has accrued a year of NFL experience on a club 's 53-man active roster .
If the player was on the active list for fewer than 9 games during their " only accrued season(s ) " , he maintains his eligibility for the practice squad .
Games in which a player is listed as the third - string quarterback do not count as being on the active list .
Former quarterback Mike Quinn , who was listed as the third - string quarterback for several teams throughout his career , is a notable example , being practice squad eligible during his 8th NFL season .
Practice squad players practice alongside regular roster players during the week , but they are not allowed to play in actual games .
They can be paid considerably less than active squad players ; in 2012 , the minimum salary for a practice squad player was $ 5,700 per week , and the minimum rookie salary was $ 390,000 .
Some practice squad players are paid considerably more , however .
In 2006 , the New England Patriots paid third - year player Billy Yates the full $ 425,000 he would have earned on the active roster .
Many NFL players spent time on practice squads before finding success in the league , including James Harrison , Jason Peters , Danny Amendola , Danny Woodhead , Arian Foster and Kyle Cook .
INTERNATIONAL PLAYERS Section::::International players .
The practice squad has also been used by the NFL and their teams as a way to bring in and train players from outside the United States or Canada , where gridiron football is not a popular sport .
The NFL has operated programs in which selected international players were assigned to teams ' practice squads as an extra member who did not count towards a team 's maximum practice squad size .
The first , called the International Practice Squad Program , began operation in 2004 .
In 2005 , Rolando Cantu of Mexico was promoted to the Arizona Cardinals ' active roster after spending the previous season on the practice squad as a member of the program .
Players from the United Kingdom , France , Germany , Finland , Sweden , Japan , and Russia also participated .
In 2008 , the program sponsored sixteen players , the largest amount to date .
The program was discontinued for 2009 .
The rule allowing for an extra practice squad player of international origin , however , remained in the NFL 's rulebook and teams attempted to use the rule even after the demise of the program .
For example , in 2013 the Detroit Lions attempted to use it to add Norwegian kicker Håvard Rugland to their practice squad , but were rejected by the NFL , which stated that the rule was meant to be used for players from NFL Europe , which folded after the 2007 season .
A new program , the International Player Pathway , was created in 2017 .
This new initiative started as a trial involving only NFC South teams .
Each team in the division was allowed to sign one international player to its practice squad who would not count against the normal 10-player limit , but would not be eligible to be activated during the season after being signed .
The pathway was expanded to 8 teams ( NFC South and AFC North ) for the 2018 season .
Additionally , several international players have tried to find their starts in the NFL through spending time on teams practice squads without having been part of these programs , such as Efe Obada , Moritz Böhringer , and Jarryd Hayne .
REFERENCES