AMPULLA OF VATER
The ampulla of Vater , also known as the or the hepatopancreatic duct , is formed by the union of the pancreatic duct and the common bile duct .
The ampulla is specifically located at the major duodenal papilla .
The ampulla of Vater is an important landmark halfway along the second part of the duodenum that marks the anatomical transition from foregut to midgut , and hence the point where the celiac trunk stops supplying the gut and the superior mesenteric artery takes over .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The cystic duct leaves the gallbladder and joins with the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct .
This duct subsequently joins with the pancreatic duct ; this junction is known as the ampulla of Vater .
The pancreatic duct delivers substances such as bicarbonate and digestive enzymes to the duodenum .
The bile from the gallbladder contains salts which emulsify large fat droplets into much smaller units .
This provides a large surface area for the lipase enzymes to act on .
The bicarbonate neutralises the acidic chyme , creating alkaline conditions for enzymes such as chymotrypsin and amylase to function optimally .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
Various smooth muscle sphincters regulate the flow of bile and pancreatic juice through the ampulla : the sphincter of the pancreatic duct , the sphincter of the bile duct , and the sphincter of Oddi .
The sphincter of Oddi controls the introduction of bile and pancreatic secretions into the duodenum , as well as preventing the entry of duodenal contents into the ampulla .
CLINICAL RELEVANCE Section::::Clinical relevance .
Pancreatitis can result from a failure of pancreatic secretions to drain properly .
One possible cause of impaired drainage of pancreatic juice is blockage of the sphincter of Oddi .
A common cause of blockage is a gallstone in the common bile duct .
Thomas ' sign is the production of silver stools and can be indicative of cancer of the Ampulla of Vater .
The silver colored stool is a combination of the white stool of obstructive jaundice combined with black stool of melena or bleeding .
It was first described in the British Medical Journal by Dr. H. Ogilvie in 1955 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The eponymic term " ampulla of Vater " is named after Abraham Vater ( 1684–1751 ) , a German anatomist who first published a description of it in 1720 .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
REFERENCES
* " Ampulla , hepatopancreatic . "
Stedman 's Medical Dictionary , 27th ed .
( 2000 ) .
* Moore , Keith L. and Arthur F. Dalley .
Clinically Oriented Anatomy , 4th ed .
( 1999 ) .