THE OFFICE ( U.S. TV SERIES )
The Office is an American television sitcom that aired on NBC from March 24 , 2005 , to May 16 , 2013 , lasting nine seasons .
It is an adaptation of the original BBC series of the same name and was adapted for American television by Greg Daniels , a veteran writer for Saturday Night Live , King of the Hill , and The Simpsons .
It was co - produced by Daniels 's Deedle - Dee Productions , and Reveille Productions ( later Shine America ) , in association with Universal Television .
The original executive producers were Greg Daniels , Howard Klein , Ben Silverman , Ricky Gervais , and Stephen Merchant , with numerous others being promoted in later seasons .
The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
To simulate the look of an actual documentary , it was filmed in a single - camera setup , without a studio audience or a laugh track .
The series debuted on NBC as a midseason replacement and aired 201 episodes over the course of its run .
The Office initially featured Steve Carell , Rainn Wilson , John Krasinski , Jenna Fischer , and B. J. Novak as the main cast ; the series experienced numerous changes to its ensemble cast during its run .
Notable stars outside the original main cast include Ed Helms , Mindy Kaling , and Ellie Kemper .
The Office was met with varied reviews during its first season , but the following four seasons received widespread acclaim from television critics .
These seasons were included on several critics ' year - end top TV series lists , winning several awards such as a Peabody Award in 2006 , two Screen Actors Guild Awards , a Golden Globe Award for Carell 's performance , and four Primetime Emmy Awards , including one for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2006 .
Later seasons were criticized for a decline in quality , with many seeing Carell 's departure in season seven as a contributing factor .
However , earlier writers oversaw the final season and ended the series ' run with a positive reception .
The series finale was viewed by an estimated 5.69 million viewers , preceded by an hour - long series retrospective .
PRODUCTION
CREW
Section::::Production .
Section::::Crew .
Greg Daniels served as the senior series showrunner for the first four seasons of the series and developed the British series for American television .
He then left the position when he co - created the comedy series Parks and Recreation with fellow Office writer Michael Schur and divided his time between the two series .
Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta were named the series showrunners for the fifth season .
Celotta left the series after the sixth season and Lieberstein stayed on as showrunner for the following two seasons .
He left the showrunner spot after the eighth season for the potential Dwight Schrute spin - off , The Farm , which was eventually passed up by NBC .
Daniels returned to the showrunner position for the ninth and final season .
Other executive producers include cast members B.J. Novak and Mindy Kaling .
Kaling , Novak , Daniels , Lieberstein and Schur made up the original team of writers .
Kaling , Novak , and Lieberstein also serve multiple roles on the series , as they play regular characters on the show , as well as write , direct , and produce episodes .
Credited with twenty - four episodes , Kaling is the most prolific writer among the staff .
Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , who created the original British series , are credited as executive producer and wrote the pilot and the third - season episode , " The Convict . "
Merchant later directed the episode " Customer Survey " while Gervais appeared in the episodes " The Seminar " and " Search Committee . "
Randall Einhorn is the most frequent director of the series , with 15 credited episodes .
The series also had several guest directors , including Lost co - creator J.J. Abrams , Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator Joss Whedon , both of whom are fans of the series , and filmmakers Jon Favreau , Harold Ramis , Jason Reitman , and Marc Webb .
Episodes have been directed by several of the actors on the show including Steve Carell , John Krasinski , Rainn Wilson , Ed Helms , and Brian Baumgartner .
DEVELOPMENT AND WRITING Section::::Development and writing .
Prior to the second episode airing , the writers spent time conducting research in offices .
This process was used for Daniels 's other series King of the Hill and Parks and Recreation .
The pilot is a direct adaptation of the first episode of the original British series .
Daniels chose to go this route because " completely starting from scratch would be a very risky thing to do " owing to the show being an adaptation .
He had briefly considered using the idea for " The Dundies " as the pilot episode .
After the writers knew who the cast was , they were allowed to write for the actors , which allowed the show to be more original for the following episode , " Diversity Day " .
Following the mixed reaction toward the first season , the writers attempted to make the series more " optimistic " and to make Michael Scott more likable .
They also established the supporting characters of the series more , giving them actual personalities .
They also made the lights in the office brighter , which allowed the series to differentiate itself from the British series .
A common problem with the scripts , according to Novak , is that they tend to run too long for the regular 22-minute time slot , leading to several cuts .
For example , the script for the episode " Search Committee " was initially 75 pages , which is 10 pages too long .
A complete script is written for each episode ; however , actors are given opportunities to improvise during the shooting process .
Fischer said , " Our shows are 100 percent scripted .
They put everything down on paper .
But we get to play around a little bit , too .
Steve and Rainn are brilliant improvisers .
" These improvisations lead to a large number of deleted scenes with almost every episode of The Office , all of which are considered part of the show 's canon and storyline by Daniels .
Deleted scenes have sometimes been restored in repeats to make episodes longer or draw back people who have seen the episode before to see the bonus footage .
In an experiment , a deleted scene from " The Return " was made available over NBC.com and iTunes , explaining the absence of a character over the next several episodes .
Daniels hoped that word of mouth among fans would spread the information , but he eventually considered the experiment a failure .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
According to Jenna Fischer , the series used an unusual casting process that did not involve a script .
The producers would ask the actors several questions and they would respond as the characters they were auditioning for .
NBC programmer Kevin Reilly originally suggested Paul Giamatti to producer Ben Silverman for the role of Michael Scott , but the actor declined .
Martin Short , Hank Azaria , and Bob Odenkirk were reported to be interested in the part .
In January 2004 Variety reported that Steve Carell , of the Comedy Central program The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , was in talks to play the role .
At the time , he was already committed to another NBC midseason replacement comedy , Come to Papa , but the series was quickly canceled , allowing his full commitment to The Office .
Carell later stated that he had only seen about half of the original pilot episode of the British series before he auditioned .
He did not continue watching for fear that he would start copying Gervais 's characterizations .
Other people who were considered or auditioned for the role included Ben Falcone , Alan Tudyk , Jim Zulevic , and Paul F. Tompkins .
Rainn Wilson was cast as power - hungry sycophant Dwight Schrute , and he watched every episode of the British series before he auditioned .
Wilson had originally auditioned for Michael , a performance that he described as a " terrible Ricky Gervais impersonation " ; however , the casting directors liked his audition as Dwight much more and hired him .
Seth Rogen , Matt Besser , Patton Oswalt , and Judah Friedlander also auditioned for the role .
John Krasinski and Jenna Fischer were cast in their respective roles as Jim and Pam , the central love interests .
Krasinski had attended school with B. J. Novak , and the two were friends .
Fischer prepared for her audition by looking as boring as possible , creating the original Pam hairstyle .
In an interview on NPR 's Fresh Air , Fischer recalled the last stages of the audition process for Pam and Jim , with the producers partnering the different potential Pams and Jims ( four of each ) together to gauge their chemistry .
When Fischer finished her scene with Krasinski , he told her that she was his favorite Pam , to which she reciprocated that he was her favorite Jim .
Adam Scott and John Cho both auditioned for the role of Jim , and Kathryn Hahn also auditioned for the role of Pam .
The supporting cast includes actors known for their improv work : Angela Kinsey , Kate Flannery , Oscar Nunez , Leslie David Baker , Brian Baumgartner , Melora Hardin , and David Denman .
Kinsey had originally auditioned for Pam .
The producers thought she was " too feisty " for the character , but they called her back for the part of Angela Martin , which she won .
Flannery first auditioned for the part of Jan Levinson - Gould , before landing the role of Meredith Palmer .
Baumgartner originally auditioned for Stanley , but was eventually cast as Kevin .
Ken Kwapis , the director of the pilot episode , liked the way Phyllis Smith , a casting associate , read with other actors auditioning so much that he cast her as Phyllis .
At the beginning of the third season , Ed Helms and Rashida Jones joined the cast as members of Dunder Mifflin Stamford .
While Jones would later leave the cast for a role on Parks and Recreation , in February 2007 , NBC announced that Helms was being promoted to a series regular .
Four of the show 's writers have also performed in front of the camera .
B. J. Novak was cast as reluctant temp Ryan Howard after Daniels saw his stand - up act .
Paul Lieberstein was cast as human resources director Toby Flenderson on Novak 's suggestion after his cold readings of scripts .
Greg Daniels was originally unsure where to use Mindy Kaling on - screen in the series until the opportunity came in the script for the second episode , " Diversity Day " , where Michael needed to be slapped by a minority . "
Since [ that slap ] , I 've been on the show " ( as Kelly Kapoor ) , says Kaling .
Michael Schur has also made occasional appearances as Dwight 's cousin Mose , and consulting producer Larry Wilmore has played diversity trainer Mr. Brown .
Plans were made for Mackenzie Crook , Martin Freeman , and Lucy Davis , from the British series , to appear in the third season , but those plans were scrapped due to scheduling conflicts .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The Office was filmed with a single - camera setup in a cinéma vérité allowing the look of an actual documentary , with no studio audience or laugh track , allowing its " deadpan " and " absurd " humor to fully come across .
The primary vehicle for the show is that a camera crew has decided to film Dunder Mifflin and its employees , seemingly around the clock .
The presence of the camera is acknowledged by the characters , especially Michael Scott , who enthusiastically participates in the filming .
The characters , especially Jim and Pam , also look towards the camera when Michael creates an awkward situation .
The main action of the show is supplemented with talking - head interviews or " confessionals " in which characters speak one on one with the camera crew about the day 's events .
Actor John Krasinski shot the footage of Scranton for the opening credits after he found out he was cast as Jim .
He visited Scranton for research and interviewed employees at actual paper companies .
In order to get the feel of an actual documentary , the producers hired cinematographer Randall Einhorn , who is known for directing episodes of Survivor , which allowed the show to have the feel of " rough and jumpy " like an actual documentary .
According to producer Michael Schur , the producers to the series would follow the documentary format strictly .
The producers would have long discussions over whether a scene could work under the documentary format .
For example , in the fourth - season episode " Did I Stutter ? , " a scene featured Michael going through a long process to go to the bathroom and not pass by Stanley .
The producers debated whether that was possible and Einhorn walked through the whole scene in order to see if a camera man could get to all the places in time to shoot the whole scene .
Despite the strict nature in the early years of the series , later seasons seem to have loosened the rules on the format , with the camera crew often going into places that actual documentary crews would not , which also changed the writing and comedy style of the series .
This inconsistency has received criticism from critics and fans .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The theme song for The Office was written by Jay Ferguson and performed by The Scrantones .
It is played over the title sequence , which features scenes of Scranton , various tasks around the office and the main cast members .
Some episodes of the series use a shortened version of the theme song .
Starting with the fourth season , the theme song is played over the closing credits , which previously rolled in silence .
The exteriors of buildings in the title sequence are actual buildings in Scranton , Pennsylvania , and were shot by cast member John Krasinski .
The mockumentary format of the show contains no laugh track , and most of the music is diegetic , with songs either sung or played by the characters or heard on radios , computers , or other devices .
However , songs have been played during montages or the closing credits , such as " Tiny Dancer " by Elton John ( " The Dundies " ) and " Islands in the Stream " by Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton ( " E - mail Surveillance " ) .
Featured music tends to be well known , and
often songs reflect the character , such as Michael 's attempt to seem hip by using " Mambo No . 5 " and later " My Humps " as his cell phone ringtone .
Daniels has said that it does not count as film score as long as it already appeared in the episode .
CHARACTERS
Section::::Characters .
The Office employs an ensemble cast .
Many characters portrayed by The Office cast are based on the original British series .
While these characters normally have the same attitude and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show .
The show is known for its generally large cast size , with many of its actors and actresses known particularly for their improvisational work .
Steve Carell stars as Michael Scott , regional manager of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton Branch .
Loosely based on David Brent , Gervais 's character in the British series , Scott is a well - intentioned man whose attempts at humor , while seemingly innocent to himself , often offend and annoy his peers and employees , and in some situations lead to reprimanding from his superiors .
Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is a salesman and the assistant to the regional manager , a fictional title created by Michael .
John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a salesman and , in later seasons , co - manager who is often known for his wittiness and his hijinks on Schrute ( often accompanied by Pam Beesly ) .
Halpert is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is known to have feelings for Pam , the receptionist .
Pam , played by Jenna Fischer , is based on Dawn Tinsley .
She is shy , but in many cases a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight .
B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard , who for the first two seasons is a temporary worker but is promoted to sales representative in the third season .
He later ascends to the position of vice president , North East Region and director of new media until his treachery was exposed for corporate fraud
and he was fired .
After this , he gets a job in a bowling alley and then briefly works for the Michael Scott Paper Company .
After all this , and a stint in rehab , he eventually ends up again as the temporary worker at the Scranton branch .
The accounting department features Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , an uptight and hypocritical woman who wishes to keep things orderly and make sure situations remain as serious as possible ; Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) , a lovable but dim - witted man who revels in juvenile humor and frequently indulges in gambling ; and Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nuñez ) , who is intelligent but often patronizing and whose homosexuality and Hispanic heritage made him a favorite target for Michael 's unintentional off - color comments .
Rounding out the office are the stern salesman Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) , who barely stood for Michael 's constant references to his Black American heritage ( he also does n't like to take part in time - wasting meetings and sometimes sleeps in them or works on crossword puzzles ) ; eccentric quality assurance representative Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) ; the shy and matronly saleswoman Phyllis Lapin ( Phyllis Smith ) , who marries Bob Vance ( Robert R. Shafer ) from Vance Refrigeration across the hall from the office ; Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , a salesman introduced in season three after the closing of the Stamford , Connecticut , branch of Dunder Mifflin and the merging of the two ; the bubbly and talkative customer service representative Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) ; the promiscuous alcoholic supply relations representative Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) ; human resources representative Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) , who is hated by , and often the target of abuse by Scott ; warehouse foreman Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) ; warehouse dock worker and Pam 's ex - fiancé Roy Anderson ( David Denman ) , who was fired in the third season ; and Michael 's former love interest and former vice president for regional sales for Dunder Mifflin Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) .
Toward the end of season five , the bubbly and naive Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) is introduced as Pam 's replacement at reception following Pam 's short stint at the Michael Scott Paper Company and her subsequent move to sales .
A story arc at the end of season four has Holly Flax ( Amy Ryan ) transferred to the office as Toby 's replacement .
She acts as a love interest for Michael , as they share very similar personalities .
Jo Bennett ( Kathy Bates ) is the CEO of Sabre and Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) , introduced in the middle of season six , is a Sabre employee who is assigned to the Dunder Mifflin Scranton branch as the regional director of sales .
In season seven , Bennett 's friend Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) is interviewed to replace Scott , and later serves as a replacement regional manager for Bernard in season eight .
In season nine Clark Green ( Clark Duke ) and Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) joined as two new customer service representatives to attempt to catch up on the ignored customer services complaints that Kelly had dismissed while she worked at Dunder Mifflin .
Clark is later moved to sales .
Initially the actors who portray the other office workers were credited as guest stars before they were named series regulars during the second season .
The show 's large ensemble has been mainly praised by critics and led to the series winning two Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series .
Carell was reportedly paid $ 175,000 per episode starting with the third season .
Krasinski and Fischer were paid around $ 20,000 for the beginning of the series .
Starting with the fourth season , the two started getting paid around $ 100,000 per episode .
SEASON SYNOPSIS
Section::::Season synopsis .
A typical episode for a half - hour time slot runs 20-and - a - half minutes .
The final episode of season two introduces the first of what would be several super - sized episodes that are approximately 28-minute running time for a 40-minute time slot .
Season three introduces the first of occasional hour - long episodes ( approximately 42-minute running time ; suitable for being shown as two separate normal episodes ) .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season consists of six episodes .
The series starts by introducing the office 's workers via a tour given by the branch manager Michael Scott for both the camera crew and a first - day temp Ryan Howard .
The audience learns salesman Jim Halpert has a crush on receptionist Pam Beesly , who helps him play pranks on co - worker Dwight Schrute , even though she is engaged to Roy , who works in the building 's lower - level warehouse .
News spreads throughout the office that Dunder Mifflin 's corporate headquarters is planning to downsize an entire branch , leading to general anxiety , but Michael chooses to deny or downplay the realities of the situation in order to maintain employee morale .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season is the series ' first 22-episode season , and has its first 28-minute " super - sized " episode .
Many workers seen in the background of the first season are developed into secondary characters , and romantic relationships begin to develop between some of the characters .
Michael makes out with and then spends the night with his boss Jan , but does not have sex with her .
Dwight and Angela become romantically involved , but keep the relationship a secret from everyone else .
Kelly develops a crush on Ryan , and they start dating .
When Roy sets a date for his wedding to Pam , at a company booze cruise party , Jim grows depressed and considers transferring to the Stamford , Connecticut branch , but tells Pam in the season finale that he loves her .
Even though Pam still insists she will marry Roy , the two kiss and Jim transfers to the Stamford branch soon after .
The general threat of downsizing continues throughout the season as well .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The third season consists of 17 half - hour episodes , four 40-minute " super - sized " episodes , and two one - hour episodes .
The season starts with a brief flashback to the last episode of season 2 , " Casino Night " , when Jim kissed Pam and confessed his feelings for her .
Jim briefly transfers to Stamford branch after Pam confirms her commitment to Roy .
Corporate is later forced to merge the Stamford branch and staff into the Scranton branch .
Michael takes this merger very seriously .
Included in the transfer to Scranton are Karen Filippelli , with whom Jim has developed a relationship , and the anger - prone Andy Bernard .
The rest of the Stamford branch are irrelevant considering they all quit within the first few episodes of them being there .
Pam is newly single after calling off her marriage and relationship to Roy prior to the merger , and Jim 's unresolved feelings for her and his new relationship with Karen lead to shifting tensions amongst the three .
Meanwhile , Michael and Jan 's relationship escalates which causes them both to behave erratically on the job .
On the other hand , Dwight and Angela continue their steamy secret relationship .
In the season 's finale , Jim , Karen , and Michael interview for a corporate position that turns out to be Jan 's , who is fired that day for poor performance .
Jim wins and rejects the offer off - screen , opting instead to return to Scranton without Karen and ask Pam out on a date , which she joyfully accepts .
In the final scene , we learn Ryan has been awarded Jan 's job due to his business school credentials .
SEASON 4
Section::::Season 4 .
NBC ordered a full fourth season of 30 half - hour episodes , but ended with only 19 due to a halt in production caused by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike .
The season consists of 9 half - hour episodes , and 5 hour - long episodes to make up the 19 total episodes of material created .
Karen has left the Scranton branch after her breakup with Jim and becomes regional manager at the Utica branch .
A self - employed Jan moves herself and her candle business into Michael 's condo , until the dissolution of their relationship midway through the season during an intimate dinner party with Pam and Jim , Andy and Angela .
After Dwight 's crude ( though well - intentioned ) method of euthanasia of Angela 's ailing cat without her permission , she leaves him for Andy , leading Dwight into depression .
Ryan , in his new corporate life in New York City , attempts to modernize Dunder Mifflin with a new website for online sales ; he also learns that his boss , David Wallace , favors Jim , and thus Ryan attempts to sabotage Jim 's career .
Ryan is soon arrested and fired for misleading the shareholders and committing fraud related to the website 's sales numbers .
Toby announces he is moving to Costa Rica , and is replaced by Holly Flax , who quickly shows a liking for Michael .
Pam decides to follow her artistic interests and attends a three - month graphic design course at the Pratt Institute in New York City .
In the season finale , Jim almost proposes to Pam , but is interrupted by Andy proposing to Angela , who reluctantly agrees .
Phyllis then catches Dwight and Angela having sex in the office .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
The fifth season consists of 28 half - hours of material , divided into 24 half - hour episodes and two hour - long episodes , one of which aired after Super Bowl XLIII .
Jim proposes to Pam at a gas station halfway between them because he could not wait .
Pam ultimately returns from New York to Scranton , where Jim has bought his parents ' house for the two of them .
Having avoided jail and only been sentenced to community service , Ryan dyes his hair and starts working for a bowling alley .
Michael initiates a romance with Holly until she is transferred to the Nashua , New Hampshire , branch and the relationship ends .
When Andy is made aware of Dwight and Angela 's continued affair , both men leave her .
Newly hired Vice President Charles Miner implements a rigid managerial style over the branch that causes Michael to resign in protest .
Michael opens the Michael Scott Paper Company , enticing Pam and Ryan to join as salespeople , and though his business model is ultimately unsustainable , Dunder Mifflin 's profits are immediately threatened .
In a buyout of the Michael Scott Paper Company , the three are rehired with Pam promoted to sales and Ryan returning as a temp .
During the chaos , new receptionist Erin is hired to fill the vacancy originally left by Pam .
The season ends with a scene that obviously announces Pam 's pregnancy .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
The sixth season consists of 26 half - hours of material , divided into 22 half - hour episodes and two hour - long episodes .
Jim and Pam marry and have a baby named Cecelia Marie Halpert .
Meanwhile , Andy and Erin develop mutual interest in one another , but find their inherent awkwardness inhibits his attempts to ask her out on a date .
Rumors of bankruptcy begin to surround Dunder Mifflin , and by Christmas , Wallace announces to the branch that Dunder Mifflin has accepted a buyout from Sabre Corporation , a printer company .
While Wallace and other executives are let go , the Scranton office survives due to its relative success within the company and Michael Scott is now the highest level employee at Dunder Mifflin .
In the season finale , Dwight buys the office park .
Michael agrees to make an announcement to the press regarding a case of faulty printers .
When Jo Bennet , Sabre CEO , asks how she can repay him , Michael responds that she could bring Holly back to the Scranton branch .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
The seventh season consists of 26 half - hours of material , divided into 21 half - hour episodes , one " super - sized " episode , and two hour - long episodes .
This is the final season for Steve Carell , who plays the lead character Michael Scott , as Carell wanted to move on after his contract expired during this season .
Beginning with this season , Zach Woods , who portrays Gabe Lewis , was promoted to a series regular .
Erin and Gabe have begun a relationship , much to Andy 's chagrin , and Andy attempts to win Erin 's affection back .
Michael 's former girlfriend , Holly , returns to Scranton to fill in for Toby who is doing jury duty for the " Scranton Strangler " trial .
Michael and Holly eventually restart their relationship .
After the two get engaged , Michael then reveals he will be leaving Scranton to go to Colorado with Holly in order to support her elderly parents .
Angela starts dating the state senator Robert Lipton , while Pam and Jim are still adjusting to parenthood .
After Michael 's replacement ( Will Ferrell ) is seriously injured , Jo creates a search committee to interview candidates and choose a new manager for the office .
In the meantime , Creed Bratton takes over as acting Manager .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
The eighth season consists of 24 episodes .
James Spader reprises his role as Robert California , the new CEO of Dunder Mifflin / Sabre .
Andy is then promoted to regional manager and works hard to make a good impression on Robert , and asks Dwight to be his number two .
Pam and Jim are expecting their second child , Phillip , at the start of the season , to coincide with Fischer 's real - life pregnancy .
Angela is pregnant with her first son , also named Philip , with State Senator Robert Lipton ( although it is implied that Dwight Schrute is actually the child 's biological father ) .
Darryl starts falling for new warehouse foreman , Val .
Dwight is tasked with traveling to Tallahassee , Florida , to assist Sabre special projects manager Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) in launching a chain of retail stores , along with Jim , Ryan , Stanley , Erin , and new office temp Cathy Simms .
Cathy is also revealed to have ulterior motives for the trip , as she intends to seduce Jim , but fails .
Robert later kills the retail store project , and Erin decides to stay in Florida as an elderly woman 's live - in helper .
Andy goes to Florida and wins back Erin , but this allows Nellie to claim the manager position as her own .
Robert tells Andy that he has been demoted back to a salesman , but he refuses to accept the news , which causes him to be fired .
Andy becomes motivated to begin a Dunder Mifflin comeback and joins with former CFO David Wallace to buy Dunder Mifflin back from Sabre , putting Sabre completely out of business and giving Andy the manager position once again .
SEASON 9
Section::::Season 9 .
The final season consists of 25 episodes .
Andy , recently returning from Outward Bound manager 's training , reverts to his arrogant earlier season personality , abandoning both Erin and the office to travel around the Caribbean with his brother in their sailboat after the demise of his parents ' relationship .
In his absence , Erin strikes up a romance with new customer service rep Pete , who along with Clark , another new character , replaces Kelly , who left for Ohio with her new husband
( Ryan also moves to Ohio for " unrelated reasons " ) .
Meanwhile , Jim receives an exciting opportunity from an old college friend who offers him a job at Athlead , a sports marketing company based in Philadelphia .
Darryl also jumps on board , but the distance and dedication to Athlead hurts Jim 's relationship with Pam .
Angela also must deal with her husband 's infidelity with Oscar .
She also deals with her lingering attraction to Dwight , who inherits his family 's beet farm .
Dwight receives more good news when David Wallace handpicks him to be the new manager after Andy quits to pursue an acting career , which quickly ends when he embarrasses himself at an a cappella singing competition that turns into a viral web sensation .
Dwight later makes Jim his assistant to the regional manager and the two officially end their grudge .
After Jim reconciles with Pam , choosing to stay in Scranton over Philadelphia , Dwight professes his love for Angela and finally marries her .
In the series finale , taking place one year after the release of the documentary , the employees reunite for Dwight and Angela 's wedding , for which Michael returns ( with help from Jim who was the person Dwight first asked to be his best man ) to serve as the best man .
Kelly and Ryan run away together , Nellie now lives in Poland and " adopts " Ryan 's abandoned baby , Erin meets her birth parents , Andy gets a job at Cornell , Stanley retires to Florida , Kevin and Toby are both fired with the former buying a bar and the latter moving to New York City to become an author , and Oscar runs for State Senate .
Jim and Pam , at her persuasion , move to Austin to open a new branch of Athleap ( previously Athlead ) with Darryl ( Dwight " fires " them to give them both severance packages ) , and Creed is arrested for his many crimes .
PRODUCT PLACEMENT
Section::::Product placement .
The Office has had product placement deals with Staples and the Olympic balers , as well as mentioning in dialogue or displaying clear logos for products such as Sandals Resorts , HP , Apple , and Gateway computers , and Activision 's Call of Duty video game series .
In " The Merger " , Kevin Malone uses a Staples - branded shredding machine to shred a Staples - branded CD - R and many other nonpaper items , including a salad .
As with HP , Cisco Systems , a supplier of networking and telephone equipment , pays for product placement , which can be seen on close - up shots of the Cisco IP telephones .
Some products have additional branding labels attached ; this can be clearly seen with the HP photo printer on Toby 's desk in season 6 , and less noticeably with the Cisco phones .
In " The Secret " Michael takes Jim to Hooters to discuss Jim 's feelings for Pam .
Many products featured are not part of product placement agreements , but rather inserted by writers as products the characters would use to create realism under the guise of a documentary .
Chili 's restaurants were used for filming in " The Dundies " and " The Client , " as the writers believed they were realistic choices for a company party and business lunch .
Though not an explicit product placement , the producers of the show had to allow Chili 's to have final approval of the script before filming , causing a scene of " The Dundies " to be hastily rewritten when the chain objected to the original version .
Apple Inc. received over four minutes of publicity for the iPod when it was used as a much - desired gift in " Christmas Party , " though the company did not pay for the placement .
The travel website TripAdvisor.com was featured during Season 4 when after a visit to Dwight 's " agritourism " bed and breakfast , Schrute Farms , Jim and Pam post an online review about their stay .
The show reportedly approached the travel review website about using their name on the show and TripAdvisor set up a review page for the fictional B&B , which itself received hundreds of reviews .
The appearance of Second Life in the episode " Local Ad " was rated eighth in the top ten most effective product placements of 2007 .
RECEPTION AND LEGACY CRITICAL REVIEWS AND COMMENTARY Section::::Reception and legacy .
Section::::Critical reviews and commentary .
Before the show aired , Ricky Gervais acknowledged that there were feelings of hesitation from certain viewers .
The first season of The Office was met with a mixed response from critics with some of them comparing it to the short - lived NBC series Coupling , which was also based on a British version .
The New York Daily News called it " so diluted
there 's little left but muddy water , " and USA Today called it a " passable imitation of a miles - better BBC original . "
A Guardian Unlimited review panned its lack of originality , stating that Steve Carell " just seems to be trying too hard ...
Maybe in later episodes when it deviates from Gervais and Merchant 's script , he 'll come into his own .
But right now he 's a pale imitation . "
Tom Shales of The Washington Post said it was " not the mishmash that [ the Americanized version of Coupling ] turned out to be , but again the quality of the original show causes the remake to look dim , like when the copying machine is just about to give out . "
The second season was better received .
James Poniewozik of Time remarked , " Producer Greg Daniels created not a copy but an interpretation that sends up distinctly American work conventions ... with a tone that 's more satiric and less mordant ...
The new boss is different from the old boss , and that 's fine by me . "
He named it the second best TV show of 2006 after Battlestar Galactica .
Entertainment Weekly writer Mark Harris echoed these sentiments a week later , stating , "
Thanks to the fearless Steve Carell , an ever - stronger supporting cast , and scripts that spew American corporate absurdist vernacular with perfect pitch , this undervalued remake does the near impossible — it honors Ricky Gervais ' original and works on its own terms .
"
The A.V. Club reviewer
Nathan Rabin expressed its views on the show 's progression : " After a rocky start , The Office improved immeasurably , instantly becoming one of TV 's funniest , sharpest shows .
The casting of Steve Carell in the Gervais role proved to be a masterstroke .
The American Office is that rarest of anomalies : a remake of a classic show that both does right by its source and carves out its own strong identity . "
The series has been included on several top TV series lists .
The show placed # 61 on Entertainment Weekly " New TV Classics " list .
Time 's James Poniewozik named it the second - best TV series of 2006 , and the sixth - best returning series of 2007 , out of ten TV series .
He also included it on his " The 100 Best TV Shows of All - TIME " list .
The show was also named the best show of 2006 by BuddyTV .
while Paste named it the sixth - best sitcom of 2010 .
In 2013 the Writers Guild of America placed it at # 66 on their list of 101 Best Written TV Series .
The show has some superficial similarities to the comic strip Dilbert , which also features employees coping with an inept superior .
John Spector , CEO of The Conference Board , says that both show the impact a leader can have , for good or bad .
Dilbert creator Scott Adams also touts the similarities : " The lesson from The Office and from Dilbert is that people are often dysfunctional , and no amount of training can fix it . "
A labor - affiliated group praised the second - season episode " Boys and Girls " for what it considered an unusually frank depiction of union busting on American television .
Metacritic , a review aggregation website , graded only the first , third , sixth , and final seasons .
However , it denoted that all four of them received " generally favorable reviews " from critics , awarding a 61 , 85 , 78 , and 64 score — out of 100—to each of them , respectively .
It later named it the thirteenth most mentioned series on " Best of Decade " top - ten lists .
The last few seasons were criticized for a dip in quality .
The sixth season received criticisms for a lack of stakes for the characters .
Other critics and fans have also criticized the dragging out of the Jim and Pam romance .
The Office co - creator Ricky Gervais wrote in his blog , referring to " Search Committee , " particularly Warren Buffett 's guest appearance , " If you 're going to jump a shark , jump a big one , " and compared the episode to the Chris Martin episode of Gervais 's other series , Extras ( although he later said on his website , " I fucking did n't [ diss The Office ] , that 's for sure " ) .
Some critics said the series should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell .
In an IAmA interview on Reddit , Rainn Wilson felt that the eighth season possessed some mistakes " creatively , " such as the chemistry between Spader and Helms , which he called " a bit dark " and argued that the show should have gone for a " brighter and more energized " relationship .
Despite this , there are later - series episodes that have received critical acclaim , including " Stress Relief , " " Niagara " , " Garage Sale " , " Goodbye , Michael " , " Dwight Christmas " , " A.A.R.M. " , and " Finale " .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The series received 42 Primetime Emmy Awards nominations , with five wins .
It won for Outstanding Comedy Series in season two , Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series ( Greg Daniels for " Gay Witch Hunt " ) , Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Jeffrey Blitz for " Stress Relief " ) , and Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series ( David Rogers and Claire Scanlon for " Finale " ) .
Many cast and crew members have expressed anger that Carell did not receive an Emmy award for his performance in the series .
Despite this , Carell won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Comedy or Musical in 2006 .
The series was also named the best TV series by the American Film Institute in 2006 and 2008 , won two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2006 and 2007 and won a Peabody Award in 2006 .
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
Premiering on Thursday , March 24 , 2005 , after an episode of The Apprentice on NBC , The Office brought in 11.2 million viewers in the U.S. , winning its time slot .
When NBC moved the series to its intended Tuesday night slot , it lost nearly half its audience with only 5.9 million viewers .
The program averaged 5.4 million viewers , ranking it # 102 for the 2004–05 U.S. television season . "
Hot Girl , " the first season 's finale , rated a 2.2 with a 10 audience measurement share .
Episodes were also rerun on CNBC .
As the second season started , the success of Carell 's hit summer movie
The 40-Year - Old Virgin and online sales of episodes at iTunes helped the show .
The increase in viewership led NBC to move the series to the " Must See TV " Thursday night in January 2006 , where ratings continued to grow .
By the 2005–06 season , it placed # 67 ( tied with 20/20 ) .
It averaged 8 million viewers with a 4.0/10 rating / share among viewers ages 18–49 , and was up 80 % in viewers from the year before and up 60 % in viewers ages 18–49 .
The series ranked as NBC 's highest rated scripted series during its run .
The highest rated episode of the series was " Stress Relief , " which was watched by 22.9 million viewers .
This episode was aired right after Super Bowl XLIII .
While later seasons dropped in the ratings , the show was still one of NBC 's highest rated shows , and in October 2011 it was reported that it cost $ 178,840 per 30-second commercial , the most for any NBC scripted series .
NIELSEN RATINGS Section::::Nielsen ratings . !
rowspan="2 " Season ! rowspan="2 " TV season !
rowspan="2 "
Timeslot ( ET CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
The city of Scranton , long known mainly for its industrial past as a coal mining and rail center , has embraced , and ultimately has been redefined by the show .
" We 're really hip now , " says the mayor 's assistant .
The Dunder Mifflin logo is on a lamppost banner in front of Scranton City Hall , as well as the pedestrian bridge to The Mall at Steamtown .
The Pennsylvania Paper & Supply Company , whose tower is shown in the opening credits , plans to add it to the tower as well .
Newspapers in other Northeastern cities have published travel guides to Scranton locations for tourists interested in visiting places mentioned in the show .
Scranton has become identified with the show outside the United States as well .
In a 2008 St. Patrick 's Day speech in its suburb of Dickson City , former Taoiseach ( Irish prime minister )
Bertie Ahern identified the city as the home of Dunder Mifflin .
The inaugural The Office convention was held downtown in October 2007 .
Notable landmarks , some of which have been settings for the show , that served as venues include the University of Scranton , the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel and the Mall at Steamtown .
Cast appearances were made by B.J. Novak , Ed Helms , Oscar Nunez , Angela Kinsey , Brian Baumgartner , Leslie David Baker , Mindy Kaling , Craig Robinson , Melora Hardin , Phyllis Smith , Creed Bratton , Kate Flannery , Bobby Ray Shafer , and Andy Buckley .
Writer appearances , besides Novak and Kaling , were made by Greg Daniels , Michael Schur , Jennifer Celotta , Lee Eisenberg , Gene Stupnitsky , Justin Spitzer , Anthony Ferrell , Ryan Koh , Lester Lewis , and Jason Kessler .
Not present were writer - actor Paul Lieberstein ( who was originally going to make an appearance ) , Steve Carell , John Krasinski , Rainn Wilson , and Jenna Fischer .
On an episode of The Daily Show , Republican presidential candidate John McCain , reportedly a devoted fan of the show , jokingly told Jon Stewart he might take Dwight Schrute as his running mate .
Rainn Wilson later accepted on Dwight Schrute 's behalf while on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno .
After the airing of " Garage Sale " , where the character of Michael Scott decides to move to Colorado , Colorado governor John Hickenlooper issued a press release appointing Scott to the position of director of paper distribution in the Department of Natural Resources .
The show is often paid tribute by the band
Relient K. Frontman Matt Thiessen is a fan of The Office , and during concerts will often perform a self - described " love song " about the series , titled " The Ballad of Dunder Mifflin , " followed by him and the band playing the show 's opening theme .
OTHER BROADCASTS
Section::::Other broadcasts .
Aside from NBC , The Office has gone into off - network syndication in the United States .
It previously ran on local stations and TBS .
After a few years absent from conventional television , it was announced in December 2017 that Comedy Central had picked up the entire series , for its second syndication cycle .
Comedy Central started airing The Office on January 15 , 2018 .
The series will additionally air weeknights on Cozi TV and Nick at Nite starting January 1 , 2019 .
In the United Kingdom , the show was named in listings magazines ( but not onscreen ) as The Office : An American Workplace when it was originally aired on ITV2 .
OTHER MEDIA
ONLINE
RELEASES
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Online releases .
Episodes from The Office were among the first shows available for download from the iTunes Store beginning in December 2005 .
In 2006 , ten internet - exclusive webisodes featuring some of the characters on The Office aired on NBC.com . "
Producer 's Cuts " ( containing approximately ten additional minutes of material ) of the episodes " Branch Closing " and " The Return " were also made available on NBC.com .
The Office also became available for download from Amazon.com 's Unbox video downloads in 2006 .
Sales of new The Office episodes on iTunes ceased in 2007 due to a dispute between NBC and Apple ostensibly over pricing .
As of September 9 , 2008 The Office was put back on the iTunes Store , and can be bought in HD and Regular format .
Netflix also offers the show for online viewing by subscribers , in addition to traditional DVD rental .
The Office is also available on Microsoft 's Zune Marketplace .
On December 13 , 2017 , Comedy Central announced that they had acquired all nine seasons of the show from NBCUniversal in a non - exclusive deal , and some episodes will be made available to stream on Comedy Central 's official website and mobile app after January 15 , 2018 .
Of the 12.4 million total viewings of " Fun Run " , the fourth season 's premiere , 2.7 million , or 22 % , were on a computer via online streaming . "
The Office " , said The New York Times , " is on the leading edge of a sharp shift in entertainment viewing that was thought to be years away : watching television episodes on a computer screen is now a common activity for millions of consumers .
" It was particularly popular with online viewers , an NBC researcher said , because as an episode - driven sitcom without special effects it was easy to watch on smaller monitors such as those found on laptops and iPods .
Between the online viewings and those who use digital video recorders , 25–50 % of the show 's viewers watch it after its scheduled airtime .
The show 's Internet success became an issue in the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike .
Daniels and many of the cast members who double as writers posted a video to YouTube shortly after the strike began , pointing out how little , if any , they received in residuals from online and DVD viewing .
" You 're watching this on the Internet , a thing that pays us zero dollars , " Schur said .
" We 're supposed to get 11 cents for every two trillion downloads .
" The writers were particularly upset that they were n't compensated for the Daytime Emmy Award - winning summer webisodes " The Accountants " , which NBC considered promotional material despite the embedded commercials .
PROMOTIONAL Section::::Promotional .
The show 's success has resulted in expansion outside of television .
Characters have appeared in promotional materials for NBC , and a licensed video game — The Office — was released in 2007 .
In 2008 two games were introduced via Pressman Toy Corp : The Office Trivia Board Game and The Office DVD Board Game .
In 2009 , The Office Clue was released , and The Office Monopoly was released in 2010 .
Other merchandise , from T - shirts and a bobblehead doll of Dwight Schrute to more office - specific items such as Dunder Mifflin copy paper and parodies of the Successories motivational poster series featuring the cast are available .
Dunder Mifflin has two websites , and the cast members maintain blogs both as themselves and in character .
CAST BLOGS Section::::Cast blogs .
Several members of the cast maintained blogs .
These include Jenna Fischer , Angela Kinsey , and Brian Baumgartner , who posted regularly during the season .
Rainn Wilson wrote in character on " Schrute Space " on NBC.com , which is updated periodically .
However , he stopped writing the blog himself .
It is unknown whether Creed Bratton authors " Creed Thoughts , " the blog attributed to his character .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
Season!!Region 1 release date!!Region 2
release date!!Region 4 release date!!Episodes!!Discs!!Bonus features
PROPOSED SPIN - OFFS
Section::::Proposed spin - offs .
A spin - off to the series was proposed in 2008 , with a pilot episode expected to debut as the Super Bowl lead - out program in 2009 .
However , The Offices creative team instead decided to develop Parks and Recreation as a separate series .
The idea created by the writers was that a copy machine breaks in The Office and then it is shipped to Pawnee , Indiana , the setting of Parks and Recreation , to be fixed .
Also actress Rashida Jones was to portray a different character in both , causing a problem for the potential spin - off .
Another spin - off starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute running a bed - and - breakfast and beet farm , titled The Farm , was proposed in early 2012 .
In October 2012 , however , NBC decided not to go forward with the series .
A backdoor pilot episode was produced , which aired during the ninth season as " The Farm " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS