TWINCHARGER Twincharger refers to a compound forced induction system used on some piston - type internal combustion engines .
It is a combination of an exhaust - driven turbocharger and an engine - driven supercharger , each mitigating the weaknesses of the other .
A belt - driven or shaft - driven supercharger offers exceptional response and low - rpm performance as it has no lag time between the application of throttle and pressurization of the manifold ( assuming that it is a positive - displacement supercharger such as a Roots type or twin - screw and not a Centrifugal compressor supercharger , which does not provide boost until the engine has reached higher RPMs ) .
When combined with a large turbocharger — if the " turbo " was used by itself , it would offer unacceptable lag and poor response in the low - rpm range — the proper combination of the two can offer a zero - lag powerband with high torque at lower engine speeds and increased power at the higher end .
Twincharging is therefore desirable for small - displacement motors ( such as VW 's 1.4TSI ) , especially those with a large operating rpm , since they can take advantage of an artificially broad torque band over a large speed range .
Twincharging does not refer to a twin - turbo arrangement , but rather when two different kinds of compressors are used .
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
Section::::Technical description .
A twincharging system combines a supercharger and turbocharger in a complementary arrangement , with the intent of one component 's advantage compensating for the other component 's disadvantage .
There are two common types of twincharger systems : series and parallel .
SERIES Section::::Series .
The series arrangement , the more common arrangement of twinchargers , is set up such that one compressor 's ( turbo or supercharger ) output feeds the inlet of another .
A sequentially - organized supercharger is connected to a medium- to large - sized turbocharger .
The supercharger provides near - instant manifold pressure ( eliminating turbo lag , which would otherwise result when the turbocharger is not up to its operating speed ) .
Once the turbocharger has reached operating speed , the supercharger can either continue compounding the pressurized air to the turbocharger inlet ( yielding elevated intake pressures ) , or it can be bypassed and/or mechanically decoupled from the drivetrain via an electromagnetic clutch and bypass valve ( increasing efficiency of the induction system ) .
Other series configurations exist where no bypass system is employed and both compressors are in continuous duty .
As a result , compounded boost is always produced as the pressure ratios of the two compressors are multiplied , not added .
In other words , if a turbocharger which produced ( pressure ratio = 1.7 ) alone blew into a supercharger which also produced 10 psi alone , the resultant manifold pressure would be ( PR=2.8 ) rather than ( PR=2.3 ) .
This form of series twincharging allows for the production of boost pressures that would otherwise be unachievable with other compressor arrangements and would be inefficient .
However , turbo and supercharger efficiencies do not multiply as some believe .
For example , if a turbocharger with an efficiency of 70 % blew on a Roots blower with an efficiency of 60 % , the total compression efficiency would be somewhere in between .
To calculate this efficiency , it is necessary to do the calculations of the 2 stages , first calculate the conditions of pressure and temperature at the exit of the first stage and starting from these to do the calculations for the second stage .
Following the previous example , for a first stage of the turbocharger ( efficiency of 70 % , pressure ratio of 1.7 )
the temperature would reach the after the first stage , to then enter the roots ( efficiency of 60 % ) and leave at a temperature of .
This is a total efficiency of 62 % .
A large turbocharger that produces by itself , with an efficiency adiabatic of around 70 % , would produce air only .
In addition , the cost of energy to drive a supercharger is higher than that of a turbocharger ; if it is ignored , the load of execution compression is eliminated , leaving only light parasitic losses of rotating the working parts of the supercharger .
The supercharger can be disconnected even more electrically ( using an electromagnetic clutch such as those used in VW 1.4TSI or Toyota 4A - GZE , although this is not because it is a double - load motor , but is intended to bypass the supercharger in low load conditions ) which eliminates this small parasitic loss .
With series twincharging , the turbocharger can be of a less expensive and more durable journal bearing variety , and the sacrifice in boost response is more than made up for by the instant - on nature of displacement superchargers .
While the weight and cost of the supercharger assembly are always a factor , the inefficiency and power consumption of the supercharger are almost totally eliminated as the turbocharger reaches operating rpm and the supercharge is effectively disconnected by the bypass valve .
PARALLEL
Section::::Parallel .
Parallel arrangements typically require the use of a bypass or diverted valve to allow one or both compressors to feed the engine .
If no valve were employed and both compressors were merely routed directly to the intake manifold , the supercharger would blow backwards through the turbocharger compressor rather than pressurize the intake manifold , as that would be the path of least resistance .
Thus a diverter valve must be employed to vent turbocharger air until it has reached the pressure in the intake manifold .
Complex or expensive electronic controls are usually necessary to ensure smooth power delivery .
DISADVANTAGES Section::::Disadvantages .
The main disadvantage of twincharging is the complexity and expense of components .
Usually , to provide acceptable response , smoothness of power delivery , and adequate power gain over a single - compressor system , expensive electronic and/or mechanical controls must be used .
In a spark - ignition engine , a low compression ratio must also be used if the supercharger produces high boost levels , negating some of the efficiency benefit of low displacement .
COMMERCIAL AVAILABILITY Section::::Commercial availability .
The concept of twincharging was first used by Lancia in 1985 on the Lancia Delta S4 Group B rally car and its street legal counterpart , the Delta S4 Stradale .
The idea was also successfully adapted to production road cars by Nissan , in their March Super Turbo .
Additionally , multiple companies have produced aftermarket twincharger kits for cars like the Subaru Impreza WRX , Mini Cooper S , Ford Mustang , and Toyota MR2 .
The Volkswagen
1.4 TSI is a 1400 cc engine – utilised by numerous automobiles of the VW Group – that sees use of both a turbocharger and a supercharger , and is available with eight power ratings : !
Power !
Torque !
Vehicles Volvo produces a twincharged 1969 cc inline - four engine that is utilised in their T6 , T8 , and Polestar models .
The T8 adds on the T6 with a rear electric motor . !
Power !
Torque !
Vehicles
The Danish supercar Zenvo ST1 made use of both turbocharger and supercharger in its 6.8-litre V8 engine . !
Power !
Torque !
Vehicles ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS
ANTI - LAG SYSTEM Section::::Alternative systems .
Section::::Anti - lag system .
Twincharging 's largest benefit over anti - lag systems in race cars is its reliability .
Anti - lag systems work in one of two ways : by running very rich AFR and pumping air into the exhaust to ignite the extra fuel in the exhaust manifold ; or by severely retarding ignition timing to cause the combustion event to continue well after the exhaust valve has opened .
Both methods involve combustion in the exhaust manifold to keep the turbine spinning , and the heat from this will shorten the life of the turbine greatly .
VARIABLE GEOMETRY TURBOCHARGER Section::::Variable geometry turbocharger .
A variable - geometry turbocharger provides an improved response at widely - varied engine speeds .
With variable - incidence under electronic control , it is possible to have the turbine reach a good operating speed quickly or at lower engine speed without severely diminishing its utility at higher engine speed .
TWIN - SCROLL TURBOCHARGER
Section::::Twin - scroll turbocharger .
A turbocharger with two sets of vanes for two operating pressures , can decrease lag by operating at different exhaust pressures .
SEQUENTIAL TWIN TURBOCHARGERS Section::::Sequential twin turbochargers .
Sequential turbocharger systems provide a way to decrease turbo lag without compromising ultimate boost output and engine power .
NITROUS OXIDE Section::::Nitrous oxide .
Nitrous oxide ( NO ) is mixed with incoming air , providing more oxidizer to burn more fuel for supplemental power when a turbocharger is not spinning quickly .
This also produces more exhaust gases so that the turbocharger quickly spools up , providing more oxygen for combustion , and the NO flow is reduced accordingly .
The expense of both the system itself and the consumable NO can be significant .
WATER INJECTION Section::::Water injection .
For more engine power , and to augment the benefits of forced induction ( by means of turbocharging or supercharging ) , an aftermarket water injection system can be added to the induction system of both gasoline and diesel internal combustion engines .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://www.greencarcongress.com/2005/08/inside_vws_new_.html