THE GUARDIAN ( 2006 FILM )
The Guardian is a 2006 action - adventure drama film directed by Andrew Davis .
The film stars Kevin Costner , Ashton Kutcher and Melissa Sagemiller .
The film 's title is introduced by a mythic tale : people lost at sea often claim they feel a presence lifting them to the surface , breathing life into their bodies while they are waiting for help to arrive .
They call this presence " The Guardian " .
The setting for the film is the United States Coast Guard and their Aviation Survival Technician ( AST ) program .
The Guardian was released on September 29 , 2006 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film opens with a narration of a legend of a man who lives beneath the sea described as a fisher of men by survivors at sea who claimed to have felt his grip beneath them pushing them to the surface until help could arrive .
Ben Randall ( Kevin Costner ) is the top rescue swimmer at the United States Coast Guard 's Aviation Survival Technician ( AST ) program .
Due to his frequent time at work , Ben 's wife requests a separation .
When on a rescue , he loses his rescue team in an HH-60J Jayhawk helicopter crash at sea .
While waiting in a survival raft , his best friend , Chief Petty Officer Carl Billings ( Omari Hardwick ) , dies .
Shaken , Ben considers retiring but becomes an instructor at a Coast Guard training school .
Jake Fischer ( Ashton Kutcher ) , a hot - shot candidate for AST , comes on the scene .
Ranked as a top high school competitive swimmer with scholarships to every Ivy League college , Jake opted to enlist in the Coast Guard .
At the " A " school , Ben is considered a legend with a countless number of rescues .
During training , Jake meets local schoolteacher , Emily Thomas ( Melissa Sagemiller ) , and they begin a " casual " relationship , both knowing their time together is limited .
Once the initial weeks of training end with most of the students dropping out , advanced instruction begins .
After sleeping at Emily 's house , Jake arrives late to class , and Ben punishes him and his entire team for his tardiness .
Ben tries to force Jake to quit , but later sees Jake 's persistence and dedication .
Meeting Emily in a bar , Jake recounts his beating all of Ben Randall 's records .
Maggie the barkeep ( Bonnie Bramlett ) , Ben 's old friend , tells Jake one unbeatable record
Ben set when a hospital ship full of invalid patients caught fire , and Ben worked tirelessly to save all the victims .
With one man left and a broken winch , Ben held the man by his fingertips till they landed safely , but received extensive injuries to his hand and shoulder .
Later , Jake 's friend Billy Hodge is unable to cope with panicked victims in the water and afraid of failing school ; Jake takes him out for a drink to cheer him up .
In a Navy bar , they get in a fight and land in jail , standing up Emily .
Jake arrives back at base beaten and bandaged , and takes the blame entirely .
Ben confronts Jake about his past .
On a late night out , Jake , who flipped a coin for designated driver and lost , crashed , and high school relay team members died .
Ben and Jake share common ground ; they both know how it feels to be the only survivor .
Near graduation , only a handful of the original candidates remain , with Jake emerging as the leader during exercises .
Emily comes to see Jake graduate , but the two part ways because Jake is leaving town .
Jake is assigned to CG Air Station Kodiak , Alaska , Randall 's previous post .
On a mission together , Ben and Jake are sent to rescue two kayakers trapped in a cave .
Ben experiences flashbacks and appears to be incapacitated during the rescue .
Jake , however , is able to guide him and together they successfully rescue the kayakers .
Ben retires and tells Jake of his only record he kept track of – the 22 people he lost during his career .
As Jake is sent out on another mission to rescue the crew of a sinking fishing trawler , Ben visits and apologizes to his wife and gives her signed divorce papers .
Meanwhile , during the rescue , Jake becomes trapped in the ship after attempting to rescue the captain .
His helicopter is forced to return to base , where Ben hears of the situation and opts to suit up to rescue Jake .
Once on scene , Ben finds and frees Jake from the hull , and as they hook up to the winch and proceed upwards towards the helicopter , their combined weight causes the cable to begin separating .
Knowing that the cable would not last , Ben unclips himself from the cable so that Jake can survive .
As Ben falls , Jake catches him by the hand and tells him he will not let him go .
Ben sees that Jake will do anything to keep him alive and he says , " I know ... " , but Ben does not want him to die , so he unstraps his glove , plummeting from a fatal height into the ocean .
Ben does not resurface and his body is never found .
Jake is on a rescue mission sometime later , when one of the survivors tells of a man in the sea who refused to let go .
Jake connects this to the legend of the Guardian ( " There 's a legend of a man who lives beneath the sea .
He is a fisher of men , the last hope of all those who have been left behind .
Many survivors claim to have felt his gripping hands beneath them , pushing them up to the surface , whispering strength until help could arrive " ) , as well as to Ben .
He goes back to Emily and they rekindle their relationship .
CAST
* Kevin Costner as Senior Chief Aviation Survival Technician Ben Randall * Ashton Kutcher as Airman / Petty Officer 3rd Class
Jake Fischer
* Neal McDonough as Chief Aviation Survival Technician Jack Skinner
* Melissa Sagemiller as Emily Thomas * Leigh Hennessy as Drowning Woman * Clancy Brown as Captain William Hadley * Brian Geraghty as Aviation Survival Technician Third Class Billy Hodge
* Sela Ward as Helen Randall * Omari Hardwick as Chief Petty Officer Carl Billings
* Michael Rady as Zingaro * Peter Gail as Airman Danny Doran * Shelby Fenner as Airman Cate Lindsey * Damon Lipari as Damon Bennett * Bonnie Bramlett as Maggie McGlone
* John Heard as Captain Frank Larson * Dulé Hill as Airman Ken Weatherly * Brian Patrick Wade as Mitch Lyons
* Joe Arquette as Co - Pilot Antunez * Andrew Schanno as Pilot Henry Mitchell
* Tilky Jones as Tilky Flint
* Jeff Loftus as USCG Commander , Executive Officer * Daniel Molthen as Richard Wakefield
* Bryce Cass as Manny * Chicago Catz as the bar band
* Travis Willingham as Travis Finley PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
David Dobkin was originally slated to direct The Guardian until being replaced by Andrew Davis .
Ron Brinkerhoff was also originally involved , making the pitch for a mid - six figure budgeted film , before Disney took over the production .
Following the series of hurricanes in the southern United States in 2005 , production moved to Shreveport , Louisiana .
Some of the base scenes were filmed at Barksdale Air Force Base in Bossier City , Louisiana and at Camp Minden in Minden , Louisiana .
Some of the scenes that were supposed to be filmed in Kodiak , Alaska were actually filmed at CG Air Station Elizabeth City , North Carolina .
60,000 pounds of ice were needed on the set .
The training pool used in the movie was LSU - Shreveport 's natatorium .
The film was revised after Hurricane Katrina , with the addition of several comments on the storm and the rescues .
The end credits are replete with " glory " shots of U.S. Coast Guard helicopters conducting rescues in the greater New Orleans area .
The DVD contains a special feature on U.S. Coast Guard rescue operations , especially in the aftermath of Katrina .
Many of the supporting actors in The Guardian , including ASTC instructors , helicopter pilots , and support personnel , are actual U.S. Coast Guard rescue swimmers , pilots , and ground personnel .
Several characters , including Kutcher 's , identify themselves as airman .
An airman is the enlisted rating of a Coast Guardsman who is undesignated and/or currently undergoing training in an aviation related field .
Similar ratings within the Coast Guard are those of seaman and fireman .
One of the students was Mark Gangloff , an Olympic swimmer who received a gold medal in the Athens Olympic Games .
The production company hired local contractors to build a massive indoor wave pool for production .
HISTORICAL RELEVANCE Section::::Historical relevance .
The mishap in The Guardian where Randall loses his crew is loosely based on an actual U.S. Coast Guard aviation mishap in Alaska .
The aircraft was an HH-3F Pelican ( USCG variant of the Jolly Green Giant ) instead of the HH-60J Jayhawk ( USCG variant of the Blackhawk / Seahawk ) pictured in the movie .
ALTERNATE ENDING
Section::::Alternate ending .
In an alternate ending to The Guardian , found on the DVD , Randall survives .
As he unhooks and tries to fall , Jake again grabs him and vows not to let go .
Instead of unstrapping his glove , Randall lets the cable pull them up and it breaks just as they get into the helicopter .
This ending was added because some of the writers were worried that the original ending was too strong for viewers .
Nonetheless , it was scrapped when Disney chairman , Dick Cook , applauded the original ending .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack of The Guardian was released by Hollywood Records on September 12 , 2006 .
The soundtrack uses a variety of music genres , including R&B , Country music , Rock and Soul blues .
Track listing RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Guardian earned $ 18 million on its opening weekend , and almost $ 95 million worldwide by January 4 , 2007 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
At Rotten Tomatoes , The Guardian received a 37 % " Rotten " rating , based on 145 reviews while Metacritic rates it a 53/100 based on 29 reviews .
Stephen Hunter pans it in The Washington Post , calling it " a good little film " for the first hour then it " begins to overload its frail reed of a structure with giant sloppages of cliches from other movies , some so bad it 's almost comical " , concluding that the movie " veers off into slobbery touchy - feeliness , and the tone becomes mock - religious , almost liturgical .
"
Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe called it " dutiful but dull . "
A.O. Scott , in his review for The New York Times , notes that participation by actual members of the Coast Guard " lends an air of authenticity " and concludes " ...
[ i]t 's not a great movie , but it 's certainly one of the finest Coast Guard pictures you 're likely to see anytime soon . "
In a Variety review , Joe Leydon says the movie is " overlong but [ the ] involving drama has obvious cross - generational appeal .
"
Ed Blank in The Pittsburgh Tribune - Review acknowledges there is plenty to snipe at yet
adds : The Guardian " regurgitates formulaic elements in a way that pays off repeatedly and potently . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The real stories of fatal Coast Guard aviation accidents
* The Guardian full production notes