TIME
WARNER CABLE
Time Warner Cable ( TWC ) was an American cable television company .
Before it was purchased by Charter Communications on May 18 , 2016 , it was ranked the second largest cable company in the United States by revenue behind only Comcast , operating in 29 states .
Its corporate headquarters were located in the Time Warner Center in Midtown Manhattan , New York City , with other corporate offices in Stamford , Connecticut ; Charlotte , North Carolina ; and Herndon , Virginia .
From 1971 to 1981 , Time Warner Cable , as Warner Cable , owned Dimension Pictures .
It was controlled by Warner Communications , then by Time Warner .
That company spun off the cable operations in March 2009 as part of a larger restructuring .
From 2009 to 2016 , Time Warner Cable was an entirely independent company , continuing to use the Time Warner name under license from its former parent ( including the " Road Runner " name for its Internet service , now Spectrum Internet ) .
In 2014 , the company was the subject of a proposed purchase by Comcast Corporation , valued at $ 45.2 billion ; however , following opposition to the deal by various groups , along with plans by the U.S. government to try to block the merger , Comcast called off the deal in April 2015 .
On May 26 , 2015 , Charter Communications announced that it would acquire Time Warner Cable for $ 78.7 billion , along with Bright House Networks in a separate $ 10.1 billion deal , pending regulatory approval .
The purchase was completed on May 18 , 2016 ; Charter had continued to do business as Time Warner Cable in its former markets , but has now re - branded these operations under the Spectrum brand in most markets ( even Charter launched this brand in 2014 ) , though it will continue to use the roadrunner.com email addresses and adelphia.net email addresses to new customers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Time Warner Cable was formed in 1992 by the merger of Time Inc. 's cable television company , American Television and Communications Corp.
( service areas that had belonged to that company went under the Time Warner Communications name ; since the 1990s , areas that had used that name have either been renamed to Time Warner Cable , Bright House Networks , or have been given to other cable providers ) , and Warner Cable , a division of Warner Communications , as a result of a merger to form Time Warner ; for the two years after the merger , the companies operated separately but under the umbrella name " Time Warner Cable Group " ( primarily due to 18 % of ATC having been publicly owned at the time ) ; they merged into one entity in 1992 .
It also includes the remnants of the defunct QUBE interactive TV service .
In 1995 , the company launched the Southern Tier On - Line Community , a cable modem service later known as Road Runner High Speed Online .
That year , talks began that would later result in Warner 's acquisition of Paragon Cable .
Glenn Britt ( 1949–2014 ) was the CEO from 2001 until December 2013 .
Time Warner retained Time Warner Cable as a subsidiary until March 2009 , when it was spun out as an independent company .
Prior to the spin - out , Time Warner had held an 84 % stake in Time Warner Cable .
Non - Time Warner shareholders received 0.083670 shares for each share already owned .
This move made Time Warner Cable the largest cable operator in the United States owned solely by a single class of shareholders ( without supervoting stock ) .
Time Warner Cable launched DVR service in the Houston area in 2004 .
( TWC 's Houston - area cable systems are now owned by Comcast . )
When first launched , it used Scientific - Atlanta set - top boxes with DVR .
In June 2009 , Time Warner Cable unveiled a concept known as " TV Everywhere"—a means of allowing multi - platform access to live and on - demand content to content from television channels that is tied to a user 's television subscription .
SALE Section::::Sale .
It was first reported in October 2013 that Time Warner Cable was exploring a sale of the company , possibly to Charter Communications .
However , on November 22 , 2013 , reports surfaced that Comcast expressed interest in acquiring Time Warner Cable .
Both companies were said to be placing bids for the company .
Charter reiterated its interest in purchasing Time Warner Cable and increased its bid on January 14 , 2014 .
On February 12 , 2014 , it was reported that Comcast had reached a deal to acquire TWC in an overall deal valued at $ 45.2 billion , pending regulatory approval .
The proposed merger was met with prominent opposition from various groups , showing concerns that the sheer size of the combined company would reduce competition and would give Comcast an unprecedented level of control over the United States ' internet and television industries , increased leverage in the distribution of NBCUniversal content , hamper over - the - top services , and lead to higher prices for its services .
In April 2015 , it was reported that the U.S. Department of Justice was preparing to file an antitrust lawsuit against the companies in a bid to halt the merger , primarily because the merged company would have controlled 57 percent of the nation 's broadband capacity .
On April 24 , 2015 , Comcast officially announced that it had called off the merger .
On May 25 , 2015 , Bloomberg News reported that Charter was " near " a deal to acquire TWC for $ 195 a share .
Charter had been involved in the Comcast / TWC merger , as the companies planned to divest around 4 million subscribers to Charter in order to reduce the combined company 's market share to an acceptable level .
The next day , Charter officially announced its intent to acquire Time Warner Cable in a deal valued at $ 78.7 billion , and confirmed that it would also continue with its proposed , $ 10.1 billion acquisition of Bright House Networks .
The deal was subject to regulatory approval , although due to the relatively smaller size of the companies and their media holdings , the deal was expected to face less resistance than the Comcast / TWC merger .
The acquisition was completed on May 18 , 2016 .
The Time Warner Cable brand was phased out in favor of Spectrum , the brand used by Charter since 2014 to market its services .
RESIDENTIAL SERVICES Section::::Residential services .
As of second quarter 2009 , there were 14.6 million basic cable subscribers , 8.8 million Digital cable subscribers , 8.7 million Road Runner residential subscribers , 2.5 million DVR subscribers , and 4.5 million residential Digital Phone subscribers , which makes it the fifth - largest landline phone provider in the United States .
BUSINESS SERVICES Section::::Business services .
As of 2013 , Time Warner Cable 's business division had the second largest business - facing enterprise by revenue ( of cable providers who offer business services ) , with $ 1.7 billion in revenue as of the third quarter of 2013 .
Total revenue for 2012 was $ 1.9 billion .
CABLE INTERNET SERVICE
NAMING RIGHTS
CURRENT ARENA
Section::::Naming rights .
Section::::Current .
Section::::Arena .
Spectrum Center , formerly Time Warner Cable Arena , is located in Charlotte , North Carolina , the home of the NBA 's Charlotte Hornets .
In April 2008 , the then - Bobcats reached a naming rights deal with Time Warner Cable , the Charlotte area 's major cable television provider ; the arena was named for the cable provider in exchange for the release of the team 's television rights , which had been on the TWC co - owned Carolinas Sports Entertainment Television for its first season , which failed to find much cable coverage in the Charlotte market outside of Time Warner systems and went dark after a year , and then News 14 Carolina which was limited to only the North Carolina side of the market , until the arena naming rights deal was made .
The team moved to the new Fox Sports South sub - feed Fox Sports Carolinas and SportSouth ( now Fox Sports Southeast ) with the 2008 - 09 season , allowing coverage through both the Carolinas .
Shortly after being acquired by Charter , the arena was renamed to Spectrum Center .
FORMER FOX CITIES STADIUM Section::::Former .
Section::::Fox Cities Stadium .
On March 9 , 2007 , Time Warner Cable , which provides service to the northeastern Wisconsin area , signed a 10-year naming rights deal .
The field is home of the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers , a local minor league baseball team of the Midwest League and affiliate of the Milwaukee Brewers , based in Grand Chute , a suburb of Appleton .
The team and Time Warner Cable mutually agreed to end the rights deal after the 2013 season , and the venue is now known as Neuroscience Group Field at Fox Cities Stadium , named for a local neurology practice .
ACQUISITIONS ADELPHIA Section::::Acquisitions .
Section::::Adelphia .
On July 31 , 2007 , Time Warner Cable and Comcast completed a deal to purchase practically all of Adelphia 's assets for $ 17 billion .
Time Warner Cable gained 3.3 million of Adelphia 's subscribers , a 29 percent increase , while Comcast gained almost 1.7 million subscribers .
Adelphia stockholders received 16 % of Time Warner Cable .
Time Warner Cable went public effective February 13 , 2007 , and the company began trading on the New York Stock Exchange on March 1 , 2007 .
In addition to Adelphia 's coverage being divided up , Time Warner Cable and Comcast also agreed to exchange some of their own subscribers in order to consolidate key regions .
An example of this is the Los Angeles market , which was mostly covered by Comcast and Adelphia ( and some areas of the region already served by TWC ) , is now under Time Warner Cable .
Philadelphia had been split between Time Warner and Comcast , with the majority of cable subscribers belonging to Comcast .
Time Warner subscribers in Philadelphia were swapped with Comcast in early 2007 .
Similarly , the Houston area , which was under Time Warner , was swapped to Comcast , while the Dallas metro area was changed to Time Warner ( RR ) .
In the Twin Cities , Minneapolis was Time Warner and Saint Paul was Comcast .
That whole market is now Comcast .
NAVISITE
Section::::NaviSite .
Time Warner Cable purchased NaviSite ( NAVI ) , a company providing cloud and hosting services , on February 1 , 2011 for $ 230 million , roughly equating to $ 5.50 per share .
INSIGHT COMMUNICATIONS Section::::Insight Communications .
On August 13 , 2011 , Time Warner Cable announced its purchase of Insight Communications for $ 3 billion acquiring Insight 's 760,000 subscribers nationwide .
The merger was completed February 29 , 2012 , and as of June 2013 all of Insight Communications was absorbed into Time Warner Cable .
DUKENET COMMUNICATIONS Section::::DukeNet Communications .
On October 7 , 2013 , Time Warner Cable announced that it has agreed to acquire DukeNet Communications LLC for $ 600 million .
DukeNet provides data and high - capacity bandwidth services to wireless carrier , data center , government , and enterprise customers in the Southeast .
ADVANCE / NEWHOUSE AND TIME WARNER ( BRIGHT HOUSE NETWORKS SPIN OFF )
Section::::Advance / Newhouse and Time Warner
( Bright House Networks spin off ) .
Some of the regional cable system clusters operated by Time Warner Cable are owned by the Time Warner Entertainment – Advance / Newhouse Partnership ( TWEAN ) .
In 2002 , Advance / Newhouse Communications , unhappy with some of the operating policies of Time Warner Cable in the AOL Time Warner era , forced a restructuring of the TWEAN partnership such that Advance / Newhouse would actively manage and operate a portion of the jointly owned cable systems equal to their percentage of equity .
Under this arrangement , Advance / Newhouse enjoys the proceeds of their actively managed systems rather than simply a percentage of the partnership 's total earnings .
The majority of the affected systems were in the Indianapolis , Tampa and Orlando markets under the Bright House Networks brand .
The value of this deal is that it allows Advance / Newhouse to more directly control their cable investments without having to completely unravel the TWEAN partnership , which does bring some benefits via Time Warner 's development and purchasing clout .
The transactions proposed by Charter were approved , TWC and Bright House Networks have been absorbed into Charter .
VENTURE
WITH SPRINT NEXTEL Section::::Venture with Sprint Nextel .
In late 2005 , TWC and several other cable companies formed a venture with Sprint Nextel .
This joint venture enables TWC customers to receive a full suite of products , linking in - home and out - of - home entertainment , information , and communications services .
All of this was included in the new " Triple Play on the Go " , similar to the Triple Play but an addition of new services through Sprint Nextel .
CONTROVERSIES BANDWIDTH METERING Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Bandwidth metering .
In Beaumont , Texas , during 2008 , Time Warner Cable began testing tier - based metered data plans that effectively placed customers into a pricing hierarchy based on the amount of data that they used .
In 2009 , Time Warner Cable announced that additional cities including Rochester , New York will become additional test sites .
In particular in Rochester groups have formed to stop TWC .
Several groups including Stop TWC and Stop The Cap are currently working to oppose these efforts .
On April 7 , 2009 , then US Congressman Eric Massa called on Time Warner to eliminate its broadband Internet cap .
SIGNAL INTRUSION AND ACCIDENTAL TRANSMISSION OF PORNOGRAPHY Section::::Signal intrusion and accidental transmission of pornography .
On March 16 , 2010 , Time Warner Cable 's transmission of their Kids on Demand and Kids Pre - School on Demand channels on systems in eastern North Carolina was interrupted by programming from the adult pay television channel Playboy TV for approximately two hours between 6:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m./EDT , in which a group of nude women talked and posed in a sexually suggestive manner .
This accidental display affected Time Warner 's digital cable subscribers in four towns in the system 's eastern North Carolina cluster , while other areas displayed a black screen .
A Time Warner spokesperson said in a statement to Raleigh CBS affiliate WRAL , " It was a technical malfunction that caused the wrong previews to be shown on our kids ' on - demand channels .
Unfortunately it hit at the worst possible time on the worst possible channels . "
A Time Warner executive said normal monitoring procedures did not take effect because the glitch affected only a few areas .
Customers were told to pay the small fee , and that their next bill would be reduced .
CABLE CLUSTERS *
West Coast cluster * California – Barstow , Desert Cities , Orange County , Los Angeles , San Bernardino , San Diego * Hawaii ( operating as Oceanic Time Warner Cable )
* Midwest cluster * Kansas – Kansas City , Overland Park , Olathe , Shawnee * Missouri – Kansas City , Independence , Lee 's Summit
* Nebraska * Ohio – Akron , Bowling Green / North Baltimore , Canton , Cincinnati , Cleveland , Columbus , Dayton , Findlay / Lima , and Youngstown * Kentucky – Lexington , Louisville , Northern Kentucky , Ashland
* Pennsylvania – Erie County , Sharon , Franklin * Wisconsin – Green Bay and Milwaukee
* Northeast cluster
* Maine * New Hampshire – Berlin , Keene * Massachusetts – Athol ,
Pittsfield * Upstate New York
*
The Carolinas cluster * North Carolina – Charlotte , Raleigh , Greensboro , and Wilmington * South Carolina – Columbia , Sumter , Florence , Summerville , Hilton Head and Myrtle Beach .
* New York cluster * New Jersey – Bergen County , Hudson County
* New York – New York City ( Manhattan , Queens , Staten Island , most of western Brooklyn ) ;
Mount Vernon ( Westchester County , rest of county is served by Cablevision )
* Texas cluster * Texas – Arlington , Austin , Beaumont / Port Arthur , Corpus Christi , Dallas , El Paso , Harlingen , Killeen / Temple , Laredo , Rio Grande Valley , San Antonio , Waco , and Wichita Falls
*
coincidentally , the Irving - Grapevine - Coppell - Lewisville cluster had been under Time Warner Cable 's control upon acquisition of Paragon Cable .
This was prior to AT&T Broadband 's full absorption of that cluster .
* Not in a cluster ( National ) * Alabama – Dothan , Enterprise
* Arizona – Yuma * California – El Centro
* Colorado – Gunnison , Telluride
* Idaho – Coeur d'Alene , Moscow
* Indiana – Terre Haute * Virginia * Washington – Pullman * West Virginia –
Clarksburg DIVISIONS Section::::Divisions .
Time Warner Cable 's divisions , from official website : WEST REGION
* PAC West Region * Oceanic Time Warner Cable ( Hawaii )
* Time Warner Cable Desert Cities
* Time Warner Cable San Diego
* Time Warner Cable Southern California ( SoCal ) * Midwest Region * Time Warner Cable Kansas City
* Time Warner Cable Nebraska
* Time Warner Cable Northeast Ohio & Western Pennsylvania ( Akron , Canton , Cleveland & Youngstown ; Erie County & Sharon , PA )
* Time Warner Cable Mid - Ohio ( Columbus )
* Time Warner Cable Southwest Ohio ( Dayton ; Cincinnati ; Lexington , KY ; Louisville , KY ; Terre Haute , IN ; Clarksburg , WV ) * Time Warner Cable Wisconsin ( Milwaukee & Green Bay )
* Texas Region
* Time Warner Cable National ( non - clustered systems ) EAST REGION
* Northeast Region
* Time Warner Cable Albany
* Time Warner Cable Buffalo
* Time Warner Cable Rochester
* Time Warner Cable Central New York / Syracuse
* Time Warner Cable
New England
* Time Warner Cable New York City
* Carolinas Region
* Time Warner Cable Charlotte * Time Warner Cable Greensboro
* Time Warner Cable Eastern Carolina
* Time Warner Cable Raleigh * Time Warner Cable South Carolina ( Columbia ) * Time Warner Cable Fayetteville / Sandhills
FORMER DIVISIONS Section::::Former divisions .
Sold to Comcast
* Time Warner Cable Houma
* Time Warner Cable Houston
* Time Warner Cable Lake City /
Live
Oak
* Time Warner Cable Mid - South ( Memphis , TN , AR , and MS )
* Time Warner Cable Minnesota
* Time Warner Cable Shreveport
* Time Warner Cable St. Augustine / Palatka * Time Warner Cable Cape Coral / Naples Divisions that became Bright House Networks
* Time Warner Cable Central Florida
* Time Warner Cable Tampa Bay RANKINGS Section::::Rankings .
The American Customer Satisfaction Index ( ACSI ) ranked Time Warner Cable as one of the least liked companies in terms of customer satisfaction in 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , and 2014 .
SEE ALSO
* List of United States telephone companies * Spectrum Sports REFERENCES