DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE
A deed in lieu of foreclosure is a deed instrument in which a mortgagor ( i.e. the borrower ) conveys all interest in a real property to the mortgagee ( i.e. the lender ) to satisfy a loan that is in default and avoid foreclosure proceedings .
The deed in lieu of foreclosure offers several advantages to both the borrower and the lender .
The principal advantage to the borrower is that it immediately releases him / her from most or all of the personal indebtedness associated with the defaulted loan .
The borrower also avoids the public notoriety of a foreclosure proceeding and may receive more generous terms than he /
she would in a formal foreclosure .
Another benefit to the borrower is that it hurts his / her credit less than a foreclosure does .
Advantages to a lender include a reduction in the time and cost of a repossession , lower risk of borrower revenge ( metal theft and vandalism of the property before sheriff eviction ) , and additional advantages if the borrower subsequently files for bankruptcy .
If there are any junior liens a deed in lieu is a less attractive option for the lender .
The lender will likely not want to assume the liability of the junior liens from the property owner , and accordingly , the lender will prefer to foreclose in order to clean the title .
In order to be considered a deed in lieu of foreclosure , the indebtedness must be secured by the real estate being transferred .
Both sides must enter into the transaction voluntarily and in good faith .
The settlement agreement must have total consideration that is at least equal to the fair market value of the property being conveyed .
Sometimes , the lender will not proceed with a deed in lieu of foreclosure if the outstanding indebtedness of the borrower exceeds the current fair value of the property ; in other cases , a lender will agree since it will likely end up with the property anyway through the costly foreclosure process .
Because of the requirement that the instrument be voluntary , lenders will often not act upon a deed in lieu of foreclosure unless they receive a written offer of such a conveyance from the borrower that specifically states that the offer to enter into negotiations is being made voluntarily .
This will enact the parol evidence rule and protect the lender from a possible subsequent claim that the lender acted in bad faith or pressured the borrower into the settlement .
Both sides may then proceed with settlement negotiation .
The Home Equity Theft Prevention Act in New York has created some confusion regarding this frequently - used method of settlement .
It is unclear whether HETPA applies to deeds in lieu of foreclosure since there is no clear exclusion as there is for a referee 's deed , for example .
The 2-year right of rescission is not a risk that banks or title insurers are comfortable with , especially given the complexities of compliance , so many banks and title insurers in New York are not willing to work with deeds in lieu .
SEE ALSO * Short sale ( real estate )
* Loss mitigation
* Foreclosure REFERENCES
* What is deed in Lieu of Foreclosure ?