HI - C Hi - C is a fruit juice - flavored drink made by the Minute Maid division of The Coca - Cola Company .
It was created by Niles Foster in 1946 and released in 1947 .
The sole original flavor was orange .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Niles Foster , a former bakery and bottling plant owner , created Hi - C in 1946 .
It took Foster over a year to develop the ideal formula for Hi - C orange drink , containing orange juice concentrate , peel oil and orange essences , sugar , water , citric acid and ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) .
The name " Hi - C " referred to its high vitamin content .
Hot - packed in enamel - lined 56-ounce cans , the product needed no refrigeration before opening .
After test marketing in 1947 , Hi - C orange drink was introduced in 1948 with a massive promotional effort , spending thousands of dollars weekly per market on promotions .
Foster entered into an agreement with Clinton Foods , Inc. , to produce and market Hi - C , with Foster managing the Hi - C business .
Originally marketed in the southern United States , Hi - C was introduced into the Los Angeles and San Francisco markets in 1949 .
As markets for Hi - C were expanded nationwide , so were the contract operations , strategically located near major market areas .
The multi - plant system facilitated quick product shipping , minimizing out - of - date merchandise problems .
New flavors of Hi - C fruit drinks were developed as an outgrowth of the contract packer system .
Grape , the second flavor introduced , evolved naturally from the fact that the Geneva , Ohio , co - packer was also processing fresh grapes .
Apple and cherry drinks were introduced as a result of the fresh fruit processing operations at the Paw Paw , Michigan , co - packer plant .
The contract packing concept is still used today by the Coca - Cola Foods Division .
As the Hi - C business continued to grow , it attracted the attention of the Minute Maid Corporation , and in 1954 Clinton Foods , Inc. , sold its Florida holdings , including Hi - C fruit drinks , to Minute Maid .
Niles Foster left the Minute Maid Corporation shortly after the Hi - C brand was purchased .
George Roberts , assistant sales manager for Niles Foster when Hi - C was introduced , stayed on , first as National Sales Manager for Hi - C , then later as Director of Contract Packer Operations for the Houston , Texas , based Coca - Cola Foods Division , ensuring the successful marketing , promotion , and distribution of Hi - C.
The Hi - C business continued to expand with new flavors ( orange - pineapple , pineapple - grapefruit , Florida Punch , peach ) and innovative marketing techniques .
By 1958 , Hi - C fruit drinks had become an American supermarket staple , available in every grocery store nationwide .
CONTENT Section::::Content .
Hi - C contains 10 % fruit juice .
The Orange Lavaburst flavor contains the following : Water , high fructose corn syrup , citric acid , ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) , potassium benzoate , modified food starch , natural flavors .
PRODUCT LINES
Section::::Product lines .
Hi - C is currently sold in drink boxes and soda fountains .
There are other flavors at Coca - Cola Freestyle .
There were no official drink bottles or bottled containers of this product .
There were soft frozen versions of Flashin ' Fruit Punch and Orange Lavaburst made by J & J Snack Foods and can be found in stores like Dollar Tree , but the Orange Lavaburst flavor seems to have been discontinued .
The Hi - C products used to be the color implied by their flavor , but in 2002 , Hi - C was re - introduced as a yellowish clear beverage that would not stain clothing .
Thus , flavors like Shoutin ' Orange Tangergreen lost their distinctive colors .
The soda fountain versions of Fruit Punch , Poppin ' Pink Lemonade and Orange Lavaburst , however , still retain their red , pink and orange colors , respectively .
At one point in time , Brach 's made candy under the Hi - C brand : fruit snacks and orange slices .
Subsequent growth of the Hi - C product line included globalization to selected markets worldwide .
DRINK BOXES
* Flashin ' Fruit Punch ( Blend of orange and pineapple juices ) * Orange Lavaburst ( Blend of orange , pear , and apple juices )
* Torrential Tropical Punch ( Blend of pineapple , orange , and pear juices )
* Boppin ' Strawberry ( Blend of pear , apple , and strawberry juices )
* Grabbin ' Grape ( Blend of pear and grape juices )
* Poppin ' Lemonade ( Lemon juice )
* Strawberry Kiwi Kraze ( Blend of pear , apple , strawberry and kiwi juices )
* Blazin ' Blueberry ( Blend of apple , grape and blueberry juices )
* Wild Cherry ( Blend of pear and cherry juices )
* Smashin ' Wild Berry ( Blend of apple , pear , blackberry , blueberry and raspberry juices )
* Candy Apple Cooler ( discontinued ) * Double Fruit Cooler ( discontinued ) * Hula Punch ( discontinued ) HI - C BLAST ( DISCONTINUED )
* Berry Blue * Blue Watermelon * Fruit Pow * Fruit Punch * Orange Supernova * Raspberry Kiwi *
Strawberry
* Strawberry Kiwi
* Wild Berry
* Ecto Cooler
* Strawberry * Wild Cherry ECTO COOLER Section::::Ecto Cooler .
Ecto Cooler was a product tie - in with the cartoon series
The Real Ghostbusters , based on the 1984 live - action film , Ghostbusters .
It was a rebranded version of an earlier drink from Hi - C called Citrus Cooler , which had been on shelves as early as 1965 and continued to be sold until the rebranding to Ecto Cooler .
Hi - C struck a deal in 1987 to promote the series by developing a drink .
Expected to last only as long as the series , the drink was successful beyond expectations and continued after the series ' 1991 cancellation to be produced for more than a decade .
The Ecto Cooler box featured The Real Ghostbusters character Slimer , as did the commercials .
Slimer left the box sometime around 1997 , but Minute Maid discontinued the product in 2001 , at which point it was renamed Shoutin ' Orange Tangergreen .
Slimer was replaced on the packaging by a similar - looking blob of lips .
The product was still noted as ecto cool on many store receipts .
In 2006 , Shoutin ' Orange Tangergreen was renamed Crazy Citrus Cooler .
In 2007 , Crazy Citrus Cooler was discontinued .
In April 2016 , Coca - Cola announced that Ecto Cooler will return for a limited time , starting May 30 , as part of a promotion with the rebooted Ghostbusters .
A company spokeswoman said the new drink will have its original sweeteners simplified to just high fructose corn syrup , and other ingredients reduced so it " maintains the correct amount of tartness " .
Ecto Cooler was re - released on May 30 , 2016 .
The color of the drink was green , the same as the original drink .
When chilled , the drink 's can changed from a dark green color to bright slime green .
Ecto Cooler was met with major backlash from fans due to the limited availability of the drink .
The limited edition can version of the drink was only available online at four sites including Amazon.com and H.E.B. Neither could keep it in stock due to the overwhelming demand .
For Amazon , stock was limited by region , making it much harder to purchase .
The juice box version was even harder to find as it was shipped to only a handful of smaller grocery stores .
A representative for the drink on the product 's Facebook page informed fans that they needed to demand that their local store carry the product .
By the end of the first week after going on sale , the drink was still very hard to find and was appearing on websites such as eBay for over $ 100 for a 12-pack .
On Amazon , however , the drink was one of the most sold items .
Physical Walmart stores as well as regional store Meijer carried them in stock .
In October 2016 , the Ecto Cooler Facebook page announced that the drink would be again discontinued at the end of the year with a post saying " My eyes are welling up with green tears as I write this : # EctoCooler will be laid to rest at the end of this year # RIPEcto " .
Fans were urged to stockpile the drink while they still can ; however , response to this news from fans was overwhelmingly negative considering the drink was never mass - produced or easy to find in stores during its May to December run .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Historical packaging ( Archived from the original on October 19 , 2016 )
* Ecto Cooler Website ( dead link )
* Ecto Cooler Facebook