PEPPERMINT EXTRACT
Peppermint extract is an herbal extract of peppermint ( Mentha x piperita ) made from the essential oils of peppermint leaves .
It is commonly used in cooking , as a dietary supplement , as an herbal or alternative medicine , and as a pest repellent .
The liquid is obtained by extracting the oils from dried or fresh leaves and the flowering tops of the plant using alcohol and is commonly sold in 1 oz .
or 4 oz .
bottles .
USES IN COOKING Section::::Uses in cooking .
Peppermint extract can be used to add a peppermint flavor to baked goods , desserts , and candy , particularly candy canes , mints , and peppermint patties .
Extracts for cooking may be labeled as pure , natural , imitation , or artificial .
While pure and natural extracts contain peppermint oil specifically , imitation and artificial extracts generally use a mix of ingredients to achieve a flavor resembling peppermint .
Peppermint extract can be substituted in recipes with peppermint oil ( a stronger ingredient primarily used in candy - making ) , crème de menthe , or peppermint schnapps .
If the food is not heated , the alcoholic properties of liqueurs may remain present in the finished product .
Peppermint extract may also be added to hot water to create peppermint tea .
MEDICINAL USES
Section::::Medicinal uses .
Medicinal uses of peppermint extract are well - documented , however the efficacy of most applications is only beginning to be confirmed in clinical trials .
Peppermint extract is commonly used to soothe symptoms of the common cold and the flu , and as a digestive aid to relieve bloating and flatulence .
It is an anti - inflammatory which be used to treat arthritis and rheumatism .
It may be used to aid in the relief of pain from menstrual cramps and headaches .
Additionally , peppermint oil may be an effective remedy for irritable bowel syndrome with constipation .
It is also used as a natural remedy for toothache .
USE AS
A PEST REPELLENT Section::::Use as a pest repellent .
Peppermint oil is commonly used to repel ants , flying insects , and rodents .
USE
AS A PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE
ENHANCER Section::::Use as a physical performance enhancer .
Peppermint oil is used in endurance sports to improve mental and physical stamina .
REFERENCES