EAR MITE
Ear mites are mites that live in the ears of animals and humans .
The most commonly seen species in veterinary medicine is Otodectes cynotis ( Gk .
oto =
ear , dectes = biter , cynotis = of the dog ) .
This species , despite its name , is also responsible for 90 % of ear mite infections in cats .
In veterinary practice , ear mite infections in dogs and cats may present as a disease that causes intense itching in one or both ears , which in turn triggers scratching at the affected ear .
An unusually dark colored ear wax ( cerumen ) may also be produced .
Cats , as well as dogs with erect ears that have control over ear direction , may be seen with one or both ear pinnas held at an odd or flattened angle .
The most common lesion associated with ear mites is an open or crusted ( " scabbed " ) skin wound at the back or base of the ear , caused by abrasion of the skin by hind limb claws , as the ear has been scratched in an attempt to relieve the itching .
This lesion often becomes secondarily infected and crusted from ordinary skin bacteria , so that the common presentation of ear mites is such a wound appearing on the back or base of one or both ears .
This is accompanied by the Pinnal - Pedal Reflex that appears as reflex scratching motions of the hind limb when the ear is manipulated ( this test is positive as well in other mite infections of the outside and rim of the ear pinnas in mange ) .
When the ear mite infection is treated , such wounds resolve spontaneously , and this resolution may be speeded with application of topical antibiotics .
The most common ear mite ( as well as mange mite ) treatments currently use the antiparasitics ivermectin and selamectin , usually as topical preparations .
Ivermectin is available as a direct water - based liquid that is squeezed into the ear canal and massaged at the base of the ear to distribute the medication .
Selamectin is available as a once - a - month preparation that can be applied to the animal 's skin , which prevents mite infestation over that time .
CONTAGION Section::::Contagion .
Ear mites spread rapidly , and can be transmitted from even brief physical contact with other animals .
In pets , ear mites most commonly affect cats , ferrets , and to a lesser extent dogs .
Humans can rarely be infected with ear mites .
Infected animals have a large amount of crumbly dark brown material in their ears .
On close inspection , tiny white mites can be seen in the debris .
Ear mites do not burrow as some mites do , but live within the ear canal .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
The life cycle of an individual mite is about 4 weeks , with eggs hatching on the 3rd or 4th day after laying .
Female mites are able to reproduce after about 3 weeks .
CONSEQUENCES OF INFECTION
Section::::Consequences of infection .
The ear mite is the most common cause of ear infections in cats , quickly spreading from one cat to another through direct contact .
Ear mites cause inflammatory symptoms , similar to bacterial and yeast infections .
Symptoms include itching and redness of the ears .
Other , more serious problems can result from untreated infections , such as skin disease in areas other than the ear like the neck and tail , and deafness .
EAR MITES IN RABBITS
Section::::Ear mites in rabbits .
The rabbit ear mite , Psoroptes cuniculi , is larger than Otodectes cynotis .
It causes thick firm debris to form in the ear canal , and can eventually migrate to the skin of the outer ear and face .
Symptoms include scratching and shaking of the head .
Treatment includes topical selamectin , or injections of ivermectin and frequent cleanings of the rabbit 's environment .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Ear mites of dogs and cats can be treated with any of the spot - on preparations available from veterinary surgeons as well as over the counter at many pet stores and online .
If the chosen solution does not destroy mite eggs , treatment should be repeated after one month , to catch the next generation of mites that will have hatched by then .
Relief , in terms of the cat or dog no longer scratching at his or her ears , will be noticeable within a few hours .
However , since mite irritation is partly allergic ( see scabies ) , symptoms may also outlive mites by weeks .
Moreover , it may take topical antibiotics and several weeks to clear infected external wounds caused by scratching on the exterior surfaces of cat and dog ears .
Common home remedy treatment options include household ingredients such as isopropyl alcohol , acetic acid ( vinegar ) , boric acid , tea tree oil , coconut oil , and many other plant based extracts , in varying proportions .
Option for treating ear mites in rabbits are the related antiparasitics ivermectin and selamectin .
Both of these antiparasitics have also been used with good effect in cats and dogs .
A topical preparation of 0.01 % ivermectin ( Acarexx ) can be used directly as an oil in cat ears , and the related new generation drug selamectin ( brand name " Revolution " ) is available as a once - per - month skin treatment for both dogs and cats , which will prevent new mite infestation as well as a number of other parasitic diseases .
As with ivermectin , selamectin must be used with caution in collies and herder breeds with the possibility for homozygous MDR1 mutations .
A single treatment with a topical formulation containing fipronil , ( S)-methoprene , eprinomectin and praziquantel was shown to be efficient for the prevention of Otodectes cynotis infestation in cats .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ear Mites FAQ from The Pet Health Library