BEE STING
A bee sting is a sting from a bee ( honey bee , bumblebee , sweat bee , etc . ) .
The stings of most of these species can be quite painful , and are therefore keenly avoided by many people .
Bee stings differ from insect bites , and the venom or toxin of stinging insects is quite different .
Therefore , the body 's reaction to a bee sting may differ significantly from one species to another .
In particular , bee stings are acidic , whereas wasp stings are alkaline , so the body 's reaction to a bee sting may be very different than to that of a wasp sting .
The most aggressive stinging insects are vespid wasps ( including bald - faced hornets and other yellowjackets ) and hornets ( especially the Asian giant hornet ) .
All of these insects aggressively defend their nests .
Although for most people a bee sting is painful but otherwise relatively harmless , in people with insect sting allergy , stings may trigger a dangerous anaphylactic reaction that is potentially deadly .
Additionally , honey bee stings release pheromones that prompt other nearby bees to attack .
HONEY BEE STINGS Section::::Honey bee stings .
A honey bee that is away from the hive foraging for nectar or pollen will rarely sting , except when stepped on or roughly handled .
Honey bees will actively seek out and sting when they perceive the hive to be threatened , often being alerted to this by the release of attack pheromones ( below ) .
Although it is widely believed that a worker honey bee can sting only once , this is a partial misconception : although the stinger is in fact barbed so that it lodges in the victim 's skin , tearing loose from the bee 's abdomen and leading to its death in minutes , this only happens if the skin of the victim is sufficiently thick , such as a mammal 's .
Honey bees are the only hymenoptera with a strongly barbed sting , though yellow jackets and some other wasps have small barbs .
Bees with barbed stingers can often sting other insects without harming themselves .
Queen honeybees and bees of many other species , including bumblebees and many solitary bees , have smoother stingers with smaller barbs , and can sting mammals repeatedly .
The sting 's injection of apitoxin into the victim is accompanied by the release of alarm pheromones , a process which is accelerated if the bee is fatally injured .
The release of alarm pheromones near a hive may attract other bees to the location , where they will likewise exhibit defensive behaviors until there is no longer a threat , typically because the victim has either fled or been killed .
( Note : A bee swarm , seen as a mass of bees flying or clumped together , is generally not hostile ; it has deserted its hive and has no comb or young to defend . )
These pheromones do not dissipate or wash off quickly , and if their target enters water , bees will resume their attack as soon as it leaves the water .
The alarm pheromone emitted when a bee stings another animal smells like a banana .
Drone bees , the males , are larger and do not have stingers .
The female bees ( worker bees and queens ) are the only ones that can sting , and their stinger is a modified ovipositor .
The queen bee has a barbed but smoother stinger and can , if need be , sting skin - bearing creatures multiple times , but the queen does not leave the hive under normal conditions .
Her sting is not for defense of the hive ; she only uses it for dispatching rival queens , ideally before they can emerge from their cells .
Queen breeders who handle multiple queens and have the queen odor on their hands are sometimes stung by a queen .
The main component of bee venom responsible for pain in vertebrates is the toxin melittin ; histamine and other biogenic amines may also contribute to pain and itching .
In one of the alternative medical uses of honey bee products , apitherapy , bee venom has been used to treat arthritis and other painful conditions .
All currently available evidence supporting this practice is either anecdotal , animal studies , or preliminary evidence , most of which has poor methodology .
While a preliminary , in - vitro proof of concept has demonstrated that isolated melittin may attenuate the infectivity of two specific HIV strains , apitherapy is not currently accepted as a viable medical treatment for any condition or disease ; the risk of allergic reaction and anaphylaxis outweighs any benefits .
According to the American Cancer Society , there is no scientific evidence that apitherapy or bee venom therapy can treat or change the course of cancer or any other disease .
Clinical trials have shown that apitherapy is ineffective in treating multiple sclerosis or any other disease , and can cause a worsening in multiple sclerosis symptoms .
The stinger consists of three parts : a stylus and two barbed slides ( or lancets ) , one on either side of the stylus .
The bee does not push the stinger in but it is drawn in by the barbed slides .
The slides move alternately up and down the stylus so when the barb of one slide has caught and retracts , it pulls the stylus and the other barbed slide into the wound .
When the other barb has caught , it also retracts up the stylus pulling the sting further in .
This process is repeated until the sting is fully in and even continues after the sting and its mechanism is detached from the bee 's abdomen .
When a honey bee stings a person , it can not pull the barbed stinger back out .
It leaves behind not only the stinger , but also part of its abdomen and digestive tract , plus muscles and nerves .
This massive abdominal rupture kills the honey bee .
Honey bees are the only bees to die after stinging .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The first step in treatment following a bee sting is removal of the stinger itself .
The stinger should be removed as quickly as possible without regard to method : studies have shown the amount of venom delivered
does not differ whether the sting is pinched or scraped off and even a delay of a few seconds leads to more venom being injected .
Once the stinger is removed , pain and swelling should be reduced with a cold compress .
A topical anesthetic containing benzocaine will kill pain quickly and menthol is an effective anti - itch treatment .
Itching can also be relieved by antihistamine or by a steroid cream .
Many traditional remedies have been suggested for bee stings including damp pastes of tobacco , salt , baking soda , papain , toothpaste , clay , garlic , urine , onions , aspirin or even application of copper coins .
As with jellyfish stings , ammonia and ammonia - containing liquids , such as window cleaner , are often suggested as a way to immediately cleanse the skin and remove excess venom , and sweat itself ( which also contains small amounts of ammonia ) may provide some small relief .
Bee venom is acidic , and these interventions are often recommended to neutralize the venom ; however , neutralizing a sting is unlikely to be effective as the venom is injected under the skin and deep into the tissues , where a topically applied alkali is unable to reach , so neutralization is unlikely to occur .
In any case , the amount of venom injected is typically very small ( between 5 and 50 micrograms of fluid ) and placing large amounts of alkali near the sting site is unlikely to produce a perfectly neutral pH to stop the pain .
Many people do claim benefit from these home remedies but it is doubtful they have any real physical effect on how much a sting hurts or continues hurting .
The effect is probably related to rubbing the area or the mind perceiving benefit .
Furthermore , none of these interventions have been proven to be effective in scientific studies and a randomized trial of aspirin paste and topical ice packs showed that aspirin was not effective in reducing the duration of swelling or pain in bee and wasp stings , and significantly increased the duration of redness .
The study concluded that ice alone is better treatment for bee and wasp stings than aspirin .
The sting may be painful for a few hours .
Swelling and itching may persist for a week .
The area should not be scratched as it will only increase the itching and swelling .
If swelling persists for over a week or covers an area greater than , medical attention should be sought .
Doctors often recommend a tetanus immunization .
For about 2 percent of people , a hypersensitivity can develop after being stung , creating a more severe reaction when stung again later .
This sensitisation may happen after a single sting , or after a series of stings where they reacted normally .
A highly allergic person may suffer anaphylactic shock from certain proteins in the venom , which can be life - threatening and requires emergency treatment .
People known to be highly allergic may carry around epinephrine ( adrenaline ) in the form of a self - injectable EpiPen for the treatment of an anaphylactic shock .
For patients who experience severe or life - threatening reactions to insect stings , allergy injections composed of increasing concentrations of naturally occurring venom may provide protections against future insect stings .
SEE ALSO
* Apitoxin
* Bee venom therapy
* Characteristics of common wasps and bees * Hornet stings
* Schmidt sting pain index *
Topical tobacco paste
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
* Thinkquest , Poisonous plants and animals accessed June 2006 * The Biology of the Honey bee , Apis Mellifera accessed August 2014
* Removing Bee Stings – Vischer Vetter Camazine accessed January 2007 EXTERNAL LINKS * Helpful medical information " About Bee and Wasp Stings " West Virginia University * Bee Venom May Take the Sting Out of Arthritis ( WebMD , 4 November 2004 )
* Bee boxes & bee tweezers for apitherapy