HEAT SYNCOPE Heat syncope is fainting or dizziness as a result of overheating ( syncope is the medical term for fainting ) .
It is a type of heat illness .
The basic symptom of heat syncope is fainting , with or without mental confusion .
Heat syncope is caused by peripheral vessel dilation , resulting in diminished blood flow to the heart and dehydration .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Heat syncope occurs in a warm environment when blood pressure is lowered as the body dilates ( widens ) arterioles ( small blood vessels ) in the skin to radiate heat .
This condition occurs within five days of heat acclimatization , before the blood volume expands .
The result is less blood to the brain , causing light - headedness and fainting when a person stands up quickly or stands for a long period of time .
Those who perform strenuous work outside in warm climates are at particular risk .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Faintness , dizziness , headache , increased pulse , restlessness , nausea , vomiting , and brief loss of consciousness .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The diagnosis of heat syncope is done during a physical examination .
During the physical exam the practitioner will test the blood pressure of the patient , and the pulse .
If the patient is experiencing heat syncope
the blood pressure will be low , and the pulse will be elevated .
Observation of excess sweating will also be a key sign .
Finally , the practitioner will ask questions figuring out the history of the patient 's symptoms .
If the patient developed symptoms while engaging in physical activity and high temperatures it will then be a true case of heat syncope .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The basic treatment for heat syncope is like that for other types of fainting : the patient is positioned in a seating or supine position with legs raised .
Water containing salt , or another drink containing electrolytes , is administered slowly , and the patient is moved to a cooler area , such as the shade .
The affected person should rest and recover , because heat syncope can lead to heat stroke or heat exhaustion .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Physical activity in extremely hot weather should be avoided .
If a person starts to experience over heating , and symptoms of heat syncope , they should move or be moved to a shaded or cool area .
It is also recommended to avoid alcoholic beverages in hot weather , because they cause dehydration which may worsen symptoms .
Finally , drinking plenty of water with electrolytes is imperative when engaging in physical activity in hot weather .
REFERENCES