NOUN ADJUNCT
In grammar , a noun adjunct or attributive noun or noun ( pre)modifier is an optional noun that modifies another noun ; it is a noun functioning as a pre - modifier in a noun phrase .
For example , in the phrase " chicken soup " the noun adjunct " chicken " modifies the noun " soup " .
It is irrelevant whether the resulting compound noun is spelled in one or two parts .
" Field " is a noun adjunct in both " field player " and " fieldhouse " .
RELATED CONCEPTS Section::::Related concepts .
Adjectival noun is a term that was formerly synonymous with noun adjunct but is now usually used to mean " an adjective used as a noun " ( i.e. the opposite process , as in the Irish meaning " Irish people " or the poor meaning " poor people " ) .
Japanese adjectival nouns are a different concept .
ENGLISH Section::::English .
Noun adjuncts were traditionally mostly singular ( e.g. " trouser press " ) except when there were lexical restrictions ( e.g. " arms race " ) , but there is a recent trend towards more use of plural ones .
Many of these can also be or were originally interpreted and spelled as plural possessives ( e.g. " chemicals ' agency " , " writers ' conference " , " Rangers ' hockey game " ) , but they are now often written without the apostrophe , although decisions on when to do so require editorial judgment .
There are morphologic restrictions on the classes of adjunct that can be plural and nonpossessive ; irregular plurals are solecistic as nonpossessive adjuncts ( for example , " men clothing " or " women magazine " sound improper to fluent speakers ) .
Fowler 's Modern English Usage states in the section " Possessive Puzzles " : Noun adjuncts can also be strung together in a longer sequence preceding the final noun , with each added noun modifying the noun which follows it , in effect creating a multiple - word noun adjunct which modifies the following noun ( e.g. " chicken soup bowl " , in which " chicken " modifies " soup " and " chicken soup " modifies " bowl " ) .
There is no theoretical limit to the number of noun adjuncts which can be added before a noun , and very long constructions are occasionally seen , for example " Dawlish pub car park cliff plunge man rescued " , in which " Dawlish " , " pub " , " car park " , " cliff " , and " plunge " are all noun adjuncts .
They could each be removed successively ( starting at the beginning of the sentence ) without changing the grammar of the sentence .
This type of construction is not uncommon in headlinese , the condensed grammar used in newspaper headlines .
USE
WHEN AN ADJECTIVALLY INFLECTED ALTERNATIVE IS AVAILABLE Section::::Use when an adjectivally inflected alternative is available .
It is a trait of natural language that there is often more than one way to say something .
Any logically valid option will usually find some currency in natural usage .
Thus " erythrocyte maturation " and " erythrocytic maturation " can both be heard , the first using a noun adjunct and the second using an adjectival inflection .
In some cases one of the equivalent forms has greater idiomaticness ; thus " cell cycle " is more commonly used than " cellular cycle " .
In some cases , each form tends to adhere to a certain sense ; thus " face mask " is the normal term in hockey , and " facial mask " is heard more often in spa treatments .
Although " spine cord " is not an idiomatic alternative to " spinal cord " , in other cases , the options are arbitrarily interchangeable with negligible idiomatic difference ; thus " spine injury " and " spinal injury " coexist and are equivalent from any practical viewpoint , as are " meniscus transplant " and " meniscal transplant " .
A special case in medical usage is " visual examination " versus " vision examination " : the first typically means " an examination made visually " , whereas the latter means " an examination of the patient 's vision " .
USING PREPOSITIONS AFTER SUCH PHRASES Section::::Using prepositions after such phrases .
" Regulatory impact analysis of the law on business " seems to be illogical because the preposition " on " grammatically belongs to the word " analysis " though it should belong to the word " impact " .
However the phrase " regulatory impact analysis " is standard in usage and its change to " analysis of ( the ) regulatory impact " would look strange , even though putting the preposition " on " after it would not cause any problems : " analysis of the regulatory impact of the law on business " .
SEE ALSO * Adjective * Adjunct ( grammar ) * Attributive verb
* Gerund *
Participle
* Nominalized adjective , an adjective used as a noun REFERENCES