BUILD - A - BEAR
WORKSHOP
Build - A - Bear Workshop , Inc. is an American retailer headquartered in Overland , Missouri , that sells teddy bears and other stuffed animals .
Customers go through an interactive process in which the stuffed animal of their choice is assembled and tailored to their own preferences during their visit to the store .
Build - A - Bear Workshop is the largest chain that operates in this style .
The company has been acclaimed for the quality of its working environment , especially for teenagers who are just starting their first jobs .
The company 's slogan was " Where Best Friends Are Made " from 1997 - 2013 , when it was changed to " The Most Fun You 'll Ever Make " .
After Toys " R " Us announced plans to close all 735 of its U.S. stores in March 2018 , Build - A - Bear Workshop remained as the only major toy retailer to survive the retail apocalypse .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Build - A - Bear has also engaged in various charities , including the WWF Collecti - bear series which has given over $ 1,000,000 ( USD ) to the World Wildlife Fund .
As part of its tenth anniversary celebrations , the company built 11 playgrounds throughout the U.S. and Canada in partnership with KaBOOM ! and announced that it had donated over $ 11,000,000 to various child and family causes since 1994 .
A Build - A - Bear Workshop video game was developed by The Game Factory and released for the Nintendo DS platform for Christmas 2009 .
Build - A - Bear created several tie - in stuffed animals for various promotional events , including a toy The Cat in the Hat , a toy Shrek , a toy Cody Maverick penguin from Surf 's Up , a toy Mumble from Happy Feet , a toy E.B. from Hop , both Alvin and Brittany from the Alvin and the Chipmunks film series , a Jonas dog ,
a Shake It Up bunny and a Wizards of Waverly Place bear .
Build - A - Bear workshop has also released several lines of miniature toys included in Happy Meals at McDonald 's restaurants , running first in May 2006 followed by a second promotion in August 2007 , a third in October 2009 , a fourth one in February 2012 , and fifth in November 2013 .
In November 2015 , they came back to McDonald 's .
These were only available at McDonald 's branches in the United States .
Build - A - Bear has been licensed since 2013 by Hasbro to sell characters based on .
In 2010 , in honor of the Sanrio company 's fiftieth anniversary , Build - A - Bear released limited edition Sanrio characters , including Hello Kitty , Chococat , My Melody , and Keroppi .
This included the release of mini - keychains of the four characters along with Deery Lou .
Starting in 2011 , Build - A - Bear added Victoria Justice as their new spokesperson .
In the mid - year , she began appearing in all Build - A - Bear Workshop commercials .
Build - A - Bear also released a feature film available on the iPad through MoPix in December 2011 .
In spring 2016 , Build - A - Bear filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection .
On July 12 , 2018 , Build - A - Bear held an event in the United Kingdom , United States and Canada where patrons could pay their child 's age for a bear .
The relative low price of the stuffed bears for the ages of small children compared to their normal prices at roughly £ 52 for a first - rate stuffed animal accounted for the massive numbers of people who overwhelmed the franchise 's stores as well as shopping malls that rent space to the franchise .
Police were needed for crowd control at the Leeds store branch because disputes between customers escalated to the point of immediate danger for other customers .
When asked by a journalist for The Guardian what it was like to be manager at the Fenwick store location during the chaos , the manager called her boss in a panic and replied " We 're not allowed to talk to anyone .
No interviews .
"
Because of long lines and security issues due to the relatively low costs , this event was forced to end .
OTHER BRANDS BUILD - A - BEARVILLE
Section::::Other brands .
Section::::Build - A - Bearville .
In late October 2007 , Build - A - Bear Workshop opened a massively multiplayer online game called Build - A - Bearville ( also known as Bearville ) , developed in association with Frima Studio .
It allowed users to play games , explore an expanding world , partake in special events , and chat in a safe community .
In addition , Build - A - Bear was featured on an episode of Undercover Boss .
Redeemable codes were sold with some products from Build - A - Bear Workshops that could be used to unlock features and content within the game .
However , these were not required in order to play .
Anyone could create an account and play with access to most of the game 's features , even if they had not purchased a product from a Build - A - Bear Workshop .
January 2015 , users received an email from the company stating that the virtual world will close on March 31st , 2015 it will be no longer playable after that time .
It was replaced by the kids ' site " Bearville Alive ! " , containing a web series featuring Build - a - Bear characters .
Bearville former users were very upset by the news and some even went to the extent of making petitions to bring it back .
So far , nothing has changed the decision of the Build - A - Bear staff for closing the site down .
Since Bearville has closed , Build - A - Bear workshop has never been the same.[clarification needed ] " Make Your Own Mascot " stores are trade at Progressive Field ( Cleveland ) , Great American Ball Park ( Cincinnati ) , AT&T Park ( San Francisco ) , Nationals Park ( Washington D.C. ) , and Busch Stadium ( St. Louis ) featuring the home team 's respective mascots , as well ones for Boston Red Sox mascot
Wally the Green Monster in the Faneuil Hall Marketplace store and Mr. Met , the mascot of the New York Mets , at their Fifth Avenue store in Manhattan ,
New York City.[10 ]
A location at Citizens Bank Park ( Philadelphia ) closed at the end of the 2010 season .
FRIENDS 2B MADE Section::::Friends 2B Made .
Friends 2B Made was an interactive store that allowed customers to make dolls and purchase related accessories launched by Build - A - Bear in 2005 .
The store was open briefly in nine locations before closing in 2009 .
BUILD - A - DINO Section::::Build - A - Dino .
Build - A - Dino allows customers to create a stuffed dinosaur and purchase related accessories .
The first location was located inside the T - Rex Café in Kansas City , in partnership with Landry 's Restaurants .
The first stand - alone store was a temporary holiday location at Chesterfield Mall in Chesterfield , Missouri , which closed after the 2006 holidays to relocate to the St. Louis Science Center .
There is also a Build - A - Dino inside a second T - Rex Cafe at Disney Springs in Walt Disney World .
There was a build a Dino at the Myrtle Beach Build - A - Bear Workshop flagship store but it has been since closed as of 2015 .
MAKE YOUR OWN MASCOT Section::::Make Your Own Mascot .
" Make Your Own Mascot " stores trade at Progressive Field ( Cleveland ) , Great American Ball Park ( Cincinnati ) , AT&T Park ( San Francisco ) , Nationals Park ( Washington D.C. ) , and Busch Stadium ( St. Louis ) featuring the home team 's respective mascots , as well ones for Boston Red Sox mascot
Wally the Green Monster in the Faneuil Hall Marketplace store and Mr. Met , the mascot of the New York Mets , at their Fifth Avenue store in Manhattan , New York City .
A location at Citizens Bank Park ( Philadelphia ) closed at the end of the 2010 season .
BUILD - A - BEAR AT
THE ZOO Section::::Build - A - Bear at the Zoo .
" Build - A - Bear at the Zoo " can be found at the Saint Louis Zoological Park .
This store features several types of zoo animals .
BUILD - A - BEAR
WORKSHOP
AT SEA Section::::Build - A - Bear Workshop At Sea .
Build - A - Bear Workshop
At Sea is located on Carnival Cruise Ships within their Camp Ocean Children 's Program .
They are pop - up shops where Guests can make their own furry friends while on a cruise .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Website * Build - A - Dino