CATEGORY 7 :
THE END OF THE WORLD Category 7 :
The End of the World is a 2005 four - hour television film miniseries that was broadcast in the United States on CBS in two parts , the first part aired on November 6 and the second on November 13 .
It was directed by Dick Lowry .
A sequel to the 2004 miniseries , this film starts directly after the events shown in that film .
The new director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) must continue to contend with the massive storm system that hit Chicago in the first film .
The storm has continued to gain strength , spawning additional storms around the world , with three converging over Washington , D.C. and forming a massive tropical cyclone scale 7 hurricane ( although no tropical cyclone scale has a category numbered 7 ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Following the events in Category 6 : Day of Destruction , the superstorm that hit Chicago is continuing to grow in size and strength , with tornadoes hitting Paris and destroying the Eiffel Tower .
Judith Carr ( Gina Gershon ) , the new head of FEMA struggles to coordinate efforts to prepare for the aftermath of the storm and provide aid to ravaged areas .
She calls in her former college lover , Dr. Ross Duffy ( Cameron Daddo ) , and her father Senator Ryan Carr ( Robert Wagner ) to help her try to determine what is causing the storms and how to deal with the political issues . "
Tornado Tommy " ( Randy Quaid ) , who survived his seeming death in the previous film , returns to aid in tracking the storm in the United States , assisted by scientist Faith Clavell ( Shannen Doherty ) .
Similar storms are developing around the country and an interaction between urban heat islands and " falling chunks of mesosphere " fuels the storms making it more powerful .
Hurricane Eduardo strikes toward Florida , while the Category 6 storm hits Buffalo , New York and heads towards New York City .
During these catastrophic events , two Christian fundamentalists ( James Brolin and Swoosie Kurtz ) fake the arrival of the plagues of Egypt to lure in new converts , culminating in their kidnapping of the first - born children of Judith Carr and other high - ranking officials .
When Tommy and Faith get their data to FEMA in New York , Judith realizes that Hurricane Eduardo is heading towards Washington , D.C. and the Category 6 storm in New York is heading in the same direction .
When both storms collide with the mesosphere , it turns into a " Category 7 " hurricane , obliterating anything in its path .
The force of the storm is so massive , that a category 7 could potentially cause a global catastrophe , possibly leading to the apocalypse .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The miniseries was produced by von Zerneck / Sertner Films , which also produced Category 6 .
It was filmed at various locations around Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada and the Canadian air force base
17 Wing was used for the fictional version of Biloxi , Mississippi 's Keesler Air Force Base .
Air force members were tapped as extra by the production company to play the United States Air Force members seen during the film .
The air force base commander noted that the filming helped to boost the local economy , due to the $ 600,000 in salaries generated during filming , but did not cause interfering with operations or security at the base .
David Price , the weather man for CBS 's The Early Show who was given a cameo role in Category 6 , returned for another cameo in Category 7 .
In this film , Price appears in a brief scene as a reporter who questions the character Judith Carr about bringing her former lover , Dr. Duffy , in to help with the storm issue .
In an interview for his own show , Price said it took him a lot of practice to deliver his " crucial line " just right , with it taking four hours to shoot the brief scene .
Director Dick Lowry jokingly noted that his biggest mistake in the film was giving Price the key line in that scene .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
Category 7 was initially aired on CBS as a two - part , four - hour miniseries .
The first part aired on Sunday , November 6 , 2005 .
The second part aired a week later .
The miniseries was released to DVD by Echo Bridge Entertainment on April 4 , 2006 on a single disc .
On March 4 , 2008 , Echo Bridge released the film as a two movie set with another disaster film , .
This was later followed by an April 2008 release of the film to Blu - ray , and a July 2008 Blu - ray release of the two movie pack .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Category 7 was the top rated network miniseries in 2006 .
The first part of the miniseries came in number 16 among the top 25 network programs aired in the week of October 31-November 6 , and was the second most watched program for that Sunday with 14.7 million viewers .
The second part of the film was also the second most watched program for its timeslot on November 13 , with 13.85 million viewers .
The film was nominated for multiple awards in 2006 , including a Primetime Emmy Award for " Outstanding Sound Editing for a Miniseries , Movie or a Special .
" It was nominated for a Saturn Award for " Best Television Presentation " , a Cinema Audio Society Award for " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for Television Movies and Mini - Series " , and two Golden Reel Awards for " Best Sound Editing in Television Long Form — Dialogue and Automated Dialogue Replacement " and " Best Sound Editing in Television Long Form — Sound Effects & Foley . "
Before Category 7 aired , CBS was criticized for choosing to air the miniseries only months after two devastating hurricanes , Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita , hitting the United States , and a third , Hurricane Wilma , causing destruction in Florida in the same month the film was slated to première .
The film received mixed reviews from critics , with many critics feeling that the first portion of the film was weak and confusing due to the large number of characters being introduced at once .
SciFi.com 's Kathie Huddleston considered the film to be " a pretty good disaster movie as disaster movies go " , praising the overall acting , particularly the chemistry between Shannen Doherty and Randy Quaid , while criticizing it for having a weak opening , having a large , confusing number of characters , and for the inclusion of too many " silly things that distract " , including most of the Fundamentalist plague and kidnapping subplot .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official site