TOUCH - MOVE RULE
The touch - move rule in chess specifies that , if a player deliberately touches a piece on the board when it is his turn to move , then he must move or capture that piece if it is legal to do so .
If it is the player 's piece that was touched , it must be moved if he has a legal move .
If the opponent 's piece was touched , it must be captured if it can be captured with a legal move .
This is a rule of chess that is enforced in all games played in formal competitions .
The player claiming a touch - move violation must do so before making a move .
A player who wants to adjust a piece on its square without being required to move it can announce the French j'adoube ( " I adjust " ) before touching the piece .
While j'adoube is internationally understood , a local language equivalent such as " adjusting " is usually acceptable .
A player may not touch the pieces on the board during the opponent 's turn .
There is a separate rule that a player who lets go of a piece after making a legal move can not retract the move .
DETAILS Section::::Details .
If a player having the move deliberately touches one of their pieces , he must move it if it can be legally moved .
So long as the hand has not left the piece on a new square , the latter can be placed on any accessible square .
Accidentally touching a piece , e.g. brushing against it while reaching for another piece , does not count as a deliberate touch .
If a player touches a hostile piece , then he must capture it if the piece can be captured .
If a player touches one of his pieces and an opponent 's piece , he must make that capture if it is a legal move .
Otherwise , he is required to move or capture the first of the pieces that they touched .
If it can not be determined whether he touched his own piece or the opponent 's piece first , it is assumed that he touched his own piece first .
If a player touches more than one piece , he must move or capture the first piece that can be legally moved or captured .
An exception to that is an attempted illegal castling ; in that case the king must be moved if possible , but otherwise there is no requirement to move the rook .
When castling , the king must be the first piece touched .
If the player touches his rook at the same time as touching the king , he must castle with that rook if it is legal to do so .
If the player completes a two - square king move without touching a rook , the player must move the correct rook accordingly if castling on that side is legal .
Otherwise , the move must be withdrawn and another king move made .
When a pawn is moved to its eighth , once the player takes his hand off the pawn , a different move of the pawn can no longer be substituted .
However , the move is not complete until the promoted piece is released on that square .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
In the diagram , from a game between future world champion Bobby Fischer and Jan Hein Donner , White had a probably winning advantage ; Black had just moved 29 ...
Qg5–f5 and White fell for a swindle .
Fischer touched his bishop , intending to move 30.Bd3 , which seems like a natural move , but then realized that Black could play 30 ...
Rxc2 , and after 31.Bxf5 Rc1
32.Qxc1
Bxc1 , the game would be a draw , because of the opposite - coloured bishops endgame .
After touching the bishop , he realized that 30.Bd3 was a bad move , but since he was obligated to move the bishop , and other bishop moves were even worse , after several seconds he played 30.Bd3 .
The queens and rooks were exchanged ( as above ) and a draw by agreement was reached after the 34th move .
Had Fischer won the game , he would have tied with Boris Spassky for first place in the 1966 Piatigorsky Cup tournament .
The touch - move rule produced an even more disastrous result for Fischer in his game as Black against Wolfgang Unzicker at Buenos Aires 1960 .
In the position diagrammed , Fischer touched his h - pawn , intending to play 12 ... h6 .
He then realized that White could simply play 13.Bxh6 , since 13 ...
gxh6 would be illegal due to the pin on the g- by White 's queen .
Having touched his h - pawn , the touch - move rule required Fischer to play either 12 ... h6 or 12 ... h5 ?
? ,
an almost equally bad move that fatally weakens Black 's .
Fischer accordingly played 12 ... h5 ? ?
and resigned just ten moves later — his shortest loss ever in a serious game .
In this position in a rapid game between former world champion Anatoly Karpov and Alexander Chernin in Tilburg in 1992 , White had just promoted a pawn to a queen on the e8-square .
Black made the discovered check 53 ... Kd6
+ .
Karpov , with very little time remaining , did not see that he was in check and played the illegal move 54.Qe6 + .
The arbiter required Karpov to play a legal move with his queen instead ( since he touched it ) , and he selected 54.Qe7
+ ? ?
( 54.Qd7 + Rxd7 + 55.Kg6 would still have drawn ) .
After 54 ...
Rxe7
+ , Karpov lost the game .
In the 1889 game between Siegbert Tarrasch and Semyon Alapin at Breslau , Alapin was expecting 5.d4 , the normal move after 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 d6 4.Nf3 Nxe4 in Petrov 's Defence .
But by the time he looked at the position he had already touched his , intending 5 ... Be7 in reply to 5.d4 , not noticing that White actually played 5.d3 attacking his knight .
Now compelled to move the bishop , he would lose the knight without compensation , so resigned immediately .
ADJUSTING PIECES
Section::::Adjusting pieces .
If a player wishes to adjust the pieces on their squares without being required to move or capture the piece , the player can announce j'adoube ( , " I adjust " ) , or words to that effect in other languages .
J'adoube is internationally recognised by chess players as announcing the intent to make incidental contact with their pieces .
The phrase is used to give warning from a player to their opponent that the player is about to touch a piece on the board , typically to centralise it on its square , without the intent of making a move with it .
Although this French term is customary , it is not obligatory ; other similar indications may be used .
A player may adjust a piece in this way only when it is his turn to move .
EXAMPLE OF MISUSE Section::::Example of misuse .
There have been occasions in chess history when a player has uttered j'adoube after making a losing move in order to retract it , thus attempting to avoid the touch - move rule .
Such behaviour is regarded as cheating ( see cheating in chess ) .
The Yugoslav grandmaster Milan Matulović was nicknamed " J'adoubovic " after such an incident .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The touch - move rule has existed for centuries .
In the Middle Ages strict rules were considered necessary because chess was played for stakes .
Luis Ramirez de Lucena gave the rule in his 1497 book Arte de Axdres .
Benjamin Franklin referred to it in his 1786 essay The morals of chess .
At one time the rule also required the player who played an illegal move to move his king .
In the first half of the nineteenth century , Rule XIII of the London Chess Club provided : If a player make a false move , i.e. , play a Piece or Pawn to any square to which it can not legally be moved , his adversary has the choice of three penalties ; viz . , 1st , of compelling him to let the Piece or Pawn remain on the square to which he played it ; 2nd , to move correctly to another square ; 3rd , to replace the Piece or Pawn and move his King .
While this rule existed , it occasionally led to tragicomedies such as in the 1893 game between Lindermann and Echtermeyer , at Kiel .
In that game , after 1.e4 d5 2.exd5 Qxd5 White , probably intending the usual 3.Nc3 , instead placed his on c3 .
Since that move was illegal , White was compelled to instead move his king .
After the forced 3.Ke2 ? ?
, Black gave checkmate with 3 ... Qe4
# .
In England , the 1862 laws of the British Chess Association rejected the above rule .
The Association 's Law VII provided instead that if a player made an illegal move , " he must , at the choice of the opponent , and according to the case , either move his own man legally , capture the man legally , or move any other man legally moveable . " .
The German chess master Siegbert Tarrasch wrote in The Game of Chess ( originally published in 1931 as Das Schachspiel ) that the former rule requiring a player who made an illegal move to move his king had only been changed a few years earlier .
SEE ALSO
* Rules of chess NOTES REFERENCES