AFRICAN DWARF
FROG
African dwarf frogs , commonly confused with dwarf clawed frogs aka African clawed frog , genus Hymenochirus , are small aquatic frogs native to parts of Equatorial Africa .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
African dwarf frogs occur in forested parts of equatorial Africa , from Nigeria and Cameroon in the north , and south through Gabon and east throughout the Congo River Basin .
SPECIES Section::::Species .
There are four species : *
Hymenochirus boettgeri
* Hymenochirus boulengeri * Hymenochirus curtipes * Hymenochirus feae DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
African dwarf frogs live their entire lives underwater but need to rise to the surface to breathe air because they have lungs and not gills .
These frogs are small in size and do not weigh more than a few grams .
They vary in color , mostly ranging from olive green to brown with black spots .
The average life expectancy of these frogs is five years , but they can live as long as 20 years , and they can grow to 3 inches ( 7.5 cm )
long .
When young , African dwarf frogs can be mistaken for and sold as African clawed frogs , of the genus Xenopus , which are larger and more aggressive than the dwarf .
All species of Pipidae are tongueless , toothless , and completely aquatic .
They use their webbed feet to shove food in their mouths and down their throats , and a hyobranchial pump to draw or suck food into their mouths .
Pipidae have powerful legs for swimming and lunging after food .
They also use the claws on their feet to tear pieces of large food .
They lack true ears , but have lateral lines running down the length of their bodies and undersides ; this is how they can sense movements and vibration in the water .
They use their sensitive fingers , sense of smell , and lateral line system to find food .
They are scavengers and will eat anything living , dying , or dead and any type of organic detritus .
These frogs have tiny black claws on their hind legs , which caused one of their discoverers , Oskar Boettger , to originally call them African dwarf clawed frogs , but they quickly lose these black tips in the sharp pebble environments and are more commonly called African dwarf frogs today .
IN THE WILD Section::::In the wild .
This African frog habitat in the wild consists of shallow rivers , creeks , and ponds during the dry season and in the flooded areas of the forests during the wet season .
These creatures prefer eating near the bottom where their coloration blends with the mud and leaf litter and they can be safe from predators .
Males are slim and develop a small gland behind each of their front legs ; this gland is not very well understood , but is believed to play some part in mating .
The gland is a small white spot on both sides , a minor outward bulge on both sides of the frog .
Males are known to " sing " or " hum " during mating or when excited , although they sometimes " hum " even if they have no intention of mating .
The females of this species are 40 % larger than males when fully mature .
They have pear - shaped bodies , as their abdomens fill with eggs as they reach a mating stage .
Another distinction is the females have a more pronounced genital region , called an ovipositor .
African dwarf frogs mate in amplexus , during which the male grabs the female around the abdomen just in front of her back legs .
The female becomes motionless and her front limbs may twitch sporadically .
Amplexus usually happens at night after one or more nights of " humming " by the male .
During amplexus , the female swims , laying eggs on the surface of the water , one at a time , whilst towing the male .
She swims to the bottom between layings .
The male fertilizes the eggs during this time by releasing sperm into the water .
Amplexus can last for several hours .
When the female has laid all her eggs she signals the male once more by going motionless , and after several minutes , the male releases the female and she returns to her normal behavior .
AS PETS Section::::As pets .
African dwarf frogs are commonly found as pets .
They first became popular in the 1970s and have spread to the pet trade all over the world .
They are desirable pets because of their low maintenance requirements compared to other amphibians .
African clawed frogs are often sold erroneously as African dwarf frogs .
The astute pet owner can recognize the difference , however , because : * Dwarf frogs have four webbed feet .
African clawed frogs have webbed hind feet while their front feet have autonomous digits .
* African dwarf frogs have eyes positioned on the sides of their heads , while African clawed frogs have eyes on the tops of their heads .
*
African clawed frogs have curved , flat snouts .
The snout of an African dwarf frog is pointed .
African dwarf frogs are very active and rarely sit still for any period of time .
When stationary , the African dwarf frog has been known to float in one spot , with its limbs completely outstretched , on the surface of the water .
This is normal behavior , called " burbling " .
Sometimes they just float with limbs spread out , drifting on the surface .
African dwarf frogs are generally peaceful with animals of their own size , but their diet sometimes include smaller animals .
Other fish are known to eat the eggs of these frogs .
African dwarf frogs spend most of their time near the bottom of the water , where they feel safe from predators .
Most frogs sleep up to 12 hours a day , provided no threat of predators is present .
These frogs are suggested to be kept in a group of two or more due to their social nature .
Despite being fully aquatic , the African dwarf frog still needs to be able to reach the surface to breathe .
These amphibians are not great swimmers , so water currents should be kept low and deep tanks may pose a challenge to their ability to breathe .
In the wild , the Congo forest floods yearly to a depth of 24 inches or more , so any depth less than that will be suitable .
They also should be kept in an enclosure with a secure cover to prevent escape and plenty of hiding spaces as in the wild they tend to be prey to a variety of animals and open spaces cause skittish behavior .
The frogs eat any smaller fish .
The optimum water temperature is 75–82 ° F .
The pH of the water should be maintained between 6.5 and 7.5 .
These frogs can not survive out of water for longer than 20 minutes in low humidity , as they dry out .
Because they are fragile animals , care should be taken when handling African dwarf frogs , especially when considering them as a pet for young children .
These frogs should never be held outside the tank , both for the safety of the frog and the child , as they may be carriers of Salmonella .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Aquarium Wiki Encyclopaedia - Aquarium care profile of this frog