TEAM GB Team GB is the brand name used since 1999 by the British Olympic Association ( BOA ) for their Great Britain and Northern Ireland Olympic team .
The brand was developed after the 1996 Summer Olympics , and is now a trademark of the BOA .
It is meant to unify the team as one body , irrespective of each member athlete 's particular sport .
It forms part of a marketing strategy , where its brevity is seen as beneficial .
The brand is seen as controversial by some , for focusing on Great Britain , at the expense of Northern Ireland , with critics suggesting it be changed to Team UK , something the BOA has so far rejected .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The British Olympic Association 's director of marketing , Marzena Bogdanowicz , felt that the official and abbreviated names of the Great Britain Olympic team were a mouthful .
She first thought of the ' Team GB ' concept in 1996 or 1997 , and said : " I went to the games in 1996 and the logo at the time was just the lion and the rings , but we were n't strong enough as a brand to just be a lion and the rings .
So coming back I wanted to find something that was less of a mouthful , and also had that team feel .
We looked at the options and came up with Team GB " .
The name was trademarked in September 1999 at the United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office ( UK IPO ) .
BRANDING STRATEGY
Section::::Branding strategy .
The British Olympic Association state that there " is only one Olympic team from Great Britain and Northern Ireland :
Team GB .
There is not an Olympic swimming team or Olympic rowing team .
The individual sports join to become Team GB , the Great Britain and Northern Ireland Olympic Team . "
The Team GB brand was used as part of a licensing and merchandising strategy following the British Olympic Association 's athletes success at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney , Australia .
Bogdanowicz stated that the British Olympic Association wanted to " cement the Team GB brand in the minds of the British public " .
CALLS FOR RENAMING Section::::Calls for renaming .
The team is officially known as the Great Britain and Northern Ireland Olympic Team , and the use of Team GB as the BOA 's branding is seen as inadequate by some , as it suggests the team is drawn from Great Britain alone , which only consists of England , Scotland and Wales , while omitting the rest of the territories where BOA athletes are eligible for selection , most notably Northern Ireland , as well as the Crown dependencies ( Isle of Man , Jersey and Guernsey ) , and those British Overseas Territories ( BOT ) that are not represented by their own National Olympic Committee .
In June 2009 , Northern Ireland 's Democratic Unionist Sports Minister Gregory Campbell suggested that the name should be changed as the abbreviated form was not inclusive enough as it " excludes , and indeed alienates , the people of Northern Ireland " .
Campbell 's successor , Nelson McCausland , also suggested that an alternative name be found .
A significant complication is that the Olympic Council of Ireland , established in 1920 while Ireland was part of the United Kingdom , claims to represent the whole island of Ireland and not merely the Republic .
The OCI and BOA have an agreement under which Northern Ireland sportspeople may choose to compete for either team , and in fact most Northern Ireland athletes choose to represent the OCI at the Olympic Games and not Team GB .
The British Olympic Committee has rejected calls for the name to be changed to Team UK , arguing that neither Team GB nor Team UK are entirely accurate , given that neither term covers all the members of its association , and that Team GB is an " effective trading name that fitted best with the Olympic identification of GBR " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The ' Team GB ' branding has been credited with creating a ' team feel ' , and direct comparisons were made of the performance at the 1996 Olympic Games in which the British Olympic Association 's representatives won one gold medal , and the 2000 games where Great Britain and Northern Ireland performed under the ' Team GB ' name and returned with eleven gold medals .
Comedian and columnist David Mitchell described the British Olympic Association 's decision to create a nickname and rebrand their representative team as " capitalism 's final victory " and " pathetic " , going on to say that anyone who thought rebranding the Olympic squad has helped win more medals " are either morons or they think our athletes are " .
Scottish columnist Gerry Hassan commented that " Team GB represents something which is a fiction and an illusion which does n't correspond with any political form " .
VICTORY PARADE Section::::Victory parade .
A celebratory parade took place on 10 September 2012 , commemorating the Olympic and Paralympic Games .
' Our Greatest Team ' was the slogan used by the BOA for the London 2012 Summer Olympics .
SEE ALSO
* Team Korea REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Team GB homepage