PS , I LOVE YOU ( NOVEL )
PS , I Love You is Irish writer Cecelia Ahern 's first novel , published in 2004 .
The book reached No . 1 best - seller status in Ireland ( for 19 weeks ) , Britain , the United States , Germany , and the Netherlands .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Holly and Gerry are a married couple who live in Dublin .
They are deeply in love , but they fight occasionally .
By winter that year , Gerry suddenly dies of a brain tumor and Holly realizes how much he means to her as well as how insignificant their arguments were .
Deeply distraught , Holly withdraws from her family and friends out of grief until her mother calls her informing her of a package addressed to her .
Within the package are ten envelopes , one for each month after Gerry died , containing messages from him , all ending with " P.S. I Love You " .
As the months pass , each new message fills her with encouragement and sends her on a new adventure .
With Gerry 's words as her guide , Holly slowly embarks on a journey of rediscovery .
CHARACTERS IN " PS
, I LOVE YOU " * Holly Kennedy –
The main character * Gerry Clark – Holly 's husband
* Sharon McCarthy – Holly 's best friend * John McCarthy – Sharon 's Husband * Denise Hennessey – Holly 's best friend
* Tom O'Connor –
Denise 's fiance
* Daniel Connolly – Holly 's friend * Elizabeth – Holly 's mother
* Frank – Holly 's father * Richard – Holly 's older brother * Meredith – Richard 's ex - wife
* Timothy – Richard 's son * Emily – Richard 's daughter
* Jack – Holly 's brother * Abbey – Jack 's girlfriend * Ciara – Holly 's younger sister * Mathew – Ciara 's Australian boyfriend * Declan – Holly 's younger brother * Leo – Holly 's hair stylist * Barbara – A travel agent * Chris Feeney – Holly 's boss * Alice Goodyear – Holly 's colleague * Charlie – A bartender * Laura – Daniel 's ex - girlfriend RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Despite the hype and commercial success , ( Irish political figure Bertie Ahern 's daughter )
Cecilia Ahern 's debut novel drew mixed - to - negative reception .
Radio Telefís Éireann ( RTÉ ) gave it three out of five stars , stating that Ahern 's book is " funny and emotional " but criticised his impression that the message of the book was one of getting over the death of a loved one by " getting drunk and shopping " .
The Guardian wrote a satirical review in which Ahern 's shallow characterisation and melodramatic plot were lampooned .
The Clare County library called the book " overhyped " , " predictable " and " full of stock characters " , but lastly an " easy read ... and a nice holiday read " .
Amazon.co.uk calls it " at times repetitive and her delivery is occasionally amateurish [ but ] Ahern deserves credit for a spirited first effort " .
MOVIE ADAPTATION Section::::Movie adaptation .
A film adaptation of the book was released in 2007 with Hilary Swank as Holly , and Gerard Butler as her husband , Gerry .
James Marsters plays John McCarthy and Jeffrey Dean Morgan plays William Gallagher .
The cast included Kathy Bates , Harry Connick , Jr. , Gina Gershon and Lisa Kudrow .
Filming began in October 2006 in New York City and Ireland , and the movie was released on 21 December 2007 in the United States ( see below for other release information ) .
Although box office numbers were high , critics gave the film negative reviews .
NOTES SOURCES