THE PEOPLE OF SPARKS
The People of Sparks is a post - apocalyptic science fiction novel by American writer Jeanne DuPrau , published in 2004 .
It is the second " Book of Ember " in the series , and a sequel to The City of Ember ; other books in the series include The Prophet of Yonwood and The Diamond of Darkhold .
The Playtone Company ( the production company that released the City of Ember film ) also purchased the rights to The People of Sparks , but after the box office failure of the first film , plans for the sequel were shelved .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The story resumes after the evacuation of Ember , an underground city , which has been cut off from the surface for more than 200 years .
The 400 + refugees from the city can not return , as the city 's resources are nearly depleted , and have no idea how to survive on the surface .
After following a road for three days , they arrive at the village of Sparks , exhausted and hungry .
The leaders of this village , Mary , Ben , and Wilmer , reluctantly agree to take in the refugees for 6 months , theoretically long enough to teach them to survive independently .
They are allowed to stay in the abandoned and decrepit Pioneer Hotel .
Tick Hassler , a former hauler of carts in Ember , organizes a series of projects intended to improve their quality of life and chances for the future , but which tend to be more grandiose than practical .
Concern soon arises about whether there is adequate food for everyone in Sparks ; if food stocks are insufficient for the winter , it would be disastrous for both groups .
The Emberites have little knowledge of the surface ( having been deliberately deprived of such knowledge at the founding of the city , so they would not try to leave ) vandalism against the people of Ember heightens the anger on both sides .
The resultant reduction in the quality and quantity of food provided to Emberites only makes them angrier .
Sparks ' leaders vote 2 - 1 to stop having Emberites in homes for meals , as was the policy before , and instead have them pick up food to eat elsewhere .
Then , Ember 's people learn that they will be ejected from the village in the middle of winter , which they had not understood .
Finally , Torren , in a rage , destroys a large amount of tomatoes , for which the two groups each blame members of the other .
Meanwhile , Lina leaves with a roamer who travels to old cities to find treasure , hoping to find the city she has been dreaming of and drawing .
There she finds not a beautiful city like she expected , but a crumbling ruin of a metropolis ( San Francisco after the Disaster ) .
She returns to Sparks after more than a month , disappointed , and is very surprised by the deteriorating political situation .
After the people from Ember are deliberately inflicted with itchy rashes by an unknown person , at a time of extreme heat , angry Emberites start to gather in the town square .
Tick Hassler urges them to attack the market stalls , seize food , and run , which some of them do .
That evening , the village leaders meet and vote ( the same ) 2 - 1 to order all former citizens of Ember to leave immediately .
When the people of Ember try to decide what to do , Tick organizes a group of people to fight back if the people of Sparks try to make them leave by force or continue to deprive them of adequate food .
In the morning , this group enters the square , followed by the rest of the people of Ember .
Ben , who voted to order them to leave , brings the " Terrible Weapon " , which is a machine gun built before the " Disaster " , from the town hall basement .
Ben threatens to ' fire ' on them , but Tick and his men charge at the gun , not knowing what it is .
When Ben tries to shoot them , Mary forces him to fire over the crowd by kicking the front upward .
As Ben tries to lower it and shoot at the crowd , the age and poor storage of the machine gun and its ammunition cause it to explode .
The explosion starts a fire , which engulfs a large tree in front of the town hall and threatens to destroy numerous buildings .
The Emberites watch passively as the people of Sparks try to extinguish the fire : some hope for the fire to spread , but most of them are simply too afraid , of the fire and their fellow Emberites , to do anything .
At this point , Lina decides to help the people of Sparks fight the fire .
As this happens , Doon Harrow sees that Torren is trapped in the burning tree by the building , rushes in , and bravely saves him before he catches fire .
These acts cause most of the people of Ember to gradually join the firefighting efforts , until the fire is extinguished .
This turns around the spiral of resentment , and with everyone thinking more clearly and less parochially , it is discovered that Tick Hassler perpetrated the vandalism against the Emberites to gain support , and the tomato incident is resolved .
The two groups decide to cooperate , with Mary declaring that " we are all the people of Sparks " to the partial resentment of the Emberites .
At the end of the book , Doon manages to construct a simple electric circuit , based on a science book found in an old heap of books .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A review by Publishers Weekly noted that this second book shifted the focus of the story onto a different set of characters , but that the novel contained a positive message .
REFERENCES