FINAL WAR OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC
The Final War of the Roman Republic , also known as Antony 's Civil War or The War between Antony and Octavian , was the last of the Roman civil wars of the Roman Republic , fought between Mark Antony ( assisted by Cleopatra ) and Octavian .
After the Roman Senate declared war on the Egyptian queen Cleopatra , Antony , her lover and ally , betrayed the Roman government and joined the war on Cleopatra 's side .
After the decisive victory for Octavian at the Battle of Actium , Cleopatra and Antony withdrew to Alexandria , where Octavian besieged the city until both Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide .
Following the end of the war , Octavian brought peace to the Roman state that had been plagued by a century of civil wars .
Octavian became the most powerful man in the Roman world and the Senate bestowed upon him the name of Augustus in 27 BC .
Octavian , now Augustus , would be the first Roman Emperor and would transform the oligarchic / democratic Republic into the autocratic Roman Empire .
The last Republican Civil War would mark the beginning of the Pax Romana , which remains the longest period of peace and stability that Europe has seen in recorded history .
REASON OF " THE FINAL WAR OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC " Section::::Reason of " The Final War Of The Roman Republic " .
Antony was in Egypt with Cleopatra instead of his wife , who also happened to be Octavian 's sister .
Octavian was scheming to find a way to sever ties with Antony , start a war to crush him , kill a potential rival ( Caesar and Cleopatra 's son , Caesarion ) , and take control of the entire Roman world .
He did this by cleverly exposing Antony 's will to the Senate , where he read out how Antony had left all his money to his children by Cleopatra , where they would reign as monarchs over kingdoms that he and Cleopatra would leave to them .
Romans were scandalized by this type of behavior .
Then Antony divorced Octavia to marry Cleopatra .
Octavian ( who later became the emperor Augustus ) convinced the Senate via a nasty propaganda campaign to start a war against Cleopatra , since they were reluctant to declare war on Antony , as he was a true Roman and the last thing Octavian or the senate needed was a mutiny .
Eventually , Octavian chased Antony 's senatorial supporters from Rome , and in 32 B.C.E , the Roman Senate declared war against Cleopatra .
POLITICAL AND MILITARY BUILDUP Section::::Political and military buildup .
The Caesarians Octavian ( Caesar 's principal , though not sole , heir ) , Mark Antony , and Marcus Lepidus under the Second Triumvirate had stepped in to fill the power vacuum caused by Julius Caesar 's assassination .
After the Triumvirate had defeated Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus at the Battle of Philippi ( 42 BC ) and Lepidus was expelled from the Triumvirate ( 36 BC ) , Octavian and Antony were left as the two most powerful men in the Roman world .
Octavian took control of the west , including Hispania , Gaul , Italia , and Africa .
Antony received control of the east , including Graecia , Asia , Syria and Aegyptus .
For a time , Rome saw peace .
Octavian put down revolts in the west while Antony reorganized the east ; however , the peace was short lived .
Antony had been having an affair with the queen of Egypt , Cleopatra .
Rome , especially Octavian , took note of Antony 's actions .
Since 40 BC , Antony had been married to Octavia Minor , the sister of Octavian .
Octavian seized the opportunity and had his minister Gaius Maecenas produce a propaganda campaign against Antony .
All of Rome felt astonished when they heard word of Antony 's Donations of Alexandria .
In these donations , Antony ceded much of Rome 's territory in the east to Cleopatra .
Cleopatra and Caesarion were crowned co - rulers of Egypt and Cyprus ; Alexander Helios was crowned ruler of Armenia , Media , and Parthia ; Cleopatra Selene II was crowned ruler of Cyrenaica and Libya ; and Ptolemy Philadelphus was crowned ruler of Phoenicia , Syria , and Cilicia .
Cleopatra took the title of Queen of Kings and Caesarion took the title of King of Kings .
In response , Octavian increased the personal attacks against Antony , but the Senate and people of Rome were not convinced .
Octavian 's chance came when Antony married Cleopatra in 32 BC before he divorced Octavia .
That action combined with information that Antony was planning to establish a second Senate in Alexandria created the perfect environment for Octavian to strip Antony of his power .
Octavian summoned the Senate and accused Antony of anti - Roman sentiments .
Octavian had illegally seized Antony 's will from the Temple of Vesta .
In it , Antony recognized Caesarion as Caesar 's legal heir , left his possessions to his children by Cleopatra , and finally indicated his desire to be buried with Cleopatra in Alexandria instead of in Rome .
The Senators were not moved by Caesarion or Antony 's children but Antony 's desire to be buried outside of Rome invoked the Senate 's rage .
Octavian , the natural politician he was , blamed Cleopatra and not Antony .
The Senate declared war on Cleopatra , and Octavian knew that Antony would come to her aid .
When Cleopatra received word that Rome had declared war , Antony threw his support to Egypt .
Immediately , the Senate stripped Antony of all his official power and labeled him as an outlaw and a traitor .
Octavian summoned all of his legions , numbering almost 200,000 Roman legionaries .
Cleopatra and Antony did the same , assembling roughly the same number in mixed heavy Roman and light Egyptian infantry .
WAR NAVAL THEATRE Section::::War .
Section::::Naval theatre .
By mid - summer of 31 BC , Antony manoeuvred his army into Greece and Octavian soon followed .
Octavian brought with him his chief military adviser and closest friend Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa to command his naval forces .
Although the ground forces were comparable , Octavian 's fleet was superior .
Antony 's fleet was made up of large vessels , but with inexperienced crews and commanders .
Octavian 's fleet of smaller , more manoeuvrable vessels was filled with experienced sailors .
Octavian moved his soldiers across the Adriatic Sea to confront Antony near Actium .
Meanwhile , Agrippa disrupted Antony 's supply lines with the navy .
Gaius Sosius commanded a squadron in Mark Antony 's fleet with which he managed to defeat the squadron of Lucius Arruntius and put it to flight , but when the latter was reinforced by Agrippa , Sosius 's ally Tarcondimotus - the king of Cilicia - was killed and Sosius himself was forced to flee .
Octavian decided not to attack and risk unnecessary losses .
Instead , Octavian wanted to battle Antony by sea where his experienced sailors could dominate .
In response , Antony and Octavian engaged in Fabian strategy until the time was right .
As the summer ended and autumn began to set in , both Octavian and Antony settled for a battle of attrition .
The strategy of delay paid dividends to Octavian , as morale sank and prominent Romans deserted Antony 's cause .
The first conflict of the war occurred when Octavian 's general Agrippa captured the Greek city and naval port of Methone .
The city had previously been loyal to Antony .
Although Antony was an experienced soldier , he did not understand naval combat , which led to his downfall .
Antony moved his fleet to Actium where Octavian 's navy and army had taken camp .
In what would become known as the Battle of Actium , Antony , on September 2 , 31 BC , moved his large quinqueremes through the strait and into the open sea .
There , Octavian 's light and manoeuvrable Liburnian ships drew in battle formation against Antony 's warships .
Cleopatra stayed behind Antony 's line on her royal barge .
A devastating blow to Antony 's forces came when one of Antony 's former generals delivered to Octavian Antony 's battle plan .
Antony had hoped to use his biggest ships to drive back Agrippa 's wing on the north end of his line , but Octavian 's entire fleet stayed carefully out of range .
Shortly after mid - day , Antony was forced to extend his line out from the protection of the shore , and then finally engage the enemy .
Octavian 's fleet , armed with better trained and fresher crews , made quick work of Antony 's larger and less experienced navy .
Octavian 's soldiers had spent years fighting in Roman naval combat , where one objective was to ram the enemy ship and at the same time kill the above deck crew with a shower of arrows and catapult - launched stones large enough to decapitate a man .
As the armies stood on either side of the naval battle , they watched as Antony was being outmatched by Agrippa .
Seeing that the battle was going against Antony , Cleopatra 's fleet retreated to open sea without firing a shot , leaving Antony to fight for himself .
As a gap opened in Agrippa 's blockade , she funneled through , and was soon closely followed by Antony 's command ships .
The commanders of Antony 's land forces , which were supposed to follow him to Asia , promptly surrendered their legions without a fight .
Antony retreated to a smaller vessel with his flag and managed to escape to Alexandria .
By the end of the day , Antony 's entire fleet would lie at the bottom of the sea and the Roman world had witnessed the largest naval battle in almost 200 years .
LAND CAMPAIGN Section::::Land campaign .
Even though Octavian wanted to immediately pursue Antony and Cleopatra , many of his veterans wanted to retire and return to private life .
Octavian allowed many of his longest serving veterans ( as many as 10 legions by some accounts ) to retire .
Many of those legionaries could trace their service to Julius Caesar some 20 years earlier .
After the winter ended , Octavian resumed the hunt .
In the spring of 30 BC , Octavian rejected the idea of transporting his army across the sea and attacking Alexandria directly , and instead travelled by land through Asia .
Antony had received much of his backing from Rome 's client kingdoms in the east .
By marching his army by land , he ensured Antony could not regroup and cement his authority over the provinces .
Meanwhile , Antony attempted to secure an army in Cyrenaica from Lucius Pinarius .
Unfortunately for Antony , Pinarius had switched his loyalty to Octavian .
When Octavian received word of this development , he ordered Pinarius to move his four legions east towards Alexandria while Octavian would move west .
Trapped in Egypt with the remnant of their former army , Antony and Cleopatra bided their time awaiting Octavian 's arrival .
When Octavian and Pinarius arrived at Alexandria , they placed the entire city under siege .
Before Octavian had arrived , Antony took the roughly 10,000 soldiers he had left and attacked Pinarius , unaware that he was outnumbered 2 to 1 .
Pinarius destroyed what was left of Antony 's army with Antony escaping back to Alexandria before Octavian arrived .
As Octavian approached with his legions , what remained of Antony 's cavalry and fleet surrendered to Octavian .
Most of Antony 's infantry surrendered without any engagement at this stage of the conflict , and Antony 's cause was lost .
Antony was forced to watch as his army and hopes of dominance in Rome were handed to Octavian .
In honourable Roman tradition , Antony , on August 1 , 30 BC , fell on his sword .
According to the ancient accounts however , he was not entirely successful and with an open wound in his belly , was taken to join Cleopatra , who had fled to her mausoleum .
Here Antony succumbed to his wound and supposedly died in his lover 's arms , leaving her alone to face Octavian .
Cleopatra did not immediately follow Antony in suicide .
Instead , in a last - ditch effort , Cleopatra opened negotiations with Octavian .
Cleopatra begged Octavian to spare Caesarion 's life in exchange for willing imprisonment .
Octavian refused .
Within a week , Octavian informed Cleopatra that she was to play a role in Octavian 's Triumph back in Rome .
This role was " carefully explained to her " , while Caesarion was " butchered without compunction " .
Octavian supposedly said " two Caesars are one too many " as he ordered Caesarion 's death .
According to Strabo who was alive at the time of the event , Cleopatra died from a self - induced bite from a venomous snake , or from applying a poisonous ointment to herself .
Learning of Cleopatra 's death , Octavian had mixed feelings .
He admired the bravery of Cleopatra , and gave her and Antony a public military funeral in Rome .
As they left Alexandria , a new age dawned when Rome annexed Egypt .
With Cleopatra 's death , the final war of the Republic was over .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Within a month , Octavian was named Pharaoh , and Egypt became his personal possession .
By executing Antony 's supporters , Octavian finally brought a century of civil war to a close .
In 27 BC Octavian was named Augustus by the Senate and given unprecedented powers .
Octavian , now Augustus , transformed the Republic into the Roman Empire , ruling it as the first Roman emperor .
In the ensuing months and years , Augustus passed a series of laws that , while outwardly preserving the appearance of the Republic , made his position within it of paramount power and authority .
He laid the foundations for what is now called the Roman Empire .
From then on , the Roman state would be ruled by a Princeps ( first citizen ) ; in modern terms , Rome would from now on be ruled by Emperors .
The Senate ostensibly still had power and authority over certain Senatorial provinces , but the critical border provinces , such as Syria , Egypt , and Gaul , requiring the greatest numbers of legions , would be directly ruled by Augustus and succeeding Emperors .
With the end of the last Republican civil war , the Republic was replaced by the Empire .
The reign of Augustus would usher in the golden era of Roman culture and produce a stability which Rome had not seen in over a century .
With Rome in control of the entire Mediterranean world , a peace would reign in the Roman world for centuries after the death of Augustus : the so - called Pax Romana ( Roman Peace ) .
The Empire that Augustus established would last in Western Europe until the fall of Rome in the 5th century AD .
The Eastern part of the Roman Empire would also survive as the Byzantine Empire until the fall of Constantinople in AD 1453 .
SEE ALSO * Crisis of the Roman Republic NOTES