WIRE GAUGE
Wire gauge is a measurement of wire diameter .
This determines the amount of electric current a wire can safely carry , as well as its electrical resistance and weight .
TYPES OF WIRE GAUGE Section::::Types of wire gauge .
Wire gauges may be broadly divided into two groups , the empirical and the geometric .
The first includes all the older gauge measurements , notably the Birmingham gauge ( B.W.G. or Stubs ) and the Lancashire .
The origin of the B.W.G. is obscure .
The numbers of wire were in common use earlier than 1735 .
It is believed that they originally were based on the series of drawn wires , No . 1 being the original rod , and succeeding numbers corresponding with each draw , so that No . 10 , for example , would have passed ten times through the draw plate .
But the Birmingham and the Lancashire gauge , the latter being based on an averaging of the dimensions collated from a large number of the former in the possession of Peter Stubs of Warrington , have long held the leading position , and are still retained and used probably to a greater extent than the more recent geometrical gauges .
The first attempt to adopt a geometrical system was made by Messrs Brown & Sharpe in 1855 .
They established a regular progression of thirty - nine steps between the English sizes , No . 0000
( 460 mils or about 12 mm ) and
No . 36 ( 5 mils or about 0.13 mm ) .
Each diameter was multiplied by 0.890526 to give the next lower size .
This is now the American wire gauge ( AWG ) , and is used to a considerable extent in the United States .
The Imperial Standard Wire Gauge , which has been sanctioned by the British Board of Trade , was formulated by J. Latimer Clark .
Following one of its recommendations , it differs from pre - existing gauges scarcely more than they differ among themselves , and is based on a rational system , the basis being the circular mil .
No . 7/0 , the largest size , is 0.50 in .
( 500 mils or 12.7 mm ) in diameter ( 1570 circular mils area ) , and the smallest , No . 50 , is 0.001 in .
( 1 mil or about 25 µm ) in diameter ( 80 circular mils area ) .
Between each step the diameter , or thickness , diminishes by 10.557 % , and the area and weight diminish by ~ 20 % .
None of the above systems of measurement is part of the metric system .
The current British Standard for metallic materials including wire is BS 6722:1986 , which is a solely metric standard , superseding 3737:1964 , which used the SWG system .
MEASURING Section::::Measuring .
In commerce , the sizes of wire are estimated by devices , also called gauges , which consist of plates of circular or oblong form having notches of different widths around their edges to receive wire and sheet metals of different thicknesses .
Each notch is stamped with a number , and the wire or sheet , which just fits a given notch , is stated to be of , say , No . 10 , 11 , 12 , etc . , of the wire gauge .
The circular forms of wire gauge measurement devices are the most popular , and are generally in diameter , with thirty - six notches ; many have the decimal equivalents of the sizes stamped on the back .
Oblong plates are similarly notched .
Rolling mill gauges are also oblong in form .
Many gauges are made with a wedge - like slot into which the wire is thrust ; one edge being graduated , the point at which the movement of the wire is arrested gives its size .
The graduations are those of standard wire , or in thousandths of an inch .
In some cases both edges are graduated differently in order to allow comparison between two systems of measurement .
A few gauges are made with holes into which the wire has to be thrust .
All gauges are hardened and ground to dimensions .
In some applications wire sizes are specified as the cross sectional area of the wire , usually in mm² .
Advantages of this system include the ability to readily calculate the physical dimensions or weight of wire , ability to take account of non - circular wire , and ease of calculation of electrical properties .
SEE ALSO
* IEC 60228 , the metric wire - size standard used in most parts of the world .
* Circular mil , Electrical industry standard for wires larger than 4/0 .
* American Wire Gauge ( AWG ) , used primarily in the US and Canada * Standard Wire Gauge ( SWG ) , the British imperial standard BS3737 , superseded by the metric .
* Jewelry wire gauge * Body jewelry sizes EXTERNAL LINKS * Wire Gauge to Diameter — Diameter to
Wire Gauge
Converter - Online calculator converts gauge to diameter or diameter to gauge for any wire size .
* Calculation : round electric cable diameter to circle cross - sectional area and vice versa
* Wire gauge conversion chart
* Standard wire sizes , Kaye & Laby , NPL