CELEBRATORY GUNFIRE Celebratory gunfire ( also called aerial firing or happy fire ) is the shooting of a firearm into the air in celebration .
It is culturally accepted in parts of the Balkans , the Middle East , the Central Asian region of Afghanistan , and the South Asian region of Pakistan .
In regions such as Puerto Rico and continental areas of the United States it is practiced illegally , especially on holidays like New Year 's Eve .
Common occasions for celebratory gunfire include New Year 's Day as well as religious holidays such as Eid .
The practice may result in random death and injury from stray bullets .
Property damage is sometimes another result of celebratory gunfire ; shattered windows and damaged roofs are often found after such celebrations .
FALLING - BULLET INJURIES
Section::::Falling - bullet injuries .
Bullets fired into the air usually fall back with terminal velocities much lower than their muzzle velocity when they leave the barrel of a firearm .
Nevertheless , people can be injured , sometimes fatally , when bullets discharged into the air fall back down to the ground .
Bullets fired at angles less than vertical are more dangerous as the bullet maintains its angular ballistic trajectory and is far less likely to engage in tumbling motion ; it therefore travels at speeds much higher than a bullet in free fall .
A study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) found that 80 % of celebratory gunfire - related injuries are to the head , feet , and shoulders .
In Puerto Rico , about two people die and about 25 more are injured each year from celebratory gunfire on New Year 's Eve , the CDC says .
Between the years 1985 and 1992 , doctors at the King / Drew Medical Center in Los Angeles , California , treated some 118 people for random falling - bullet injuries .
Thirty - eight of them died .
Firearms expert Julian Hatcher studied falling bullets in the 1920s and calculated that .30 caliber rounds reach terminal velocities of 90 m / s ( 300 feet per second or 186 miles per hour ) .
A bullet traveling at only 61 m / s ( 200 feet per second ) to 100 m / s ( 330 feet per second ) can penetrate human skin .
In 2005 , the International Action Network on Small Arms ( IANSA ) ran education campaigns on the dangers of celebratory gunfire in Serbia and Montenegro .
In Serbia , the campaign slogan was " every bullet that is fired up , must come down . "
PROPERTY DAMAGE
Section::::Property damage .
Bullets often lodge in roofs , causing minor damage that requires repair in most cases .
Normally , the bullet will penetrate the roof surface through to the roof deck , leaving a hole where water may run into the building and cause a leak .
TRENDS * Philippine Health Secretary Francisco Duque III noted the drop in stray bullet injuries , in that country , during the 2005 year - end holiday period – from 33 cases to 19 .
* The number of complaints regarding random shooting in Dallas , Texas , on New Year 's Eve declined from approximately 1,000 in 1999 to 800 each in 2001 and 2002 .
*
In early 2008 , increased partisanship in Lebanon led to the practice of firing celebratory gunfire in support when politicians appeared on local television , leading to multiple deaths and to calls from these leaders to end the practice .
NOTABLE INCIDENTS MIDDLE EAST
* April 6 , 2014 :
A 20-year - old pregnant mother of two , Wadia Baidawi , was struck in the head and killed by a stray bullet from her neighbor 's wedding in Sidon , Lebanon .
* November 21 , 2012 :
Following a cease - fire ending fighting with Israel , celebratory gunfire in the Gaza Strip killed a man and wounded three others .
* October 30 , 2012 : Twenty - three people were electrocuted after celebratory gunfire brought down a power cable during a wedding party in eastern Saudi Arabia .
* August 2012 : A Kuwaiti bridegroom was killed when a friend of his accidentally shot him as he charged his gun to fire into the air in celebration .
* August 2010 : 2 people were killed and 13 were injured in Jordan , as part of the yearly celebration of the announcement of the result of Tawjihi .
* July 29 , 2007 : At least four people were killed and 17 others wounded by celebratory gunfire in the capital city of Baghdad , Iraq , following the victory of the national football team in the AFC Asian Cup .
Celebratory gunfire occurred despite warnings issued by Iraqi security forces and the country 's leading Shiite cleric , Grand Ayatollah Ali al - Sistani , who forbade the gunfire with a religious fatwā .
* July 22 , 2003 : More than 20 people were killed in Iraq from celebratory gunfire following the deaths of Saddam Hussein 's sons Uday and Qusay in 2003 .
UNITED STATES * July 1 , 2017 :
A 13-year - old boy , Noah Inman , was struck in his head and killed while playing basketball in the street .
* January 1 , 2017 : Armando Martinez , a Texas state Representative , was wounded in the head by a stray bullet during a New Year 's celebration .
* January 1 , 2015 :
A 43-year - old man , Javier Suarez Rivera , was struck in his head and killed while watching fireworks with his family in Houston .
* July 4 , 2013 : A 7-year - old boy , Brendon Mackey , was struck in the top of his head and killed while walking with his father shortly before 9 p.m. amid a large crowd prior to the fireworks display over the Swift Creek Reservoir , outside Richmond , Virginia .
* January 1 , 2013 :
A 10-year - old girl , Aaliyah Boyer , collapsed after being struck in the back of the head while watching the neighborhood fireworks in Eklton , Maryland .
She died two days later of her injuries .
* July 4 , 2012 :
A 34-year - old woman , Michelle Packard , was struck in the head and killed while watching the fireworks with her family .
The police believe the shot could have come from a mile away .
* January 1 , 2010 : A four - year - old boy , Marquel Peters , was struck by a bullet and killed inside his church The Church of God of Prophecy in Decatur , GA .
It is presumed the bullet may have penetrated the roof of the church around 12:20AM .
*
In March 2008 , Chef Paul Prudhomme was grazed by a .22-caliber stray bullet while catering the Zurich Classic of New Orleans golf tournament .
He at first thought a bee had stung his arm , required no serious medical attention , and within five minutes was back to cooking for the golf tournament .
It was thought to have been a falling bullet .
* December 28 , 2005 :
A 23-year - old U.S. Army private on leave after basic training fired a 9 mm pistol into the air in celebration with friends , according to police , one of the bullets came through a fifth - floor apartment window in the New York City borough of Queens , striking a 28-year - old mother of two in the eye .
Her husband found her lifeless body moments later .
The shooter had been drinking the night before and turned himself in to police the next morning when he heard the news .
He was charged with second - degree manslaughter and weapons - related crimes , and was later found guilty and sentenced to 4 to 12 years in prison .
* June 14 , 1999 :
Arizona , A 14-year - old girl , Shannon Smith , was struck on the top of her head by a bullet and killed while in the backyard of her home .
This incident resulted in Arizona enacting " Shannon 's Law " in 2000 , that made the discharge of a firearm into the air illegal .
* December 31 , 1994 :
Amy Silberman , a tourist from Boston , was killed by a falling bullet from celebratory firing while walking on the Riverwalk in the French Quarter of New Orleans , Louisiana .
The Police Department there has been striving to educate the public on the danger since then , frequently making arrests for firing into the air .
* July 4 , 1950 : Bernard Doyle was killed in his seat while attending a New York Giants game at the Polo Grounds .
The bullet was determined to have been fired by Robert Peebles , a juvenile , from an apartment building some distance away on Coogan 's Bluff , presumably in celebration of Independence Day .
SOUTH ASIA
* November 16 , 2016 :
A self - proclaimed godwoman and her private guards went on a celebratory shooting spree at a wedding in Haryana 's Karnal town in India , killing the groom 's aunt and leaving three of his relatives critically wounded .
* February 25 , 2007 :
Five people were killed by stray bullets fired at a kite festival in Lahore , Pakistan , including a six - year - old schoolboy who was struck in the head near his home in the city 's Mazang area .
* December 1859 : An autopsy showed that a native servant in India , who suddenly fell dead for no apparent reason , was mortally wounded from a bullet fired from a distance too far for the shot to be heard .
The falling bullet had sufficient energy to pass through the victim 's shoulder , a rib , a lung , his heart and his diaphragm .
* June 6 , 2013 : a 42-year - old Pakistani woman was killed by a stray bullet from celebratory gunfire .
The gunfire was attributed to celebrations for the election of Pakistan 's prime minister Newaz Sharif .
Her 19-year - old niece was also hit , and rushed to hospital in critical condition .
EUROPE
* January 1 , 2005 :
A stray bullet hit a young girl during New Year celebrations in the central square of downtown Skopje , Macedonia .
She died two days later .
This incident led to the 2006 IANSA awareness campaign in that country .
* October 12 , 2003 :
Wedding guests in Belgrade , Serbia mistakenly shot down a small aircraft .
*
On 7 January 2008 , at about 9:30 pm , a Montenegro Airlines Fokker 100 ( 4O - AOK ) was shot at while landing at Podgorica Airport .
A routine inspection of the aircraft led to the discovery of a bullet hole in the aircraft 's tail .
The aircraft was carrying 20 passengers , but no one was injured .
The reason for the incident is unknown ; however , reports indicate that it may have been an inadvertent result of guns being fired during celebrations for Orthodox Christmas .
SOUTH AMERICA
* December 25 , 2012 :
A stray bullet killed a three - year - old girl in Asunción , Paraguay .
PENALTIES
*
In the Republic of Macedonia , a person found guilty of firing off a gun during celebrations faces a jail sentence of up to ten years .
*
In Italy , under the art.703 of the Penal Code(Dangerous lightings and explosions ) , a person found guilty of firing off , without authority 's permission , a gun in an inhabited place or near it , is sentenced to a fine up to 103 Euros , while if he commit the act in a place with more person than usual is sentenced to up a month in prison .
The offence include also fireworks , rockets , flaming aerostats and , in general , " dangerous lightings and explosions " .
*
In Pakistan , section 144 of the law is imposed to prevent aerial firing during celebrations if harm is caused , and an FIR may be registered against a person who does so .
However , many cases of aerial firing go unreported .
*
In the United States , crime classifications vary from a misdemeanor to a felony in different states : *
In Arizona , firing a gun into the air was raised from a misdemeanor to a felony by Shannon 's law , in response to the death of a 14-year - old from a stray bullet in 1999 .
*
In California , discharging a firearm into the air is a felony punishable by three years in state prison .
If the stray bullet kills someone , the shooter can be charged with murder .
*
In Minnesota , it is illegal to discharge a firearm over a cemetery , or at or in a public transit vehicle .
Additionally , local governments may regulate the discharge of a weapon within their jurisdictions .
*
In Ohio , discharging a firearm or a deadly weapon in a public place is classified as disorderly conduct , a Class B misdemeanor , punishable by up to 180 days in jail and a fine of up to $ 2,000 .
*
In Texas , random gunfire is a Class A misdemeanor , punishable by a maximum one year in jail and $ 4,000 fine .
Anyone who injures or kills someone with a stray bullet could face more serious felony charges .
*
In Wisconsin , criminal charges for this type of offense range from " endangering safety by use of a dangerous weapon " to " reckless homicide " in the event of a death , with penalties ranging from nine months to 25 years in prison . " CULTURAL REFERENCES Section::::Cultural references .
The non - fiction U.S. cable television program MythBusters on the Discovery Channel covered this topic in Episode 50 : " Bullets Fired Up " ( original airdate : April 19 , 2006 ) .
Special - effects experts Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman conducted a series of experiments to answer the question : " Can celebratory gunfire kill when the bullets fall back to earth ? "
Using pig carcasses , they worked out the terminal velocity of a falling bullet and had a mixed result , answering the question with all three of the show 's possible outcomes : Confirmed , Plausible and Busted .
They tested falling bullets by firing them from both a handgun and a rifle , by firing them from an air gun designed to propel them at terminal velocity , and by dropping them in the desert from an instrumented balloon .
They found that while bullets traveling on a perfectly vertical trajectory tumble on the way down , creating turbulence that reduces terminal velocity below that which would kill , it was very difficult to fire a bullet in a near - ideal vertical trajectory .
In practice , bullets were likely to remain spin - stabilized on a ballistic trajectory and fall at a potentially lethal terminal velocity .
They also verified cases of actual deaths from falling bullets .
SEE ALSO
* Feu de joie
* 21-gun salute REFERENCES
FURTHER READING *
" Falling bullets : terminal velocities and penetration studies " , by L. C. Haag , Wound Ballistics Conference , April 1994 , Sacramento , California .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* UN Development Programme activity report
* Can a bullet fired into the air
kill someone when it comes down ?
The Straight Dope * Celebratory Gunfire : Good Idea or Not ?
* ' Celebratory ' shot kills groom
* Spreading the Word About Dangers of Celebratory Gunfire :
Henry Louis Adams
* Minister Fighting to End Celebratory Gunfire