X - RAY SPECS X - ray specs are American novelties , purported to allow users to see through or into solid objects .
In reality , the spectacles merely create an optical illusion ; no X - rays are involved .
The current paper version is sold under the name " X - Ray Spex " ; a similar product is sold under the name " X - Ray Gogs " .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
X - Ray Specs consist of an outsized pair of glasses with plastic frames and white cardboard " lenses " printed with concentric red circles , and emblazoned with the legend " X - RAY VISION " .
The " lenses " consist of two layers of cardboard with a small hole about a quarter - inch ( 6 millimeters ) in diameter punched through both layers .
The user views objects through the holes .
A feather is embedded between the layers of each lens .
The vanes of the feathers are so close together that light is diffracted , causing the user to receive two slightly offset images .
For instance , if viewing a pencil , one would see two offset images of the pencil .
Where the images overlap , a darker image is obtained , giving the illusion that one is seeing the graphite embedded within the body of the pencil .
VALUE Section::::Value .
X - Ray Specs were long advertised with the slogan " See the bones in your hand , see through clothes ! "
Some versions of the advertisement featured an illustration of a young man using the X - Ray Specs to examine the bones in his hand while a voluptuous woman stood in the background , as though awaiting her turn to be " X - rayed " .
The claim is untrue .
Besides the unlikelihood of a safe and functional X - ray device selling for about a dollar , X - ray detectors require an X - ray generator .
Part or even most of the novelty value lies in provoking the object of the wearer 's attentions .
These subjects , if unable to be entirely sure that the device did not indeed allow the wearer to compromise their modesty , were liable to respond with a variety of amusing reactions .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The principle behind the illusion , as well as its use in a pair of " spectacles " , was first patented ( in the United States ) in 1906 by George W. Macdonald ( ) .
A tubular configuration employing the same principle as well as the use of a feather for the diffraction grating was first patented in 1909 by Fred J. Wiedenbeck ( ) X - Ray Specs were improved ( ) by Harold von Braunhut , also the inventor of Amazing Sea - Monkeys .
A previous product called the Wonder Tube worked in a similar way .
Instead of glasses , the device was in the form of a small telescope .
Their name was used as the inspiration for the UK punk band X - Ray Spex .
SIMILAR USEFUL DEVICES
* Thermal imaging goggles are used by various military and police organizations .
They are intended for night use , but the longer wavelength of infrared light allows the user to see images through some materials that are impervious to visible light .
Some video cameras have a night mode that gives an IR image under the right conditions .
Digital cameras can also be used .
* Devices for airport security are able to see through clothing quite well .
Some of these are true X - ray devices , using backscatter X - rays .
The devices are not portable and use a typical X - ray display screen , not goggles .
* Cargo scanning , includes the use of X - ray radiography , dual - energy X - ray radiography , backscatter X - ray radiography , muon radiography , muon tomography , neutron activation systems , or gamma - ray radiography .
* Terahertz imaging uses electromagnetic radiation in the terahertz or far infrared range to see through objects in a similar manner to X - rays .
It is currently a very expensive new technology , and is being tested for use in customs inspection , firefighting , search and rescue and medical imaging .
IN
FICTION Section::::In fiction .
In the science fiction short story Deep Eddy by Bruce Sterling , the protagonist wears a pair of Smartglasses which contains many apps , including one called " X - Specs " .
This generates an image that makes a person in the field of view appear to be unclothed .
SEE ALSO
* X - ray vision
* Night vision goggles
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Example of a comic book ad for X - ray specs