GMC ACADIA
The GMC Acadia is a mid - size crossover SUV from GMC .
The first generation GMC Acadia shared the GM Lambda platform with the Chevrolet Traverse , and Buick Enclave .
The Acadia went on sale in 2006 as a 2007 model in the United States , Canada and Mexico .
The Acadia replaces three of the 7- or 8-seater vehicles on the Pontiac - Buick - GMC dealership network , the mid - size GMC Safari van , the GMC Envoy , and the Pontiac Montana SV6 minivan for the domestic market .
As of 2009 , the Lambda vehicles have replaced the Buick Rainier , Buick Rendezvous , and the Buick Terraza , and then subsequently the GMC Envoy and the Chevrolet TrailBlazer .
A Denali version of the Acadia debuted in 2010 as a 2011 model .
In 2016 , the second generation Acadia was repositioned as a mid - size crossover utility vehicle ( as a 2017 model ) in order to compete within the growing mid - size CUV market against the likes of the Ford Explorer and Dodge Journey .
FIRST GENERATION ( 2007–2017 ) Section::::First generation ( 2007–2017 ) .
The Acadia represents GMC 's entry - level truck - like CUV and is the first unibody vehicle from the marque .
It is also GMC 's first front - wheel drive passenger vehicle and GMC 's first crossover utility vehicle ( CUV ) .
The Acadia has seating for eight and either front or all - wheel drive .
With a towing capacity , the Acadia slots between the GMC Terrain and the Yukon .
The Acadia is the mid - priced Lambda model between the Chevrolet Traverse and Enclave .
In December 2006 , all production and sales of the Acadia ( and the Saturn Outlook ) were temporarily stopped due to the engine mounts not having holes drilled to release accumulated water , as well as an issue with potentially faulty rivets in the load floor just forward of the vehicle 's rear hatch .
The assembly process was quickly adjusted , and dealership sales of the vehicles had resumed within days of the notice .
The first - generation Acadia will continue to be sold alongside its second - generation replacement as the Acadia Limited .
For more information , please see below .
SUSPENSION AND CHASSIS Section::::Suspension and chassis .
The 2008 Acadia has a wheelbase and front / rear tracks .
The independent front suspension is a MacPherson strut design , with a direct - acting stabilizer bar and aluminum knuckles .
The independent rear suspension uses a " H " Linked design .
Steering is power - assisted rack - and - pinion , with an optional variable - effort system .
Standard are 18 inch wheels and tires , with optional 19 inch wheels .
Four - wheel disc brakes with ABS are standard .
ENGINE AND TRANSMISSION Section::::Engine and transmission .
The Acadia uses GM 's High Feature LY7 V6 that was introduced in the Cadillac CTS .
In the Acadia , the engine produces and of torque .
The Acadia also uses the new GM - Ford 6-speed automatic transmission .
The 2009 model year engine was the direct injected LLT , producing and of torque .
The 2012 Acadia has a 3.6 L V6 engine producing at 6,300 rpm and of torque at 3,400 rpm .
The 2017 Acadia Limited has a 3.6 L V6 engine producing 310 hp ( 231 kW ) and 271 lb ft ( 367 Nm ) of torque !
Year!!Engine!!Power!!Torque!!Transmission 2007–20083.6
L LY7 V6 rowspan="2 "
6-speed 6T75 2009–20163.6 L LLT V6 2017
3.6 L LGX V6 310 hp ( 231 kW ) 271 lb·ft ( 367 N·m )
6-speed 6T70 INTERIOR Section::::Interior .
The Acadia features available 3-row , 7 or 8-seater seating .
Inside , the Acadia features more contemporary trim than the Outlook , including chrome and satin nickel textures , and a wider variety of two - toned interior colors such as an Ebony and Light Titanium ( grey ) cloth upholstery , and a choice of either Ebony , Light Titanium ( grey ) or Brick ( brown ) leather upholstery .
A heads - up display similar to those found in the Cadillac XLR , Cadillac STS , Pontiac Grand Prix , Pontiac Aztek , Pontiac Bonneville , Buick Park Avenue and Chevrolet Corvette is one of the available options exclusive to the Acadia and standard on the Acadia Denali thus far .
WHEELS AND TIRES Section::::Wheels and tires .
The 2008 Acadia features 19 inch cast aluminum wheels and Goodyear Eagle RS - A M+S P255/60R-19 108H tires with a high - pressure compact spare tire standard on the SLT2 model and optional on the SLT1 .
The SLE model has 18 inch painted aluminum wheels with P255/65R-18 tires .
The SLT1 comes standard with 18 inch machined aluminum wheels .
ACADIA DENALI Section::::Acadia Denali .
The Denali version of the Acadia arrived at dealerships in 2010 as 2011 model .
This upgraded trim is available in FWD and AWD versions in seven- or eight - passenger form and features monotone paint , honeycomb grille , unique front and rear fascias , along with HID headlamps , chrome accents , exhaust tips , and six - spoke 20-inch wheels .
Interior upgrades include perforated leather seating and wood trim .
The Acadia Denali joins its SUV siblings , the Terrain Denali , the Yukon Denali and Yukon XL Denali , and marks GMC 's first crossover to take the Denali badge .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim levels . !
Trim Level !
Years SAFETY Section::::Safety .
A unibody construction helps lower center of gravity , compared to previous truck - based GM SUVs , reduces the risk of rollover accidents .
Much of the Acadia 's structure is reinforced with high - strength steel , including a steel cross - car beam welded across the floor between the B - pillars .
The Acadia has six different airbags equipped in the vehicle ; two dual - stage front air bags for the driver and front passenger , two seat - mounted side - impact air bags in the first row and two head curtain side impact air bags that cover all three seating rows .
Similar to the Volvo XC90 , the Acadia will have a detection system on board that will deploy various airbags if a rollover is detected .
Additionally , the Acadia comes standard with the OnStar system .
MODEL YEAR UPDATES 2013 FACELIFT Section::::Model year updates .
Section::::2013 facelift .
GM unveiled an updated 2013 GMC Acadia at the 2012 Chicago Auto Show , taking the bodyshell of the discontinued Saturn Outlook .
The 2013 Acadia received a completely redesigned grille and front fascia , a redesigned rear liftgate , and an improved interior with upgrades to interior quality , as with its other two updated siblings , the Buick Enclave and Chevrolet Traverse .
2014
MODEL YEAR Section::::2014
model year .
For the 2014 model year , the Acadia added Forward Collision Alert and Lane Departure Warning as a standard on Denali and as an optional feature on SLT1 and SLT2 trims , while two charging - only USB ports on the rear of the center console for second - row use were added as a standard for all trims .
2015
MODEL YEAR
Section::::2015 model year .
For the 2015 model year , a heated , leather - wrapped steering wheel became standard on SLT-2 and Denali models , along with a twenty - inch aluminum wheel design .
Crimson Red Tintcoat , Dark Sapphire Blue Metallic , and Midnight Amethyst Metallic are added as new exterior color palettes .
In addition , dual exhaust became available only on Denali versions , while all other trim levels received single exhaust .
SECOND GENERATION ( 2017–PRESENT )
Section::::Second generation ( 2017–present ) .
The second generation Acadia made its official debut at the North American International Auto Show on January 12 , 2016 .
The redesigned Acadia went on sale in May 2016 as a 2017 model .
The second generation Acadia is built in Spring Hill , Tennessee .
The second generation Acadia was reduced from 200.8 inches to 193.6 inches in length and from 78.9 inches to 75.4 inches in width ( losing 700 pounds in the process ) , as GM repositioned the vehicle to mid - size status while remaining above the Terrain in size
( the Terrain itself would relinquish its midsize status after it was repositioned as a second generation smaller compact crossover with the 2018 model ) , as GM has already announced that the next generation Traverse and Enclave will be the only GM - built full - size crossover SUVs in this segment .
With the reduction from full - size to mid - size , the Acadia 's MSRP was reduced to $ 29,995 ( US ) .
The GMC Acadia now has 5 , 6 , and 7 passenger configurations arranged respectively like either two front bucket seats and one rear bench seat ; two bucket seats up front , two buckets in the second row , and two seats in the rear row ; or two front bucket seats , one second row bench seat , and two rear seats in the third row .
The second generation Acadia features seven seats instead of eight , a choice of either a 2.5L or 3.6L engine , a new advanced twin - clutch AWD system ( available only with All - Terrain package ) by GKN Driveline designed for off - road environment ( joining the FWD and AWD drivetrains available on all other models ) , an updated fascia and redesigned lighting .
The Acadia is built on the same platform as the Cadillac XT5 and will be joined by the Chinese - built Buick Envision and the Chevrolet Blazer ( built on the C1XX platform ) when GM unveils its lineup for its mid - size CUVs for 2018 and beyond .
With the decrease in size , fuel economy with the 3.6L increases to 18 city , 25 hwy ( AWD and FWD ) from 17 city 24 hwy ( FWD ) .
The 2017 Acadia will offer the newly launched AppShop feature .
Trim levels for the second generation Acadia were carried over from the previous generation ; SL , SLE-1 , SLE-2 , SLT-1 , SLT-2 , as well as a Denali trim level , though an All - Terrain Package is available on Acadia SLE and SLT trim levels that will be more rugged in its appearance .
The second generation Acadia is also available with Third Row Seat Delete option on SLE and SLT trim levels as part of the All - Terrain Package .
The second generation Acadia introduced a feature to remind drivers to check the rear seats for children to help prevent heatstroke of children accidentally left behind in a vehicle .
HOLDEN
ACADIA
Section::::Holden Acadia .
The Acadia is sold in Australia and New Zealand as a Holden badged vehicle .
It went on sale November 12 , 2018 .
The Holden Acadia is built in Tennessee with RHD specifications , and is marketed as a full - size CUV .
Australia and New Zealand will be the only markets in the world where a right - hand drive version of the Acadia will be sold .
ACADIA LIMITED Section::::Acadia Limited .
Starting with the 2017 model year , the first - generation Acadia is sold alongside its second - generation replacement , but was renamed the Acadia Limited , much like the Chevrolet Cruze Limited , Chevrolet Malibu Limited , and Chevrolet Impala Limited were also sold alongside their replacements , at least for a single model year , as rental and fleet vehicles .
However , production remained in Lansing , Michigan as the second generation Acadia moved to Spring Hill , Tennessee , the site of the old Saturn plant .
With the second - generation Buick Enclave and Chevrolet Traverse making their debuts in 2017 as 2018 models , GMC ended production on the Acadia Limited on March 31 , 2017 in order to start production on the Traverse and Enclave .
The Acadia Limited carried a base price tag of $ 44,775 and continued to offer the same features from the 2016 model .
YEARLY US SALES Section::::Yearly US sales . !
Year !
Sales REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official GMC Acadia site