SRAOSHA
Sraosha ( ) is the Avestan name of the Zoroastrian yazata of " Conscience " and " Observance " , which is also the literal meaning of his name .
In the Middle Persian commentaries of the 9th-12th centuries , the divinity appears as S(a)rosh .
This form appears in many variants in New Persian as well , for example , Sorūsh .
Unlike many of the other Yazatas ( concepts that are " worthy of adoration " ) .
Sraosha is also frequently referred to as the " Angel of Conscience " or " Voice of Conscience " , which overlaps with both of his role as the " Teacher of Daena " , Daena being the hypostasis of both " Conscience " and " Religion " and Guardian / Companion over the Chinvat Bridge .
IN SCRIPTURE IN ZOROASTER 'S REVELATION Section::::In scripture .
Section::::In
Zoroaster 's revelation .
Sraosha is already attested in the Gathas , the oldest texts of Zoroastrianism and believed to have been composed by Zoroaster himself .
In these earliest texts , Sraosha is routinely associated with the Amesha Spentas , the six " Bounteous Immortals " through which Ahura Mazda realized ( " created by His / Her thought " ) creation .
In the Gathas , Sraosha 's primary function is to propagate conscience and the beauty of life , secondly the religion of Ahura Mazda to humanity , as Sraosha himself learned it from Ahura Mazda .
This is only obliquely alluded to in these old verses but is only properly developed in later texts ( Yasna 57.24 , Yasht 11.14 etc . ) .
Directly evident in the Gathas is the description as the strongest , the sturdiest , the most active , the swiftest , and the most awe - inspiring of youths ( Yasna 57.13 ) , and as the figure that the poor look to for support ( 57.10 ) .
In the ethical goals of Zoroastrianism ( " good thoughts , good words , good deeds " ) as expressed in Yasna 33.14 , Sraosha is identified with good deeds .
This changes in Zoroastrian tradition ( Denkard 3.13 - 14 ) , where Sraosha is identified with good words .
In Yasna 33.5 , the poet speaks of Sraosha as the greatest of all ( decision makers ) at the final renovation of the world .
In 50.4 - 5 , the poet sees the path of Sraosha ( an allusion to the Chinvat bridge ) as
In 43.46 , Zoroaster is reminded to hurry with the propagation of Mazda 's message before the prophet 's death ( before he encounters Sraosha and Ashi ) .
In 44.16 , Sraosha and Vohu Manah ( " Conscience " and " Good Thought " ) are said to be brought to all humankind .
IN THE YOUNGER AVESTA Section::::In the younger Avesta .
Sraosha has two yashts dedicated to him .
One of these is Yasna 56 - 57 , which is part of the primary Zoroastrian act of adoration .
Yasna 56 - 57 is a " hidden " yasht in that those verses describe a devotee 's relationship with Sraosha but do not directly address him .
The other hymn to the divinity is Yasht 11 , which is a direct invocation of Sraosha and bears his name in the title .
Yasht 11
- like the other direct Yashts also - is not part of the liturgy of the Avesta proper .
Yasht 11 has survived in a fragment of the Hadhokht Nask , which is today part of the Khordeh Avesta , the " little Avesta . "
In Yasna 56 - 57 , Sraosha is variously described as mighty , the incarnate word of reason , whose body is the holy spell ( 57.1 ) .
Sraosha " possesses Truth " ( ashavanem ) and is " stately " ( 57.2 , 57.5 , 57.7 , 57.9 , 57.11 , 57.15 etc . ) .
He is said to have been the first in all of creation to adore Ahura Mazda and the Amesha Spentas .
( 57.2 and 57.6 ) .
He recited five holy verses in order to favor the great sextet ( 57.8 ) , and the Ahuna Vairya invocation and other sacred formulae are Sraosha 's weapons ( 57.22 ) .
He returned victorious from his battles with evil ( 57.12 ) , which allowed the various aspects of creation to populate the world ( 57.23 ) .
Sraosha wanders about the world teaching the religion of Mazda ( 57.24 ) .
Sraosha is frequently described as the " lord of ritual " ( 57.2 , 57.5 , 57.7 , 57.9 , 57.11 etc . )
and he propitiates haoma with sacrifice ( 57.19 ) .
In Yasht 11 , mankind lives under Sraosha 's constant guardianship ( 11.7 ) .
He is not interrupted by sleep in his constant vigil ( 11.14 ) in which he wields his weapons against the druj ( 11.0 ) .
Sraosha teaches the word of Ahura Mazda to mankind ( 11.14 ) .
The poor look to him for support ( 11.3 ) and he is welcome in all homes that he protects ( 11.20 ) .
In
yet other texts Sraosha is again protector of ritual , but here the celebrant priest receives the epithet Sraoshavarez ( Yasht 24.15 ; Vendidad 5.25 , 7.17 et al . ) .
In Vendidad 18.22 , Sraosha is called for help against the demon - serpent Azi Dahaka who threatens to extinguish the hearth fire ( cf .
Atar ) .
Sraosha is the chief adversary of Aeshma , the daeva of wrath , for Aeshma distracts from proper worship , distorting " the intention and meaning of sacrifice through brutality against cattle and violence in war and drunkenness . "
While Aeshma 's standard epithet is xrvi.dru- " of the bloody mace , " Sraosha 's standard epithet is darshi.dru- " of the strong ( Ahuric ) mace .
"
Sraosha will overthrow Aeshma at the renovation of the world ( Yasht 19.95 ) .
IN ZOROASTRIAN TRADITION Section::::In Zoroastrian tradition .
In Zoroastrian tradition , Sraosha is one of the three guardians of the Chinvat bridge , the " bridge of judgement " that all souls of the dead must cross .
Although Sraosha is only one of the three divinities that pass judgement ( the other two being Rashnu and Mithra ) , Sraosha alone accompanies the soul on their journey across the bridge .
As also the other two guardians of the bridge , Sraosha is closely identified with Ashi , " Recompense " .
In Yasht 17.15 and 17.17 , Sraosha is called Ashi 's " brother . "
One of Sraosha 's stock epithets is ashya , which may either mean " companion of recompense " or simply " companion of Ashi " .
In the day - name dedications of the Zoroastrian calendar , the seventeenth day of the month is dedicated to Sraosha .
REFERENCES
* , p. 182 .