ART INSTITUTE OF PITTSBURGH
The Art Institute of Pittsburgh ( AIP ) is a nonprofit educational institution owned and operated by Dream Center Education Holdings ( DCEH ) , LLC .
It is located in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , and emphasizes design education and career preparation for the creative job market .
It was founded in 1921 .
According to the National Center for Education Statistics , the Art Institute of Pittsburgh has a 32 % graduation rate and a 20 % student loan default rate .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Founded in 1921 , the school began as a profit - based independent school of art and illustration , producing a number of notable artists including watercolorist Frank Webb , animation producer and director Rick Schneider - Calabash , and the late science fiction illustrator Frank Kelly Freas .
The Institute now specializes primarily in design disciplines and culinary arts .
In 1968 , Education Management Corporation ( EDMC ) acquired The Art Institute of Pittsburgh , and created additional schools the Art Institute system .
In 2008 , it briefly became one of the largest arts colleges in the United States ( factoring online enrollment ) .
However , in 2010 enrollment began to drop , in part due to the falsification of records .
Whistleblowers within the company sued the Institute due to practices at the online division , and were later joined by the United States Department of Justice .
Since the 2009 public offering of EDMC , and the subsequent majority position by Goldman Sachs , emphasis throughout the EDMC system shifted increasingly toward shareholder profits with cost - cutting measures resulting in larger classes , fewer student services , and a standardized curriculum throughout the system .
This standardization removed the need for resident experts and curriculum developers at the individual colleges .
Enrollment in the online division and EDMC 's other online programs ballooned from 7,900 in 2007 to 42,300 in 2012 , due in large part to practices that devoted more per - student expenditures to marketing ( $ 4,158 ) than on education ( $ 3,460 ) .
Since then , however , dramatic drops in enrollment have led to massive layoffs in the online division .
In 2013 , Payscale.com found that the institute provided the worst return on tuition of all institutes of higher learning surveyed .
According to disclosures the college is required to provide to the Department of Education , the overall graduation rates fell to 39 % in 2012 , while graduation rates among Pell grant recipients were still lower at 27 % .
The graduation rate fell substantially further in 2014 from 39 % to 24 % .
New owners took control of EDMC in 2015 , as EDMC entered into a debt - for - equity swap with its current owners , giving up the majority of their stock to creditors with whom they broke loan covenants .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
On March 27 , 2017 , The Art Institute of Pittsburgh moved to 1400 Penn Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15222 .
During its growth phase it relocated several times , expanding and broadening the curriculum , but then later reduced offerings during its contraction period .
The school purchased a historic landmark building at 420 Boulevard of the Allies in 2000 , but sold the same to a Chicago developer in 2014 .
The Art Institute then moved to a more industrial building in the Strip District of Pittsburgh , or " the Strip . "
THE ART INSTITUTE OF PITTSBURGH – ONLINE DIVISION Section::::The Art Institute of Pittsburgh – Online Division .
The Art Institute of Pittsburgh 's online division is a semi - autonomous division of the Art Institute .
It offers degree programs and non - degree diploma courses in a variety of creative fields .
LICENSING , ACCREDITATION AND MEMBERSHIPS Section::::Licensing , accreditation and memberships .
The Art Institute of Pittsburgh is accredited by The Middle States Commission on Higher Education ( since 2008 ) .
NOTABLE ALUMNI Section::::Notable alumni .
The Art Institute of Pittsburgh has more than 55,000 alumni .
Alumni include professionals in the areas of art , design , advertising , motion picture , entertainment , business , fashion , and culinary industries worldwide .
* Matt Bors , a nationally syndicated American editorial cartoonist and editor of online comics publication , The Nib .
* Shane Callahan , an American film and television actor .
* Frank Kelly Freas , an American science fiction and fantasy artist with a career spanning more than 50 years .
He was known as the " Dean of Science Fiction Artists " and he was the second artist inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame .
* Paul Gulacy , an American comics artist who worked for both DC and Marvel Comics .
He is best known for drawing one of the first graphic novels , Eclipse Enterprises 1978 Sabre : Slow Fade of an Endangered Species , with writer Don McGregor .
* Leon Levinstein , an American street photographer best known for his work documenting everyday street life in New York City from the 1950s through the 1980s .
* Garrett Mason , an American Republican politician .
* J. Howard Miller ( 1939 ) , an American graphic artist who painted posters during World War II in support of the war effort , among them the famous " We Can Do It ! "
poster , frequently misidentified as Rosie the Riveter .
* Martha Rial , an independent photographer based in Pittsburgh , PA .
She is the winner of 1998 Pulitzer Prize for Spot News
Photography
her photographs of Rwandan and Burundian refugees .
* Jennifer M. Smith , the Premier of Bermuda from 1998 until 2003 .
She was the first premier who was not a member of the United Bermuda Party .
* Roman Verostko ( diploma in illustration , 1949 ) , an American artist and educator who created code - generated imagery , known as algorithmic art .
* Frank Webb ( 1946 ) , an American watercolor painter .
* Tom Wilson ( 1955 ) , an American cartoonist .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official website REFERENCES