ANIMAL - MADE ART
Animal - made art is art created by an animal .
Animal - made works of art have been created by apes , elephants , cetacea , reptiles , and bowerbirds , among other species .
PAINTING PRIMATES Section::::Painting primates .
During the late 1950s , biologists began to study the nature of art in humans .
Theories were proposed based on observations of non - human primate paintings .
Hundreds of such paintings were cataloged by Desmond Morris .
Morris and his associate Tyler Harris interpreted these canvas paintings as indications of an intrinsic motivation toward abstract creativity , as expressed through an exploration of the visual field and color .
Many of these painters progressed over time by expanding or contracting the area of paint coverage , the horizontal or vertical stroke relationships , and even the development of content .
Monkey paintings were exhibited in many modern art museums during an early 1960s fad .
The cultural and scientific interest in monkey painting diminished steadily and little note is taken today .
PAINTING ELEPHANTS
Section::::Painting elephants .
Elephants in captivity have been trained to paint as a form of zoo environmental and behavioural enrichment .
An example of this is seen at Melbourne Zoo .
However , research published in 2014 indicated that elephants gain little enrichment from the activity of painting apart from the positive reinforcement given by zookeepers during the activity .
The scientists concluded that the " benefits of this activity appear to be limited to the aesthetic appeal of these paintings to the people viewing them " .
The elephants draw the same painting each time and have learned to draw it line - for - line .
It has been alleged that cruelty is involved in some tourist destinations where elephants are trained to paint .
PAINTING DOLPHINS
Section::::Painting dolphins .
In some dolphin shows , educated dolphins and beluga whales paint with brushes .
The Institute for Marine Mammal Studies has taught several of its dolphins to paint .
RABBIT PAINTER Section::::Rabbit painter .
In 2014 , Bini the Bunny showed the world that rabbits also can paint .
Given a blank canvas to work with , Bini grabs a brush with his mouth and begins adding colors to create an abstract work .
COPYRIGHT ISSUES Section::::Copyright issues .
The copyright to an artistic work is typically held by its author .
In cases where the artistic work was created by an animal , intellectual property analysts Mary M. Luria and Charles Swan have argued that neither the human who provides the equipment used to create the work , nor the human who owns the animal itself ( when applicable ) , can hold the copyright to the resulting work by the animal .
In these cases , the animal 's work was not an intellectual creation of the humans , and copyrights can only be held by legal persons — which an animal is not .
The question of ownership of copyright for photographs created by animals was tested in the monkey selfie case , in mid-2014 .
Equipment owned by nature photographer David Slater was used by a Celebes crested macaque in Tangkoko Nature Reserve in Indonesia to take a series of self - portraits .
Slater claimed copyright over the image , arguing that he had set up the situation .
Other individuals and organizations , however , argued that the photographs , as the work of a non - human animal ( and thus not the work of a legal person ) , were public domain .
Slater stated that the upload of the images to Wikimedia Commons , a free media repository , had cost him more than £ 10,000 in lost income ; he unsuccessfully attempted to have the media removed .
In August 2014 , the United States Copyright Office clarified their rules to explicitly state that items created by a non - human can not be copyrighted , and lists in their examples a " photograph taken by a monkey " , which would appear to reference this case .
SEE ALSO
* F.D.C. Willard * Infinite monkey
theorem
FOOTNOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Conn Ó Muíneacháin , " ' Monkey Selfie ' Photographer David Slater on his Fight with Wikipedia ( audio ) " , www.technology.ie/ August 14 , 2014 .