MARV ( SIN CITY )
Marv is a fictional character in the graphic novel series Sin City , created by Frank Miller .
In the 2005 film adaptation and its , he is played by Mickey Rourke .
He first appears in The Hard Goodbye and follows with appearances in A Dame to Kill For , Just Another Saturday Night , and Silent Night .
He makes a brief cameo in Blue Eyes ( as featured in Lost , Lonely , and Lethal ) .
Marv has been well received both as a comic book character and a film character .
APPEARANCES IN THE SIN CITY SERIES Section::::Appearances in the Sin City series .
Marv is one of the major characters of the series , and appears or is mentioned in nearly every book .
He is the protagonist of the first Sin City " yarn " , The Hard Goodbye , as well as two shorter installments , Silent Night and Just Another Saturday Night .
He also has a supporting role in A Dame to Kill For .
THE HARD GOODBYE Section::::The Hard Goodbye .
The Hard Goodbye begins as Marv has sex with a beautiful blonde prostitute named Goldie , only to wake up to find her dead and himself framed for her murder .
He escapes from the cops and vows that he will avenge Goldie 's death , killing his way through a chain of small - time thugs before learning the identity of Goldie 's killer to be a mute and cannibalistic serial killer named Kevin .
Kevin is the ward of Cardinal Patrick Henry Roark , and is thus under the protection of the powerful Roark family .
Marv finds Kevin , but is knocked out and finds himself in Kevin 's basement , which is decorated with the heads of prostitutes mounted on the mantle .
Marv also discovers that his parole officer , Lucille , is Kevin 's next intended victim ; he has already eaten her hand .
He escapes with Lucille , who is killed by a squad of Sin City police .
Marv , hearing from Lucille that Goldie was a prostitute , heads off to Old Town for more information before being ambushed by Goldie 's twin sister Wendy , who also believed that Marv killed her sister .
Marv convinces Wendy of his innocence and reluctantly takes her along to the infamous Roark family farm to subdue Kevin .
Knocking Wendy out
so she would not witness what will occur next , Marv inflicts the most brutal form of death he can imagine : sawing off Kevin 's legs and leaving him to be eaten by his own pet wolf .
Marv then finds Cardinal Roark , who admits that he and Kevin had been killing and cannibalizing prostitutes together and that Kevin killed Goldie for knowing too much .
Marv kills Roark in an unspecified ( but presumably grisly ) manner before the police burst in and shower Marv with bullets .
Marv survives , however , creating a problem for the Roark family and the corrupt police force as he possesses knowledge that would have the city implode .
The police threaten to kill Marv 's mother unless he confesses to the murders that Roark and Kevin committed ; Marv agrees , but only after breaking an attorney 's arm in three places .
He is sentenced to die in the electric chair .
Before his execution , Wendy visits him one last time to thank him for everything he has done .
Marv goes to the chair , but survives the first jolt , defiantly saying to his executioners : " Is that the best you can do , you pansies ?
" They have to pull the switch again to finish him off , announcing " He 's gone " .
A DAME TO KILL FOR
Section::::A Dame to Kill For .
In A Dame
To Kill
For ( which is set just before The Hard Goodbye )
Marv becomes a sidekick of sorts to his good friend Dwight McCarthy , agreeing to help him rescue his former lover Ava Lord .
When it is revealed to be a set - up , he rushes a mortally wounded Dwight to Old Town , where he is taken in by his former ' associate ' Gail .
Shortly afterwards , Marv becomes involved with Goldie .
SILENT NIGHT Section::::Silent Night .
In Silent Night , Marv rescues a young girl from sexual torture .
The story is told with almost no dialogue .
JUST
ANOTHER SATURDAY NIGHT
Section::::Just Another Saturday Night .
In Just Another Saturday Night , Marv wakes up on the side of a highway , surrounded by dead men , and tries to piece together how he got there .
PHYSICAL APPEARANCE Section::::Physical appearance .
Marv is depicted as an extremely imposing , man with a flattop buzzcut , a falcon - like nose and a heavily scarred face , making him unappealing to the opposite sex .
He has a massive frame and is distinctly broad - shouldered , generally towering over his fellow characters .
He is usually seen dressed in an overcoat , white undershirt , leather pants and combat boots .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
In the book Sin City : The Making of the Movie , creator Frank Miller describes the creation of Marv as a juxtaposition of his two biggest influences : film noir and medieval stories .
The result was the idea for a character he called " Conan in a trench coat . "
In the film Sin City his good friend Dwight remarks " most people think Marv is crazy .
He just had the rotten luck of being born in the wrong century .
He 'd be right at home on some ancient battlefield swinging an axe into somebody 's face .
Or in a Roman arena , taking his sword to other gladiators like him . " Even for someone his size , Marv has an unusual level of speed which , coupled with his well developed fighting skills , incredible strength and pain tolerance , allow him to bring down nearly anyone who challenges him or breaks his personal code of ethics with startling ease .
He notes with a measure of grudging respect in The Hard Goodbye that Kevin is the only person to ever successfully sneak up on him .
Marv is also fond of long trench coats , and immediately prior to killing someone in possession of such a coat , he often remarks something to the effect of " That 's a damn fine coat you 're wearing " , after which he takes their coat , especially if the one he had was damaged .
He suffers from an unnamed mental condition that causes him to " get confused " , which , judging from his own awareness of his illness and the effects it is shown to have , probably involves short - term memory loss and possibly hallucinations .
He also fears " turn[ing ] into what they always said [ he ] was gon na turn into- a maniac , a psycho killer .
" Lucille , his parole officer , supplies him with medication ( presumably antipsychotics ) through her girlfriend Claire to control these effects of his condition .
Claire , a psychiatrist , once tried to analyze him , but he claims she got " too scared . "
Marv has convinced himself that he does n't have a particularly high intellect , but he shows a surprising amount of intelligence when needed , noticeably an ability to logically deduce confusing and complex events quite accurately , sometimes based on scarce or conflicting information , and his skills in combat also imply a degree of intelligence from a tactical viewpoint .
However , in most situations he just smashes his way through conflicts , such as kicking down a door and sending police flying , or charging a squad of heavily armed cops whilst only armed with a hatchet .
In at least one instance , after being tied to a chair by Gail , who states that knots are her specialty , she and the rest of the girls of Old Town are startled to find out Marv was able to untie himself while being beaten by her , all without anyone in the room even noticing .
Marv has a well - developed skill and a strong appetite for torture .
He never blinks , nor seems to think twice about inflicting the slowest , most creatively painful death he can possibly implement on his worst enemies .
He often speaks in a soft , plain - spoken , calm , almost nonchalant demeanor , showing no sign of hesitation or fear , even while committing gruesome killings .
Marv shows little to no fear in dangerous situations , even when heavily outnumbered , and faces them with a dry laconic humor .
In The Hard Goodbye , instead of panicking when cornered by several members of the SWAT team , upon being asked to open the door , he lights up a cigarette and very calmly states " I 'll be right out .
" , before successfully fighting his way out of the building .
While Marv has no compunction about maiming and killing anyone he feels has wronged him or those close to him , even he has his limits .
He is deeply afraid of winding up as " a maniac [ or ] a psycho killer " ( as mentioned previously ) .
Marv will only kill someone if , as he himself puts it , " I know for sure
I ought to .
"
He makes it a point to avoid unnecessarily hurting or killing those who have not earned it in his eyes , and also notes with some amusement that he enjoys confrontations with paid hitmen , since he never feels guilty about what he does to them .
A perfect example of his resolve to avoid causing unnecessary harm is when he knocks out Wendy rather than let her watch him dismember Kevin ; he believed Wendy witnessing Kevin 's dismemberment would cause her a lifetime of nightmares , and would therefore be unnecessarily hurting her , a belief which also superseded his otherwise ironclad rule against hitting women .
He also adheres unrelentingly to his own personal code of honor , which dictates the repayment of debts and chivalry towards women , stating that " it really gets my goat when guys rough up dames " , even refusing to lay a finger on Gail , who wrongly believed he had killed several prostitutes under her employ , after she tied him to a chair and tortured him for information .
He also highly values kindness , often going out of his way to repay kindness shown to him .
As such , he will defend anyone whom he considers a friend or has shown him kindness until he is no longer capable , or he feels the debt has been repaid , whichever comes first .
As a devout Catholic , Marv condones the violence and blood on his hands , both figurative and literal , as justice against those who would do evil in the world , even if Marv 's personal brand of justice might fly in the face of Catholic teachings .
It may be best paraphrased as " It may be God 's job to judge a man 's evil deeds , but it Marv 's job to arrange the meeting . "
noting that some things in this world are , in Marv 's own words , " worth going to Hell for " .
Marv is shown to have a platonic relationship with Nancy , being a sort of guardian angel to her , especially after an incident in which " some frat boyfriend of hers roughed her up " .
Another platonic relationship is with his social worker , Lucille , who is a lesbian .
While Marv has no objections to her being a homosexual , or to homosexuality in general , he simply can not fathom why Lucille is a lesbian , stating " that with a body like hers , she can have any man she wanted .
" Marv also has a soft spot for children , suggested when he rescues a little girl from pimps in Silent Night , as well as for animals , as shown when he knocks out , rather than kills , Kevin 's wolf , which he only does as a matter of necessity to maintain the element of surprise , since Kevin 's wolf had otherwise done nothing wrong to him .
Throughout the story , Marv often shows a good - natured , humorous side , unresentful of even the worst that fate can throw at him and often showing a wry laconic sense of humor at the absurdity of his situations .
The one woman Marv loves above all others is his mother .
His mother , who is blind , has a nigh - supernatural sense of hearing , and can hear Marv tip - toeing around the house , even when he is completely silent .
She dotes on her only son , keeping his room exactly
has he left it when he moved out , and shows concern for him when people come looking for him .
He , in turn , treats her with great respect and is very protective of her , doing his best to keep her from harm or anyone who would even threaten to hurt her .
For instance , when an assistant DA threatens her life after he refuses to sign a false confession , Marv signs it ( after fracturing the assistant DA 's arm in three places ) MOVIE APPEARANCE Section::::Movie appearance .
Marv is played by Mickey Rourke in the first film adaptation ; Rourke took to the role despite the heavy amount of make - up work required and the minimal use of sets and even other actors .
Because of the speed at which the film was shot ( and the fact that most of the cast who appeared in multiple stories had n't yet been cast ) , several of the people
Rourke is seen interacting with were n't necessarily there during the day it was shot .
During the scenes at Kadie 's , he never met or interacted with Brittany Murphy , Clive Owen or Jessica Alba , all of whom were yet to be cast or scheduled for filming ; those scenes were all shot on different days several months later .
Similarly , Rutger Hauer and Elijah Wood never met Rourke either .
Hauer was one of the last people to be cast and his scene was shot months after The Hard Goodbye had finished principal photography .
Wood and Rourke were shot fighting each other 's respective stunt doubles .
He also makes a cameo appearance in the segment That Yellow Bastard at the same bar where John Hartigan goes to look for Nancy Callahan , just as featured in The Hard Goodbye .
Rourke reprises his role as Marv in the 2014 sequel , .
Rourke 's portrayal of the character was very popular among audiences and critics , winning awards from the Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films , Online Film Critics Society , Chicago Film Critics Association , and the Irish Film and Television Awards .
On the Sin City DVD , Frank Miller commented that " After [ the interview ] with Rourke , I was only able to get down one note : ' He IS Marv ! ' " MERCHANDISING Section::::Merchandising .
In 1999 , Marv 's likeness was captured in the form of three McFarlane Toys action figures , all depicting scenes from " The Hard Goodbye . "
One comes with Kevin 's severed head and a gun , while another figure was made with bandages on his face .
The latter also comes in black and white and a gun , while the other , known as " Death Row Marv " , comes with an electric chair .
Death Row Marv was comparably rare to most other action figures on the market , as it was offered exclusively to comic book specialty stores and was not made available to larger chains such as Toys R Us and Walmart .
Despite the fact that this was a collectible marketed solely towards adults , it caused a considerable amount of controversy .
In 2005 , the license for Sin City toys has been acquired by NECA , who has also done their own versions of " Death Row Marv " .
In 2007 , Marv was announced to be in the second series of Marvel Toys ' Legendary comic book heroes action figure line .
Shortly afterward , another company , Dynamic Forces announced a full series of Sin City comic figures , which will start with a repaint of the Marvel Toys Marv figure .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
In 2006 , French country troubadour Steffan Rock recorded a song called " The Return of Marv " , which is a tribute to both the character and Mickey Rourke .
Marv and the film adaptation of Sin City was parodied in the Robot Chicken episode " Bionic Cow " .
Marv is portrayed as a gruff , mean - spirited protector of cats and grandmas in " Virtue City " .
He was voiced by Hugh Davidson .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Marv has been well received both as a comic book character and a film character .
Marv was ranked as the 24th greatest comic book character in Wizard magazine .
Empire magazine also ranked Marv as the 26th greatest comic book character of all time writing that " Marv is a grade A patsy , the fall guy , the hapless hero at the center of a conspiracy that he ca n't even begin to understand but with a traditional Miller tweak ...
[ he is ] a force of nature , cutting a path through the corrupt power - brokers of the city , until his pound of flesh ( and more ) has been exacted . "
Also in 2008 , Empire Magazine ranked Marv as the 82nd greatest film characters : " He ai n't too bright , but it turns out that Marv , despite his seemingly indestructible ( if bandage - swathed ) exterior , has a soft center . "
IGN also listed Marv as the 75th greatest comic book hero of all time , writing that " Sin City is a place where only the strong and sadistic can survive .
Marv is a little of both , but he also has a noble streak and an unbreakable sense of loyalty towards those few people who can see beneath his craggy exterior and recognize the good man within . "
REFERENCES