RICK DECKARD Rick Deckard is a fictional character , the protagonist of Philip K. Dick 's 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? .
Harrison Ford portrayed the character in the 1982 film adaptation , Blade Runner , and reprised his role in the 2017 sequel , Blade Runner 2049 .
James Purefoy voiced the character in the 2014 BBC Radio 4 adaptation .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Rick Deckard is a bounty - hunter who becomes a specialist plainclothes police officer with the San Francisco Police Department in the early 21st century , responsible for killing ( euphemistically , " retiring " ) androids that escape from off - world colonies .
In the film adaptation , he was / is with the Replicant Detection Division ( i.e. Blade Runner unit ) of the Los Angeles Police Department .
In both novel and film versions , he begins the story as a selfish , self - involved cop who seemingly sees no value in android life .
In the novel , his experiences cause him to develop empathy toward androids and all living things .
It is implied in the film that he had already begun to undergo this change prior to the start of the film , causing his original resignation some time ( around May 2019 ) before its opening .
Deckard is married to Iran , one of the more empathetic characters in the novel .
She descends into a depression over the state of humanity , and is able to find the empathy necessary to care for an electric toad at the end of the novel .
ADAPTATION BLADE RUNNER Section::::Adaptation .
Section::::Blade Runner .
Harrison Ford portrayed Deckard in the 1982 film .
In the film , the bounty - hunters are replaced by special police personnel called " Blade Runners " , and the androids are called " replicants " , terms not used in the original novel .
The novel depicts Deckard as an obsequious and officious underling who is human and has a wife , but because of the many versions of the film and because of script , the backstory of the movie version of Rick Deckard becomes unclear .
Viewers have to make up their own minds as to whether Deckard is a and therefore has a past .
The voice - over in the theatrical release indicates Deckard is divorced , as it mentions an ex - wife .
However the voice - over has been removed from subsequent versions and so this detail is not mentioned .
If the viewer takes the perspective that Deckard is a replicant then the " ex - wife " only becomes an implanted memory .
BLADE RUNNER 2049 Section::::Blade Runner 2049 .
Ford reprised the role for the sequel , portraying an older Deckard who is hiding in the radioactive ruins of Las Vegas , violently resisting intrusion .
Prior to the events of the film , Deckard 's replicant lover Rachael became pregnant with his child , which she died giving birth to .
Deckard was forced to leave the child , a girl , with a replicant freedom movement and scrambled the child 's birth records to protect her before disappearing .
The pursuit of the child by different groups is the main driving force of the plot .
At the end of the film , Deckard finally meets his daughter Ana Stelline , a scientist who designs memories for replicants .
REFERENCES