LIST OF XBOX GAMES COMPATIBLE WITH XBOX 360
The Xbox 360 gaming console has received updates from Microsoft from its launch in 2005 until November 2007 that enable it to play select games from its predecessor , Xbox .
The Xbox 360 launched with backward compatibility with the number of supported Xbox games varying depending on region .
Microsoft continued to update the list of Xbox games that were compatible with Xbox 360 until November 2007 when the list was finalized .
Microsoft later launched the Xbox Originals program on December 7 , 2007 where select backward compatible Xbox games could be purchased digitally on Xbox 360 consoles with the program ending less than two years later in June 2009 .
The following is a list of all backward compatible games on Xbox 360 under this functionality .
HISTORY Section::::History .
At its launch in November 2005 , the Xbox 360 did not have hardware - based backward compatibility with Xbox games due to the different types of hardware and architecture used in the Xbox and Xbox 360 .
Instead backward compatibility was achieved using software emulation .
When the Xbox 360 launched in North America 212 Xbox games were supported while in Europe 156 games were supported .
The Japanese market had the least amount of titles supported at launch with only 12 games .
Microsoft 's final update to the list of backward compatible titles was in November 2007 bringing the final total to 461 Xbox games .
In order to use the backwards compatibility feature on Xbox 360 a hard drive is required .
Updates to the list were provided from Microsoft as part of regular software updates via the Internet , ordering a disc by mail from the official website or downloading the update from the official website then burning it to a CD or DVD .
Subscribers to Official Xbox Magazine would also have updates to the backwards compatibility list on the demo discs included with the magazine .
Supported original Xbox games will run each with an emulation profile that has been recompiled for each game with the emulation profiles stored on the console 's hard drive .
Original Xbox games must use the original game disc and ca n't be installed to the hard drive unlike Xbox 360 games .
Game saves and downloadable content ca n't be transferred from an original Xbox to an Xbox 360 .
Xbox Live functionality for original Xbox games were available until April 15 , 2010 until support for original Xbox games were discontinued .
System link functionality between original Xbox and Xbox 360 remains available .
Microsoft launched the Xbox Originals program in December 2007 where Xbox 360 owners could purchase select original Xbox titles digitally if they did not own a game disc and could be found inside their own section in the Xbox Live Marketplace .
Beginning in June 2009
the branding was phased out and the games were moved to the " Games on Demand " section of the store while Microsoft stating that they have " finished it 's portfolio " of Xbox Originals .
During Microsoft 's E3 2017 press conference on June 11 , 2017 , backward compatibility for original Xbox games on Xbox One family of consoles was announced .
Part of the backward compatibility program for Xbox One will see original Xbox games be made available digitally in addition to owners of the original Xbox game disc .
Prior to the first batch of original Xbox backward compatible titles for Xbox One were revealed six titles that were never released digitally as part of Xbox Originals program for Xbox 360 appeared in its " Games on Demand " store .
Microsoft also confirmed that digital licenses would also carry over to Xbox One .
Game saves for original Xbox games that are backward compatible on both Xbox 360 and
Xbox One ca n't be transferred between the three generations .
While Xbox Live functionality wo n't be available Albert Penello , head of marketing for Xbox , explained users could " system link an original Xbox , an Xbox 360 , an Xbox One and an Xbox One X for a four - player system - link LAN play with all original disks across three generations of consoles . "
LIST OF COMPATIBLE XBOX GAMES Section::::List of compatible Xbox games .
There are currently ' on this list out of ' games released for the Xbox .
XO XBO NA North America only PAL PAL
only J Japan
only ! class="unsortable " 2006 FIFA World Cup
EA Sports Sometimes text on menu options and buttons will be replaced by text from a similar object on the same screen .
25 to Life Eidos Random crashes would occur when starting an online match .
NA 4x4 Evo 2 Gathering of Developers Airforce Delta Storm Deadly Skies Airforce Delta II
Konami Aggressive Inline AKA Acclaim
Alias Acclaim Entertainment EA Games All - Star Baseball 2003 Acclaim Sports All - Star Baseball 2005
Acclaim Entertainment
Ubisoft AMF Bowling 2004
Bethesda Softworks NA Microsoft Studios
Amped 2 Tenku 2 Microsoft Studios Flickering geometry on some levels .
Occasionally a sound effect plays repeatedly .
APEX Racing Evoluzione Infogrames
During the dream mode cutscene there is missing audio dialogue .
TDK Arena Football
EA Games
Minor audio static is heard during gameplay .
Armed and Dangerous LucasArts
After the first level voice audio does n't play during game cinematics .
During the opening cinematic there is some audio and video choppiness .
3DO
Atari Anthology
Atari ATV Quad Power Racing 2 AKA Acclaim Auto Modellista
Capcom
THQ Empire Interactive Interplay Entertainment
During combat scenes in the second zone there is a 30 - 40 frames per second drop in performance .
NA Interplay Entertainment Vivendi Universal Games
Only the top half of the screen is drawn correctly in split - screen .
The Bard 's
Tale Vivendi Universal Games Bass Pro Shops Trophy Hunter 2007
Vivendi Universal Games
The aiming reticule is surrounded by a box .
The snowmobile suffers from a partial lack of collision .
Batman Begins EA Games
Ubisoft
Battle Engine Aquila Infogrames Battlestar Galactica Vivendi Universal Games
Big Mutha Truckers
THQ Bionicle Electronic Arts ,
Lego Interactive Black Electronic Arts
Xicat Interactive
Graphics for Y button do not display correctly in Controller Settings .
Blade II
Activision
There is a slight pause when reaching a save point .
Microsoft Studios
This title consistently runs at a slightly slower frame rate .
XBO Microsoft Studios
This title experiences consistent performance problems .
Midway Games NA Blood Omen 2
Eidos Characters may spin around in a different direction randomly during cut scenes .
When receiving a new ability graphical effects do not display correctly .
BloodRayne 2
Majesco
After reloading the checkpoint there is a noticeable loss in frame rate .
XBO BlowOut Majesco Entertainment BMX XXX AKA Acclaim Breakdown Namco
During gameplay system hangs on occasion while light sources show through walls .
XBO Brute Force Microsoft Studios Buffy the Vampire Slayer Electronic Arts When viewing the opening logos and cinematic it will not display properly .
Vivendi Universal Games
Burnout Acclaim Entertainment
During the " USA Marathon " track performance drops .
Acclaim Entertainment
Pressing Start on attract mode will cause the game to boot back instantly .
When playing split - screen races and on tracks with snow and rain effects performance slows down .
Electronic Arts
NA PAL Cabela 's Big Game Hunter 2005 Adventures Activision Cabela 's Dangerous Hunts Activision Cabela 's Dangerous Hunts 2 Activision
Cabela 's Outdoor Adventures Activision
Activision Activision Bethesda Softworks , 2 K Games
During the prologue stage a green dot appears and will remain on screen while walking down the last set of stairs .
Activision Activision
When playing multiplayer , dots representing the enemy do not appear in the HUD .
Call of Duty 3 Activision
Cars THQ
When viewing cut scenes pixel color alteration will occur .
Casino Catwoman EA Games Championship Manager 2006
Eidos NA Chicago Enforcer
Kemco
Buena Vista Games
Encore 2
K Games
Colin McRae Rally 04 Codemasters
Colin McRae Rally 2005
Codemasters
While on the main menu there is some texture flickering in the background image .
Before the start of a race graphical artifacts appear on text on screen .
During single and multiplayer races there are minor performance drops .
SouthPeak Interactive
Eidos SCi Microsoft Studios Loading screens will not appear , occasional system hangs during gameplay and local multiplayer .
Effects such as dust and smoke will not render correctly .
The game crashes when entering the Dung Bettle dungeon .
XBO Constantine THQ Counter - Strike Microsoft Studios When playing in VGA / HD video mode performance drops occur during single player mode high bot matches .
Vivendi Games
NA
PAL Crash Nitro
Kart Vivendi Universal Games Multiplayer games do not work for this title .
NA Crash Twinsanity Vivendi Universal Games Konami
Random cut scenes display a static image while audio plays normally .
There is an occasional crash during the loading screen .
Microsoft Studios
XO XBO Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon Ubisoft
The Da Vinci Code
2 K Games
There are some environments that are transparent .
There is some skipping during the cut scenes .
Kemco
After the opening logos , a dirty disc error is occasionally displayed .
Dark Angel Vivendi Universal Games
Darkwatch
Capcom
Dave Mirra Freestyle BMX 2 Acclaim Max Sports
The sky is corrupted in the Attract Mode .
There is also a random performance drop during gameplay .
Dead or Alive 3 Tecmo Dead or Alive Ultimate Tecmo
A random crash may occur before starting the opening movie .
Dead to Rights Namco Flickering during third helicopter fight on mission # 6 .
Temporary performance drops on stage # 7 .
XBO Deathrow
Ubisoft Destroy All Humans !
THQ
The weapon sounds cut out during periods of high activity .
Digimon Rumble Arena 2 Bandai Issue
only present in the Japanese version , save data title is shown in English .
TDK Mediactive NA
Doom 3
Activision Activision Drake of the 99 Dragons Majesco Entertainment Aspyr Media
XO Drive to Survive Empire Interactive
A short pause in gameplay will occur when taunting .
Atari Dynasty Warriors 4 Shin Sangokumusou 3
Koei
Kemco Bethesda Softworks
The load game screenshots will fail to render correctly .
XBO ESPN College Hoops
Sega ESPN College Hoops
2K5 Sega
During the intro video , there is some choppiness .
NA
ESPN Major League Baseball Sega
The following issues occur during Xbox Live matches ; controller sometimes fails to viberate outside of the strike zone , logos on player uniforms sometimes flicker and occasional choppy animations when video mode is set to 1080i .
ESPN MLS ExtraTime 2002
Konami ESPN NFL 2K5
Sega ESPN NHL 2K5 Sega
There are texture issues throughout the gameplay and gameplay splash screens .
Euro 2004
EA Games
THQ
Evil Dead Regeneration
THQ
Some
in - game light sources engulf large portions of the screen .
There is some random crashing .
F1 2001
EA Sports
Fable Microsoft Studios
Occasionally there is an audio " scratch " or static popping sound .
Fable : The Lost Chapters Microsoft Studios THQ Family Guy Video Game !
2 K Games
Fantastic Four Activision
There is a random crash during the first full - motion video .
Far Cry Instincts Ubisoft
During three - person split - screen , there is graphic distortion and loss of control .
There are jagged horizontal lines in the attract mode on 480p/720p displays .
Frame rate drops during the second mission , and there are visible texture seams while riding the zipline in the mines .
When using a melee attack after transformation , the knife audio effect plays .
The checkpoints do not save when running in PAL-50 .
Fatal Frame Project Zero Tecmo , Microsoft Studios Missing video during a ghost introduction cutscene in the mansion .
Tecmo
FIFA Football 2003
EA Sports
FIFA Football 2004
EA Sports FIFA 06 EA Sports FIFA 07 EA Sports
The frame rate drops on the opening video , and the in - game cut scenes are blurry .
FIFA Street
EA Sports BIG FIFA Street 2 EA Sports BIG Fight Night 2004 EA Sports Fight Night Round 3 EA Sports Final Fight Streetwise Capcom
The audio and video are not synced in the cut scenes while there is minor flickering in the cinematics .
There is a performance slowdown during gameplay when there is a significant number of objects on screen , and the floor texture is missing in the Pier 15 area of Chapter 3 .
FlatOut
Empire Interactive 2
K Games
Ford vs. Chevy Global Star Software Atari
In Chapter 4 , there is a texture dropout in the cut scene .
In Chapters 4 and 5 , the unlockable concept art videos do not play .
There is a small vertical dotted line distortion on the right side of the heads - up display .
Forza Motorsport
Microsoft Studios Freaky Flyers Midway Games
The frame rate occasionally drops during the game .
Freedom Fighters
EA Games NA Freestyle Street Soccer Urban Freestyle Soccer Acclaim Entertainment Frogger
Beyond Konami
Full Spectrum Warrior THQ
There is some improper aliasing on player models and environment .
XBO THQ
There is some improper aliasing on player models and environment .
Futurama SCi Games , Vivendi Universal Games JoWooD Productions ,
Crave Entertainment Fuzion Frenzy Microsoft Studios Midway Games
Capcom
Infogrames
Atari EA Games
Grabbed by the Ghoulies Microsoft Studios Video output is too narrow on VGA with 1280x1024 resolution .
This can be remedied by selecting a different output resolution .
XO XBO The Great Escape Gotham Games Jaleco Entertainment Grand Theft Auto III Rockstar Games
Grand Theft Auto :
Double Pack Rockstar Games Rockstar Games XO Rockstar Games
There is some chugging during the intro .
Rockstar Games
Midway Games Greg Hastings Tournament Paintball
Activision
During system link and online gameplay , players may be randomly teleported .
Encore Guilty Gear Isuka Sammy Guilty Gear XX
# Reload Majesco Entertainment
The Guy Game Gathering of Developers
There is audio choppiness in videos under the bonus unlockables , and on the extra videos at the end of an episode .
NA
Half - Life 2 Valve Corporation
This game does not play on PAL-60 televisions with composite cabling this does not affect PAL-50 .
Screen corruption in attract mode after console has been idle for a long period of time .
Microsoft Studios
Halo 2 Microsoft Studios Performance problems while playing on the Backwash map .
You may occasionally observe " ghost " images displayed on the screen .
To workaround this , return to the Dashboard and restart the game .
Halo
2 Multiplayer
Map Pack Microsoft Studios Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets EA Games
No graphics on certain objects .
There is a frames - per - second issue .
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire Electronic Arts Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban EA Games
An occasional hard lock occurs when switching to cut scenes .
Occasionally , enemies will become stuck in a loop or just stuck to the environment .
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's
Stone EA Games
Midas Interactive Entertainment An Xbox version was planned but never released however this title is included on Microsoft 's official backwards compatible list .
3DO NA Eidos THQ
The House of the Dead III
Sega
Hulk
Vivendi Universal Games White Wolf ,
Inc. XBO NA I - Ninja Namco
The frame rate drops in World 3 Central map .
Bethesda Softworks
IHRA Professional Drag Racing 2005
Bethesda Softworks
Vivendi Universal Games
THQ THQ Indiana Jones and the Emperor 's Tomb LucasArts
Some sound effects are out of sync , and there is a random crash on the last level .
Indigo Prophecy Atari IndyCar Series 2005 Codemasters Intellivision Lives !
Crave Entertainment XO Jade Empire Microsoft Studios
The Monk Zeng content from the limited edition became available as of the December 2005 update .
Jet Set Radio Future Sega
There is graphic flickering in the main menu .
Evolved Games Vivendi Universal Games , Konami
Justice League Heroes
Eidos Text still appears when scrolling through the upgrade menu screen .
There are performance drops during game play .
There are some texture issues .
Kabuki Warriors Crave Entertainment Kelly Slater 's Pro Surfer Activision Kill Switch Namco King Arthur
Konami Minor video stuttering occurs during the actual movie videos .
The King of Fighters
Neowave SNK Playmore XBO SNK Playmore KOF 2003 not compatible .
Microsoft Studios Game hangs when selecting " Create Match " after editing a party .
Vivendi Games
Eidos , Giant Interactive Entertainment LucasArts
Vivendi Universal Games Incorrect textures are loaded as the player progresses .
Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events Activision Links 2004
Microsoft Studios System hangs occasionally when transitioning between players on an Xbox Live game .
Infogrames EA Games
EA Games
Magatama
Microsoft Studios J Atari Manhunt Rockstar Games EA Games Marvel vs. Capcom 2 Capcom
There is some severe artifacting on character sprites .
Mat Hoffman 's Pro BMX 2 Activision O2
Max Payne Rockstar Games Rockstar Games LucasArts
The thumbnail map does not render .
There are random system hangs preventing progress that occur during the China campaign .
XBO Maximum Chase Majesco Entertainment Microsoft Studios EA Games EA Games EA Games Mega Man Anniversary Collection
Capcom Vivendi Games Micro Machines Infogrames
Mike Tyson
Heavyweight
Boxing Codemasters Activision MLB SlugFest 2003 Midway Games
All resolutions above 480i / 480p show no video .
There is text corruption throughout the game in the menu , gameplay , pause , and other screens .
MLB SlugFest 2004 Midway Games Midway Games
NA Monster Garage Activision Midway Games
The Press Start screen has severe flickering .
Midway Games
There is flickering on the title screen .
MotoGP THQ MotoGP 2 THQ Engine sound effects play louder than normal setting when at higher speeds .
Engine sounds crackle and cut out during races .
The option to assign keys to the Right Trigger in the Settings menu is missing .
Tutorial videos shake and flash .
MVP Baseball 2003 EA Sports NA MVP Baseball
2004 EA Sports NA MTV Music Generator 3 : This is the Remix Codemasters MTX Mototrax Activision
The loading progress bar is missing .
Ubisoft MX Unleashed THQ
The shadows flicker when leaving the starting gate .
Loading screens have a silver box behind the text .
Distant trees flicker in and out on the Montauk Plains Freestyle stage .
XBO MX vs. ATV Unleashed
THQ
When entering or leaving a race , graphics are polarized .
There is object rendering difficulty on the horizon during a waypoint race .
Shadows flicker in the THQ SX championship on the Tucson track .
MX World Tour
Featuring Jamie
Little Crave Entertainment
Ubisoft Namco Museum
Namco Namco Museum 50th Anniversary
Arcade Collection
Namco EA Sports NASCAR Thunder 2002 EA Sports
There is audio static throughout the game , and the performance drops when the rear view mirror is enabled .
NA NASCAR Thunder 2003
EA Sports
There is audio static throughout the game , the audio effects are loud when in the in - car view , and there is some flickering in the Pause menu .
NA NBA Ballers Midway Games NBA Inside Drive 2002 Microsoft Studios NBA 2K3
Sega NA NBA Live 2002 EA Games
NBA Live 2004
EA Sports NBA Street V3
EA Sports BIG
There is audio stuttering in the introductory video .
NCAA College
Basketball 2K3 Sega NCAA Football 06 EA Sports
During gameplay there is some audio static .
NCAA March Madness 06 EA Sports Performance problems occur during the intro video , there is some audio stutter during the game setup , and
minor audio static occurs during gameplay .
NA NCAA March Madness 2005
EA Sports Video stutters during the introductory video .
NA EA Games
NFL 2K2 Sega NA NFL 2K3
Sega NA NFL Blitz 2002
Midway Games
NFL Blitz 2003
Midway Games
NFL Blitz Pro Midway Games
NFL Fever 2004
Microsoft Studios NHL 2004 EA Sports NHL 2005 EA Sports Audio and video are out of sync in the introductory cinematic .
NHL 2K3
Sega NA NHL Hitz 2003
Midway Games NHL Hitz Pro Midway Games
During faceoffs and replays , there is minor flickering on the players .
NightCaster Microsoft Studios Audio dialogue ends early during the gameplay , and there is a minor performance drop during the opening and closing of the spellbook .
Ninja Gaiden
Tecmo
The unlockable NES arcade games can not be played .
Ninja Gaiden Black Tecmo
This title is rendered at a slightly reduced speed on PAL-50 televisions .
The game runs normally under PAL-60 .
The unlockable NES arcade game ca n't be played .
NTRA Breeders ' Cup World Thoroughbred Championships Bethesda Video in the Start menu skips .
NA Infogrames
The frame rate drops during in - game cinematics , and the sound effects sound very distant .
Open Season Ubisoft
The camera is jittery when running uphill on the Beaver Damage Stage .
Outlaw Golf
2 Global Star Software Outlaw Golf
9 More Holes of X - mas Simon & Schuster Frame rate drops during gameplay .
Outlaw Tennis
Global Star Software Outlaw Volleyball Simon & Schuster Flickering background graphics occur during a match .
Outlaw Volleyball : Red Hot Simon & Schuster OutRun 2 Microsoft Studios Audio loops occasionally get stuck .
Graphics do not always stream in time around checkpoints .
Performance drops during game play .
Sega
The loading screen hangs .
Over the Hedge Activision Pac - Man World 3 NamcoElectronic Arts
Character motion can be blurry .
Panzer Dragoon Orta
Sega XBO JoWooD Entertainment XBO PAL Pariah Groove Games
There is a minor , but recurring , drop in performance during gameplay .
The Loading bar does not display until it is almost full .
There is a green line in the pre - game introduction video .
Phantom Crash
Phantagram Phantom Dust Majesco Entertainment , Microsoft Studios
The system occasionally hangs during gameplay .
Crave Entertainment Activision Playboy
the Mansion Arush Entertainment , Groove Games Vivendi Universal Games Ubisoft Unlockable mini - games do not play correctly for this title .
XBO Pro Race Driver
TOCA Race Driver Codemasters Project
Gotham Racing Microsoft Studios
There is a performance drop on the Tokyo map .
Project Gotham Racing 2 Microsoft Studios Cars do n't render properly in Car Select and Transmission Select .
The car radio does not work in - game .
A graphic error occurs when choosing Xbox Demos .
Psychonauts
Double Fine
Productions NA PAL Pump It Up :
Exceed Mastiff
The Punisher THQ Pure Pinball XS Games
Puyo Pop Fever
Sega J Quantum Redshift Microsoft Studios RalliSport Challenge Microsoft Studios Rapala Pro Fishing Activision
The compass fails to load in certain levels , and fish can become stuck in the rocks when on the line .
Rayman Arena Ubisoft
Raze 's Hell Majesco Entertainment Red Dead Revolver Rockstar Games
There is some graphics flicker in HD video mode .
Red Faction II
THQ XBO RedCard 20 - 03
Midway Games
Reservoir Dogs
Eidos Return To Castle Wolfenstein :
Tides of War Activision Richard Burns Rally SCi Game play pauses during Exercise in the Rally School .
PAL Run Like Hell
Interplay Entertainment RoadKill Midway Games Main Menu does not display .
Press A to launch single player mode .
ZOO Digital Group , Capcom
TDK Mediactive
Rocky Ubisoft NA Rocky Legends
Ubisoft Rogue Ops
Kemco Rogue Trooper Eidos Rugby 2006
EA Sports
There is audio stuttering during the gameplay , and players render as a dark silhouette on the right side of the field but only during the first game played .
Rugby League 2 Tru Blu Entertainment Sega
An Xbox version was planned but never released however this title is included on Microsoft 's official backwards compatible list .
Samurai Warriors
Koei Vivendi Games
Scooby - Doo !
Night of 100 Frights THQ Scrapland THQ Sega GT 2002
Sega Title plays very slowly .
Sega GT
Online
Sega Performance drops too low on many levels .
Sega Soccer Slam
Sega
Serious Sam Gathering of Developers Atari Performance drops with poor frame - per - second rate in gameplay .
Shadow
the Hedgehog Sega Shamu 's Deep Sea Adventures Activision Shark Tale Activision
While running at 480p in - game cinematics are choppy .
Shattered Union
2 K Games
Eidos Shenmue II Microsoft Studios Shinchou Mahjong ( Nobunaga Mahjong ) E - Frontier
A line - like graphic is displayed near the character 's neck .
TDK Mediactive Sid Meier 's Pirates !
2
K Games
While sailing on the world map , there are occasional choppy animations .
Konami PAL version ( Silent Hill 2 : Inner Fears ) is NOT compatible .
Konami Visible seams on NPC 's faces during cutscenes .
Vivendi Universal Games Electronic Arts
The Sims 2 Electronic Arts
Smashing Drive
Namco
Sneakers
Microsoft Studios
NA PAL Sonic Heroes Sega Sonic Mega Collection
Plus Sega Sonic Riders Sega Soul Calibur II Namco
The controller vibration does not work .
Namco Speed Kings
Acclaim Entertainment Sphinx and the Cursed Mummy THQ Spider - Man Activision Spider - Man
2 Activision Textures flicker during the game .
Splat Magazine
Renegade Paintball Take - Two
Interactive
THQ THQ
The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie
THQ
Certain textures load incorrectly in the game .
Spy Hunter 2 Midway Games Midway Games Vivendi Universal Games SSX 3 Electronic Arts
This title has minor graphical glitches .
XBO Metro3D , Inc. LucasArts
In some instances , system link games may freeze .
XBO LucasArts XBO LucasArts LucasArts Can not play multiplayer or split - screen games for this title .
XBO LucasArts Minor slowdown during menu selections and transitions , minor performance issues during cut scenes .
Items on HUD may randomly become solid instead of transparent .
XBO LucasArts XBO LucasArts XBO LucasArts XBO Starsky and Hutch Empire Interactive State of Emergency Rockstar Games Street Fighter Anniversary Collection Capcom Street Racing Syndicate Namco Stubbs the Zombie in " Rebel Without a Pulse "
Aspyr Media XO The Suffering Midway Games
Super Bubble Pop
Jaleco
Super Monkey Ball Deluxe
Sega
SX Superstar
AKA Acclaim
Syberia II
XS Games Game takes almost a minute to load from the Xbox splash screen .
There are graphical issues when moving between screens .
Infogrames
During World 3 , Stage 2 : Haunted there is a partially mis - textured graphic .
The reconnect controller screen is not displayed .
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
Konami Konami
The introductory video stutters .
Infogrames Atari
There is a minor performance drop during gameplay .
The black bars are not positioned properly at 640x480 VGA .
Test Drive TD Overdrive Infogrames
There are minor performance drops and minor texture flickering during gameplay .
Character voices are missing during cut scenes from stage 35 until end of game .
NA Atari Tetris Worlds
THQ
Only the " offline version " is compatible .
The " Xbox Live - enabled " version is not compatible .
Eidos
The Thing Vivendi Universal Games
Thousand Land
FromSoftware
Thrillville LucasArts
There is an occasional random crash during gameplay .
The Pirate Raiders mini - game sometimes loads without environments .
In the Event Horizon mini - game , enemy sprites are missing and are replaced by a white rectangle .
Tiger Woods
PGA Tour 07
EA Games
NewKidCo
Tom Clancy 's Ghost Recon Ubisoft Tom Clancy 's Ghost Recon 2 Ubisoft Night vision does n't work properly in split - screen multiplayer .
Ubisoft
In split - screen multiplayer games , the screen is completely black .
Ubisoft
In - game voice chat is not working .
Tom Clancy 's Rainbow Six 3 Ubisoft
Ubisoft
Ubisoft
Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell Ubisoft
Ubisoft
Ubisoft
When accessing Versus Mode , the system occasionally hangs and the video signal is corrupted .
Frame rate drops in the second and third missions .
The Save File Snapshot Photo is corrupted after saving .
Ubisoft Tony Hawk 's American Wasteland Activision Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 2X Activision
There are graphic obstructions in system link .
Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 3 Activision Client soft locks after the host leaves a system link game .
Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 4 Activision Tony Hawk 's Underground Activision Tony Hawk 's Underground 2 Activision Torino 2006 2
K Games
Ubisoft
Toxic Grind
THQ TransWorld Surf Infogrames
Trigger Man
Crave Entertainment
Trivial Pursuit Unhinged Atari Stuttering occurs during the logo animations during at start up on the splash screen .
Texture errors on occur on command prompts .
Activision
When operating the car , a small indistinct screen appears .
Graphic defects are displayed around the track name .
Acclaim Entertainment
During gameplay there are flickering textures .
Ty the Tasmanian Tiger EA Games EA Games Activision Value Ultimate Spider - Man Activision
The frame rate drops in the in - game cinematics , and there is random texture flickering on various surfaces .
Ultra Bust - a - Move Ultra Puzzle Bobble Majesco Entertainment Midway Games
The frame rate drops in the Story Mode character selection screen .
There are occasional system hangs during Instant Action games , and after leaving the game while navigating back to the Xbox Dashboard .
There are some missing textures on the Eternal map .
EA Games
In the Cozmo Street area the game stutters .
While on loading screens random system hardlocks will occur .
Van Helsing Vivendi Universal Games
At the top edge of the man menu and mission briefing screens there is flickering .
Vexx Acclaim Entertainment
Vietcong :
Purple Haze Gathering Volvo : Drive For Life Microsoft Studios Wakeboarding Unleashed featuring Shaun Murray Activision
WarPath Groove Games NA
Whacked !
Microsoft Studios Loading screens do not display correctly .
While on the High Rise level characters will flicker .
During the Space Walk level there is some texture tearing when in combat or being knocked off the platform .
Koei
When switching to character B there are some missing textures .
Without Warning Capcom
Some texture corruption , gameplay freezes briefly .
World Series Baseball 2K3 Sega World Soccer Winning Eleven 8 International Pro Evolution Soccer 4 Winning Eleven 8 Konami World Soccer Winning Eleven 9 Pro Evolution Soccer 5
Winning Eleven
9 Konami
Worms 3D Sega Codemasters , Majesco Entertainment Sega Wrath Unleashed LucasArts
Upon completion of a battle the " You are Victorious " audio file may play twice .
Only weapons and armor of the models are drawn .
Game units " Centaur " and " Centabra " will not display on the map .
WWE Raw 2
THQ WWF Raw THQ
When six characters are present on screen the game runs very slowly .
Activision
When approaching locker cabinets they will flash .
Characters / surrounding environments experience minor , occasional texture flickering on later levels Xiaolin Showdown
Konami
XIII
Ubisoft
Yourself!Fitness
Respondesign
Yu - Gi - Oh !
The Dawn of Destiny Konami
During system link play random crashes and the system hardlock will occur .
Infogrames
Zathura
2 K Games
During the first level there is missing audio in the pre - rendered video .
LIST OF XBOX
TITLES REMOVED FROM BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY LIST Section::::List of Xbox titles removed from backward compatibility list .
The following Xbox titles listed below were initially announced as being backwards compatible with Xbox 360 that were later removed from the official list from Microsoft . ! class="unsortable
"
2002 FIFA World Cup
EA Sports Global Star Software DreamCatcher , Wanadoo Electronic Arts Legends of Wrestling Acclaim Entertainment NBA
Live
2003 EA Sports Rugby 2005
Electronic Arts
Sniper Elite Namco
When beginning a single player mission the game hangs .
LucasArts
Unable to utilize Xbox Live on Xbox 360 before the service was shutdown .
When text is displayed there are graphical artifacts .
Tecmo Classic Arcade
Tecmo SEE ALSO
* Xbox 360 system software
* List of backward compatible games for Xbox One NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS