THE OUTSIDERS ( FILM )
The Outsiders is a 1983 American coming - of - age drama film directed by Francis Ford Coppola , an adaptation of the 1967 novel of the same name by S. E. Hinton .
The film was released on March 25 , 1983 .
Jo Ellen Misakian , a librarian at Lone Star Elementary School in Fresno , California , and her students were responsible for inspiring Coppola to make the film .
The film is noted for its cast of up - and - coming stars , including C. Thomas Howell ( who garnered a Young Artist Award ) , Rob Lowe , Emilio Estevez , Matt Dillon , Tom Cruise , Patrick Swayze , Ralph Macchio , and Diane Lane .
The film helped spark the Brat Pack genre of the 1980s .
Both Lane and Dillon went on to appear in Coppola 's related film Rumble Fish .
Emilio Estevez went on to be in That
Was Then ...
This Is Now , the only S. E. Hinton film adaptation not to star Matt Dillon .
The movie received mostly positive reviews from critics , and performed well at the box office , grossing $ 33 million on a $ 10 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In Tulsa , Oklahoma , greasers are a gang of tough , low - income working - class teens .
They include Ponyboy Curtis and his two older brothers , Sodapop and Darrel , as well as Johnny Cade , Dallas Winston , Two - Bit Matthews , and Steve Randle .
Their rivalry is with the Socs , a gang of wealthier kids from the other side of town .
Two Socs , Bob Sheldon and Randy Anderson , confront Johnny , Ponyboy , and Two - Bit , who are talking to the Socs ' girlfriends , Cherry and Marcia , at a drive - in theater .
The girls defuse the situation by going home with the Socs .
Later that night , Ponyboy and Johnny are attacked in a park by Bob , Randy , and three other Socs .
They begin dunking Ponyboy in a fountain attempting to drown him , but Johnny pulls out his switchblade and stabs Bob to death .
On the advice of Dallas , and the fact that murderers in Oklahoma will be executed in the electric chair , Ponyboy and Johnny flee on a cargo train , and hide out in an abandoned church in Windrixville .
Both boys cut their hair and Ponyboy bleaches his with peroxide in order to change their appearances .
To pass the time , the boys play poker and Ponyboy reads Gone with the Wind and quotes the Robert Frost poem " Nothing Gold Can Stay " .
After a few days , Dallas arrives with news that Cherry has offered to support the boys in court , that he told the police that Johnny and Pony were in Texas , and gives Pony a note from Sodapop .
They go out to get something to eat , then return to find the church on fire with children trapped inside .
The Greasers turn into heroes as they rescue the kids from the burning church .
It does n't take long for Ponyboy and Dally to heal up .
Johnny , on the other hand , ends up with a broken back and severe burns .
The boys are praised for their heroism , but Johnny is charged with manslaughter for killing Bob , while Ponyboy may be sent to a boys ' home .
Bob 's death has sparked calls from the Socs for " a rumble , " which the Greasers win .
Dallas drives Ponyboy to the hospital to visit Johnny .
Johnny is unimpressed by the victory , and dies after telling Ponyboy to " stay gold , " referring to the Frost poem .
Unable to bear Johnny 's death , Dallas wanders through the hospital , pretending to shoot a doctor with his unloaded gun , which clicks harmlessly .
He then robs a grocery store with the same gun , but he is shot and wounded by the owner as he flees .
Pursued by the police , Dallas is surrounded in a park and the police kill him after he repeatedly refuses to drop his unloaded gun .
Ponyboy is eventually cleared of wrongdoing in Bob 's death and allowed to stay with his brothers .
Turning the pages of Johnny 's copy of Gone with the Wind , Ponyboy finds a letter from Johnny saying that saving the children was worth sacrificing his own life .
The story ends with Ponyboy writing a school report about his experiences .
CAST
* C. Thomas Howell as Ponyboy Curtis * Matt Dillon as Dallas
" Dally " Winston * Ralph Macchio as Johnny Cade
* Patrick Swayze as Darrel " Darry " Curtis * Rob Lowe as Sodapop Curtis * Emilio Estevez as Two - Bit Matthews
* Tom Cruise as Steve Randle
* Glenn Withrow as Tim Shepard * Diane Lane as Sherri " Cherry " Valance * Leif Garrett as Robert " Bob " Sheldon * Darren Dalton as Randy Anderson
* Michelle Meyrink as Marcia
* Tom Waits as Buck Merrill PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Francis Ford Coppola had not intended to make a film about teen angst until Jo Ellen Misakian , a school librarian from Lone Star Elementary School in Fresno , California , wrote to him on behalf of her seventh and eighth grade students about adapting The Outsiders .
When Coppola read the book , he was moved not only to adapt and direct it , but to follow it the next year by adapting Hinton 's novel Rumble Fish .
The latter film 's cast also included Matt Dillon , Diane Lane , and Glenn Withrow .
The film was shot on location in Tulsa , Oklahoma .
Coppola filmed The Outsiders and Rumble Fish back - to - back in 1982—a newspaper , used to show a story about the three greasers saving the kids in The Outsiders , includes a real story from 1982 regarding the death of a man hit by a train in Boston .
He wrote the screenplay for the latter while on days off from shooting the former .
Many of the same locations were used in both films , as were many of the same cast and crew members .
The credits are shown at the beginning of the film in the style normally found in a published play .
Coppola 's craving for realism almost led to disaster during the church - burning scene .
He pressed for " more fire " , and the small , controlled blaze accidentally triggered a much larger , uncontrolled fire , which a downpour doused .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes has a rating of 64 % based on 39 reviews , with an average rating of 6.1/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " The cracks continue to show in Coppola 's directorial style , but The Outsiders remains a blustery , weird , and fun adaptation of the classic novel . "
Roger Ebert awarded the film two and a half out of four stars , citing problems with Coppola 's vision , " the characters wind up like pictures , framed and hanging on the screen . "
Authors Janet Hirshenson and Jane Jenkins , in a 2007 book , wrote that the film 's realistic portrayal of poor teenagers " created a new kind of filmmaking , especially about teenagers — a more naturalistic look at how young people talk , act , and experience the world .
This movie was one of the few Hollywood offerings to deal realistically with kids from the wrong side of the tracks , and to portray honestly children whose parents had abused , neglected , or otherwise failed them . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The Outsiders was nominated for four Young Artist Awards , given annually since 1978 by the Young Artist Foundation .
C. Thomas Howell won for " Best Young Motion Picture Actor in a Feature Film " .
Diane Lane was nominated for " Best Young Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture " .
The film was nominated for " Best Family Feature Motion Picture " .
Francis Ford Coppola was nominated for the Golden Prize at the 13th Moscow International Film Festival .
" THE COMPLETE NOVEL " RE - RELEASE Section::::"The Complete Novel " re - release .
In September 2005 , Coppola re - released the film on DVD , including 22 minutes of additional footage and new music , as a 2-disc set called The Outsiders : The Complete Novel .
Coppola re - inserted some deleted scenes to make the film more faithful to the book .
At the beginning of the film , he added scenes where Ponyboy gets stalked and jumped , the gang talks about going to the movies , Sodapop and Ponyboy talking in their room and Dally , Pony and Johnny bum around before going to the movies .
In the end , Coppola added the scenes taking place in court , Mr. Syme talking to Ponyboy , and Sodapop , Ponyboy and Darry in the park .
Also , much of the original score was replaced with music popular in the 1960s as well as new music composed by Michael Seifert and Dave Padrutt .
The film was re - rated by the MPAA as PG-13 for " violence , teen drinking and smoking , and some sexual references " .
Disc 2 of the DVD includes some special features , featuring behind - the - scenes interviews with the cast & crew , readings from the novel , additional deleted scenes , original theatrical trailer , and an NBC News Today segment from 1983 talking about how The Outsiders has inspired teenagers across the world .
The director also removed three scenes that were in the theatrical version in order to improve pacing .
Those scenes being : Ponyboy and Johnny looking at their reflections in the lake and talking about their hair , attempting to catch a rabbit , and playing poker .
They can be found on the second disc as additional scenes along with other deleted scenes that were filmed but not put into the movie .
In addition , Swayze , Macchio , Lane , and Howell gathered at Coppola 's estate to watch the re - release , and their commentary is included on the DVD .
Dillon and Lowe provided separate commentary .
A Blu - ray edition of The Outsiders : The Complete Novel was released in Region 1 on June 3 , 2014 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The original film score was composed by the director 's father , Carmine Coppola ; the main theme , " Stay Gold " , was sung by Stevie Wonder .
The original soundtrack included one rock song , Them 's " Gloria . "
SEQUEL TV SERIES Section::::Sequel TV series .
A television series based on the characters of the novel and film aired in 1990 .
It consists of a different cast playing the same characters .
It picks up right after the events of the film 's ending but lasted only one season .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Coppola Pays a Return Visit to His ' Gone With the Wind ' for Teenagers , a New York Times review of the 2005 version