THE IT CROWD
The IT Crowd is a British sitcom originally broadcast by Channel 4 , written by Graham Linehan , produced by Ash Atalla and starring Chris O'Dowd , Richard Ayoade , Katherine Parkinson , and Matt Berry .
Set in the offices of the fictional Reynholm Industries , the show revolves around the three staff members of its IT ( information technology ) department : coding genius Maurice Moss ( Ayoade ) , work - shy Roy Trenneman ( O'Dowd ) , Jen Barber ( Parkinson ) , the department head / relationship manager , who knows nothing about IT .
The show also focuses on the bosses of Reynholm Industries : Denholm Reynholm ( Chris Morris ) and
later , his son Douglas ( Matt Berry ) .
Goth IT technician Richmond Avenal ( Noel Fielding ) , who resides in the dark server room , also features in a number of episodes .
The comedy premiered on Channel 4 on 3 February 2006 , and ran for four series of six episodes each .
Although a fifth series was commissioned , it was not produced .
The programme was concluded with a special , one - off episode , that aired on 27 September 2013 .
The show was critically acclaimed and has become a cult television series .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
The IT Crowd is set in the offices of Reynholm Industries , a fictional British corporation in central London , located at 123 Carenden Road .
It focuses on the shenanigans of three members of the IT support team located in a dingy , untidy , and unkempt basement – a great contrast to the shining modern architecture and stunning London views enjoyed by the rest of the organisation .
The obscurity surrounding what the company does is a running gag throughout the series , and all that is known is that the company bought and sold ITV , and has a chemicals laboratory .
However , it is hinted that Reynholm Industries is a communications company , as Denholm Reynholm claims that the company , through buying mobile phone carriers and television stations , had created the largest communications empire in the UK .
Douglas Reynholm states his father Denholm , whom he succeeds after Denholm commits suicide , once described the IT department as being run by " a dynamic go - getter , a genius , and a man from Ireland . "
Roy and Moss , the two technicians , are socially inept geeks or , in Denholm Reynholm 's words , " standard nerds " .
Despite the company 's dependence on their services , they are despised , ignored , and considered losers by the rest of the staff .
Roy 's exasperation causes his laziness : his support techniques include ignoring the phone , hoping it will stop ringing , and using reel - to - reel tape recordings of stock IT suggestions like , " Have you tried turning it off and on again ? "
and " Is it definitely plugged in ? " .
He also wears a different T - shirt in each episode .
Moss 's wide and intricate knowledge of all things technical is reflected in his accurate yet indecipherable suggestions , while he can not deal with practical problems like extinguishing fires and removing spiders .
Moss has trouble speaking to others in a rational manner , often citing bizarre facts about himself or technology , and is occasionally arrogant around others when it comes to computers .
Jen , the newest member of the team , is hopelessly non - technical , despite claiming on her CV that she has " a lot of experience with computers " .
As Denholm , the company boss , is equally technologically illiterate , he is convinced by Jen 's interview bluffing and appoints her head of the IT department .
After meeting Roy and Moss , Jen redefines her role as " relationship manager " , yet her attempts at bridging the gap between the technicians and the business generally have the opposite effect , landing Jen in situations just as ludicrous as those of her teammates .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Chris O'Dowd as Roy Trenneman – an IT technician originally from Ireland , Roy is often shown to go to great lengths to distract workmates so he can do nothing .
However , when an incident does arise , he is constantly either injured or embarrassed .
* Richard Ayoade as Maurice Moss – a highly intelligent IT technician with a lack of social skills .
* Katherine Parkinson as Jen Barber – a new hire at Reynholm Industries who , after claiming she has had " a lot of experience with computers " , is made relationship manager and head of the IT department , where she is soon proven by Roy and Moss to in fact have very little knowledge of computers .
* Matt Berry as Douglas Reynholm ( series 2 recurring , 3 and 4 main cast ) – the womanizing son of Denholm , who inherits Reynholm Industries in series 2 after
his father , the CEO , commits suicide .
* Chris Morris as Denholm Reynholm ( series 1 and 2 recurring , series 3 guest ) – the egocentric founder and executive of Reynholm Industries , who has very little understanding of IT .
* Noel Fielding as Richmond Avenal ( series 1 and 2 recurring , series 4 guest , special ) – an eccentric and reclusive but kind IT technician and goth who was originally banished to the department 's server room .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Creator Graham Linehan wrote the series .
The show was filmed in front of a live studio audience , which at the time was considered by some as risky , with the format thought to have been surpassed by more fly - on - the - wall type presentations .
This was a deliberate choice by Linehan , who sought to challenge the current vogue for hailing the " death of the sitcom , " stating " I trust my instincts , so I 'm going to do it my way and hope people come to me .
" The first series was recorded in front of a live audience at Teddington Studios and moved to Pinewood Studios for series 2 onward , with some additional location footage .
Cinematic - style footage was also recorded before live tapings .
The title sequence of the show was produced by Shynola .
BROADCAST AND RELEASE INTERNATIONAL SYNDICATION Section::::Broadcast and release .
Section::::International syndication .
The show is broadcast internationally .
In Australia the show has been broadcast on ABC1 and UKTV .
In Bulgaria , GTV began airing the show in July 2008 , while Comedy Central Germany started airing the first series in September 2009 .
ETV has aired the show in Estonia .
In Poland it has been shown on Comedy Central Poland and TVP2 .
In the Czech Republic the show was broadcast on Česká televize and HBO .
TV 2 Zulu has aired the show in Denmark , as has Comedy Central in the Netherlands .
Canal+ runs the show in Spain .
In New Zealand , the show was aired on TVNZ .
The show airs sporadically in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ2 and on the RTÉ Player .
In the United States , episodes have been shown on IFC ; all 4 series and the special are also available on Netflix , Tubi TV , and Hulu , and for purchase in the iTunes Store .
Canadian channel G4 ran the show during their Adult Digital Distraction block in July 2007 .
Reruns of the show also aired on BiteTV in Canada until it relaunched as " Makeful " in August 2015 .
In Brazil , Argentina and Chile the show has been broadcast on I.Sat .
In Mexico the show has aired on Canal 11 since 2010 .
It was also broadcast in Spain on Canal 3xl during 2011 .
ENDING AND FUTURE Section::::Ending and future .
A fifth series was commissioned by Channel 4 , for release in 2011 .
Initially , series creator Graham Linehan had begun pre - production on the new series .
For this series , he worked with a team of writers .
Linehan stated it would be the show 's last series , as a " goodbye to the characters " .
The team were unable to meet regularly , so instead created a virtual writers room using Basecamp allowing the team to communicate online and co - develop plotlines , scenes , dialogue , with Linehan putting together the script itself .
Linehan reflected that the service was a hindrance , as it was such a " stuffy , businesslike service that I think it actually ended up making everyone self - conscious " ; however , there was no suitable alternative .
Despite this , the writers did formulate ideas for stories , with Linehan believing that it could work out .
Ultimately due to Linehan 's schedule and budget the fifth series was shelved .
Ideas for the fifth series included a Die Hard episode .
After eventually scrapping a fifth series , Linehan began working on a special episode .
Due to the actors ' schedules and Linehan being busy with his TV adaptation of Count Arthur Strong , as well as working on The Walshes , it was not until June 2013 that they were able to film the episode .
Linehan has stated that there are certain characters he would like to explore in future spin - off style specials , particularly Matt Berry 's character , Douglas .
In an interview in 2014 , expanding upon revisiting Douglas , Linehan stated he has a half - formed idea , but with Matt Berry busy with his series Toast of London , Linehan will " pounce when he 's taking a rest " .
Linehan has also expressed reprising Benedict Wong 's character Prime from the episode " Final Countdown " .
Wong has also said that he would be " thrilled " if Prime got his own series , joking it would be called Prime Time .
HOME VIDEO RELEASES
Region 1 ! scope="col " Region 2 !
scope="col " Region 4
The first series was released in the UK as The IT Crowd – Version 1.0 on 13 November 2006 by
2 Entertain Video Ltd. The DVD start - up sequence and subsequent menus are designed to resemble a ZX Spectrum .
The DVD also included a short film written and directed by Linehan called Hello Friend , his directorial debut , and a tongue in cheek behind - the - scenes documentary presented by Ken Korda , a film maker created and portrayed by comedian Adam Buxton ( of Adam and Joe ) .
The IT Crowd – Version 2.0 DVD was released in the UK on 1 October 2007 , together with a box set containing both the first and second series .
Retail chain HMV sold an exclusive limited edition version featuring a set of four postcards in the style of popular viral photos such as Ceiling Cat — here replicated as Ceiling Goth .
While the first series DVD menus parodied 8-bit games , the Series 2 DVD menus parody 16-bit games and make reference to Zero Wing ( all your base meme ) , Mortal Kombat , Tetris and Lemmings .
There are also several ' hidden ' extras encoded into the subtitles .
These are done in much the same way as the base64 subtitles from Series 1 , and include three JPG images and a text adventure game file .
Episode 4 has a BBC BASIC listing , and Episode 6 has light bars in the corner of the screen which can be decoded using a barcode reader .
Series 3 was released on 16 March 2009 , the DVD menus are based on such internet games as GROW CUBE , Doeo and flow .
The DVD for series 4 was released in the UK on 26 September 2010 , also under the 2entertain label .
A box - set containing all four series was also released on the same day , which includes an IT Crowd - themed board game .
The series 4 DVD includes a documentary feature on the computer games which served as inspiration for the menus on each of the series ' DVDs , culminating in the game Windosill , the basis for the series 4 DVD .
The Internet Is Coming was released in Australia 18 December 2013 , but had yet to be released elsewhere until it was announced in November 2015 that a Region 2 DVD version would be released in the United Kingdom and throughout Region 2 on 23 November 2015 .
All episodes of the show are available to stream in the United Kingdom on All 4 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The IT Crowd holds a Metacritic critic score of 67/100 .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The premiere of the show on Channel 4 was watched by 1.8 m viewers , described as " disappointing " by BBC News ; however , Linehan stated he was " playing the long game " and reflected how the first series of Father Ted also " went pretty unnoticed " but went on to gain viewers and awards .
The series 4 finale on 30 July 2010 saw the show reach its current ratings peak of 2.17 million and was highly successful in its time slot .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
The show has won awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTAs ) , the International Academy of Television Arts and Sciences ( the International Emmys ) , the Rose d'Or television entertainment awards , and also from the fan voted Comedy.co.uk Awards organized by the British Comedy Guide .
Individual awards have also come in the British Comedy Awards and Irish Film and Television Awards .
In 2006 , the series was voted Best New British Sitcom at the 2006 Comedy.co.uk Awards out of seventeen nominees .
In 2007 , the series was voted Comedy of The Year at the 2007 Comedy.co.uk Awards , out of over 100 nominees .
Nominated in the 2007 BAFTAs for Best Situation Comedy alongside Green Wing and Pulling , it lost out to eventual winner The Royle Family .
In 2008 , the series was awarded the International Emmy Award for Comedy and the 2008 Rose d'Or for Best Sitcom .
Nominated in the 2008 BAFTAs for Best Situation Comedy alongside The Thick of It and Benidorm , it lost out to eventual winner Peep Show .
In 2009 , the series won the Best Situation Comedy award at the 2009 BAFTAs .
Also in 2009 , Graham Linehan won best television script at the 6th Irish Film and Television Awards for the show , while Katherine Parkinson won the Best Comedy Actress award at the 2009 British Comedy Awards .
In 2014 , Katherine Parkinson won in the 2014 BAFTAs for Female Performance in a Comedy Programme for her role as Jen in the 2013 special episode .
On the same night , Richard Ayoade won the BAFTA for Male Performance in a Comedy Programme for his role as Moss ; Chris O'Dowd was nominated in the same category that year .
ADAPTATIONS
AMERICAN VERSIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::American versions .
An American version of The IT Crowd was almost aired by NBC in 2007 - 08 .
It starred Richard Ayoade reprising his role as Moss , with Joel McHale as Roy , Jessica St. Clair as Jen and Rocky Carroll as Denholm .
The show was produced by FremantleMedia for Universal Media Studios with Steve Tao as executive producer .
Linehan is also credited as executive producer , but states he had no involvement .
There were four writers involved — David Guarascio , Moses Port , Joe Port and Joe Wiseman .
A pilot was filmed in January 2007 , and a full series was ordered , advertised by NBC to be aired in 2007–08 .
According to a report in The Hollywood Reporter in September 2007 , the show had not gone into production and was to be cancelled , despite the fact that a number of scripts had already been written , stating the series " did n't quite spark " with new NBC chairman Ben Silverman .
In 2012 the pilot was leaked online .
In October 2014 , it was announced that NBC is going to produce another pilot for the show , produced by Bill Lawrence .
Like the previous attempt , it did not make it to air .
A third attempt at an NBC remake was confirmed in January 2018 .
Unlike the two previous version , it will feature the original creator Graham Linehan as writer and executive producer .
GERMAN VERSION Section::::German version .
A German version of the show was in production starting June 2007 , starring Sky du Mont , Sebastian Münster , Stefan Puntigam and Britta Horn .
Originally titled Das iTeam –
Die Jungs mit der
Maus ( The iTeam – The Boys with the Mouse )
, the title was changed to Das iTeam –
Die Jungs an der Maus ( The iTeam – The Boys at the Mouse )
at the last minute .
The first episode was aired on 4 January 2008 on Sat.1 and received a mainly negative reception .
It was criticized for the poor translation of the original stories and jokes , poor direction , poor timing , and the poor performance of the actors ,
mainly Stefan Puntigam as Gabriel ( the German version of Moss ) .
Manuel Weis of Quotenmeter.de heavily panned the show , commenting : " It could indeed be possible that the boys of the class 10a from the secondary school of Brunsbüttel made the series .
In short : In this form ' The iTeam ' should never have come onto the screen .
The look is strongly reminiscent of cheap crime documentaries in the afternoon and the actors are reminiscent of lousy Daytime formats .
The climax of these catastrophes is [ ... ]
Stefan Puntigam , who embodies the role of the computer geek Gabriel .
[ ... ] his role seems artificial , exaggerated and in any case badly acted .
" The IT Crowd creator Graham Linehan noted in his blog that the first gag already does not work due to being wrongly executed .
The show was cancelled after only two episodes due to low ratings .
All episodes were later screened on Sat.1 Comedy .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The IT Crowd at FremantleMedia