VIOLIN FAMILY
The violin family of musical instruments was developed in Italy in the 16th century .
At the time the name of this family of instruments was violas da braccio which was used to distinguish them from the viol family ( violas da gamba ) .
The standard modern violin family consists of the violin , viola , cello , and double bass .
Instrument names in the violin family are all derived from the root viola , which is a derivative of the Medieval Latin word vitula ( meaning " stringed instrument " ) .
A violin is a " little viola " , a violone is a " big viola " or a bass violin , and a violoncello ( often abbreviated cello )
is a " small violone " ( or literally , a " small big viola " ) .
( The violone is not part of the modern violin family ; its place is taken by the modern double bass , an instrument with a mix of violin and viol characteristics . )
The instruments of the violin family may be descended in part from the lira da braccio and the medieval Byzantine lira .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
The playing ranges of the instruments in the violin family overlap each other , but the tone quality and physical size of each distinguishes them from one another .
The ranges are as follows : violin : G to E ;
viola : C to A ( conservative ) ;
violoncello : C to A ( conservative ) ; and double - bass :
E to C ( slightly expanded from conservative estimate ) .
Both the violin and viola are played under the jaw .
The viola , being the larger of the two instruments , has a playing range that reaches a perfect fifth below the violin 's .
The cello is played sitting down with the instrument between the knees , and its playing range reaches an octave below the viola 's .
The double bass is played standing or sitting on a stool , with a range that typically reaches a minor sixth , an octave or a ninth below the cello 's .
While the cello ( which developed from the bass violin ) , the viola and the violin are indisputable members of the ancestral violin or viola da braccio family , the double bass 's origins are sometimes called into question .
The double bass is occasionally taken to be part of the viol family , due to its sloping shoulders , its tuning , the practice of some basses being made with more than four strings and its sometimes flat back .
Others point out that correlation does not imply causation and say that these external similarities are either arbitrary or that they arose from causes other than a relationship to the viol family .
They point to the internal construction of the double bass , which includes a sound post and bass bar like other violin family instruments as a more weighty piece of evidence than the external features .
Its origins aside , it has historically been used as the lowest member of the violin family .
All string instruments share similar form , parts , construction and function , and the viols bear a particularly close resemblance to the violin family .
However , instruments in the violin family are set apart from viols by similarities in shape , tuning practice and history .
Violin family instruments have four strings each , are tuned in fifths ( except the double bass , which is tuned in fourths ) , are not fretted and have four rounded bouts while always having a sound post and bass bar inside .
In contrast , the viol family instruments usually have five to six strings with a fretted fingerboard , are tuned in fourths and thirds , often have sloping shoulders , and do not necessarily have a sound post or bass bar .
USES Section::::Uses .
The instruments of the violin family are the most used bowed string instruments in the world today .
Although all share a place in classical music , they are also used to a lesser degree in jazz , electronic music , rock , and other types of popular music , where they are often amplified , or simply created to be used as electric instruments .
The violin is also used extensively in fiddle music , country music , and folk music .
The double bass plays an indispensable part in both classical and jazz music forms .
One of the most popular and standardized groupings in classical chamber music , the string quartet , is composed entirely of instruments from the violin family :
two violins , one viola and one cello .
This similarity in the manner of sound production allows string quartets to blend their tone colour and timbre more easily than less homogeneous groups .
This is particularly notable in comparison to the standard wind quintet , which , although composed entirely of wind instruments , includes four fundamentally different ways of producing musical pitch .
OCTOBASS Section::::Octobass .
The octobass , a larger version of the double bass , is a rarely used member of this family constructed in the 19th century .
It is extremely unwieldy to play and thus has not found much acceptance ; nevertheless , it can be found in some Romantic - era scores and is called for occasionally in modern works .
The octobass is played standing and its range typically reaches an octave below the double bass .
SEE ALSO
Violin Viola Cello ( violoncello )
Double bass
* Violin octet , an experiment in part to create an even more homogeneous blend of instruments related to the violin .
* Kit violin
* Tenor violin
*
String instrument *
String orchestra
* List of string instruments
* Viol NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Andrea Amati violin , Cremona , ca .
1560
at The Metropolitan Museum of Art * Violin makers : Nicolò Amati and Antonio Stradivari on the Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History , The Metropolitan Museum of violin