NATIONAL TRUST FOR JERSEY
The National Trust for Jersey is a charitable organisation which aims at preserving and safeguarding sites of historic , aesthetic and natural interest in Jersey .
The Trust held its first formal meeting , headed by the Dean of Jersey , Samuel Falle , on 3 August 1936 , and was incorporated in the following year by the States of Jersey .
The Trust is now the island 's largest private land owner , caring for over 130 sites .
FARMS Section::::Farms .
The Trust owns several farms which are of historic interest , some of these are described below .
THE ELMS Section::::The Elms .
The Elms is a former 18th century farm , in St. Peter 's Valley , and has been the Trust 's headquarters since 1978 .
It is n't operated as a museum , but some areas are normally open to visitors .
HAMPTONNE
Section::::Hamptonne .
Hamptonne is a country life museum in the parish of St. Lawrence , and was purchased by the Trust in 1987 .
The museum is operated by Jersey Heritage .
The earliest records indicate that a building was located here in 1445 .
In 2005 , much of the Ecosse Films drama Under the Greenwood Tree was filmed here .
The museum is open to the public , from June to September .
In October , it becomes the venue for La Faîs'sie d'Cidre ( a cider making festival ) .
MOREL FARM Section::::Morel Farm .
This working farm is located in St. Lawrence .
Some structures here were built in 1666 .
MILLS Section::::Mills .
Le Moulin de Quétivel , a restored watermill which is open to the public and grinds flour for sale in its shop .
MILITARY BUILDINGS Section::::Military buildings .
The Trust owns a number of former military buildings in Jersey .
Some of these are listed here .
CÂTEL FORT Section::::Câtel Fort .
Câtel Fort is an 18th - century guardhouse , situated overlooking Grève de Lecq Bay .
GRÈVE DE LECQ BARRACKS Section::::Grève de Lecq Barracks .
In 1810 , construction of Grève de Lecq Barracks was started , and a garrison was stationed here until the 1920s .
It was able to house up to 250 troops .
The barrack buildings , located in St Mary , have been restored and are open to the public from May to September .
LA CAUMINE À MARIE BEST Section::::La
Caumine à Marie Best .
Le Don Hilton , or La Caumine à Marie Best is a former guard house and gunpowder magazine in St. Ouen 's Bay , St. Peter .
VICTORIA TOWER
Section::::Victoria Tower .
Victoria Tower is a Martello tower built in 1837 , and located on Le Mont Nicholas opposite Mont Orgueil .
It overlooks Anne Port on the north side and Gorey on the south .
COTTAGES
LA RONCE Section::::Cottages .
Section::::La
Ronce .
La Ronce is a two - story 17th century granite cottage which is listed as a Site of Special Interest ( pSSI ) .
The stone above the doorway has been incised with what appears to be the year 1621 .
The building has had further additions made , probably during the 18th century .
In 2012 , a 99-year lease on the property was made available to purchase from the Trust .
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
JERSEY
WETLAND CENTRE Section::::Natural environment .
Section::::Jersey Wetland Centre .
In 2012 , plans were submitted to improve facilities at the wetland area known as St. Ouen 's Pond , in St. Ouen .
The plans include a substantial upgrade of the existing bird hide .
The costs are estimated to be £ 102,000 , and funded by the Tourism Development Fund ( States of Jersey ) and the RBC Blue Water Project ( Royal Bank of Canada ) .
LE NOIR PRÉ Section::::Le
Noir Pré .
Le Noir Pré comprises two adjacent wet meadows , also known as the orchid fields because the Orchis laxiflora can be found growing here .
The Channel Islands are the only place in the British Isles where this orchid can be seen , normally during May and June .
LES MONTS GRANTEZ Section::::Les Monts Grantez .
This is an elevated area which overlooks St Ouen 's bay , it features the Neolithic dolmen des Monts Grantez , pedestrian footpaths , grazing areas for cattle , and car parking .
The site is used as a venue for the trust 's annual Sunset Concert .
LA VALLÉE DES VAUX Section::::La
Vallée des Vaux .
La Vallée des Vaux is a woodland valley which lies in the north of St Helier , parts of which are owned by the trust .
FERN VALLEY Section::::Fern Valley .
Fern Valley is a Y - shaped valley in the parish of St Lawrence .
Wildlife found here includes red squirrels and Jersey Tiger moths ( Euplagia quadripunctaria ) .
GALLERY
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * National Trust for Jersey