THE WRECK OF THE TITAN :
OR , FUTILITY The Wreck of the Titan :
Or , Futility ( originally called Futility ) is an 1898 novella written by Morgan Robertson .
The story features the fictional ocean liner Titan , which sinks in the North Atlantic after striking an iceberg .
Titan and its sinking have been noted to be very similar to the real - life passenger ship , which sank fourteen years later .
Following the sinking of the Titanic , the novel was reissued with some changes , particularly in the ship 's gross tonnage .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The first half of Futility introduces the hero John Rowland .
Rowland is a disgraced former US Navy officer .
Now an alcoholic fallen to the lowest levels of society , he has been dismissed from the Navy and works as a deckhand on the Titan .
One April night the ship hits an iceberg , sinking somewhat before the halfway point of the novel .
The second half follows Rowland .
He saves the young daughter of a former lover by jumping onto the iceberg with her .
The pair find a lifeboat washed up on the iceberg , and are eventually rescued by a passing ship .
But the girl is recovered by her mother and Rowland is arrested for her kidnapping .
A sympathetic magistrate discharges him and rebukes the mother for being unsympathetic to her daughter 's savior .
Rowland disappears from the world .
In a brief final chapter covering several years , Rowland works his way up from homeless and anonymous fisherman to a desk job and finally , two years after passing his civil service exam , to " a lucrative position under the Government , and as he seated himself at the desk in his office , could have been heard to remark : ' Now John Rowland , your future is your own .
You have merely suffered in the past from a mistaken estimate of the importance of women and whisky . '
THE END " ( 1898 edition at Google Books ) .
A later edition includes a coda .
Rowland receives a letter from the mother , who congratulates him and pleads for him to visit her , and the girl who begs for him .
( External links : undated edition at titanic-titanic.com ) SIMILARITIES TO THE TITANIC
Section::::Similarities to the Titanic .
Although the novel was written before the RMS Titanic was even conceptualized , there are some uncanny similarities between both the fictional and real - life versions .
Like the Titanic , the fictional ship sank in April in the North Atlantic , and there were not enough lifeboats for all the passengers .
There are also similarities between the size ( long for Titan versus long for the Titanic ) , speed ( 25 knots for Titan , 22.5 knots for Titanic ) and life - saving equipment .
Similarities between the Titanic and the fictional Titan include : * Similar names of the ships *
Both were described as the largest craft afloat and the greatest of the works of men
*
The Titan was 800 feet long , displacing 75,000 tons ( up from 45,000 in the 1898 edition ) .
*
The Titanic was 882 feet long , displacing 46,000 tons .
* Described as " unsinkable " * Had triple screw ( propeller ) * Shortage of lifeboats * The Titan carried " as few as the law allowed " , 24 lifeboats , which could carry " less than half " of her total complement of 3,000 .
*
The Titanic carried only 16 lifeboats ( plus 4 Engelhardt folding lifeboats ) .
* Struck an iceberg * The Titan , moving at 25 knots , struck an iceberg on the starboard side on a night of April , in the North Atlantic , from Newfoundland ( Terranova ) .
* The Titanic , moving at 22½ knots , struck an iceberg on the starboard side on the night of April 14 , 1912 , in the North Atlantic , from Newfoundland ( Terranova ) .
*
Sinking *
The Titan sank , and the majority of her 2,500 passengers and crew died ; only 13 survived .
* The Titanic sank , and 1,523 of her 2,200 passengers and crew died ; 705 survived .
After the Titanic sinking , some people credited Robertson with clairvoyance .
Robertson denied this , claiming the similarities were explained by his extensive knowledge of shipbuilding and maritime trends .
IN POPULAR MEDIA
* Walter Lord 's book A Night to Remember , relating the Titanic wreck , begins with a summary of Robertson 's novel .
*
The American anthology series used the story in the episode eleven segment entitled " Titan " .
* The novel can be found in some locations in the video game .
* The 2010 Doctor Who audio drama
The Wreck of the Titan by Barnaby Edwards connects the writing of Futility to the Titanic story through time travel .
*
The book was referenced in the game Nine Hours , Nine Persons , Nine Doors * Martin Gardner 's book The Wreck of the Titanic foretold ?
( 1986 )
* The book was referenced in the television series , in season 1 , episode 2 , entitled , which aired January 27 , 1959 .
*
In the League of Extraordinary Gentlemen fictional universe , the Titan serves as the Titanic 's fictional counterpart .
SEE ALSO
* List of fictional ships
* Synchronicity REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * Online edition ( undated novella , as ' The Wreck of the Titan ' or ' Futility ' * Online edition ( 250-page novel , 1912 )