CAST - IRON COOKWARE Cast - iron cookware is valued for its heat retention properties and can be produced and formed with a relatively low level of technology .
Seasoning is used to protect bare cast iron from rust and to create a non - stick surface .
Types of bare cast - iron cookware include panini presses , waffle irons , crepe makers , dutch ovens , frying pans , deep fryers , tetsubin , woks , potjies , karahi , flattop grills and griddles .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In Asia , particularly China , India , Korea and Japan , there is a long history of cooking with cast iron vessels .
However , the first mention of a cast - iron kettle in English appeared in 679 or 680 , though this was n't the first use of metal vessels of cooking .
The term pot came into use in 1180 .
Both terms referred to a vessel capable of withstanding the direct heat of a fire .
Cast - iron cauldrons and cooking pots were valued as kitchen items for their durability and their ability to retain heat evenly , thus improving the quality of cooked meals .
In both Europe and the United States , before the introduction of the kitchen stove in the middle of the 19th century , meals were cooked in the hearth or fireplace , and cooking pots and pans were either designed for use in the hearth , or to be suspended in a fireplace .
Cast - iron pots were made with handles to allow them to be hung over a fire , or with legs so that they could stand in the coals .
In addition to Dutch ovens with three or four feet , which Abraham Darby I secured a patent in 1708 to produce , a commonly used cast - iron cooking pan called a spider had a handle and three legs allowing it to stand upright over campfires as well as in the coals and ashes of a fireplace .
Cooking pots and pans with legless , flat bottoms came into use when cooking stoves became popular ; this period of the late 19th century saw the introduction of the flat cast - iron skillet .
Cast - iron cookware was especially popular among homemakers during the first half of the 20th century .
It was a cheap , yet durable cookware .
Most American households had at least one cast - iron cooking pan , and brands such as Griswold , which began manufacturing in 1865 , Wagner Ware , which began manufacturing in 1881 , and Lodge Manufacturing , which entered the marketplace in 1896 as Blacklock Foundry , all competed for market share .
The 20th century also saw the introduction and popularization of enamel - coated cast - iron cookware .
Cast iron fell out of favor in the 1960s and 1970s , as teflon - coated aluminum non - stick cookware was introduced and quickly became the item of choice in many kitchens .
The decline in daily use of cast - iron cookware contributed to the closure of nearly all the iron cookware manufacturers in the United States .
Many went out of business in the 1920s as seen in the List of cast - iron cookware manufacturers .
Others were absorbed by other cookware manufacturers , such as the buyout of Griswold by Wagner in 1957 , which was then purchased by the American Culinary Corporation .
By the end of the 20th century , Lodge Manufacturing was the only remaining manufacturer of cast - iron cookware in the United States .
Today , of the large selection of cookware that can be purchased from kitchen suppliers , cast iron comprises only a small fraction .
However , the durability and reliability of cast iron as a cooking tool has ensured its survival .
Lodge , Wagner and Griswold cast - iron pots and pans from the 19th and 20th century continue to see daily use to the present day .
They are also highly sought after by antique collectors and dealers .
However , cast iron has seen a resurgence of its popularity in specialty markets .
Through cooking shows , celebrity chefs have brought renewed attention to traditional cooking methods , especially the use of cast iron .
In the 2010s , small startup companies such as FINEX , Element Cookware , Smithey Ironware Company , Marquette Castings , Stargazer Cast Iron and Borough Furnace began producing cast - iron cookware designs for specialty cooking markets .
The Lodge Manufacturing company is currently the only major manufacturer of cast - iron cookware in the United States , as most other cookware suppliers use pots and pans made in Asia or Europe .
BARE CAST IRON
Section::::Bare cast iron .
Cast iron 's ability to withstand and maintain very high cooking temperatures makes it a common choice for searing or frying , and its excellent heat retention makes it a good option for long - cooking strong - flavored stews or braised dishes .
Because cast - iron skillets can develop a " non - stick " surface when cared for properly , they are excellent for frying potatoes or preparing stir - fries .
Some cooks consider cast iron a good choice for egg dishes , while others feel the iron adds an off - flavor to eggs .
Other uses of cast - iron pans include baking , for instance for making cornbread , cobblers and cakes .
Most bare cast - iron pots and pans are cast as a single piece of metal , including the handle .
This allows them to be used on both the stovetop and in the oven .
Many recipes call for the use of a cast - iron skillet or pot , especially so that the dish can be initially seared or fried on the stovetop then transferred into the oven , pan and all , to finish baking .
Likewise , cast - iron skillets can double as baking dishes .
This differs from many other cooking pots , which have varying components that may be damaged by the excessive temperatures of or more .
Cast iron is a very slow conductor of heat and forms hot spots if heated too quickly , or if heated over an undersized burner .
However , it has excellent heat retention properties .
If given time to equalize , the entire pan will eventually heat to an evenly high temperature , which includes any iron handles , making it important to use protection to prevent burns .
ENAMELED CAST IRON
Section::::Enameled cast iron .
Enameled cast iron is cast iron that has a vitreous enamel glaze applied to the surface .
The fusion of the glaze with the cast iron prevents rusting , eliminates the need to season the metal , and allows more thorough cleaning .
Enameled cast iron is excellent for slow cooking and drawing flavor from foods .
Furthermore , pigments used in the enameling process can produce vibrant colors .
While enamel - coated cast iron does n't have the seasoning and cleaning issues of bare cast iron , a similar style of enamel - coated cast iron can cost three or four times its bare cast iron counterpart .
For those seeking to reduce iron in their diet , enameled cast iron limits the leaching of dietary iron into food .
However , some of the benefits of bare cast iron , such as the ability to withstand searing heat and resist sticking , are lost through enameling .
In addition , chipping of the enamel coating can occur if the pan is dropped , overheated , or cold water is added to a hot pot .
HEALTH EFFECTS Section::::Health effects .
An American Dietetic Association study found that cast - iron cookware can leach significant amounts of dietary iron into food .
The amounts of iron absorbed varied greatly depending on the food , its acidity , its water content , how long it was cooked , and how old the cookware is .
The iron in spaghetti sauce increased 945 percent ( from 0.61 mg/100 g to 5.77 mg/100 g ) , while other foods increased less dramatically ; for example , the iron in cornbread increased 28 percent , from 0.67 to 0.86 mg/100 g .
Anemics , and those with iron deficiencies , may benefit from this effect , which was the basis for the development of the lucky iron fish , an iron ingot used during cooking to provide dietary iron to those with iron deficiency .
People with hemochromatosis ( iron overload , bronze disease ) should avoid using cast - iron cookware because of the iron leaching effect into the food .
SEASONING
Section::::Seasoning .
A seasoned pan has a stick - resistant coating created by polymerized oils and fats .
Seasoning is a process by which a layer of animal fat or vegetable oil is applied and cooked onto cast - iron or carbon steel cookware .
New cookware should be vigorously washed in hot water with a strong detergent to remove any casting oils from the cookware 's surface .
A light coat of oil is applied and the cookware is placed upside down in an oven above a large pan ( to drain for an hour ) , the pan can now be removed , then the oven set to 350 degrees Fahrenheit ( 180 degrees Celsius ) and baked for 30 minutes .
Some cookware comes pre - seasoned from the factory .
A proper cast iron seasoning protects the cookware from rusting , provides a non - stick surface for cooking , and reduces food interaction with the iron of the pan .
However , exposure to acidic foods such as tomatoes removes the seasoning , and the cookware must be re - seasoned again .
Enamel - coated cast - iron pans do not need seasoning , as the enamel coating prevents rust in most instances .
It is recommended to maintain the seasoning frequently to keep the food from sticking to the iron .
CLEANING Section::::Cleaning .
Because other cookware cleaning techniques like scouring or washing in a dishwasher can remove or damage the seasoning on a bare cast - iron pan , these pans should not be cleaned like most other cookware .
Some chefs advocate never cleaning cast - iron pans at all ; simply wiping them out after use , or washing them with hot water and a stiff brush .
Others advocate washing with mild soap and water , and then re - applying a thin layer of fat or oil .
A third approach is to scrub with coarse salt and a paper towel or clean rag .
BRANDS Section::::Brands .
The primary producers of traditional cast iron in France are Le Creuset and Staub , though both companies only offer enameled cast iron cookware lines .
Netherton Foundry in Shropshire , England , produces cast iron and spun iron cookware .
Skeppshult is a Scandinavian foundry that produces cast iron cookware and cast iron kitchen accessories .
While there are many well - established brands in the United States such as Milo , Camp Chef , Lodge , Bayou Classic , and John Wright , most manufacture their cookware in China .
Additional manufacturers of enameled cast - iron cookware include Milo , Cousances , Ferleon , Tramontina , Le Chasseur , Lodge , Descoware , Combekk and John Wright .
Several newer brands are associated with well - known celebrities and chefs , including Daniel Boulud Kitchen , Martha Stewart , Rachael Ray Cookware ( made by Anolon ) , and Mario Batali ( made by Copco ) .
SEE ALSO
* Cast iron
* Cookware and bakeware
* List of cast iron cookware manufacturers * List of cooking vessels * Non - stick surface * Non - stick pan REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS