NBA SALARY CAP
The NBA salary cap is the limit to the total amount of money that National Basketball Association teams are allowed to pay their players .
Like many professional sports leagues , the NBA has a salary cap to control costs and benefit parity , defined by the league 's collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) .
This limit is subject to a complex system of rules and exceptions and as such is considered a soft cap and is calculated as a percentage of the league 's revenue from the previous season .
Under the CBA ratified in December 2011 , the cap will continue to vary in future seasons based on league revenues .
For the 2015–16 season , the salary cap was $ 70 million and the luxury tax limit was $ 84.74 million .
For the 2016–17 season , the salary cap was set at $ 94.14 million and the luxury tax limit was $ 113.29 million .
For the 2017–18 season , the cap is set at $ 99 million for the salary cap and $ 119 million for the luxury tax .
The NBA 's salary caps are considered " soft " salary caps .
There are two kinds of salary caps : soft and hard .
Soft salary caps allow teams to go above the salary cap however will subject the teams to reduced privileges in free agency .
If the team goes above the tax line - typically about 10 million dollars higher than the salary cap - they will be subject to the luxury tax ( for every dollars a team goes over they are subject to a variable amount of tax per dollar ) .
Hard salary caps forbids teams from going above that salary cap no matter what the circumstance .
The majority of leagues ( NFL , NHL , MLS ) have hard caps while the NBA has a soft salary cap .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The NBA had a salary cap in the mid-1940s , but it was abolished after only one season .
The league continued to operate without such a cap until 1984–85 season , when one was instituted in an attempt to level the playing field among all of the NBA 's teams and ensure competitive balance for the League in the future .
Before the cap was reinstated , teams could spend whatever amount of money they wanted on players , but in the first season under the new cap , they were each limited to $ 3.6 million in total payroll .
Under the 2005 CBA , salaries were capped at 57 percent of basketball - related income ( BRI ) and lasted for six years until June 30 , 2011 .
The next CBA , which took effect in 2011 , set the cap at 51.2 percent of BRI in 2011–12 , with a 49-to-51 band in subsequent years .
To ensure the players get their share of the BRI , teams are required to spend 90 percent of the salary cap each year , the salary floor for the 2016–17 season will be 84.73 million .
In December 2016 , the league and the players ' union reached a tentative agreement on a new CBA , with both sides ratifying it by the end of that month .
The new agreement will run through the 2023–24 season , with either side able to opt out after the 2022–23 season .
NBA Salary Cap in USD NBA Salary Cap in 2016
USD ( Inflation rate through May 2016 )
SOFT
VERSUS
HARD CAPS Section::::Soft versus hard caps .
Unlike the NFL and NHL , the NBA features a so - called soft cap , meaning that there are several significant exceptions that allow teams to exceed the salary cap to sign players .
This is done to allow teams to keep their own players , which , in theory , fosters fan support in each individual city .
By contrast , the NFL and NHL salary caps are considered hard , meaning that they offer relatively few ( if any ) circumstances under which teams can exceed the salary cap .
The NBA and MLS version of the " soft " cap does , however , offer less leeway to teams than that of the MLB .
MLB does allow teams to spend as much as they want on salary , but it penalizes them a percentage of the amount by which they exceed the soft cap .
The percentage increases as the number of consecutive years a team exceeds the cap grows , resetting only when a team falls under the cap .
LUXURY TAX Section::::Luxury tax .
While the soft cap allows teams to exceed the salary cap indefinitely by re - signing their own players using the " Larry Bird " family of exceptions , there are consequences for exceeding the cap by large amounts .
A luxury tax payment is required of teams whose payroll exceeds a certain " tax level " , determined by a complicated formula , and teams exceeding it are punished by being forced to pay bracket - based amounts for each dollar by which their payroll exceeds the tax level .
While most NBA teams hold contracts valued in excess of the salary cap , few teams have payrolls at luxury tax levels .
The tax threshold in 2005–06 was $ 61.7 million .
In 2005–06 , the New York Knicks ' payroll was $ 124 million , putting them $ 74.5 million above the salary cap , and $ 62.3 million above the tax line , which Knicks owner James Dolan paid to the league .
Tax revenues are normally redistributed evenly among non - tax - paying teams , so there is often a several - million - dollar incentive to owners not to pay the luxury tax .
The luxury tax level for the 2008–09 season was $ 71.15 million .
For the 2009–10 season , the luxury tax level was set at $ 69.92 million .
The luxury tax level for the 2010–11 and 2012–13 NBA seasons was $ 70,307,000 .
The 2011 CBA instituted major changes to the luxury tax regime .
The previous CBA had a dollar - for - dollar tax provision system , which remained in effect through the 2012–13 season .
Teams exceeding the tax level were punished by being forced to pay one dollar to the league for each dollar by which their payroll exceeded the tax level .
Starting in 2013–14 , the tax changed to an incremental system .
Under the current system , tax is assessed at different levels based on the amount that a team is over the luxury tax threshold .
The scheme is not cumulative — each level of tax applies only to amounts over that level 's threshold .
For example , a team that is $ 8 million over the tax threshold will pay $ 1.50 for each of its first $ 5 million over the tax threshold , and $ 1.75 per dollar for the remaining $ 3 million .
Starting in 2014–15 , " repeat offenders " , subject to additional penalties , are defined as teams that paid tax in previous seasons .
In the first season , repeat offenders from in all previous three seasons will pay a stiffer tax rate ; from 2015–16 thereafter , teams paying taxes in three out of four years will be subject to the higher repeater rate .
As in the previous CBA , the tax revenue is divided among teams with lower payrolls .
However , under the new scheme , no more than 50 % of the total tax revenue can go exclusively to teams that did not go over the cap .
Initial reports did not specify the use of the remaining 50 % under the 2011 CBA , but it was later confirmed that this amount would be used to fund revenue sharing for the season during which tax was paid .
For the 2013–14 season , the luxury tax threshold was set at $ 71.748 million .
The Brooklyn Nets , whose payroll for that season was projected to be over $ 100 million , would face a luxury tax bill above $ 80 million , resulting in a total payroll cost of $ 186 million .
TAX LEVELS FROM 2013–14 Section::::Tax levels from 2013–14 . !
Amount over tax threshold !
Standard tax per excess dollar !
Repeat offender tax per excess dollar EXCEPTIONS Section::::Exceptions .
Because the NBA 's salary cap is a soft one , the CBA allows for several important scenarios in which a team can sign players even if their payroll exceeds the cap .
The exceptions are as follows : MID - LEVEL EXCEPTION Section::::Mid - level exception .
Once a year , teams can use a mid - level exception ( MLE ) to sign a player to a contract for a specified maximum amount .
The amount of the MLE and its duration depend on the team 's cap status .
In the 2017 CBA , the MLE was initially set at $ 8.406 million in the 2017–18 season for teams that are over the cap either before or after the signing , but under the luxury tax apron , set at $ 6 million above the tax line .
Teams can use this exception to offer contracts of up to four years .
Teams above the apron have an MLE initially set at $ 5.192 million , allowing contracts of up to three years .
Teams with cap room , which were ineligible for the MLE before the 2011 CBA , have an MLE initially set at $ 4.328 million that allows two - year contracts .
In subsequent seasons , all MLE amounts will be determined by applying the percentage change of the salary cap to the previous exception amount .
Before the 2011 CBA , the MLE was equal to the average NBA salary for all teams over the cap ; teams with cap room were then ineligible for the MLE .
The Mid - Level Exception for the 2008–09 NBA season was $ 5.585 million .
The MLE was $ 5.854 million for the 2009–10 NBA regular season .
Under the 2017 CBA , the apron was initially set at $ 6 million above the tax line for the 2017–18 season .
In a new feature , the apron will change from season to season , with the percentage change ( up or down ) set at half of the rate of change of the cap for that season .
BI - ANNUAL EXCEPTION Section::::Bi - annual exception .
The bi - annual exception can currently be used by teams below the apron to sign a free agent to a contract starting at $ 3.29 million .
Like the mid - level exception , the bi - annual exception can also be split among more than one player , and can be used to sign players for up to two years ; raises were originally limited to 8 % per year , but in the 2017 CBA are limited to 5 % .
This exception was referred to as the " $ 1 million exception " in the 1999 CBA , although it was valued at $ 1 million for only the first year of the agreement .
An example of the bi - annual exception was the Los Angeles Lakers ' signing of Karl Malone to a contract before the 2003–04 season .
The exception was eliminated for teams above the tax apron following the 2011 NBA lockout as many high spending teams were using this as a tool to gain top paid players .
A team can not use this exception in consecutive years ; a team that used it in 2016–17 ( under the 2011 CBA ) could not use it in 2017–18 ( under the 2017 CBA ) .
It also can not be used by a team that has already used an MLE in the same season .
Additionally , once a team uses the bi - annual exception , the tax apron becomes a hard salary cap for the remainder of that season .
ROOKIE EXCEPTION
Section::::Rookie exception .
The NBA allows teams to sign their first - round draft choices to rookie " scale " contracts even if their payroll exceeds the cap .
TWO - WAY CONTRACTS Section::::Two - way contracts .
The 2017
CBA introduced two - way contracts between NBA teams and players in the NBA G League ( formerly the D - League ) .
Before the 2017 CBA , all D - League players were contracted directly with the league , and all D - League players could be called up by any NBA team , regardless of whether they were affiliated with the player 's D - League team .
Now , each NBA team can sign two players to contracts that allow them to assign the players to the G League without risk of being " poached " by another NBA team .
The players signed to such deals benefit by receiving a considerably higher salary than other G League players while in that league , as well as earning a prorated share of the NBA minimum rookie salary for each day they are with their contracted NBA team .
Salaries of two - way players are not included in salary cap calculations .
Additionally , a team can convert a two - way contract to a standard NBA contract at any time , with the player 's salary becoming the NBA minimum for the player 's years of service , prorated from the time of the conversion ; a converted contract also does not count in cap calculations .
EXHIBIT 10 Section::::Exhibit 10 .
Related to the two - way contract , and also introduced in the 2017 CBA , is an attachment to the standard NBA contract known as Exhibit 10 .
A contract that contains this attachment may be converted to a two - way contract at the team 's option .
Exhibit 10 can be used only in one - year , non - guaranteed contracts for the minimum NBA salary , with no bonuses except for an " Exhibit 10 bonus " of $ 5,000 to $ 50,000 .
The bonus is paid if the player is waived by his NBA team , signs with the G League , is assigned to that NBA team 's G League affiliate , and remains with the affiliate at least 60 days .
The bonus is not counted against the salary cap , but is counted in overall league salaries .
Each NBA team is limited to six active contracts that contain Exhibit 10 at any given time .
LARRY BIRD
EXCEPTION Section::::Larry Bird exception .
Perhaps the most well - known of the NBA 's salary cap exceptions is the Larry Bird exception , so named because the Boston Celtics were the first team permitted to exceed the salary cap to re - sign one of their own players ( in that case , Larry Bird ) .
Free agents who qualify for this exception are called " qualifying veteran free agents " or " Bird Free Agents " in the CBA , and this exception falls under the terms of the Veteran Free Agent exception .
In essence , the Larry Bird exception allows teams to exceed the salary cap to re - sign their own free agents , at an amount up to the maximum salary .
To qualify as a Bird free agent , a player must have played three seasons without being waived or changing teams as a free agent .
Players claimed after being amnestied have their Bird rights transferred to their new team .
Other players claimed off waivers are not eligible for the full Bird exception , but may qualify for the early Bird exception .
Prior to an arbitrator ruling in June 2012 , all players that were waived and changed teams lost their Bird rights .
This means a player can obtain " Bird rights " by playing under three one - year contracts , a single contract of at least three years , or any combination thereof .
It also means that when a player is traded , his Bird rights are traded with him , and his new team can use the Bird exception to re - sign him .
Since the 2011 CBA , Bird - exception contracts can be up to five years in length , down from six under the 2005 CBA .
EARLY BIRD EXCEPTION Section::::Early Bird exception .
The lesser form of the Larry Bird exception is the " early Bird " exception .
Free agents who qualify for this exception are called " early qualifying veteran free agents " , and qualify after playing two seasons with the same team .
Players that are traded or claimed off waivers have their Bird rights transferred to their new team .
Prior to an arbitrator ruling in June 2012 , all players that were waived and changed teams lost their Bird rights .
Using this exception , a team can re - sign its own free agent for either 175 % of his salary the previous season , or the NBA 's average salary , whichever is greater .
Early Bird contracts must be for at least two seasons , but can last no longer than four seasons .
If a team agrees to a trade that would make a player lose his Early Bird Rights , he has the power to veto the trade .
A much - publicized example for this was Devean George , who vetoed his inclusion into a larger trade during the 2007–08 season that would have sent him from the Dallas Mavericks to the New Jersey Nets .
NON - BIRD EXCEPTION Section::::Non - Bird exception .
" Non - qualifying free agents " ( those who do not qualify under either the Larry Bird exception or the early Bird exception ) are subject to the non - Bird exception .
Under this exception , teams can re - sign a player to a contract beginning at either 120 % of his salary for the previous season , or 120 % of the league 's minimum salary , whichever amount is higher .
Contracts signed under the Non - Bird exception can last up to four years ( down from six under the 2005 CBA ) .
MINIMUM SALARY
EXCEPTION Section::::Minimum Salary Exception .
Teams can sign players for the NBA 's minimum salary even if they are over the cap , for up to two years in length .
In the case of two - year contracts , the second - season salary is the minimum salary for that season .
The contract may not contain a signing bonus .
This exception also allows minimum - salary players to be acquired via trade .
There is no limit to the number of players that can be signed or acquired using this exception .
TRADED PLAYER EXCEPTION Section::::Traded Player Exception .
If a team trades away a player with a higher salary than the player they acquire in return ( the deal hereafter referred to as " Trade # 1 " ) , they receive a Traded Player Exception , also known as a " Trade Exception .
" Teams with a trade exception have up to a year in which they can acquire more salary in other trades ( Trade # 2 , # 3 , etc . )
than they send away , as long as the gulf in salaries for Trade # 2 , # 3 , etc .
are less than or equal to the difference in salary for Trade # 1 .
This exception is particularly useful when teams trade draft picks directly for a player ; since draft picks have no salary value , often the only way to get salaries to match is to use a trade exception , which allows trades to be made despite unbalanced salaries .
It is also useful to compensate teams for losing free agents , as they can do a sign and trade of that free agent to acquire a trade exception that can be used later .
Note this exception is for single player trades only , though additional cash and draft picks can be part of the trade .
DISABLED PLAYER EXCEPTION Section::::Disabled Player Exception .
Allows a team that is over the cap to acquire a replacement for a disabled player who will be out for either the remainder of that season ( for in - season injuries / deaths ) or the next season ( if the disability occurs during the offseason ) .
The maximum salary of the replacement player is either 50 % of the injured player 's salary , or the mid - level exception for a non - taxpaying team , whichever is less .
This exception requires an NBA - designated doctor to verify the extent of the injury .
Under the 2005 CBA , a team could sign a player under this exception for five years ; since the 2011 CBA , it has been allowed only for one year .
Note that while teams can often use one exception to sign multiple players , they can not use a combination of exceptions to sign a single player .
REINSTATEMENT Section::::Reinstatement .
A player banned from the league for a drug - related offense who is reinstated may be re - signed by his prior team for a salary up to his previous salary .
INDIVIDUAL CONTRACTS UNDER THE CBA Section::::Individual contracts under the CBA .
The maximum amount of money a player can sign for is based on the number of years that player has played and the total of the salary cap .
The maximum salary of a player with 6 or fewer years of experience is either $ 25,500,000 or 25 % of the total salary cap ( projected for 2017–18 ) , whichever is greater .
For a player with 7–9 years of experience , the maximum is $ 30,600,000 or 30 % of the cap , and for a player with 10 + years of experience , the maximum is $ 35,700,000 or 35 % of the cap .
There is an exception to this rule : a player is able to sign a contract for 105 % of his previous contract , even if the new contract is higher than the league limit .
The 2017
CBA made a subtle change to the determination of maximum salaries .
Under the 2011 CBA , the salary cap was based on players receiving 44.74 % of the league 's basketball - related income ( BRI ) , while the calculation of maximum salaries used a lower figure of 42.14 % of BRI .
This difference was eliminated in the 2017 CBA , with the same 44.74 % of BRI used for both cap and maximum salary calculations .
ROOKIE SCALE SALARY Section::::Rookie scale salary .
First - round draft choices are assigned salaries according to their draft position .
The first overall pick receives more than the second pick , the second more than the third , and so on .
Each contract is for two years , with a team option for the third and fourth seasons ( CBAs before 2011 provided for three - year contracts with an option for the fourth season ) , with built - in raises every year to compensate for increases in the average salary .
A team may elect to exceed rookie scale for a drafted player that was unsigned for which they retained his draft rights three seasons after the draft .
The contract would be for at least three seasons , with a maximum value up to the team 's available cap room .
In 2017 , the scale for lottery picks was as follows : Second - round picks are not subject to a scale , and technically can be paid anywhere from the minimum to the maximum contract amount .
In practice , they rarely receive more than the minimum .
Prior to the 2017 CBA , the rookie scales for each season were negotiated into the agreement .
For the current agreement , only the rookie scales for the 2017–18 season were determined in advance .
In subsequent seasons , the percentage change in the salary cap will be applied to all dollar amounts in the previous season 's scale .
Amounts that are expressed as a percentage of salary , such as the allowable salary change from the third to the fourth season of the rookie contract , remain the same from season to season .
DESIGNATED PLAYER Section::::Designated Player .
Since the 2011 CBA , each NBA team has been able to nominate a player on his rookie contract to receive a " Designated Player " contract extension .
A Designated Player is eligible for a 5-year contract extension , instead of being held to the standard 4-year restriction .
From 2011 through the 2016–17 season , a team could only allocate a single Designated Player contract at any one time ( if a team had already extended a rookie contract by using the Designated Player extension , they could not create a second Designated Player contract until the current contract expired , or until the player moved to a different team ) ; however the 2011 CBA allowed teams to sign a second Designated Player from another team in addition to the one they already had .
All teams were limited to having a maximum of two Designated Players contracted on their roster at any time ( one which they had created from one of their own rookie contracts , and one acquired from another team ) .
Under the 2017 CBA , the " Designated Player " limit remains at two , but in a new feature , teams are now able to create Designated Player contracts from their own veteran contracts .
In addition , teams may now use their Designated Player slots on any combination of their own rookie contracts , their own veteran contracts , or players acquired in trades .
" DERRICK ROSE " RULE Section::::"Derrick Rose " Rule .
A Designated Player coming off his rookie contract may be eligible to earn 30 % of the salary cap ( rather than the standard 25 % ) if he passes certain criteria .
Through the 2017–18 season , in order to be eligible , the player must be voted to start in two All - Star Games , or be named to an All - NBA Team twice ( at any level ) , or be named MVP .
Officially titled the " 5th Year 30 % Max Criteria " , it has been dubbed ( and is more commonly known as ) the " Derrick Rose Rule " after the 2011 MVP , due to the fact that when the criteria were introduced , Rose was the only player in the NBA eligible to sign the maximum extension ( due to his MVP award ) .
The reasoning for the rule is to suitably reward players being extended off of their rookie contract who are considered to be of a higher " caliber " than their peers , without restricting them to the lower ( 25 % ) salary level .
A player may sign a " 5th Year , 30 % Max " contract before the final year of his rookie contract and before fulfilling the criteria needed to receive the 30 % salary grade .
Should the player fail to fulfill the criteria before the start of his Designated Player contract , he will receive the standard five - year , 25 % Designated Player contract .
James Harden of the Houston Rockets and Anthony Davis of the New Orleans Pelicans had such a clause in their contract extensions , but both failed to meet the criteria .
The only player in the NBA who was attempting to qualify for a full 30 % contract in 2013–14 was Paul George , who signed a provisional 30%/5 year contract in September 2013 .
George , who had made the All - NBA third team in 2012–13 , qualified by again making the All - NBA third team .
The 2017 CBA changed the qualification criteria for " 5th Year , 30 % Max " contracts .
Players who come off rookie contracts at the end of the 2017–18 season , or later , must meet any of the following criteria to qualify :
* Selection to an All - NBA team ( at any level ) in the player 's fourth season , or in two of the three seasons between his second and fourth seasons .
* Selection as Defensive Player of the Year in the player 's fourth season , or in two of the three seasons between his second and fourth seasons .
* Selection as MVP in any season from the player 's second onward .
These criteria are identical to those for the veteran player extensions introduced in the 2017 CBA .
Had these criteria been part of the 2011 CBA , Rose would still have qualified for a 30 % contract , as he was in his third NBA season when he was named MVP .
5/30 % CONTRACTS Section::::5/30 % Contracts .
The following players have signed 5 year/30 % contracts :
* Derrick Rose ( signed with the Chicago Bulls ; was later traded to the New York Knicks during the last year on that deal ) until 2017 ( qualified by winning the 2011 MVP award )
* Blake Griffin ( signed with the L.A. Clippers ; was later traded to the Detroit Pistons in 2018 ) signed through 2018 ( qualified by making the All - NBA second team in 2011–12 and 2012–13 )
* Paul George ( signed with Indiana Pacers ; since has been traded to the Oklahoma City Thunder ) signed until 2019 ( qualified by making the All - NBA third team in 2012–13 and 2013–14 ) * Karl - Anthony Towns ( signed with Minnesota Timberwolves ) through 2024 ( qualified by making the All - NBA third team in 2017–18 )
5/25 % CONTRACTS Section::::5/25 % Contracts .
In addition the following players are known to have signed 5 year/25 % contracts : * Joel Embiid ( Philadelphia 76ers ) until 2023
* Russell Westbrook ( Oklahoma City Thunder ) until 2017 * Anthony Davis ( New Orleans Pelicans ) until 2021 * John Wall ( Washington Wizards ) until 2019 * James Harden ( Houston Rockets ) until 2018 * Kyrie Irving ( Boston Celtics ) until 2020 * Damian Lillard ( Portland Trail Blazers ) until 2021 Kevin Love was eligible for a designated player contract , but the Minnesota Timberwolves opted for a 4-year contract ( with a player option year included , potentially allowing him to become an unrestricted free agent ) instead .
During Kevin Durant 's final five seasons with the Oklahoma City Thunder ( 2011–2016 ) , he received a Designated Player level salary .
His contract was initially drawn up before the lockout — during which the Derrick Rose Rule was implemented — but was officially approved under the provisions of the 2005 CBA by the NBA after the lockout .
This led some people to question whether the Thunder had ( with NBA approval )
effectively signed two players as their Designated Player , as both were contracted for 5 years .
" SUPERMAX " RULE Section::::"Supermax
" Rule .
The provision in the 2017 CBA that allows teams to create Designated Player contracts for their own veteran players , officially known as the " Designated Veteran Player Extension " ( DVPE ) , came to be called the " Kevin Durant Rule " because it was seen as a reaction to a wave of veteran superstars leaving their teams in free agency , capped off by Durant 's departure from the Thunder to the Golden State Warriors in the 2016 offseason .
The contract is also commonly called " The Supermax " .
The 2011 CBA allowed all of the teams that were trying to lure Durant to offer him the same initial salary of $ 26.5 million .
For a veteran player to qualify for such an extension , he must be entering his eighth or ninth season in the NBA , and have either :
* made the All - NBA team ( at any level ) in either the season immediately before signing the extension , or two of the three previous seasons ; * been named NBA Defensive Player of the Year in either the season immediately before signing the extension , or two of the three previous seasons ; or * been named NBA MVP at least once in the previous three seasons .
Additionally , the team offering the extension must have originally drafted the player , or obtained him in a trade while he was on his rookie contract .
Players who qualify can be offered contracts with a starting salary between 30 and 35 % of the salary cap .
The extension can not last more than five years after the expiration of the player 's current contract ( or five years for a player who is a free agent when signed ) , but can be negotiated and signed one year before the current contract expires .
The extension can be offered to a team 's own free agent as well as a player with time left on his contract .
Additionally , once a player signs a DVPE , he can not be traded for one year .
Ironically , while the rule was intended to encourage star players to stay with their current teams , the first major move by an NBA team involving a player eligible for the DVPE was the Sacramento Kings ' trade of DeMarcus Cousins to the New Orleans Pelicans during the 2017 All - Star break .
Cousins ' contract with the Kings was not set to expire until 2018 , but he was eligible to sign a DVPE after the 2016–17 season for up to $ 209 million over five years , a financial commitment that the Kings were apparently unwilling to make .
PLAYERS ELIGIBLE FOR THE SUPERMAX Section::::Players eligible for the supermax .
Following the announcement of the 2016–17 All - NBA team , four players were eligible to sign DVPE contracts during the 2017 offseason .
All four were named to one of the three All - NBA teams for that season ; two were already eligible under the new criteria .
* Stephen Curry , Golden State Warriors ( met DVPE criteria before the 2016–17 season )
* James Harden , Houston Rockets
* John Wall , Washington Wizards
* Russell Westbrook , Oklahoma City Thunder ( met DVPE criteria before the 2016–17 season )
Harden and Westbrook would not have qualified under the standard DVPE criteria because both signed extensions to their contracts in the 2016 offseason , Harden for two years and Westbrook for one .
The players ' union and owners negotiated a special dispensation allowing them to sign DVPE contracts should they otherwise qualify .
The most recent player to qualify for a supermax contract is Anthony Davis , who has played his entire NBA career to date with the New Orleans Pelicans .
He qualified by being named to the All - NBA first team in , enabling the Pelicans to offer him a five - year extension worth up to $ 230 million , effective with the 2019–20 season .
SUPERMAX CONTRACTS Section::::Supermax contracts .
The first player to sign a supermax contract was Stephen Curry , who agreed to a new five - year DVPE deal with the Warriors , worth $ 201 million , that runs through the 2021–22 season .
Curry signed the contract once the NBA 's free agency moratorium ended on July 6 , 2017 .
Shortly thereafter , James Harden agreed on a DVPE with the Rockets .
At the time of signing , his current contract had two years remaining with total pay of $ 59 million ; the extension will add another $ 170 million over four seasons , ending in 2022–23 .
The next supermax signing was that of John Wall , who agreed later in July to a four - year , $ 170 million extension that will start in 2019–20 .
In late September , Russell Westbrook became the fourth and final supermax signing of the 2017 offseason , signing a five - year , $ 205 million extension that started in 2018–19 .
OVER-38 RULE Section::::Over-38 rule .
The cap also includes a provision to close a potential loophole that would provide incentives for teams to skirt the cap by signing an older player to a long - term deal that would not end until after the team expects the player to retire .
Cap analyst Larry Coon outlined how this potential loophole would work : For example , suppose the Non - Taxpayer Mid - Level exception is $ 9 million .
With 5 % raises , a three - year contract would total $ 28.35 million .
But if they added a fourth year to the contract , the salary would total $ 38.7 million .
If the player retires after three seasons and continues drawing his salary for the additional season , then he effectively will be paid $ 38.7 million for three years ' work .
In essence , they are giving the player a three - year contract with additional deferred compensation .
To address this issue , CBAs since at least the 1990s have included what is now called the " over-38 rule " , under which certain contracts that extend past the player 's 38th birthday are presumed to cover seasons following the player 's expected retirement .
The age threshold that triggered this rule was originally set at 35 , changed to 36 in the 1999 CBA , and changed again to 38 in the 2017 CBA .
The salary for any years that come after the player 's 38th birthday is presumed to be deferred compensation , and is shifted for cap purposes to the under-38 seasons of the deal , with the over-38 year(s ) being referred to as " zero years " in the CBA .
If the player continues to play under the deal ( proving the presumption of retirement wrong ) , the salary that had originally been treated as deferred is distributed evenly over the remaining years of the contract , starting with the second season before the zero years .
This rule had been a larger issue before the 2011 CBA , which limited the maximum contract length to 5 years .
While the threshold age was changed in the 2017 CBA , the mechanics of the rule remained the same .
Notably , several members of the union 's executive committee at the time the 2017 CBA was negotiated were older players who were seen as potential major beneficiaries of a change to an over-38 rule .
For example , the change to an over-38 rule gave union president Chris Paul , scheduled to become a free agent after the 2016–17 season , a potential gain of nearly $ 50 million over the life of his next contract .
Similarly , executive committee members LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony , who could opt out of their current contracts after the same season , had the potential for similar gains with this change .
OPTIONS Section::::Options .
Many NBA contracts are structured with options for either the player or the team .
An option simply gives the party that controls the option the right to extend the contract for one more season at a salary no less than the prior year 's amount .
FREE AGENCY Section::::Free agency .
There are two types of free agency under the NBA 's Collective Bargaining Agreement : Unrestricted and Restricted .
UNRESTRICTED FREE AGENT Section::::Unrestricted free agent .
An unrestricted free agent is free to sign with any team that they choose to .
RESTRICTED
FREE AGENT
Section::::Restricted free agent .
A restricted free agent is subject to his current team 's Right of First Refusal , meaning that the player can be signed to an offer sheet by another team , but his current club reserves the right to match the offer and keep the player .
An offer sheet is a contract offer of at least two years made by another team to a restricted free agent .
The player 's current club has three days to match the offer or they lose the player to the new team ; the CBA prior to 2011 allowed seven days .
For first - round draft picks , restricted free agency is only allowed after a team exercises its option for a fourth year , and the team makes a Qualifying Offer at the Rookie - scale amount after the fourth year is completed .
For any other player to be a restricted free agent , he must be at most a three - year NBA veteran , and his team must have made a Qualifying Offer for either 125 % of his previous season 's salary or the minimum salary plus $ 200,000 , whichever offer is higher .
Teams are limited in what they can offer an unrestricted free agent with two years or less experience .
The maximum first - year salary in an offer sheet is the mid - level exception .
The second - year salary can be raised a maximum of 4.5 % .
The third year salary is limited to the maximum a team has available in their salary cap .
The salary in the fourth season may increase ( or decrease ) by up to 4.1 % of the salary in the third season .
The offer sheet can only increase in the third season if it provides the highest salary allowed in the first two seasons , the contract is fully guaranteed , and it contains no bonuses .
A player 's original team can use the Early Bird exception or their Mid - Level exception to re - sign the player .
If the raise in the third season is greater than 4.5 % of the first year , the offering team must be able to fit the average of the entire contract under their cap .
Through the 2016–17 season , the accounting was different for the player 's original team , where the player 's salary for a given year — not the contract 's average — was counted against the cap .
In some cases , the offering team could exploit a loophole to create what is referred to as a poison pill for the player 's original team , potentially forcing the original team to pay the luxury tax by the third season , as the Houston Rockets did in order to sign Jeremy Lin and Ömer Aşık away from the New York Knicks and Chicago Bulls , respectively .
This could discourage them from matching the offer sheet .
The 2017 CBA changed the accounting rules for the player 's original team in this scenario .
If the original team matches , and has enough cap space to absorb the average annual salary of the offer , it can choose to take cap hits of either the actual contract payouts or the average of the contract in each season .
Before the 2005 CBA , the original team could only use an exception to re - sign a player who had been drafted in the first round .
The 2005 CBA allowed teams to use exceptions on non - first - round picks , with the extension named the " Gilbert Arenas Rule " .
In 2003 , Gilbert Arenas , who had been a second - round pick in 2001 , signed a six - year , $ 60 million contract with the Washington Wizards after his original team , the Golden State Warriors , were unable to match the offer since they were over the salary cap .
JULY MORATORIUM Section::::July moratorium .
Players on a team 's season - ending roster remain under contract with their respective team until the start of free agency on July 1 .
During a period in the beginning of July , teams may begin negotiating with free agents , but trades can not be made and most free agents can not be signed .
The salary cap for the upcoming year is not set until the league 's audit is completed by the end of the period .
Contracts that are allowed during this period are limited to : * Rookie scale contracts to first round draft picks .
* A second round draft pick can accept a required tender , which is a one - year contract that teams are required to offer in order to retain their rights to the player .
*
A restricted free agent can accept a qualifying offer from his previous team .
*
A restricted free agent finishing the fourth season of his rookie scale contract can accept a maximum qualifying offer .
The actual amount is not determined until the end of the moratorium .
* Teams may sign players to contracts of one or two years for the minimum salary .
* Teams may sign players to two - way contracts , convert a two - way contract to a standard NBA contract , or convert a standard NBA contract with an Exhibit 10 bonus to a two - way contract During the moratorium , teams are restricted from commenting on deals .
Teams and players can reach verbal agreements , but they are not binding .
Contracts can be signed once the moratorium ends .
In 2015 , DeAndre Jordan had reached a verbal agreement to sign with the Dallas Mavericks , but changed his mind at the end of the moratorium and re - signed with the Los Angeles Clippers .
A year later , the moratorium period was shortened from 10 to 5 days in what was unofficially called the " DeAndre Jordan Rule " .
The change was intended to discourage parties from backing out of their agreements .
CAP HOLDS Section::::Cap holds .
The end of a free agent 's contract does not remove him from a team 's cap calculations .
During the free agency period ( from July 1 until the player signs with a team , or the free agent 's former team renounces its rights ) , each free agent carries a specified salary cap charge for his last team , most often called a " cap hold " .
Normally , the cap hold can be no more than a player 's maximum salary , or less than his minimum salary , based on years of service .
The only exception is for free agents who made the minimum salary in the previous season ; if the league reimbursed the team for a portion of his salary in the last season of his contract , the reimbursement is not counted in the cap hold .
Apart from these restrictions , the cap hold varies based on the status of the free agent and his salary in the previous season :
* Bird free agent : *
If not coming off a rookie scale contract , and salary was at or above the estimated average salary , 150 % of previous salary .
*
If not coming off a rookie scale contract , and salary was below the estimated average salary , 190 % of previous salary .
* If coming off the fourth season of a rookie scale contract , and salary was at or above the estimated average salary , 200 % of previous salary .
* If coming off the fourth season of a rookie scale contract , and salary was below the estimated average salary , 250 % of previous salary .
* If coming off the third season of a rookie scale contract , the maximum amount that the team can pay under the Bird exception .
* Early Bird :
* If coming off the second season of a rookie scale contract , the maximum amount that the team can pay under the Bird exception .
*
Otherwise , 130 % of previous salary .
* Non - Bird : 120 % of previous salary .
The 2017 CBA will increase some cap holds from those found in the 2011 CBA as follows : * Unsigned first - round draft picks : 120 % of rookie scale ( up from 100 % )
* Bird free agent ( as of the 2018–19 season ) : * If coming off the fourth season of a rookie scale contract , and salary was at or above the estimated average salary , 250 % of previous salary ( up from 200 % ) .
* If coming off the fourth season of a rookie scale contract , and salary was below the estimated average salary , 300 % of previous salary ( up from 250 % ) .
SIGN AND TRADE AGREEMENTS
Section::::Sign and trade agreements .
When a team is willing to sign an upcoming free agent , but the player 's current team wants something in return , it might be in the best interest of both clubs to execute a sign - and - trade deal .
This occurs when one team signs one of its free agents and immediately trades that player to another team .
A sign - and - trade is beneficial to both the player and the teams ; the player receives a bigger contract than he might ordinarily get from a team that he would like to play for , while the trading club gets something in return for a free agent , and the recipient of the trade gets the player they desire .
Sign - and - trades are a reality in the NBA because of the CBA 's rules : unlike baseball , where teams losing free agents are compensated with draft picks or cash , NBA teams that lose free agents receive no compensation .
When a team initiates a sign - and - trade agreement , it must trade the signed player immediately ; teams can not renege on the arrangement and keep the player for themselves , using the other team 's financial situation to leverage the signee into a more favorable deal for themselves .
Also , the contract signed before the trade must be for at least 3 years , with the first year guaranteed .
Because of the contract length requirement , the signing team can not use an exception that can not be used to offer a contract of 3 or more years .
Since the 2011 CBA , the signed player must have been on the roster of his previous team at the end of the last regular season .
Previous agreements allowed teams to sign - and - trade any player to whom they held Bird rights , which do not automatically disappear with a player 's retirement — for example , in July 2012 , the Los Angeles Lakers still held Bird rights to John Salley , who had not played since .
In the , two teams used sign - and - trades on players who had been out of the league .
The Dallas Mavericks signed Keith Van Horn out of retirement as part of a package to acquire Jason Kidd , and the Lakers did the same with Aaron McKie to facilitate their deal for Pau Gasol .
The 2011 CBA put further restrictions on sign - and - trades , with these restrictions maintained in the 2017 CBA .
Since the 2013–14 season , the payroll of the receiving team can not exceed the so - called " apron " ( as of 2017–18 set at $ 6 million above the tax line ) as a result of the trade , and a team that has used the taxpayers ' MLE can not receive a player in a sign - and - trade in that season .
Additionally , the apron becomes a hard salary cap for the first season after the signing .
Teams above the apron before the trade can not receive a player unless the trade leaves the team below the apron .
TRADING AND THE SALARY CAP
* Teams below the salary cap may trade without regard to salary , as long as they do n't end up more than $ 100,000 above the cap following a trade .
* Teams above the cap ( or teams below the cap but would end up more than $ 100,000 over the cap following a trade ) can not acquire more than 125 % plus $ 100,000 of the salary they trade away .
Under the 2011 CBA , teams that remain below the luxury tax threshold even after the trade can acquire the lesser of 150 % plus $ 100,000 , or 100 % plus $ 5 million , of the salary they trade away .
There is no lower limit — teams may divest themselves of as much salary as they wish ( or can convince another team to take on ) in a trade .
* No free agent signed in the offseason can be traded until December 15 of that year or until three months have passed ( whichever comes later ) , a rule that prevents teams from signing free agents with the intent of using them strictly as trade fodder .
For draft picks this moratorium lasts 30 days .
*
If teams acquire a player in a trade , they are allowed to trade that player straight - up for another individual player immediately .
However , if teams wish to package that player with another and make a trade , they must wait 60 days before doing so .
Section::::Trading and the salary cap .
The tight salary - matching rules of the 2005 CBA often required what NBA cap analyst Larry Coon called " trade ballast"—extra players added to a deal solely for salary matching , who would typically be waived by their new teams .
Under that CBA , such players were restricted from rejoining their original teams for 30 days during the season or 20 days in the offseason .
This led to what Coon called " wink - wink deals where players are traded with the full expectation of returning later . "
A notable example of such a deal occurred in the 2009–10 season , in which the Cleveland Cavaliers included Zydrunas Ilgauskas in their trade with the Washington Wizards for Antawn Jamison .
Ilgauskas was waived a week later without ever appearing in a game for the Wizards , and re - signed with Cleveland after the 30-day waiting period passed .
Since the 2011 CBA , a player acquired in a trade and waived by his new team can not re - sign with his original team until one year after the trade or July 1 after the expiration of his contract , whichever is sooner .
BASE YEAR
COMPENSATION
Section::::Base year compensation .
Certain players in the first few months of a new contract are subject to base year compensation ( BYC ) .
The intent of BYC is to prevent teams from re - signing players to salaries specifically targeted to match other salaries in a trade ( in other words , salary should be based on basketball value , not trade value ) .
A BYC player 's trade value as outgoing salary is 50 % of his new salary , or his previous salary , whichever is greater .
BYC applies only to players who re - sign with their previous team and receive a raise greater than 20 % .
It also applies only when ( and as long as ) the team is over the salary cap .
Since the 2011 CBA , players subject to BYC can not be traded before January 15 except in a sign - and - trade , and BYC is only applied to outgoing salary in sign - and - trade deals .
WAIVERS Section::::Waivers .
NBA teams can release a player to the waiver wire , where he can stay for 48 hours ( during the regular season ) .
While he is on waivers , other teams may claim him , for his existing salary .
If he is not claimed , he is said to have " cleared waivers " , and is treated like any free agent , able to sign with any team ( with the special restriction noted above for players who were traded and then waived ) .
Players waived after March 1 are not eligible to be on a team 's playoff roster .
The deadline was March 23 during the lockout - shortened 2011–12 season .
RELEASED PLAYERS Section::::Released players .
Released / waived players with guaranteed contracts continue to be included in their former team 's payroll .
Players whose contracts are guaranteed are included in team salary in the amount they made while they were with the team .
Players on non - guaranteed " summer contracts " are not included in team salary unless they make the regular season roster .
If another team signs a released player who had a guaranteed contract ( as long as the player has cleared waivers ) , the player 's original team is allowed to reduce the amount of money they still owe the player ( and lower their team payroll ) by the right of set - off .
This is true if the player signs with any professional team — it does not even have to be an NBA team .
The amount the original team gets to set off is limited to one - half the difference between the player 's new salary and a pro - rated share of the minimum salary for a one - year veteran ( if the player is a rookie , then the rookie minimum is used instead ) .
STRETCH PROVISION Section::::Stretch provision .
Both the 2005 and 2011 CBAs contained a so - called " stretch " provision regarding payment of guaranteed money to waived players and its effect on the salary cap ; the 2011 provisions were kept in the 2017 CBA .
Under the 2005 CBA , players and teams could alter the schedule of payments to waived players by mutual agreement .
The remaining guaranteed salary was equally spread across the remaining years of the player 's contract .
The 2011 CBA dramatically changed this regime .
While contracts signed under the 2005 CBA remained under the original scheme , different rules apply to contracts signed since the 2011 CBA went into effect .
Today , when a team waives a player , it can spread the remaining guaranteed salary ( and its accompanying cap hit ) over twice the remaining length of the contract , plus one year .
According to Coon , " if a team has an underperforming player with one season remaining at $ 12 million , the team can waive him and stretch his salary across three seasons at $ 4 million per season . "
AMNESTY CLAUSE Section::::Amnesty clause .
The NBA Amnesty Clause provided franchises a means of escaping a contractual obligation to a player whose performance falls far short of the extremely large salary they initially agreed to pay him .
Under the 2005 CBA , one player could be waived prior to the start of the 2005–06 season and not count toward the luxury tax .
Unlike the 2011 CBA , the player still counted under the salary cap .
The 2005 amnesty provision was derisively named the " Allan Houston Rule " , but his team , the New York Knicks , actually did n't use the measure on Houston — they instead applied it to Jerome Williams due to
Allan Houston later retiring under medical circumstances the same season .
Ironically enough , Jerome Williams would retire as well from the NBA just two days after being under the amnesty clause for the Knicks that season .
Under the 2011 Collective Bargaining Agreement ( CBA ) , each franchise is allowed to waive one player prior to the start of any season between the 2011–12 and 2015–16 seasons .
The remaining salary still contractually owed will not be included in the salary cap or luxury tax totals of the team terminating his employment .
Only players signed prior to the 2011–12 season can be " amnestied " .
The clause can be exercised during the seven days following the NBA 's July moratorium period on player transactions .
The clause 's provisions allow a rival team to claim an amnestied player at a significantly ( often , dramatically ) reduced salary ; the waiving team only has to pay the player the remaining balance .
The team with the highest bid acquires the player .
If unclaimed , the player becomes a free agent .
Teams over the salary cap can only acquire an amnestied player if he becomes a free agent and the offer would be limited to the veteran 's minimum contract .
+ Players amnestied under the 2005 CBA !
Season !
Team !
Player !
class="unsortable"Ref + Players amnestied under the 2011 CBA !
Season !
Team !
Player !
Next team !
Bid amount !
class="unsortable"Ref
Note
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* NBA Salary Cap FAQ by Larry Coon