FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX ( 2004 FILM )
Flight of the Phoenix is a 2004 American survival drama film and a remake of a 1965 film of the same name , both based on the 1964 novel
The Flight of the Phoenix , by Elleston Trevor , about a group of people who survive an aircraft crash in the Gobi Desert and must build a new aircraft out of the old one to escape .
The film stars Dennis Quaid and Giovanni Ribisi .
Flight of the Phoenix opened in the U.S. on December 17 , 2004 .
The film was a box - office failure , and received generally mixed reviews ; criticism was geared toward its similarity to the 1965 film , while praise related to the acting , direction and visuals .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When an Amacore oil rig in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia proves unproductive , Captain Frank Towns ( Dennis Quaid ) and co - pilot A.J. ( Tyrese Gibson ) are sent to shut down the operation and transport the crew ( Amacore executive Ian , rig supervisor Kelly , Rodney , Davis , Liddle , Jeremy , Sammi , Rady , Kyle , Newman , and Dr. Gerber ) out of the desert , along with a load of cargo from the site to be liquidated or redistributed to another site , causing the plane to be overweight .
However , en route to Beijing , a major dust storm disables one engine when Towns attempts a vertical climb with the overweight plane , forcing them to crash land their C-119 Flying Boxcar in an uncharted area of the Gobi Desert .
Kyle falls to his death and the crash kills Dr. Gerber and Newman .
Their cargo consists of used parts and tools from the rig , the rig 's crew , and Elliot ( Giovanni Ribisi ) , a hitchhiker .
When the dust storm ends , it becomes apparent that they are 200 miles off course with only a month 's supply of water .
Jeremy ( Kirk Jones ) thinks about walking to get help , but Rady ( Kevork Malikyan ) explains that July is the hottest month in the Gobi , and that he wo n't make it .
In the middle of the night , Davis ( Jared Padalecki ) goes out to urinate without informing anybody , trips , gets lost in a sandstorm , and dies .
The group panics after a failed search for him , and Kelly ( Miranda Otto ) argues with Frank , who says that walking out of the desert would fail and that their only option is to await rescue .
The group initially agrees but reconsiders after Elliot , claiming to be an aeronautical engineer , pitches a radical idea : rebuild the wreckage of their C-119 into a functional aircraft .
Frank initially refuses , which causes Liddle ( Scott Michael Campbell ) to wander off on his own in protest .
Frank attempts to find him .
He comes across a valley littered with debris , cargo from the aircraft , which dropped out when the tail was torn open .
Among the debris he discovers the bullet - ridden and stripped body of Kyle , after which Liddle appears saying he came to retrieve his watch which he lost to Kyle in a poker game ; Towns then deduces that either nomads or smugglers used Kyle 's corpse for target practice .
Liddle says he will only go back with him if they build the plane , and Frank agrees .
They struggle for several weeks building the new aircraft , losing their fuel reserves in a spark fire , through an electrical storm , lack of water , and fighting amongst the group .
Rady christens it Phoenix after the legendary bird .
A problem evolves when a group of smugglers camp nearby ; when Ian , A.J. , and Rodney attempt to communicate , the bandits kill Rodney ( Tony Curran ) after Liddle notices that one of them is wearing his watch , but they are killed in a short , fierce skirmish when ambushed by Frank who was with Liddle , save one who escaped .
When going through the smugglers encampment , they find a wounded smuggler and argue about what to do until Elliot walks over and executes him with a pistol .
Towns accuses him of murder , but Elliot states that that Towns murdered him and got Rodney killed by going to investigate the smugglers and wasting a whole days work ; Towns punches out Elliot which causes the project to stall , until they give Elliot creative control .
After it 's finished , it is revealed that Elliot 's aircraft design experience has been restricted to the design of model aircraft , much to the anger of everyone , especially Ian ( Hugh Laurie ) , who threatens to shoot Elliot .
However as a storm is brewing the high force winds cause the plane to lift off temporarily ; forced to take shelter in the old plane 's hull during the sandstorm , they later dig out the plane from beneath the sand and take off , barely in time to escape a larger group of bandits seeking revenge for the murdered smugglers .
Through a series of photos , we see what became of the survivors when they made it back to civilization .
All have been revitalized by the experience :
Frank and A.J. start their own airline ( appropriately named Phoenix Aviation ) , Sammi ( Jacob Vargas ) and his wife start their own restaurant ( Jeremy and Rady are there to celebrate ) , Liddle is reunited with his wife and kids , Ian becomes a professional golfer , Kelly is working at an ocean oil rig , and Elliot is wearing a flight suit on a Flight International magazine cover with the headline : " NASA 's New Hope ? "
CAST
* Dennis Quaid as Captain Frank Towns
* Giovanni Ribisi as Elliot * Tyrese Gibson as A.J. * Miranda Otto as Kelly Johnson * Tony Curran as Alex Rodney
* Hugh Laurie as Ian * Scott Michael Campbell as James Liddle
* Sticky Fingaz as Jeremy * Jacob Vargas as Sammi * Kevork Malikyan as Rady * Jared Padalecki as John Davis
* Paul Ditchfield as Dr. Gerber
* Martin Hindy as Newman
* Bob Brown as Kyle * Anthony Wong as Lead Smuggler PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Co - writer Edward Burns was personally asked by Tom Rothman , who at the time was the president of Fox and had discovered Burns when he bought The Brothers McMullen as Fox Searchlight 's first acquisition , to rewrite the film 's dialogue .
Burns said , " I probably did three drafts of it , and that was it .
I never met Scott ( Scott Frank , the other credited co - writer ) .
" This is the only film Burns has writing credit on that he did not also direct .
Director John Moore scouted locations in Morocco and Australia before looking at , and quickly choosing , Namibia as the crash site .
" Where most of the film takes place , was only a 20 minute - drive from the coastal town of Swakopmund . "
The Namib Desert location caused problems : cameras and other equipment had to be constantly cleaned of sand , and a " couple of hundred people were employed as ' dune groomers ' " so that visual continuity could be maintained .
The set was the site of several mishaps :
* A ferry sank during transportation of a major set piece across a river , forcing the river bottom salvage of the aircraft fuselage .
* Jared Padalecki flipped his vehicle .
* Concluding the aerial filming sequences , the flying C-119 G N15501 suffered a long gash under the right wing when a film truck backed under it and its driver misjudged the truck 's height .
A repair crew was flown in , the damaged segment re - skinned and the aircraft flown back across the Atlantic .
*
On June 3 , 2004 , camera operator and second unit cinematographer Ciaran Barry was " filming behind a plywood barrier intended to protect his equipment " when an 800-pound " fiberglass model plane propelled down an elevated track , bounced off a sand dune in the Namibian desert and crashed into his hut . "
For the latter , in October 2009 a Los Angeles jury awarded Barry $ 3.95 million in damages for broken legs and neurological damage he received during the accident ; $ 1.3 million of the amount was awarded for lost future income .
A behind - the - scenes documentary , " The Phoenix Diaries , " was included on the DVD .
In it , director John Moore can be seen screaming at the crew .
Fox executives are also not shown in a flattering light .
The documentary was not included in the 2006 Blu - ray release .
AIRCRAFT Section::::Aircraft .
Four aircraft were used during the film :
* Fairchild C-119 G , N15501 - flying shots .
( still flying as of 2007 , now part of the Lauridsen Collection at the Buckeye Municipal Airport , February 2010 . )
* Fairchild C-119F , BuNo.131700 / N3267U - desert wreck .
* Fairchild C-119F , BuNo.131691 - Phoenix film prop .
* Fairchild C-119F , BuNo.131706 - Phoenix film prop .
A Phoenix that could be taxied but not flown was built for closeups .
The Phoenix in flying scenes were done using a radio - controlled model and computer graphics .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Flight of the Phoenix has received generally mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a " rotten " score of 30 % , with an average rating of 4.8/10 .
On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 47 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews .
" The main criticism for the film was its similarity to the original ; John Anderson from Newsday said , " if you 've seen the original , there 's absolutely no difference in what happens .
And very little reason to check it out . "
Aerofiles , a non - commercial website focusing on North American aviation history , called the film " perhaps the worst remake ever of a classic film . "
Stephen Holden of The New York Times said the film is a " rickety update of the far superior 1965 movie " that " throws in every cheap trick in the manual to pump up your heartbeat [ and ] is so manipulative that the involuntary jolts of adrenaline it produces make you feel like a fool . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film two stars , writing " I 'm not recommending it for those who know the original , but it might work nicely enough for those who have not ( seen it ) . "
The film did receive some praise .
Scott Brown from Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B grade , saying " refreshingly , it 's actually about action , albeit arbitrary action , and how it defines us and keeps us alive . "
Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times gave the film four stars out of five , calling it " a worthy remake . "
SEE ALSO * Coffman engine starter *
Lady Be Good ( aircraft )
* Tragedy at Kufra REFERENCES NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Flight of the Phoenix ( 2004 ) DVD .
Beverley Hills , California : 20th Century Fox ( Release date : March 1 , 2005 ) .
* O'Leary , Michael . "
By Box to Darkest Africa . "
Air Classics Volume 40 , No . 3 , March 2004 .
EXTERNAL LINKS