TITLE SEARCH
In real estate business and law , a title search or property title search is the process of retrieving documents evidencing events in the history of a piece of real property , to determine relevant interests in and regulations concerning that property .
In the case of a prospective purchase , a title search is performed primarily to answer three questions regarding a property on the market :
* Does the seller have a saleable and marketable interest in the property ?
* What kind of restrictions or allowances pertain to the use of the land ?
These would include real covenants , easements and other equitable servitudes .
* Do any liens exist on the property which need to be paid off at closing ?
These would be mortgages , back taxes , mechanic 's liens , and other assessments .
A title search is also performed when an owner wishes to mortgage property and the bank requires the owner to insure this transaction .
Anyone may do a title search , with the right knowledge and resources .
Documents concerning conveyances of land are a matter of public record .
These documents are maintained in hard copy paper format or sometimes scanned into image files .
The information within the documents is typically not available as data format as the records are descriptions of legal events which contain terms , conditions , and language in excess of data .
TYPICAL PROCESS Section::::Typical process .
Generally , there are two main types of title searching , a full coverage search and limited coverage search ; other types include non - insured reports and foreclosure guarantee search .
It is often the case that people choose to contact a title company or attorney to conduct an exhaustive title search .
The process of performing a title search involves accessing the official land records for the subject property .
Each record is a document evidencing an event which occurred in the history of the property .
A deed records an event of property transfer , a mortgage documents the collateral interest of a home loan , and a lien documents a claim against the property in favor of another , such as a creditor , vendor , or tradesman .
The objective of the title search is to establish clear , marketable title by exposing any outstanding claims prior to transfer of title .
Each recorded document must name the parties involved , e.g. , grantor and grantee .
The grantor is the party transferring away a property right , and the grantee is receiving a property right .
In the case of a deed the grantor would typically be the property seller , and the grantee the buyer .
A mortgage grantor or mortgagor is the borrower of the loan , since they are giving away certain property rights to the mortgagee , lender , or mortgage grantee .
More recent wording simplifies this language with " Borrower " and " Lender .
"
The records are kept in a centralized government office , usually at the county courthouse
( in states with strong county governments such as Washington State or Massachusetts , the title on the door would be something like Registrar of Deeds or County Recorder ) ; or in the municipal offices ( in small states such as Connecticut , Vermont , and Rhode Island ) , often the title searcher must go to each individual town or county office to research the title .
The process of a title search begins with searching for and retrieving each physical document from the books which contain them .
Every document is recorded by date in a special set of volumes called by various names such as Grantor - Grantee index , Land Records or Deed Records ) , which may or may not be digitized or scanned into a searchable file , depending on the financial resources of the county or town .
An official stamp located usually at the bottom of the first page gives the name of the recording official , date , time , book and page number .
If the document has been recorded , this stamp will ALWAYS be there .
The collected documents are then reviewed and analyzed to see how each affects the property , and which documents have been released by subsequent recordings .
Contingent conditions within documents such as life estates and remainder interests may exist within the document language .
This process is often performed by a trained professional called a title abstractor .
Some title abstractors have certifications documenting their experience level and training and successfully having passed an exam .
The document produced by a title abstractor is called a title abstract , or abstract of title .
This is not a document which exists in public records , but it is derived from recorded documents .
The title abstract is provided to the title company , attorney , or end - user by the abstractor .
For example , a title report may also show any easements , or recorded encumbrances against the property or portions of the property .
A previous owner may have legally given a neighbor the right to share the driveway , or the city may have a right to strips of the property for putting power lines , communication lines , water pipes , or sewer pipes .
A few on - line services offer title searches for relatively little cost , and their accuracy is not inferior to what a title company or attorney will offer ; however on - line businesses rely mostly on electronically available information , and for that reason could at times be limited both in completeness and geographical availability .
FULL COVERAGE SEARCH Section::::Full coverage search .
A full coverage search is usually done when creating a title report for sale / resale transactions and for transaction that involves construction loans .
It generally includes searches related to property lien , easements , covenants , conditions and restrictions(CC&Rs ) , agreements , resolutions and ordinances that will affect the real property in question .
* Search for liens against the owner and the other parties on title .
* * Search for liens against the buyer ( for sale transactions only ) .
* * Search for Bankruptcy and Judgement proceedings against the owner of the property .
* * Search for liens against the buyer is not something that is covered in a title search .
*
LIMITED COVERAGE SEARCH Section::::Limited coverage search .
A limited coverage search is usually making title reports for refinance transactions that involves ownership equity loans and for making simple title guarantee reports .
This kind of title searching usually includes searches for property liens , liens against the owner and the other parties on title and search for bankruptcy proceedings against the owner of the property .
TITLE INSURANCE Section::::Title insurance .
In the United States , the buyer of a property will usually purchase title insurance , which protects the buyer from any title problems that may arise after sale , such as liens that were missed during the title search .
The title insurance company issues a report and an insurance policy in support of its findings .
However , title searches are most often carried out before contracting is completed between parties , and sometimes during the escrow phase of a closing .
There are a variety of title searches which provide the customer with a report , but no insurance .
These are for informational purposes only , and are called by a variety of names , such as Lot Book Report , Plat Certificate , 300-foot Radius Report , and others .
These informational searches are used mainly in two instances : * Probate .
This is when a family , lawyer , or court is dividing up the property of a deceased person .
Heirs will want to know what liens they are taking on and who has rights to the land .
* Subdividing .
To create a subdivision , a person takes land previously platted ( legally named and recorded ) under another name and renames and re - plats it as a new development or subdivision .
A report must be given to the city , showing taxes and liens paid .
The owner can then sell the lots individually or en masse , and may record Covenants , Conditions , and Restrictions , which govern how residents may construct their houses or yards , and may limit other activities .
Many subdivisions have noise , pet , and trash regulations as well .
FORECLOSURE GUARANTEE
SEARCH
Section::::Foreclosure guarantee search .
A foreclosure guarantee is a type of report ( e.g. trustees sale guarantee , judicial foreclosure guarantee and litigation guarantee ) that is used mainly for foreclosing an encumbrances ( or a lien ) in a certain property .
The title searcher will perform a full coverage search to the property in default and a search for the addresses of the lien holders to the property in default .
The addresses will be used for sending copies of the notice of foreclosure letters ( such as notice of trustees sale , etc . ) to the lien holders to the property in default .
PROPERTY TITLE SEARCH
BEFORE
FORECLOSURE
SALE
Section::::Property title search before foreclosure sale .
A home foreclosure is often linked with liens held by banks or governmental agencies .
Multiple liens from various sources may be held against a property in foreclosure .
If a home is sold at a foreclosure auction , the proceeds are divided and paid to lienholders in order of filing until all proceeds are expended .
Public auctions ( also known as sheriff 's sales or foreclosure auctions ) are typically held in the municipal or county courts , which neither guarantee an unencumbered title nor offer protection to buyers against additional liens on the property .
SEE ALSO * Chain of title *
Title ( property )