NAVY DIVER ( UNITED STATES NAVY )
A United States Navy diver refers to a member of the community of restricted line ( Engineering Duty ) officers , civil engineer corps ( CEC ) officers , Medical Corps officers , and enlisted Navy diver ( ND rating ) personnel in the United States Navy who are qualified in underwater diving and salvage .
Navy divers serve with fleet diving detachments and in research and development .
Some of the mission areas of the Navy diver include marine salvage , harbor clearance , underwater ship husbandry and repair , submarine rescue , saturation diving , experimental diving , underwater construction and welding , as well as serving as diving technical experts at Navy SEAL , Marine Corps , and Navy EOD diving commands .
The U. S. Navy is the lead agency in military diving technology and training within the U.S. Department of Defense .
The foundation of the Navy diving program consists of the Navy Diver ( ND ) rating for enlisted personnel who perform diving as their occupational specialty in the Navy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The early history of diving in the U.S. Navy parallels that of the other navies of the world .
Since the middle of the nineteenth century , the U.S. Navy has employed divers in salvage and repair of ships , in construction work , and in military operations .
For the most part , early Navy divers were swimmers and skin divers , with techniques and missions unchanged since the days of Alexander the Great .
During the Civil War Battle of Mobile Bay , swimmers were sent in ahead of Admiral Farragut 's ships to locate and disarm Confederate mines that had been planted to block the entrance to the bay .
In 1898 , Navy divers were briefly involved in an international crisis when the second - class armored battleship USS Maine ( ACR-1 ) was sunk by a mysterious explosion while anchored in the harbor at Havana , Cuba .
Navy divers were sent from Key West to study and report on the wreck .
Although a Court of Inquiry was convened , the reason for the sinking was not found .
The beginning of the twentieth century saw the attention of all major navies turning towards developing a weapon of immense potential - the military submarine .
The highly effective use of the new weapon by the German Navy in World War
I heightened this interest , and an emphasis was placed on the submarine that continues today .
The U.S. Navy had operated submarines on a limited basis for several years prior to 1900 .
As American technology expanded , the U.S. submarine fleet grew rapidly .
However , throughout the period of 1912 - 1939 , the development of the Navy 's F , H , and S class boats was marred by a series of accidents , collisions , and sinkings .
Several of these submarine disasters resulted in a correspondingly rapid growth in the Navy diving capability .
Until 1912 , U.S. Navy divers rarely went below 60 FSW ( feet of seawater ) .
In that year , Chief Gunner George D. Stillson set up a program to test Haldane 's diving tables and methods of stage decompression .
A companion goal of the program was to develop improvements in Navy diving equipment .
Throughout a three - year period , first diving in tanks ashore and then in open water in Long Island Sound from the USS Walke ( DD-34 ) , Navy divers went progressively deeper .
The publication of the first U.S. Navy Diving Manual and the establishment of a Navy Diving School at Newport , Rhode Island were the direct outgrowth of experience gained in the test program and the USS F-4 salvage .
When the United States entered World War I , the staff and graduates of the school were sent to Europe , where they conducted various salvage operations along the French coast .
In 2006 , the U.S. Navy established a new rating , Navy Diver ( or ND ) , in the Navy 's engineering / hull community .
Navy divers are often associated with underwater salvage or special operations .
TRAINING AND RATINGS
THE SCHOOLS
Section::::Training and ratings .
Section::::The Schools .
After completion of recruit training or acceptance in the Navy diver program from the Fleet , individuals will go to Naval Training Command , Great Lakes , for Diver Preparation Course ( 32 training days , including 20 days of basic electrical and engineering courses ) .
Upon completion of the training , candidates will go to Naval Diving and Salvage Training Center ( NDSTC ) in Panama City , Florida , for Second Class Dive School , which is 70 training days long .
The center has 22 different courses of instruction and a throughput of approximately 1300 students per year , with an average of 300 students in training at any given time .
The training center conducts approximately ten thousand dives each year .
The NDSTC is divided into Fleet and specialized sections .
Regardless of their section , all candidates are taught : * Basic gas laws as they relate to diving .
* Diving medicine * Decompression chamber operations * Dive planning * Diving physics * Salvage operations
* Surface - supplied diving systems
* Use of all diving apparatus : Open- and closed - circuit rigs * Underwater mechanics and tools , and underwater cutting and welding FLEET TRAINING Section::::Fleet Training .
After completing Second Class Dive School , the member will be assigned to one of the Navy Diver Units to hone the undersea diving and salvage skills required by the United States Navy .
A Navy diver can perform underwater ship repair , salvage , and construction , using either SCUBA equipment or a surface - supplied diving system .
Training for Diving Medical Officers and diving medical technicians is also part of Fleet training .
ADVANCED TRAINING
Section::::Advanced Training .
Many experienced divers return to NDSTC for further course work so they can qualify as First Class divers and Master divers .
SPECIALIZED TRAINING
Section::::Specialized Training .
A Navy diver gets specialized training in demolition and mixed - gas diving .
Navy divers work in extreme conditions , performing various underwater tasks ranging from underwater ship repair , underwater salvage and special operations / special warfare type diving .
Because their area of operations are so varied , they can be required to utilize any type of diving equipment for use in any depth or temperature in any part of the world .
Certain diving qualification allows NDs to live and work at extreme depths for days or weeks at a time , a discipline known as saturation diving .
Navy enlisted personnel that graduate from second class or first class dive school ; and ultimately master diver comprise the Navy Diver rating .
NDs are the in - water operators and supervisors for the various mission areas mentioned previously as their primary day to day mission is that of in - water operator and/or supervisor .
There are three enlisted diving badges / qualifications in the ND rating : * Second class diver - E-4 to E-5 personnel .
This is the basic diving qualification in the ND rating , awarded upon completion of ND ' A ' School ( pin awarded upon warfare qualification ) .
Primary duties are to serve as in - water operators during various missions .
* First class diver - E-6 to E-8 personnel .
Advanced diving qualification awarded upon completion of ND ' C ' School .
In addition to duties as a second class diver , first class divers serve as diving and chamber treatment supervisors .
* Master diver - The highest enlisted diving position in the Navy .
Awarded upon successful completion of the master diver course which includes exceptionally demanding diving operational problems and acceptance by a master diver board .
Oversees diving operations and train / qualify diving supervisors .
Personnel in the CEC
( Seabee ) ratings can qualify as underwater construction technician ( UCT ) .
Like other Navy divers , UCTs are primary in - water operators that conduct underwater construction .
They also have three qualification levels with similarities to those in the navy diver rating .
Navy hospital corpsmen can qualify as a diving medical technician ( DMT ) , where they are given training in medical aspects of diving .
Primary responsibilities are to provide medical advice and treatment to diving personnel .
They also instruct members of the diving team in first aid procedures when the presence of diving medical personnel is indicated .
Additionally , there is a scuba diver qualification primarily for those stationed on submarines to serve as sub divers in a limited capacity .
Navy scuba divers are also trained at NDSTC at a 5-week course .
Their duties consist primarily of conducting occasional inspections on the submarine they are stationed on .
Scuba divers maintain their traditional Navy rating such as ET or MM ; their diving Navy Enlisted Classification ( NEC ) is a collateral duty , not their primary one .
U.S. NAVY DIVER
PHYSICAL FITNESS TEST Section::::U.S. navy diver physical fitness test .
Diving medical personnel evaluate the fitness of divers before operations begin and are prepared to handle any emergencies which might arise .
They also observe the condition of other support personnel and are alert for signs of fatigue , overexposure , and heat exhaustion .
The physical fitness test has been shown to be a poor predictor of job task performance .
The test consists of the following carried out in the order given :
* Swim 500 yards ( or 450 m ) utilizing only combat side stroke or breast stroke within 12 minutes 30 seconds ( candidates are allowed to push off the sides when turning .
However , if the candidate uses the bottom to stand or rest , they will fail the test ) .
* * 10-minute rest period .
*
* Perform 50 push - ups within 2 minutes ( Upper arms must parallel deck at dip and arms locked out at the top of the rep ) .
* * 2-minute rest period .
*
* Perform 50 curl - ups within 2 minutes ( Bent knees .
Candidates hands must stay on the collarbone and the elbows must touch the knees ) .
* * 2-minute rest period .
*
* Perform 6 pull - ups within 2 minutes ( no kipping or swinging is allowed and the chin must clear the top of the bar on each repetition ) .
* * 10-minute rest period .
*
* Run 1.5 miles ( 2.414 km ) within 12 minutes 30 seconds .
*
Note : The times and quantities listed are for passing the screening test only .
Each candidate 's scores are submitted and the candidates with the top scores along with ASVAB exam scores will be selected and given a navy diver contract .
Passing the physical fitness test is necessary but by no means guarantees the candidate a contract .
HEALTH IMPACT
Section::::Health impact .
A study published in 2011 by the Navy Experimental Diving Unit reviewed the long term health impact on the U.S. Navy diving population .
The divers surveyed participated as divers for an average of 18 years out of their average 24 active duty years .
Sixty percent of the divers surveyed were receiving disability compensation .
One in seven of the divers had experienced neurologic symptoms of decompression sickness , with 41 % of the divers experiencing one or more of the nine diving injuries surveyed .
Seven percent of the surveyed divers had undergone a joint replacement .
Eighty six percent of the divers rated their health as " Excellent , Very Good , or Good " .
When compared to the general population , the divers showed better mental health but poorer physical health .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The navy diver rating was announced in Naval Administration Message 003/06 and consists of sailors with the following NECs :
* NEC 5341 — master diver * NEC 5342 — first class diver * NEC 5343 — second class diver
The effective date of the ND rating was June 1 , 2006 for E6-E9 sailors ( petty officer 1st class and above ) , and October 1 , 2006 for E1-E5 sailors .
ENLISTED RATING DESIGNATORS
* E4 ( ND3 ) — Navy diver
third class * E5 ( ND2 ) — Navy diver
second class
* E6 ( ND1 ) — Navy diver
first class * E7 ( NDC ) — Chief Navy diver
* E8 ( NDCS ) —
Senior Chief Navy diver * E9 ( NDCM ) —
Master Chief Navy diver OFFICER DESIGNATORS Section::::Officer designators .
MILPERSMAN 1210 - 140 Designation as a Diving Officer for selected ( 1 ) Unrestricted Line ( 117X , 112X ) , ( 2 ) Restricted Line / Staff Corps ( 146X , 144X , 210X , 510X ) , ( 3 ) Limited Duty ( 61XX , 648X , 653X ) , and 1440 — Engineering Duty ( restricted line ) Officer 510x — Civil Engineer Corps ( staff ) Officer 720x —
Diving ( warrant ) Officer SEE
ALSO REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Supervisor of Diving , Naval Sea Systems Command , 2007 .
US Navy Diving Manual .(UK )
: AquaPress Publishing . .
Revision 5 .
Hardback .
The complete manual for equipment , procedures and operations established by the Department of Navy .
* Supervisor of Diving , Naval Sea Systems Command , 2007 .
US Navy Diving Manual .(UK )
: AquaPress Publishing . .
Revision 5 .
Looseleaf .
The complete manual for equipment , procedures and operations established by the Department of Navy .
* https://web.archive.org/web/20080310094417/http://www.necc.navy.mil/diver/
* https://web.archive.org/web/20090712084127/http://www.necc.navy.mil/content.htm EXTERNAL LINKS * Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center * Navy .
Com recruiting page * NECC Diver recruiter page
* Naval Undersea Museum