DISCHARGE ( SENTENCE )
A discharge is a type of sentence where no punishment is imposed , and which ( by law in some Commonwealth realms , and arguably in others ) vitiates the court 's guilty verdict , thus resulting in a non - conviction .
An absolute discharge is an unconditional discharge where the Court finds that a crime has technically been committed , but that any punishment of the defendant would be inappropriate , and the case is closed .
In some jurisdictions , an absolute discharge means there is no conviction on the defendant 's record , despite the plea of the defendant .
A conditional discharge is an order made by a criminal court whereby an offender will not be sentenced for an offence unless a further offence is committed within a stated period .
Once the stated period has elapsed and no further offence is committed then the conviction may be removed from the defendant 's record .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australia , offenders can be discharged with or without being convicted , and with or without being placed on a good behaviour bond ( or other conditions ) .
These sentencing options vary from state to state .
Note that defendants can be discharged without conviction even if they plead guilty to the alleged crime .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , a conditional discharge is a sentence passed in criminal court in which an individual is found guilty of an offence but is deemed not to have been convicted .
Although a discharge is not considered a conviction , a record of an absolute or conditional discharge is kept by Canadian Police Information Centre ( CPIC ) and by the charging police agency and is purged from the individual 's police record after a period of time : one year in the case of an absolute discharge , three years for a conditional one .
The Criminal Records Act states that , except in exceptional circumstances , if the discharge is conditional , no record may be disclosed after three years .
While no conviction occurs , the offender is required to fulfill certain conditions as part of the sentence .
The offender is put on probation for a period of up to three years .
If the offender fails to meet the conditions of the probation , or commits another criminal offence during the probation period , they may be returned to court where the discharge is cancelled and receive a criminal conviction and sentence on the original offence , and for breach of probation .
If the conditions of the discharge are met it becomes an absolute discharge .
A court may grant a conditional or absolute discharge only for offences with no minimum penalty , and a maximum penalty of less than fourteen years .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In New Zealand , offenders can be " convicted and discharged " ( gets a criminal record , but no other punishment ) or " discharged without conviction " ( no punishment and no criminal record ) .
Note that defendants can be discharged without conviction even if they plead guilty to the alleged crime .
This is usually done in cases where the negative impact of a conviction far outweigh the crime committed .
For example , if a high - end businessman is caught in possession of a small quantity of marijuana , due to the small nature of the crime compared to the effects a conviction ( even without a sentence ) would have , he may be discharged without conviction .
UNITED KINGDOM ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::United Kingdom .
Section::::England and Wales .
In England and Wales , a conditional discharge is a sentence vitiating the finding of guilt , in which the offender receives no punishment provided that , in a period set by the court ( not more than three years ) , no further offence is committed .
If an offence is committed in that time , then the offender may also be re - sentenced for the offence for which a conditional discharge was given .
Pursuant section 14 of the Powers of Criminal Courts ( Sentencing ) Act 2000 and R v
Patel [ 2006 ]
EWCA Crim 2689
the conditional discharge does not constitute a conviction unless the individual breaches the conditional discharge and is re - sentenced .
Absolute discharge is a lesser sentence imposed by a court , in which no penalty is imposed at all .
Exceptionally , however , a court occasionally grants an absolute discharge for a very serious offence .
( The signalman in the Thirsk rail crash , who was found guilty of manslaughter , is an example of this . )
This usually signifies that while a crime may technically have been committed , the imposition of any punishment would , in the opinion of the judge or magistrates , be inappropriate .
In both cases , the passing of a discharge does not prevent the court from ordering the defendant to pay compensation to a victim , to pay a contribution towards the prosecution 's costs , or to be disqualified from driving .
A court may grant a discharge only if it is " inexpedient to inflict punishment " , and may not do so for certain firearms offences or " three strikes " offenders .
The law on discharges is set out in sections 12 to 15 of the Powers of Criminal Courts ( Sentencing ) Act 2000 .
In 2008 , 9,734 offenders were given absolute discharges ( 0.7 % of sentences ) and 87,722 offenders were given conditional discharges ( 6 % of sentences ) .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
In Scots law , there is no conditional discharge similar to that in England and Wales , although admonition has a similar effect with a conviction recorded although there is no punishment .
However , section 246 of the Criminal Procedure ( Scotland ) Act 1995 provides that in dealing with cases other than where the sentence is fixed by law ( e.g. murder ) *
In cases on indictment , if it appears to the court , having regard to the circumstances including the nature of the offence and the character of the offender , that it is inexpedient to inflict punishment and that a probation order is not appropriate it may instead of sentencing him make an order discharging him absolutely .
*
In summary cases , where the court is satisfied that the person committed the offence , and it is of the opinion , having regard to the circumstances including the nature of the offence and the character of the offender , that it is inexpedient to inflict punishment and that a probation order is not appropriate may without proceeding to conviction make an order discharging him absolutely .
Section 247 further provides that an absolute discharge shall be deemed not to be
a conviction for any purpose other than the purposes of the proceedings in which the order is made and of laying it before a court as a previous conviction in subsequent proceedings for another offence , and shall in any event be disregarded for the purposes of any enactment which imposes any disqualification or disability upon convicted persons , or authorises or requires the imposition of any such disqualification or disability .
However , courts can consider previous absolute discharges in the same way as they consider previous convictions .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The concept of absolute or conditional discharge does not exist , as such , in United States law .
However , different jurisdictions within the United States have a variety of analogues .
The most direct is the suspended sentence or sentencing to " time served " , meaning time spent in custody until sentencing .
Many or most states also have alternative forms of adjudication for which a defendant may apply .
These measures are typically available only to first offenders facing non - felony charges , and typically exclude certain types of charges , depending on the state .
Such possibilities often include a guilty plea followed by a special form of probation , upon successful completion of which the public record of the case is sealed and the offender 's criminal record expunged .
REFERENCES