THE LONGEST YARD ( 2005 FILM )
The Longest Yard is a 2005 American sports prison comedy film and a remake of the 1974 film of the same name .
Adam Sandler plays the protagonist Paul Crewe , a disgraced former professional quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers , who is forced to form a team from the prison inmates to play football against their guards .
Burt Reynolds , who played Sandler 's role in the original , co - stars as
Nate Scarborough , the inmates ' coach .
Chris Rock plays Crewe 's friend , known as Caretaker .
The cast includes James Cromwell , Nelly , William Fichtner and several former and current professional athletes such as Terry Crews , Michael Irvin , Brian Bosworth , Bill Romanowski , Bill Goldberg , Bob Sapp , Kevin Nash , Stone Cold Steve Austin , and
Dalip " The Great Khali " Singh Rana .
The film was produced by MTV Films and Happy Madison Productions and distributed by Paramount Pictures and Columbia Pictures , and was released on May 27 , 2005 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Paul Crewe is a former NFL player who , one night , gets drunk and goes joyriding in the Bentley of his girlfriend Lena , crashing it .
It is revealed that he was accused of shaving points in a big game , although it was never proven .
In prison , Warden Rudolph Hazen , wishing to boost his prison 's reputation for future elections as State Governor , uses threats and confinement in a hot box to coerce Crewe into helping the prison guards ' football team , led by the hostile Captain Knauer .
Crewe informs Hazen that what Hazen 's team needs is a tune - up game to boost the guards ' confidence , and is therefore coerced to form an inmate team to play against the guards .
He does so with the help of a newfound friend , Caretaker .
They start off with a poorly organized team , before being noticed by another prisoner , former college football star Nate Scarborough , who decides to help coach the team by gathering several intimidating inmates as a boost to the team 's strength .
Caretaker tells Crewe that they need more " brothers " on the team .
When Crewe goes to the basketball court to ask the black inmates to join the team , their leader , Deacon Moss rebuffs him .
Crewe challenges Deacon to a one - on - one basketball game , saying that if he wins , the brothers will join the team , and if Deacon wins , Crewe will leave them alone .
Deacon accepts , and despite Deacon 's undisguised personal fouls in which he elbows , punches or grabs Crewe , Crewe continues without complaint .
On the game - winning shot , Crewe cleanly steals the ball from Deacon and scores , but Deacon calls a foul .
Realizing he wo n't be allowed to win , Crewe lets Deacon score the final shot .
Although Deacon beats Crewe , one of the brothers , a fast runner named Earl Megget , impressed with Crewe 's decision to take the beating , joins the football team as its running back .
When the guards learn of this , they confront Earl in an attempt to provoke an assault by him by saying the racial epithet " nigger " , but Earl does not allow himself to be provoked despite intimidation and minor abuse .
Having witnessed this , the other " brothers " , including Deacon , decide to join the team too .
Hazen and the guards continue attempts to hinder Crewe 's team by flooding their field , but the team decides to practice in the mud anyway .
Inmate Unger spies on the activities of the inmates and after being pressured by the guards , rigs Crewe 's radio with an explosive .
Caretaker unknowingly enters the cell to give a photo gift to Crewe , but is killed when he tries to turn the dial on the radio .
On game day , the inmates are revitalized in the wake of Caretaker 's murder when Crewe reveals Caretaker 's last gift to the team , quality gear and uniforms from his cousin at Reebok with the team name " Mean Machine " on the uniforms .
The Mean Machine overcomes a rough start , due to individual inmates ' attempts to retaliate against guards for the abuse they 've suffered .
Crewe angrily tells the inmates that winning the game is more important and will damage the guards more than their personal grudges , and gets them to play as a team .
The first half ends with the score tied .
The angered Hazen informs Crewe in private that if he does not lose he will be charged for Caretaker 's murder .
Crewe acquiesces to Hazen 's threat , asking that the guards refrain from using excessive force on the field after getting a comfortable lead , to which Hazen agrees to do so after they obtain a two touchdown lead .
After Crewe fakes an injury in order to leave the field , his teammates voice their displeasure over his obvious deserting of the team .
After seeing that Hazen has broken his promise and two members of the Mean Machine are injured , Crewe asks Skitchy if the time spent in jail for punching the warden was worth it .
Skitchy replies , " It was worth every goddamn second , " and inspired Crewe returns to the field .
The team initially doubts Crewe 's resolve and allows him to be sacked twice .
After running for a first down on 4th and Long , Crewe , realizing that his inmates are still not protecting him due to his prior actions , calls a huddle , admits to the point shaving that disgraced him , the injury that he faked as a result of Hazen 's threat , and sabotage to the other inmates , and asks for their forgiveness , putting his hands in the middle of all of them .
Moss puts his hand in , followed by the rest of the team .
The Mean Machine , united again as a team , quickly scores two touchdowns to cut the guards ' lead to 35–28 .
After Megget is injured following a long run , Scarborough comes in for one play as replacement and scores a touchdown off a trick play involving a fumble called a Fumblerooski .
Mean Machine decides to go for the two - point conversion and the win .
As they get up to the line they seem to be confused , and Crewe and Scarborough start arguing in order to trick the guards .
Moss gets the snap and passes it to Crewe , who scores the winning conversion , winning the game .
Knauer , with a newfound respect for Crewe , tells him that he showed extraordinary nerve , and lets him know that he will vouch that Crewe had nothing to do with Caretaker 's death .
Hazen admonishes Knauer for losing a fixed game and notices that Crewe is heading towards the exit .
Eagerly implying Crewe is trying to escape , Hazen orders that Crewe be shot for attempting to escape .
Knauer hesitates and at the last moment realizes ( and scornfully tells Hazen )
that Crewe is only picking up the game football .
Crewe returns it to Hazen , telling him to " stick it in [ his ] trophy case .
" Moss and Joey Battle give Hazen a Gatorade shower , and when he tells them that this has earned them a week in the hot box , Battle defiantly yells " Who gives a shit ? ! "
CAST CONS
* Adam Sandler as Paul " Wrecking " Crewe * Chris Rock as James " Caretaker " Farrell *
Nelly as Earl Megget * David Patrick Kelly as Unger
* Terry Crews as " Cheeseburger " Eddy * Nicholas Turturro as Brucie * Bill Goldberg as Joey
" Battle " Battaglio * Bob Sapp as Switowski
* Steve Reevis as Billy " Baby Face Bob " Rainwater * Lobo Sebastian as Torres
* Dalip Singh as Turley
* Joey " Coco " Diaz as Anthony " Big Tony " Cobianco * Eddie Bunker as " Skitchy " Rivers * Tracy Morgan as Miss Tucker * Cloris Leachman as Lynette Grey * Burt Reynolds as Coach Nate
Scarborough
* Michael Irvin as Deacon Moss
* D12 as Basketball Convicts
GUARDS
* James Cromwell as Warden Rudolph Hazen
* William Fichtner as Captain Brian Knauer
* Bill Romanowski as Guard Lambert * Brian Bosworth as Guard Garner * Kevin Nash as Sergeant Engleheart
* Steve Austin as Guard Dunham
* Michael Papajohn as Guard Papajohn * Conrad Goode as Guard Webster * Brandon Molale as Guard Malloy
* Todd Holland as Guard Holland * Walter Williamson as Errol Dandridge
* John Hockridge as Guard Hock OTHERS * Allen Covert as Referee * Rob Schneider as Punky * Chris Berman as Himself
* Jim Rome as Himself * Patrick Bristow as Walt
* Lauren Sanchez as Herself * Dan Patrick as Officer Jack Pugh
* Christopher Neiman as Big Ear Cop * Ed Lauter as Duane * Sean Salisbury as Vic * Rob " Revolution " Moore as Gavin * Big Boy as Jesse
* Marc S. Ganis as Lorenzo
* Shane Ralston as Bradlee * Courteney Cox as Lena ( uncredited ) PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The movie was filmed at the New Mexico State Penitentiary on Route 14 , Santa Fe , New Mexico .
The football game at the end of the film was filmed at Murdock Stadium at the El Camino College in Torrance , California .
The car chase scene was filmed whereabouts in Long Beach , California .
Other parts of the film were filmed in Los Angeles and New Mexico .
The golf course scene was filmed at Lost Canyons Golf Club in Simi Valley , California .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film did well at the box office .
Its $ 47.6 million opening weekend was the largest of Sandler 's career and only second to The Day After Tomorrow as the largest opening by a movie that was not # 1 .
The film would go on to gross $ 158.1 million in the United States and Canada and $ 190 million worldwide .
It was the highest - grossing film produced by MTV Films , until it was surpassed by .
Despite the large number of remakes released at the theaters , it 's worth noting that The Longest Yard is the highest grossing comedy remake of the modern box office era ( from 1980 on ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 32 % based on 165 reviews , with an average rating of 4.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " This Yard has some laughs but missing from this remake is the edginess of the original . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
According to CinemaScore , audiences gave the film a grade of " A− " on an A+ to F scale .
Roger Ebert , in the critical minority with this title , gave it a " Thumbs Up " , defending it later in his Chicago Sun - Times review as a film that " ... more or less achieves what most of the people attending it will expect .
" In the print review , Ebert beseeches his readers to " ... seek out a movie you could have an interesting conversation about " , citing films not in wide release such as and Kontroll , until finally encouraging his readers to " drop any thought of seeing anything else instead " if they can see Crash .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The film earned Chris Rock a BET Comedy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Theatrical Film .
Burt Reynolds earned a Golden Raspberry Award nomination for Worst Supporting Actor for his performance in the film .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The official soundtrack , which consisted entirely of hip - hop music , was released on May 24 , 2005 by Universal Records .
It peaked at 11 on the Billboard 200 and 10 on the Top R&B / Hip - Hop Albums .
The film itself contains a mixture of hip hop and rock music , featuring music by Creedence Clearwater Revival , Norman Greenbaum and AC / DC among others .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Longest Yard at americanfootballfilms