BACK - PASS RULE
In association football , the back - pass rule prohibits the goalkeeper from handling the ball in most cases when it is passed to them by a team - mate .
It is described in Law 12 , Section 2 of the Laws of the Game .
AWARD Section::::Award .
Goalkeepers are normally allowed to handle the ball within their own penalty area , and once they have control of the ball in their hands opposition players may not challenge them for it .
However the back - pass rule prohibits goalkeepers from handling the ball after it has been deliberately kicked to them by a team - mate , or after receiving it directly from a throw - in taken by a team - mate .
Back - passes with parts of the body other than the foot , such as headers , are not prohibited .
Despite the popular name " back - pass rule " , there is no requirement in the laws that the kick or throw - in must be backwards ; handling by the goalkeeper is forbidden regardless of the direction the ball travels .
The penalty for the offence is an indirect free kick .
This is awarded from the position where the handling occurred , unless it is within the 6-yard goal area , in which the kick is taken from the point on the 6-yard line closest to the point of the offence .
TRICKS TO CIRCUMVENT THE RULE Section::::Tricks to circumvent the rule .
Goalkeepers are allowed to handle the ball if the ball is played back to them by an action other than a kick or throw -
in ( such as a header ) , but defenders are not permitted to attempt to use a deliberate trick to pass the ball to the goalkeeper with a part of the body other than the foot to circumvent the rule .
This would include flicking the ball up with the foot and then heading the ball back to the goalkeeper , or heading a ball on the ground that would otherwise be regularly playable with the foot .
If a player uses such a trick , they are cautioned for unsporting behaviour , and the opponents are awarded an indirect free kick from where the trick was performed .
It is irrelevant as to whether the goalkeeper subsequently handles the ball or not .
INTERPRETATION Section::::Interpretation .
The United States Soccer Federation ( USSF ) has provided the following guidance on how this offence should be judged by referees : HISTORY AND IMPACT Section::::History and impact .
The back - pass rule was introduced in 1992 to discourage time - wasting and unduly defensive play after the 1990 World Cup was described as exceedingly dull , rife with back - passing and goalkeepers holding up the ball .
The first games played with the new rule were at the 1992 Summer Olympics .
Early matches with the new rule resulted in some confusion in defences ; indeed in the very first game Italy fell foul of the new rule and USA were able to score after being awarded an indirect free kick 15 yards from goal .
In 1997 , the back - pass rule was extended to prevent goalkeepers handling the ball when received directly from a team - mate 's throw in .
The back pass rule is considered one of the most popular and successful rule changes in the modern game .
As well as preventing dull play , it also required goalkeepers to become more proficient with playing the ball with the foot , and has been cited as the start of evolution of the play - making " sweeper - keeper " .
REFERENCES