HEARING RANGE Hearing range describes the range of frequencies that can be heard by humans or other animals , though it can also refer to the range of levels .
The human range is commonly given as 20 to 20,000 Hz , although there is considerable variation between individuals , especially at high frequencies , and a gradual loss of sensitivity to higher frequencies with age is considered normal .
Sensitivity also varies with frequency , as shown by equal - loudness contours .
Routine investigation for hearing loss usually involves an audiogram which shows threshold levels relative to a normal .
Several animal species are able to hear frequencies well beyond the human hearing range .
Some dolphins and bats , for example , can hear frequencies up to 100,000 Hz .
Elephants can hear sounds at 14–16 Hz , while some whales can hear infrasonic sounds as low as 7 Hz ( in water ) .
MEASUREMENT Section::::Measurement .
A basic measure of hearing is afforded by an audiogram , a graph of the absolute threshold of hearing ( minimum discernible sound level ) at various frequencies throughout an organism 's nominal hearing range .
Behavioural hearing tests or physiological tests can be used to find hearing thresholds of humans and other animals .
For humans , the test involves tones being presented at specific frequencies ( pitch ) and intensities ( loudness ) .
When the subject hears the sound , he or she indicates it by raising a hand or pressing a button .
The lowest intensity they can hear is recorded .
The test varies for children ; their response to the sound can be indicated by a turn of the head or using a toy .
The child learns what to do upon hearing the sound , such as placing a toy man in a boat .
A similar technique can be used when testing animals , where food is used as a reward for responding to the sound .
The information on different mammals hearing was obtained primarily by behavioural hearing tests .
Physiological tests do not need the patient to consciously respond .
IN ANIMALS
HUMANS Section::::In animals .
Section::::Humans .
In humans , sound waves funnel into the ear via the external ear canal and reach the eardrum ( tympanic membrane ) .
The compression and rarefaction of these waves set this thin membrane in motion , causing sympathetic vibration through the middle ear bones ( the ossicles : malleus , incus and stapes ) , the basilar fluid in the cochlea , and the hairs within it , called stereocilia .
These hairs line the cochlea from base to apex , and the part stimulated and the intensity of stimulation gives an indication of the nature of the sound .
Information gathered from the hair cells is sent via the auditory nerve for processing in the brain .
The commonly stated range of human hearing is 20 Hz to 20 kHz .
Under ideal laboratory conditions , humans can hear sound as low as 12 Hz and as high as 28 kHz , though the threshold increases sharply at 15 kHz in adults , corresponding to the last auditory channel of the cochlea .
Humans are most sensitive to ( i.e. able to discern at lowest intensity ) frequencies between 2,000 and 5,000 Hz .
Individual hearing range varies according to the general condition of a human 's ears and nervous system .
The range shrinks during life , usually beginning at around age of eight with the upper frequency limit being reduced .
Women typically experience a lesser degree of hearing loss than men , with a later onset .
Men have approximately 5 to 10 dB greater loss in the upper frequencies by age 40 .
Audiograms of human hearing are produced using an audiometer , which presents different frequencies to the subject , usually over calibrated headphones , at specified levels .
The levels are weighted with frequency relative to a standard graph known as the minimum audibility curve , which is intended to represent " normal " hearing .
The threshold of hearing is set at around 0 phon on the equal - loudness contours ( i.e. 20 micropascals , approximately the quietest sound a young healthy human can detect ) , but is standardised in an ANSI standard to 1 kHz .
Standards using different reference levels , give rise to differences in audiograms .
The ASA-1951 standard , for example , used a level of 16.5 dB SPL ( sound pressure level ) at 1 kHz , whereas the later ANSI-1969 / ISO-1963 standard uses 6.5 dB SPL , with a 10 dB correction applied for older people .
OTHER PRIMATES
Section::::Other primates .
Several primates , especially small ones , can hear frequencies far into the ultrasonic field .
Defined at 60 decibels , the hearing range for the Senegal bushbaby is 92 Hz–65 kHz , and 67 Hz–58 kHz for the ring - tailed lemur .
Of 19 primates tested , the Japanese macaque had the widest range , 28 Hz–34.5 kHz , compared with 31 Hz–17.6 kHz for humans .
CATS Section::::Cats .
Cats have excellent hearing and can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies .
They can hear higher - pitched sounds than humans or most dogs , detecting frequencies from 55 Hz up to 79 kHz .
Cats do not use this ability to hear ultrasound for communication but it is probably important in hunting , since many species of rodents make ultrasonic calls .
Cat hearing is also extremely sensitive and is among the best of any mammal , being most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz .
This sensitivity is further enhanced by the cat 's large movable outer ears ( their pinnae ) , which both amplify sounds and help a cat sense the direction from which a noise is coming .
DOGS Section::::Dogs .
The hearing ability of a dog is dependent on breed and age , though the range of hearing is usually around 67 Hz to 45 kHz .
As with humans , some dog breeds ' hearing ranges narrow with age , such as the German shepherd and miniature poodle .
When dogs hear a sound , they will move their ears towards it in order to maximise reception .
In order to achieve this , the ears of a dog are controlled by at least 18 muscles , which allow the ears to tilt and rotate .
The ear 's shape also allows the sound to be heard more accurately .
Many breeds often have upright and curved ears , which direct and amplify sounds .
As dogs hear higher frequency sounds than humans , they have a different acoustic perception of the world .
Sounds that seem loud to humans often emit high frequency tones that can scare away dogs .
Whistles which emit ultrasonic sound , called dog whistles , are used in dog training , as a dog will respond much better to such levels .
In the wild , dogs use their hearing capabilities to hunt and locate food .
Domestic breeds are often used to guard property due to their increased hearing ability .
So - called " Nelson " dog whistles generate sounds at frequencies higher than those audible to humans but well within the range of a dog 's hearing .
BATS Section::::Bats .
Bats have evolved very sensitive hearing to cope with their nocturnal activity .
Their hearing range varies by species ; at the lowest it can be 1 kHz for some species and for other species the highest reaches up to 200 kHz .
Bats that can detect 200 kHz can not hear very well below 10 kHz .
In any case , the most sensitive range of bat hearing is narrower : about 15 kHz to 90 kHz .
Bats navigate around objects and locate their prey using echolocation .
A bat will produce a very loud , short sound and assess the echo when it bounces back .
Bats hunt flying insects ; these insects return a faint echo of the bat 's call .
The type of insect and how big it is can be determined by the quality of the echo and time it takes for the echo to rebound ; there are two types ; constant frequency ( CF ) , and frequency modulated ( FM )
calls that descend in pitch
Each type reveals different information ; CF is used to detect an object , and FM is used to assess its distance .
FM and CF are two different types of echo which inform the bat on the size and distance of the prey .
The pulses of sound produced by the bat last only a few thousandths of a second ; silences between the calls give time to listen for the information coming back in the form of an echo .
Evidence suggests that bats use the change in pitch of sound produced via the Doppler effect to assess their flight speed in relation to objects around them .
The information regarding size , shape and texture is built up to form a picture of their surroundings and the location of their prey .
Using these factors a bat can successfully track change in movements and therefore hunt down their prey .
MICE Section::::Mice .
Mice have large ears in comparison to their bodies .
They hear higher frequencies than humans ; their frequency range is 1 kHz to 70 kHz .
They do not hear the lower frequencies that humans can ; they communicate using high frequency noises some of which are inaudible by humans .
The distress call of a young mouse can be produced at 40 kHz .
The mice use their ability to produce sounds out of predators ' frequency ranges to alert other mice of danger without exposing themselves , though notably , cats ' hearing range encompasses the mouse 's entire vocal range .
The squeaks that humans can hear are lower in frequency and are used by the mouse to make longer distance calls , as low frequency sounds can travel farther than high frequency sounds .
BIRDS
Section::::Birds .
Hearing is birds ' second most important sense and their ears are funnel - shaped to focus sound .
The ears are located slightly behind and below the eyes , and they are covered with soft feathers – the auriculars – for protection .
The shape of a bird 's head can also affect its hearing , such as owls , whose facial discs help direct sound toward their ears .
The hearing range of birds is most sensitive between 1 kHz and 4 kHz , but their full range is roughly similar to human hearing , with higher or lower limits depending on the bird species .
No kind of bird has been observed to react to ultrasonic sounds , but certain kinds of birds can hear infrasonic sounds .
" Birds are especially sensitive to pitch , tone and rhythm changes and use those variations to recognize other individual birds , even in a noisy flock .
Birds also use different sounds , songs and calls in different situations , and recognizing the different noises is essential to determine if a call is warning of a predator , advertising a territorial claim or offering to share food . "
" Some birds , most notably oilbirds , also use echolocation , just as bats do .
These birds live in caves and use their rapid chirps and clicks to navigate through dark caves where even sensitive vision may not be useful enough . "
FISH Section::::Fish .
Fish have a narrow hearing range compared to most mammals .
Goldfish and catfish do possess a Weberian apparatus and has a wider hearing range than the tuna .
IN MARINE MAMMALS Section::::In marine mammals .
As aquatic environments have very different physical properties than land environments , there are differences in how marine mammals hear compared with land mammals .
The differences in auditory systems have led to extensive research on aquatic mammals , specifically on dolphins .
Researchers customarily divide marine mammals into five hearing groups based on their range of best underwater hearing .
( Ketten , 1998 ) :
Low - frequency baleen whales like blue whales (
7 Hz to 35 kHz ) ; Mid - frequency toothed whales like most dolphins and sperm whales
( 150 Hz to 160 kHz ) ; High - frequency toothed whales like some dolphins and porpoises (
275 Hz to 160 kHz )
; Seals ( 50 Hz to 86 kHz ) ; Fur seals and sea lions ( 60 Hz to 39 kHz ) .
The auditory system of a land mammal typically works via the transfer of sound waves through the ear canals .
Ear canals in seals , sea lions , and walruses are similar to those of land mammals and may function the same way .
In whales and dolphins , it is not entirely clear how sound is propagated to the ear , but some studies strongly suggest that sound is channeled to the ear by tissues in the area of the lower jaw .
One group of whales , the Odontocetes ( toothed whales ) , use echolocation to determine the position of objects such as prey .
The toothed whales are also unusual in that the ears are separated from the skull and placed well apart , which assists them with localizing sounds , an important element for echolocation .
Studies have found there to be two different types of cochlea in the dolphin population .
Type
I has been found in the Amazon river dolphin and harbour porpoises .
These types of dolphin use extremely high frequency signals for echolocation .
Harbour porpoise emits sounds at two bands , one at 2 kHz and one above 110 kHz .
The cochlea in these dolphins is specialised to accommodate extreme high frequency sounds and is extremely narrow at the base of the cochlea .
Type II cochlea are found primarily in offshore and open water species of whales , such as the bottlenose dolphin .
The sounds produced by bottlenose dolphins are lower in frequency and range typically between 75 and 150,000 Hz .
The higher frequencies in this range are also used for echolocation and the lower frequencies are commonly associated with social interaction as the signals travel much farther distances .
Marine mammals use vocalisations in many different ways .
Dolphins communicate via clicks and whistles , and whales use low frequency moans or pulse signals .
Each signal varies in terms of frequency and different signals are used to communicate different aspects .
In dolphins , echolocation is used in order to detect and characterize objects and whistles are used in sociable herds as identification and communication devices .
SEE ALSO
* Audiology * Audiometry *
The Mosquito
*
Seismic communication * Minimum audibility curve
* Musical acoustics
NOTES
REFERENCES WORKS CITED