THAI BASIL
Thai basil
( , , ISO : h̄oraphā , ; ) is a type of basil native to Southeast Asia that has been cultivated to provide distinctive traits .
Widely used throughout Southeast Asia , its flavor , described as anise- and licorice - like and slightly spicy , is more stable under high or extended cooking temperatures than that of sweet basil .
Thai basil has small , narrow leaves , purple stems , and pink - purple flowers .
TAXONOMY AND NOMENCLATURE Section::::Taxonomy and nomenclature .
Sweet basil ( Ocimum basilicum ) has multiple cultivars —
Thai basil , O. basilicum var .
thyrsiflora , is one variety .
Thai basil itself has multiple cultivars .
One cultivar commonly grown in the United States is ' Siam Queen ' .
Thai basil may sometimes be called anise basil or licorice basil , in reference to its anise- and licorice - like scent and taste , but it is different from the Western strains bearing these same names .
Occasionally , Thai basil may be called cinnamon basil , which is its literal name in Vietnamese , but cinnamon basil typically refers to a separate cultivar .
The genus name Ocimum is derived from the Greek word meaning " to smell " , which is appropriate for most members of the plant family Lamiaceae , also known as the mint family .
With over 40 cultivars of basil , this abundance of flavors , aromas , and colors leads to confusion when identifying specific cultivars .
Three types of basil are commonly used in Thai cuisine .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Thai basil is sturdy and compact , growing up to , and has shiny green , slightly serrated , narrow leaves with a sweet , anise - like scent and hints of licorice , along with a slight spiciness lacking in sweet basil .
Thai basil has a purple stem , and like other plants in the mint family , the stem is square .
Its leaves are opposite and decussate .
As implied by its scientific name , Thai basil flowers in the form of a thyrse .
The inflorescence is purple , and the flowers when open are pink .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Thai basil is a tender perennial but is typically grown as an annual .
As a tropical plant , Thai basil is hardy only in very warm climates where there is no chance of frost .
It is generally hardy to USDA plant hardiness zone 10 .
Thai basil , which can be grown from seed or cuttings , requires fertile , well - draining soil with a pH ranging from 6.5 to 7.5 and 6 to 8 hours of full sunlight per day .
The flowers should be pinched to prevent the leaves from becoming bitter .
Thai basil can be repeatedly harvested by taking a few leaves at a time and should be harvested periodically to encourage regrowth .
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
Thai basil is widely used in the cuisines of Southeast Asia , including Thai , Vietnamese , Lao , and Cambodian cuisines .
Thai basil leaves are a frequent ingredient in Thai green and red curries , though in Thailand the basil used in drunken noodles and many chicken , pork , and seafood dishes is holy basil .
In the West , however , such dishes typically contain Thai basil instead , which is much more readily available than holy basil .
Thai basil is also an important ingredient in the very popular Taiwanese dish sanbeiji ( three - cup chicken ) .
Used as a condiment , a plate of raw Thai basil leaves is often served as an accompaniment to many Vietnamese dishes , such as phở , bún bò Huế , or bánh xèo , so that each person can season to taste with the anise - flavored leaves .
SEE ALSO
* Basil * List of basil cultivars
* List of Thai ingredients REFERENCES