EQUAL - TIME RULE
The equal - time rule specifies that U.S. radio and television broadcast stations must provide an equivalent opportunity to any opposing political candidates who request it .
This means , for example , that if a station gives a given amount of time to a candidate in prime time , it must do the same for another candidate who requests it , at the same price if applicable .
This rule originated in ยง 18 of the Radio Act of 1927 ; it was later superseded by the Communications Act of 1934 .
A related provision , in ยง 315(b ) , requires that broadcasters offer time to candidates at the same rate as their " most favored advertiser " .
The equal - time rule was created because the FCC was concerned that broadcast stations could easily manipulate the outcome of elections by presenting just one point of view , and excluding other candidates .
The equal - time rule should not be confused with the now - defunct Fairness Doctrine , which dealt with presenting balanced points of view on matters of public importance .
There are four exceptions to the equal - time rule .
If the airing was within a documentary , bona fide news interview , scheduled newscast or an on - the - spot news event , the equal - time rule does not apply .
Since 1983 , political debates not hosted by the media station are considered " news events , " and as a result , are not subject to the rule .
Consequently , these debates may include only major - party candidates without having to offer air time to minor - party or independent candidates .
Talk shows and other regular news programming from syndicators , such as Entertainment Tonight , are also declared exempt from the rule by the FCC on a case - by - case basis .
The equal - time rule was temporarily suspended by Congress in 1960 in order to permit the Kennedy - Nixon debates to take place .
The Zapple Doctrine was similar to the equal - time rule , but applied to different political campaign participants .
The equal - time rule applies to the political candidate only .
The Zapple Doctrine had the same purpose and requirements of equivalent coverage opportunity as the equal - time rule , but its scope included the candidate 's spokesman and supporters , not the candidate .
SOURCES
* Communications Act of 1934 , ยง 315 ; codified at 47 U.S.C. ยง 315 * Radio Act of 1927
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Equal Time Rule in The Museum of Broadcast Communications
* Radio and TV Stations Required to Give Equal Time in Issues of Democracy
* MSN Encarta - Equal Time Rule ( Archived 2009 - 10 - 31 )