SAIGON CINNAMON
Saigon cinnamon ( Cinnamomum loureiroi , also known as Vietnamese cinnamon or Vietnamese cassia and quế trà
my , quế thanh , or " quế trà bồng " in Vietnam ) is an evergreen tree indigenous to mainland Southeast Asia .
Despite its name , Saigon cinnamon is more closely related to cassia ( C. cassia ) than to cinnamon ( C. verum , " true cinnamon " , Ceylon cinnamon ) , though in the same genus as both .
Saigon cinnamon has 1 - 5 % essential oil in content and 25 % cinnamaldehyde in essential oil , which is the highest of all the cinnamon species .
Consequently , among the species , Saigon cinnamon commands a relatively high price .
The scientific name was originally spelled as Cinnamomum loureirii , but because the species is named after the botanist João de Loureiro , this is to be treated under the ICN as an orthographic error for the correctly derived spelling of loureiroi .
Saigon cinnamon contains the highest amount of coumarin of all the four Cinnamomum species sold as cinnamon , with one study detecting 6.97 g / kg in an authenticated sample .
Coumarin is moderately toxic to the liver and kidneys , and minor neurological dysfunction was found in children exposed to coumarin during pregnancy .
PRODUCTION AND USES Section::::Production and uses .
Saigon cinnamon is produced primarily in Vietnam , both for domestic use and export .
The Vietnam War disrupted production , but since the beginning of the early 21st century , Vietnam has resumed export of the spice , including to the United States , where it was unavailable for nearly 20 years .
Although it is called Saigon cinnamon , it is not produced in the area around the southern city of Saigon , but instead in the Central Highlands regions of the country , particularly the Quảng Ngai Province of central Vietnam .
Saigon cinnamon is used primarily for its aromatic bark , which has a taste quite similar to that of C. cassia , but with a more pronounced and complex aroma .
In Vietnamese cuisine , Saigon cinnamon bark is an important ingredient in the broth used to make phở , a popular noodle soup dish .
SEE ALSO
* Cinnamon * Cinnamomum * Cinnamomum cassia *
Cinnamomum tamala
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Vietnamese cinnamon ( Cinnamomum loureirii Nees . )
page from Gernot Katzer 's Spice Pages