ROW , ROW , ROW
YOUR BOAT " Row , Row , Row Your Boat " is an English language nursery rhyme and a popular children 's song .
It can also be an " action " nursery rhyme , whose singers sit opposite one another and " row " forwards and backwards with joined hands .
It has a Roud Folk Song Index number of 19236 .
Bing Crosby included the song in a medley on his album 101 Gang Songs ( 1961 ) .
Crosby also used the song as part of a round with his family during his concert at the London Palladium in 1976 .
The performance was captured on the album Bing Crosby Live at the London Palladium .
LYRICS Section::::Lyrics .
The most common modern version is often sung as a round for four voice parts ( ) .
A possible arrangement for SATB is as follows : !
Soprano !
Contralto !
Tenor !
Bass Row , row , row your boat , Gently down the stream .
Row , row , row your boat , Merrily , merrily , merrily , merrily , Gently down the stream .
Row , row , row your boat , Life is but a dream .
Merrily , merrily , merrily , merrily , Gently down the stream .
Row , row , row your boat , Life is but a dream .
Merrily , merrily , merrily , merrily , Gently down the stream .
Life is but a dream .
Merrily , merrily , merrily , merrily , Life is but a dream .
} The text above is often sung multiple times in succession to allow for the different voices to interweave with each other , forming four - part harmony .
MELODY Section::::Melody .
\relative c ' { c4 c4 c8 .
d16 e4 e8 .
d16 e8 .
f16 g2
\times 2/3 { c8 c c } \times 2/3 { g8 g g } \times 2/3 { e8 e e } \times 2/3 { c8 c c } \addlyrics { Row , row , row your boat
gent- ly down the stream ;
mer- ri-
ly , mer- ri-
ly , mer- ri-
ly , mer- ri-
ly , ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
It has been suggested that the song may have originally arisen out of American minstrelsy .
The earliest printing of the song is from 1852 , when the lyrics were published with similar lyrics to those used today , but with a very different tune .
It was reprinted again two years later with the same lyrics and another tune .
The modern tune was first recorded with the lyrics in 1881 , mentioning Eliphalet Oram Lyte in The Franklin Square Song Collection but not making it clear whether he was the composer or adapter .
ADDITIONAL OR ALTERNATIVE
VERSES Section::::Additional or alternative verses .
People often add additional verses , a form of children 's street culture , with the intent of either extending the song or ( especially in the case of more irreverent versions ) to make it funny , parody it , or substitute another sensibility for the perceived innocent one of the original .
In Bean , Rowan Atkinson ( Mr. Bean ) and Peter MacNicol ( David Langley ) also used this parody singing in the film .
Don Music , a muppet character in Sesame Street , changed the lyrics to feature a car instead of a boat .
Versions include : And : NOTES AND REFERENCES