WALT DISNEY WORLD SWAN
The Walt Disney World Swan is a resort hotel designed by architect Michael Graves located between Epcot and Disney 's Hollywood Studios behind Disney 's BoardWalk Resort and across from its sister resort , the Walt Disney World Dolphin .
The Swan , which opened January 13 , 1990 on Disney property , is a joint venture between the Walt Disney Company , Tishman Hotel Corporation , MetLife and Starwood Hotels and Resorts .
The land the resort occupies is owned by the Walt Disney Company , while the buildings themselves are leased by Disney to the Tishman Hotel Corporation and MetLife and operated by Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide under the Westin brand .
The Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin are a part of the Walt Disney Collection of resorts , because of this they are Disney branded and guests of the resort have access to special Disney benefits available to Disney Resort Hotel guests only .
The Dolphin and Swan share similar elements , but each has a distinctive appearance .
The Swan 's main structure is a 12-story rectangular main structure with a gently arching top and two 7-story wings , on the Dolphin side the main structure is crowned with two , tall Swan statues .
The colored facade is adorned with turquoise waves similar to the Dolphin 's banana - leaf motif .
In 2008 , The Walt Disney Swan Resort was awarded a One Palm Designation through the Florida Green Lodging Program established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection .
The Florida Green Lodging Program is a voluntary state initiative that provides the lodging industry with free technical assistance , encouraging hotels and motels to adopt cost - saving " green " practices that reduce waste , conserve natural resources and improve the bottom line .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the late 1980s , Disney saw that they were losing business to area hotels that catered to conventions and large meetings , so Michael Eisner decided to build a convention - oriented hotel near Epcot .
The Tishman Group , the contractor who was hired to build Epcot and who also had hotels in the nearby Disney hotel zone , claimed that the Epcot deal gave them exclusive rights to operate convention hotels on the Disney property , so Disney partnered with Tishman to develop the Swan and Dolphin complex .
Eisner had used Graves for other company projects and wanted to continue to build striking , unique buildings .
Tishman and MetLife own the buildings , but has a 99-year lease on the land from Disney .
Disney also receives a share of the hotel 's revenues , and has a say in any design or architecture changes to the interior or exterior of the buildings .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
The Walt Disney Swan Resort is located near many Disney hotspots and hotels .
Walking paths or Disney boats are available from the resort to both Epcot and Disney 's Hollywood Studios .
Disney Transport Buses bring guests to all other Walt Disney World attractions .
AMENITIES Section::::Amenities .
The resort , along with the Walt Disney World Dolphin Resort , has two lap pools and one grotto pool with a waterslide and waterfall .
Drinks can be ordered by guests near the pools through a nearby cabana bar .
Resort guests have access to a spa , arcade , day care program , along with multiple Disney gift shops .
WALT DISNEY
WORLD PRIVILEGES Section::::Walt Disney World privileges .
Walt Disney World Swan guests are provided complimentary transportation to all Walt Disney World theme parks and attractions on the Disney Transportation System , via boat ( to Epcot and Disney 's Hollywood Studios ) , and bus ( to all other Disney attractions ) .
Length - of - stay park passes are available , as is package delivery from Disney theme park shops to the resort .
There is a Walt Disney World guest services desk located in the lobby of each resort .
Walt Disney World Swan guests can also use Extra Magic Hours , and Disney 's Fastpass+ service , guests can select time slots for attractions 60 days prior to their arrival at the resort .
However , room charging ( using hotel key as a credit card at Walt Disney World ) is not available and hotel restaurants only participate in the Tables in Wonderland Dining Plan , not the Disney Dining Plan .
For an additional fee , the hotel features onsite Disney Character Dining nightly and on weekend mornings , and reservations for all restaurants can by made through Disney .
Room charging within the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin Resort Complex is available .
Also , guests staying at the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin have free parking on - site , which is near the theme parks but not in the main theme park lot , and priority access to the Disney theme parks during sell out situations .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photo Gallery of Swan & Dolphin Hotel by Michael Graves
* Swan & Dolphin official website
* Walt Disney World Swan page at Westin Hotels website
* Swan Resort 's page at Walt Disney World website