EAST MISSISSIPPI COMMUNITY COLLEGE East Mississippi Community College ( EMCC ) , formerly known as East Mississippi Junior College , is a community college in Scooba , Mississippi .
EMCC serves and is supported by Clay , Kemper , Lauderdale , Lowndes , Noxubee and Oktibbeha counties in east central Mississippi .
The college has two principal campuses and offers courses at five other locations .
One of fifteen community colleges in Mississippi , EMCC is the home of the 2011 , 2013 , 2014 , 2017 , and 2018 NJCAA National Championship EMCC Lions Football team .
EMCC is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges ( SACSCOC ) to award the Associate of Applied Science degree and the Associate of Arts degree .
The college offers a broad range of academic / university parallel , career - technical and workforce training programs .
Community colleges in Mississippi were originally designed to make educational opportunities more accessible for residents of rural areas throughout the state .
CAMPUSES
SCOOBA
CAMPUS Section::::Campuses .
Section::::Scooba campus .
East Mississippi Community College 's original campus is located in the Kemper County town of Scooba .
It was founded in 1927 following its beginnings 15 years earlier as Kemper County Agricultural High School .
The town is adjacent to the Kansas City Southern Railroad , U.S. Route 45 , and Mississippi Highway 16 , 35 miles north of Meridian and 50 miles south of Columbus .
The college owns 287 acres of land , 25 of which make up the campus .
The central administrative office for all of EMCC 's locations is in the Thomas L. Davis Jr. Administration Building .
Other buildings include the F.R. Young Student Union ( includes cafeteria and bookstore ) , Wallace Hall ( business and financial aid offices ) , Wellness and Fitness Center , Physical Plant Complex , Chapel in the Pines , Orr Center for Christian Activity , Scooba Campus Police Department and EMCC president 's residence .
Athletic facilities include Athletic Instruction and Training Building / Lions Field House , Sullivan - Windham Field ( 5,000-seat , artificial turf football stadium ) , Keyes Currie Coliseum ( 900-seat basketball arena ) , Gerald Poole Baseball Field , Lady Lions Softball Field and rodeo training arena .
RESIDENCE HALLS Section::::Residence halls .
The college maintains six residence halls and thirty cottages on the Scooba Campus which house nearly 600 students .
Student residences are air - conditioned and equipped with furniture , cable TV outlets , Wi - Fi , security and laundry facilities .
Gilbert - Anderson Hall , the main residence hall for women , has living accommodations for 170 students .
The Women 's Honor Residence Hall can house 46 students ; assignment to this residence hall requires students to demonstrate , and maintain , high grade point averages .
Residence halls for men include Lauderdale Hall ( 78 students ) , Noxubee Hall ( 84 students ) and Sullivan Hall ( 60 students ) .
The Men 's Honor Residence can house 46 students ; assignment to this residence hall requires students to demonstrate , and maintain , high grade point averages .
The campus also includes three athletic villages made up of 30 Katrina - style cottages , each housing four or five students , for a combined capacity of 104 .
New dorm : Due to increasing demand , a new residence hall for the Scooba campus is currently in the planning stages .
GOLDEN TRIANGLE
CAMPUS Section::::Golden Triangle campus .
The Golden Triangle campus was opened in 1968 .
It is located in Mayhew , an unincorporated area in Lowndes County .
on 83.46 acres adjacent to the frontage road of Highway 182 and the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad and 1 mile east of the intersection of U.S. Route 45 Alternate and U.S. Route 82 .
The campus is 10 miles east of Starkville , 10 miles south of West Point , and 12 miles west of Columbus .
The Golden Triangle campus of multiple building with more than 200,000 square feet .
Thomas Douglas Building :
Originally built as a vocational education center , the building has been expanded over time into a large complex , which houses classrooms for both academic and technical instruction .
In addition , the Counseling Center , classrooms and laboratories for career - technical programs , computer applications , IT , Administrative Computing , ABE - GED and developmental education are located in this facility .
Also located in the Douglas Building is the Aaron Langston Student Center , which houses the bookstore , lounge area and 155 Grill .
Thomas Douglas Annex :
This facility includes classrooms , labs , and office space for three career - technical programs , Automotive Technology , Welding and Fabrication and Industrial Maintenance .
Center for Manufacturing Technology Excellence : Located on the west side of the campus , the CMTE is the home of EMCC 's Manufacturing Technology & Engineering Division , which provides workforce training for Golden Triangle area industries .
It includes 7,800 square feet of high bay manufacturing space , a 4,400-square - foot multi - purpose commons area , classrooms , a 70-seat elevated seminar room , and an administration area which includes office space , workrooms and a conference room .
Math and Science Building : This facility provides classrooms and additional office space for faculty , recruiting staff , and the Dean of Students .
It contains three science laboratories , which are used concurrently as chemistry , physics and biology classrooms .
A 70-seat elevated seminar classroom for larger group instruction is supported by laptop connections .
Library :
With more than 8,000 square feet , the library has two study rooms , a computer lab with 17 computers , and a multi - media center .
Administration and Student Services Building :
This facility houses administrative offices , the business office , financial aid offices , the registrar 's office and other student services offices .
Humanities and Fine Arts Building : Opened in 2008 , this facility includes classrooms and offices for faculty , as well as the campus art studio .
A central administrative suite contains the offices of the Vice President for Instruction and the Associate Deans of Instruction .
Student Union : A new 76,000-square - foot Student Union is scheduled to open during fall 2016 .
The building will house a full - service cafeteria with a large open dining room and a much larger bookstore , with lounge areas and additional retail space for online e - books , laptop computers and tablets .
Also included are a special events dining room , 12 multi - purpose classrooms , large elevated lecture hall , computer lab with 100 work stations , office suites , art gallery , convenience store and Starbucks coffee shop .
COLUMBUS AIR FORCE BASE EXTENSION Section::::Columbus Air Force Base extension .
East Mississippi Community College opened an extension campus at Columbus Air Force Base in 1972 , just four years after the Golden Triangle campus in Mayhew .
CAFB is located 11 miles north of Columbus .
The extension campus offers daytime , evening and online classes .
Military students can complete their associate degrees with EMCC , or transfer credits to the Community College of the Air Force and pick up where they left off at their next duty station .
Generally , about a third of CAFB Extension 's students are active - duty military or military dependents .
The other two - thirds are civilians from the Lowndes County area .
NAVAL AIR STATION MERIDIAN EXTENSION
Section::::Naval Air Station Meridian extension .
Since 1989 , East Mississippi Community College has offered classes year - round at its Naval Air Station Meridian Extension , located 20 miles north of Meridian .
Military students can complete their associate degrees with EMCC , or pick up where they left off at their next duty station through an agreement with the Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges and the American Council on Education .
Students include active - duty military , military dependents and civilians from the Lauderdale County area .
LION HILLS CENTER Section::::Lion Hills Center .
In October 2012 , East Mississippi Community College purchased the land and buildings of the former Columbus Country Club in Columbus , Miss. , in U.S. Bankruptcy Court .
After renovations , the facility re - opened the following year as Lion Hills Center , an extension campus of EMCC .
Education and training is the centerpiece of Lion Hills Center 's service to the community .
The facility is the home of EMCC 's Hotel and Restaurant Management , Culinary Arts , and Golf and Recreational Turf Management programs .
In addition to these college credit programs , Lion Hills hosts continuing education and community interest courses , educational and corporate seminars , and small conferences that serve local and regional interests .
EMCC has retained the facility 's identity as a community meeting place .
Lion Hills Center operates as a dining facility with professionally trained staff and opportunities for EMCC Hotel and Restaurant and Culinary Arts students to benefit from hands - on experience .
Culinary camps are offered in the summer to area children .
Lion Hills Center also hosts civic club meetings , banquets , receptions , holiday parties and family gatherings .
Lion Hills Center continues to operate the golf course , swimming pool and tennis courts .
Community groups host fund - raising golf tournaments .
Golf , swimming and tennis lessons are offered to area children .
As with the restaurant operation , EMCC Golf and Recreational Turf Management students work with professional groundskeepers to put classroom lessons into practice .
WEST POINT - CLAY COUNTY CENTER Section::::West Point - Clay County Center .
EMCC opened the West Point - Clay County Center in August 2007 after a plant closing in West Point resulted in the loss of 1,600 jobs and a double - digit unemployment rate in Clay County .
The West Point facility is the result of a collaborative effort among the city of West Point , Clay County and EMCC .
It began with the signing of an interlocal agreement providing for the renovation of three buildings donated by the Tennessee Valley Authority .
The West Point - Clay County Center is the home of EMCC 's Commercial Truck Driving and Residential Carpentry programs .
Through EMCC 's Manufacturing Technology & Engineering Division , students can also take Adult Basic Education and GED preparation classes .
Workforce classes in welding are offered in the evening .
In addition , Yokohama Tire Manufacturing Mississippi , located in West Point , requires all potential employees to complete workforce classes at EMCC before applying for jobs .
These classes , as well as classes and training for current Yokohama employees , are conducted at the West Point - Clay County Center .
MACON EXTENSION Section::::Macon Extension .
In the mid-1980s , East Mississippi Community College established extension offerings in Macon , which is located in Noxubee County .
Core classes are taught at various locations , including Noxubee County High School , Noxubee County Public Library , Noxubee County Civic Center and Hensleigh Training Center .
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS Section::::Educational programs .
Roughly three - quarters of all freshmen in the state of Mississippi are enrolled in community colleges .
EMCC offers a broad range of academic / university parallel , career - technical , and workforce training options .
These include " stackable " education credentials .
At EMCC , one student could progress seamlessly though these steps , earning in order : GED , industry certificate through a non - credit workforce class , vocational certificate through a for - credit career - technical program , two - year associate degree in a career - technical program .
Some EMCC graduates enter the workforce at different points along this path ; others transfer to four - year colleges and universities .
ACADEMIC / UNIVERSITY PARALLEL
Section::::Academic / university parallel .
EMCC offers a full range of academic classes that prepare students for transfer to four - year colleges and universities .
Graduates earn an Associate of Arts degree .
The college has Honors programs and Phi Theta Kappa chapters at its Scooba and Golden Triangle campuses .
CAREER - TECHNICAL PROGRAMS Section::::Career - technical programs .
EMCC offers career - technical programs at its Scooba and Golden Triangle campuses , as well as Lions Hills Center and the West Point - Clay County Center .
In many programs , students have the option of earning a vocational certificate through a short - term curriculum plan or an Associate of Applied Science degree over the course of two years of study .
Career - technical programs related to industry and manufacturing are overseen by EMCC 's Manufacturing Technology and Engineering ( MTE ) Division .
WORKFORCE TRAINING
Section::::Workforce training .
EMCC 's Manufacturing Technology & Engineering Division offers workforce training designed around the needs of the Golden Triangle area 's high - tech industries .
Students learn the skills needed by potential employers , earn certificates and degrees recognized by industry and are prepared to compete successfully for jobs .
Industry leaders have the unique opportunity to partner with EMCC and build training models to ensure that new hires will start their jobs with a skill set suited to their duties .
EMCC established the Workforce Development program in 1993 .
The staff now works with more than 70 industrial and business partners and is working to increase the number of workforce offerings throughout EMCC 's six - county district .
Workforce Development and the new Manufacturing Technology & Engineering Division are headquartered at the Golden Triangle campus in the Center for Manufacturing Technology Excellence ( CMTE ) .
Expansion :
In 2018 , EMCC is scheduled to open a large - scale workforce training center on land adjoining the Golden Triangle Regional Global Industrial Aerospace Park .
Known as the " Communiversity " in the Golden Triangle area , it will replace the current CMTE .
The 140,000-square - foot facility will accommodate EMCC Manufacturing Technology & Engineering Division credit and non - credit courses related to training workers for careers in advanced manufacturing .
It is intended to enhance a growing manufacturing sector in East Mississippi by supporting workforce development for existing and prospective industries .
CREDIT CLASSES Section::::Credit classes .
Workforce / Manufacturing Technology & Engineering oversees nine career - technical programs offering vocational certificate and/or associate degree options : Automation & Control , Automotive Technology , Drafting and Design , Electrical Technology , Electro - Mechanical Technology / Mechatronics , Electronics Technology , Industrial Maintenance , Precision Manufacturing & Machining , and Welding & Fabrication Technology .
NON - CREDIT CLASSES Section::::Non - credit classes .
Non - credit workforce training options include customized programs for individual industries .
EMCC also offers non - credit workforce classes in computer applications , leadership , manufacturing skills , medical technology and health care , construction , electrical work , machining , HVAC , AutoCAD and welding .
The MTE Division also offers employability skills classes for young adults and a summer camp for students in grades
7–12 .
ABE - GED Section::::ABE - GED .
The Manufacturing Technology and Engineering Division oversees the EMCC Launch Pad , which offers Adult Basic Education and GED preparation classes .
HISTORY Section::::History .
East Mississippi Community College was organized in 1927 following its beginnings as Kemper County Agricultural High School in Scooba .
While the Scooba location has always been the primary campus , the Golden Triangle campus has been growing at an increasing rate since the 1990s .
Founded as the Golden Triangle Vo - Tech Center in 1968 , it serves the Golden Triangle region of Mississippi and is the primary location for workforce training and career - technical programs .
Historical highlights : * 1922 :
The Mississippi Legislature passed enabling legislation authorizing agricultural high schools to add the " 13th and 14th grades . "
* 1927 : Kemper County Agricultural High School became the sixth agricultural high school to add the 13th grade , marking the beginnings of the present - day college .
Twenty students were enrolled that first year .
* 1929 :
John C. Stennis , then a state representative in the Mississippi Legislature , guided a bill that enabled Kemper County Agricultural High School to borrow $ 50,000 for the repair of buildings .
* 1932 :
Noxubee County joined in the support of Kemper - Noxubee Junior College and enrollment increased to 155 students .
The 1933 catalogue included this statement : " To assist our students in paying matriculation fees and buying books , we will purchase , as far as we can use them , corn , peas , potatoes , molasses , pork , beef , butter , eggs and vegetables .
" This established the college 's long - term policy of helping students overcome economic barriers to education .
* 1939 : Lauderdale County joined in providing support , and the college was renamed East Mississippi Junior College .
* 1963 : Lowndes County joined the EMJC district .
* 1966 : Clay County joined the EMJC district .
* 1967 : Oktibbeha County joined the EMJC district .
* 1968 : East Mississippi Junior College 's board of trustees voted to establish a vocational - technical center in Mayhew – the beginnings of the present - day Golden Triangle campus .
* 1972 : EMJC began offering classes to military personnel and civilians at Columbus Air Force Base .
*
Mid-1980s : EMJC began offering classes in Macon .
The first teaching site was at the Noxubee County Vocational Center ; present - day classes are taught at various locations in Macon .
* 1989 : EMJC began offering classes at Naval Air Station Meridian .
* 1989 :
East Mississippi Junior College was renamed East Mississippi Community College .
* 1993 : East Mississippi Community College established a Workforce Development program .
The Workforce Development staff now works with more than 70 industrial and business partners , and the Center for Manufacturing Technology Excellence is considered a model program throughout the state .
* August 2007 : East Mississippi Community College opened the West Point - Clay County Center in partnership with elected officials from Clay County and West Point .
The first West Point programs were housed in three buildings donated by the Tennessee Valley Authority .
* October 2008 : The State College Board of the Institutions of Higher Learning approved an associate degree Nursing Program at EMCC 's Golden Triangle campus .
* Fall 2008 to Spring 2009 :
EMCC 's tuition guarantee program got off the ground in Clay County in October 2008 , with help from the CREATE Foundation , the Clay County Board of Supervisors and local fund - raisers .
In January 2009 , with the help of an anonymous corporate donor , the tuition guarantee program expanded to include students from Lowndes County .
EMCC 's tuition guarantee program went district - wide in April 2009 and is now available to students from Clay , Lowndes , Oktibbeha , Noxubee , Kemper and Lauderdale counties .
* October 2012 : EMCC purchased the land and buildings of the former Columbus Country Club in U.S. Bankruptcy Court .
After renovations , the facility re - opened the next year as Lion Hills Center , an extension campus of EMCC .
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
EMCC offers men 's athletics programs in baseball , basketball , cheerleading , football , golf and rodeo .
Women 's teams are fielded in basketball , cheerleading , rodeo , and softball .
The Lions of East Mississippi Community College are affiliated with the National Junior College Athletic Association ( NJCAA ) and the Mississippi Association of Community and Junior Colleges ( MACJC ) .
EMCC competes at the NJCAA Division I level in football and basketball while participating at the Division II level in baseball , softball and men 's golf .
The College 's athletic teams in football and basketball currently compete within the MACJC 's North Division .
Over the past decade ( beginning with 2008–09 season ) , East Mississippi Community College 's athletic teams have combined for four NJCAA national championships , 10 NJCAA national postseason appearances , nine NJCAA Region 23 championships , four MACJC state championships , and 16 MACJC North Division regular - season titles .
Individually since 2008–09 , EMCC has had a composite total of 30 NJCAA All - Americans in football , men 's basketball , women 's basketball and men 's golf combined .
In addition , Marcus Theriot claimed the national collegiate championships ( National Intercollegiate Rodeo Association ) in men 's All - Around and tie - down roping at the 2016 College National Finals Rodeo .
The 2015 and 2016 football seasons were documented in the first and second seasons of the Netflix series
Last Chance
U. FOOTBALL * Five - time NJCAA National Champions ( 2011 , 2013 , 2014 , 2017 & 2018 )
* Six - time MACJC State / NJCAA Region 23 Champions ( 2009 , 2011 , 2013 , 2014 , 2016 & 2017 )
Sunrisetime MACJC North Division also on Netflix MEN 'S BASKETBALL * Five - time NJCAA National Tournament participants ( 2010–13 & 2016 )
* Four - time NJCAA Region 23 Tournament champions ( 2010–13 ) * Four - time MACJC North Division champions ( 2010–13 ) WOMEN 'S BASKETBALL * 2009
NJCAA National Tournament
participant * 2009 NJCAA Region 23 Tournament champion * Three - time MACJC North Division champions ( 2009 , 2011 & 2014 )
BASEBALL
* 2015
NJCAA Region 23 Tournament participant * 2014 MACJC North Division champion * Three - time MACJC state playoff participants ( 2011 , 2014 , & 2015 ) SOFTBALL * Two - time NJCAA Academic Softball Team of the Year ( 2013 & 2014 )
* 2011 MACJC North Division champion * Seven - time MACJC state playoff participants ( 2009–14 & 2016 )
MEN 'S GOLF * Four - time MACJC State Championship runners - up ( 2011–13 & 2015 )
* Two - time NJCAA Region 23 Championship runners - up ( 2009 & 2014 ) RODEO
* Fifth - place men 's team national finish in 2016
College National Finals Rodeo
* Marcus Theriot won 2016
All - Around and tie - down roping national championships at 2016
CNFR
* Represented at CNFR every year since program 's inception in 2010 ALUMNI * Fred Adams Jr. , founder and CEO of Cal - Maine .
* Breiseus " Alex " Ashford , Jack Kent Cooke Scholar , 2007 and winner of the 2010 Prize Americana for Poetry for her book Danke Schoen .
* Denico Autry , current NFL player for the Indianapolis Colts .
* LeGarrette Blount , University of Oregon running back and NFL player with the Detroit Lions .
* Orlando Bobo , former NFL player for the Minnesota Vikings , Cleveland Browns , and the Baltimore Ravens .
* Mississippi Lt .
Gov. Eddie Briggs
* Milford Brown , former NFL player for multiple NFL teams .
* Sen. Terry Brown , R - District 17 , Mississippi State Legislature
* Bill Buckner , longtime regional director of Fellowship of Christian Athletes .
* Kortney Clemons , Paralympic athlete who played cornerback at EMCC .
* Justin Cox , former - NFL player for the Kansas City Chiefs , current player for the CFL 's Saskatchewan Roughriders * George Cummings , guitarist and songwriter .
Founder of Dr. Hook & the Medicine Show , well known for many hits , among them " The Cover of Rolling Stone . "
* Dr. Tommy Davis , president emeritus of East Mississippi Community College .
*
Quinton Dial , University of Alabama NFL player for the San Francisco 49ers .
* Eugene Futato , deputy director of University of Alabama Office of Archaeological Research .
* Randy Galloway , deputy director of NASA 's John C. Stennis Space Center .
* Willie Earl Gillespie , USFL and NFL wide receiver .
* Tom Goode , former NFL player for the Baltimore Colts .
* Garry Hughes , founder of Hughes Construction Company .
* Chad Kelly , current football player for the Denver Broncos .
* Jack Manley , former NFL player for the San Francisco 49ers .
* Buster Orr , founder and CEO of Juice Plus .
* DJ Pettway , current NFL player for the New Orleans Saints .
* Devonta Pollard , basketball player for the University of Houston , currently playing overseas .
* Jarran Reed , NFL player for the Seattle Seahawks .
*
Dr. Donald C. Simmons , Jr. , noted documentary filmmaker , author , and social entrepreneur .
* Antowain Smith , former NFL player for the Buffalo Bills .
* James Smith , engineer who worked on NASA 's Apollo , Skylab and Space Shuttle .
* Rep. Jeff Smith , R - District 39 , Mississippi State Legislature .
* Robert " Bull " " Cyclone " Sullivan , famous EMJC football coach who has been the subject of books , article , and documentary films .
Featured in a 1984 Sports Illustrated article " The Toughest Coach There Ever Was " .
Sullivan is enshrined in the Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame .
* Bo Wallace , former football player for the University of Mississippi .
* James Windham , president of Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer .
*
Dr. Rick Young , president emeritus of East Mississippi Community College .
* John Franklin III , 2016–2017 Auburn football wide receiver and one of the subjects of Last Chance U , a Netflix documentary on the football program .
* Za'Darius Smith , University of Kentucky and Current NFL player ( Baltimore Ravens )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* EMCC Athletics