A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE ( 1951 FILM )
A Streetcar Named Desire is a 1951 American drama film , adapted from Tennessee Williams 's Pulitzer Prize - winning 1947 play of the same name .
It tells the story of a southern belle , Blanche DuBois , who , after encountering a series of personal losses , leaves her aristocratic background seeking refuge with her sister and brother - in - law in a dilapidated New Orleans tenement .
The Broadway production and cast was converted to film with several changes .
Tennessee Williams collaborated with Oscar Saul and Elia Kazan on the screenplay .
Kazan , who directed the Broadway stage production , also directed the black and white film .
Marlon Brando , Kim Hunter , and Karl Malden were all cast in their original Broadway roles .
Although Jessica Tandy originated the role of Blanche DuBois on Broadway , Vivien Leigh , who had appeared in the London theatre production , was cast in the film adaptation for her star power .
Upon release of the film , Marlon Brando , virtually unknown at the time of the play 's casting , rose to prominence as a major Hollywood film star , and received the first of four consecutive Academy Award nominations for Best Actor .
The film earned an estimated $ 4,250,000 at the US and Canadian box office in 1951 , making it the fifth biggest hit of the year .
In 1999 , A Streetcar Named Desire was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Under mysterious circumstances , Blanche DuBois , an aging high school teacher , leaves her home in Auriol , Mississippi to travel to New Orleans to live with her sister , Stella Kowalski .
She arrives on the train and boards a streetcar named " Desire " and reaches her sister 's home in the French Quarter where she discovers that her sister and brother - in - law , Stanley Kowalski , live in a cramped and dilapidated one - bedroom apartment in an old New Orleans tenement .
Blanche and Stella are all that remain of an old aristocratic family .
Blanche discloses that the family estate , Belle Reve , has been lost to creditors , and that she wants to stay with Stella and Stanley for a while .
Blanche seems lost and broke , with nowhere to go .
Stella welcomes her with an open heart .
From the start , Blanche and Stanley are wary of each other .
Blanche has a soft - spoken manner ; Stanley is rough and loud .
His mere presence seems to threaten her , while her behavior and manner arouse suspicion in him .
She is especially adroit at patronizing and criticizing Stella from the start .
When interrogated about her past , struggling to be polite , Blanche says that she was married and widowed at a young age .
She says that she has taken a leave of absence from her job due to her nerves .
To satisfy Stanley 's skepticism about the loss of the estate , Blanche hands over her papers pertaining to Belle Reve .
But Stanley grabs at some of her private papers that she is holding back , and they cascade to the floor .
Weeping , she gathers them all back , saying that they are poems from her dead husband .
He defends himself by saying that he was just looking out for his family , and then announces that Stella is going to have a baby .
Soon after her arrival , Stanley has a poker night with his friends where Blanche meets Mitch .
His courteous manner sets him apart from Stanley 's other friends .
They like each other right away .
This is the start of their romance .
Stanley explodes in a drunken rage , striking Stella , and sending his friends running , while Blanche and Stella flee to the upstairs neighbor , Eunice .
When his anger subsides , Stanley cries out remorsefully for Stella to come back . "
Stella , Stella , hey Stella , " he bellows , until she comes down , and Stanley carries her off to bed .
In the morning , Blanche tells Stella that she is married to a subhuman animal .
In an emotional monologue , she urges her sister to leave Stanley .
Stella disagrees with her sister 's bluntness and assures Blanche that all is well , and that she does not want to leave .
As the weeks pass into months , the tension rises between Blanche and Stanley .
But Blanche has hope in Mitch , telling Stella that she wants to go away with him and not be anyone 's problem .
She is on the verge of mental collapse , anticipating a marriage proposal from Mitch .
Finally , he tells her that they need each other and should be together .
But Stanley , still skeptical , begins to research her past and discovers a closet full of skeletons .
He tells Stella what Blanche has been concealing from them , that she has a reputation for mental instability and that she was fired from her teaching job in Auriol for having sexual relations with a minor and practically run out of town .
He then says that Mitch will not be coming around anymore .
Stanley has informed Mitch about Blanche 's past , and the news of her promiscuity has turned Mitch off from her .
Stella erupts in anger that Stanley has ruined Blanche 's chances with Mitch .
But the fight is cut short , as she tells Stanley to take her to the hospital ; the baby is coming .
As Blanche waits at home for news of the baby , Mitch arrives and confronts her with the stories that Stanley has told him .
At first , she denies everything .
Then , she breaks down in confession , describing , in a lengthy monologue , her troubled past .
As she speaks to Mitch , she gives up the Southern belle façade ; her voice grows weary and deep ; her face becomes drawn and old ; she pleads for his forgiveness , but Mitch is hurt and humiliated and rejects her .
Blanche starts screaming , and Mitch runs away .
Later that night , while Stella 's labor continues , Stanley returns from the hospital to get some sleep , only to find Blanche dressed up in a tattered old gown pretending to be departing on a trip with an old admirer .
She disdainfully antagonizes him , asserting her sense of superiority over him , spinning tale after tale about her plans for the future .
He sees that she is delusional , but he feels no pity for her .
Instead , he seeks to destroy her illusions .
They become engaged in a struggle and the fact that Blanche is shown as having regressed into a psychotic state gives the impression that Stanley has raped her .
Weeks later , at another poker game at the Kowalski apartment , Stella and her neighbor , Eunice , are packing Blanche 's belongings .
Stella and Eunice have told Blanche that she is going on a vacation , but , in truth , Blanche is being committed to a mental hospital .
She has suffered a complete mental breakdown .
She has told Stella what happened , but Stella can not believe Blanche 's story .
Stella , under obvious stress , does not know what to do .
An older gentleman and lady come to the door ; it is the doctor and nurse come to take Blanche away .
Blanche does not recognize them and resists going ; she collapses on the floor seized with total confusion .
Mitch , present at the poker game , breaks down in tears .
The doctor approaches and helps Blanche up .
He offers his arm gently to her , and she goes willingly with him , saying , " Whoever you are , I have always depended upon the kindness of strangers .
" As the car drives away with Blanche , Stella takes the baby upstairs to Eunice 's , and says she is never coming back to Stanley again .
CAST * Vivien Leigh as Blanche DuBois * Marlon Brando as Stanley Kowalski * Kim Hunter as Stella Kowalski
* Karl Malden as Harold " Mitch " Mitchell * Peg Hillias as Eunice Hubbel * Rudy Bond as Steve Hubbel
* Nick Dennis as Pablo Gonzales * Mickey Kuhn as The Helpful Sailor
* Wright King as a Newspaper Collector * Edna Thomas as the Flower Lady * Richard Garrick as a Doctor
* Ann Dere as a Matron / Nurse * John George as Passerby ( uncredited ) Section::::Cast . , Mickey Kuhn is the last surviving cast member .
DIFFERENCES FROM THE PLAY Section::::Differences from the play .
The play was set entirely at the Kowalski apartment .
The film was opened up to include places only briefly mentioned or non - existent in the play , such as the train station , the streets of the French Quarter , the bowling alley , the pier of a dance casino , and the machine factory .
Dialogue was abbreviated or cut in some scenes , when Blanche was trying to convince Stella to leave Stanley , for example , or when Mitch confronted Blanche about her past .
The name of the town where Blanche was from was changed from Laurel , Mississippi , which is a real place , to Auriol , Mississippi , a fictitious place .
The play 's themes were controversial , causing the screenplay to be modified to comply with the Hollywood Production Code .
In the original play , Blanche 's husband had committed suicide after he was discovered having a homosexual affair .
This reference was removed from the film ; Blanche says instead that she showed scorn at her husband 's sensitive nature , driving him to suicide .
At the end of the play , Stella , distraught at Blanche 's fate , mutely allows Stanley to console her .
In the movie , this is changed to a " Hollywood ending " in which Stella blames Stanley for Blanche 's fate , and resolves to leave him .
Other scenes were shot but cut after filming was complete to conform to the Production Code and later , to avoid condemnation by the National Legion of Decency .
In 1993 , after Warner Brothers discovered the censored footage during a routine inventory of archives , several minutes of the censored scenes were restored in an ' original director 's version ' video re - release .
Close tight photography altered the dramatic qualities of the play , for example in the lengthy scenes of escalating conflict between Marlon Brando and Vivien Leigh , or when Karl Malden shines the light on Leigh to see how old she is , or when the camera hovers over Leigh , collapsed on the floor , with her head at the bottom of the screen , as though she were turned upside down .
In the movie , Blanche actually rode the streetcar , only mentioned in the play .
By the time the film was in production however , the Desire streetcar line had been converted into a bus service , and the production team had to gain permission from the authorities to hire out a streetcar with the " Desire " name on it .
The music score , by Alex North , was written in short sets of music that reflected the psychological dynamics of the characters .
For his work on the film , North was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Music Score , one of two nominations in that category that year .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon release , the film drew very high praise .
The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther stated that " inner torments are seldom projected with such sensitivity and clarity on the screen " and commending both Vivien Leigh 's and Marlon Brando 's performances .
Film critic Roger Ebert has also expressed praise for the film , calling it a " great ensemble of the movies .
" The film currently has a 98 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 50 reviews .
A Streetcar Named Desire won four awards at the 24th Academy Awards .
The film set an Oscar record when it became the first film to win in three acting categories ( a feat only since matched by Network ) .
The awards it won were for Actress in a Leading Role ( Leigh ) , Actor in a Supporting Role ( Malden ) , Actress in a Supporting Role ( Hunter ) , and Art Direction . !
Award ! !
Result ! !
Notes American Film Institute recognition
* 1998 AFI 's 100 Years ...
100
Movies
No . 45
* 2002 AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Passions No . 67
* 2005 AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movie Quotes : * " Stella !
Hey , Stella !
"
No . 45 * " I 've always depended on the kindness of strangers , " No . 75
* 2005 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores No . 19
* 2007 AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition )
No . 47
IN
POPULAR CULTURE
* Ten Years After 's song " Hard Monkeys " references the movie :
" Got no street car called Desire , and I 'll never light the fire . "
*
In Modern Family episode " Door to Door " , Gloria loses Jay 's dog Stella .
Gloria in a panic asks Cam for help .
While searching for the dog , Cam realizes that he is to play the role he was meant to play , screaming Stella just as Stanley did in A Streetcar Named Desire .
*
In Gilmore Girls episode 14
That Damn Donna Reed Rory is given a bird to look after for school which they name Stanley , upon finding out she 's a girl rename Stella .
When the bird goes missing Lorelai hollers " STELLA " such as in the traditional film .
*
In The Simpsons episode " Secrets of a Successful Marriage " , Waylon Smithers has a flashback to his love , with Mr. Burns below his balcony yelling " SMITHERS ! "
the way Stanley called for Stella .
The episode " A Streetcar Named Marge " is centered around a musical remake of A Streetcar Named Desire in which Marge plays Blanche Dubois .
Marge 's portrayal of Blanche is meant to mirror her relationship with her husband , Homer .
In the episode " What Animated Women Want " , Milhouse Van Houten adopts Brando 's surly attitude and Lisa , after years of rejecting him , finds him irresistible .
*
In The Princess and the Frog , when Naveen and Tiana had turned into frogs and accidentally disrupt a party , " Big Daddy " La Bouff calls for a dog named Stella , in the same manner , to get the frogs .
*
In Over the Hedge , when Tiger the Persian cat is separated from Stella the skunk , who is disguised as a cat , he calls for her as Stanley called for Stella .
*
In Wu - Tang Clan 's song " Triumph " , Method Man references the movie :
" Transform into the Ghost Rider / A six - pack and a streetcar named Desire " . "
*
In the Rod Stewart / Larry John McNally song " The Motown Song " , a line references Stanley Kowalski 's remark during one of his poker games in the movie : " 'Cause you know what luck is / luck is believing you 're lucky " .
*
In Panic !
at the Disco 's song " Memories " , they refer to the play : " And it was beautifully depressing , like a street car named Desire .
They were fighting for their love that had started growing tired . "
* New Orleans rapper Curren$y references the film in his song " Famous " : " this morning staring down at the ocean , inspired , scribbling fire on a streetcar named Desire . "
*
In Seinfeld episode " The Pen " , Elaine takes too many muscle relaxants and meets a woman named Stella at a function .
She screams " Stella " repeatedly during the function .
*
In Saves The Day 's song entitled " Hot Times in Delaware " , the track starts with an excerpt from the movie 's script : " Oh , how pretty the sky is .
I oughta go there on a rocket that never comes down .
Which way do we go now , Stella , this way ?
Stella :
No , honey this way . "
*
In Lana Del Rey 's song entitled " Carmen " , Blanche 's famous line is alluded to : "
That 's the little story of the girl you know , relying on the kindness of strangers " .
*
In Sleeper , a 1973 Woody Allen film , Miles Monroe ( Woody Allen ) attempts to regain his identity by acting out a scene with Luna Schlosser ( Diane Keaton ) from A Streetcar Named Desire , with Keaton playing the Stanley Kowalski ( Marlon Brando ) role and Allen playing Blanche DuBois ( Vivien Leigh ) .
*
In an episode of Malcolm in the Middle , Krelboynes act out scenes from the movie with puppet dolls .
*
In Lil Wayne 's song " Let 's Start a Fire " , he raps " She 's riding me like a street car named desire . "
*
In the title song to Colin Hay 's 2002 album Company of Strangers , a " Blanche DuBois " is invoked as is reliance upon the kindness of strangers .
*
In Bad Religion 's album entitled " The New America " a song is titled " A Streetkid Named Desire " .
The song is an autobiography of sorts that compares the struggles punk rock kids faced in the 70/80 's to Blanche 's struggles .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS