LIST OF ALCOHOL LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES
The following table of alcohol laws of the United States provides an overview of alcohol - related laws by first level jurisdictions throughout the US .
This list is not intended to provide a breakdown of such laws by local jurisdiction within a state ; see that state 's alcohol laws page for more detailed information .
On July 17 , 1984 , Congress passed the National Minimum Drinking Age Act .
The bill would force all states to raise their drinking age from 18 , 19 , or 20 to 21 .
States that did not choose to raise their drinking age to 21 would risk losing 10 % ( Changed to 8 % in 2012 ) of federal highway funding as a penalty .
As of July 1988 , all 50 states and the District of Columbia had a minimum purchase age of 21 , with some grandfather clauses , and with the exception of Louisiana 's complicated legal situation that was not resolved until July 2 , 1996 .
Prior to 1988 , the minimum purchase age varied by jurisdiction .
After Congress passed the National Minimum Drinking Age Act in July 1984 , states not in compliance had a portion of their federal highway budget withheld .
South Dakota and Wyoming were the final two states to comply , in mid-1988 .
However , most states continue to allow those under 21 to drink in certain circumstances .
Examples are some states like Tennessee and Washington , which allow those under 21 to drink for religious purposes .
States including Oregon and New York allow those under 21 to drink on private non - alcohol selling premises .
Unlike on the mainland , the U.S. territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands have a minimum purchase and drinking age of 18 .
The minimum purchase age is 21 in the Northern Mariana Islands , Guam , American Samoa , and US Minor Outlying Islands .
U.S. military reservations are exempt under federal law from state , county , and locally enacted alcohol beverage laws .
Class Six stores in a base exchange facility , officers ' or NCO clubs , as well as other military commissaries which are located on a military reservation , may sell and serve alcohol beverages at any time during their prescribed hours of operation to authorized patrons .
While the installation commander is free to set the drinking age , with some exceptions , most stateside military bases have a drinking age that mirrors the local community .
Individual states remain free to restrict or prohibit the manufacture of beer , mead , hard cider , wine , and other fermented alcoholic beverages at home .
Homebrewing beer became legal in all 50 states in 2013 as the governor of Mississippi signed a bill legalizing homebrewing on March 19 , 2013 and as the governor of Alabama signed a bill legalizing homebrewing of beer and wine which came into effect on May 9 , 2013 .
The Mississippi bill went into effect July 1 , 2013 .
Most states allow brewing of beer per adult per year and up to a maximum of per household annually when there are two or more adults residing in the household .
Because alcohol is taxed by the federal government via excise taxes , homebrewers are prohibited from selling any beer they brew .
This similarly applies in most Western countries .
In 1979 , President Jimmy Carter signed into law a bill allowing home beers , which was at the time not permitted without paying the excise taxes as a holdover from the prohibition of alcoholic beverages ( repealed in 1933 ) .
This change also exempted home brewers from posting a " penal bond " ( which is currently $ 1000.00 ) .
Production of distilled alcohols is regulated at the National level under USC Title 26 subtitle E Ch51 .
Numerous requirements must be met to do so and production carries an excise tax .
Owning or operating a distillation apparatus without filing the proper paperwork and paying the taxes carries federal criminal penalties .
In land or property that is being rented or owned by the federal government , state , federal district , and territory alcohol laws do not apply .
Instead , only laws made by the federal government apply .
TABLE ALABAMA – HAWAII Section::::Table .
Section::::Alabama – Hawaii . !
rowspan="2"Statefederal district or territory !
colspan="3"Alcoholic beverage control state !
colspan="2"Alcohol sale hours !
colspan="3"Grocery store sales !
colspan="2
" Age !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
On - premises !
Off - premises !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
Purchasing !
Consumption
Alabama colspan="3"Yes
colspan="2"Prohibited between midnight until noon on Sundays in some counties .
Private clubs , which require a membership fee and a membership card , have no day or time restrictions .
colspan="2"Yes
No 21 21 No exceptions to the law
13.9 % ABV cap on beerBeer containers may not exceed 25.4 ounces ( 0.75 l)ABV > 14.9 % wine sold in state storesAlcohol may be served 24 hours a day unless restricted by local ordinances .
Twenty - six of Alabama 's 67 counties do not allow the sale of alcohol .
However , possession and consumption remain legal within those 26 counties .
Of the 26 " dry " counties , 23 have at least one " wet " city ; these are considered " moist " dry counties .
Within those 23 counties there are 43 wet cities .
State law allows any city with a population greater than 1,000 located within a dry county to " go wet " if a referendum is passed by 50 % of voters .
State retains monopoly over wholesaling of distilled spirits only .
Distilled spirits ( liquor ) are purchasable in either state - owned retail liquor stores , known as ABC Stores , or privately owned retail liquor stores .
Privately owned retail liquor stores tend to be open on Sundays , public ( federal & state ) holidays , and later hours than state - owned liquor stores .
Alaska
colspan="3"No colspan="2"8 a.m. – 5 a.m. , except election days ( liquor stores may not open until polls close )
colspan="3"No (
although many grocery stores have separate areas that sell all forms of alcoholic beverages and many bars sell packaged liquor as well ) 21 21 Exception :
Underage drinking allowed for medical purposes , and on private non - alcohol selling premises with parental consent
Most communities have more restrictive laws , ranging from restrictions on operating hours to bans on sale and possession .
Sellers / servers may not , for any reason , give a person alcohol for free or sell it for less than its cost .
Sellers / servers may drink while on duty , but no intoxicated person may remain on the premises , so an impaired server could be arrested .
Arizona colspan="3"No
colspan="2"6
a.m. –
2 a.m. seven days a week — no election day nor holiday restrictions
colspan="3"Yes
21 21 Exception :
Underage drinking allowed for religious and medical purposes Arkansas colspan="3"No 7 a.m. –
1 a.m.
( Restaurants)7 a.m. – 2 a.m.
( Class A license)10 a.m. – 5 a.m. ( Class B license ) 7 a.m. – 1
a.m.(Generally prohibited on Sundays , but exceptions can be made through local option . )
colspan="2"Yes
No 21 21 No exceptions to the law Has numerous dry counties and other dry areas , but private clubs can serve even in dry areas .
No sales on Christmas Day .
Alcohol sales are permitted 24 hours a day 7 days a week regardless of holiday in state casinos .
California colspan="3"No
colspan="2"6
a.m. –
2 a.m.
colspan="3"Yes
21 21 Exception : A minor will not be penalized for consuming alcohol if discovered or reported through a medical emergency .
Relatively unrestricted ; beer , wine and liquor available at grocery stores , convenience stores , gas stations , and warehouse clubs .
No statewide holiday restrictions .
Motor vehicles entering from Mexico may only import 1 liter of alcohol ( duty - free ) .
Sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages higher than 60 %
ABV is illegal ( B&P 23403).You may serve alcohol if you are at least 21 years of age .
City and county governments can set different sale
hours.18- , 19- and 20-year - old wine and beer production students can taste — but not consume — what they are making and studying .
Colorado colspan="3"No 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. Beer , wine , and liquor : 8 a.m. – midnight 3.2 beer : 5 a.m.-midnight 3.2
only * colspan="2"No
* 21
21 Exception :
Underage consumption allowed on private non - alcohol selling premises with parental consent , for religious , medical , and educational purposes .
Connecticut
colspan="3"No 9 a.m. –
1
a.m.
( Mon.–Thurs.)9 a.m. – 2 a.m. ( Fri.–Sat.)11 a.m. – 1 a.m.
( Sun . ) 8 a.m. – 10 p.m. ( Mon.–Sat . )
10 a.m. – 6 p.m. ( Sun . )
Yes
colspan="2"No 21 Exception :
No explicit age if a present legal guardian is 21 or older 21 Exception
: Underage consumption is allowed on private non alcohol selling premises with parental consent , for medical and religious purposes , and on alcohol selling premises with parental consent .
Sunday
off - premises sales allowed as of May 20 , 2012 ; Sunday on - premises sales subject to local ordinances .
Beer can be purchased at grocery / convenience stores .
Spirits and wine can be purchased only at liquor stores .
No off - premises alcohol sales on Thanksgiving , Christmas Day , and New Year 's Day .
Open container law applies only to drivers , not passengers .
Delaware colspan="3"No 9 a.m. – 1 a.m. 9 a.m. –
1 a.m.
( Mon.–Sat.)noon–8 p.m. ( Sun . )
Municipalities with a population over 50,000 persons may impose stricter hours of sale by local ordinance .
colspan="3"No
21 21 Exception : A minor will not be penalized for if discovered consuming alcohol through a medical emergency .
Underage drinking allowed on private non - alcohol selling premises with parental consent , for religious purposes .
For off - premises consumption , alcohol may be purchased only in a liquor store , taproom , or a brew pub that has an off - premises license .
Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian over 21 , no person under 21 may enter a liquor store or taproom for any reason , even for the intent of purchasing only tobacco or lottery tickets .
No sales of alcohol by liquor stores or taprooms are permitted during designated holidays including Thanksgiving , Easter or Christmas .
District of Columbia colspan="3"No 8 a.m. –
2 a.m. Sun.–Thu . , 8 a.m. – 3 a.m.
Fri.–Sat .
Liquor Stores : 9 a.m.
–
midnight daily * Grocery Stores : 9 a.m.-12
a.m. daily colspan="2"Yes
No 21 21 Exception : A minor will not be penalized for if discovered consuming alcohol through a medical emergency .
* Liquor stores can begin applying for licenses to open on Sunday as of January 16 , 2013 .
No singles sold , but stores in some areas may apply for an exemption .
Certain wards may be made dry by the decision of the local ANC , but none are
The day before a federal or district holiday , on - premises retailers may sell / serve from 8 a.m.-3
a.m.
On New Yer 's Eve , on - premises retailers may sell / serve until 4 a.m. on January 1 .
Florida colspan="3"No colspan="2"State , federal district or territory law prohibits selling of alcohol between midnight and 7 a.m. , unless the county chooses to change the operating hours later ( FS 562.14(1 ) ) ; such as for Sunday morning ; Ormond Beach stays open until 7 pm on Sundays .
Miami - Dade County liquor stores may operate 24 hours a day .
colspan="2"Yes
No 21 21 Exception : 18 for educational purposes Sale , processing , or consumption of any liquor or spirit of greater than 153 proof is illegal .
( FSS 565.07 ) No retail sale of wine in containers larger than 1 gallon .
FS 564.05 Supermarkets and other licensed business establishments may sell beer , low - alcohol liquors , and wine .
Liquor must be sold in dedicated liquor stores which may be in a separate part of a grocery or a drug store .
As of July 1 , 2015 , the restriction on 64 ounce refillable containers , or growlers , has been lifted and beer may be sold in quantities of 64 ounces , in addition to the previously legal 32 and 128 ounce sizes .
Georgia colspan="3"No colspan="2"Hours of sale determined by local jurisdiction .
No alcohol sales on Christmas Day .
colspan="2"Yes
No 21 21 Exception :
Underage drinking allowed on non - alcoholic premises with parental consent , and for religious and medical purposes .
14 % ABV cap on beer .
Sunday
off - premises sales from 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. allowed only by local referendum .
In general , one may not be drunk in public .
Though there is no state law prohibiting drinking in public , most municipal corporations and political subdivisions limit the possession of open containers of alcohol to private property , with notable exceptions being Savannah and Roswell .
A charge of public drunkenness is only warranted when one is drunk in public and his acts are either loud or disorderly .
Hawaii colspan="3"No 6 a.m. to 12 a.m.
Within Honolulu County 6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Within Kauai , Maui , and Hawaii counties
colspan="3"Yes
21 21 Exception :
Underage consumption allowed for religious purposes IDAHO –
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Idaho – Massachusetts . !
rowspan="2"Statefederal district or territory !
colspan="3"Alcoholic beverage control state !
colspan="2"Alcohol sale hours !
colspan="3"Grocery Store Sales !
colspan="2
" Age !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
On - premises !
Off - premises !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled Spirits !
Purchasing !
Consumption Idaho colspan="2"No
Yes 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. , 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. in some counties colspan="2"Yes No Alcoholic beverages exceeding 16 %
ABV can only be sold in Idaho State Liquor Dispensary stores , or contracted stores .
Illinois colspan="3"No colspan="3"Yes Opening / closing hours are up to the decision of counties or municipalities .
Indiana colspan="3"No 7 a.m. –
3 a.m. 7 a.m. – 3 a.m . Noon - 8 p.m. on Sunday .
colspan="3"Yes
Indiana prohibits the sales of cold beer by grocery stores or gas stations , but allows cold beer to be sold from liquor stores ( IC 7.1 - 5 - 10 - 11 ) .
Minors , including babies , are not allowed to enter a liquor store .
Indiana has a photo identification requirement for all off - premises transactions to anyone who is or reasonably appears to be less than forty ( 40 ) years of age .
( See IC 7.1 - 5 - 10 - 23 ) .
Public intoxication is a class B misdemeanor .
( IC 7.1 - 5 - 1 - 3 )
Iowa colspan="2"No
Yes colspan="2"6 a.m. –
2 a.m. Mon – Sat8
a.m. –
2 a.m. Sun colspan="3"Yes
If a controlled substance is detected in a person 's system at or near the time they were operating a motor vehicle , they can be charged and potentially convicted of operating while intoxicated ( OWI ) even if they were not " impaired " by that substance .
Kansas
colspan="3"Yes 9 a.m. - 2
a.m.
( in counties which allow on - premises sales ) 9 a.m. - 11 p.m.
( Mon – Sat )
( in counties which allow off - premises sales)noon - 7 p.m. or 8 p.m. ( Sun ) ( in communities which allow Sunday off - premises sales ) 3.2 only colspan="2"No
Kansas 's alcohol laws are among the strictest in the United States .
Kansas prohibited all alcohol from 1881 to 1948 , and continued to prohibit on - premises sales of alcohol from 1949 to 1987 .
Sunday sales only have been allowed since 2005 .
Today , 29 counties still do not permit the on - premises sale of alcohol .
59 counties require a business to receive at least 30 % of revenue from food sales to allow on - premises sale of alcohol .
Only 17 counties allow general on - premises sales .
Not all communities which allow off - premises sales allow sales on Sunday .
Sales are prohibited on Christmas and Easter .
The only alcoholic beverage which grocery stores and gas stations may sell is beer with no more than 3.2 % alcohol by weight .
Other liquor sales only are allowed at state - licensed retail liquor stores .
Kansas has comprehensive open container laws for public places and vehicles , public intoxication laws , and requirements for prospective on - premises or off - premises licensees .
Kentucky colspan="3"No 6 a.m. to 4 a.m. on Monday through Saturday 1 p.m. to 4 a.m. on Sundays
Yes
colspan="2"No Local ordinance may vote to permit Sunday sales at restaurants .
Sales 2–4
a.m. only in Louisville .
As of 2005 Sunday sales were allowed per state law , but may still be prohibited in some areas by local ordinance ( as of early 2006 , such a situation existed with smaller cities within Louisville Metro , though these cities have since changed local ordinances ) .
Alcohol sale restriction and wet / dry ( both by drink and package ) allowed by both county and city local option .
Approximately 39 counties in the state ( mostly eastern and southern counties ) are dry , all alcohol sale and possession prohibited ; 22 " moist " counties ( with " wet " cities allowing package liquor sales in counties otherwise dry ) ; 29 counties that are otherwise dry but have communities with local option that allow sales of liquor by the drink or under special exemptions allowing sales at wineries .
Majority of wet counties are around major metropolitan areas ( Louisville , Lexington , Covington , Bowling Green ) .
Note :
Beginning in 2013 Liquor by the drink and beer by the drink are available on Sundays in Louisville , KY beginning at 10:00 am .
Bowling Green
, KY recently began allowing Sunday sales in December 2013 for carry - out beer , wine , and liquor .
Prohibition on liquor sales on Election Day was repealed effective June 24 , 2013 .
Kentucky was one of only two states to still have Election Day prohibition , the other being South Carolina .
Louisiana colspan="3"No
No state imposed restrictions on on - premises hours .
" 24 hour " bars are common in New Orleans and in Jefferson Parish .
Some municipalities and parishes ( including Baton Rouge and East Baton Rouge Parish ) require on - premises service to stop at 2:00 am .
No statewide restrictions on hours of package sales .
colspan="3"Yes 21 Exceptions to state law include : For an established religious purpose;When a person under twenty - one years of age is accompanied by a parent , spouse , or legal guardian twenty - one years of age or older;For medical purposes when purchased as an over the counter medication , or when prescribed or administered by a licensed physician , pharmacist , dentist , nurse , hospital , or medical institution;In a private residence , which shall include a residential dwelling and up to twenty contiguous acres , on which the dwelling is located , owned by the same person who owns the dwelling;The sale , handling , transport , or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful ownership of an establishment or to lawful employment of a person under twenty - one years of age by a duly licensed manufacturer , wholesaler , or retailer of beverage alcohol .
Packaged alcoholic beverages of any strength may be sold in supermarkets , drug stores , gas stations , and convenience stores .
Local municipalities may not restrict this .
As a result , dedicated " liquor stores " are mostly specialty stores in larger cities , and some supermarkets have large selections of liquors and wines , and compete on the basis of liquor prices and selection .
Alcohol can be consumed in the streets of New Orleans as long as it is in an " unbreakable container " ( no glass ) and may be taken from club to club if both establishments allow it .
Otherwise , it depends on the locality .
Most parishes other than Orleans Parish do not permit alcoholic beverages served on premises to be carried out .
However , many parishes and municipalities permit consumption of packaged beverages ( for example , cans of beer ) on the street .
Glass bottles on the streets are prohibited .
One can enter most bars at 18 years of age but must be 21 years old to purchase or consume alcohol .
Also , it is legal in the state of Louisiana for a legal parent or guardian to purchase alcoholic beverages for their underaged child .
Drive - thru frozen daiquiri stands are legal and common , but the police can arrest you for driving with an open container , if you have put the straw in the cup Maine colspan="2"No
Yes
Yes 6 a.m. to 1 a.m.
( Mon – Sun )
colspan="3"Yes 21 21 ABV >
Alcohol may not be purchased after 1 a.m. any day of the week , may not be purchased prior to 6 a.m. Monday through Saturday , and not prior to 9 a.m. on Sunday .
Bars and restaurants may serve until 1:15 a.m.
On New Year 's Day alcohol may be sold one hour later in all establishments .
When St. Patrick 's Day falls on a Sunday , bars and restaurants may serve alcohol starting at 6 a.m that day .
Wholesaling through state - licensed monopoly .
Municipalities may prohibit the sale of alcohol by referendum ; 56 towns have done so .
Maryland colspan="3"Variable by locality Variable by locality Variable by locality colspan="3"Variable by locality Baltimore County prohibits the sale on Sunday in some areas .
In the counties of Montgomery , Somerset , Wicomico , and Worcester sale of alcoholic beverages are controlled directly by the county Liquor Control Boards , there are exceptions in Montgomery where some liquors are still sold in grocery store due to being grandfathered before the change of the law .
Garrett County prohibits the sale on Sunday except in some areas .
The sale of alcohol at grocery and convenience stores varies by county .
There are no dry counties , but some individual voting districts within counties restrict or prohibit alcohol on a local - option basis .
Massachusetts colspan="3"No
8:00 a.m. –
2:00 a.m. by state law , although individual cities and towns may prohibit sales before 11:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m. Not before 11:00 a.m. on Sunday .
8:00 a.m. – 11:00 p.m. , or 8:00 a.m. – 11:30 p.m.
on the day before a holiday .
Not before 10:00 am on Sunday .
colspan="3"Yes . 21 21
As of January 2016 , no individual , partnership , or corporation may have more than seven off - premises licences in the state , nor more than two in any city , nor more than one in any town .
No individual , partnership , or corporation not resident or headquartered in Massachusetts may apply for a license , although one may devolve thereupon .
As of 2012 - 10 - 29 , a Massachusetts driver 's license , Massachusetts Liquor ID card , RMV - issued Massachusetts non - driver ID card , passport ( issued by the US or a US - recognized foreign entity ) , US - issued Passport Card , and military identification card are the only acceptable proofs of age under state law .
Out of state or Canadian driver 's licenses/ ID 's and other forms of identification do not grant the establishment legal protection if accepted as proof of age ( and many establishments will not accept out of state licenses for this reason ) .
On - premises regulations : No discounts at specific times ( i.e. no " Happy Hour " discounts ) or for specific individuals , no fixed - price open bar or all - you - can - drink ( except at private functions ) , no more than two drinks per individual at any one time , no pitchers for fewer than two people , no drinking contests , no drinks as prizes , no free drinks .
Off - premises sale of alcohol is prohibited on the last Monday in May ( Memorial Day ) , Thanksgiving Day , Christmas Day , and the day after Christmas if Christmas falls on a Sunday .
Sale of alcohol is prohibited during polling hours on election days ( subject to local exceptions)."Malt beverages " defined as having not more than 12 % alcohol by weight .
MICHIGAN – NEW MEXICO Section::::Michigan – New Mexico . !
rowspan="2"Statefederal district or territory !
colspan="3"Alcoholic beverage control state !
colspan="2"Alcohol sale hours !
colspan="3"Grocery Store Sales !
colspan="2
" Age !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
On - premises !
Off - premises !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled Spirits !
Purchasing !
Consumption
Michigan colspan="2"No
Yes 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Mon.–Sat . )
noon-2 a.m. ( Sunday)*sales may begin at 7 a.m. with special license extension
7 a.m.-2
a.m.
( Mon - Sat )
noon-2 a.m. ( Sunday)*sales may begin at 7 a.m. with special license extension
colspan="3"Yes 21 21
The Michigan Liquor Control Commission allows the sale of alcoholic beverages until 11:59 p.m. on December 24 and after 12:00 p.m. on December 25 .
On - premises sales are permitted on January 1 until 4:00 a.m. Local or county ordinance may restrict Sunday or Sunday morning sales .
State does not operate retail outlets ; maintains a monopoly over wholesaling of distilled spirits only .
State owns liquor until purchased and distributor acts as a delivery service for cases sold to retailers .
Minnesota colspan="3"No ( but see note ) 8 a.m. – 2 a.m. seven days 8:00
a.m.-10:00 p.m. ( Mon – Sat ) ; 11:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. ( Sun ) 3.2 %
Only colspan="2"No Local or County ordinance prevails for hours of operation for off - sale licenses .
Growler sales allowed until 10 p.m. 7 days a week .
Certain municipalities may establish municipal liquor stores ; they are permitted , but not required , to exclude privately owned stores .
Off - premises sales on Sundays became legal on July 1 , 2017 .
Mississippi colspan="2"No
Yes
Local authorities fix hours of alcohol sale Yes colspan="2"No ABW > 5 % wine and sparkling wine sold in state - contracted stores which are open from 10:00 am until 10:00 pm ( Closed Sundays ) statewide .
Beer and light wine ( ABW < 5 % , ABV < ~6.3 % ) sold in convenience stores / supermarkets .
Beer and light wine ( ABW < 5 % ) may be consumed by persons age 18 - 20 with parental supervision .
Governor Phil Bryant signed a bill permitting beer with 8 % ABW/10 % ABV on April 9 , 2012 .
The bill went into effect on July 1 , 2012 .
No sales on Christmas Day .
No state open container laws .
Complimentary alcohol all day and night in coastal casinos .
In most counties , alcohol can not be sold on Sundays .
There are many dry counties in which it is illegal to possess alcoholic beverages , though some cities within dry counties have voted in beer sales .
Missouri colspan="3"No
Most establishments : ( Mon – Sat )
6:00am–1:30am ( Sunday ) 9:00am–12:00pm Special licenses in Kansas City and St. Louis : ( Daily )
6:00am–3:00am
( Mon – Sat )
6:00am–1:30am ( Sunday ) 9:00am–12:00am
Sales permitted until 3:00 am in those Kansas City and St. Louis bars grandfathered into the ability to double as liquor stores .
colspan="3"Yes
One of the most alcohol - permissive states , perhaps only behind Nevada and Louisiana :
* No open container law .
* No state public intoxication law .
* Liquor control law covers all beverages containing more than 0.5 % alcohol , without further particularities based on percentage .
* Cities and counties are prohibited from banning off - premises alcohol sales .
* No dry jurisdictions .
* State preemption of local alcohol laws which do not follow state law .
* Certain bars in Kansas City and St. Louis grandfathered into the ability to double as liquor stores .
* Special licenses available for bars and nightclubs which allow selling alcohol until 3:00am in Kansas City , Jackson County , North Kansas City , St. Louis , and St. Louis County .
* Grocery stores , drug stores , and even gas stations may sell liquor without limitation other than hours .
* Patrons allowed to take open containers out of bars in Kansas City 's Power & Light District .
* Parents and guardians may furnish alcohol to their children .
* Missourians over 21 may manufacture up to 100 gallons of any liquor per year for personal use , without any further state limitation , state taxation , or state license .
( Obtaining a permit from the Federal Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau and meeting other requirements under federal law probably still is required for private citizens to manufacture distilled alcohol - but not wine or beer - for personal use . )
Missouri law recognizes two types of alcoholic beverage : liquor , which is any beverage containing more than 0.5 % alcohol except " non - intoxicating beer " ; and " non - intoxicating beer , " which is beer containing between 0.5 % and 3.2 % alcohol .
Liquor laws apply to all liquor , and special laws apply to " non - intoxicating beer . "
Montana colspan="2"No
Yes
Closing 2 am
No alcohol sales between 2 am and 8 am colspan="2"Yes Distilled spirits can not be sold in grocery stores
21 Minors can consume alcohol purchased by a parent or guardian in a private location .
ABV > 16 % wine sold in state - contracted stores , ABV < 16 % may be sold in grocery stores .
Some local ordinances restrict alcohol sales on Sundays .
State run liquor stores are closed on Sundays .
Nebraska colspan="3"No
colspan="2"6
a.m. – 1
a.m. Legislation passed in 2010 allows for municipalities to extend on - premises sales to 2 a.m. with two - thirds approval of city or county councils .
colspan="3"Yes
No on- or off - premises sales of spirits before noon on Sundays .
All beer , wine , and champagne can be sold starting at 6 a.m. Nevada colspan="3"No
colspan="2"24 hours colspan="3"Yes
There are few restrictions on the sale and consumption of alcohol in Nevada except for age .
The maximum abv of alcohol sold is 80 % .
State law also renders public intoxication legal , and explicitly prohibits any local or state law from making it a public offence .
Alcohol purchase is only controlled in Panaca .
New Hampshire colspan="2"No
Yes 6 a.m. –
1 a.m. 6 a.m. – 11:45 p.m. colspan="2"Yes
No Liquor sold in state - run stores , many found at highway rest areas.14 % ABV cap on beer .
State is wholesaler of wine .
State taxes beer $ 0.30 / gal at the wholesale level .
New Jersey colspan="3"No
Each municipality can control hours by local ordinance .
Most municipalities have a last call of 2 or 3 a.m. Atlantic City , Brigantine , Absecon , Elwood , Pomona , Smithville , Galloway , and Mullica ( All in Atlantic County ) serve 24 hours .
There are some dry towns in the southern part of the state , including Ocean City .
9 a.m.-10 p.m. for liquor .
Beer and wine can be sold at any time on - premise sales are permitted in that municipality .
This causes most liquor stores to close at 10 PM , however some will stay open an hour later selling only beer and wine .
Cities of the first class ( e.g. Jersey City and Newark ) are exempt from this law and may set their own hours for liquor sales .
colspan="3"Rarely 21 21 ( unless provided by parent or guardian in private )
Some dry communities in historically Methodist and Quaker communities in the southern part of the state .
Though there is not a ban on selling alcoholic beverages at grocery stores , New Jersey limits each chain to two licenses , so with only a few exceptions , most supermarkets / convenience stores / gas stations / pharmacies do not sell alcoholic beverages .
In addition , liquor sales are only permitted in a separate department or attached sister store .
The ability of a " liquor store " to sell other items , such as convenience store fare , is determined by municipality .
Many towns permit beer / wine / liquor stores to sell non - alcohol items including convenience store items at the same register .
In such towns , grocery stores including chains may theoretically apply for and receive a liquor license if the company does not already have two in the state .
Bars are allowed to off - sale packaged goods .
With the exception of Jersey City and Newark , all municipalities MUST allow off - sales of beer and wine at any time on - sales are permitted .
However , since alcoholic beverages are generally only found in package stores , this right is rarely exercised .
Alcoholic beverages by the drink as well as off - sales of beer and wine are permitted 24 hours a day in Atlantic City and Brigantine .
New Mexico
colspan="3"No 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. , except Sundays , for establishments with full dispenser license .
7
a.m. – 11 p.m. , except Sundays , for restaurants with beer and wine license .
7
a.m. –
midnight except Sundays colspan="3"Yes New Mexico issues two types of license for consumption on - premises : a full dispenser license allowing sale of all types of alcohol , or a restaurant license permitting sale of beer and wine only .
An additional Sunday permit is available which allows sale ( on or off premises ) on Sundays from noon until midnight .
Exceptions are the prohibition of alcohol sale on Christmas , regardless of the day it falls on , and a Sunday permit allowing of sale ( on or off premises ) until 2:00 a.m. January 1 , if December 31 falls on a Sunday .
Sunday permits are only available where approved by voters within a local option district .
Selling , serving and giving alcohol to a minor is a class 4 felony punishable by up to 18 months in prison , except when " a parent , legal guardian or adult spouse of a minor serves alcoholic beverages to that minor on real property , other than licensed premises , under the control of the parent , legal guardian or adult spouse " , or for religious purposes .
NEW YORK –
SOUTH DAKOTA Section::::New York – South Dakota . !
rowspan="2"Statefederal district or territory !
colspan="3"Alcoholic beverage control state !
colspan="2"Alcohol sale hours !
colspan="3"Grocery Store Sales !
colspan="2
" Age !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
On - premises !
Off - premises !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled Spirits !
Purchasing !
Consumption New York colspan="3"No 8 a.m. –
4 a.m. ( Mon – Sat )
Noon – 4 a.m. ( Sun )
Some counties have more restrictive hours .
Beer : 24 hours Wine & spirits : 8 a.m. – midnight
( Mon – Sat )
Noon – 9 p.m. ( Sun ) .
Yes colspan="2"No 21 Off - premises sale of wine and spirits is only at liquor stores , and beer is not sold at liquor stores ; it must be sold at supermarkets and convenience stores .
Exchanges for returned items are permitted ( at store owners ' discretion ) .
Some counties may retain the Sunday morning beer prohibition which the state discontinued as of July 30 , 2006 .
Twelve dry towns , mostly in western region of state .
Many counties have more restrictive off - premises hours , such as bans on beer sales overnight ( hours vary ) .
All liquor stores must be owned by a single owner , who owns that store and lives within a certain distance of it — effectively banning chain liquor stores from the state .
New York City law does not allow open containers of alcohol in public .
Distilled spirits may not be sold within 200 feet of a school , church , synagogue or other place of worship .
North Carolina colspan="2"No
Yes 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Mon – Sat ) 10
a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Sun ) Beer and wine : 7 a.m. – 2 a.m. ( Mon – Sat ) 10
a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Sun ) Liquor : 9 a.m. – 9 p.m. ( Mon – Sat ) colspan="2"Yes
No 21 15 % ABV cap on beer , 16 % cap on unfortified wine , 24 % cap on fortified wine .
No " happy hour , " " buy one get one free , " or " ladies night " style specials allowed .
North Dakota
colspan="3"No 8 a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Mon – Sat )
Noon – 2 a.m. ( Sun ) 8 a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Mon – Sat )
Noon – 2 a.m. ( Sun )
colspan="3"No 21
No off - sale on Thanksgiving Day .
No Christmas Day on - sale , nor sales on Christmas Eve after 6 p.m. Ohio colspan="2"No
Yes colspan="3"Yes , under 21 % ABV 21 21 or older , unrestricted under supervision of individual 's parent or legal guardian or legal age spouse
12 % ABV cap on beer was removed on May 31 , 2016 .
21 % ABV cap on wine .
Some counties have more restrictive off - premises hours .
The Division of Liquor Control does not operate retail outlets ; it appoints private businesses to act as its agents and sell its products in exchange for a commission .
Normal proof spirits ( > 21 % ABV ) are sold only in a limited number of agent stores .
Many retail outlets sell diluted spirits ( diluted by water to 21 % ABV ) under a more readily obtained permit .
No intoxicating liquor shall be handled by any person under twenty - one years of age , except that a person eighteen years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle or sell beer or intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with wholesale or retail sales , and any person nineteen years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle intoxicating liquor in open containers when acting in the capacity of a server in a hotel , restaurant , club , or night club . .
Beverages with less than 0.5 %
ABV can be sold /
given to people under the age of eighteen if given by a physician in the regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes , or the underage person is accompanied by a parent , spouse who is not an underage person , or legal guardian .
Oklahoma colspan="3"No 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. Liquor stores : 8 a.m. – midnight
( Mon – Sat )
Sunday sales vary by county .
Grocery stores : 6 a.m. - 2 a.m. seven days a week including holidays .
colspan="2"Yes
colspan="1"No 21 Consumption by those under 21 is not prohibited in private settings , where supervised by a parent or guardian .
As of October 1 , 2018 , strong beer ( up to 9 % ABV ) and wine ( up to 15 % ABV ) can be sold in grocery and convenience stores , and can be sold refrigerated .
Prior to this date , only 3.2 % ABV beer could be sold in these outlets , and liquor stores could only sell strong beer and wine at room temperature .
Distilled spirits are only available in package liquor stores .
State law prohibits public intoxication , many counties and cities also prohibit public intoxication .
Oregon colspan="2"No
Yes 7 a.m. – 2:30 a.m. 7 a.m. – 2:30 a.m. colspan="2"Yes
No 21 Liquor , all of which is state - owned prior to sale to consumers , is sold in private liquor stores .
These stores are approved by Oregon 's Liquor Commissioners to act as sales agents on the state 's behalf .
Pennsylvania
No colspan="2"Yes Restaurants , and bars : 7 a.m. –
2 a.m. ( Mon – Sat ) 11
a.m. - 2 a.m.
( Sun ) Clubs : 7 a.m. – 3 a.m. Beverage Centers and State Run Stores : 9 a.m. – 10 p.m. ( Mon – Sat )
Noon –
5 p.m .
( Sun )
Grocery Stores : 7 a.m. - 10 p.m.
( Mon - Sat ) 9
a.m. - 10 pm
No 21 Spirits can only be sold at state - operated stores .
All persons must be at least 21 years of age to enter a state - operated liquor store alone .
Beer is not sold at state - operated liquor stores .
Beer ( but not wine ) to go can be purchased at beverage outlets in any quantity .
Prior to 2015 beverage centers could only sell 24 pack cases or greater .
The rules were relaxed to permit sales of beer in any quantity in 2016 .
* Beer and wine to go can be purchased in restaurants and grocery stores ( at a separate point of purchase for alcohol and prepared foods sales in grocery stores ) ( six and 12 packs/192 oz max .
purchase ( two six packs ) ) with Liquor Control Board – issued licenses .
Sunday sales were prohibited in LCB stores until 2003 ( selected locations ) and beverage outlets ( owner 's option ) until 2005 .
Special permits may be purchased for certain organizations for fundraisers once per calendar year , and are valid for a total of six days under the same rules governing restaurants .
Grain alcohol prohibited as a beverage .
Rhode Island
colspan="3"No 9 am – 1 a.m. ( Mon – Sat )
Noon – 1 a.m. ( Sun ) 9 a.m. – 10 p.m. ( Mon – Sat ) 10
a.m. – 6 p.m. ( Sun )
colspan="3"No 21 21
All alcohol may be sold only in liquor stores .
Bars may stay open until 2 a.m. in Providence only on Friday and Saturday nights and nights before a state - recognized holiday .
South Carolina
colspan="2"No
Yes
Liquor : 10 AM - 2 AM .
Beer and Wine : Local Option .
Beer and low - alcohol wine :
24 hours Liquor : 9 a.m. – 7 p.m. ( Mon – Sat . )
colspan="2"Yes
No 21 14 % ABW ( 17.5 % ABV ) cap on beerWine
> 16 % ABV sold in liquor storesNo hard liquor sales after 7 p.m. and none on Sundays .
No off - premises alcohol sales after midnight Saturday until 7 a.m. Monday , except in Aiken , Greenville , Pendleton , Spartanburg , Horry County , Colleton County , Richland County , Charleston County / city , Beaufort County , York County , and Newberry County .
South Dakota
colspan="3"No
colspan="3"Yes
21 14 % ABV cap on beer TENNESSEE – WYOMING , PUERTO RICO
Section::::Tennessee – Wyoming , Puerto Rico . !
rowspan="2"Statefederal district or territory !
colspan="3"Alcoholic beverage control state !
colspan="2"Alcohol sale hours !
colspan="3
" Grocery Stores !
colspan="2
" Age !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Beer !
Wine !
Distilled spirits !
On - premises !
Off - premises !
Wine !
Beer !
Distilled Spirits !
Purchasing !
Consumption
Tennessee
colspan="3"No Mon - Sat : 8 a.m. to 3 a.m.
; Sun : Noon to 3 a.m. Hours of alcohol sale can be modified by local jurisdictions if approved by the alcohol control commission .
Beer :
By municipality .
Wine & Spirits : 8 a.m. to 11 p.m. Mon – Sat
No 21 Wine may be sold in grocery stores .
As of January 2018 , sales of wine and liquor are no longer limited to on - premises in restaurants on Sundays .
Liquor stores may remain open on Sundays , and liquor is permitted to be sold from retail stores for off - premises consumption .
There are no liquor sales in OFF Premise Grocery Stores as of 8/2018 .
Retail stores must be closed for business on Christmas , Thanksgiving Day , Labor Day , New Year 's Day , and the Fourth of July .
Beer above 8 % ABW /10.1 % ABV must be sold in liquor stores .
Open container law only applies to drivers , not passengers .
It is legal to carry alcohol in a non - glass container on the Beale Street stretch in Memphis .
While most clubs allow drinks to be carried outside , many do not allow drinks from outside .
Texas colspan="3"No Monday -
Friday :
7am - midnightSaturday : 7am-1amSunday :
Noon to 12 midnight .
Some cities / counties permit sale until 2 am ( with license ) .
Beer / Non - hard liquor : 7 a.m. to midnight
( Mon.-Fri.)7 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
( Sat.)Noon to midnight ( Sun . )
Hard Liquor:10 a.m. to 9 p.m. ( Mon.-Sat . )
No 21 No alcohol cap but ABV > 15.5 % requires additional license , so many places are beer / wine only .
Wet / dry issues determined by city / county election .
Liquor stores statewide closed all day Sunday .
An alcoholic beverage served ( on - premises ) to a customer between 10 a.m. and noon on Sunday may only be provided during the service of food to the customer .
Eleven Texas counties are completely dry .
In many counties , public intoxication laws are vigorously upheld .
Texas law permits consumption by minors ( any age under 21 ) if in the " visible presence " of a parent , guardian or adult spouse .
( Section 106.04 )
Possession by minors is permitted as part of employment or education , or in the visible presence of an adult parent , guardian or spouse , or supervision of a commissioned peace officer .
( Section 106.05 )
There are also exemptions for minors requesting or receiving medical attention .
Utah colspan="3"Yes Restaurants :
Noon to midnight for liquor , 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. for beer .
Bars may serve liquor from 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Varies by state liquor store hours 3.2 only
No 21 ABV > 4.0+% sold in state - controlled stores only .
3.2 % ABW ( 4.0 % ABV ) beer may be sold at grocery stores and convenience stores .
State - controlled stores close on Sundays and cease operations no later than 10 p.m. the rest of the week .
Restaurants must buy from the state - controlled store ( no delivery ) at retail prices .
No alcohol is served in restaurants without purchase of food .
Sales of kegs prohibited .
Importation of alcohol into the state by private individuals generally prohibited .
Vermont colspan="2"No
Yes 8 a.m. –
2 a.m. 6 a.m. – midnight
Yes
No 21 ABV > 16 % beer and ABV >
16 % wine are only available through state liquor stores ( most of which are integrated within grocery and beverage stores ) .
A 2008 bill allows the sale of beer in grocery and convenience stores up to ABV 16 % .
Virginia colspan="2"No
Yes 6 a.m. –
2 a.m.
No restrictions at any time for club licensees .
6 a.m. – 11:59 p.m. except local blue law .
Yes
No 21 Licensed supermarkets , convenience stores , and gas stations may sell beer and wine .
Off - premises sales no later than 12 midnight .
Liquor stores are owned and operated by the Commonwealth and are generally open 10am-9pm Monday - Saturday and from 12pm-6pm on Sunday .
Washington colspan="3"No
colspan="2"6
a.m. –
2 a.m.
( A local government subdivision may establish later opening hours or earlier closing hours . )
colspan="3"Yes 21 Beer and wine are available in specialty stores , grocery stores , convenience stores , department stores , taverns , and other locations licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board .
Spirits are available in stores greater than 10,000 sq ft ( grocery stores , big box liquor chains ) .
There are two exceptions to the 10,000-sq - ft rule : 1 )
Former State and Contract Liquor Stores that reopened under private ownership may also sell spirits provided they have been issued a new license from the state .
2 ) Cities , mostly in rural areas , that do not have a store that meets the minimum floor space may be allowed to sell spirits if the Liquor Control Board deems that there are no sufficient establishments within the trade area .
West Virginia
colspan="2"No
Yes
Beer / Wine :
Mon - Sat:7 am-2 am , Sun:1
pm-2 am Liquor :
Mon - Sat:8 am - Midnight , Sun :
Prohibited Mon - Fri:7 am-3:30 am , Sat : 7A-3:00A , Sun:1 pm-3 am 21 12 % ABV Cap on Beer .
75 % ABV spirits Permitted .
Liquor , wine and beer products that are not already in closed packaging must be bagged before exiting retail locations .
State no longer operates retail stores ( formerly State ABC Stores ) ; Number of privately owned stores restricted according to county or city population .
All stores are state contracted ; Bars and clubs must purchase liquor from state contracted private stores in person .
State retains monopoly over wholesaling of distilled spirits only .
Wisconsin
colspan="3"No 6 a.m. –
2 a.m.
Sunday – Thursday , 2:30 a.m.
Friday – Saturday , no closing time on New Year 's Day .
6
a.m. – midnight for beer ( some counties and municipalities only allow sales until 9 p.m. for beer ) , 6 a.m. – 9 p.m. for liquor and wine 21 Wisconsin permits the consumption of alcohol by minors , provided they are being supervised by parents / guardians / spouses .
Most municipalities have a uniform 9 p.m. restriction on all alcohol sales .
Notable exceptions :
Kenosha , Green Bay , La Crosse , Maple Bluff ( near Madison ) , Baraboo ( near the Dells ) .
Supermarkets , liquor stores , and gas stations may sell liquor , wine , and beer .
Law changed effective 12/7/2011 to allow all liquor sales to begin at 6 a.m. Nonalcoholic beer is not regulated by state law .
Wyoming
No colspan="2"Yes 6.00 a.m. –
2.00 a.m.
21 Clubs holding liquor licenses may be exempt from the hours of operation here specified by local ordinance or regulation of the appropriate licensing authority , but it does not seem to happen in practice Puerto Rico colspan="3"No
No territory - wide mandated last call
No territory - wide mandated hours of operation for liquor stores , but sales prohibited on Election Day and during hurricane emergencies ; some municipalities prohibit sales after midnight weekdays or 2:00 weekends .
18 Minimum drinking age is 18.Drinking on the street is illegal in San Juan ( except in designated areas during selected street festivals ) but not in all cities .
SEE ALSO
* Alcohol consumption by youth in the United States
* Alcohol exclusion laws
* Blue laws in the United States
*
Drunk driving in the United States *
Last call * Liquor store
* List of dry communities by U.S. state
* Shoulder tap ( alcohol )
* United States open container laws * Wine shipping laws in the United States FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * National Alcohol Beverage Control Association
* Alcohol Policy Information System , U.S. National Institute of Health * Federation of Tax Administrators - State Excise Taxes * National Restaurant Association - State laws on alcohol sales ( Word document )
* Alcohol and Public Health FAQ , U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention