PALM BEACH STATE
COLLEGE
Palm Beach State College is a public state college in Palm Beach County , Florida , and is a member institution of the Florida College System .
Palm Beach State College enrolls nearly 49,000 students in over 100 programs of study including bachelor of applied science , associate in arts and associate in science degree programs , and short - term certificates , as well as continuing education and avocational courses .
In 2009 , the college started its first baccalaureate program , a Bachelor of Applied Science degree in Supervision & Management .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Palm Beach State College was founded in 1933 as Palm Beach Junior College and was the first public junior college in the state of Florida .
The college 's first classes were held at Palm Beach High School in West Palm Beach .
County school superintendent Joe Youngblood and Howell Watkins , principal of Palm Beach High School , who became the college 's first dean , were instrumental in opening the college .
The college 's initial goal was to provide additional training to local high school graduates who were unable to find jobs during the Great Depression .
In 1948 , Palm Beach Junior College moved to Morrison Field , a deactivated Army Air Force base , which is now Palm Beach International Airport .
In 1951 , the college relocated to the Lake Park Town Hall .
Due to the limited availability of space at the town hall , the college had to lay off faculty and staff and cut enrollment to 200 students .
During this period , Palm Beach Junior College was known as " the little orphan college . "
In 1955 , the Palm Beach County Commission gave the college in Lake Worth , and the state legislature passed a bill providing over $ 1,000,000 for construction at this site .
The college moved to this location , which remains its main campus , in the fall of 1956 .
In 1965 , Palm Beach Junior College merged with Roosevelt Junior College , which was established in 1958 under President Britton Sayles to serve African American students .
In 1968 , control over the college passed from the Palm Beach County school district to a board of trustees .
In 1978 , the college opened its Belle Glade campus .
The Palm Beach Gardens campus opened in 1982 .
In 1983 , the college opened a campus adjacent to Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton .
In 1988 , the college 's board of trustees changed the college 's name to Palm Beach Community College .
The District Board of Trustees approved a resolution in June 2009 stating that the college 's name should change in light of offering baccalaureate degrees .
On September 8 , 2009 , the Board approved changing the name to Palm Beach State College .
The new name officially took effect on January 12 , 2010 .
CAMPUS Section::::Campus .
Palm Beach State College 's main campus is located in Palm Beach County , Florida .
In addition to the Lake Worth campus , the largest ( 114 acre/51 building complex ) and longest established campus ( 1956 ) , the college also serves students at full - service locations in Belle Glade ( 1978 ) , Palm Beach Gardens ( 1982 ) , Boca Raton ( 1983 ) and Loxahatchee Groves ( 2017 ) .
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION Section::::Organization and administration .
The college is part of the Florida College System .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
Palm Beach State College enrolls nearly 49,000 students in over 100 programs of study including bachelor of applied science , associate in arts and associate in science degree programs , and short - term certificates .
ENROLLMENT Section::::Enrollment .
+ Demographics of student body ( Fall 2018 ) ! ! !
Students ! !
Florida ! !
U.S. Census !
African American !
Asian American !
European American !
Hispanic American !
Native American
The most popular program of study is the associate in arts degree .
Among associate in science degrees , the nursing program has the highest enrollment and number of graduates .
In August 2009 , the college started its first baccalaureate program , a Bachelor of Applied Science degree in Supervision & Management .
Palm Beach State now offers three bachelor 's degrees in six tracks .
Information Management was added in 2011 and Nursing in 2012 .
The college is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges to award the Bachelor of Science , Bachelor of Applied Science , Associate in Arts , Associate in Science and Associate in Applied Science degrees .
The Palm Beach State College truck technology program was ranked as the best in the United States in 2015 .
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
The college athletics teams , which are nicknamed the Panthers , compete in the Southern Conference of the Florida State College Activities Association , a body of the National Junior College Athletic Association Region 8 .
In 2013 , the Panther baseball team were runners up at the Alpine Bank Junior College World Series in Grand Junction , Colorado .
The Panthers lost 7 - 3 in the National Championship Game to Central Alabama Community College .
NOTABLE PEOPLE Section::::Notable people .
Among the most notable alumni of Palm Beach State College are actor Burt Reynolds , Jesper Parnevik who currently plays on the PGA Tour , soap opera actress Deidre Hall , Yolanda Griffith an Olympic Gold Medalist and Professional Basketball Player with the WNBA , and James L. Wattenbarger who was the Architect of the Florida Community College system , and Pamela Ketter Browning , author of 50 books for adults and children .
Alumnus status is open to all graduates of Palm Beach State College , as well as all former students of Palm Beach State College who regularly matriculated and left the College in good standing . !
Alumnus !
Notability
Ross Baumgarten MLB baseball player Dante Bichette MLB baseball player Wilson G. Bradshaw Current President of Florida Gulf Coast University Mark Brownson MLB baseball player Crystl Bustos Olympic Gold Medalist in Softball William Calley Convicted war criminal ( did not graduate ) Tony Cruz MLB player
Paul Dicken MLB baseball player John R. Ellis Filmmaker and
special effects artist Gar Finnvold MLB baseball player Mark Foley Former U.S. Representative Joe Grahe MLB baseball player Ken Green
Professional golfer Yolanda Griffith
Olympic Gold Medalist and Professional Basketball Player Deidre Hall
Television actress David Manning MLB baseball player Monte Markham
Television and movie actor Andy McGaffigan MLB baseball player
Bobby Muñoz MLB baseball player Randy O'Neal MLB baseball player Jesper Parnevik
Professional golfer Brad Peacock MLB baseball player
Judge
Reinhold Television and movie actor Burt Reynolds Television and movie actor Antoan Richardson MLB baseball player Lucia
St. Clair Robson Historical novelist Kevin Siegrist MLB player Kim Swan
Politician , Leader of the Opposition in Bermuda Robby Thompson MLB baseball player James L. Wattenbarger Architect of the Florida Community College system Charles Willeford American writer Gareth Williams Television and movie actor SEE
ALSO
* List of colleges and universities in Florida
* List of community colleges REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Palm Beach State College website * A timeline of the college 's history