TJ MAXX
TJ Maxx is an American department store chain , selling at prices generally lower than other major similar stores .
It has more than 1,000 stores in the United States and Puerto Rico , making it one of the largest clothing retailers in the United States .
The company is part of the TJX Companies , which also owns HomeGoods / HomeSense , and " off - price " retail chains Sierra Trading Post in the United States , Marshalls in the US and Canada , and Winners in Canada .
Under the name TK Maxx , its parent company TJX operates stores throughout the United Kingdom , Ireland , Germany , Australia , Poland , Austria , and The Netherlands .
It sells men 's , women 's and children 's apparel and shoes , toys , bath and beauty , accessories , and home products ranging from furniture to kitchen utensils .
TJ Maxx and Marshalls operate as sister stores , and share a similar footprint throughout the country .
While their prices are nearly identical and they have similar store layouts , TJ Maxx has a more upscale appearance than Marshalls and typically sells a larger range of fine jewelry and accessories .
Some higher - volume stores have a high - end designer department called The Runway .
The CEO of TJX companies is Ernie Herrman .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1976 TJ Maxx was founded in Framingham , Massachusetts by Bernard Cammarata , as a nameplate of the Zayre chain of discount department stores .
When Zayre sold their own nameplate to Ames , a rival discount department store , Zayre was renamed as " TJX Companies , Incorporated " .
In March 2009 its e - commerce site was launched , at first only selling handbags , the range later expanded to include clothing , shoes , jewelry , other accessories , and some home goods .
COMPARISON WITH COMPETITORS Section::::Comparison with competitors .
Business Insider described TJ Maxx as " Macy 's worst nightmare " in an oft - quoted 2016 article by Mallory Schlossberg .
In a later article Schlossberg also reported on how TJ Maxx 's soaring sales " should be concerning for ailing department stores that are fighting to get people to pay full price . "
As off - price retailers are becoming an increasing threat to traditional department stores , signaling a change in consumer buying habits , TJ Maxx 's revenue grew to surpass that of Macy 's .
According to The Economist , " the overheads at TJX and Ross are , as a percentage of sales , about half those of Macy 's or Nordstrom " and Fortune stated that " the quicker inventory turn and the sense that an item on a rack might not be there the following week at a TJ Maxx or a Marshalls has led to a boom in this area of retail and made such stores a rarity in the business : shoppers are coming to stores . "
DATA THEFT Section::::Data theft .
In 2007 the company disclosed a computer security breach dating back to 2005 : computer hackers had gained access to information on credit and debit card accounts for transactions since January 2003 .
This exposed more than 100 million customers to potential theft from their accounts .
According to the company , this affected customers who used their card between January 2003 and June 2004 at any branch of TJ Maxx .
Details were stolen by hackers installing software via wi - fi in June 2005 that allowed them to access personal information on customers .
The breach continued until January 2007 .
Affected TJX stores included TJ Maxx , Marshalls , Winners , HomeSense ,
A.J. Wright , KMaxx , Bob 's Stores in the United States and Puerto Rico , Winners and HomeGoods stores in Canada , and possibly TK Maxx stores in the UK and Ireland .
Eleven people from around the world were charged with the breach in 2008 .
In 2007 outside security provider Protegrity estimated that TJ Maxx 's losses as a result of the data breach might reach £ 800 million in the following years , as a result of paying for credit checks and administrative costs for managing the fallout from the breach .
The TJ Maxx Corporation was sued by the Massachusetts Bankers Association and co - plaintiffs including Maine and Connecticut Associated Banks for the data theft .
In March 2010 computer hacker Albert Gonzalez was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison after confessing to stealing credit and debit card details from a number of companies , including TJ Maxx .
NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* TJ Maxx official website