JEEP PATRIOT
The Jeep Patriot ( MK74 ) is a front - engine five - door compact crossover SUV manufactured and marketed by Jeep , having debuted with the Jeep Compass in April 2006 at the New York Auto Show for the 2007 model year .
Both cars , as well as Dodge Caliber shared the GS platform , differentiated by their styling and marketing , with the Patriot exclusively offering a four - wheel drive system , marketed as Freedom Drive II .
The Patriot was manufactured at Chrysler 's Belvidere , Illinois assembly plant alongside the Compass .
Although the model was still selling well even as it was essentially unchanged as it entered its 11th model year , production ended with the 2017 model year .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
In the U.S.
the Patriot uses either the 2.0 L or 2.4 L World gasoline I4 engine .
Both front - wheel drive and four - wheel drive are available .
The Patriot features two four - wheel drive systems both of which are electronically controlled .
The basic four - wheel drive system is called Freedom Drive I.
This system is a full - time front - wheel - drive based 4WD / AWD system that is front - wheel - drive when it has traction , but can automatically put up to 20 - 30 % power to the rear wheels , or can be locked in 50 - 50 below a certain speed .
The other system , called Freedom Drive II , is based on Freedom Drive I , but by using the vehicle 's CVT transmission it is capable of a 19:1 gear reduction simulating a low range usually found in vehicles with dedicated transfer cases .
The 2.4 L GEMA I4 is an option for the 4X2 model Patriot .
For Europe and Australia , a 2.0 L ( 1968 cc ; 120 cid ; 140ps )
Volkswagen - manufactured diesel engine is fitted along with a 6-speed manual gearbox .
All EU cars are fitted as standard with four wheel drive and a version of the Freedom Drive System that tuned differently from the U.S. versions , but with similar capability to FDII with brake traction control and three switchable electronic stability control and traction control settings for on or off - road use .
The Patriot won 2007 Green 4x4 Award and the 2008 4x4 of the Year in the UK .
The Patriot uses a continuously variable transmission equipped with a four wheel drive system , marketed as Freedom Drive II , capable of holding the lowest ratio the CVT can reach , in lieu of a traditional two - speed transfer case .
The Patriot carries Jeep 's " Trail Rated " badging . !
Model!!Engine!!Power!!Torque!!Transmission
Sportrowspan=22.4 L World I4rowspan=2 rowspan=2 5-speed manual LimitedCVT MODELS Section::::Models .
The Patriot is offered in three basic models with several additional options available :
Sport : -Manual
Roll - Up Windows and Manual Door Locks -Vinyl - Wrapped Steering Wheel and Dual - Note Horn
-Cruise Control ( Not all years ) -Anti - Theft Ignition -Vinyl
( Later Cloth )
Seating Surfaces -Manual
Front Bucket Seats
-Folding
Rear Bench Seat -Heater and Fan Blower -2.0L I4 Engine ( 4X2 ) or 2.4L I4 Engine ( 4X4 ) -5-Speed
Manual Transmission -Tinted
Windows -16
" All - Season Tires -16 " Styled Steel Wheels -A / M - F / M Stereo w/ Single - Disc CD Player ( Later CD - MP3 Player ) and Four Speakers
Latitude : -Power
Windows w/
One - Touch Driver 's Auto Down Feature and Power Door Locks
-SIRIUS - XM Satellite Radio ( optional accessory )
-Leather - Wrapped Steering Wheel
-Keyless
Entry w/ Panic Feature and Security System
-Cloth
Seating Surfaces -Air
Conditioning w/ Manual Control -17
" All - Season Tires -17
"
Alloy Wheels -Rear Dome Light
Flashlight
Limited : -Cloth ( Later Leather )
Seating Surfaces -Power
Front Driver 's Seat -Power Sunroof -U
Connect Hands - Free Bluetooth Telephone System
ELECTRIC VERSION Section::::Electric version .
At the 2009 North American International Auto Show in Detroit , the Jeep Patriot was added to Chrysler 's ENVI lineup .
As with the previously announced Jeep Wrangler EV , the Jeep Patriot EV is an extended - range electric vehicle ( EREV , also called a plug - in hybrid vehicle ) , capable of traveling solely on battery power and up to on a single tank of gas .
However , Chrysler 's new partner Fiat SpA disbanded the ENVI division in November 2009 , and removed the three ENVI models from its 5-year plan for Chrysler .
There have been no announced plans to continue with the electric version .
2011 FACELIFT Section::::2011 facelift .
The Patriot received minor interior and exterior upgrades for 2011 .
The front fog lamps were shrunken and relocated , and the " Patriot " lettering on the rear bumper was removed and replaced with a more traditional rear bumper .
Three trims were offered in the US : Sport , Latitude , and Limited ( which replaced the earlier Latitude X ) .
In Canada , North Edition replaced the Latitude trim with slightly different equipment .
In the EU , four trims were offered : Sport , Sport Plus , Limited , and an Overland version .
In the EU market , the 2.0 L Volkswagen PD Diesel Engine was replaced by a 2.2 L Mercedes - Benz Twin - Cam Common Rail Diesel engine delivering .
For 2011 , a 70th Anniversary Edition model was offered to commemorate the Jeep history .
It was based on the Sport model with special olive or beige interior colors , unique alloy wheels , a nine - speaker Boston Acoustics premium sound system with subwoofer and fold - down lift gate speakers , Sirius XM Radio , a leather - wrapped steering wheel , leather seats , heated front seats , and other features .
This model was available from May to October 2011 .
For 2012 only , an Altitude Edition model , based on the Sport model , was offered .
It featured a black leather upholstery , special black - finished alloy wheels , a nine - speaker sound system , Sirius XM Radio , a leather - wrapped steering wheel , heated front seats , and black - painted exterior accents .
This model started production in May 2012 , and was only available for a few months .
For the 2013 model year , a Freedom Edition model , based on the Sport model , was offered to commemorate Jeep 's commitment to the U.S. Army and military , as well to commemorate all of the soldiers who have served .
It has a special star hood decal , power leather seats , a leather - wrapped steering wheel , Sirius XM Radio , and dark - finished alloy wheels .
This model features Commando Green Metallic exterior paint that is not available on other 2013 Jeep Patriots .
The Jeep Patriot underwent many changes in trims or models for the 2014 model year ; however , 2014 was the first model year that Freedom Drive 1 Patriots came with a Hyundai 6-speed automatic transmission instead of the CVT .
DISCONTINUATION
Section::::Discontinuation .
2017 was the last year for the Patriot , but production was discontinued in December 2016 ( with the remainder of the fleet marketed as " 2017 " and sold until stock depletion ) .
Both Patriot and first - generation Jeep Compass were replaced by second - generation thereof .
However , in 2018 , the Jeep Patriot is still available for the Canadian market .
SAFETY INSURANCE INSTITUTE FOR HIGHWAY SAFETY ( IIHS )
Section::::Safety .
Section::::Insurance Institute for Highway Safety ( IIHS ) .
+ IIHS scores Moderate overlap frontal offsetGood Small overlap
frontal offsetPoor Side impactGood * Roof strengthGood * 2007 - 2013 models with additional optional side airbags .
Models without additional optional side air bags were rated Marginal .
NHTSA Section::::NHTSA . +2007 - 2010
Patriot NHTSA scores Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver : Side Passenger : 4x2
Rollover : 4x4
Rollover :
+2013
Patriot NHTSA scores Overall : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver : Side Passenger : Side Pole Driver : Rollover : GLOBAL SALES Section::::Global Sales . !
Calendar Year !
United States Canada Other México 121,9269,026
40,495 3,004 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * Jeep Patriot Debut at Geneva Motor Show
* Jeep Patriot Review
Off Road Test
* Technical description of the Freedom Drive 4WD system