BIG DIPPER
The Big Dipper ( US ) or the Plough ( UK , Ireland ) is a large asterism consisting of seven bright stars of the constellation Ursa Major ; six of them are of second magnitude and one , Megrez ( δ ) , of third magnitude .
Four define a " bowl " or " body " and three define a " handle " or " head " .
It is recognized as a distinct grouping in many cultures .
The North Star ( Polaris ) , the current northern pole star and the tip of the handle of the Little Dipper ( Little Bear ) , can be located by extending an imaginary line through the front two stars of the asterism , Merak ( β ) and Dubhe ( α ) .
This makes it useful in celestial navigation .
NAMES AND PLACES Section::::Names and places .
The constellation of Ursa Major ( Latin : Greater Bear ) has been seen as a bear , a wagon , or a ladle .
The " bear " tradition is Greek , but apparently the name " bear " has parallels in Siberian or North American traditions .
WESTERN ASTRONOMY Section::::Western astronomy .
The name " Bear " is Homeric , and apparently native to Greece , while the " Wain " tradition is Mesopotamian .
Book XVIII of Homer 's Iliad mentions it as " the Bear , which men also call the Wain " .
In Latin , these seven stars were known as the " Seven Oxen " ( ' , from ' ) .
The classical mythographer identified the " Bear " as the nymph Callisto , changed into a she - bear by Hera , the jealous wife of Zeus .
In Ireland and the United Kingdom , this pattern is known as the Plough .
The symbol of the Starry Plough has been used as a political symbol by Irish Republican and left wing movements .
Former names include the Great Wain ( i.e. , wagon ) or Butcher 's Cleaver .
The terms Charles 's Wain and Charles
his Wain are derived from the still older Carlswæn .
A folk etymology holds that this derived from Charlemagne , but the name is common to all the Germanic languages and intended the churls ' wagon ( i.e. , " the men 's wagon " ) , in contrast with the women 's wagon ( the Little Dipper ) .
An older " Odin 's Wain " may have preceded these Nordic designations .
In German , it is known as the " Great Wagon " ( ' ) and , less often , the " Great Bear " ( ' ) .
In Scandinavia , it is known by variations of " Charles 's Wagon " ( , , or ) , but also the " Great Bear " ( ) .
In Dutch , its official name is the " Great Bear " ( ) , but it is popularly known as the " Saucepan " ( ) .
In Italian , too , it is called the " Great Wagon " ( ) .
In Romanian and most Slavic languages , it is known as the " Great Wagon " as well .
In Hungarian , it is commonly called " Göncöl 's Wagon " ( ' ) or , less often , " Big Göncöl " ( ' ) after a táltos ( shaman ) in Hungarian mythology who carried medicine that could cure any disease .
In Finnish , the figure is known as with established etymology in the archaic meaning ' salmon net ' , although other uses of the word refer to ' bear ' and ' wheel ' .
The bear relation is claimed to stem from the animal 's resemblance to — and mythical origin from — the asterism rather than vice versa .
In the Lithuanian language , the stars of Ursa Major are known as Didieji Grįžulo Ratai ( " Stars of the Riding Hall 's Wheels " ) .
Other names for the constellation include Perkūno Ratai ( " Wheels of Perkūnas " ) , Kaušas ( " Bucket " ) , Vežimas ( " Carriage " ) , and Samtis ( " Summit " ) .
ASIAN TRADITIONS
Section::::Asian traditions .
In traditional Chinese astronomy , which continues to be used throughout East Asia ( e.g. , in astrology ) , these stars are generally considered to compose the Right Wall of the Purple Forbidden Enclosure which surrounds the Northern Celestial Pole , although numerous other groupings and names have been made over the centuries .
Similarly , each star has a distinct name , which likewise has varied over time and depending upon the asterism being constructed .
The Western asterism is now known as the " Northern Dipper " ( ) or the " Seven Stars of the Northern Dipper " ( ) .
The personification of the Big Dipper itself is also known as " Doumu " ( ) in Chinese folk religion and Taoism , and Marici in Buddhism .
In Shinto , the seven largest stars of Ursa Major belong to Amenominakanushi , the oldest and most powerful of all kami .
In North Korea , the constellation is featured on the flag of the country 's special forces .
In South Korea , the constellation is referred to as " the seven stars of the north " .
In the related myth , a widow with seven sons found comfort with a widower , but to get to his house required crossing a stream .
The seven sons , sympathetic to their mother , placed stepping stones in the river .
Their mother , not knowing who put the stones in place , blessed them and , when they died , they became the constellation .
In Malaysian , it is known as the " Dipper Stars " ( ) ; in Indonesian , as the " Canoe Stars " ( Bintang Biduk ) .
In Burmese , these stars are known as Pucwan Tārā ( ပုဇွန် တာရာ , pronounced " bazun taya " ) .
Pucwan ( ပုဇွန် ) is a general term for a crustacean , such as prawn , shrimp , crab , lobster , etc .
In Javanese , as known as " Bintang Kartika " .
This name comes from Sanskrit which refers " krttikã " the same star cluster .
In ancient Javanese this brightest seven stars are known as Lintang Wuluh , literally means " seven stars " .
This star cluster is so popular because its emergence into the sky signals the time marker for planting .
In Hindu astronomy , it is referred to as the " Collection of Seven Great Sages " ( Saptarshi Mandala ) , as each star is named after a mythical Hindu sage .
An Arabian story has the four stars of the Plough 's bowl as a coffin , with the three stars in the handle as mourners , following it .
In Mongolian , it is known as the " Seven Gods " ( ) .
In Kazakh , they are known as the Jetiqaraqshi ( Жетіқарақшы ) and , in Kyrgyz , as the Jetigen ( Жетиген ) .
STARS Section::::Stars .
Within Ursa Major the stars of the Big Dipper have Bayer designations in consecutive Greek alphabetical order from the bowl to the handle . ! ProperName Bayerdesignation Apparentmagnitude Distance(l yrs )
In the same line of sight as Mizar , but about one light - year beyond it , is the star Alcor ( 80 UMa ) .
Together they are known as the " Horse and Rider " .
At fourth magnitude , Alcor would normally be relatively easy to see with the unaided eye , but its proximity to Mizar renders it more difficult to resolve , and it has served as a traditional test of sight .
Mizar itself has four components and thus enjoys the distinction of being part of an optical binary as well as being the first - discovered telescopic binary ( 1617 ) and the first - discovered spectroscopic binary ( 1889 ) .
Five of the stars of the Big Dipper are at the core of the Ursa Major Moving Group .
The two at the ends , Dubhe and Alkaid , are not part of the swarm , and are moving in the opposite direction .
Relative to the central five , they are moving down and to the right in the map .
This will slowly change the Dipper 's shape , with the bowl opening up and the handle becoming more bent .
In 50,000 years the Dipper will no longer exist as we know it [ citation required ] , but be re - formed into a new Dipper facing the opposite way .
The stars Alkaid to Phecda will then constitute the bowl , while Phecda , Merak , and Dubhe will be the handle .
GUIDEPOST Section::::Guidepost .
Not only are the stars in the Big Dipper easily found themselves , they may also be used as guides to yet other stars .
Thus it is often the starting point for introducing Northern Hemisphere beginners to the night sky :
* Polaris , the North Star , is found by imagining a line from Merak ( β ) to Dubhe ( α ) and then extending it for five times the distance between the two Pointers .
* Extending a line from Megrez ( δ ) to Phecda ( γ ) , on the inside of the bowl , leads to Regulus ( α Leonis ) and Alphard ( α Hydrae ) .
A mnemonic for this is " A hole in the bowl will leak on Leo . "
* Extending a line from Phecda ( γ ) to Megrez ( δ ) leads to Thuban ( α Draconis ) , which was the pole star 4,000 years ago .
* Crossing the top of the bowl from Megrez ( δ ) to Dubhe ( α ) takes one in the direction of Capella ( α Aurigae ) .
A mnemonic for this is " Cap to Capella . "
* Castor ( α Geminorum ) is reached by imagining a diagonal line from Megrez ( δ ) to Merak ( β ) and then extending it for approximately five times that distance .
*
By following the curve of the handle from Alioth ( ε ) to Mizar ( ζ ) to Alkaid ( η ) , one reaches Arcturus ( α Boötis ) and Spica ( α Virginis ) .
A mnemonic for this is " Arc to Arcturus then speed ( or spike ) to Spica . "
Additionally , the Dipper may be used as a guide to telescopic objects :
* The approximate location of the Hubble Deep Field can be found by following a line from Phecda ( γ ) to Megrez ( δ ) and continuing on for the same distance again .
* Crossing the bowl diagonally from Phecda ( γ ) to Dubhe ( α ) and proceeding onward for a similar stretch leads to the bright galaxy pair M81 and M82 .
* Two spectacular spiral galaxies flank Alkaid ( η ) , the Pinwheel ( M101 ) to the north and the Whirlpool ( M51 ) to the south .
* Projecting a line from Alkaid through the pole star will point to Cassiopeia .
CULTURAL ASSOCIATIONS Section::::Cultural associations .
The " Seven Stars " referenced in the Bible 's Book of Amos may refer to these stars or , more likely , to the Pleiades .
In addition , the constellation has also been used in corporate logos and the Alaska flag .
The seven stars on a red background of the Flag of the Community of Madrid , Spain , are the stars of the Big Dipper Asterism .
It can be said the same thing about the seven stars pictured in the bordure azure of the Coat of arms of Madrid , capital of Spain .
SEE ALSO
* Abenaki mythology
*
Amenominakanushi
* Apkallu * Saptarishi * Seven Sages of Greece * Swastika symbols
* Taidi REFERENCES