YIELD ( ENGINEERING )
The yield point is the point on a stress – strain curve that indicates the limit of elastic behavior and the beginning of plastic behavior .
Yield strength or yield stress is the material property defined as the stress at which a material begins to deform plastically whereas yield point is the point where nonlinear ( elastic + plastic ) deformation begins .
Prior to the yield point the material will deform elastically and will return to its original shape when the applied stress is removed .
Once the yield point is passed , some fraction of the deformation will be permanent and non - reversible .
The yield point determines the limits of performance for mechanical components , since it represents the upper limit to forces that can be applied without permanent deformation .
In structural engineering , this is a soft failure mode which does not normally cause catastrophic failure or ultimate failure unless it accelerates buckling .
Advances in measurement techniques allow higher precision mapping of the yield point which , as Marcus Reiner stated , showed " there was no yield point "
Yield strength is the critical material property exploited by many fundamental techniques of material - working : to reshape material with pressure ( such as forging , rolling , pressing , bending , extruding , or hydroforming ) , to separate material by cutting ( such as machining ) or shearing , and to join components rigidly with fasteners .
Yield load can be taken as the load applied to the centre of a carriage spring to straighten its leaves .
The offset yield point ( or proof stress ) is the stress at which 0.2 % plastic deformation occurs .
In the three - dimensional principal stresses ( formula_1 ) , an infinite number of yield points form together a yield surface .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
It is often difficult to precisely define yielding due to the wide variety of stress –
strain curves exhibited by real materials .
In addition , there are several possible ways to define yielding : True elastic limit :
The lowest stress at which dislocations move .
This definition is rarely used , since dislocations move at very low stresses , and detecting such movement is very difficult .
Proportionality limit : Up to this amount of stress , stress is proportional to strain ( Hooke 's law ) , so the stress – strain graph is a straight line , and the gradient will be equal to the elastic modulus of the material .
Elastic limit ( yield strength )
: Beyond the elastic limit , permanent deformation will occur .
The elastic limit is therefore the lowest stress point at which permanent deformation can be measured .
This requires a manual load - unload procedure , and the accuracy is critically dependent on the equipment used and operator skill .
For elastomers , such as rubber , the elastic limit is much larger than the proportionality limit .
Also , precise strain measurements have shown that plastic strain begins at low stresses .
Yield point :
The point in the stress – strain curve at which the curve levels off and plastic deformation begins to occur .
Offset yield point
( ): When a yield point is not easily defined based on the shape of the stress – strain curve an offset yield point is arbitrarily defined .
The value for this is commonly set at 0.1 or 0.2 % plastic strain .
The offset value is given as a subscript , e.g. , R=310 MPa .
High strength steel and aluminum alloys do not exhibit a yield point , so this offset yield point is used on these materials .
Upper and lower yield points : Some metals , such as mild steel , reach an upper yield point before dropping rapidly to a lower yield point .
The material response is linear up until the upper yield point , but the lower yield point is used in structural engineering as a conservative value .
If a metal is only stressed to the upper yield point , and beyond , Lüders bands can develop .
THEORETICAL YIELD STRENGTH Section::::Theoretical Yield Strength .
The theoretical yield strength can be estimated by considering the process of yield at the atomic level .
In a perfect crystal , shearing results in the displacement of an entire plane of atoms by one interatomic separation distance , b , relative to the plane below .
In order for the atoms to move , considerable force must be applied to overcome the lattice energy and move the atoms in the top plane over the lower atoms and into a new lattice site .
The applied stress to overcome the resistance of a perfect lattice to shear is the theoretical yield strength , τ .
DERIVATION Section::::Derivation .
The stress displacement curve of a plane of atoms varies sinusoidally as stress peaks when an atom is forced over the atom below and then falls as the atom slides into the next lattice point .
where formula_3 is the interatomic separation distance .
Since γ = G τ and dτ / dγ =
G at small strains ( ie .
Single atomic distance displacements )
, this equation becomes : For small displacement of γ =
x
/ a , where a is the spacing of atoms on the slip plane , this can be rewritten as : Giving a value of τ equal to :
The theoretical yield strength can be approximated as τ =
G/30 .
TYPICAL VALUES OF THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL YIELD STRESS Section::::Typical Values of Theoretical and Experimental Yield Stress .
The theoretical yield strength of a perfect crystal is much higher than the observed stress at initiation of plastic flow .
Theoretical and experimental yield stresses of common materials are shown in the table below . !
Material !
Theoretical Shear Strength ( GPa ) !
Experimental Shear Strength ( MPa ) That experimentally measured yield strength is significantly lower than the expected theoretical value can be explained by the presence of dislocations and defects in the materials .
Indeed , whiskers with perfect single crystal structure and defect free surfaces have been shown to demonstrate yield stress approaching the theoretical value .
For example , nanowhiskers of copper were shown to undergo brittle fracture at 1 GPa , a value much higher than the strength of bulk copper and approaching the theoretical value .
YIELD CRITERION Section::::Yield criterion .
A yield criterion , often expressed as yield surface , or yield locus , is a hypothesis concerning the limit of elasticity under any combination of stresses .
There are two interpretations of yield criterion : one is purely mathematical in taking a statistical approach while other models attempt to provide a justification based on established physical principles .
Since stress and strain are tensor qualities they can be described on the basis of three principal directions , in the case of stress these are denoted by formula_7 , formula_8 , and formula_9 .
The following represent the most common yield criterion as applied to an isotropic material ( uniform properties in all directions ) .
Other equations have been proposed or are used in specialist situations .
ISOTROPIC YIELD CRITERIA
Section::::Isotropic yield criteria .
Maximum Principal Stress Theory – by W.J.M Rankine(1850 ) .
Yield occurs when the largest principal stress exceeds the uniaxial tensile yield strength .
Although this criterion allows for a quick and easy comparison with experimental data it is rarely suitable for design purposes .
This theory gives good predictions for brittle materials .
Maximum Shear Stress Theory – Also known as the Tresca yield criterion , after the French scientist Henri Tresca .
This assumes that yield occurs when the shear stress formula_12 exceeds the shear yield strength formula_13 : Total Strain Energy Theory – This theory assumes that the stored energy associated with elastic deformation at the point of yield is independent of the specific stress tensor .
Thus yield occurs when the strain energy per unit volume is greater than the strain energy at the elastic limit in simple tension .
For a 3-dimensional stress state this is given by : Maximum Distortion Energy Theory ( von Mises yield criterion )
– This theory proposes that the total strain energy can be separated into two components : the volumetric ( hydrostatic ) strain
energy and the shape ( distortion or shear ) strain energy .
It is proposed that yield occurs when the distortion component exceeds that at the yield point for a simple tensile test .
This theory is also known as the von Mises yield criterion .
Based on a different theoretical underpinning this expression is also referred to as octahedral shear stress theory .
Other commonly used isotropic yield criteria are
the * von Mises yield criterion
* Mohr - Coulomb yield criterion
* Drucker - Prager yield criterion * Bresler - Pister yield criterion
* Willam - Warnke yield criterion
The yield surfaces corresponding to these criteria have a range of forms .
However , most isotropic yield criteria correspond to convex yield surfaces .
ANISOTROPIC YIELD CRITERIA Section::::Anisotropic yield criteria .
When a metal is subjected to large plastic deformations the grain sizes and orientations change in the direction of deformation .
As a result , the plastic yield behavior of the material shows directional dependency .
Under such circumstances , the isotropic yield criteria such as the von Mises yield criterion are unable to predict the yield behavior accurately .
Several anisotropic yield criteria have been developed to deal with such situations .
Some of the more popular anisotropic yield criteria are : * Hill 's quadratic yield criterion * Generalized Hill yield criterion * Hosford yield criterion FACTORS INFLUENCING YIELD STRENGTH Section::::Factors influencing yield strength .
The stress at which yield occurs is dependent on both the rate of deformation ( strain rate ) and , more significantly , the temperature at which the deformation occurs .
In general , the yield strength increases with strain rate and decreases with temperature .
When the latter is not the case , the material is said to exhibit yield strength anomaly , which is typical for superalloys and leads to their use in applications requiring high strength at high temperatures .
Early work by Alder and Philips found that the relationship between yield strength and strain rate ( at constant temperature ) was best described by a power law relationship of the form where C is a constant and m is the strain rate sensitivity .
The latter generally increases with temperature , and materials where m reaches a value greater than ~0.5 tend to exhibit super plastic behavior .
m can be found from a log - log plot of yield strength at a fixed plastic strain versus the strain rate .
Later , more complex equations were proposed that simultaneously dealt with both temperature and strain rate :
where α and A are constants and Z is the temperature - compensated strain - rate – often described by the Zener - Hollomon parameter : where Q is the activation energy for hot deformation and T is the absolute temperature .
STRENGTHENING MECHANISMS Section::::Strengthening mechanisms .
There are several ways in which crystalline and amorphous materials can be engineered to increase their yield strength .
By altering dislocation density , impurity levels , grain size ( in crystalline materials ) , the yield strength of the material can be fine tuned .
This occurs typically by introducing defects such as impurities dislocations in the material .
To move this defect ( plastically deforming or yielding the material ) , a larger stress must be applied .
This thus causes a higher yield stress in the material .
While many material properties depend only on the composition of the bulk material , yield strength is extremely sensitive to the materials processing as well .
These mechanisms for crystalline materials include *
Work hardening * Solid solution strengthening * Precipitation strengthening * Grain boundary strengthening WORK HARDENING
Section::::Work hardening .
Where deforming the material will introduce dislocations , which increases their density in the material .
This increases the yield strength of the material , since now more stress must be applied to move these dislocations through a crystal lattice .
Dislocations can also interact with each other , becoming entangled .
The governing formula for this mechanism is : where formula_21 is the yield stress , G is the shear elastic modulus , b is the magnitude of the Burgers vector , and formula_22 is the dislocation density .
SOLID SOLUTION STRENGTHENING Section::::Solid solution strengthening .
By alloying the material , impurity atoms in low concentrations will occupy a lattice position directly below a dislocation , such as directly below an extra half plane defect .
This relieves a tensile strain directly below the dislocation by filling that empty lattice space with the impurity atom .
The relationship of this mechanism goes as : where formula_24 is the shear stress , related to the yield stress , formula_25 and formula_3 are the same as in the above example , formula_27 is the concentration of solute and formula_28 is the strain induced in the lattice due to adding the impurity .
PARTICLE / PRECIPITATE STRENGTHENING Section::::Particle / precipitate strengthening .
Where the presence of a secondary phase will increase yield strength by blocking the motion of dislocations within the crystal .
A line defect that , while moving through the matrix , will be forced against a small particle or precipitate of the material .
Dislocations can move through this particle either by shearing the particle , or by a process known as bowing or ringing , in which a new ring of dislocations is created around the particle .
The shearing formula goes as : and the bowing / ringing formula :
In these formulas , formula_31 is the particle radius , formula_32 is the surface tension between the matrix and the particle , formula_33 is the distance between the particles .
GRAIN BOUNDARY STRENGTHENING
Section::::Grain boundary strengthening .
Where a buildup of dislocations at a grain boundary causes a repulsive force between dislocations .
As grain size decreases , the surface area to volume ratio of the grain increases , allowing more buildup of dislocations at the grain edge .
Since it requires a lot of energy to move dislocations to another grain , these dislocations build up along the boundary , and increase the yield stress of the material .
Also known as Hall - Petch strengthening , this type of strengthening is governed by the formula : where TESTING Section::::Testing .
Yield strength testing involves taking a small sample with a fixed cross - section area , and then pulling it with a controlled , gradually increasing force until the sample changes shape or breaks .
This is called a Tensile Test .
Longitudinal and/or transverse strain is recorded using mechanical or optical extensometers .
Yield behaviour can also be simulated using virtual tests ( on computer models of materials ) , particularly where macroscopic yield is governed by the microstructural architecture of the material being studied .
Indentation hardness correlates roughly linearly with tensile strength for most steels , but measurements on one material can not be used as a scale to measure strengths on another .
Hardness testing can therefore be an economical substitute for tensile testing , as well as providing local variations in yield strength due to , e.g. , welding or forming operations .
However , for critical situations tension testing is done to eliminate ambiguity .
IMPLICATIONS FOR STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING Section::::Implications for structural engineering .
Yielded structures have a lower stiffness , leading to increased deflections and decreased buckling strength .
The structure will be permanently deformed when the load is removed , and may have residual stresses .
Engineering metals display strain hardening , which implies that the yield stress is increased after unloading from a yield state .
Highly optimized structures , such as airplane beams and components , rely on yielding as a fail - safe failure mode .
No safety factor is therefore needed when comparing limit loads ( the highest loads expected during normal operation ) to yield criteria .
TYPICAL YIELD AND ULTIMATE
STRENGTHS Section::::Typical yield and ultimate strengths .
Note : many of the values depend on manufacturing process and purity / composition . !
Material !
data - sort - type="number " Yield strength(MPa ) !
data - sort - type="number " Ultimate strength(MPa ) !
data - sort - type="number " Density(g / cm³ ) !
data - sort - type="number " Free breaking length(km ) + Elements in the annealed state !
Element !
data - sort - type="number " Young 's modulus ( GPa ) !
data - sort - type="number " Proof or yield stress ( MPa ) !
data - sort - type="number " Ultimate tensile Strength ( MPa ) SEE ALSO * Elastic modulus
* Linear elasticity * Piola - Kirchhoff stress tensor
*
Specified Minimum Yield Strength
*
Strain tensor *
Stress concentration * Tensile strength
* Virial stress * Yield curve ( physics )
* Yield surface
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* .
* Boresi , A. P. , Schmidt , R. J. , and Sidebottom , O. M. ( 1993 ) .
Advanced Mechanics of Materials , 5th edition John Wiley & Sons .
* Oberg , E. , Jones , F. D. , and Horton , H. L. ( 1984 ) .
Machinery 's Handbook , 22nd edition .
Industrial Press .
* Shigley , J. E. , and Mischke , C. R. ( 1989 ) .
Mechanical Engineering Design , 5th edition .
McGraw Hill .
* Engineer 's Handbook