LIST OF TIE - BREAKING VOTES CAST BY VICE PRESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES
The Vice President of the United States is the ex officio President of the Senate , as provided in Article I , Section 3 , Clause 4 , of the United States Constitution , but may only vote in order to break a tie .
According to the U.S. Senate , as of December 11 , 2018 , a tie - breaking vote had been cast 267 times by 36 vice presidents .
The following is the list of tie - breaking votes cast by vice presidents of the United States .
HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Historical significance .
The first President of the Senate , John Adams , cast 29 tie - breaking votes .
He cast his first tie - breaking vote on July 18 , 1789 .
His votes protected the president 's sole authority over the removal of appointees , influenced the location of the national capital , and prevented war with Great Britain .
On at least one occasion he persuaded senators to vote against legislation that he opposed , and he frequently lectured the Senate on procedural and policy matters .
Adams 's political views and his active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration .
Toward the end of his first term , as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters , he began to exercise more restraint in the hope of realizing the goal shared by many of his successors : election in his own right as President of the United States .
In 2001 , during the 107th Congress , the Senate was divided 50–50 between Republicans and Democrats and thus Dick Cheney 's tie - breaking vote gave the Republicans the Senate majority .
However , because the 107th Congress was sworn in on January 3 , while the president and vice president were not sworn in until the 20th , Democrats technically held a 51–50 majority in the Senate for the 17 days while Al Gore was still Vice President .
However , no substantive legislative work was done during that time .
Mike Pence cast six tie - breaking votes during his first year in office , the most for any vice president .
He broke a tie with John Adams , William Wheeler , and Alben Barkley , who all cast four tie - breaking votes within their first year .
This was also the most tie - breaking votes in any single year since 1872 , when there were seven cast by Schuyler Colfax during the Grant administration .
He has so far cast the most tie - breaking votes ( 12 ) for a vice president since Schuyler Colfax was vice president from 1869 – 1873 .
In recent years , the increased threat of a filibuster has led to a rise in the use of cloture to end debate in the Senate , especially on high - profile issues where the Senate is sharply divided , thus rendering the vice president 's tie - breaking vote increasingly unnecessary or unhelpful , since the invocation of cloture requires a three - fifths majority , rather than a simple one .
However , the cloture requirement was reduced to a simple majority for all executive and judicial nominations in 2013 ( except for Supreme Court nominations , which were included in 2017 ) , which led to the first ever use of a tie - breaking vote to confirm a Cabinet member when Pence broke a tie to confirm Betsy DeVos in 2017 .
In 2018 Pence broke a tie to confirm Jonathan A. Kobes for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit .
This was the first ever tie - breaking vote to confirm a judicial nominee in U.S. history .
In general , tie - breaking votes have become less common over time , both in terms of absolute frequency and in terms of the average number of such votes cast by individual vice presidents .
More tie - breaking votes were cast by the first 12 vice presidents in the 61 years from 1789 to 1850 ( 135 ) than have been cast by the 36 vice presidents in the 168 years since then ( 132 ) .
LIST OF VICE PRESIDENTS
BY NUMBER OF TIE - BREAKING VOTES Section::::List of vice presidents by number of tie - breaking votes .
As of December 11 , 2018 , there have been 267 tie - breaking votes cast by 36 vice presidents while 12 others did not cast any votes .
The average number of tie - breaking votes cast by a vice president may be considered to be 0 ( the mode : 12 cast no tie - breaking votes ) , 3 ( the median value :
half cast more , half cast less ) , or about 5.5 ( the mean value : 267 votes divided among 48 Presidents of the Senate ) . !
Rank by number of tie - breakingvotes !
Number of tie - breakingvotes !
President of the Senate !
Party !
Order inoffice !
Term of office !
President(s )
LIST OF TIE - BREAKING VOTES SINCE 1945 Section::::List of tie - breaking votes since 1945 . !
Senate President !
Date !
Bill !
Vote !
Ultimate result
JoeBiden REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* U.S. Senate :
Tie Votes ( Secretary of the U.S. Senate )