LIQUID LATEX
Liquid latex is often used for special effects make - up and body painting applications .
Liquid latex contains about one - third latex , two - thirds water ( plus less than one percent ammonia to keep the latex from spoiling and to control the pH of the solution ) .
Liquid latex is sold in jars ranging from 2 oz .
through gallon jugs and the consistency is similar to latex house paint .
A four - ounce jar can typically cover an average sized body .
It is typically applied using a disposable sponge and takes about five to ten minutes to dry depending on how thick it is applied .
As it dries it solidifies to a rubbery consistency and in the processes ends up shrinking about three percent .
As the latex dries it becomes very sticky and will stick to itself if accidentally folded over .
Most manufacturers offer a slick spray for latex once it is dry to take away the stickiness allowing the movement of the model 's limbs .
Alternatively , shimmer powders can be dusted over dried liquid latex to create metallic effects .
One advantage to the tackiness of liquid latex is that it can act as an adhesive to attach things to the paint , such as zippers .
Unlike most other body and face paints , liquid latex is removed by peeling it off since water does not reactivate it .
Peeling the latex from the skin can be painful to some people and does tend to pull body hairs out similar to waxing .
Even though latex is non - toxic , some people can have an allergic reaction .
The most severe of these happen immediately and are categorised as an immediate hypersensitivity reaction .
Cosmetic liquid latex contains approximately 0.3 % ammonia to increase shelf - life .
Craft and mould making latex can contain more than double this amount and as a result has a much stronger odour .
The fumes from the ammonia in liquid latex can irritate the eyes when used as special effect make up on the face .
For this reason it is recommended that liquid latex be allowed to vent for several minutes before being applied in this way .
Appropriate liquid latex safety guidelines should be followed before the cosmetic use of liquid latex .
Latex is a natural ingredient that comes from rubber trees in the form of a milky liquid .
There are thousands of species of plants that produce different types of latex , including the Chicle tree that yields the raw material for producing the rubbery material in chewing gum .
Unlike some rubber compounds , rubber tree latex is non - toxic in both its liquid and solid states , and because of this it can be found in many products such as surgical gloves , condoms and body paint .
Liquid latex is naturally clear and then dries into a translucent amber color .
Manufacturers add pigments to the product to provide opaque paint choices of multiple colors .
The color of the paint in the jar may initially look chalky , but as it dries it develops into a rich color ( grey becomes black for example ) .
Additional acrylic paints can be mixed with the liquid latex solution for custom colors but may not be suitable for use a cosmetic application .
Liquid latex used for special effect make - up projects like scars and gashes incorporate flesh colored latex that is applied to the skin and then built up using materials such as tissue paper and cotton .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
" Liquid latex safety guidelines "