RAMADAN ( CALENDAR MONTH )
Ramadan ( Arabic : ) or Ramadhan is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar , and the month in which the Quran was revealed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad .
Fasting during the month of Ramadan is one of the Five Pillars of Islam .
The month is spent by Muslims fasting during the daylight hours from dawn to sunset .
According to Islam , the Quran was sent down to the lowest heaven during this month , thus being prepared for gradual revelation by Jibreel ( Gabriel ) to Muhammad .
Therefore , Muhammad told his followers that the gates of Heaven would be open for the entire month and the gates of Hell ( Jahannam ) would be closed .
The first day of the next month , Shawwal , is spent in celebration and is observed as the " Festival of Breaking Fast " or Eid al - Fitr .
TIMING
Section::::Timing .
The calendar is a lunar calendar , and months begin when the first crescent of a new moon is sighted .
Since the Islamic lunar calendar year is 10 to 11 days shorter than the solar year and contains no intercalation , Ramadan migrates throughout the seasons .
The Islamic day starts after sunset .
The estimated start and end dates for Ramadan , based on the Umm al - Qura calendar of Saudi Arabia , are : !
width=20%AH !
width=40%First day ( CE / AD ) !
width=40%Last day
( CE / AD )
align="center"1437 6 June 2016 5 July 2016
align="center"1438 27 May 2017 24 June 2017
align="center"1439 17
May 2018 14 June 2018
align="center"1440 6 May 2019 3 June 2019
align="center"1441 24 April 2020 23 May 2020
align="center"1442 13 April 2021 12 May 2021
colspan=3
Many Muslims insist on the local physical sighting of the moon to mark the beginning of Ramadan , but others use the calculated time of the new moon or the Saudi Arabian declaration to determine the start of the month .
Since the new moon is not in the same state at the same time globally , the beginning and ending dates of Ramadan depend on what lunar sightings are received in each respective location .
As a result , Ramadan dates vary in different countries , but usually only by a day .
This is due to the cycle of the moon .
The moon travels the same path all year round and when the moon is seen in the east , it is then seen traveling towards the west .
All the countries around the world see the moon within a 24-hour period once spotted by one country in the east .
Each year , Ramadan begins about eleven days earlier than in the previous year .
Astronomical projections that approximate the start of Ramadan are available .
33 Islamic years are approximately equal to 32 tropical years , with six days over .
EVENTS Section::::Events .
Ramadan is observed by Muslims during the entire lunar month by the same name .
The month of religious observances consists of fasting and extra prayers .
Some important historical events during this month are generally believed to include : * 1 Ramadan , birth of
Sayyid Abdul - Qadir Gilani *
2 Ramadan , the Torah ( Tawrat ) was bestowed on Moses ( Musa ) * 10 Ramadan , death of Khadijah bint Khuwaylid – first wife of Muhammad * 10 Ramadan , in 1973 , Operation Badr took place , starting the Yom Kippur War * 12 Ramadan , the Gospel ( Injil ) was bestowed on Jesus ( Isa ) * 15 Ramadan , birth of Hasan ibn Ali * 15 Ramadan , In the Ottoman Empire , the sultan presented trays of baklava to the Janissaries in a ceremonial procession called the Baklava Alayı
* 17 Ramadan , death of Aisha bint Abu Bakr – third wife of Muhammad
* 17 Ramadan , death of Ruqayyah bint Muhammad-
daughter of Muhammad and Khadija bint Khuwaylid .
Wife of Uthman Bin Affan .
* 17 Ramadan , the Battle of Badr was won by the Muslims *
18 Ramadan , the Psalms ( Zabur ) were bestowed on David ( Dawood ) * 19 Ramadan , Ali bin Abu Talib was struck on the head by a sword *
20 Ramadan , the Conquest of Mecca by Muhammad
* 21 Ramadan , Ali bin Abu Talib died due to injuries he sustained by a sword * 27 Ramadan , the Dominion of Pakistan was established on 14 August 1947 ( 27 Ramadan 1366 in the Islamic calendar )
Laylat al - Qadr is observed during one of the last ten days of the month ( typically the odd nights ) .
Muslims believe that this night which is also known as " The Night of Power " is better than a thousand months .
This is often interpreted as praying throughout this night is rewarded equally with praying for a thousand months ( just over 83 years i.e. , a lifetime ) .
Many Muslims spend the entire night in prayer .
HADITH Section::::Hadith .
In Islamic eschatology :
*
Abu Hurairah said that the Prophet said : There will be an Ayah ( sign ) in ( the month of ) Ramadan .
Then , there will ' isabah ( splitting into groups ) in Shawwal .
Then , there will be fighting in ( the month of )
Dhu al - Qi'dah .
Then , the pilgrim will be robbed in ( the month of )
Dhu al - Hijjah .
Then , the prohibitions will be violated in ( the month of ) al - Muharram .
Then , there will be sound in ( the month of )
Safar , then the tribes will conflict with each other in the two months of Rabi ' al - awwal & Rabi ' al - thani .
Then , the most amazing thing will happen between ( the months of ) Jumada and Rajab .
Then , a well - fed she - camel will be better than a fortress ( castle ) sheltering a thousand ( people ) .
SEE ALSO
* Islamic holy books
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Islamic - Western Calendar Converter (
Based on the Arithmetical or Tabular Calendar )
* The Umm al - Qura Calendar of Saudi Arabia * Predicting the First Visibility of the Lunar Crescent ( with lunar crescent visibility maps to 2019 )