INDOTYPHLOPS BRAMINUS Indotyphlops braminus , commonly known as the brahminy blind snake and other names , is a nonvenomous blind snake species found mostly in Africa and Asia , but has been introduced in many other parts of the world .
They are completely fossorial ( i.e. , burrowing ) animals , with habits and appearance similar to earthworms , for which they are often mistaken , although close examination reveals tiny scales rather than the annular segments characteristic of true earthworms .
The specific name is a Latinized form of the word Brahmin , which is a varna among Hindus .
No subspecies are currently recognized .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Adults measure long , uncommonly to , It is the smallest known snake species .
The head and tail are superficially similar as the head and neck are indistinct .
Unlike other snakes , the head scales resemble the body scales .
The eyes are barely discernible as small dots under the head scales .
The tip of the tail has a small , pointed spur .
Along the body are fourteen rows of dorsal scales .
Coloration ranges from charcoal gray , silver - gray , light yellow - beige , purplish , or infrequently albino , the ventral surface more pale .
Coloration of the juvenile form is similar to that of the adult .
Behavior ranges from lethargic to energetic , quickly seeking the cover of soil or leaf litter to avoid light The tiny eyes are covered with translucent scales , rendering these snakes almost entirely blind .
The eyes can not form images , but are still capable of registering light intensity .
COMMON NAMES
Section::::Common names .
I. braminus is variously known as brahminy blind snake ( or brahminy blindsnake ) , flowerpot snake , common blind snake , island blind snake , and Hawaiian blind snake .
The moniker " flowerpot snake " derives from the snake 's incidental introduction to various parts of the world through the plant trade .
GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Section::::Geographic range .
Probably originally native to Africa and Asia , it is an introduced species in many parts of the world , including Australia , the Americas , and Oceania .
It is common throughout most of Florida now .
The vertical distribution is from sea level to 1,200 m in Sri Lanka and up to 1,500 m in Guatemala .
The type locality given is " Vizagapatam " [ India ] .
This is also the only snake reported from the Lakshadweep Islands .
INDIGENOUS Section::::Indigenous .
In Africa , it has been reported in Egypt , Senegal , Benin , Togo , Ivory Coast , Cameroon , Somalia , Zanzibar , Tanzania , Mozambique , South Africa ( an isolated colony in Cape Town , also about eight have been found in Lephalale , Limpopo Province at the Medupi Power Station during construction ) , Madagascar , the Comoro Islands , Mauritius , the Mascarene Islands and the Seychelles .
In Asia , it occurs on Arabian Peninsula , Iran , Pakistan , Nepal , mainland India , the Maldives , the Lakshadweep Islands , Sri Lanka , Bangladesh , the Andaman Islands , the Nicobar Islands , Myanmar , Singapore , the Malay Peninsula , Thailand , Cambodia , Vietnam , Laos , Hainan , southern China , Hong Kong , Taiwan , and the Ryukyu Islands of Okinawashima and Miyakoshima .
In Maritime Southeast Asia , it occurs on Sumatra and nearby islands ( the Riao Archipelago , Bangka , Billiton and Nias ) , Borneo , Sulawesi , the Philippines , Butung , Salajar , Ternate , Halmahera , Buru , Ceram , Ambon , Saparua , Java , Bali , Lombok , Sumbawa , Madura , Flores , Lomblen , Sumba , Timor , East Timor , Kai Island , the Aru Islands , New Guinea ( Western Papua and Papua New Guinea ) , New Britain , and Bougainville Island .
It occurs in the Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands , on Christmas Island .
INTRODUCED Section::::Introduced .
In Australia , it occurs in the Northern Territory near Darwin , and at the northern tip of Queensland and other parts of queensland like sunshine coast .
In Oceania , it occurs on Palau , Guam , Fiji , Saipan , and the Hawaiian Islands .
In the Americas , it occurs in the United States ( California , Connecticut , Florida , Louisiana , Massachusetts , Arizona , Hawaii and Texas ) , western and southern Mexico , Guatemala , Colombia , Barbados and on the Cayman Islands , Turks and Caicos Islands .
It has been found in the Canary Islands of Tenerife and Gran Canaria , probably being introduced in soil imported with potted plants .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Usually , they occur in urban and agricultural areas .
These snakes live underground in ant and termite nests .
They are also found under logs , moist leaves , stones and humus in wet forest , dry jungle , abandoned buildings and even city gardens .
The distribution and survival of this group of blind snakes directly reflect soil humidity and temperature .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
Their diet consists of the larvae , eggs , and pupae of ants and termites .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
This species is parthenogenetic and all specimens collected so far have been female .
They lay eggs or may bear live young .
Up to eight offspring are produced - all female and all genetically identical .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Annandale N. 1906 .
Notes on the fauna of a desert tract in southern India .
Part I. Batrachians and reptiles , with remarks on the reptiles of the desert region of the North - West Frontier .
Mem .
Asiatic Soc .
Bengal , Calcutta 1 : 183 - 202 .
* Boulenger GA .
1893 .
Catalogue of the Snakes in the British Museum ( Natural History ) .
Volume I. , Containing the Families Typhlopidæ ...
London : Trustees of the British Museum ( Natural History ) .
( Taylor and Francis , printers ) .
xiii +
448 pp .
+ Plates I - XXVIII .
( Typhlops braminus , pp .
16–17 ) .
* Daudin FM .
1802 .
"
Histoire Naturelle , Générale et Particulière des Reptiles .
Tome septième [ Volume 7 ] .
Paris : F. Dufart .
436 pp .
* , Marion AB , Lipp KM , Marin J , Vidal N. 2014 .
A taxonomic framework for typhlopid snakes from the Caribbean and other regions ( Reptilia , Squamata ) .
Caribbean Herpetology ( 49 ) :
1 - 61 .
( Indotyphlops braminus , new combination ) .
* Jones GS , Thomas LA , Wong K. 1995 . "
Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
Herpetological Review 26 ( 4):210 - 211 .
* Kelaart EF .
1854 .
Catalogue of reptiles collected in Ceylon .
Ann .
Mag .
Nat .
Hist . , Second Series 13 : 137 - 140 . * , Carvalho D. 2001 .
The Risk to Hawai'i from Snakes .
Pacific Science 55 ( 4 ) : 409 - 417 .
PDF at University of Hawai'i press .
Accessed 20 April 2008 .
* . 1980 .
The brahminy blind snake ( Ramphotyphlops braminus ) in the Seychelles Archipelago : Distribution , variation , and further evidence for parthenogenesis .
Herpetologica 36 ( 3 ) : 215 - 221 .
* Oliver JA , Shaw CE .
1953 .
The amphibians and reptiles of the Hawaiian Islands .
Zoologica , New York 38 ( 5 ) : 65 - 95 .
* O'Shea M , Halliday T. 2002 .
Smithsonian Handbooks : Reptiles and Amphibians .
London : DK Publishing .
256 pp . .
* Ota H , Hikida T , , Mori A , Wynn AH .
1991 .
Morphological variation , karyotype and reproduction of the parthenogenetic blind snake , Ramphotyphlops braminus , from the insular region of East Asia and Saipan .
Amphibia - Reptilia 12 : 181 - 193 .
* Owen R , Bowman DT Jr , Johnson SA .
1998 .
" Geographic Distribution .
Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
Herpetological Review 29 ( 2 ) : 115 . * Palmer , DD and RN Fisher .
2010 .
" Geographic Distribution .
Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
Herpetological Review 41 ( 4 ) : 518 .
* Thomas LA .
1997 .
" Geographic Distribution .
Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
Herpetological Review 28 ( 2 ) : 98 .
* Vijayakumar SP , David P. 2006 .
Taxonomy , Natural History , And Distribution Of The Snakes Of The Nicobar Islands ( INDIA ) , Based On New Materials And With An Emphasis On Endemic Species .
Russian Journal of Herpetology 13 ( 1 ) : 11 – 40 .
* Wall F. 1919 .
Notes on a collection of Snakes made in the Nilgiri Hills and the adjacent Wynaad .
J. Bombay Nat .
Hist .
Soc . 26 : 552 - 584 .
* Wallach V. 1999 . "
Geographic distribution : Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
Herpetological Review 30 ( 4 ) : 236 .
* Wynn AH , Cole CJ , Gardner AL .
1987 .
"
Apparent Triploidy in the Unisexual Brahminy Blind Snake , Ramphotyphlops braminus " .
American Museum Novitates 2868 : 1 - 7 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Image of Ramphotyphlops braminus at the Institute of Toxicology and Genetics .
Accessed 30 August 2007 .
* Ramphotyphlops braminus at Snakes of Japan .
Accessed 30 August 2007 .
* Ramphotyphlops braminus at WildHerps.com .
Accessed 30 August 2007 .
* R. braminus at ThailandSnakes.com .
Accessed 22 December 2014 .