GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE ( FILM )
George of the Jungle is a 1997 American live - action film adaptation of the Jay Ward cartoon of the same name , which is also a spoof of Tarzan .
The film was produced by Walt Disney Pictures with Mandeville Films and The Kerner Entertainment Company and was released in theatres on July 16 , 1997 .
It stars Brendan Fraser as the eponymous main character , a primitive man who was raised by animals in an African jungle ; Leslie Mann as his love interest ; and Thomas Haden Church as her treacherous fiancé .
A direct - to - video sequel , George of the Jungle 2 , was released on DVD in 2003 , however only three of the original actors ( Thomas Haden Church , John Cleese , and Keith Scott ) returned for the sequel .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In an animated sequence , a plane flying through the fictional Bukuvu region in the heart of East Africa crashes .
A child on board the plane , George , disappears into the jungle and is raised by a sapient , talking gorilla named Ape .
Twenty - five years later , George , who enjoys swinging on vines to move about but has a habit of crashing into trees , has grown to be King of the Jungle .
Ursula Stanhope , a San Francisco heiress , tours Uganda with local guide Kwame and a trio of porters .
Ursula is tracked down and joined by her fiancé , Lyle Van De Groot , with two poachers named Max and Thor .
Kwame tells the group of the " White Ape " , a local legend of a superhuman primate that rules the jungle .
The next day Lyle , insistent on taking Ursula home as soon as possible , goes into the jungle with her to find the White Ape
and they are attacked by a lion .
Lyle knocks himself out trying to flee while Ursula is saved by George .
George takes Ursula to his treehouse home and cares for her , introducing her to Shep , an African bush elephant that acts like George 's dog , and Tookie , a toco toucan .
George is smitten with Ursula and attempts to woo her ; Ursula reciprocates his attraction , and her time spent with George makes her no longer wish to return home .
Lyle , Max and Thor find the treehouse and Lyle confronts Ursula and George .
Max and Thor make to shoot Shep for his ivory , and Ape shouts at Shep to run .
Everyone is stunned by the sight of a talking ape and Max and Thor decide to tranquilize and capture him .
George runs to stop them and is accidentally shot by Lyle , who thought his gun was a novelty lighter .
Lyle and the poachers are imprisoned and Lyle is identified as the shooter by the porters ; Max and Thor are released and resolve to capture Ape to make a fortune in Las Vegas .
Meanwhile , Ursula takes George home to get medical help for his wound and to see the human world he belongs in .
While Ursula is at work , George explores San Francisco and uses his vine - swinging to rescue a paraglider that got tangled in the Bay Bridge .
Ursula , uninterested in marrying Lyle , admits the truth to her parents , but her overbearing mother Beatrice objects .
At a party intended to celebrate Ursula 's engagement , Beatrice takes George aside and coldly tells him she will not let Ursula 's engagement fall apart , and refuses to let George be with her .
In Africa , Max and Thor capture
Ape , who manages to order Tookie to find George before he falls unconscious .
Tookie flies to San Francisco and George returns to the jungle , leaving Ursula in the night .
While Ursula 's parents comfort her , she realizes she loves George and goes to find him , much to Beatrice 's dismay but to her father 's approval .
Ape tricks the poachers into circling the jungle and returning to the treehouse where George confronts them and incapacitates them with his animal friends .
However , Lyle arrives : the narrator explains that Lyle escaped prison , joined a cult , and is now an ordained minister .
Lyle has the mercenaries he brought with him subdue George and takes Ursula to the nearby Ape River , where he has a boat waiting to escape while he performs a marriage ceremony .
However , the river is a harsh series of rapids that hurtle the two into danger .
George performs a big swing , only to crash into a massive tree .
However , the tree falls over the river and he pulls Ursula to safety .
Lyle ends up in a cave and , believing he is still sharing the boat with Ursula , proclaims them wedded ; he lights his lighter and beholds that he just married himself to a gorilla .
George and Ursula fall in love with each other and marry , Ursula moving into George 's treehouse .
Some years later the two are raising a son , George Jr , who they present to the animals from atop Pride Rock .
In a mid - credits scene , Ape reveals he has become a famous entertainer in Las Vegas , using Max and Thor as stuntmen .
CAST * Brendan Fraser as George , a young man who was raised in the jungle like Tarzan and frequently crashes into trees while swinging on vines .
* Leslie Mann as Ursula Stanhope , a wealthy heiress .
* Thomas Haden Church as Lyle van de Groot , Ursula 's wealthy fiancé .
* Richard Roundtree as Kwame , Ursula 's jungle guide .
* Greg Cruttwell and Abraham Benrubi as Max and Thor , 2 poachers and trackers who work for Lyle .
* John Bennett Perry as Arthur Stanhope , Ursula 's father .
* Holland Taylor as Beatrice Stanhope , Ursula 's mother .
* Kelly Miller as Betsy , Ursula 's best friend .
* Abdoulaye N'Gom as Kip , Ursula 's friend and an African tour guide .
* Michael Chinyamurindi as N'Dugo , Ursula 's friend and another African tour guide .
* Lydell M. Cheshier as Baleto , Ursula 's friend and the third African tour guide .
* Crystal the Monkey as monkey .
VOICES
* John Cleese as Ape , a well - educated , talking eastern gorilla who is George 's best friend .
* Keith Scott as Narrator .
* Frank Welker as Lion , Little Monkey , Shep , Tooki Tooki Bird , and Gorilla sound effects
GORILLA SUIT PERFORMERS
* Nameer Ed - Kadi –
Ape ( body )
* Tom Fisher
* Jody St. Michael * Philip Tan * Lief Tilden * Robert Tygner –
Ape ( facial puppetry ) ANIMALS Section::::Animals .
In the opening animated sequence , various animals swing on vines with young George , his " dog " Shep ( actually an elephant ) , fetches a crocodile instead of a log , and a wildebeest falls in love with a bushman wearing a wildebeest mask .
In the live action film , a whole host of animals are seen .
George fights with a lion , accidentally swings on a snake instead of a vine , rides an elephant , talks to a bird , and lives with various monkeys and apes .
The lion , elephant , and bird scenes were all filmed with a mix of real animals , puppetry ( especially for the lion fight ) , and CGI ( to show Shep the elephant acting like a dog ) .
The scenes with the orangutan , a chimpanzee , and the capuchin monkeys were filmed with live animals , but some computer work was used in a scene wherein the little monkey imitates George .
The large gorillas who live with George were all costumed actors or animatronic figures with the gorilla suits provided by Jim Henson 's Creature Shop .
In the " Pride Rock " scene , when George presents his son to the animals , CGI work is again used . SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Track # 2 , the Johnny Clegg song " Dela " , also features the first few bars of the original George of the Jungle theme song ( movie version only ) .
* " George of the Jungle " ( Sheldon Allman , Stanley Worth ) – 2:53 – Presidents of the United States of America
* * " Dela ( I Know
Why the Dog Howls at the Moon ) "
( Johnny Clegg )
– 4:16 –
Johnny Clegg & Savuka
*
* " Wipe Out " ( Jim Fuller , Berryhill , Patrick Connolly , Ron Wilson ) – 2:39 – The Surfaris
* * " The Man on the Flying Trapeze " ( Traditional ) – 0:57 – Roger Freeland , Jon Joyce , Steve Lively , Gary Stockdale *
* " My Way " ( Paul Anka , Jacques Revaux , Claude François , Gilles Thibault ) – 1:11 –
John Cleese * *
" Aba Daba Honeymoon " ( Walter Donovan , Arthur Fields ) – 1:55 – Karen Harper * *
" George of the Jungle " ( Allman , Worth ) – 1:03 – " Weird Al "
Yankovic
*
* " Go Ape [ The Dance Mix ] " ( Michael Becker ) – 3:25 – Michael Becker
* * " Jungle Band " ( Michael Becker ) – 3:18 – Carl Graves * *
" George to the Rescue " – 1:11
* * " Rumble in the Jungle " –
3:15
* * " The Little Monkey " – 2:23
* * " George of the Jungle [ Main Title Movie Mix ] "
( Marc Shaiman ) – 2:20 * RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 56 % based on 52 reviews with an average rating of 5.3/10 .
The consensus states : " George of the Jungle is faithful to its source material — which , unfortunately , makes it a less - than - compelling feature film " .
Roger Ebert awarded the movie three out of four stars , praising the film as " good - natured " and complimenting the cast 's comedic performances .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The movie debuted at No . 2 at the box office behind Men in Black , and eventually went on to become a box office success , grossing $ 174.4 million worldwide .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
The movie was followed by a direct - to - video sequel , George of the Jungle 2 , which picks up five years after the original .
Most of the major characters are re - cast using different actors , although Keith Scott , Thomas Haden Church and John Cleese reprise their roles from the original .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS