REMOVAL JURISDICTION
In the United States , removal jurisdiction sometimes exists for the defendant to move a civil action filed in a state court to the United States district court in the district in which the state court is located .
A federal statute , et seq .
, governs removal .
Generally , removal jurisdiction exists only if , at the time plaintiff filed the action in state court , the federal court had a basis for exercising subject - matter jurisdiction over the action , such as diversity of citizenship of the parties or where plaintiff 's action involves a claim under federal law .
If removal is based solely on diversity of citizenship , removal jurisdiction does not exist if any properly joined and served defendant is a citizen of the state in which the action action is pending .
28
U.S.C. § 1441(b)(2 ) .
Where removal jurisdiction exists , the defendant may remove the action to federal court by filing a notice of removal in the federal district court within 30 days after receiving the complaint .
The defendant must file a copy of the notice of removal in the state court and must notify all other parties of the removal .
In a case with more than one defendant named defendant , normally all defendants who have been served with legal process must join in the notice of removal .
28
U.S.C. § 1446 .
If the party contends that removal was improper , based on any ground other than that the federal district court lacks subject matter jurisdiction , the party may move the district court to remand the case to state court within 30 days after the defendant filed the notice of removal .
28
U.S.C. § 1447 .
The district court will grant the motion if it finds that removal was improper .
If the district court determines that it lacks subject matter jurisdiction at any time before entry of final judgment , the district court must remand the action to the state court .
28
U.S.C. § 1447 .
The Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 creates a separate basis for defendants to remove specified class actions filed in a state court to a federal district court .
REMOVAL AND COMPLETE DIVERSITY Section::::Removal and complete diversity .
When there are multiple defendants in a case , if even just one is a citizen of the state where the lawsuit was filed , a plaintiff can successfully object to removal if the only basis for federal jurisdiction is based on diversity of citizenship .
The reason for the rule is that diversity jurisdiction was created by the Founding Fathers of the United States in the Constitution to shield defendants from possible discrimination in a foreign forum ( i.e. , a state not their home state ) .
When an in - state defendant is being sued in a state court , it is expected that he will not be subject to unfair prejudice .
With the exception of class actions under CAFA , every defendant must agree to remove ; otherwise , the plaintiff or non - removing defendants can request remand for failure to satisfy the " rule of unanimity " .
Notably , there is a circuit split ( and several intracircuit splits ) over whether every defendant named in the complaint must join in the removal notice , or whether the rule of unanimity applies only to those defendants who have been properly served as of the date of removal .
The reason this is important is that sometimes a plaintiff may not be able to ( or may deliberately choose not to ) formally serve all defendants on the same day , or some defendants may become aware of the existence of the complaint before it is formally served ( for example , if other already - served defendants send them a " courtesy copy " ) .
In courts that adhere to the latter rule , removal jurisdiction may be proper as long as defendants can show that all defendants who were properly served by the date of removal joined in the removal notice , even though not all named defendants joined in the notice .
A plaintiff may never remove its own case , even if the defendant files counterclaims alleging violations of federal law by the plaintiff .
A plaintiff must seek a dismissal without prejudice and refile in federal court .
There exists a small set of cases ( e.g. , workers ' compensation actions and actions under the Federal Employers Liability Act ) that are barred from removal under all circumstances .
REMOVAL OF CRIMINAL CASES Section::::Removal of criminal cases .
A statute dating back to 1815 , the latest analogue of which is codified at , allows removal of state criminal cases where the defendant is a federal officer who alleges that the act was committed in carrying out his federal duties .
Under this , a number of state criminal cases have been removed to federal court and there summarily dismissed , thus preventing trial on the merits of whether the officer or agent was in fact carrying out his official duties , or acting outside of them .
A famous example of such a removal was the case of Idaho v. Lon Horiuchi , alleged to have committed manslaughter of Vicki Weaver in the Ruby Ridge encounter .
REMOVAL OF CASES
INVOLVING FEDERAL OFFICERS Section::::Removal of Cases involving Federal Officers .
The removal jurisdiction in cases involving federal officers who are sued or criminally prosecuted , is pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1442 .
as opposed to removal under 28 U.S.C. 1446 .
The primary difference between the two statutes is that in the wording of the 1442 statute , the law provides that in the case of federal officers , the federal district court need not otherwise have subject - matter jurisdiction over the type of case presented so long as the federal officer was acting within the scope of the performance of a federal duty , where cases brought under 1446 require the requisite federal subject - matter jurisdiction specifically mentioned in the 1446 statute in order to survive .
TIMELINESS OF REMOVAL Section::::Timeliness of removal .
When defendants want to remove , they ordinarily must do so within 30 days of receiving the complaint , " through service or otherwise " , under ( b ) .
An exception applies if diversity jurisdiction , and thus removal jurisdiction , is lacking at the time of the initial pleading in state court , but becomes available within a year after initiation of the suit .
In such case , defendants may remove under 28 U.S.C. § 1446(b ) ( second paragraph ) .
For example , a federal court would not initially have removal jurisdiction over claims under state law brought by a Texas citizen against another Texas citizen and a New York citizen .
However , should the Texas defendant be dropped from the claim , the New York citizen can remove if one year has not passed since the initiation of the suit .
Some courts permit equitable tolling of the one - year limitation of § 1446(b ) if the original complaint was an attempt in bad faith to evade federal jurisdiction .
Defendants may remove state law claims for which a federal court has only supplemental jurisdiction , if they share a common nucleus of operative fact with claims based on federal law .
The federal court has the discretion to accept the case as a whole or remand the issues of state law , however the court must apply state substantive law to state law claims , as opposed to federal law- a practice which is inline to actions brought under 42 U.S.C. 1983 .
OTHER ISSUES
Section::::Other issues .
State courts do not adjudicate whether an action could be properly removed .
Once a defendant has filed a notice to remove a case , jurisdiction is transferred automatically and immediately by operation of law from the state court to the federal court .
Any objection to removal must be presented to the federal court .
If a federal court finds that the notice of removal was in fact defective , or that the federal court does not have jurisdiction , the case is remanded to the state court .
A defendant used to have to formally petition the federal court for the right to remove , and jurisdiction was not transferred until the federal court entered a formal order to that effect .
The petition procedure was abolished around 1980 by Congress and replaced with the simple filing - of - notice removal procedure , although federal courts still see the occasional petition for removal or a motion for remand due to the lack of such a petition .
There is no reverse " removal " .
That is , if a case originates in a federal court , there is no ability for a defendant to remove a case from federal court into state court .
If the federal court lacks jurisdiction , the case is dismissed .
Only cases that originate in a state court and are improperly removed to a federal court may be sent back to the state court where they started .
A defendant can waive the right to remove by contract , although courts take different positions about what language is necessary to create a waiver .
Remand orders are not generally appealable , but may be appealed in the case of removals brought under the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 or where the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation appeals a remand order under 12 U.S.C. § 1819(b)(2)(C ) .
An alleged waiver of removal rights is also appealable , since the issue is not jurisdiction but the legal effect of the defendant 's actions and agreements .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* 28 U.S.C § 1441 - Actions removable generally