PARKING BRAKE
In road vehicles , the parking brake , also called hand brake , emergency brake , or e - brake , is used to keep the vehicle stationary and in many cases also perform an emergency stop .
Parking brakes on older vehicles often consist of a cable connected to two wheel brakes at one end and the other end to a pulling mechanism which is operated with the driver 's hand or foot .
The mechanism may be a hand - operated lever , at floor level beside the driver , or a straight pull handle located near the steering column , or a ( foot - operated ) pedal located beside the drivers leg .
In most automobiles the parking brake operates only on the rear wheels , which have reduced traction while braking .
Some automobiles have the parking brake operate on the front wheels , for example most Citroens manufactured since the end of World War II , and the early models of the Saab 900 .
The most common use for a parking brake is to keep a vehicle motionless when it is parked .
The parking brake has a ratchet or other locking mechanism that will keep it engaged until manually released .
On vehicles with automatic transmissions , this is usually used in concert with a parking pawl in the transmission .
ELECTRIC PARKING BRAKE Section::::Electric parking brake .
A recent variation is the electric parking brake .
First installed in the 2001 BMW 7 Series ( E65 ) , electric parking brakes have since appeared in a number of vehicles .
Two variations are available : In the more - traditional " cable - pulling " type , an electric motor simply pulls the parking brake cable on the push or pull of a button rather than a mechanical pedal or handle in the cabin .
A more complex unit ( first seen on the 2003 Audi A8 ) uses a computer - controlled motor attached to each of the two rear brake calipers referred to as the Motor on Caliper(MoC ) system .
It is expected that these systems will incorporate other features in the future .
Jaguar , Land Rover , BMW , Renault , Subaru and VW already have a system where the parking brake engages when the engine is stopped and is released when the gas pedal is pressed .
An extension of this system , called the hill - hold function , prevents roll - back when stopping and starting on a hill .
The OEM can easily turn off the system .
Some electric parking brakes function similar to " park " on an automatic transmission and will not engage when the vehicle is in motion , there is no emergency brake in this case .
EMERGENCY BRAKE Section::::Emergency brake .
The emergency brake was originally intended for one particular emergency and that was " no other way to stop " , as was the case when the footbrake suddenly failed due to a loss of hydraulic pressure or other issue .
Drivers had to respond when brakes failed , so they were expected to learn how to stop a speeding vehicle using the emergency brake alone .
Safety regulations became almost universal by 1980 , so modern brake systems are very reliable , using dual - circuit hydraulics and more recently low - brake - fluid sensors .
As modern brakes no longer cause emergencies in normal contexts ( a brake warning light comes on after the first sign of trouble ) , it is no longer necessary for the average driver to learn to use this brake for emergencies .
Some drivers benefiting from the " park " function on their automatic transmissions do not use this brake at all ( daily use of the parking brake is recommended , to ensure it does not seize up ) .
After a lack of recent braking emergencies , automakers stopped using the term and started referring it by its other use , the " parking brake " , even though the ability to function at a high speed was still there .
On an increasing number of modern vehicles , the parking brake can only be engaged when the vehicle is at a stop , and they no longer have an emergency brake .
The emergency brake in some cars is completely mechanical ; that is , by pulling the lever , the driver pulls a cable , which in turn causes the brake shoes inside a drum brake to press against the cylinder .
In a car with a completely mechanical emergency brake , the driver would be able to apply the brake even in if there was a complete loss of hydraulic pressure and a stopped engine ( which would mean that there would be no power braking ) .
DRIVING AND PARKING TECHNIQUES Section::::Driving and parking techniques .
Parking brakes do not stop very well , as the stopping force provided is less than half the force of normal braking and takes much longer to stop a vehicle .
Parking brakes also provide much less braking than what a car with power braking ( also called " brake booster " ) would provide .
For vehicles with manual transmissions , the mechanical parking brake is routinely used to assist in " hill starts " ( when the car is being started on a hill ) as this frees both feet for use on the accelerator and clutch pedals .
Even an unskilled motorist can get started without rolling backwards .
It is inadvisable to use rear wheel parking brakes when the standard brakes are available , unless there is a problem with the front wheels such as a tire blowout or slippery conditions risking skidding and a loss of control .
Using the parking brake while driving changes the traction balance between the front and rear of the vehicle , if over applied may lock the back wheels and skid the car into a handbrake turn .
Handbrake turns are often intentionally used in street racing and offroad rally racing to initiate rear wheel drift .
In conditions near freezing where it is both wet and icy , the parking brake mechanics may freeze and be impossible to release until thawed .
If only using the " park " function on a transmission to hold the car parked , there is no freezing problem .
The parking brake is also used to keep a parked manual transmission car from unintentionally moving when it is parked on a hill .
Even though it is possible to keep a parked manual transmission car in place by putting it in gear in the opposite direction of the slope ( e.g. , if parking pointing downhill , put the car in " reverse " ) , the parking brake is still typically used , as if the engine were to lose compression , the car could roll forward .
As a further precaution , some driving instructors tell students to point the wheels of hill - parked standard transmission cars towards the curb .
TYPES OF BRAKES Section::::Types of brakes .
In vehicles with rear disc brakes , the parking brake either actuates the disc calipers ( again , with much less force ) or a small drum brake housed within the hub assembly ( the inner circumference of the disc is often used instead of a separate drum ) .
Hudson automobiles used an unusual hybrid hydraulic - mechanical dual - brake system which operated the rear brakes through the otherwise conventional mechanical parking brake system when a failure of the hydraulic system allowed the pedal to travel beyond its normal limit .
A number of production vehicles , light and medium duty trucks , and motor homes have been made with a separate drum brake on the driveline ; called a transmission brake .
This has an advantage of being completely independent of other braking systems .
This is effective when there are multiple driving axles , all driven wheels are braked at once .
A line lock is a temporary parking brake that makes use of the vehicles standard hydraulic brakes .
Often used for off road conditions stopping on steep grades .
By trapping hydraulic pressure in the brake lines , all four wheels can be locked .
LARGE VEHICLES Section::::Large vehicles .
Large vehicles are usually fitted with power operated or power assisted parking brakes .
Power assisted parking brakes are usually found on large vans as well as some older heavy vehicles .
These operate in the same way as a conventional parking brakes , but pulling the lever operates a valve that allows air or hydraulic pressure or vacuum into a cylinder which applies force to the brake shoes and makes applying the parking brake easier .
When releasing the parking brake , the same mechanism also provides assistance to the driver in disengaging the ratchet .
Particularly on commercial vehicles with air operated brakes , this has the added benefit of making it much harder or even impossible to release the parking brake when insufficient air pressure is available to operate the brakes .
A reservoir or accumulator is usually provided so a limited amount of power assistance is available with the engine off .
Power operated parking brakes are fitted to heavy commercial vehicles with air brakes , such as trucks and buses .
These are usually spring applied , with air pressure being used to hold the brake off and powerful springs holding the brakes on .
In most cases , a small lever in the cab is connected to a valve which can admit air to the parking brake cylinders to release the parking brake , or release the air to apply the brake .
On some modern vehicles the valve is operated electrically from a lever or button in the cab .
The system is relatively safe since if air pressure is lost the springs will apply the brakes .
Also , the system prevents the parking brake being released if there is insufficient air pressure to apply the foot brake .
A disadvantage to this system is that if a vehicle requires towing and can not provide its own air supply , an external supply must be provided to allow the parking brake to be released , or the brake shoes must be manually wound off against the springs .
JACKING Section::::Jacking .
It is important to know which wheels are providing the braking action when lifting the car with a jack , for example when a motorist is changing a flat tire .
Usually the rear wheels are stopped with parking brakes .
Most Citroens , the Alfasud , Saab 99s , early 900s , and most early Subarus applied the parking brake force to the front wheels , which makes them notable exceptions .
If one lifts the braking wheels off the ground then the car can move and fall off the jack .
This could injure persons who are underneath or near the car .
This is the reason manufacturers recommend jacking be conducted on level ground and with chocks immobilizing the wheels that will remain on the ground .
RAILROAD
HAND BRAKES Section::::Railroad hand brakes .
Virtually all railroad rolling stock is equipped with manually operated mechanical hand brake devices that set and release the brakes .
Most of these involve a chain linked to the brake rigging , most often at the brake cylinder , that when tightened pull the piston out against the releasing springs , thus applying the brakes on the car ( if there is only one brake cylinder per car ) or bogie ( if there is more than once cylinder per car ) .
Newer locomotives have electric systems that simply place an electric motor in place of the chain winding mechanism .
This brake acts independent of the action of the automatic air brakes , which function collectively when coupled in a train and are under the control of the locomotive driver / engineer .
Manual hand brakes serve to keep a piece of rolling stock stationary after it has been spotted in a rail yard or at a customer for unloading or loading .
They are also used to secure a parked train from inadvertent movement , especially while unmanned .
Before the development of locomotive - actuated train braking systems in the late 19th century , designated railroad employees known as brakemen would move about the tops of cars , setting hand brakes in an effort to stop the train in a timely manner .
This process was imprecise and extremely dangerous .
Many brakemen lost life and limb as a result of falling from a moving train , icy and wet conditions often adding to the hazards involved in negotiating the top of a swaying boxcar .
In the U.S. , an 1893 federal law , the Railroad Safety Appliance Act , required automatic brakes on all railroads , effective in 1900 .
SEE ALSO
*
Handbrake turn
* Johnson bar ( vehicle ) NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Family Car Parts . "
A Short Course on Brakes : Parking . "