HIGH SCHOOL MUSICAL High School Musical is a 2006 American musical television film and the first installment in the High School Musical trilogy directed by Kenny Ortega .
It was filmed in 2005 in Salt Lake City .
Upon its release on January 20 , 2006 , it became the most successful Disney Channel Original Movie ( DCOM ) ever produced , with a television sequel , High School Musical 2 , released in 2007 and the feature film , , released theatrically in October 2008 .
It is the first DCOM to have a theatrical sequel .
The film 's soundtrack was the best - selling album in the United States , reaching number 1 on the American charts for 2006 .
High School Musical was Disney Channel 's most watched film that year with 7.7 million viewers in its premiere broadcast in the US , until August 's premiere of The Cheetah Girls 2 , which achieved 8.1 million viewers .
In the United Kingdom , it received 789,000 viewers for its premiere ( and 1.2 million viewers overall during the first week ) , making it the second most watched program for the Disney Channel ( UK ) of 2006 .
On December 29 , 2006 , it became the first DCOM to be broadcast on the BBC .
Globally , High School Musical has been seen by over 225 million viewers .
With a plot described by the author and numerous critics as a modern adaptation of Romeo & Juliet , High School Musical is a story about two high school juniors from rival cliques – Troy Bolton ( Zac Efron ) , captain of the basketball team , and Gabriella Montez ( Vanessa Hudgens ) , a shy transfer student who excels in mathematics and science .
Together , they try out for the lead parts in their high school musical , and this causes division among all the school 's students .
Despite other students ' attempts to thwart their dreams , Troy and Gabriella resist peer pressure and rivalry , inspiring others along the way not to " stick to the status quo " .
High school diva Sharpay Evans ( Ashley Tisdale ) and her twin brother Ryan ( Lucas Grabeel ) , will do anything not only to sabotage the friendship and romance between Troy and Gabriella but also to get the leads in the school musical .
High School Musical was filmed at East High School located in Salt Lake City , Utah , the auditorium of Murray High School , and Downtown Salt Lake City .
Murray High School was also the set of several other Disney productions
: Take Down ( 1979 ) , Read It and Weep ( 2006 ) , Minutemen ( 2008 ) , and ( 2008 ) .
In January 2016 , cast members Vanessa Hudgens , Ashley Tisdale , Lucas Grabeel , Corbin Bleu and Monique Coleman reunited in a Los Angeles high school gym ( decorated to resemble the gym used in the film ) to celebrate the film 's tenth anniversary .
Zac Efron was unable to attend but instead sent in a short video of himself giving acknowledgements toward the cast , crew , and fans of the film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On New Year 's Eve , high school juniors
Troy Bolton ( Zac Efron ) and Gabriella Montez ( Vanessa Hudgens ) meet at a party while both teens are at a ski lodge during winter break .
At the party , the two are called upon to sing karaoke together ( " Start of Something New " ) .
They find that they have a connection and decide to exchange numbers before going their separate ways .
On the first day back at school after Christmas break , Troy sees Gabriella in his classroom and she explains that she just moved to Albuquerque , New Mexico , and transferred to East High School over the break .
Troy then shows Gabriella around the school .
Drama Club president Sharpay Evans ( Ashley Tisdale ) arrives and assumes that Gabriella is interested in auditioning .
Wanting to eliminate competition , Sharpay investigates the new girl and has the scholastic decathlon captain and Chem Club president , Taylor McKessie ( Monique Coleman ) , find out about Gabriella 's past academic achievements , which results in her and Gabriella becoming great friends .
During basketball practice , Troy has trouble focusing because his thoughts are on Gabriella and the idea that he might enjoy singing in addition to basketball ( " Get'cha Head in the Game " ) .
Gabriella and Troy go to the musical auditions where Sharpay and her twin brother Ryan Evans ( Lucas Grabeel ) perform ( " What I 've Been Looking For " ) , but Troy and Gabriella are both too shy to audition .
When Gabriella finally gains the confidence to step forward once the auditions are unofficially " over " , Troy offers to sing with her , but drama teacher Ms. Darbus ( Alyson Reed ) tells them that they are too late and leaves .
Kelsi Nielsen ( Olesya Rulin ) , the musical 's composer , trips and drops her music all over the stage .
Troy and Gabriella rush to help her , and they sing together as Kelsi plays the piano
( " What I 've Been Looking For ( Reprise ) " ) .
Ms Darbus overhears them and gives them a callback audition .
When the callback list is posted , Sharpay discovers that she has competition for the lead in the musical , and the rest of the Wildcats are shocked that Troy has auditioned .
Other students confess their own secret passions and talents ( " Stick to the Status Quo " ) , alarming Taylor and Troy 's best friend Chad Danforth ( Corbin Bleu ) .
Since Gabriella has agreed to join the scholastic decathlon team , both Taylor and Chad want their teammates to focus on their upcoming competitions rather than the musical .
In the locker room , Troy is tricked by his teammates into saying that Gabriella is not important while she watches through a video conference that the scholastic decathlon team had set up through a hidden webcam in cahoots with the basketballers .
Gabriella gets extremely upset by his betrayal ( " When There Was Me and You " ) and decides not to audition for the musical .
Troy is left confused as to why Gabriella did not want to audition anymore and is unable to concentrate on the game .
Gabriella is also seen to be in low spirits .
Realizing their mistake , Chad and the basketball team tell Troy what happened and offer to support him in callbacks .
Troy goes to Gabriella 's house and they reconcile .
After overhearing Gabriella and Troy practicing , Sharpay has Ms Darbus change the callback time to coincide with both the basketball championship and the scholastic decathlon to interfere with Gabriella and Troy 's participation .
Kelsi overhears the conversation and the basketball team and the decathlon team work together to come up with a plan .
On the day of the competitions , Taylor and Gabriella use the school 's computers to delay the championship game by messing with the power in the gym and causing a chemical reaction that forces an evacuation during the decathlon .
Troy and Gabriella rush to the auditorium while Sharpay and Ryan finish performing their callback song ( " Bop to the Top " ) , confident that their plan worked .
After Gabriella and Troy audition ( " Breaking Free " ) , Ms Darbus gives the two the lead roles , making Sharpay and Ryan understudies .
Both teams win their respective competitions and the entire school gathers in the gym to celebrate ( " We 're All In This Together " ) .
Chad asks Taylor out , and Sharpay makes peace with Gabriella .
In a post - credits scene , Zeke Baylor ( Chris Warren Jr. ) paces alone in the gym as Sharpay runs in declaring the cookies she rejected from him earlier " genius " .
She then hugs him and he says he will make her a crème brûlée .
Zeke smiles in victory .
CAST
* Zac Efron as Troy Bolton , Gabriella 's boyfriend , the most popular male student at East High School , and the captain of the varsity basketball team .
On New Year 's Eve , after singing with Gabriella , he finds himself developing a crush on her .
Drew Seeley provides the singing voice of Troy Bolton , but Efron sings very briefly in five songs : " Start of Something New " , "
What I 've Been Looking For ( Reprise ) " , " Breaking Free " , " We 're All in This Together " and
" I Ca n't Take My Eyes Off of You " .
* Vanessa Hudgens as Gabriella Montez , Troy 's girlfriend , a new student and one of the brainiacs on the scholastic decathlon team .
She develops a love for Troy after meeting him at a New Year 's party .
* Lucas Grabeel as Ryan Evans , Sharpay 's twin brother .
He is very easily pushed around by his sister but is not as mean as her , despite going along with her plans to sabotage Troy and Gabriella .
He is also shown to not be particularly smart , such as not knowing how to spell " drama " , never understanding Sharpay 's plans and is admired by Kelsi .
* Ashley Tisdale , as Sharpay Evans , Ryan 's twin sister and an energetic and proud student with a love of theatre .
She very easily pushes around her brother .
She is very mean , unlike him , but enjoys being the center of attention , particularly Troy 's and is admired by Zeke .
* Corbin Bleu as Chad Danforth , Troy 's friend , Taylor 's love interest , and is very good friends with Jason and Zeke .
He likes the status quo but later ends up dating Decathlon captain Taylor .
* Monique Coleman as Taylor McKessie , Gabriella 's friend , Chad 's love interest , and is very good friends with Martha and Kelsi .
She is captain of the school 's scholastic decathlon team , and despises the basketball players and cheerleaders , believing them to be airheads , although she later ends up going out with Chad .
* Joey Miyashima as Dave Matsui , a principal at East High .
He does the morning announcements every day .
* Bart Johnson as Jack Bolton , Troy 's father and the coach of the basketball team .
He has a mutual dislike with Ms. Darbus , thinks that theater is worthless , and also believes that Gabriella is a distraction to Troy 's basketball career .
However , he eventually comes around to it .
* Olesya Rulin as Kelsi Nielsen , a friend of Gabriella and Taylor and a student at East High .
She is a pianist and composer .
She is very shy and is constantly bossed around by Sharpay , but in the end , she learns to stand up for herself and not get bossed around by Sharpay .
She also enjoys composing and is an admirer of Ryan .
* Chris Warren Jr. as Zeke Baylor , a friend of Troy and Chad who plays for the basketball team .
He also enjoys baking and is an admirer of Sharpay .
* Ryne Sanborn as Jason Cross , Martha 's love interest , one of the jocks on the scholastic decathlon team and plays for the basketball team .
He also tends to ask mundane questions in Ms. Darbus ' class .
He is good friends with Troy , Chad , and Zeke .
* Kaycee Stroh as Martha Cox , Jason 's love interest and a peppy brainiac who enjoys hip - hop .
She is good friends with Gabriella , Taylor , and Kelsi .
* Alyson Reed as Ms. Darbus , the stern drama teacher at East High .
She despises sports and cell phones but takes her job very seriously , though she can be overdramatic .
She clashes frequently with Jack Bolton .
* Socorro Herrera as Lisa Montez , Gabriella 's mother .
Her job has caused her to be transferred frequently from city to city , but she has been guaranteed that she and Gabriella will be able to stay in Albuquerque until Gabriella graduates from high school .
* Leslie Wing Pomeroy as Lucille Bolton , Troy 's mother .
She serves food for Troy at his house but is more sufficient for Troy to love her .
* Joyce Cohen as Ms. Falstaff , the librarian at East High .
She keeps Chad quiet in the library and gets a book for Gabriella and Sharpay to read but takes her work very carefully .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
The soundtrack was released on January 10 , 2006 , and debuted at number 133 on the Billboard 200 , selling 7,469 copies in its first week .
In the album 's third week , for the chart dated February 11 , 2006 , it climbed to number ten , and has since risen to number one on the Billboard 200 twice ( on March 1 and 22 ) and had shipped 3.8 million copies on December 5 , 2006 .
Out of those copies , more than 3 million copies have been sold by August 2006 ; it was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA . !
Song Primary singer(s )
Other singers Scene RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On its premiere , the film was a success with 7.7 million viewers .
However , the reviews were mixed .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 56 % , while Common Sense Media rated it at 4/5 stars .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Kevin Carr gave the film a score of 3/5 saying , " The filmmakers were just trying to tell a story .
Sex , drugs and violence just did n't factor into that equation .
"
On the other hand , David Nusair gave the film a negative review with a score of 1.5/4 saying , " ... it 's difficult to imagine even the most die - hard fan of musicals finding anything here worth embracing . "
Scott Weinberg also gave the film a negative review saying , " A schmaltzy little piece of obvious fluff that 's directed in truly horrendous fashion and populated by cardboard characters who spit out simplistic platitudes and breathy pop tunes . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The DVD was released on May 23 , 2006 , under the title , High School Musical : Encore Edition .
It created a sales record when 1.2 million copies were sold in its first six days , making it the fastest - selling television film of all time .
It is , however , the second DCOM ( Disney Channel Original Movie ) on DVD to be certified Platinum in DVD sales , the first being The Cheetah Girls .
The High School Musical DVD was also released in Australia on July 12 , 2006 , through Walt Disney and was released on European Region 2 on December 4 , 2006 , where it went on to reach number one in the UK DVD charts .
It was also shown on Disney Channel South Africa , the latest Disney channel at that time in the southern hemisphere .
It was the top - selling DVD in Australia in August 2006 .
In addition , the Region 3 DVD was released on October 10 in Hong Kong .
It also released in Taiwan on December 15 , 2006 .
This is the first Region 3 DCOM DVD ever released .
It was released in Mexico on November 10 and in Brazil on December 6 to coincide with Christmas and the Rede Globo broadcast of the film .
It was released in New Zealand on July 12 , 2006 , and was awarded most popular pre - teen movie in New Zealand for
2006 High School Musical was the first feature - length video content from the iTunes Store in mid - March 2006 .
At the time it was available as a 320x240 resolution 487 MB download for $ 9.99 after initially being mistakenly listed for $ 1.99 .
The Remix Edition , a 2-disc Special Edition , was released on December 5 , 2006 .
The Remix DVD was released in France on June 20 , 2007 .
and in Germany on September 13 , 2007 .
The Remix DVD was released in the UK on September 10 , 2007 .
As of 2010 , the film has sold 8million DVD units , earning an operating income of .
Despite being filmed in the 1.85:1 aspect ratio , both the original and Remix Edition DVD releases featured a 1.33:1 " full screen " version ( though not pan and scan as the camera stays directly in the center of the image ) , the format of the film as shown on the Disney Channel .
The widescreen , high definition version is available exclusively on Disney Blu - ray in North America and has subsequently been showing in the UK & Ireland on BBC One and BBC HD , and RTÉ One .
The HD version is also available on PlayStation StoreVideo section and Sony Entertainment online for the US market .
OTHER MEDIA SEQUELS
HIGH SCHOOL MUSICAL 2 ( 2007 )
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Sequels .
Section::::High School
Musical 2 ( 2007 ) .
High School Musical 2 is the first sequel .
It debuted on August 17 , 2007 , on Disney Channel in the U.S. , and on Family in Canada .
The premiere brought in a total of 17.3 million viewers in the United States — almost 10 million more than its predecessor — making it ( at the time of its airing ) the highest - rated Disney Channel Movie to date and the most viewed television film to date .
HIGH SCHOOL MUSICAL 3 :
SENIOR YEAR ( 2008 )
Section::::High School Musical 3 :
Senior Year ( 2008 ) .
High School Musical 3
: Senior Year is the third installment in Disney 's High School Musical franchise .
It was released to theaters across the United States on October 24 , 2008 .
Kenny Ortega returned as director and choreographer , as did all six primary actors .
SHARPAY 'S FABULOUS ADVENTURE ( 2011 )
Section::::Sharpay 's Fabulous Adventure ( 2011 ) .
Sharpay 's Fabulous Adventure is a spin - off and direct - to - DVD film starring Ashley Tisdale .
The film features Sharpay Evans trying to get a role in a Broadway show following graduation .
The film was released as a Blu - ray and DVD combination pack on April 19 , 2011 .
BAD LIP READING VERSION Section::::Bad Lip Reading version .
On July 11 , 2016 , Disney XD released a half - hour overdubbed version of High School Musical to its YouTube channel in collaboration with Bad Lip Reading , a popular YouTube channel known for making parody dubs of various clips from films , TV shows , songs , sports , and political news stories that perfectly matches the lip movements of the targets .
The story in this version is essentially similar to the original with new dialogue , the lead characters now being " Chorky " and " Lumpkinella " , the latter secretly being a robot who escaped from a secure government facility .
FOREIGN ADAPTATIONS
ARGENTINA Section::::Foreign adaptations .
Section::::Argentina .
High School Musical :
El desafio ( Argentina ) is a spin - off for the Argentine market , based on the book " Battle of the Bands " .
The film arrived in Argentine theatres on July 17 , 2008 .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
High School
Musical :
O Desafio is a spin - off of the American film High School Musical .
The Brazilian spin - off is based on the book Battle of the Bands .
The film was released in Brazilian theatres on February 5 , 2010 .
CHINA Section::::China .
Disney High School Musical China ( ) , also called High School Musical China :
College Dreams is a Chinese version of the American series , released in North America on DVD under the Disney World Cinema Brand .
Film Business Asia critic Derek Elley rated the adaptation three points out of ten and called the choreography by former Madonna dancer , Ruthy Inchaustegui , and songs " bland " .
However , Elley picked the three songs as " half - memorable " : " the ballad ' Rainy Season ' ( ) [ sung by ] two lead[ing characters , ] the glitzy ' Perfection ' ( ) [ by ] the college rich - bitch [ , ] and [ the ] climatic '
I Can Fly ' ( ) , which does n't quite succeed at being an , uplifting ballad . "
ON STAGE PERFORMANCES
CONCERT TOUR
Section::::On stage performances .
Section::::Concert tour .
The " High School Musical :
The Concert " tour started on November 29 , 2006 , kicking off in San Diego , California .
The tour continued until January 28 , 2007 , performing in major cities around the United States , Canada , and Latin America .
The concert featured all of the original cast members except for Zac Efron , who was shooting Hairspray .
Efron was replaced by Drew Seeley ( whose voice was blended with Efron 's during the film ) .
The concert featured the original songs from the film , as well as songs from Vanessa Hudgens , Ashley Tisdale , and Corbin Bleu .
STAGE MUSICAL Section::::Stage musical .
On August 1 , 2006 , Playbill announced that the Stagedoor Manor summer theater camp , featured in the film Camp , would be the first venue to produce High School Musical on - stage .
North Shore Music Theater in Beverly , MA had a stage production of High School Musical running until the end of July 2007 , featuring Broadway actor Andrew Keenan - Bolger and Kate Rockwell , a semi - finalist on , as Sharpay .
Pacific Repertory Theatre 's School of Dramatic Arts staged the California premiere in 2007 ( which it revived in 2008 ) , and presented the West Coast premiere of High School Musical 2 in January 2009 .
Theatre of the Stars in Atlanta , Georgia was the first professional company to put on High School Musical .
ICE TOUR Section::::Ice tour .
" Feld Entertainment " produced global tour titled
, High School Musical :
The Ice Tour which had its world premiere in New York City on September 29 , 2007 .
The cast included 2004 World Junior Bronze Medalist Jordan Brauninger and 2004–2005 Australian national champion Bradley Santer .
The show contained elements and songs from both the original film and its sequel , High School Musical 2 and featured a special preview of when the movie of the same name premiered in theatres .
BOOK SERIES Section::::Book series .
In June 2006 , Disney Press published High School Musical :
The Junior Novel , the novelization of the successful film .
This novel hit number one on the New York Times best - selling list and remained on the list for sixteen weeks .
As of August 2007 , the novel has sold more than 4.5 million copies , with 1 million copies of the novel 's follow - up , High School Musical 2 :
The Junior Novel , being shipped to American retailers .
High School Musical 3 :
Senior Year : The Junior Novel came out on September 23 , 2008 .
Shortly after the success of the original novel , Disney announced that a book series , entitled Stories from East High , would be published in February 2007 with a new book being published every 60 days until July 2008 .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Disney Interactive Studios has produced 6 video games based on the High School Musical series , all taking the guise of music video games incorporating songs and plots from the films .
REALITY SERIES Section::::Reality series .
During July and August 2008 , ABC broadcast a reality competition based on the series , High School Musical : Get in the Picture In the UK , a reality show titled premiered in 2008 on Sky1 .
It saw a team of vocal coaches , acting coaches and choreographers hold auditions at a regular comprehensive school where a mix of students could audition for a West End production of the hit Broadway musical , Hairspray .
Although the musical being performed was not High School Musical , the film was the inspiration behind the show .
The show was presented by Denise Van Outen and was credited , along with High School Musical , for inspiring a generation of children in the United Kingdom to get into theatrical work .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* High School
Musical DVDs
Disney 's Official High School Musical DVD site * High School Musical Song Lyrics