LIST OF NORTH CAROLINA HURRICANES
The list of North Carolina hurricanes includes 413 known tropical or subtropical cyclones that have affected the U.S. state of North Carolina .
Due to its location , many hurricanes have hit the state directly , and numerous hurricanes have passed near or through North Carolina in its history ; the state is ranked fourth , after Florida , Texas , and Louisiana , in the number of cyclones that produced hurricane - force winds in a U.S. state .
Hurricanes in North Carolina history are responsible for over $ 11 billion in damage ( 2008 USD ) and almost 1,000 total fatalities .
CLIMATOLOGY Section::::Climatology .
As to statistical hurricane research between 1883 and 1996 by the North Carolina State Climatology Office , a tropical cyclone makes landfall along the coastline about once every four years .
An estimated 17.5 percent of all North Atlantic tropical cyclones have affected the state .
Additionally , the remnants of a few Pacific tropical cyclones struck the state .
Cape Hatteras is most affected by storms within the state , though Cape Lookout and Cape Fear are also regularly affected ; the increased activity in three areas is because it protrudes from elsewhere along the Atlantic coastline .
After Southern Florida , Cape Hatteras has the lowest return period , or the frequency at which a certain intensity or category of hurricane can be expected within 86 mi ( 139 km ) of a given location , in the country .
As the Outer Banks are a narrow strip of low - lying land , hurricanes occasionally leave portions of the land partially or fully submerged .
Additionally , the remnants of inland tropical cyclones have produced flooding and landslides in the state 's western region .
Tropical cyclones have affected North Carolina in every month between May and December ; about 35 percent of the storms struck the state in September , and 80 percent affected the state between August and October , which coincides with the peak of the hurricane season .
The earliest storm to affect the state was Subtropical Storm Andrea on May 7 , 2007 , and the latest was a tropical storm that moved across the Outer Banks on December 2 , 1925 .
The strongest storm to strike the state was Hurricane Hazel on October 15 , 1954 , which made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale .
PRE-1900 Section::::Pre-1900 .
The list of North Carolina hurricanes before 1900 encompasses 139 tropical cyclones that affected the U.S. state of North Carolina .
Collectively , cyclones in North Carolina during the time period resulted in over 775 direct fatalities during the period .
Seven cyclones affected the state in the 1893 season , which was the year with the most tropical cyclones devastating the state during the time period .
From the beginning of the official Atlantic hurricane record in 1851 to 1899 , there were 12 years without a known tropical cyclone affecting the state .
Historical data prior to 1700 is sparse due to lack of significant European settlements along the coastline ; the few storms listed are largely records from Roanoke Colony and later the Province of Carolina .
Modern meteorologists believe early storms were tropical cyclones , though due to the time period confirmation is impossible .
One theory explaining the disappearance of Roanoke Colony suggests a hurricane destroyed the village , though there is no evidence to prove the theory .
It is considered unlikely due to lack of damage to a fence around the village , on which the villagers left an inscription .
1900–1949
Section::::1900–1949 .
Between 1900 and 1949 , 75 tropical cyclones or their remnants affected the state .
Collectively , cyclones in North Carolina during that time period resulted in 53 total fatalities during the period , as well as about $ 328 million in damage ( 2008 USD ) .
Tropical cyclone affected the state in all but nine seasons .
In the 1916 season , five storms affected the state , which was the season with the most storms devastating the state .
The strongest hurricanes to affect the state during the time period were the 1933 Outer Banks hurricane and the 1944 Great Atlantic Hurricane , which produced winds of Category 3 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale within the state .
The 1933 Outer Banks hurricane was the deadliest hurricane in the state during the time period , which killed 21 people .
The remnants of a hurricane in 1940 dropped heavy rainfall in the state , which caused over $ 150 million in damage ( 2008 USD ) from flooding and landslides .
1950–1979 Section::::1950–1979 .
A total of 79 tropical or subtropical cyclones affected North Carolina between 1950 and 1979 .
Collectively , cyclones during the time period resulted in 37 total fatalities during the period , as well as about $ 3 billion in damage ( 2008 USD ) .
A cyclone affected the state in every year during the time period , and in three seasons a total of five cyclones assailed the state .
The strongest hurricane to hit the state during the time period was Hurricane Hazel , which struck the state as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale .
Hazel was both the costliest and deadliest cyclone during the period , causing over $ 1 billion in damage ( 2008 USD ) and 19 deaths .
Most storms affected the state in September , though cyclones lashed the state between May and October .
1980–PRESENT
Section::::1980–Present .
The period from 1980 to the present encompasses 120 tropical or subtropical cyclones that affected the state .
Collectively , cyclones in North Carolina during the time period resulted in over $ 10 billion in damage ( 2010 USD ) , primarily from hurricanes Fran and Floyd .
Additionally , tropical cyclones in North Carolina were responsible for 77 direct fatalities and at least 44 indirect casualties during the period .
Eight cyclones affected the state in the 1985 season , which was the year with the most tropical cyclones striking the state .
Every year included at least one tropical cyclone affecting the state .
The strongest hurricane to hit the state during the time period was Hurricane Fran in 1996 , which struck near Wilmington as a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ; Hurricane Emily in 1993 brushed the Outer Banks also as a Category 3 hurricane .
The deadliest hurricane during the period was Hurricane Floyd in 1999 , which caused 35 fatalities and record – breaking flooding in the eastern portion of the state .
Hurricane Irene hit the Outer Banks on August 27th 2011 as a Category 1 , making it the first of its kind to make landfall since Hurricane Ike in 2008 .
NORTH CAROLINA MAJOR
HURRICANES Section::::North Carolina major hurricanes .
The following major hurricanes either made landfall on the state or brought winds of Category 3 status to the state .
Storms are listed since 1851 , which is the official start of the Atlantic hurricane database . !
Storm !
Saffir – SimpsonCategory !
Date of landfall !
Year !
Landfall intensity(in knots ) !
Landfall location DEADLY STORMS Section::::Deadly storms .
The table lists hurricanes by death tolls of over 20 fatalities .
Direct deaths are those that are directly caused by the storm passage , such as drownings or deaths from being struck by windblown objects .
Indirect deaths , which are not included in the toll of Hurricane Floyd , are those that are related to the storm , but not directly from its storm effects .
Due to lack of data , many early hurricanes have overall death tolls that do not specify indirect or direct .
+
Total deaths !
Name !
Year !
Number of deaths SEE ALSO * Climate of North Carolina
* Geography of North Carolina
* Hazard mitigation in the Outer Banks * List of United States hurricanes
* List of wettest known tropical cyclones in North Carolina
* List of Atlantic hurricanes REFERENCES