FIXED PENALTY NOTICE
Fixed penalty notices ( FPNs ) were introduced in Britain in the 1950s to deal with minor parking offences .
Originally used by police and traffic wardens , their use has extended to other public officials and authorities , as has the range of offences for which they can be used .
In recent years , this has taken the form of using them to give police and public authorities in England , Scotland and Wales a realistic weapon against anti - social behaviour .
They are designed to reduce paperwork on police and council officers by allowing low - level anti - social behaviour to be dealt with on the spot .
Newer types of notice exist for disorder , environmental crime , truancy and noise .
A fixed penalty notice is not a fine or criminal conviction and the recipient can opt for the matter to be dealt with in court instead of paying .
However , if the recipient neither pays the penalty nor opts for a court hearing in the time specified , the penalty may be increased by 50 % and registered against the recipient as a fine .
It may then be enforced by the normal methods used to enforce unpaid fines , including imprisonment in some circumstances .
In Hong Kong , fixed penalty notices are issued for minor offences such as smoking , littering , parking , idling engine , etc .
PENALTY NOTICES FOR PARKING AND MOTORING OFFENCES
Section::::Penalty notices for parking and motoring offences .
This was the original use for FPNs , currently continuing in Great Britain under powers provided by the Road Traffic Act 1991 as well as in Northern Ireland ; in many areas this style of enforcement has been taken over from police by local authorities .
Some other motoring offences ( other than parking ) can also be dealt with by the issue of FPNs by police , VOSA or local authority personnel .
FPNs issued by local authority parking attendants are backed with powers to obtain payment by civil action and are defined as " penalty charge notices " , distinguishing them from other FPNs which are often backed with a power of criminal prosecution if the penalty is not paid ; in the latter case the " fixed penalty " is sometimes designated as a " mitigated penalty " to indicate the avoidance of being prosecuted which it provides .
If a charge is paid within 14 days of the 28-day period , the charge is decreased by 50 % .
Appealing against or contesting this notice , requires going through courts and hearings : if lost , the 50 % period pay could be extended .
PENALTY NOTICES FOR DISORDER Section::::Penalty notices for disorder .
Issued under Section 1–11 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 for public disorder offences and divided into " lower - tier " and " higher - tier " offences each with its own penalty amount , a penalty notice for disorder ( PND ) can only be issued to people aged 18 or over .
There are 26 offences for which a notice can be issued , such as being drunk and disorderly in a public place , selling alcohol to a minor ( under 18 ) , threatening behaviour or language and " behaviour likely to cause harassment , alarm or distress to others " .
Penalty notices can also be issued for minor shop thefts and minor criminal damage and in January 2009 the offence of possession of cannabis was added to the scheme .
Recipients have 21 days to pay the notice or request a court hearing .
If a penalty notice is not paid after 21 days then the outstanding amount is increased by 50 % and if it is still unpaid the fine is lodged at the local magistrates ' court just as if the matter was an unpaid court fine .
This is where PNDs and FPNs vary if they are not paid : the former results in an unpaid fine being lodged and the latter results in the recipient being summoned to court to answer for the original offence .
When paying penalty notices for disorder , no admission of guilt is required .
Paying the PND involves neither an official finding nor an acceptance of guilt and discharges all liability to conviction for the offence .
PNDs for recordable offences are recorded on the Police National Computer however and may be disclosed on an Enhanced Criminal Records Disclosure issued by the Criminal Records Bureau , if it is concluded that the behaviour leading to the PND was relevant to the matter at hand , for example the applicant 's suitability to work with children .
However , the mere fact that a PND has been issued would not make it relevant .
PNDs are generally issued to first - time offenders with no previous record .
PNDs do not constitute a criminal record ; they are non - conviction information and treated as intelligence .
JUVENILE PND TRIALS Section::::Juvenile PND trials .
In some areas there was a pilot scheme that allowed penalty notices to be issued to 10- to 15-year - olds the parent or guardian was liable for the penalty and the tariff would be reduced , £ 40 for the higher - tier offences and £ 30 for the lower - tier offences .
The police forces that piloted Juvenile PNDs were : * British Transport Police ( Birmingham Division ) *
Essex * Lancashire * Merseyside * Metropolitan Police ( Kingston Division ) * Nottinghamshire * West Midlands PENALTY NOTICE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME
Section::::Penalty notice for environmental crime .
Fixed penalty notices are available as a means for dealing with various environmental crimes .
The first was introduced in 1990 for leaving litter , and since then numerous others have followed , particularly as a result of the Anti - social Behaviour Act 2003 , and the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005 .
The majority of these are issued by local authority officers , but police and Environment Agency officers have been authorised to issue some .
The penalty ranges from £ 20 for unnecessary idling of a stationary vehicle engine to £ 500 for failing to comply with a noise warning notice in licensed premises .
By far the majority of fixed penalty notices issued for environmental crimes are for leaving litter , failing to remove dog faeces , and fly posting .
The Government has determined that fly tipping is too serious to warrant a fixed penalty , and that cases should be referred to a magistrates ' court .
Minor criminal damage such as graffiti may also be dealt with by issuing a fixed penalty notice .
PENALTY NOTICE FOR TRUANCY
Section::::Penalty notice for truancy .
Section 23 of the Anti - social Behaviour Act 2003 allows local authorities , head teachers ( or their deputies ) and the police to issue a £ 50 or £ 100 fixed penalty notice to a parent or parents who fail to ensure that their child regularly attends school .
The Education and Inspections Act 2006 came into force on 4 September 2007 .
Under this , parents of children excluded from school are required to keep them under supervision for the first five days of their exclusion .
If the child is found in a public place without their parent during this time , the parent can be issued a £ 50 penalty notice , which rises to £ 100 if not paid in 28 days .
PENALTY NOTICE FOR NIGHT NOISE
Section::::Penalty notice for night noise .
Section 2 of the Noise act 1996 allows local authorities to investigate complaints from residents about excessive noise coming from a residential dwelling during the night , defined as between the hours of 11 pm and 7 am .
SEE ALSO * Anti - social Behaviour Act 2003
* Presumption of guilt
* Traffic ticket and parking ticket for United States equivalents REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Respect Task Force website *
Home Office * Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 * Anti - social Behaviour Act
2003
* Noise Act 1996
* Education and Inspections Act 2006 Services
* PenaltyChargeNotice.co.uk ( Serving London & the UK )