CHEVROLET COBALT SS
The Chevrolet Cobalt SS comprises three sport compact versions of the Chevrolet Cobalt that were built on the General Motors Delta platform at Lordstown Assembly in Ohio , United States .
The three versions included two forced induction inline‑four
Ecotec engines and a third naturally aspirated engine that was later called the Cobalt Sport .
SS is an abbreviation of Super Sport , a historic moniker used by Chevrolet to denote high performance upgrades that meet certain criteria .
The Cobalt SS was GM 's first foray into the tuner market , launching with a supercharged 2.0 L engine in late 2004 as a 2005 model , paired only with the F35 manual transmission of Opel .
The following year , a naturally aspirated 1SS model equipped with GM 's new 2.4 L engine was added ; it had both automatic and manual transmission options .
Production of the supercharged version continued until 2007 ; after a brief hiatus the SS relaunched in the second quarter of 2008 with a more economical and powerful turbocharged 2.0 L engine producing before all Cobalt production ended in 2010 .
( See timeline ) .
The Cobalt SS received generally positive reviews , particularly the turbocharged version .
In a 2013 review , journalist Patrick George called it the best compact car ever made by General Motors , and a potential " future classic " .
At first release in 2004 , the supercharged version was praised for its performance but drew criticism for its interior quality and exterior styling , both described as too reminiscent of its predecessor , the Cavalier .
Reports surfaced in May 2009 that General Motors planned to eliminate the Cobalt SS as early as December 2009 , but they proved to be untrue .
Production continued but ordering options for late 2010 models were limited and production of all Cobalts ended in June 2010 .
The car was replaced by the Cruze , but a high performance version comparable to the Cobalt SS has not yet been announced .
MODEL DETAILS
OVERVIEW Section::::Model details .
Section::::Overview .
General Motors used five different inline - four engines in the Cobalt over the course of production , designated three as SS models .
The first was launched in 2004 as a 2005 model with a new powertrain that had debuted one year earlier on the Saturn ION Red Line .
It was available as a Supercharged coupe only .
The naturally aspirated 2.4 L LE5 engine was the next SS to launch in late 2005 as a 2006 model , available as both a coupe and sedan for the duration of its run .
However , in late 2007 , at the same time the announcement cancelling the SS Supercharged was made , GM also announced that the 2.4 L would be renamed " Cobalt Sport " , rendering Chevrolet without a Cobalt SS for the first half of the 2008 model year .
The 2.0 L LNF turbocharged Cobalt was the last to launch in the second quarter of 2008 .
It was initially available only as a coupe until a sedan option was offered for the 2009 model year but again deleted for 2010 after less than 500 were produced .
All three models of the Cobalt SS feature four wheel , anti‑lock disc brakes .
Compared to the base Cobalt , the SS has lower front and rear fascias for a more aggressive look with integrated fog lights , side rocker moldings , interior accents , and a chrome exhaust tip .
Exclusive to the 2.0 L Cobalt are a titanium‑faced sport analogue cluster with a 160 mph ( 260 km / h in Canada ) speedometer , an A‑pillar mounted boost gauge , reclining front bucket seats with two‑tone leather‑appointed seating surfaces , vertical adjusting head restraints and driver‑side lumbar and height adjusters , and a sport‑tuned FE5 suspension with a 24 mm front stabilizer bar and 22 mm rear stabilizer bar .
SS SUPERCHARGED Section::::SS Supercharged .
Available as a coupe only , the SS Supercharged featured the 2.0 L LSJ Ecotec engine with an Eaton M62 Roots type supercharger and air‑to‑liquid intercooler .
The engine makes at 5600 rpm and at 4,400 rpm .
18‑inch broad spoke wheels with P215/45R18 summer Pirelli tires were standard .
Optional for the LSJ was
a performance package coded G85 that added Recaro bucket seats and a limited slip differential ( LSD ) .
LSD was optional for 2005 models ( performance package came with LSD ) and was standard in models from 2007 to 2010 .
The G85 option continued in the LNF Cobalt , but added only the LSD .
The car became notable for a high‑profile spoiler that was standard in 2005 , but optional from 2008 when a lower profile spoiler used on all other Cobalt coupes became an option .
GM offered dealer - installed performance upgrade packages called " stage kits " that were covered by factory warranty .
The Stage 1 kit consists of new fuel injectors and a reprogram of the ECU , and yields up to a improvement .
The Stage 2 kit consists of new fuel injectors and the same reprogram with a smaller serpentine belt and pulley for the supercharger , producing a improvement and of torque .
Both kits increase the engine redline to 7,000 rpm .
The Stage 3 kit consists of a smaller , supercharger pulley , a 2‑pass intercooler end plate and a customizable replacement ECU .
The Stage 3 ECU allows for the use of a 50‑shot of nitrous , 100 octane fuel and an adjustable redline from 6,750 to 8,000 rpm .
Stage 3 produces using 93 octane fuel , up using 100 octane fuel , and much higher power with nitrous .
Stage 3 is for track use only , and to emphasize this , air conditioning is disabled with the Stage 3 ECU .
Wheel hop , wheelspin , and a general lack of traction were problems frequently encountered with the supercharged Cobalt due to its front drive setup and relatively high torque .
Upgraded front and rear trans and motor mounts would help to alleviate these issues .
The GM Performance Division later tried to rectify these problems in the turbocharged car by providing wider , stickier tires and stronger axles .
SS TURBOCHARGED Section::::SS
Turbocharged .
The LSJ engine did not meet emissions requirements for the 2008 model year , and General Motors ' contract with Eaton had expired .
The non - supercharged 2.4 L Cobalt SS also lost its Super Sport designation for the 2008 model year and was renamed " Sport " , leaving no SS in production .
However , in fall 2007 , a more powerful Cobalt SS was announced for the second quarter of 2008 .
It would be equipped with the 2.0 L , turbocharged , direct injected , VVT , LNF Ecotec engine , making at 5300 rpm and at 2,000 rpm , remaining mated to the F35 5-speed manual transmission .
The engine had been introduced in a rear wheel drive application for the 2007 GM Kappa platform , which includes the Saturn Sky , Pontiac Solstice , and Opel GT .
Also new for the 2008 SS were SS - embroidered sport seats with suede - like UltraLux inserts , several new exterior colors , and wider forged , split - spoke wheels with P225/40R18 Continental AG tires , styled similarly to those offered for the Chevrolet Corvette C6 .
The car 's electronics were also new , and along with greater assist in poor traction conditions , a " no‑lift‑shift " feature was added which allows the driver to maintain turbocharger boost during shifts to a higher gear .
During a no‑lift‑shift , the driver begins the shift normally by depressing the clutch , but the accelerator pedal is held wide open while the shift is completed .
Also new was " launch control " , which feathers the throttle at roughly 4,800 rpm until engagement of the clutch , allowing more consistent launches in competitive situations .
To activate launch control , the driver presses twice on the traction control button which first turns off traction control , and then notifies the driver through the Driver 's Information Center that Competitive Mode is active and launch control is ready for use .
Turbocharged Cobalt owners have found that better times can be achieved while racing when the car is manually launched .
These features help propel the car from 0 to in a 5.5 seconds , and a quarter mile time of 13.9 seconds at .
New for 2009 was the aforementioned four - door sedan option , as well as an optional " reconfigurable performance display " ( RPD ) for the coupe only .
The $ 295 option replaced the boost gauge in the A‑pillar , and allows the driver to manipulate traction control , stability control , " shift points " , and the engagement of Competition Mode , as well as information regarding the car 's engine torque and horsepower , g‑force , boost , wideband air fuel ratio , barometric pressure , temperature , and battery voltage .
For 2010 , the RPD and a power sunroof were standard .
The red / ebony and grey / ebony interior color options were also dropped , as was the turbocharged sedan .
A stage 1 kit which raises power to and was made available in October 2009 after several delays .
The kit can be installed by the owner of the car , but final alteration of the vehicle 's engine control unit must take place at a GM dealer .
SS NATURALLY ASPIRATED Section::::SS Naturally aspirated .
Chevrolet introduced a naturally aspirated Cobalt SS in the fall of 2005 as a 2006 model , available as both a coupe and sedan .
It featured the 2.4 L LE5 Ecotec engine with variable valve timing , making at 5,600 rpm and at 5,000 rpm , later upped to at 4,500 rpm .
The LE5 engine was paired with a 5-speed manual ( or optionally the 4T45 4‑speed automatic ) for 2006 and was introduced on both the FWD Delta platform and RWD Kappa platform .
For the 2006 and 2007 model years the car was called SS , or " 1SS " , but was replaced with the moniker " Cobalt Sport " for 2008 with the anticipated introduction of the turbocharged SS ; it is the Getrag F23 transmission with different ratios from the F35 in the forced induction cars , and is the same transmission that Chevrolet mated to the 2.2 L L61 engine in the Cobalt LS and LT .
Other changes over the supercharged car are notable but not drastic ; 17‑inch broad spoke wheels with narrower
P205/50R17
all‑season Pirelli tires were standard , as was the low profile spoiler .
2.4 L and 2.2 L Sport Package Cobalts have a 140 mph ( 220 km / h in Canada ) speedometer with optional white face gauges .
The car rides on the FE3 suspension , superior and more sport‑tuned to that of base Cobalts but less refined than the FE5 on the supercharged and turbocharged cars .
Brakes on the 2.4 L naturally aspirated and supercharged model are identical , but the turbocharged model received an upgraded Brembo braking system .
The front and rear bumpers are the same , but the front lacks a lip accessory and the bottom of the rear fascia
is slightly different .
With the exception of exterior styling and some interior trims , the vehicle is identical to the Pontiac G5 GT .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviews of the supercharged Cobalt SS were generally positive .
While the Cavalier received very negative reviews , the supercharged Cobalt was seen as an improvement , and a worthy first entry for GM into the tuner market .
However , the general fit and finish was poor , and power levels were not up to par with other competitors .
Journalist Thom Blackett said , " When compared with more contemporary cars including the Dodge Neon SRT‑4 and the Subaru WRX , that SS badge seems to lose some of its luster . "
The F35 transmission has also been deemed inferior to that in the newest of generation of Honda 's Civic Si .
Critics also disliked the heavy wheels which negatively affected handling , as well as the spoiler which obstructed rearward visibility .
Speaking of the high‑profile aero wing , automotive journalist Alexandra Straub said , " the deck‑lid spoiler was directly in my line‑of‑sight when looking out of the rearview mirror .
It 's almost like it cut everything in half .
"
In his review of a later model , John Neff of Autoblog called the wing " obnoxious " .
Some Cobalt SS owners have traded spoilers with lower trim owners to obtain a less aggressive look , or traded the entire trunklid with Cobalt LS owners , for whom a rear spoiler is merely optional .
The naturally aspirated Cobalt SS has been seen as an improvement over the base models with its slightly more potent 2.4 L engine , but notably inferior to the supercharged car .
The powertrain of the 2008 turbocharged Cobalt SS received rave reviews .
John Neff of Autoblog said , " The GM Performance Division completely reworked the Cobalt SS for 2008 , swapping in a more powerful turbocharged engine , upgrading the rest of the mechanicals , and tweaking the entire package on the world 's most demanding race tracks , including the famed Nürburgring in Germany .
The result is – and we 're not kidding here – the most impressive performance car to wear a bow‑tie badge on sale today .
" Journalists were impressed with the performance of the car in relation to the price ; Neff added that the " 2009 Cobalt SS Turbo is freakishly good at going fast and the best bang for the buck value below $ 30,000 . "
Ron Kiino of Motor Trend said , " at only $ 22,995 , the SS could stand for Super Steal . "
The MSRP was raised to $ 24,095 for the 2009 model year .
The Nürburgring‑tuned suspension gives the Cobalt SS some of the best handling characteristics of any General Motors front wheel drive vehicle , and the suspension is stiffer and more refined than the supercharged car .
Since the interior is hardly changed other than the seats , those criticisms remain .
Of the interior in the turbocharged sedan , Car and Driver said it " is constructed primarily of plastics cheap enough to be rejected from a Chinese toy factory ; the Tata Nano probably has a fancier parking‑brake lever .
" The new Cobalt was the winner in its price class ( under $ 30,000 ) of Car and Driver 's 2008 Lightning Lap competition at Virginia International Raceway , beating lap times of several cars in the $ 30,000-$60,000 class including the Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution X.
It held the front - wheel drive record until it was surpassed by the Honda Civic Type R in 2018 .
Four Chevrolet Cobalt SS cars were used in the Continental Challenge Street Tuner class in 2009 .
SEE ALSO * Chevrolet Cobalt
* GM Performance Division REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 2008
Cobalt SS - GM promotional video
* 2010 Cobalt SS Turbocharged review * 2008 Cobalt SS launch control demonstration