THE PERFECT STORM ( FILM )
The Perfect Storm is a 2000 American biographical disaster drama film directed by Wolfgang Petersen and based on the 1997 non - fiction book of the same name by Sebastian Junger .
The film tells the story of the Andrea Gail , a commercial fishing vessel that was lost at sea with all hands after being caught in the Perfect Storm of 1991 .
The film stars George Clooney , Mark Wahlberg , William Fichtner , Michael Ironside , John C. Reilly , Diane Lane , Karen Allen and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio .
It was released on June 30 , 2000 , by Warner Bros. PLOT Section::::Plot .
In October 1991 , the commercial fishing boat Andrea Gail returns to port in Gloucester , Massachusetts , with a poor catch .
Desperate for money , Captain Billy Tyne ( Clooney ) convinces the Andrea Gail crew to join him for one more late season fishing expedition .
The crew heads out past their usual fishing grounds on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland , leaving a developing tropical storm behind them .
Initially unsuccessful , they head to the Flemish Cap , where their luck greatly improves .
At the height of their fishing , the ice machine breaks ; the only way to sell their catch before it spoils is to hurry back to shore .
After debating whether to sail through the building storm or to wait it out , the crew decides to risk the storm .
However , between Andrea Gail and Gloucester is a confluence of two powerful weather fronts and a hurricane , which the Andrea Gail crew underestimates .
After repeated warnings from other ships , Andrea Gail loses her antenna , forcing Captain Linda Greenlaw ( Mastrantonio ) of sister ship Hannah Boden to call in a Mayday .
A New York Air National Guard HH-60 Pave Hawk rescue helicopter responds , but after failing to perform a midair refueling with an HC-130 Hercules , the helicopter crew ditch their aircraft .
All but one of the Air National Guard crew members are rescued by a Coast Guard vessel , the USCGC Tamaroa .
After Andrea Gail endures various problems , the crew struggles to sail through pounding waves and shrieking winds , while friends and family worry and wait for a ship that never comes home .
The vessel encounters an enormous rogue wave .
They attempt to drive the boat over the wave but it crests before it can get to the top and is overturned ; Billy elects to go down with his ship , the rest of the crew are trapped inside and only one ,
rookie fisherman Bobby Shatford ( Wahlberg ) , manages to get out .
He surfaces and watches as Andrea Gail rights herself before sinking stern - first into the Atlantic .
As Bobby silently says his goodbyes to his loved ones , the rapidly rising swell carries him away .
There are no survivors ; Linda reads the eulogy at the memorial , followed by her remembering Billy 's voice soliloquising about what it means to be a swordboat captain .
CAST
* George Clooney as Frank William " Billy " Tyne , Jr. , captain of Andrea Gail , a swordfishing boat .
Billy is a divorced father of two daughters , who is determined to undertake one last fishing trip before the end of the season to make up for a recent string of poor catches .
* Mark Wahlberg as Robert " Bobby " Shatford , the least experienced of the crew of Andrea Gail .
Bobby is the son of Ethel Shatford , the owner of the Crow 's Nest , and boyfriend to Chris Cotter .
He enjoys commercial fishing , but his deepening relationship with Chris ( coupled with her reluctance to let him sail again ) creates conflict within himself and between the couple .
Yet , he is compelled by the potential to earn more money at sea than he could make with a job on shore to sign on for one last trip .
*
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio as Linda Greenlaw , the captain of Hannah Boden .
Linda and Billy both captain ships for the same owner and maintain a friendly rivalry .
She is concerned about Billy and his crew 's going out in what she considers dangerous weather .
Linda is the last to speak to Andrea Gail .
* Diane Lane as Christina " Chris " Cotter , girlfriend of Bobby Shatford .
She does not want Bobby to go on the trip because of a bad feeling she has about it .
She spends her time during the last fishing trip decorating an apartment she has rented as a surprise for Bobby to symbolize her commitment to him .
* John C. Reilly as Dale " Murph " Murphy , crewmember on Andrea Gail .
Murph is a veteran fisherman who is divorced with a son with whom he 's very involved .
Murph has a rocky relationship with crewmember David " Sully " Sullivan that is eventually resolved during the trip .
* William Fichtner as David " Sully " Sullivan , crewmember on Andrea Gail .
He signed on for the trip at the last minute when another fisherman suddenly backed out .
Sully and Murph initially have an antagonistic relationship that is fueled in part by Sully 's past involvement with Murph 's ex - wife , although the details are not made clear in the film .
The relationship is eventually resolved during the trip .
* Michael Ironside as Bob Brown , owner of Andrea Gail and Hannah Boden .
Although Brown seems to harbor a deep - seated recognition of Tyne 's skills at catching fish , he nevertheless pressures Tyne over the latter 's recent inability to bring in larger hauls , resulting in an uneasy relationship between the two .
* Bob Gunton as Alexander McAnally III , owner of Mistral , a yacht caught in the storm .
* Karen Allen as Melissa Brown , crewmember on Mistral .
* Cherry Jones as Edie Bailey , crewmember on Mistral .
* Allen Payne as Alfred Pierre , one of the crew of Andrea Gail .
* John Hawkes as Michael " Bugsy " Moran , a member of Andrea Gail 's crew .
Bugsy 's somewhat comic inability to connect with women appears to change on the eve of the trip , when he meets a divorced mother at the Crow 's Nest , who later comes to the dock to see him off .
They hint at the prospect of a budding relationship that fatefully never materializes .
* Janet Wright as Ethel Shatford , Bobby 's mother .
* Christopher McDonald as Todd Gross , a Boston meteorologist working for the WNEV - TV ( the present day WHDH - TV ) .
* Dash Mihok as Sergeant Jeremy Mitchell , a crewmember on the New York Air National Guard rescue helicopter .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY
THE ANDREA GAIL Section::::Historical accuracy .
Section::::The Andrea Gail .
A ship similar to Andrea Gail , Lady Grace , was used during the filming of the movie .
Most of the names used were not changed for the fictional film , but in response two lawsuits were later filed by certain families of the crew members .
The film only claims to be " based on a true story " , and differs in many ways from the book starting with the fictionalization of the material into a " story " .
The events shown in the film after the Andrea Gail 's last radio contact are pure speculation , as the boat and the bodies of the crew were never found .
Contrary to the movie 's storyline , Captain Linda Greenlaw says she did not place a distress call on behalf of Andrea Gail .
" Without a distress call ( directly ) from the imperiled vessel , the Coast Guard will not initiate a search until the vessel is five days overdue in port , " Greenlaw said .
The 1993 U.S. Coast Guard 's investigative report said that Andrea Gail was experiencing 30-foot waves and winds from anywhere from 50 to 80 knots around the time of the last communication .
The conditions , though threatening , were probably not unfamiliar to Tyne , who had been a successful fisherman for about a decade on other vessels , taking trips to the Grand Banks and fishing off Florida , the Carolinas , and elsewhere .
In addition , Hurricane Grace ( 1991 ) was described by a weather forecaster as a category 5 storm in the movie , though it never achieved those wind speeds .
In the movie , Tyne and his crew agreed to head into the dangerous storm in order to save their fish from spoiling .
Greenlaw acknowledged that Tyne did mention having ice problems , but that was not unusual .
" My one gripe about [ the ] movie was how Warner Brothers depicted Billy Tyne and his crew as making a very conscious decision to steam into a storm that they knew was dangerous , " said Greenlaw .
" That is not what happened .
Andrea Gail was three days into their steam home when the storm hit .
Whatever happened to Andrea Gail happened very quickly . "
An Air National Guard helicopter was dispatched from Francis S. Gabreski Air National Guard Base on Long Island , New York , but not in response to the Andrea Gail or Satori ( Mistral in the movie ) .
The helicopter departed mid - storm on a mission to help save a lone Japanese fisherman from a sinking sailboat 250 miles off the New Jersey coast .
Unsuccessful and running low on fuel , the Air National Guard HH-60 G helicopter was compelled to attempt a mid - flight refueling maneuver .
The zero - visibility conditions thwarted their efforts , however , and lacking enough fuel to make the flight back to the Long Island base , the crew were forced to ditch the helicopter .
After a search by Tamaroa , four of the HH-60 's crew were picked up ; one was never seen again .
The Japanese yachtsman was later rescued by a Romanian cargo ship .
When asked about the portrayal of " Sully " in the movie , Cathy Sullivan Mustone , an older sister of David " Sully " Sullivan , said she was disappointed .
" They made my brother 's character out to be a hothead , " she said .
" I guess every movie needs a villain , but my brother was a funny guy with a loud laugh and a big smile .
He had a lot of guts and he loved fishing . "
In fact , David 's bravery and quick thinking made headlines on a different boat — Harmony .
One night during a winter fishing trip , Harmony began taking on water while tied to another boat .
The crew of Harmony yelled for help , hoping to wake the nearby crew .
No one woke , so David dove into the icy water , pulling himself on the ropes that tied the boats together .
As a result of his bravery , Harmony 's crew was saved .
Mustone said , " At least in the movie , they did represent my brother 's bravery in a water rescue scene .
He was a good man .
And I just know he is at peace in heaven , safe with our Dad . "
THE SATORI Section::::The Satori .
The crew members of Satori ( renamed Mistral in the movie ) were not rescued by an Air National Guard helicopter , but rather a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter .
The helicopter was changed in the film after the Air National Guard had issues consulting with the movie producers .
According to the owner 's son , Satori never made a 360 ° roll , although it had two knockdowns , during which it lay on its side for about 30 seconds .
In response to requests by the crew , Captain Ray Leonard permitted the two crewmembers to make a position report over radio , during which they made an unauthorized Mayday call .
One of those crewmembers reported that she was so convinced that she was going to die that she wrote her name down and put it into a plastic bag so that her body could be identified when it was finally found .
There is controversy over whether the Captain was drunk , as charged by the women in the book , with Leonard objecting to this characterization .
Out of compassion for the expected loss of his boat , the Coast Guard did not test his blood alcohol levels at the time .
The Coast Guard declared the voyage manifestly unsafe and ordered everyone off - board , including the unwilling skipper .
The Coast Guard first tried to take them on board via an inflatable boat , but after it was damaged when trying to approach Satori they sent a helicopter , which is a much riskier approach , as a rescue swimmer must jump into dangerous seas .
The Coast Guard helicopter did not try to lower rescue gear onto the yacht ( as shown in the movie , where it gets entangled with the mast ) , but rather asked the crew of Satori to jump overboard to meet a rescue swimmer in the water .
Leonard eventually complied with the request .
After the storm , Leonard searched for the " Satori " , hoping to find her still afloat , but in spite of his attempts she was found a few days later washed ashore on a Maryland beach , a bag of personal belongings still on deck .
Leonard paid for a 60-foot fishing vessel to drag her off the beach , helped by a channel dug by Park Rangers who had been guarding the boat .
He continued to sail the boat until 2000 , and she remained in use with a new owner .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Perfect Storm received mixed reviews from critics , with a 47 % approval rating on critic site Rotten Tomatoes with a consensus of , " While the special effects are well done and quite impressive , this film suffers a lack of any actual drama or characterization .
The end result is a film that offers nifty eye - candy and nothing else . "
The Perfect Storm was a box office success .
On its opening weekend , it debuted with $ 42 million ahead of Sony 's The Patriot and eventually brought in over $ 182.6 million in the United States , and $ 146.1 million around the world to a total of $ 328.7 million worldwide .
The film was nominated for 2 Academy Awards , Best Visual Effects ( Walt Conti , Stefen Fangmeier , John Frazier and Habib Zargarpour ) and Best Sound ( John T. Reitz , Gregg Rudloff , David E. Campbell and Keith A. Wester ) , but lost both to Gladiator .
LAWSUITS Section::::Lawsuits .
After the film was released , the families of two crew members sued the film makers for the fictionalization of events which happened prior to the loss of Andrea Gail .
In 2005 , the Florida Supreme Court ruled against the family of Captain Tyne by a 6–2 vote .
Some unnamed families also sued the producers in federal district court , claiming that their names were used without their permission , and that facts were changed .
The district court , which is also located in Florida , dismissed the case , as in their opinion the defendants ' First Amendment right to freedom of speech barred the suit .
The plaintiffs appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit , which could not decide how to interpret the Florida law at issue and certified the question to the Florida Supreme Court .
In the end , the Florida Supreme Court upheld the district court 's interpretation of Florida law , and remanded the case to the 11th Circuit , which affirmed the prior decision to dismiss the case .
SEE ALSO * 106th Rescue Wing * 129th Rescue Wing
* 1991 Perfect Storm * Air Force Pararescue *
The Perfect Storm ( book ) * Godless Men ( 1920 ) * Stormswept ( 1923 )
* Code of the Sea ( 1924 )
* Rugged Water ( 1925 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Plot and background at reelviews.net