EDWARD
ST AUBYN Edward St Aubyn ( born 14 January 1960 ) is an English author and journalist most prominent for his semi - autobiographical Patrick Melrose novels .
He is the author of eight novels .
In 2006 , Mother 's Milk was nominated for the Booker Prize .
FAMILY AND PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Family and personal life .
Edward St Aubyn was born in London into an upper - class family , the son of Roger Geoffrey St Aubyn ( 1906–1985 ) , a former soldier and a surgeon , and his second wife , Lorna Mackintosh ( 1929–2005 ) .
He is the great - great grandson of Sir Edward St Aubyn , 1st Baronet , whose eldest son was John St Aubyn , 1st Baron St Levan .
His father was first married to Baroness Sophie Helene von Puthon of Schloss Mirabell in Salzburg , whom he divorced in 1957 .
His maternal grandparents were Capt .
Alastair William Mackintosh of the Seaforth Highlanders , who later moved to Palm Beach , Florida , and New York heiress Lela Emery , daughter of Cincinnati businessman John Josiah Emery , Sr . , and sister of John J. Emery , Jr. and Audrey Emery , wife of Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich of Russia .
She later married the Duc de Talleyrand et Dino and resided in Saint - Brice - sous - Forêt , France .
Alistair Mackintosh , a native of Inverness , was briefly married to American silent film star Constance Talmadge from 1926–1927 .
He has an elder sister , Alexandra , and two half - sisters by his father 's first marriage .
St Aubyn grew up in London and France , where his family had a house .
He has described an unhappy childhood in which he was repeatedly raped by his abusive father , with the complicity of his mother , from the ages of 5 to 8 .
He attended Westminster School and in 1979 went on to read English at Keble College , Oxford , by which time he was a heroin addict .
He entered psychotherapy at the age of 25 and subsequently became a professional writer .
From 1987 to 1990 , he was married to the author Nicola Shulman , now the Marchioness of Normanby .
St Aubyn has two children , and lives in London .
PATRICK MELROSE SERIES Section::::Patrick Melrose series .
Five of St Aubyn 's novels ,
Never Mind , Bad News , Some Hope , Mother 's Milk , and At Last , form The Patrick Melrose Novels , the first four of which were republished in a single volume in 2012 , in anticipation of the fifth .
They are based on the author 's own life , growing up in a highly dysfunctional upper - class English family , dealing with the deaths of both parents , alcoholism , heroin addiction and recovery , and marriage and parenthood .
Although the Melrose books are sometimes portrayed in the media as tales of decadent aristocracy , they are frequently caustic about the futility and triviality of people with inherited wealth , a point made very explicit in At Last , the final book in the Melrose series .
The books have been hailed as a powerful exploration of how emotional health can be carved out of childhood adversity .
Mother 's Milk was made into a feature film in 2012 .
The screenplay was written by St Aubyn and director Gerald Fox .
It stars Jack Davenport , Adrian Dunbar , Diana Quick , and Margaret Tyzack in her last performance .
Benedict Cumberbatch stars as Patrick Melrose ( with the young Patrick played by Sebastian Maltz ) in a five - part television series , with each episode based on a different novel in the series .
The series is a joint production of Showtime and Sky Atlantic .
The series premiered on Showtime on 12 May 2018 to favourable reviews .
AWARDS AND HONOURS
* 1992 Betty Trask Award winner for Never Mind
* 1998 Guardian Fiction Prize shortlisted for On the Edge * 2006 Man Booker Prize shortlisted for Mother 's Milk
* 2007 Prix Femina Etranger winner for Mother 's Milk * 2007 South Bank Show award on literature winner for Mother 's Milk * 2014 Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse Prize winner for Lost for Words WORKS REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Guardian interview *
The Independent article * " Edward St Aubyn and the enigma of consciousness
" ( Telegraph ) * Biography from the Berlin International Literature Festival