FLAGRANT FOUL
In basketball , a flagrant foul is a personal foul that involves excessive or violent contact that could injure the fouled player .
A flagrant foul may be unintentional or purposeful ; the latter type is also called an " intentional foul " in the NBA .
However , most intentional fouls are not considered flagrant and fouling intentionally is an accepted tactic to regain possession of the ball with minimal time off the game clock .
NBA Section::::NBA .
The NBA established the flagrant foul in the 1980 - 81 season and enacted proper penalties for it in 1990 - 91 , to deter contact which , in addition to being against the rules , puts an opponent 's safety or health at risk .
The NBA defines two levels of flagrant fouls , " Flagrant 1 " and " Flagrant 2 " .
Flagrant 2 has the additional element of " excessive " violence and results in the immediate ejection of the offender .
Flagrant 1 does not result in the offender 's ejection unless the same player commits a second Flagrant 1 foul in the same game .
Referees have discretion in determining which level to call .
FINES Section::::Fines .
Flagrant fouls over the course of the season can result in monetary fines and suspension , at the sole discretion of the Commissioner of the NBA .
GAME TACTICS Section::::Game tactics .
The flagrant foul rule deters undesired play by awarding possession of the ball to the offended team as an extra penalty .
A simple personal foul may let the fouling team regain possession of the ball ( by rebound or by award after a made free throw ) .
However , a flagrant foul results in free throws and possession afterwards .
Toward the end of a game , when a trailing team is committing intentional fouls to regain the ball , it must be careful not to use unnecessary or excessive contact , because a foul ruled Flagrant gives no advantage to the team committing the foul .
FIBA
Section::::FIBA .
FIBA basketball rules have similar fouls but use different terms .
*
FIBA 's unsportsmanlike foul is comparable to a Flagrant 1 .
Two in one game by the same player result in automatic ejection of that player .
An unsportsmanlike foul can also be called if a player fouls with no intention to play the ball ( including excessive holding or shirt grabbing ) , as well as if a player fouls another player on a fast break from behind .
*
FIBA 's disqualifying foul is comparable to a Flagrant 2 and results in immediate ejection of the offender .
The penalty for these fouls is two free throws and possession at midcourt for the team that was fouled .
UNITED STATES SCHOLASTIC RULES Section::::United States scholastic rules .
U.S. college and high school rules define a flagrant foul as a personal or technical foul that is extreme or severe .
NCAA Section::::NCAA .
The NCAA 's Playing Rules Oversight Panel adopted the " flagrant " term before the 2011 - 12 season for both men 's and women 's basketball .
However , the NCAA 's women 's rules committee abandoned the term " flagrant " , effective with the 2017–18 season , in favor of FIBA 's " unsportsmanlike " and " disqualifying " terms .
These fouls are counted as personal fouls and technical fouls .
* A flagrant 1 foul ( men 's ) or unsportsmanlike foul ( women 's ) involves excessive or severe contact during a live ball , including especially when a player " swings an elbow and makes illegal , non - excessive contact with an opponent above the shoulders " .
This offense includes the former " intentional foul " of fouling an opposing player to prevent an easy breakaway score .
In women 's basketball only , the unsportsmanlike foul also includes contact dead - ball technical fouls .
The penalty for a flagrant 1 or unsportsmanlike foul is two free throws and a throw - in for the opposing team at the out - of - bounds spot nearest the foul .
* A flagrant 2 foul ( men 's ) or disqualifying foul ( women 's ) involves unsportsmanlike conduct that is extreme in nature , including " when a player swings an elbow excessively and makes contact above the shoulders " , or excessive or severe contact during a dead ball ( men only ) .
Fighting is also a flagrant 2 or disqualifying foul .
The penalty for a flagrant 2 or disqualifying foul is immediate ejection of the offender , plus two free throws and a throw - in for the opposing team at the division line opposite the scorer 's table .
Certain conduct constitutes a flagrant foul despite not being malevolent or unsportsmanlike .
NFHS
Section::::NFHS .
In the United States , the NFHS rulebook defines flagrant fouls in Rule 10 : Fouls and Penalties .
The word " flagrant " itself is defined in Rule 2 : Definitions ; 2 - 16c calls it " a foul so severe or extreme that it places an opponent in danger of serious injury , and/or involves violations that are extremely or persistently vulgar or abusive conduct . "
EQUIVALENTS IN OTHER SPORTS
*
In American football , such fouls generally result in an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty and possibly ejection .
*
In football , such fouls generally result in either a yellow card or a red card being issued .
*
In ice hockey , such fouls sometimes result in a boarding , attempt to injure or other infraction being called and may result in either a major or game misconduct , or match penalty .
REFERENCES RELATED READING
* NCAA Rule 4 : Definitions * NCAA Rule 10 : Fouls and Penalties in 2008
NCAA Men 's and Women 's Basketball Rules
* NFHS Rule 2 : Definitions 2 - 16c
* NFHS Rule 10 : Fouls and Penalties
* Kermit Washington , subject ( along with Rudy Tomjanovich ) of a book :