LUNGO Lungo ( Italian for " long " ) is a coffee beverage made by using an espresso machine to make an Italian - style coffee – short black ( single or double dose or shot ) with much more water ( generally twice as much ) , resulting in a larger coffee , a lungo .
A normal serving of espresso takes from 18 to 30 seconds to pull , and fills 25 to 60 millilitres , while a lungo may take up to a minute to pull , and might fill 130 to 170 millilitres .
Extraction time of the dose is determined by the variety of coffee beans ( usually a blend of Arabica and Robusta ) , their grind and the pressure of the machine .
The optimum is obtained with 9–12 bars 130–150 ml .
In French it is called café allongé .
RELATED BEVERAGES Section::::Related beverages .
A caffè lungo should not be mistaken for a caffè americano ( an espresso with hot water added to it ) or a long black ( hot water with a short black added to it , which is the inverse order to an Americano and done to preserve the crema ) .
In the lungo , all the water is brewed , and the lungo is generally shorter than an Americano or a long black .
In comparison , the caffè crema is a significantly longer drink , comparable in size to an Americano or long black .
( This drink is rare in the English - speaking world )
Like the lungo , it is all brewed water , but is about twice as long as a lungo .
FLAVOUR
Section::::Flavour .
A lungo is less strong , but more bitter , than an espresso , because the additional hot water passing through the ground coffee extracts components that would normally remain undissolved .
The more water is passed through the coffee grounds , the more bitter and watery the shot tastes .
Conversely , using less water than normal produces a stronger , richer shot known as a ristretto .
As the amount of water is increased or decreased relative to a normal shot , the composition of the shot changes due to the fact that the flavour components of coffee dissolve at varying rates .
For this reason , a long or short shot will not contain the same ratio of components that a normal shot contains .
Therefore , a ristretto is not simply twice as " strong " as a regular shot , nor is a lungo simply half the strength .
Moreover , since espresso is brewed under pressure , a lungo does not have the same taste or composition as coffee produced by other methods , even when made with the same ratio of water and ground coffee .
BREWING
Section::::Brewing .
Ristretto , normale , and lungo are relative terms without exact measurements .
Nevertheless , a rough guide is a brewing ratio of 1:1 for ristretto , 1:2 for normale , and 1:3–1:4 for lungo – a ristretto is thus 30 ml/1 oz ( the foamy crema slightly increases this volume ) , normale is 60 ml/2 oz , and lungo is 90–120 ml/3–4 oz .
By contrast , a caffè crema will be approximately 180 ml/6 oz .
SEE ALSO * Americano ( coffee ) – hot water added to espresso ( in that order )
* Caffè crema
* List of coffee beverages
* Long black – espresso added to hot water ( in that order ) ; famous in Australia * Ristretto – half - length extraction ; the opposite of a lungo REFERENCES