EDDIE AND THE CRUISERS Eddie and the Cruisers is a 1983 American film directed by Martin Davidson with the screenplay written by the director and Arlene Davidson , based on the novel by P. F. Kluge .
A sequel , , followed in 1989 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A television reporter named Maggie Foley ( Ellen Barkin ) investigates the mysterious disappearance of legendary rock star Eddie Wilson ( Michael Paré ) .
Flashbacks dramatize Eddie 's life and the rise and fall of his rock and roll band , Eddie and the Cruisers .
The band gets its start at a Somers Point , New Jersey club called Tony Mart 's .
Not adept at writing lyrics , Eddie hires Frank Ridgeway ( Tom Berenger )
aka " Wordman " to be the band 's keyboard player and lyricist , over the protests of band manager Doc Robbins ( Joe Pantoliano ) and bassist Sal Amato ( Matthew Laurance ) .
Rounding out the Cruisers are saxophonist Wendell Newton ( Michael " Tunes " Antunes ) , background singer and Eddie 's girlfriend Joann Carlino ( Helen Schneider ) , and drummer Kenny Hopkins ( David Wilson ) .
The band 's first album , Tender Years , became a major hit , but recording their next album , A Season in Hell , turns out to be a nightmare .
Inspired by the bleak , fatalistic poetry of Arthur Rimbaud , Eddie pushes his bandmates beyond their limits , musically and personally .
Eddie wants to be great , but bassist Sal replies , " We ai n't great .
We 're just some guys from Jersey .
"
Eddie makes this clear that if the band can not be great , there is no reason to ever play music again .
A Season in Hell is ultimately rejected by Satin Records on the grounds that it is " dark and strange " .
In the early morning hours , Eddie 's car crashes through the railing and over the Stainton Memorial Causeway .
Eddie vanishes without a trace , his body never found .
Almost 20 years later , Satin re - releases the band 's first album , which charts even higher than it did originally .
A television documentary is soon in the works , exploring the mystery of the band 's second album , which had disappeared from the vaults of Satin Records the day after Eddie 's disappearance .
All of the original Cruisers are set to participate in it except Eddie and Wendell Newton , who had died of an overdose in August 1963 at age 37 .
The others are now living ordinary lives : Sal Amato fronts a Cruisers tribute band .
Ridgeway is a high school English teacher in Vineland .
Doc works as a radio disc jockey in Asbury Park .
Joann is a stage choreographer in Wildwood , and Hopkins works in an Atlantic City casino .
During the documentary interviews , the band expresses a desire to relive the past , even though many of their memories are humiliating .
For example , during a concert at Benton College , where Frank was once a student , Eddie ridicules Frank repeatedly by referring to him as " Toby Tyler " after seeing him and Joann kissing before the concert .
The other Cruisers members share similar stories .
Joann is able to complete the one piece of the puzzle that Frank could not : revealing what happened to the band 's second album .
After storming from the studio , Eddie brought her to the Palace of Depression , a makeshift castle made of garbage and junk that he visited often as a child .
She reveals it was in fact she who took the master tapes for the album from Satin Records , hiding them in the Palace of Depression , where she felt they belonged .
Frank and Joann go back to the Palace of Depression to retrieve the master tapes .
A mystery man driving a blue ' 57 Chevy Bel Air convertible identical to Eddie 's arrives at the house and calls to Joann .
But before she can reach the car , Frank unmasks the impostor , revealing him to be Doc , who was after the master tapes all these years .
Moved by his story , Frank and Joann give him the master tapes .
Doc drives off into the night vowing that the Cruisers will finally conquer the world this time .
In a surprise reveal at the ending , a bearded , much older looking Eddie is shown alive , watching the ending credits of Foley 's documentary tribute to him and the band roll through the window of an appliance store .
He smiles serenely , proud to know that his work is finally being heard , and then disappears into the night .
CAST
* Tom Berenger as Frank Ridgeway
* Michael Paré as Eddie Wilson
* Joe Pantoliano as Doc Robbins * Matthew Laurance as Sal Amato
* Helen Schneider as Joann Carlino * David Wilson as Kenny Hopkins * Michael " Tunes " Antunes as Wendell Newton * Ellen Barkin as Maggie Foley * Joanne Collins as Regina Lewis
* John Stockwell as Keith Livingston
* Joey Balin as Eddie 's replacement * Robin Karfo as Joann 's replacement CAST NOTES Section::::Cast notes .
Only two cast members , Michael " Tunes " Antunes , the tenor saxophone player for John Cafferty and the Beaver Brown Band , and backup singer Helen Schneider were professional musicians in the fictional band .
Ellen Barkin 's appearance in the film is uncredited .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Martin Davidson has said that the inspiration for the film came from a desire to " get all my feelings about the music of the last 30 years of rock music into it . "
He optioned P. F. Kluge 's novel with his own money and at great financial risk .
He wrote the screenplay with Arlene Davidson and decided to use a Citizen Kane - style story structure .
He remembered , " That was in my head : the search . "
Davidson made a deal with Time - Life , a company that was going into the movie - making business .
However , it quickly left the business after making two films that were not financially successful .
He was understandably upset and
a couple of days later he went out to dinner and met a secretary who had worked on his first film .
He told her what had happened to his film , and she gave his script for Eddie and the Cruisers to her business partners .
In a relatively short time , a deal was struck with Aurora and Davidson was given a $ 6 million budget .
SHOOTING
Section::::Shooting .
In order to get a credible looking and sounding band for the film , Davidson hired Kenny Vance , one of the original members of Jay and the Americans .
He showed Davidson his scrapbook , the places the band performed , the car they drove in , and how they transported their instruments .
Vance also told Davidson stories about the band , some of which he incorporated into the script .
Tom Berenger has said that he did not try to learn piano for the film but did practice keyboards for hours in his trailer .
Matthew Laurance actually learned how to play the bass through rehearsals .
Michael Paré was discovered in a New York City restaurant working as a chef .
He said of his role in the film that it was " a thrill I 've never experienced .
It 's a really weird high .
For a few moments , you feel like a king , a god .
It 's scary , a dangerous feeling .
If you take it too seriously ... " Davidson had the actors who played in Eddie 's band rehearse as if they were getting ready for a real concert .
Pare remembers , " The first time we played together - as a band - was a college concert .
An odd thing happened .
At first , the extras simply did what they were told .
Then , as the music heated up , so did the audience .
They were n't play - acting anymore .
The screaming , stomping and applause became spontaneous .
"
Davidson recalls , " One by one , kids began standing up in their seats , screaming and raising their hands in rhythmic applause .
A few girls made a dash for the stage , tearing at Michael 's shirt .
We certainly had n't told them to do that .
But we kept the cameras rolling . "
Additionally , New Jersey musician Southside Johnny was hired as a technical advisor for the film .
Ellen Barkin , who has the small role of the television reporter , Maggie Foley , later said that she " hated " making the film :
That was what we liked to call a " pay the rent " job .
It was n't a script I liked , but I remember my agent at the time saying , " Look , you only have to work two weeks , and they 're going to pay you a lot of money .
We 'll just say it was your first movie
and they just did n't release it .
" I think people were all fucked up on drugs .
I do n't know .
I was a little removed , because I was n't on the movie the whole time , but it seemed like it was just a mess .
Like , when I 'd go , I 'd think -- I like to make a movie where I know who the boss is .
I like a big boss .
I like a real director .
And it seemed like it was just , " Who 's driving the ship here ?
What 's going on ? "
According to Davidson , when he completed the film , three different studios wanted to distribute it , and he went with Embassy Pictures because they offered him the most money .
However , they had no prior experience in distribution and were unable to properly release it in theaters .
Davidson remembered , " And
six months later , somebody said , ' Your picture is appearing on HBO this weekend , '
and I did n't even know . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Vance asked Davidson to describe his fictitious band and their music .
Initially , Davidson said that the Cruisers sounded like Dion and the Belmonts , but when they meet Frank , they have elements of Jim Morrison and The Doors .
However , Davidson did not want to lose sight of the fact that the Cruisers were essentially a Jersey bar band , and he thought of Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band .
The filmmaker told Vance to find him someone that could produce music that contained elements of these three bands .
Davidson was getting close to rehearsals when Vance called him and said that he had found the band -- John Cafferty & The Beaver Brown Band from Providence , Rhode Island .
Davidson met the band and realized that they closely resembled the band as described in the script , right down to a Cape Verdean saxophone player , whom he cast in the film .
Initially , Cafferty was only hired to write a few songs for the film , but he did such a good job of capturing the feeling of the 1960s and 1980s that Davidson asked him to score the entire film .
After successful screenings on HBO in 1984 , the album suddenly climbed the charts , going quadruple platinum .
The studio re - released the soundtrack in the fall of 1984 .
Nine months after the film was released in theaters , the main song in the film , " On the Dark Side , " was the number one song in the country on Billboard 's Mainstream , Rock , and Heatseeker charts ; and # 7 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart .
Another single from the film , " Tender Years " , peaked at # 31 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
REACTION
Section::::Reaction .
Eddie and the Cruisers was originally intended to open during the summer , but a scheduling error resulted in a September release , when its target audience - teenagers - were back in school .
The film had its world premiere at Deauville .
Embassy Pictures threw a promotional party for the film at a West Hollywood dance club in September , 1983 where Cafferty and his band played .
The film was a box office flop , receiving many negative to mixed reviews from critics .
The film was released in theaters on September 23 , 1983 and grossed $ 1.4 million on its opening weekend .
It would go on to make a paltry $ 4.7 million in North America .
The film was pulled from theaters after three weeks and all of the promotional ads pulled after one week .
In the fall of 1984 , the single " On the Dark Side " from the soundtrack album suddenly climbed the charts , as the film was rediscovered on cable television and home video , prompting the studio to briefly re - release the album .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Eddie and the Cruisers was not well received by critics .
Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars and wrote , " the ending is so frustrating , so dumb , so unsatisfactory , that it gives a bad reputation to the whole movie . "
In her review for The New York Times , Janet Maslin wrote , " Some of the details ring uncannily true , like the slick oldies nightclub act that one of the Cruisers is still doing nearly 20 years after Eddie 's supposed death .
Other aspects of the film are inexplicably wrong .
Eddie 's music sounds good , but it also sounds a lot like Bruce Springsteen 's , and it would not have been the rage in 1963 . "
However , she did praise Paré 's performance : " Mr. Paré makes a fine debut ; he captures the manner of a hot - blooded young rocker with great conviction , and his lip - synching is almost perfect . "
Gary Arnold , in the Washington Post , wrote , " At any rate , it seemed to me that what Eddie and the Cruisers aspired to do was certainly worth doing .
The problem is that it finally lacks the storytelling resources to tell enough of an intriguing story about a musical mystery man . "
As of October 2018 , the film holds a rating of 38 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 16 reviews .
RE - RELEASE Section::::Re - release .
In 1984 , Eddie and the Cruisers was discovered by additional audiences during its first pay cable run on HBO .
Embassy Pictures re - released the film for one week based on successful summer cable screenings and a popular radio single , but it once again failed to perform at the box office .
Looking back , Davidson said , " that picture should have been a theatrical success .
There was an audience for it .
People still watch it and still tell me about it . "
Davidson was offered the job of directing a sequel to the film , but he was not keen on the idea and wanted no participation .
The eventual project , which , unlike the first , had had no source novel from Kluge as its basis , was released as in 1989 .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Muir , John Kenneth .
The Rock and Roll Film Encyclopedia .
Applause Books , 2007 .
EXTERNAL LINKS