WORKING TAX CREDIT
Working Tax Credit ( WTC ) is a state benefit in the United Kingdom made to people who work and have a low income .
It was introduced in April 2003 and is a means - tested benefit .
Despite their name , tax credits are not to be confused with tax credits linked to a person 's tax bill , because they are used to top - up wages .
Unlike most other benefits , it is paid by HM Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) .
WTC can be claimed by working individuals , childless couples and working families with dependent children .
In addition , people may also be entitled to Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) if they are responsible for any children .
WTC and CTC are assessed jointly and families remain eligible for CTC even if where no adult is working or they have too much income to receive WTC .
In 2010 the coalition government announced that the Working Tax Credit will , by 2017 , be integrated into and replaced by the new Universal Credit .
However implementation of this has been repeatedly delayed and may not be finished until 2022 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The WTC replaced the Working Families Tax Credit ( WFTC ) , which operated from April 1999 until March 2003 .
The WFTC was itself a transitional system from the earlier benefit for working families known as Family Credit ( FC ) , which had been in operation since 1986 .
The WFTC shared its assessment of means and period of renewal ( 6 months ) with FC but moved towards a tax credit approach styled on schemes in other countries , which used an annual declaration of income to assess entitlement for a whole year .
Tax credits also replaced the child elements in means tested benefits , the Children 's Tax Credit in the tax system , and disabled persons tax credit .
In 2014 WTC and CTC combined cost £ 30 billion per year .
HOW IT WORKS Section::::How
it works .
The basic operation of the tax credit is broken down into the following steps :
* An individual makes an application for WTC to HM Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) .
*
* HMRC calculates a provisional amount of tax credit to be awarded .
It is based on the previous tax year 's income and current circumstances .
The tax credit is then paid in weekly or four weekly instalments to the claimant via bank account until the end of the tax year , 5 April .
It is possible to ask HMRC to base their calculations on the estimated current year 's income , but this does carry some risks .
*
*
After the end of the tax year , HMRC send claimants forms (
TC603R
and TC603D commonly called renewal or declaration forms )
asking them to confirm their actual income for the year just ended .
For those who do not have actual income figures available , they must provide an estimate to HMRC , usually by 31 July and confirm this , usually by the following 31 January .
* * A final calculation of the WTC is made using the confirmed income .
This final amount might be greater , equal to or lower than the provisional amount received the previous year .
*
* If someone received more than the final WTC calculation , this is an over payment and must be repaid to HMRC .
Similarly , if someone received less than the final WTC calculation , this is an underpayment in which case HMRC will make a lump sum payment back to that person .
* CALCULATION OF THE ANNUAL AWARD Section::::Calculation of the annual award .
The amount of the award is calculated from two separate amount as follows :
The component called Elements is based on circumstances whilst the Withdrawal component is income based .
The following sections describe how each component is arrived at . ELEMENTS Section::::Elements .
The Working Tax Credit ( WTC ) and the Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) are made up of " elements " related to individual circumstances .
Examples of elements for an entire year are : * a basic element of £ 1,890 payable to everyone ( in 2009/10 ) * a couple and lone parent element ( £ 1,860 ) * a 30 hour [ working week ] element ( £ 775 ) * a disabled worker element ( £ 2,530 )
* a severely disabled worker element ( £ 1,075 ) * a 50 + return - to - work payment ( discontinued after April 2012 ) .
Each element that applies to a claimant 's circumstances is added together to determine the maximum award of tax credit ( before any withdrawal is considered ) .
For example , a couple would have elements calculated as WITHDRAWAL Section::::Withdrawal .
The withdrawal rate is the amount that is deducted from the Elements described above .
If the gross annual income exceeds a predetermined first threshold of £ 6,420 ( in 2013/14 )
then the withdrawal rate is 41 percent .
This means that for every £ 1 earned above the threshold , 41p of the WTC entitlement is withdrawn .
As withdrawal of tax credits is based on ' gross ' rather than ' net ' income , however , the claimant is also subject to Class 1 NIC national insurance contributions at 12 percent and UK income tax at 20 percent — making an effective marginal tax rate of 73 percent .
For example , if one person in a couple earns £ 10,000 pa , then the amount of withdrawal is Under withdrawal , entitlement to WTC is gradually reduced first until ' exhausted ' at an income level that can be calculated from the first threshold and the basic award .
For a couple , for instance , this would be : £ 6,420 , plus
( £ 1,920 + £ 1,970 ) divided by 41 % .
That is £ 15,908 in rounded figures .
AMOUNT OF WTC Section::::Amount of WTC .
In this example , the award is then calculated as follows : INTERACTION
WITH CHILD TAX CREDIT Section::::Interaction with Child Tax Credit .
WTC and CTC are designed to be a seamless allowance that steadily reduces as family income rises .
If they are claimed together , both combine to form the basic award .
This combined award is subject to withdrawal from the point at which WTC entitlement would have been zero ( called the First threshold for those entitled to Child Tax Credit only ) .
In 2009/10 this threshold was £ 16,040 .
However , unlike WTC , CTC does not continue to reduce to zero .
It reduces only until it reaches the " basic family element " of £ 545pa .
Thereafter it remains fixed until the household reaches a second income threshold ( £ 50,000 in 2009/10 ) .
After that it reduces again at a rate of £ 1 for every £ 15 of income .
Recipient households of combined WTC / CTC awards thus fall into three categories * those on a ' main - rate ' reduction of 70 % ( i.e. marginal tax + 39 % ) receiving > £ 545pa
* those on an income of up to £ 50,000 in receipt of the small flat rate family element ( i.e. marginal tax only ) receiving £ 545pa * those with incomes between £ 50,000 and £ 58,170 ( i.e. marginal tax + 6.67 % ) receiving £ 545pa
This section is out of date .
The second income threshold has now been removed and the withdrawal rates are higher .
AWARDS AND DISREGARDS Section::::Awards and disregards .
WTC and CTC for the current tax year are considered to be an interim award because they are based on the previous tax year 's gross household income .
Final awards would need to be adjusted in subsequent years when the actual income is known .
Since large fluctuations from year to year would be undesirable , broad allowance is made for this by disregarding the first £ 2,500 of any increase in the final income from one year to the next .
Only changes in excess of this income disregard are taken into account in establishing a final award .
Overpayments are recovered by adjustment to the amount of the following years ' interim award .
Tax credits have not proved to be nearly as robust or well administered as the initial design envisaged .
Claimants have not always recognised the need to report any change of circumstances immediately .
The time taken by the system of administration to then take these into account adds to any overpayment generated and shortens the time available for their recovery .
This led to significant levels of overpayments .
In order to reduce the overpayment problem , the income disregard was raised tenfold from £ 2,500 to £ 25,000 with effect from 2006/07 .
ASSESSMENT OF INCOME Section::::Assessment of income .
Income for tax credit purposes is in principle assessed similarly to UK income tax .
Thus ' income ' ( c / f ' taxable income ' ) consists of what the individual receives from gross earned and unearned sources — less allowances for ' expenditures ' that would reduce that income .
But , unlike income tax , tax credits measure income based on family ' household ' , rather than the individuals within .
Also the effect of income disregard — to mask large annual increases in resources from reassessment — weakens comparisons with a true income tax still further .
By comparison with other means tested benefits , the income treatment of claimants of tax credits is especially generous ; it permits deduction of the full gross amount ( rather than 50 % net)of any individual pension contributions and any Gift aid payments .
Since increases in income are subject to withdrawal at 39%(in the initial range ) , such reductions are effectively ' rebated ' at the same rate through the tax credits received .
Thus , while a pension ( or Gift Aid ) contribution of £ 100 will cost the employee £ 80 ( after basic rate tax relief ) directly from net pay , it attracts an additional £ 39 in tax credits ; so the true cost is only £ 41 .
Other concessions with regard to assessment of income ( in contrast to means testing used elsewhere ) include : * disregarding the first £ 300 of ' other ' gross income ( rent , interest or dividends etc . ) .
* disregarding ' other ' income derived from tax - free savings and investments
* having no explicit ( ineligibility ) limit for capital resources ( as only actual income derived from capital is taken into account )
LEVEL OF TAKE - UP Section::::Level of take - up .
Around 7 million people in the UK are entitled to claim Working Tax Credit or the companion Child Tax Credit , although around 2 million people do not do so .
The levels of Tax Credit take - up in the UK have not risen in recent years , despite an increase of 100,000 children living in households classed as " below the poverty line " between 2004 and 2005 .
IMPLEMENTATION DIFFICULTIES
Section::::Implementation difficulties .
The introduction of the Working Tax Credit scheme was marred by implementation issues and large - scale overpayments .
The Office of National Statistics estimated that of the £ 13.5bn paid out in tax credits in 2004 , £ 1.9bn consisted of overpayments .
In addition , computer problems led to delays in many receiving payments , causing significant financial hardship for those on low incomes , and resulting in EDS losing its contract to provide the Inland Revenue with computer services .
These problems led to considerable political fallout .
Dawn Primarolo , who as Paymaster General was the minister responsible for the implementation of tax credits , had to apologise to parliament and was asked whether she had " lost control " of her department .
Prime Minister Tony Blair also apologised to Parliament over the incident .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The Working Tax Credit scheme was subject to much criticism , particularly in the wake of the difficulties surrounding its implementation .
Criticism focused on the way that credits are calculated on an annual basis , leading to overpayment , followed by large demands for repayment , which those on low income may find difficult to meet .
David Harker , chief executive of Citizens Advice , commented " This is an untenable system .
An annualised system does n't provide the stability of income required by low income families . "
In addition , the scheme was accused of being over - complicated and difficult for claimants to understand , and of underestimating the extent to which the incomes of low earners can fluctuate over a year , especially a problem for self - employed people whose income may fall below the minimum wage ( at which point Working Tax Credit is disallowed ) .
The Labour Party claimed that the tax credit system was effective in tackling child poverty , with , by their government 's definitions , 2 million children lifted out of absolute poverty and almost 1 million out of relative poverty by 2007 .
However , the subsequent Coalition government sought to redefine poverty so as to highlight " children living in workless households or those with drug - dependent parents " , despite their tax credit incomes , remaining in poverty .
Even with the previous definition , this government claimed that the existing tax credits system failed to " meet its statutory target to halve the problem by 2010 – despite the huge amount of taxpayers ' money spent on tackling it . "
SEE ALSO
* Taxation in the United Kingdom
* UK labour law *
Earned income tax credit ( 1975 ) and New Jobs tax credit ( 1977 ) in the US REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* House of Commons Public Accounts Committee report into Tax Credits and Overpayment * Tax Credit Casualties * Tax Credits rates and elements