WRISTLOCK
A wristlock is a joint lock primarily affecting the wrist - joint and possibly the radioulnar joints through rotation of the hand .
A wristlock is typically applied by grabbing the opponent 's hand , and bending and/or twisting it .
Wristlocks are very common in martial arts such as aikido , hapkido and jujutsu where they are featured as self - defense techniques .
They are also used as submission holds in combat sports such as Brazilian jiu - jitsu ( where the most common name is mão de vaca , " the cow 's hand " ) and catch wrestling .
While being an illegal technique in modern sambo and judo competitions , it is still practiced in judo forms of self - defense kata kōdōkan goshinjutsu .
Wristlocks are also widely used as pain compliance holds , often in police and military .
The wristlock is a technique that can be applied from a stand - up position , simply by grabbing the opponent 's hand and twisting and/or bending it in a non - natural direction .
It is considered to be a relatively safe technique to practice with a willing opponent , but if applied suddenly and/or forcefully , a wristlock can cause ligament tears or possibly even dislocation or bone fractures .
Mixed martial arts organizations usually allow wrist locks but they are almost never performed due to the MMA gloves and wrist wraps which stabilize the wrist .
They are seen as being easy to defend against and often leave the attacker vulnerable to punches and elbow strikes .
One notable use of a wristlock was by Royce Gracie against Akebono Taro .
TYPES ROTATIONAL Section::::Types .
Section::::Rotational .
A rotational wristlock ( in budo referred to as kote hineri , and in Aikido referred to as a type of sankyō , 三教 , " third teaching " ) is a very common type of wristlock , and involves forced supination or pronation of the wrist , and is typically applied by grabbing and twisting the hand .
The wrist joint does not allow rotating motion , and the force is transferred to the forearm causing radioulnar rotation , eventually resulting in a joint lock on the radioulnar joint .
Once the radius and ulna have been brought to their extreme positions , further twisting motion will put severe torque on the wrist .
In martial arts , standing rotational wristlocks are often accompanied by the opponent instinctively throwing him or herself to escape or alleviate the lock .
SUPINATING
Section::::Supinating .
The supinating wristlock ( in budō referred to as kote gaeshi , 小手返 , " forearm return " ) is a rotational wristlock , and arguably the most common wristlock .
It involves rotating the hand so that it becomes maximally supinated , often referred to as ' externally rotating ' the wrist , and hence putting a joint lock on the wrist and radioulnar joint .
This can be done by grabbing the opponent 's hand with one or both hands , and twisting the hand so that the opponent 's thumb points away from the opponent .
A supinating wristlock performed from a stand - up position can be used to force the opponent to the ground on his or her back .
Straightening the arm does not alleviate the pressure , since the shoulder joint does not allow further supination of the hand .
A properly executed lock of this type does not apply torque to the wrist itself .
In practice , the bones of the forearm and , eventually , the shoulder are the focus of the lock .
If performed correctly , this technique will break the opponents wrist , elbow and dislocate the shoulder .
In practice , uke will turn over his own arm in order to prevent his wrist from breaking .
The goal of almost all throws executed via joint / bone manipulation , at least from the perspective of some classical ( koryu ) martial arts , is to break or dislocate a limb(s ) .
PRONATING
Section::::Pronating .
The pronating wristlock ( in budō referred to as kote mawashi , 小手回し , " forearm turn " , and in Aikido referred to as nikyō , 二教 , " second teaching " ) is similar to the supinating wristlock except that it is reversed in direction , known as ' internally rotating ' the wrist .
The hand becomes maximally pronated , resulting in a joint lock on the wrist and radioulnar joint .
The degree of possible pronation depends on the degree of flexion at the elbow , as a bent elbow inhibits rotation of the humerus .
Hence , straightening the arm allows rotation of the whole arm and alleviates the pressure on the joints .
The arm has to be additionally twisted until the shoulder joint reaches maximal rotation to preserve the joint lock .
This typically results in the arm moving posteriorly , and allows for the complementary technique of pushing the arm at the elbow or shoulder to force the opponent to the ground .
HYPERFLEXING
Section::::Hyperflexing .
A hyperflexing wristlock ( in budō referred to as tekubi gatame , 手首固め , " wrist lock " ) involves forcing the wrist into hyperflexion by pushing or pulling the hand towards the inside of the forearm .
A hyperflexing wristlock is often performed in combination with rotational wristlocks , since the hyperflexed hand provides a good lever for twisting , and in addition it increases the overall effectiveness of the wristlock .
Hyperflexing wristlocks are often featured as pain compliance techniques , since they allow for good control , and a gradual pain increase if more leverage is added .
Hyperflexing wristlocks are also a typical wristlock used as a submission hold .
Hyperflexing wrist locks , often applied after an escape from a rotational wrist lock , is a signature technique in Chen - style t'ai chi ch'uan .
HYPEREXTENDING
Section::::Hyperextending .
The " hyperextending wristlock " is often combined with a fingerlock as the wristlock itself is not very strong .
It involves bending the wrist so that the knuckles travel back toward the forearm .
ADDUCTIVE Section::::Adductive .
An adductive wristlock ( in budō referred to as kote hono gaeshi , " partial forearm return " , part of aikido 's nikyō , or second teaching ) involves forced ulnar deviation of the hand .
It is typically applied by twisting the opponent 's arm so that the opponent 's palm points laterally and the elbow is slightly bent .
The hand is then grabbed using one or both hands , and the wrist is forced downwards , hence reaching the limit of possible ulnar deviation , and creating a potent joint lock on the wrist joint .
To avoid damage , it is possible for the opponent to drop down to the ground , and alleviate the pressure .
The adductive wristlock is often taught as a self - defense technique against grabbing .
*
Note : in aikido this lock is called Nikyō ; It is also commonly referred to as a " Z - Lock " because the bend of the arm forms a Z.
*
Note : in some parts of America this is also called the " Goose Neck " because the bend of the arm forms a S. SEE ALSO * Armlock * Leglock * Small joint manipulation
* Spinal lock *
Chin na
REFERENCES
MAIN
REFERENCES
* United States Marine Corps ( 1999 ) .
MCRP 3 - 02B Close Combat .
Department of the Navy .
Commercial * University of York Jiu Jitsu Club .
Wrist Locks in Jiu Jitsu .
www.yorkjitsu.org .
URL last accessed February 8 , 2006 .
OTHER REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Omo Plata to wristlock .
Shows the omo plata position being used to execute a wristlock .
* Joint locks : The wrist Section::::External links .
Phanuel 's Wrist is illegal in 15 states