WHITE - TAILED SPIDER White - tailed spiders are spiders native to southern and eastern Australia , and so named because of the whitish tips at the end of their abdomens .
Body size is up to 18 mm , with leg - span of 28 mm .
Common species are Lampona cylindrata and Lampona murina .
Both these species have been introduced to New Zealand .
White - tailed spiders are vagrant hunters that seek out and envenom prey rather than spinning a web to capture it ; their preferred prey is other spiders .
They are reported to bite humans ; effects include local pain , a red mark , local swelling and itchiness ; rarely nausea , vomiting , malaise or headache may occur .
Ulcers and necrosis have been attributed to the bites , but a scientific study by Isbister and Gray ( 2003 ) showed these had other causes , mostly infections .
A study of 130 white - tailed spider bites found no necrotic ulcers or confirmed infections .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Ludwig Carl Christian Koch described Lampona cylindrata in 1866 and Lampona murina in 1873 .
The genus name comes from the Latin lampo ( " to shine " ) .
The species name cylindrata refers to the cylindric body shape , while murinus means " mouse - gray " in Latin . DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The two common species of white - tailed spiders are Lampona cylindrata and Lampona murina .
They are similar in appearance ; L. cylindrata is slightly larger with females being up to 18 mm long while males are up to 12 mm in body length .
The legs span approximately 28 mm .
The two species are not easily distinguished without microscopic examination .
They are slender spiders with dark reddish to grey , cigar - shaped body and dark orange - brown banded legs .
The grey abdomen has two pairs of faint white spots and — usually but not always — a distinct white spot at the tip just above the spinnerets .
The similarities have led people to think there is only one species of white - tailed spider .
It is possible that not all white - tailed species have been identified .
The descriptor , white tail , is applied to a variety of species of spiders for which a distal white mark on their abdomen is a distinctive feature ; other markings disappear with moultings but the white tail remains to adulthood .
L. cylindrata lay pinkish eggs which are enclosed in a flattened silk capsule and are guarded by the female until they hatch .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Both species are native to Australia .
Lampona cylindrata is present across south - east Queensland , New South Wales , Victoria , South Australia , Tasmania and Western Australia while Lampona murina is found in eastern Australia from north - east Queensland to Victoria .
The spiders have been introduced in New Zealand with Lampona murina residing in the North Island for over a hundred years while Lampona cylindrata has become widespread throughout the South Island since 1980 .
HABITAT AND BEHAVIOUR Section::::Habitat and behaviour .
They live in gardens and inside houses , beneath bark and rocks , in leaf litter and are often found in the folds of clothes , towels and shoes .
They do not build webs .
Most active at night , they hunt for other spiders .
Their favoured prey are the black house spider ( Badumna insignis ) and the closely related brown house spider ( Badumna longinqua ) , both of which are , like the whitetail , native to Australia but have been inadvertently introduced to New Zealand .
BITES TO HUMANS Section::::Bites to humans .
A common perception is that white tail spider bites can be associated with long term skin infections , and in rarer cases progression to necrosis .
This is an attribution of infections presenting to medical care with a complaint of " spider bite .
" Venom has no bacteria , and infections do not arise from spider bites .
The well - described brown recluse bite causes direct damage to skin and tissue .
It has a limited area and does not spread .
No formal studies have found evidence for associating necrosis with white tail spider bites .
White tail spider bites may cause a small red or discolored bump , similar to an insect bite , that burns or itches .
The issue of necrosis in some bite cases in published studies begins with a paper presented at the International Society on Toxinology World Congress held in Brisbane in 1982 .
Both the white - tailed spider and the wolf spider were considered as candidates for possibly causing suspected spider bite necrosis in the Australian context .
In Brazil the recluse spider was identified as linked to necrosis .
Following this initial report , numerous other cases implicated white - tailed spiders in causing necrotic ulcers .
All of these cases lacked a positively identified spider — or even a spider bite in some cases .
Additionally , there had not been a case of arachnogenic necrosis reported in the two hundred years of European colonisation before these cases .
Of the 130 cases of white tail spider bites studied by Isbister and Gray , more than 60 % reported that the person had been bitten by spiders that had got into clothing , towels or beds .
Clinical toxicologist Geoffrey Isbister studied 130 cases of arachnologist - identified white - tailed spider bites , and found no necrosis or confirmed infections , concluding that such outcomes are very unlikely for a white - tailed spider bite .
The major effects from a bite in this study were local ( pain , a red mark , local swelling and itchiness ) ; and rarely systemic ( nausea , vomiting , malaise or headache ) .
All these symptoms are generally mild and resolve over time .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * White - tailed spiders at the Australian Museum * White - tailed spiders at Landcare Research , New Zealand