POLICE CAUTION
A police caution is a formal alternative to prosecution in minor cases , administered by the police in England and Wales .
It is commonly used to resolve cases where full prosecution is not seen as the most appropriate solution .
Accepting a caution requires an admission of guilt .
PURPOSE
Section::::Purpose .
A police caution ( since 2005 more properly known as a simple caution ) is a formal warning given by the police to anyone aged 10 years or over and who has admitted that they are guilty of a minor crime .
A person may refuse to admit guilt and not accept a caution , but can then be subject to criminal prosecution .
A police caution as a non - statutory disposal of an offence is quite different from the caution used for the purpose of advising a suspect of their right to silence .
The aims of the formal police caution are : * to offer a proportionate response to low - level offending where the offender has admitted the offence ; * * to deliver swift , simple and effective justice that carries a deterrent effect ; * * to record an individual 's criminal conduct for possible reference in future criminal proceedings or in criminal record or other similar checks ; * * to reduce the likelihood of re - offending ; * * to increase the amount of time officers spend dealing with more serious crime and reduce the amount of time police officers spend completing paperwork and attending court , whilst simultaneously reducing the burden on the courts ; * TYPES OF CAUTIONS Section::::Types of cautions .
As a result of changes made by the Criminal Justice Act 2003 , cautions can be administered in two forms : as a simple caution or as a conditional caution , the latter of which has specific conditions attached that the offender must satisfy — attending a course aimed at targeting offending behaviour , for example .
The Home Office has released guidance to the police and prosecutors on the use of the simple caution .
Although a caution is not a conviction , it forms a part of a person 's criminal record and can be used as evidence of bad character if a person is prosecuted for another crime , and Disclosure and Barring Service ( DBS ) checks ( previously called Criminal Records Bureau ( CRB ) checks ) for certain types of employment .
A caution can cause some countries not to allow a person to visit or reside in the country .
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR USE Section::::Circumstances for use .
In order to safeguard the offender 's interests , the following conditions must be met before a caution can be administered : Where the available evidence does not meet the standard normally required to bring a prosecution , a caution can not be administered .
A caution will not be appropriate where a person does not make a clear and reliable admission of the offence ( for example if intent is denied or there are doubts about their mental health or intellectual capacity ) .
Cautions are typically administered in the case of an offence that is triable summarily or either - way .
The Ministry of Justice recommends that the decision to offer a simple caution for the most serious of offences ( an indictable only offence , an either - way offence routinely dealt with at the Crown Court or any offence which the sentencing guidelines indicate has a starting point at high level community order or sentence of imprisonment ) is taken only in exceptional circumstances .
People aged 17 or under may receive a youth caution where the following conditions are met : On 13 April 2015 , the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 implemented restrictions on the use of cautions by the police : ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
There is no statutory basis for the formal caution , it is a discretionary procedure adopted by the police under Home Office guidance .
Only the police have the power to administer a caution .
The Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) does , however , have a role to play in helping the police to ensure that the Ministry of Justice guidelines contained within the Guidance are applied consistently and fairly .
CPS officers are instructed to refer to the police any case in which they consider a caution is the appropriate way of handling the offence .
Where the CPS remains satisfied that a caution is appropriate but the police refuse to administer one , the CPS guidance recommends that the case is not accepted for the prosecution .
DURATION
Section::::Duration .
Per the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 , simple cautions , reprimands and final warnings become spent ( meaning that they do not need to be disclosed , unless applying for particular types of work ) immediately , and conditional cautions become spent after 3 months .
Cautions will appear on a DBS certificate until 6 years have passed ( or 2 years if the person was under 18 at the time of caution )
provided the offence is not on the prescribed list of offences that will never be filtered from a criminal record check .
All information relating to simple cautions ( as well as convictions ) issued for a recordable offence is retained on the Police National Computer ( PNC ) .
Association of Chief Police Officers ( ACPO ) guidelines set out how long this information will be retained for .
The information is kept for police operational reasons and in the interest of prevention and detection of crime .
HISTORY Section::::History .
It is likely the practice of using police cautions began early in the nineteenth century .
In the 1920s written warnings started being given for motoring offences .
In 1928 the Home Office published statistics on cautions , and by 1931 was giving advice on the wording of cautions .
In 1959 the Street Offences Act made a provision for removing cautions from criminal records .
In 1962 Royal Commission on the Police noted concerns about the uneven enforcement of cautions .
In 1978 the Home Office issued its first circular to bring about consistency in the use of cautions for juveniles , and in 1985 for adults .
From 1995 cautions were recorded on the Police National Computer , and it was recommended that cautions should be retained for 5 years , though each police force could follow its own guidelines .
The 1997 Police Act made provision for disclosing cautions to employers of those who might have unsupervised contact with children .
The Criminal Justice Act 2003 introduced the concept of statutory Conditional Cautions .
By the early 2000s police forces were given targets for the number of offences brought to justice .
As giving a caution was a way of bringing an offence to justice more easily than going to court , in some policing areas the number of cautions given increased to about 30 % of all offences brought to justice .
In 2006 new guidelines were issued for the retention of records until the subject reached 100 years of age , but after 5 or 10 years , depending on the severity of the offence , they would only be used for DBS checks .
In 2008 a Home Office circular made clear suspects must receive a written explanation of the implications before accepting a caution , to meet the informed consent obligation , and provided a new form to be signed by the offender which explained in considerable detail the consequences .
From about 2008 a less stringent resolution of low - level offences has often been used by police forces in England and Wales instead of a caution .
This is usually called a ' community resolution ' and invariably requires less police time as offenders are not arrested .
A community resolution does not require any formal record , but the offender should admit the offence and the victim should be happy with this method of informal resolution .
Concerns have been expressed over the use of community resolution for violent offences , in particular domestic violence .
SEE ALSO
* Right to silence in England and Wales
* Warning ( traffic stop ) NOTES