BART THE BEAR Bart the Bear ( January 19 , 1977 – May 10 , 2000 ) was a male Alaskan Kodiak bear actor best known for his numerous appearances in Hollywood films , including The Bear ( for which he reportedly received an Oscar nomination ) , White Fang , Legends of the Fall , and The Edge .
He was trained by animal trainers Doug and Lynne Seus of Wasatch Rocky Mountain Wildlife , Inc. , in Heber City , Utah .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Bart was born on January 19 , 1977 , at the Baltimore Zoo .
When Bart was five weeks old and weighed five pounds ( 2 kg ) , he was adopted by Doug and Lynne Seus , who worked as animal trainers for films .
The Seuses trained Bart using a reward and praise system .
While still a cub , he appeared in the TV series The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams playing Adams ' companion bear , Ben , as a cub .
After reaching adulthood , he subsequently made his film debut in the film Windwalker ( released 1981 ) .
He grew to 9 ' 6 " ( 2.90 m ) tall and weighed 1,500 pounds ( 680 kg ) throughout his life as an adult .
CAREER Section::::Career . Robert Redford , Morgan Freeman , John Candy , Dan Aykroyd , Daryl Hannah , Annette Bening , Ethan Hawke , Steven Seagal , Tchéky Karyo , Brad Pitt , Alec Baldwin , Trevor Howard , and Anthony Hopkins all appeared in films opposite Bart .
All of them were reportedly impressed with how well he was trained .
Film directors Jean - Jacques Annaud and Lee Tamahori , both of whom directed Bart in The Bear and The Edge respectively , called Bart
" The John Wayne of Bears " .
Anthony Hopkins worked with Bart in two movies : Legends of the Fall and The Edge .
According to Lynne Seus , " Tony Hopkins was absolutely brilliant with Bart ...
He acknowledged and respected him like a fellow actor .
He would spend hours just looking at Bart and admiring him .
He did so many of his own scenes with Bart .
"
Film critic Kenneth Turan called Bart 's performance in The Edge " the capstone of an illustrious career " and " a milestone in ursine acting . "
Bart 's greatest recognition came when he starred in the title role of Jean - Jacques Annaud 's 1988 French film , The Bear , playing an adult grizzly bear who befriends an orphaned cub and defeats hunters .
Annaud auditioned 50 bear actors from all over the world before selecting Bart for the role .
In order to perform the role , Bart , trained by Seus , successfully learned several new routines and behaviors , including going against his natural abhorrence of a strange bear to accept the unrelated cub co - starring with him .
Annaud remained impressed with Bart 's performance even after being injured by Bart when Annaud , against trainers ' orders , entered Bart 's enclosure to pose for publicity photos .
The Bear was a hit in both Europe and the United States , grossing over $ 31 million in the United States and over $ 100 million worldwide , and reportedly resulting in an Oscar nomination for Bart , which was unable to go forward because animal actors are precluded from receiving Academy Awards .
In 1998 , Bart made an appearance at the 70th Academy Awards as part of a salute to animal actors .
He presented an envelope to Mike Myers onstage .
CHARITY WORK Section::::Charity work .
Bart was an ambassador for the Vital Ground Foundation , which procures threatened wildlife habitat along the Rocky Mountains , on Kodiak Island in Alaska , and in the Gobi Desert .
After his cancer diagnosis , Bart also served as the " spokesbear " for the Animal Cancer Center at Colorado State University .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
In October 1998 , Bart was diagnosed with cancer , and later underwent surgery twice to remove tumors from his right paw .
Cancer reoccurred , taking away his strength and appetite causing him to not want to take the pain medication , so he was euthanized on May 10 , 2000 , at the age of 23 .
He was buried on the Seus ' ranch .
At the time of his death , he was filming the television documentary Growing Up Grizzly ( 2001 ) ( also featuring Bart 's namesake Little Bart ) , which was narrated by Brad Pitt , who had appeared with Bart in Legends of the Fall .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Bart the Bear 2 , an unrelated Alaskan brown bear cub born in 2000 and adopted by Doug and Lynne Seus shortly before Bart 's death , was named for Bart and has sometimes been called " Little Bart " .
Bart the Bear 2 has followed in the footsteps of the original Bart , becoming an established animal actor and Vital Ground ambassador .
FILMOGRAPHY
* Windwalker ( 1981 ) –
Bear
* The Clan of the Cave Bear ( 1986 ) –
The Cave Bear
* Benji the Hunted ( 1987 ) – Bear
*
The Great Outdoors ( 1988 ) –
The Bald - Headed Bear ( Jody ) * The Bear ( 1988 ) – The Kodiak Bear * White Fang ( 1991 ) – Bear * The Giant of Thunder Mountain ( 1991 ) – Bear * ( 1993 ) – Bear *
On Deadly Ground ( 1994 ) – Bear * Legends of the Fall ( 1994 ) – Bear * 12 Monkeys ( 1995 ) –
Bear * Walking Thunder ( 1997 ) – Walking Thunder
* The Edge ( 1997 ) – Bear * Meet the Deedles ( 1998 ) –
Bear TELEVISION
* The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams ( TV series ) , multiple episodes ( 1977–78 ) – Ben as a cub
* ( TV movie ) ( 1983 ) –
Bear * Louis L'Amour 's Down the Long Hills ( TV Movie ) ( 1986 ) –
The Bear
* Lost in the Barrens ( TV movie ) ( 1990 ) –
Bear * The Young Riders , Season 1 , Episode 17 , " Decoy " ( 1990 ) –
Bart * Les amants de rivière rouge ( TV miniseries ) ( 1996 ) –
Bear * 70th Academy Awards – Presenter ( 1998 )
COMMERCIAL * Labatts Blue *
Tums REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Vital Ground *
Wasatch Rocky Mountain Wildlife , Inc.