CALIFORNIA ROLL
A California roll or California maki is a makizushi sushi roll that is usually rolled inside - out and containing cucumber , crab meat or imitation crab , and avocado .
Sometimes crab salad is substituted for the crab stick , and often the outer layer of rice in an inside - out roll ( uramaki ) is sprinkled with toasted sesame seeds , tobiko or masago ( capelin roe ) .
As one of the most popular styles of sushi in the United States and Canada , the California roll has been influential in sushi 's global popularity and in inspiring sushi chefs around the world in creating their non - traditional fusion cuisine .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The identity of the creator of the California roll is disputed , with chefs from both Vancouver and Los Angeles claiming credit .
The theory is that the California roll was created in Canada by chef Hidekazu Tojo , a Japanese - born resident of Vancouver since 1971 .
Tojo insists he is the innovator of the " inside - out " sushi , and it got the name " California roll " because it was popular with patrons from Los Angeles .
He has recounted how his original invention included cucumber , cooked crab , and avocado .
A rival theory of the California roll credits a Los Angeles chef named Ken Seusa at the Kin Jo sushi restaurant near Hollywood .
Mrs. Fuji Wade , manager of the restaurant credited Seusa with the invention in a report to an Associated Press news feed in 1979 .
Food writer Andrew F. Smith observes that this claim stood uncontested for more than 20 years .
The AP story appeared very shortly after the term " California roll " was used in print , in the Los Angeles Times and an Ocala , Florida newspaper on November 25 , 1979 .
The California roll was also featured by Gourmet magazine in 1980 , and taken up by a restaurant critic for The New York Times the following year .
Another rival theory attributes the invention to Ichiro Mashita , another Los Angeles sushi chef , from Little Tokyo joint " Tokyo Kaikan " .
According to this account , Mashita began substituting avocado for toro ( fatty tuna ) in the off - season , and after further experimentation , developed the prototype , back in the 1960s ( or early 1970s ) .
Early California roll recipes used frozen king crab legs , since surimi imitation crab was not yet available locally and importing it was n't convenient .
Cucumber , mayonnaise , and sesame seed were missing ; these ingredients were all added later .
The original California roll was wrapped traditional style , with the nori seaweed on the outside , which American customers tended to peel off .
So eventually the roll " inside - out " , i.e. uramaki version was developed .
This adaptation has also been credited to Mashita by figures associated with the restaurant .
After becoming a favorite in Southern California , the dish became popular all across the United States by the 1980s .
The roll contributed to sushi 's growing popularity in the United States by easing diners into more exotic sushi options .
Sushi chefs have since devised many kinds of rolls , beyond simple variations of the California roll .
NOTES
REFERENCES
Citations Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS