MARION RAVENWOOD
Marion Ravenwood is a fictional character who first appeared in the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark. Played by Karen Allen , she enters the story when Indiana Jones visits her in Nepal , needing her help to locate the Ark of the Covenant with a possession originally obtained by her father , Dr. Abner Ravenwood .
After 27 years of absence ( 21 years in the films ' internal chronology ) , the character returned in Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and was once again played by Allen , who was portrayed as marrying Jones .
CONCEPT AND CREATION Section::::Concept and creation .
Screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan named the character after his wife 's grandmother , and took the character 's surname from Ravenwood Lane in California .
Spielberg originally intended the role for his girlfriend Amy Irving .
Sean Young auditioned for the role , Barbara Hershey was considered , while Debra Winger turned it down .
Steven Spielberg cast Karen Allen , on the strength of her performance in National Lampoon 's Animal House .
Allen screen tested opposite Tim Matheson and John Shea , before Harrison Ford was cast as Indiana .
Kasdan 's depiction of Marion was more complex , and she was genuinely interested in René Belloq in earlier script drafts .
She and Paul Freeman added more comedy in the tent seduction scene .
Allen came up with her own backstory for the character , such as what happened to her mother , her romance with Indiana at age 16 or 17 , and her time in Nepal ; Spielberg described it as " an entirely different movie " .
After Raiders of the Lost Ark was released , Spielberg wanted Allen to return for Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , but George Lucas decided that Indy would have a different love interest in each film .
Marion became a frequent supporting character in The Further Adventures of Indiana Jones , a Marvel Comics title which ran for 34 issues from January 1983 until March 1986 .
During the 1990s , Lucas forbade author Rob MacGregor from including her in his novels for Bantam Books ' Indiana Jones series .
" How did Indy meet Marion ?
What happened in their earlier encounters ?
George apparently wanted to keep that for the future .
Maybe we 'll find out in Indy 4 , " MacGregor speculated .
Frank Darabont claimed it was his idea to bring back Marion for Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , during his tenure as writer from 2002 to 2004 .
APPEARANCES FILMS RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Films .
Section::::Raiders of the Lost Ark. Marion 's father
, Dr. Abner Ravenwood was a professor of archaeology obsessed with finding the Ark of the Covenant ( as referred to in the Bible ) , he was also a mentor to the young Henry " Indiana " Jones , who eventually accompanied them on several digs .
Marion entered into a relationship with Indiana Jones during this time ( when she was 15 , according to the novelization of Raiders of the Lost Ark ) .
Jones abruptly left the Ravenwoods in 1926 ; Marion was about 16 or 17 years old when the relationship ended , and Jones was 27 , ten years her senior .
Later in her life , Marion chastised Jones , stating , " I was a child !
I was in love !
It was wrong and you knew it ! "
Jones showed little remorse and simply replied , " You knew what you were doing . " After Jones broke off contact with them both , he returned to the United States to focus on his career as an archaeology professor , and Marion and her father settled in Nepal .
She later started running a local tavern – " The Raven " – after its manager ( her father ) died and left it to her .
Taking advantage of her high tolerance for alcohol , she would frequently drink the bar 's patrons under the table on a wager .
She refused to return to the United States until she had enough money to return " with style " .
In 1936 , Marion found herself back in contact with Jones , when he offered her money for the headpiece of the Staff of Ra , an artifact originally located by her father .
Reluctant at first , she was forced to cooperate when the bespectacled Gestapo agent Arnold Toht arrived to demand the piece himself .
During the subsequent fight , the tavern caught fire .
Marion told Jones that , until he compensated her for her savings , destroyed in the fire , she was his partner .
She was then captured by the Nazis .
Indy believed she was dead until , by a fortunate accident , he stumbled upon her with her hands and bare feet bound and gagged , and a knotted handkerchief between her teeth in one of the Nazi tents .
To her chagrin , he decided to leave her , reasoning that an escape would draw too much unwanted attention , and regagged her with the promise to come back for her .
The perceived betrayal did not affect Marion 's refusal to cooperate with her captors , however .
Belloq 's advances resulted only in an aborted escape attempt , and Toht 's interrogation was likewise met with uncommon resistance .
After being captured by and escaping from Jones ' rival , Rene Belloq , she helped Jones recover the Ark of the Covenant from the Nazis .
In the process , the couple rekindled their relationship .
KINGDOM OF THE CRYSTAL SKULL
Section::::Kingdom of the Crystal Skull .
Jones continued to pursue archaeological artifacts , while Marion tried her hand at journalism before opening a bar in New York City named The Raven 's Nest .
For a time , she also worked as the public relations officer for the museum at Marshall College .
However , a week before their planned wedding Indy left her without explanation and unaware
she was pregnant with their future son Henry " Mutt " Jones III .
Marion began a relationship with the RAF pilot Colin Williams ( whom Jones had initially introduced to her ) three months after Mutt was born , and they eventually married and lived happily until Colin was killed during World War II .
Jones ' eccentric old friend , Harold Oxley , then helped raise Mutt , acting as a second ( technically third ) father .
Twenty years after Mutt 's birth , Russians captured Oxley in an attempt to find the mythical crystal skulls that he had pursued .
After she was captured trying to find Oxley , Marion sent Mutt to find Jones .
After a desperate escape attempt , she revealed to Jones , who had remained clueless , that Mutt was actually his son .
They argued so much that one of the Soviet agents finally gagged her .
During the adventure , she and Jones again realized their love for each other .
Back home , they were married , set to continue their adventures together .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS