MAKE YOUR OWN KIND OF MUSIC ( SONG )
" Make Your Own Kind of Music " is a pop song written by Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil , first recorded in 1968 by the New York City - based trio
the Will - O - Bees ( Janet Blossom , Steven Porter , and Robert Merchanthouse ) , who regularly performed Mann / Weil compositions .
After Cass Elliot had a hit in the summer of 1969 with Mann / Weil 's
" It 's Getting Better " , she recorded " Make Your Own Kind of Music " as the follow - up single , and her album Bubblegum , Lemonade , and ... Something for Mama was re - released as " Make Your Own Kind Of Music /
It 's Getting Better , " the title cut having been added to the original track listing .
However , Elliot 's " Make Your Own Kind of Music " single only reached No . 36 .
The similar chart impact of the follow - up single , another Mann / Weil composition entitled " New World Coming , " which reached No . 42 , signaled Elliot 's challenges in maintaining a profile as a current hitmaker , as the 1960s turned into the 1970s .
The Cass Elliot track is in the key of E major .
The song has also been used for I en annan del av Köping .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance . !
align="left"Chart ( 1969 ) !
align="left"Peakposition
Australia KMR
Canada RPM Top Singles Canada RPM Adult Contemporary US
Billboard Hot
100
US Billboard Adult Contemporary US Cash Box Top 100
REMIXES Section::::Remixes .
A remixed version of the Cass Elliot track was featured in the 1997 Dance compilation Dance Across The Universe ( Part 1 ) , which was released by Universal Records , along with a separate club - only promo which featured four different mixes ( one of them dubbed " The Mama Cass Mix " ) .
PALOMA FAITH VERSION Section::::Paloma Faith version .
In March 2018 , Paloma Faith released a cover of the song , which was also featured in a TV commercial for Škoda , promoting the Karoq crossover vehicle .
It made it to No . 28 on the UK Singles Chart .
It was later confirmed in April 2018 that the song would be included on the digital track listing of her fourth studio album
The Architect as one of the album 's singles .
It was included in the tracklist of the album on sites like Spotify and Apple Music on 20 April 2018 .
CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Chart ( 2018 ) !
Peakposition OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
In 1972 , Barbra Streisand released " Make Your Own Kind of Music " as a single in a medley with " Sing " , which became an Easy Listening hit ( No . 28 ) but only reached No . 94 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
Streisand also recorded parts of the song as a medley with The World is a Concerto for Barbra Streisand ...
And Other Musical Instruments .
A happy hardcore cover of the track was released in 1997 by DJ Daydream .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Discography for the song
* ( Mama Cass )
* Remix by DJ Mathieu Bouthier and Muttonheads