HIGH - SPEED RAIL IN THE UNITED STATES Plans for high - speed rail in the United States date back to the High Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 .
Various state and federal proposals have followed .
Despite being one of the world 's first countries to get high - speed trains ( the Metroliner service in 1969 ) , it failed to spread .
Definitions of what constitutes high - speed rail vary , including a range of speeds over and dedicated rail lines .
Inter - city rail in the United States with top speeds of or more but below is sometimes referred to as higher - speed rail .
Amtrak 's Acela Express ( reaching ) , Northeast Regional , Keystone Service , and certain MARC Penn Line express trains ( the three services reaching ) are the only high - speed services in the country according to American standards , but elsewhere in the world " high speed " means services at or above .
As of 2017 , the California High - Speed Rail Authority is working on the California High Speed Rail project and construction is under way on sections traversing the Central Valley .
Phase I will be completed in 2029 , and Phase II will likely be completed before 2040 .
DEFINITIONS IN AMERICAN CONTEXT Section::::Definitions in American context .
Authorities in the United States maintain various definitions of high - speed rail .
The definitions range from rail services with top speeds of to or higher by the United States Department of Transportation which is an entity in the executive branch , while the United States Code , which is the official codification of Federal statutes , defines them as the rail services with " reasonably expected to reach sustained speeds of more than 125 miles per hour " .
A legislative branch agency within the Library of Congress , the Congressional Research Service , used different terms to clarify the confusion by defining the rail services with top speeds less than to be higher - speed rail .
There is no current train service in the United States which meets all of the domestic criteria for high - speed rail .
Amtrak 's Acela Express is classified as " higher - speed rail " in the Congressional Research Service report by virtue of being on shared tracks , whereas page 5 of that report also requires dedicated tracks to be classified as " very high speed rail " .
In China , high speed rail is officially defined as " newly - built passenger - dedicated rail lines designed for electrical multiple unit
( EMU ) train sets traveling at not less than ( including lines with reserved capacity for upgrade to the 250 km / h standard ) , on which initial service operate at not less than . "
In Europe the definition of a minimum speed for newly built high - speed railways is ; for upgraded high - speed railways it is .
In places where high - speed rail programs are in earlier developmental stages or where substantial speed increases are achieved by upgrading current infrastructure and/or introducing more advanced trains , lower minimum speed definitions of high - speed rail are used .
Directive 2008/57 / EC defines high - speed rail in terms of speeds of the order of for existing , upgraded lines , and for lines specially built for high - speed travel .
This is the case in the United States .
For transportation planning purposes focussing on the development of high - speed rail , the United States Department of Transportation ( USDOT ) distinguishes four types of intercity passenger rail corridors : * High - Speed Rail –
Express : Frequent , express service between major population centers 200–600 miles ( 320–965 km )
apart , with few intermediate stops .
Top speeds of at least 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) on completely grade - separated , dedicated rights - of - way
( with the possible exception of some shared track in terminal areas ) .
Intended to relieve air and highway capacity constraints .
* High - Speed Rail –
Regional : Relatively frequent service between major and moderate population centers apart , with some intermediate stops .
Top speeds of 125–150 mph ( 201–240 km / h ) , grade - separated , with some dedicated and some shared track ( using positive train control technology ) .
Intended to relieve highway and , to some extent , air capacity constraints .
* Emerging High - Speed Rail : Developing corridors of , with strong potential for future HSR Regional and/or Express service .
Top speeds of up to 90–110 mph ( 145–177 km / h ) on primarily shared track ( eventually using positive train control technology ) , with advanced grade crossing protection or separation .
Intended to develop the passenger rail market , and provide some relief to other modes .
* Conventional Rail : Traditional intercity passenger rail services of more than 100 miles with as little as one to as many as 7–12 daily frequencies ; may or may not have strong potential for future high - speed rail service .
Top speeds of up to to as high as generally on shared track .
Intended to provide travel options and to develop the passenger rail market for further development in the future .
However , state - level departments of transportation and council of governments may also use different definitions for high - speed rail .
For examples , the North Central Texas Council of Governments uses the definition of the speeds over , and the Texas Department of Transportation and Oklahoma Department of Transportation use the speeds of or more .
These agencies have a separate category for higher - speed rail which can be a wide range of speeds between and .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The development of the American rail network during the 19th century created structural impediments to the adoption of high - speed rail in the later half of the 20th that were not present in Europe and Asia .
Freight on American railroads had to travel vastly longer distances , so railroads developed longer cars that could be joined into longer trains .
In contrast to Europe , these freights traveled past very few older buildings that were at risk of structural damage from vibrations created by heavy passing trains ( even today , American freight cars and their contents may be as heavy as , while their European counterparts are limited to ) .
With such long and heavy freights often sharing the same tracks as passenger trains , it was necessary to require that passenger cars be able to withstand the higher impact forces of a potential collision with those freights .
Axial strength standards , first required for the mail cars where clerks worked sorting mail en route and later applied to passenger cars , require that an American passenger car be able to withstand applied to either end , as opposed to the European regulations mandate .
This necessarily results in American passenger cars being made of heavier materials .
FASTER INTER - URBANS : 1920–1941 Section::::Faster inter - urbans : 1920–1941 .
During the period from 1900 to 1941 , most long - distance travel was by rail in the United States .
Rail transportation was not high - speed by modern standards but inter - city travel often averaged speeds between .
Most of the major railroads had faster than normal trains called " express " or " limited " on their mainline routes ( e.g. the Empire State Express and the 20th Century Limited ) between major towns and cities .
The development of faster trains , however , faced indirect regulatory hurdles .
After a 1921 crash at Porter , Indiana , in which a derail failed to stop one passenger train that had already passed through two red lights from crashing into another at a level junction , killing 37 , the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) ordered almost a hundred railroads to install automatic train stops by the end of 1925 .
The railroads opposed the ICC vigorously , noting that stopping longer freights that way might lead to derailments .
As a result , the requirement was revised to allow waivers for certain lines , and rarely enforced as the debate continued without any real resolution over the next two decades ; in the meantime passenger fatalities began declining as the automobile emerged as a transportation option .
During the 1930s railroads began to develop lightweight , diesel - powered streamlined trains which provided even faster running times than the previous express trains .
Two early streamliners were the Union Pacific M-10000 ( nicknamed Little Zip and The City of Salina ) in revenue service between 1934 and 1941/42 and the Burlington Railroad 's Zephyr .
The design of the Zephyr incorporated a diesel - electric power system ; the M-10000 used a spark - ignition engine running on " petroleum distillate " , a fuel similar to kerosene .
These trains were much lighter than the common engines and passenger cars of the day , as the " Zephyr " was constructed using stainless steel and the M-10000 chiefly of the aircraft alloy Duralumin .
On May 26 , 1934 , the Zephyr made a record - breaking " Dawn to Dusk " run from Denver to Chicago .
The train covered the distance in 13 hours , reaching a top speed of and running at an average speed of .
However the railroad was unable to capitalize on this since the Depression had cut into the demand for intercity rail travel .
Many steam locomotives were streamlined during this time to attract passengers , and the first steam streamlined locomotive was the New York Central 's Commodore Vanderbilt .
Nonetheless , some of these steam locomotives became very fast : some were said to exceed on a regular basis .
Examples include the New York Central 's " Super Hudsons " as used on the Twentieth Century Limited ; the Milwaukee Road 's purpose - built Atlantics and Hudsons used in Hiawatha service ; the Pennsylvania Railroad 's duplex - drive 4 - 4 - 4 - 4 type T1 locomotives , and two Union Pacific engines , a 4 - 6 - 2 and a 4 - 8 - 2 , used on the " Forty Niner " and other trains .
POST - WAR PERIOD :
1945–1960 Section::::Post - war period : 1945–1960 .
The debate over signaling and train control between the railroads and the ICC had never really been settled , just deferred as passenger deaths declined , in part due to more travelers using their automobiles for shorter commutes and an expanding and improving highway network .
It ended in 1946 , when one express passenger train crashed into another one that had stopped , both operated by the Chicago , Burlington & Quincy , in Naperville , Illinois .
The conductor of the first train had had it stopped in the town outside Chicago because he thought something was dragging ; within two minutes it was struck from behind by another traveling at , killing 45 .
The engineer of the second train survived the crash , and claimed he had not seen the signal in sufficient time to stop his train .
Investigation showed that even if he had missed the yellow light going on , warning him to slow down in anticipation of a red , he still had space to stop the train had he applied his full brakes at the red .
As a result , the ICC decided the time had come to force the issue of train control .
For the first time it set national rail speed limits .
In 1947 it ordered that automatic block signaling be used where freight traveled at more than and on passenger lines where trains went faster than .
This rule remains in force today .
While the railroads generally complied with this rule , affecting of track , they were not as tolerant of the ICC"s additional requirement for ATS or cab signalling on passenger trains that exceeded .
Some railroads complied with the equipment requirement in part , and installed it on about of track .
This was what the ICC had hoped for .
But on the other where the rule applied , railroads simply ran their trains under the limit .
This made intercity passenger rail an even less competitive option , accelerating its decline as not only automobile use was increasing but airlines were beginning to compete on longer routes .
By the late 1950s many passenger routes that had existed at the time of the Naperville crash had been discontinued .
The results of World War II shifted further high - speed rail technological development overseas .
While the U.S. had not suffered the infrastructure damage it had inflicted on Europe and Japan , it had also developed its road network , leading to the creation of the Interstate Highway System after the war , giving prosperous citizens an efficient way to use the cars they were buying .
Europe and Japan , by contrast , had largely not begun to build highway networks and had seen heavy damage to their rail systems .
With their citizens impoverished as they rebuilt their economies , and unable to afford automobiles to the extent Americans could , those countries invested in rail as the primary means of intercity travel .
FIRST ATTEMPTS
AT HIGH - SPEED RAIL :
1960–1992 Section::::First attempts at high - speed rail : 1960–1992 .
Following the creation of Japan 's first high - speed Shinkansen , U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson asked the U.S. Congress to devise a way to increase speeds on American railroads .
The request was part of his Great Society infrastructure building initiatives .
Congress delivered the High Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 which passed with overwhelming bi - partisan support .
It helped to create regular Metroliner service between New York City and Washington , D.C. inaugurated in 1969 .
Trains on the line reached speeds of and averaged along the route , faster than even Acela Express trains operated between the cities of New York and Washington in 2012 .
The Metroliner was able to travel from New York to Washington in just 2.5 hours because it did not make any intermediate stops .
U.S. federal and state governments continued to revisit the idea of fast trains .
The Passenger Railroad Rebuilding Act of 1980 led to funding of high - speed corridor studies in 1984 .
Private - sector consortia intending to build
high - speed lines were created in Florida , Ohio , Texas , California , and Nevada .
Maglev trains became a new field of interest .
They were officially added to the definition of " railroad " in 1988 , and were studied repeatedly .
Five high - speed corridors were officially endorsed in October 1992 following passage of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 .
TEA-21 and other legislation continued to be passed with mentions of high - speed rail , but lacking funding or real direction .
Nevertheless , no new high - speed service was added to the U.S. passenger rail system following the Metroliners .
ACELA EXPRESS AND RENEWED INTEREST IN HIGH - SPEED RAIL :
1993–2008 Section::::Acela Express and renewed interest in high - speed rail : 1993–2008 .
In 1993 , the U.S. attempted to improve service between Boston and New York by electrifying the Northeast Corridor north of New Haven , Connecticut and purchasing new train sets to replace the by then 30-year - old Metroliners and run on the newly electrified route .
Some existing trains ( Swedish X 2000 and German ICE 1 ) were tested , but finally , the " Acela " , a new tilting train manufactured by Alstom and Bombardier , was ordered .
The new service was named Acela Express and ran on the Northeast Corridor , linking Boston , New York City , Philadelphia , Baltimore , and Washington ,
D.C. The service was inaugurated in December 2000 , and was an immediate success , operated at a profit and , it produced about 25 % of Amtrak 's total service revenue .
The Acela lacks a dedicated high - speed rail line which limits its average speed , although it reaches a maximum speed of on small sections of its route through Rhode Island and Massachusetts .
The travel time between Washington and New York is 2 hours and 53 minutes ( compared to 2 hours and 30 minutes for PRR 's nonstop Metroliner in 1969 ) , or an average speed of .
Schedule between New York and Boston is 3 hours 34 minutes , an average speed of only .
With a 15-minute layover in New York , the entire end - to - end trip averages .
PLANS IN THE TIME SPAN 2008–2013 Section::::Plans
in the time span 2008–2013 .
The largest project for American high - speed rail is the California High - Speed Rail network , which was authorized by voters with Proposition 1A in 2008 .
In August 2013 , Tutor Perini signed a $ 1-billion contract to begin construction of the first phase in 2014 .
Construction began in early 2015 .
High - speed rail development was a goal of the Obama administration which came into office in January 2009 .
Higher jet fuel prices , congested airports and highways , and increasing airport security rules have combined to make high - speed rail a more attractive option for passengers .
A study conducted by the International Union of Railways indicated that high - speed trains produced five times less CO than automobiles and jet aircraft .
In 2012 , then - Amtrak president Joseph Boardman proposed a plan to build a dedicated high - speed rail line between Washington , D.C. and Boston .
He estimated it would cost $ 151 billion and take more than 25 years to design and build the line .
The proposed rail line would allow for top speeds of 220 mph ( 354 km / h ) .
CURRENT STATE AND REGIONAL EFFORTS
THE NORTHEAST NORTHEAST CORRIDOR :
NEXT GENERATION HIGH - SPEED RAIL
Section::::Current state and regional efforts .
Section::::The Northeast .
Section::::Northeast Corridor :
Next Generation High - Speed Rail .
Amtrak officials released a concept report for next - generation high - speed rail within the Northeast Corridor ( NEC ) on October 1 , 2010 .
Amtrak projected planning and construction of the next - generation high - speed Northeast Corridor line will cost approximately $ 117 billion ( 2010 dollars ) and reduce the travel time from New York to Washington , including a stop in Philadelphia , to 96 minutes , and the travel time from Boston to New York to 84 minutes by 2040 .
In 2012 , Amtrak released the details of the proposal .
The first of two phases envisions the NEC 's to be upgraded allowing Acela Express speed improvements .
By 2022 , Acela trainsets will be replaced with new trainsets , named Avelia Liberty .
The new trainsets will be limited to the maximum speed supported by the NEC .
The second phase will begin and new track , stations and systems will be constructed separately from the NEC network .
The construction will start on the New York to Washington , D.C. segment first which will be completed in 2030 .
By 2040 , the construction of the dedicated network for the New York to Boston segment will be completed .
At that time , the oldest 12 trains will be retired and 14 new ones will be deployed increasing the total capacity to 46 .
This is projected to cut the travel time from Boston to Washington , D.C. to 3 hours and 8 minutes .
The entire initiative is expected to cost $ 151 billion ( 2012 dollars ) .
PROPOSED ROUTES
Section::::Proposed routes .
The concept proposes trains running on dedicated tracks between Washington , D.C. and Boston , Massachusetts which will closely follow the existing Northeast Corridor south of New York City .
A number of different routes will be studied north of New York City , including one through interior Connecticut paralleling Interstates 684 , 84 , and 90 , one following the existing shoreline route paralleling Interstate 95 and one via Long Island ( requiring a bridge or tunnel across Long Island Sound to Connecticut ) .
Another possible route could follow the existing NEC and I-95 from New York to New Haven , Connecticut , then turn north and follow I-91 to either Hartford or Springfield , Massachusetts before turning east or northeast toward Boston .
The current NEC network would be used for non - high - speed passenger rail and freight services .
NORTHEAST MAGLEV PROPOSAL
Section::::Northeast Maglev proposal .
In 2012 , the Northeast Maglev , a small firm in Washington , D.C. with backing from the Central Japan Railway Company , proposed a new high - speed rail service along the Northeast Corridor with initial service between Washington , DC and New York City and they have spent $ 1.4 million lobbying Congress .
The proposal calls for the use of maglev technology which will require infrastructure separate from the Amtrak 's NEC networks .
The company proposes to deploy the JR - Maglev trains on a service from Washington , D.C. to New York City with a travel time of 60 minutes .
Previous proposals of deploying maglev in the area have stalled due to lack of funding and legislative support .
In November 2015 , the Federal Railroad Administration approved a grant of $ 27.8 million to Maryland Department of Transportation and Maryland Economic Development Corporation to conduct studies on building a high - speed Maglev line that would carry passengers between Washington and Baltimore .
NEW JERSEY –
NEW YORK CITY
UPGRADES Section::::New Jersey – New York City upgrades .
In February 2011 , Amtrak announced plans for the Gateway Project , an high - speed right of way across the Meadowlands , the Hudson Palisades , and the Hudson River , between Newark Penn Station and New York Penn Station .
In November 2011 , US Congress allocated $ 15 million for engineering work on the project .
It remains unclear how much preliminary work done for the somewhat similar cancelled ARC project will be utilized .
On August 24 , 2011 , the United States Department of Transportation obligated $ 450 million to a six - year project to support capacity increases on one of the busiest segments on the NEC , a section in New Jersey between New Brunswick and Trenton .
The project is designed to upgrade electrical power , signal systems , and overhead catenary wires to improve reliability and increase speeds up to , and after the purchase of new equipment , up to .
Work is being done in coordination with New Jersey Transit Rail Operations , which is redeveloping Amtrak 's County Yard and building the Mid Line Loop .
The improvements were scheduled to be completed in 2016 , but have been delayed ; the project is now scheduled to be finished in 2019 .
This section of track holds the record for the highest speed by a train in the US , which is , achieved in a test run by the U.S./Canada - built UAC TurboTrain on December 20 , 1967 .
That same day , Congress obligated $ 295 million to improvements at Harold Interlocking , the nation 's busiest rail junction nearby Sunnyside Yards in Queens , New York
so that Amtrak 's New England service can avoid congestion and bypass New Jersey Transit and Long Island Rail Road trains .
NEW YORK STATE Section::::New York State .
New York State has been actively discussing high - speed rail service since the 1990s , but thus far little progress has been made .
Amtrak Acela service between Washington , D.C. and Boston is available to New York City , but cities in Upstate New York and Western New York remain isolated from high - speed rail service .
Further , destinations outside the New York metropolitan area have been plagued by delayed service for decades .
Nonetheless , New York has been quietly endorsing and even implementing rail improvements for years .
Closer and faster railroad transportation links between New York City and the rest of the state are frequently cited as a partial solution to Upstate 's stagnant economic growth .
Beginning in 2010 , a study conducted by the New York State Department of Transportation identified 10 alternatives for improving the Empire Corridor .
In early 2014 , a Tier 1 Draft Environmental Impact Statement was released for public review and comments .
The draft eliminated 5 of the alternatives , including those with top speeds of and .
The remaining 5 build alternatives under consideration have top speeds of ( the base alternative ) , ( options A and B ) , , and .
PENNSYLVANIA
Section::::Pennsylvania .
The Keystone Corridor is a rail corridor between Philadelphia and Pittsburgh , composed of two different rail lines , the Amtrak Philadelphia to Harrisburg Main Line and the Norfolk Southern Pittsburgh Line .
Between Philadelphia and Harrisburg the Amtrak line is electrified and grade separation was completed in 2014 .
Between Harrisburg and Pittsburgh the Norfolk Southern owned line is used for freight transportation .
In 1999 , the Keystone Corridor was formally recognized as a " designated high - speed corridor " by the Federal Railroad Administration .
The line , over which Amtrak 's Pennsylvanian and Keystone Service routes operate , was upgraded in 2006 with two segments of track .
These trains are higher - speed rail services between Philadelphia and Harrisburg , with express service taking 95–100 minutes over .
WEST COAST
CALIFORNIA Section::::West Coast .
Section::::California .
California Proposition 1A , passed in November 2008 , authorized the state to issue $ 9.95 billion in bonds to fund the first phase of a planned multi - phase high - speed rail network .
Conventional steel - wheel on rail technology is the adopted mode with trains traveling at speeds of up to .
Los Angeles to San Francisco via the Central Valley was expected to be the first phase of the network , though the initial operating segments have since become unclear .
The California High - Speed Rail Authority ( CSHRA ) is the lead agency charged with planning and implementing the system .
The state was been awarded $ 2.55 billion in funding from the federal government in 2010 .
Since the passage of Proposition 1A , cost estimates for the project have risen due to increased planning and disputes over routes .
Ridership projections have faced scrutiny by a number of groups including UC Berkeley 's Institute of Transportation Studies .
In May 2013 , with costs estimates double the original figures approved by the voters in 2008 , opponents filed lawsuits intended to invalidate the $ 10 billion bond measures which were part of the financing of the rail line .
By December 2018 , the Authority had of right - of - way from Madera to near Bakersfield under contract and in construction .
PACIFIC NORTHWEST Section::::Pacific Northwest .
The Pacific Northwest Corridor or the Pacific Northwest Rail Corridor is one of eleven federally designated high - speed rail corridors in the United States .
It was designated a high - speed rail by the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 ( ISTEA ) .
Improvements proposed in Washington State 's long range plan would have had passenger trains operating at a maximum speed of on line .
The Cascadia high - speed rail was a proposed dedicated high - speed rail line that would have connected Salem / Portland , Vancouver WA / Olympia / Tacoma / Seattle / Everett , and Bellingham , Washington .
As of 2012 , neither the Washington State Department of Transportation nor Oregon plan to implement speeds higher than due to safety and other freight service concerns voiced by the track owner , Union Pacific Railroad .
The plan to provide high - speed and higher - speed rail services on this corridor was thus halted .
In early 2018 , Washington State pledged money to studying ultra - high speed rail between Vancouver BC , Seattle , and Portland .
After a preliminary study , the state pledged $ 300,000 in funding and was shortly backed by British Columbia .
The study is estimated to be completed by early 2019 .
Washington State Governor Inslee has expressed his desire to see a Cascadia innovation corridor , linking together the main economic centers of the Pacific Northwest .
COLORADO /
NEW MEXICO Section::::Colorado / New Mexico .
On July 9 , 2009 the governors of Colorado , New Mexico , and Texas announced plans to jointly seek federal designation of a high - speed rail corridor linking Denver , Albuquerque , and El Paso and request up to $ 5 million in federal funding for a feasibility study .
In 2010 the Rocky Mountain Rail Authority did a high - speed rail feasibility study .
Primary corridors being studied are the Interstate 70 corridor from Denver International Airport ( DEN ) to Eagle Airport ( EGE ) in Eagle County near Vail , and the Interstate 25 corridor from the Wyoming border to the New Mexico border .
These corridors however , are not defined as high - speed rail corridors by the FRA .
MID - ATLANTIC AND THE SOUTH FLORIDA Section::::Mid - Atlantic and the South . Section::::Florida .
Development of a high - speed rail system in Florida was mandated by a constitutional referendum in 2000 , but taken off the books by another referendum in 2004 .
Florida resurrected its high - speed rail authority to capitalize on the nationwide effort to build a high - speed rail network .
Florida legislature approved SunRail in a special session in late 2009 , which along with work already completed on the originally proposed line between Tampa and Orlando , was instrumental in the state winning a significant amount of the total amount allotted to high - speed rail .
Only California received more high - speed rail funding than Florida .
In February 2011 , Florida 's newly elected governor Rick Scott cancelled the project .
Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood then announced he would be redirecting the funds intended for Florida to other states .
In 2012 , a plan for a high - speed rail from Miami to Orlando to be operated by a privately owned developer was announced .
The plan called " All Aboard Florida " included a segment between Cocoa and Orlando with a top speed of .
The plan was later renamed to Brightline , and began service between Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach on January 13 , 2018 , although at speeds up to .
But by May 19 , 2018 Brightline will begin service from Fort Lauderdale to Miami at , and by 2021 it will begin service to Orlando at , legally classifying Brightline as a high - speed rail service .
SOUTHEAST
Section::::Southeast .
The Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor is a passenger rail transportation project to extend high - speed passenger rail services from Washington ,
D.C. south through Richmond and Petersburg in Virginia through Raleigh and Charlotte in North Carolina and connect with the existing high - speed rail corridor from DC to Boston , Massachusetts known as the Northeast Corridor .
Since first established in 1992 , the U.S. Department of Transportation ( USDOT ) has since extended the corridor to Atlanta and Macon , Georgia ; Greenville , South Carolina ; Columbia , South Carolina ; Jacksonville , Florida ; and Birmingham , Alabama .
Incremental rail improvements to existing rail lines have been taking place while the environmental impact study required under the National Environmental Policy Act is being completed .
The two - tiered EIS began in 1999 , and completion is expected in 2011 , with passenger service expected by 2015 to 2020 , depending upon funding availability .
TEXAS Section::::Texas .
In 1991 the Texas High Speed Rail Authority awarded a 50-year high - speed rail franchise to the Texas TGV Corporation — a consortium of Morrison Knudsen ( USA ) , Bombardier ( Canada ) , Alstom ( France / UK ) , Crédit Lyonnais ( France ) , Banque IndoSuez ( France ) , Merrill Lynch ( USA ) , and others .
Texas TGV won the franchise after more than two years of litigation instigated by a rival consortium backing German ICE technology .
The plan was to connect the " Texas Triangle " ( Houston − Dallas / Fort Worth − San Antonio ) with a privately financed high - speed train system which would quickly take passengers from one city to the next at prices designed to compete with or beat other transport options .
This was the same model Southwest Airlines used 20 years earlier to break into the Texas market where it served the same three cities .
Funding for the project was to come entirely from private sources , since Texas did not allow the use of public money .
The original estimated cost was $ 5.6 billion , but the task of securing the necessary private funds proved extremely difficult .
Southwest Airlines , with the help of lobbyists , created legal barriers to prohibit the consortium from moving forward and the entire project was eventually scuttled in 1994 , when the State of Texas withdrew the franchise .
Several hotel chains like Days Inn , Best Western , and La Quinta Inn , as well as fast food establishments like McDonald 's and Burger King lobbied against the plan , primarily because many of their locations were located along Interstates and in several highway - dependent rural towns .
Another proposal for high - speed rail in Texas was part of a larger proposed , statewide super - infrastructure , the Trans - Texas Corridor .
In 2002 , Governor Rick Perry proposed the project , but it was eventually canceled by the legislature in 2009 .
In 2002 , the Texas High Speed Rail and Transportation Corporation ( THSRTC ) , a grass roots organization dedicated to bringing high - speed rail to Texas was established .
In 2006 , American Airlines and Continental Airlines formally joined THSRTC , in an effort to bring high - speed rail to Texas as a passenger collector system for the airlines .
The Texas High Speed Rail and Transportation Corporation developed the Texas T - Bone and Brazos Express corridors to link Central Texas .
In 2010 , Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) received a federal grant to study a high - speed rail corridor linking Oklahoma City with Dallas – Fort Worth .
The state also received another grant in 2011 to start engineering and environmental work on a high - speed link between Houston and Dallas .
Another study was being conducted in 2012 by TxDOT on a possible link between Houston and Austin .
While the preliminary work was in progress by TxDOT for the Houston to Dallas line , an unrelated project to build a high - speed railway between the two cities was announced in 2011 by a private company , Lone Star High Speed Rail .
The company was founded in 2009 by U.S. Japan High Speed Rail to market the use of N700-I bullet train in Texas .
In 2012 , the company with a new name , Texas Central Railway Company , announced that Central Japan Railway Company signed up to be the primary investor in the project with the total estimated cost of $ 10 billion to be privately funded .
The preliminary engineering , market and financing studies have been started for the service with maximum speed of 205 miles per hour and travel time of 90 minutes .
The plan was to seek additional investors in late 2012 , start the construction in 2014 , and begin the service in 2024 .
MIDWEST ILLINOIS AND THE MIDWEST
Section::::Midwest . Section::::Illinois and the Midwest .
The Midwest Regional Rail Initiative or Midwest Regional Rail System ( MRRI , MWRRI , or MWRRS ) is a plan to implement a to passenger rail network in the Midwestern United States , using Chicago , Illinois as a hub .
Primary routes would stretch across Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Minnesota , Ohio , and Wisconsin , possibly reaching Kentucky .
Secondary routes would operate at a slower speed across Missouri and Iowa , just touching Nebraska and nearly reaching Kansas .
With some upgrades already completed , trains regularly travel at for a significant distance in Michigan and for a short distance in Illinois .
Construction to provide higher - speed rail services between Chicago and St. Louis is taking place .
Illinois has been one of the most aggressive at pursuing highspeed rail , getting $ 1.1 billion in 2010 .
Governor Quinn said that " we want to make this corridor the pre - eminent one in America " .
The Chicago – St .
Louis rail line is being upgraded so passenger trains will be able to reach top speeds of between Carlinville , Illinois and Joliet , Illinois , with work scheduled to be completed in 2017 .
Plans have been such that they originated from the southern part of the state going up north .
The first installment of funds provided for construction between Alton and Lincoln .
In March 2011 , the next installment of funds ( $ 685 million ) provided for another section to go from Lincoln to Dwight .
In May 2011 , additional funds got allocated for further construction between Dwight and Joliet .
In June 2011 , Illinois commenced a study on implementing a 220 mph service between Chicago and Champaign - Urbana .
Legislation passed in 2013 gives the Illinois Tollway the power to build high - speed rail lines .
Plans called for eventually investing in true high - speed travel that would boost train speeds to .
Once the United States ' entire high - speed rail projects are built and thus connected to one another , Chicago will be the hub of the country 's high - speed rail network .
As a result of upgrades that begin in 2001 , trains in Michigan now travel at for between Porter , Indiana and Kalamazoo , Michigan .
On May 9 , 2011 , the state received $ 196.5 million to extend the higher speed rail upgrades from Kalamazoo an additional to Dearborn , Michigan .
The improvements would reduce the travel time from Chicago to Detroit to roughly 5 hours .
Michigan had received more than $ 161 million for high - speed rail and $ 40 million for Amtrak stations in Troy , Battle Creek and Dearborn .
About of the Michigan trains ' route passes through a congested area of northwestern Indiana along Lake Michigan 's south shore , where trains are regularly delayed by freight traffic .
In early 2010 the federal government authorized some $ 71.4 million for this project .
In Minnesota , there is a proposed high - speed rail service from Rochester to the Twin Cities called Zip Rail .
The trains would run on a dedicated track at speeds between and .
This is proposed to be a public – private partnership with public funding for capital costs and private investment for operations , maintenance and growing ridership .
THE SOUTHWEST Section::::The Southwest .
The cities of Denver , Las Vegas , Reno , Phoenix and Salt Lake City have recently formed the Western High Speed Rail Alliance , which is slated to spend $ 11 million over three years to study the feasibility of building railway links between the major cities of the southwestern United States , as well as linking to the California high - speed corridor via Las Vegas .
In June 2012 , the developer of XpressWest , formerly known as DesertXpress , announced that they expanded the planned high - speed rail network to include links to Phoenix , Salt Lake City and Denver .
The XpressWest plan was supported by the Western High Speed Rail Alliance .
FEDERAL PROPOSALS HIGH - SPEED RAIL INITIATIVES Section::::Federal Proposals High - Speed Rail Initiatives .
In February 2009 , as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act ( ARRA ) , Congress allocated $ 8 billion to be granted to states for intercity rail projects , with " priority to projects that support the development of intercity high speed rail service . " AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT OF 2009 STRATEGIC PLAN Section::::American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 .
Section::::Strategic plan .
In April 2009 , as required by ARRA , the FRA released its strategic plan describing the agency 's vision for developing high - speed rail in the United States .
As potential funding targets , the plan formally identified ten corridors ( all previously designated as high - speed rail corridors by several successive Secretaries of Transportation ) as well as the Northeast Corridor .
The ten designated high - speed corridors , together with the major cities served by each , are : * Southeast Corridor — Washington , Richmond , Newport News , Norfolk , Raleigh , Durham , Greensboro , Charlotte , Greenville , Atlanta , Columbia , Jacksonville
* California Corridor — Sacramento , San Francisco , San Jose , Fresno , Los Angeles , San Diego , Las Vegas * Pacific Northwest Corridor — Eugene , Portland , Seattle , Vancouver * South Central Corridor — Tulsa , Oklahoma City , Dallas , Austin , San Antonio , Texarkana , and Little Rock * Gulf Coast Corridor — Houston , New Orleans , Mobile * Chicago Hub Network — Chicago , Indianapolis , Detroit , Springfield , Cleveland , Toledo , Columbus , Dayton , Cincinnati , Kansas City , St. Louis , Louisville , Milwaukee , Minneapolis / St .
Paul
* Florida Corridor — Tampa , Orlando , Miami * Keystone Corridor — Pittsburgh , Philadelphia , Harrisburg
* Empire Corridor — Buffalo , Rochester , Syracuse , Utica , Schenectady and Albany * Northern New England Corridor — Boston ,
Portland
/ Auburn , Montreal , Springfield , New Haven
In addition to the $ 8 billion provided by ARRA , the plan predicted an additional $ 5 billion over 5 years would be made annually available for projects to " jump - start a potential world - class passenger rail system .
"
On June 17 , 2009 , the FRA advised grant applicants that evaluation for funding would be based on a proposal 's potential to make trips quicker and more convenient , reduce congestion on highways and at airports , and meet other environmental , energy , and safety goals .
2009
FEDERAL GRANT FUNDING Section::::2009
Federal Grant Funding .
The FRA received grant applications from states for stimulus funds and FY 2009 intercity capital funds in August and October 2009
Over $ 57 Billion in requests were filed from 34 states and on January 28 , 2010 31 states and 13 rail corridors
received funding .
The five areas receiving the most funding had originally been designated as high - speed rail corridors in October 1992 following passage of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 . !
Corridor ! !
Grant received ( in millions $ ) 2010
ALLOCATION Section::::2010
Allocation .
Congress allocated $ 2.5 billion in the FY 2010 budget and these funds were allocated on October 28 , 2010 .
Major allocations are listed below . !
Corridor ! !
Grant received ( in millions $ ) CANCELLATION OF FUNDS FOR WISCONSIN , OHIO , AND FLORIDA Section::::Cancellation of funds for Wisconsin , Ohio , and Florida .
On December 10 , 2010 , Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood announced $ 1.2 billion in grants for Wisconsin and Ohio would be removed , and redirected to other states .
This was due to opposition from governors - elect in both states , Scott Walker of Wisconsin and John Kasich of Ohio .
From the redirected funds , California received $ 624 million , Florida $ 342 million , Washington $ 161 million , and Illinois $ 42 million .
On February 16 , 2011 , Florida Governor Rick Scott formally announced that he would be rejecting all federal funds to construct a high - speed railway project in the state , thereby killing the Florida High Speed Rail project .
Governor Scott 's reasoning behind cancelling the project was that it would be " too costly to taxpayers " and that " the risk far outweigh[ed ] the benefits " .
Those funds were once again redistributed to other states .
2011 & 2012 PROPOSALS AND REJECTIONS OF FUNDING Section::::2011 & 2012 Proposals and Rejections of Funding .
In February 2011 , Vice President Biden proposed spending $ 53 billion on improved passenger rail service over six years .
The plan drew fire from majority Republicans in the House of Representatives , who preferred private investment rather than government investment .
No money was appropriated for passenger rail in either the FY 2011 or FY 2012 budgets .
PUBLIC OPINION OF HIGH SPEED RAIL PROPOSALS
Section::::Public opinion of High Speed Rail proposals .
In an Angus Reid poll released on April 6 , 2010 , 59 % of Americans were in favor of the proposed plan laid out in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Grants , while 26 % were opposed and the remaining 15 % were unsure .
When shown a map of the proposed high - speed lines , 32 % of the participants said they would rather take a high - speed train than fly , drive , or take the bus ( which would put high - speed rail a few percentage points behind driving but well ahead of flying and taking the bus ) .
Republicans and Independents who took part in the poll were more likely to state that they would rather drive ( 40 % of Republicans and 38 % of Independents ) , while 44 % of Democrats stated they would use the proposed high - speed rail system ( making it the most popular choice among Democrats ) .
Among Republicans , high - speed rail was competitive with air travel ( 24 % to 24 % ) , while high - speed rail was preferred to air travel among both Independents and Democrats .
SEE ALSO
* High - speed rail * Maglev train proposals in the United States * Rail transportation in the United States
* Speed limits in the United States ( rail ) * Turboliner * UAC TurboTrain NOTES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* High Speed Rail Overview - Federal Railroad Administration * US High Speed Rail Association