THE PRINCESS BRIDE
The Princess Bride is a 1973 fantasy romance novel by American writer William Goldman .
The book combines elements of comedy , adventure , fantasy , romantic love , romance , and fairy tale .
It is presented as an abridgment ( or " the good parts version " ) of a longer work by S. Morgenstern , and Goldman 's " commentary " asides are constant throughout .
It was originally published in the United States by Harcourt Brace , then later by Random House , while in the United Kingdom it was later published by Bloomsbury .
The book was adapted into a 1987 feature film directed by Rob Reiner from a screenplay written by Goldman himself .
William Goldman said , " I 've gotten more responses on The Princess Bride than on everything else I 've done put together — all kinds of strange outpouring letters .
Something in The Princess Bride affects people . "
A segment of the book was published as " Duel Scene ( From The Princess Bride ) " in the anthology
The Best of All Possible Worlds ( 1980 ) , which was edited by Spider Robinson .
In 2015 , a collection of essays on the novel and the film adaptation was published entitled The Princess Bride and Philosophy .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In a Renaissance - era world , a young woman named Buttercup lives on a farm in the country of Florin .
She abuses the farm hand Westley , calling him " farm boy " and demands that he perform chores for her .
Westley 's response to her demands is always " As you wish .
" She eventually realizes that what he is saying is , " I love you . "
After Buttercup realizes that she loves him and confesses her feelings , Westley leaves to seek his fortune so they can marry .
Buttercup later receives word that the Dread Pirate Roberts attacked his ship at sea .
Believing Westley dead , Buttercup sinks into despair .
Later she reluctantly agrees to marry Prince Humperdinck , heir to the throne of Florin .
Before the wedding , a trio of outlaws — the Sicilian criminal genius Vizzini , the Spanish fencing master Inigo Montoya , and the enormous and mighty Turkish wrestler Fezzik — kidnap Buttercup .
A masked man in black follows them across the sea and up the Cliffs of Insanity ,
whereupon Vizzini orders Inigo to stop him .
Before the man in black reaches the top of the cliff , a flashback of Inigo 's past reveals that he is seeking revenge on a six - fingered man who killed his father .
When the man in black arrives , Inigo challenges him to a duel .
The man in black wins the duel , but leaves the Spaniard alive .
Vizzini then orders Fezzik to kill the man in black .
His conscience compelling him , Fezzik throws a rock as a warning and challenges the man to a wrestling match .
The man in black accepts the challenge and chokes Fezzik until the giant blacks out .
He then catches up with Vizzini and proposes a battle of wits , guessing which cup of wine is poisoned with iocane powder .
They drink , and Vizzini dies , after which it is revealed that both cups were poisoned , but the man in black had developed an immunity to iocane powder .
With Prince Humperdinck 's rescue party in hot pursuit , the man in black flees with Buttercup .
He taunts Buttercup , claiming that women can not be trusted and that she must have felt nothing when her true love and sweetheart had died .
She shoves him into a gorge , yelling , " You can die , too , for all I care ! " , and hears him call , " As you wish ! "
from the bottom of the ravine .
She realizes he is Westley , and follows him down into the gorge , to find him battered but largely unhurt .
They travel through the Fire Swamp to evade Humperdinck 's party , Westley tells Buttercup about his experience with the Dread Pirate Roberts .
The Fire Swamp has many obstacles , such as Snow Sand and Rodents of Unusual Size .
Westley and Buttercup successfully navigate the Fire Swamp , but they are captured by Prince Humperdinck and his cruel six - fingered assistant , Count Tyrone Rugen .
Buttercup negotiates for Westley 's release and returns with Humperdinck to the palace to await their wedding .
Rugen follows Humperdinck 's secret instructions not to release Westley , but to take him to his underground hunting arena , the " Zoo of Death " .
Here , Rugen tortures and weakens Westley with his life - sucking invention , The Machine .
Meanwhile , Buttercup has nightmares regarding her marriage to the prince .
She expresses her unhappiness to Humperdinck , who proposes a deal wherein he will send ships to locate Westley , but if they fail to find him , Buttercup will marry him .
The novel reveals that , to start a war with the neighboring country of Guilder , Humperdinck himself had arranged Buttercup 's kidnapping and murder , but that he now believes that Buttercup dying on her wedding night will inspire his subjects to fight more effectively .
On the day of the wedding , Inigo meets again with Fezzik , who tells him that Count Rugen is the six - fingered man who killed his father .
Knowing that Vizzini is dead , they seek out the man in black hoping that his wits will help them plan a successful attack on the castle to find and kill Count Rugen .
Buttercup learns that Humperdinck never sent any ships , and taunts him with her enduring love for Westley .
Enraged , Humperdinck tortures Westley to death via The Machine .
Westley 's screams echo across the land , drawing Inigo and Fezzik to the Zoo of Death .
Finding Westley 's body , they enlist the help of a magician named Miracle Max who was fired by Humperdinck .
Max pronounces Westley to be merely " mostly dead " , and returns him to life ( out of a desire to get back at Humperdinck ) , though Westley remains partially paralyzed and weak .
Westley devises a plan to invade the castle during the wedding , and the commotion caused by this prompts Humperdinck to cut the wedding short .
Buttercup decides to commit suicide when she reaches the honeymoon suite .
Inigo pursues Rugen through the castle and kills him in a sword fight .
Westley reaches Buttercup before she commits suicide .
Still partially paralyzed , Westley bluffs his way out of a sword fight with Humperdinck , who shows himself to be a coward .
Instead of killing his rival , Westley decides to leave him alive .
The party then rides off into the sunset on four of the prince 's purebred white horses .
The story ends with a series of mishaps and the prince 's men closing in , but the author indicates that he believes that the group got away .
CONTEXT Section::::Context .
The Princess Bride is presented as Goldman 's abridgment of an older version by " S. Morgenstern " , which was originally a satire of the excesses of European royalty .
The book , in fact , is entirely Goldman 's work .
Morgenstern and the " original version " are fictitious and used as a literary device .
Goldman carried the joke further by publishing another book called The Silent Gondoliers ( explaining why the gondoliers of Venice no longer sing to their passengers ) under S. Morgenstern 's name .
Goldman 's personal life , as described in the introduction and commentary in the novel , is also fictional .
In The Princess Bride , Goldman claimed to have one son with his wife , Helen , a psychiatrist .
In reality , Goldman had two daughters , and his wife , Ilene , was not a psychiatrist .
The commentary is extensive , continuing through the text until the end .
The book 's actual roots are in stories Goldman told to his daughters ( aged 7 and 4 ) , one of whom had requested a story about " princesses " and the other " brides " .
Goldman describes the earliest character names from the " kid 's saga " as " silly names : Buttercup , Humperdinck " .
The countries are both named after coins .
The florin was originally an Italian gold coin minted in Florence , and later the name of various currencies and denominations .
The guilder was originally a Dutch gold coin , and later the name of various currencies used mainly in the Netherlands and its territories .
The two names are often interchangeable .
Goldman said he wrote the first chapter about Buttercup which ran for about 20 pages .
Then , he wrote the second chapter , " The Groom " , about the man she was going to marry ; Goldman only managed to write four pages before running dry .
Then he got the idea to write an abridged novel :
Goldman said he was particularly moved writing the scene where Westley dies .
REUNION SCENE Section::::Reunion scene .
In the novel 's commentary , Goldman writes that he added nothing to the " original " Morgenstern text .
He did write one original scene , a loving reunion between Buttercup and Westley , but , he said , his publisher objected to this addition .
He invites any reader who wants to read the " Reunion Scene " to write to the publisher ( formerly Harcourt Brace Jovanovich ; now Random House ) and request a copy .
Many readers wrote in to the publisher and did receive a letter , but instead of an extra scene , the letter detailed the ( obviously fictitious ) legal problems that Goldman and his publishers encountered with the Morgenstern estate and its lawyer , Kermit Shog .
This letter was revised and updated periodically ; the 1987 revision mentioned the movie , while the 25th Anniversary Edition publishes the letter with an addendum about Kermit 's lawyer granddaughter Carly .
The 30th Anniversary Edition has a footnote at this point saying that one can now find the three pages of the reunion scene online .
However , if one goes to the linked website , all they send via email is the text of the three letters .
BUTTERCUP 'S BABY Section::::Buttercup 's Baby .
The epilogue to some later editions of the novel , notably the 25th anniversary edition , mentions a sequel , Buttercup 's Baby , that was " having trouble getting published because of legal difficulties with S. Morgenstern 's estate " .
Later editions actually reprint Goldman 's " sample chapter " .
The chapter consists of a disjointed assemblage of stories about the quartet 's escape to " One Tree Island " , and the eventual kidnapping of Waverly ( Westley and Buttercup 's daughter ) by a skinless - faced " madman " who eventually throws her off a mountainside .
The chapter ends with Fezzik , Waverly 's appointed babysitter , leaping off the mountain to save her , and then cradling her to preserve her from the impact that seems certain to spell at least Fezzik 's doom .
Also noteworthy is a flashback to Inigo 's past , his training as a swordsman , and his one - time romantic love interest .
The 30th anniversary edition of The Princess Bride included hints to the sequel 's plot , and a promise to have the full version completed before a 50th anniversary edition ( 2023 ) .
In a January 2007 interview , Goldman admitted that he is having difficulty coming up with ideas for the story : ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The book was adapted into a 1987 feature film directed by Rob Reiner from a screenplay was written by Goldman himself .
Goldman partnered with Adam Guettel to create a musical version of the story with Goldman writing the book and Guettel writing the music , but the two parted ways on the project when Goldman demanded 75 % of the author 's royalties , though Guettel was writing both the music and the lyrics .
Guettel 's score was nearly complete , but it is unlikely to be heard beyond an orchestral suite performed at the Hollywood Bowl in 2006 .
In November 2013 , Disney Theatrical announced that it will be staging a new stage musical version , based on the novel and film screenplay .
In 2008 , Toy Vault , Inc. announced it was working on a Princess Bride – based card game due for release in the second quarter of 2008 .
It also announced that it is working on a board game , the second ever produced for this movie , after a simple board game included with some VHS releases .
Also in 2008 , the production company Worldwide Biggies released a computer game , The Princess Bride Game .
Several actors from the movie provided voices for their video game counterparts , including Mandy Patinkin as Inigo Montoya , Wallace Shawn as Vizzini , and Robin Wright Penn as Buttercup .
Sierra Online parodied the title of the novel in their computer game .
In 2014 , Game Salute licensed the tabletop game adaptation publishing rights to the Princess Bride ; a series of board and card games released later that year .
SEE ALSO
* Ruritanian romance REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS