WHO WANTS TO BE A MILLIONAIRE ?
( UK GAME SHOW )
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ?
is a British quiz show , created and produced by David Briggs , and made for the ITV network .
The show 's format , devised by Briggs , sees contestants taking on multiple - choice questions , based upon general knowledge , winning a cash prize for each question they answer correctly , with the amount offered increasing as they take on more difficult questions .
To assist each contestant who takes part , they are given three lifelines to use , may walk away with the money they already have won if they wish not to risk answering a question , and are provided with a safety net that grants them a guaranteed cash prize if they give an incorrect answer , provided they reach a specific milestone in the quiz .
The original series aired for 30 series and a total of 592 episodes , from 4 September 1998 to 11 February 2014 , and was presented by Chris Tarrant .
Over the course of its run , the original series had around five contestants walk away with the top cash prize of £ 1 million , and faced a number of controversies during its run , including an attempt to defraud the show of its top prize by a contestant .
The original format of the programme was tweaked in later years , changing the number of questions from fifteen to twelve and altering the payout structure as a result , and later incorporating a time limit .
Four years after the original series ended , ITV announced that the series would be revived , this time produced by Stellify Media , to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the programme .
The revived format was based upon the original design .
It was hosted by Jeremy Clarkson , filmed at dock10 studios and aired every evening between 6 May and 11 May 2018 .
On 14 September 2018 , ITV confirmed that Millionaire would return for a new series in early 2019 consisting of 10 episodes .
Clarkson will return as host .
On 4 December 2018 , ITV confirmed that Millionaire would return on 1 January 2019 .
The game show became one of the most significant shows in British popular culture , ranking 23rd in a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes .
It was the highest quiz programme to appear on the list .
Its success led to exports to many other countries , all of which follow the same general format , though with some versions including unique differences in gameplay and lifelines provided .
HISTORY CREATION Section::::History .
Section::::Creation .
The creation of the game show was led by David Briggs , assisted by Mike Whitehill and Steven Knight , who had helped him before with creating a number of promotional games for Chris Tarrant 's morning show on Capital FM radio .
The basic premise for the show was a twist on the conventional game - show genre of the time , with a focus towards the setup used in radio quizzes , in that the programme would have one contestant taking on the game and answering questions , but with the ability to pull out at any time , to have certain points in the quiz where once passed , they could have a set prize given to them if they should give a wrong answer , and be provided with special forms of assistance during their game .
During the design phase , the show was given the working title of " Cash Mountain " , before Briggs decided upon using the name of the song written by Cole Porter for the 1956 film High Society , as the show 's finalised title .
After presenting their idea to ITV , the broadcaster gave the green - light for production to begin on a series .
The set designed for Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ?
was conceived by British production designer Andy Walmsley , who focused the design towards making contestants feel uncomfortable , creating an atmosphere of tension similar to movie thriller .
The design was in stark contrast to the design of sets made for more typical game shows , which are designed to make contestants feel more at ease .
Walmsley 's design feature a central stage made primarily with Plexiglas , with a huge dish underneath covered in mirror paper , onto which two slightly - modified , -high Pietranera Arco All chairs were chosen for use by both the contestant and the host , each having an LG computer monitor directly facing each that would be used to display questions and other pertinent information .
The rest of the set featured seating spaced out around the main stage in a circle , with breaks in them to allow movement of people on and off the set .
The lighting rig used for the set was designed so as to allow only the lights to switch from illuminating the entire set , to focusing on the host and contestant on the main stage when a game was underway , but to include special lighting effects when the contestant reached higher cash prize amounts .
His overall conception would eventually prove to be a success , becoming one of the most reproduced scenic designs in television history .
The music provided for the show was composed by father - and - son duo Keith and Matthew Strachan .
The Strachans ' composition for the game show helped with Briggs ' tense game design , by providing the necessary drama and tension .
Unlike other game show musical scores , the music provided for Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? was designed to be played throughout the entire episode of the show .
The Strachans main theme for the game show was inspired from the " Mars " movement of Gustav Holst 's The Planets .
For the main game of the show , the pair designed the music to feature three variations , with the second and third compositions focused on emphasising the increased tension of the game - as a contestant made progress to higher cash amounts , the pitch of the music was increased by a semitone for each subsequent question .
On Game Show Network 's Gameshow Hall of Fame special , the narrator described the Strachan tracks as " mimicking the sound of a beating heart " , and stated that as the contestant works their way up the money ladder , the music is " perfectly in tune with their ever - increasing pulse " .
ORIGINAL SERIES
Section::::Original series .
With the show created , ITV assigned Chris Tarrant as its host , and set its premiere to 4 September 1998 .
The programme was assigned a timeslot of one hour , to provide room for three commercial breaks , with episodes produced by production company Celador .
Originally , the show was broadcast on successive evenings for around ten days , before the network modified its broadcast schedule to air it within a primetime slot on Saturday evenings , with occasional broadcasts on Tuesday evenings .
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ?
proved a ratings hit , pulling in average viewing figures of up to 19 million during its broadcast in 1999 , though such figures often occurred when the programme was allocated to a half - hour timeslot ; by 2003 , the viewing figures declined to an average of around 8 million viewers .
Over the course of his time presenting the game show , Tarrant developed a number of notable catchphrases , including " Is that your final answer ? " , " But we do n't want to give you that " and " All Vote Now ! "
with the latter often used to emphasize his wish to see contestants continue on and win more money and audience allowed to vote the answers in the lifeline used .
Since its launch , several individuals made claims over the origins of the format or elements of it , with each accusing Celador of breaching their copyrights .
In three cases , the matters could not be proven by the claimants - in 2002 , Mike Bull , a Southampton - based journalist , was given an out - of - court settlement when he claimed the authorship of lifelines was his work , though with a confidentiality clause attached ; in 2003 , Sydney resident John J. Leonard made claims in that the show 's format was based on one he had made of a similar nature , but without the concept of lifelines ; in 2004 , Alan Melville was given an out - of - court settlement after he claimed that the opening phrase " Who wants to be a millionaire ? " had been taken from document he sent to Granada Television , concerning his idea for a game show based on the lottery .
One of most significant claims Celador received against them was from John Bachini .
In 2002 , he started legal proceedings against the production company , ITV , and five individuals who had claimed they had created Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , stating that the idea from the show was taken from several elements he had created - a board game format he conceived in 1981 ; a two - page TV format , known as Millionaire , made in 1990 ; and the telephone mechanics for a TV concept he created in 1990 , BT Lottery .
In his claim , Bachini stated that he submitted documents for his TV concepts to Paul Smith , from a sister company of Celador 's , in March 1995 and again in January 1996 , and to Claudia Rosencrantz of ITV , also in January 1996 , accusing both of using roughly 90 % of the format for Millionaire in the pilot for the game show , including the use of twenty questions , lifelines and safety nets , although the lifelines were conceived under different names - Bachini claimed that he never coined the phrase " phone - a - friend " that Briggs designed in his format .
In response to this claim , Celdaor made a counter - claim that the franchise originated from the basic format idea conceived by Briggs .
The defendants in the claim took Bachini to a summary hearing but lost their right to have his claim dismissed .
Although Bachini won the right to go to trial , he was unable to after the hearing due to serious illness .
Celador eventually settled the matter with him out - of - court .
In March 2006 , Celador began procedures to sell the format of the show and all UK episodes , as part of their first step towards the sale of their formats divisions .
The purchase of both assets was made by Dutch company 2waytraffic , which were then passed on to Sony Pictures Entertainment in 2008 when it acquired 2waytraffic .
As the original series progressed , variations of the format were created , and screened as special episodes , including celebrity editions , games featuring couples as contestants , and episodes themed around special events such as Mother 's Day .
From April 2011 , only celebrity contestants appeared on the show , in special live editions that coincided with holidays , events and other notable moments , such as the end of a school term .
However , in 2012 , three special episodes , entitled " The People Play " , were broadcast for three consecutive nights between 9 and 11 July .
They featured standard contestants , with viewers at home allowed to play along .
The special was used three more times in 2013 , once on 7 May , and twice more on 21 May , before the special 's format was discontinued .
On 22 October 2013 , Tarrant announced that after fifteen years of hosting the programme , he would be leaving Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , which consequently led ITV to axe the programme once his contract was finished ; no more specials would be filmed after this announcement , leaving only those made before it to be aired as the final episodes .
After a few more celebrity editions of the game show , Tarrant hosted his final episode , a clip show entitled " Chris ' Final Answer " , which aired on 11 February 2014 .
REVIVAL
Section::::Revival .
In 2018 , ITV revived the show for a new series , as part of its 20th anniversary commemorations of the programme .
On 23 February , the broadcast put out a casting call for contestants who would appear on the game show .
On 9 March , Jeremy Clarkson was confirmed as the new host of the show .
On 13 April , the trailer for the revival premiered on ITV and confirmed that the show would return in May for a week - long run .
Shows aired from 5 May to the 11 May and were filmed live from dock10 in Greater Manchester .
The revival received mostly positive reviews from critics and fans , and , as well as high viewing figures , led to ITV renewing the show for another series with Clarkson returning as host .
It will air for ten episodes starting 1 January 2019 .
TOP PRIZE WINNERS Section::::Top prize winners .
Over the course of the programme 's broadcast history , it has had to date five winners who managed to successfully receive its top prize of £ 1 million .
They include : *
Judith Cynthia Aline Keppel , a cash - strapped garden designer at the time .
On 20 November 2000 , she became the first contestant to win the top prize , and is to date the only woman to have received it in the British original .
Following her success , Keppel later went onto become part of team of quiz experts for the BBC game show , Eggheads .
* David Edwards , a former physics teacher of Cheadle High School and Denstone College in Staffordshire .
On 21 April 2001 , he became the first man to win the top prize .
Following his success , Edwards went on to compete in both series of Are You an Egghead ? , in 2008 and 2009 respectively , but failed to win either series and secure a place as a panellist on Eggheads .
* Robert Kempe Brydges , an Oxford - educated banker from Holland Park , London .
On 29 September 2001 , he became the third person to win the show 's top prize .
* Pat Gibson , a multiple world champion Irish quiz player .
On 24 April 2004 , he became the fourth person to win the top prize , and is the only person in the show 's history to reach the final question with two lifelines still intact .
* Ingram Wilcox , a British quiz enthusiast .
On 23 September 2006 , he became the fifth person to win the top prize , and is to date , the most recent person to answer the show 's final question .
FORMAT AUDITIONING Section::::Format .
Section::::Auditioning .
Members of the public wishing to apply for the game show are provided with four options to choose form - calling / texting a premium - rate number ; submitting an application via the show 's ITV website , using a system of £ 1 " credits " ; taking part in a casting audition , held at various locations around the UK .
Once an application is made , production staff select an episode 's contestants through a combination of random selection , and a potential contestant 's ability to answer a set of test questions based on general knowledge .
GAME RULES Section::::Game Rules .
Once a contestant has auditioned for a part on the programme and filming takes place , they undertake a preliminary round entitled " Fastest Finger First " -
the group of contestants seeking a chance to take on the main game of the show , must answer a single question correctly but do so faster than their opponents .
Initially , the round required contestants to provide the correct answer to a question , but from the second series onwards , they are tasked with putting four answers in the correct order stated within the question ( i.e. earliest to latest ) .
The contestant who answers a question correctly and in the fastest time , moves on towards playing the main game ; in the event that no - one answers the question correctly , a new question is given , while if two or more contestants give the correct answer in the same amount of time , they undergo a tiebreaker question to determine who takes on the main game .
This round is primarily used to determine the new contestant for the main game , and can often be used more than once in an episode .
After completing the preliminary round , the contestant now begins taking on the main game , tackling a series of increasingly difficult question , which offering increasingly high sums of money , up to the top prize of £ 1 million .
The questions they undertake are randomly chosen from a list of generated questions based on general knowledge , with each consisting of four answers to choose from .
While undertaking questions , the contestant is allowed to use a set of lifelines to provide them assistance with a question at any time , and two safety nets - if a contestant gets a question wrong , but had reached a designated cash value during their game , they left with that amount as their prize .
Unlike other game shows , if a contestant is unsure about a question they are facing , they are allowed to leave the game at that point with the cash amount they had managed to win by that stage .
While the initial questions are generally easy , the subsequent ones after it require the contestant to confirm that their answer / decision is final by the host , at which point it is locked in and can not be reversed .
As a rule , the host is not shown the correct answer , until a contestant has given their answer .
If an episode is reaching the end of its allotted , an audio cue is triggered to highlight this ; contestants still playing the main game are left to wait until filming for the next episode begins to continue , though this is not the case for special editions of the show , such as celebrity episodes .
Over the course of the show 's history on British television , the format of the programme was altered in a number of aspects , mainly towards the setup of questions and the payout structure used in the game show , along with minor tweaks and changes in other aspects : * Between 1998 and 2007 , the format focused on contestants answering 15 questions , with two safety nets placed at £ 1,000 and £ 32,000 respectively , and the use of three standard lifelines .
The payout structure during these years was focused as follows : * Between 2007 and 2014 , the number of questions was reduced to 12 .
This alteration led to the second safety net being assigned to a new cash value , £ 50,000 , and the payout structure being changed as a result : *
In 2010 , the format was changed to include time limits on the questions , similar to the format from the US version , but with some differences .
The time limit was 15 seconds for the first two questions , and 30 seconds for the next 5 questions - questions 8–12 had no time limit .
The clock would start ticking down as soon as the answers appeared onscreen , and the contestant would have to give his / her 's final answer within the limit .
If they ran out of time it was treated as an incorrect answer .
The clock would briefly pause however if any lifeline was used .
It also added a fourth lifeline , Switch , which would be made available after passing question 7 and discontinued the preliminary round , meaning contestants were selected more traditionally by the production staff .
*
For the revived series in 2018 , the format returned to that used between 1998–2007 , including the payout structure , but with one noticeable difference .
Apart from the use of a brand new lifeline , Ask The Host , the series included a new rule in which upon reaching £ 1,000 , the contestant would be asked before each subsequent question if they would like to set the cash prize for that question as their second safety net , with it offered up to £ 500,000 .
There were also fewer contestants that played ' Fastest Finger First ' , with there now just being 6 instead of 10 .
LIFELINES Section::::Lifelines .
During a contestant 's game , they may make use of a set of lifelines to provide assistance on a question .
Throughout the course of the show 's history , these lifelines involve the following : *
50/50 : Two random incorrect answers are eliminated , leaving the correct answer and one incorrect answer , thus granting the contestant a 50/50 chance of answering a question correctly .
* Phone a Friend : The contestant calls one of their friends , and has 30 seconds to read the question and the possible answers to them .
The friend uses the leftover time to offer an answer .
Since 2018 , a member of the production team accompanies the friend to prevent cheating .
* Ask the Audience : Audience members use keypads to vote on what they believe to be the correct answer to the question .
The percentage of each option selected by the audience is displayed to the contestant after this vote .
* Switch ( 2002–03 , 2010–14 )
: The computer replaces one question with another of the same monetary value .
Any lifelines already used on the original question are not reinstated .
From 2010 to 2014 , this lifeline was earned after the contestant answered seven questions correctly .
* Ask the Host ( 2018 – ) : The host offers an answer to the question .
The host has no contact with outside sources and there is no time limit .
On this question , the answer is revealed to the contestant and host simultaneously .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes TEXT GAME ( 2004–2007 ) Section::::Text game ( 2004–2007 ) .
On 23 October 2004
the show included a new feature called the " Walkaway Text Game " .
The competition was offered to viewers at home to play the text game where they had to answer the question , if a contestant decided to walk home with the cash prize they have got , by choosing the letters ' A , B , C or D ' within 30 seconds to a specific mobile number .
The viewer who answered the question won £ 1,000 by having their entries selected randomly .
On 9 September 2006 , there were some changes .
The competition stayed the same but this time , they played it before some commercial breaks .
A question to which the contestant had given their final answer , but the correct answer had not yet been revealed , was offered as a competition to viewers .
Entry was via SMS text message at a cost of £ 1 per entry , and the competition ran through the commercial break , after which the answer was revealed and the game continued .
One viewer who answered the question correctly won £ 1,000 .
The text game ended on 28 July 2007 .
CONTROVERSIES INCORRECT ANSWER
TO QUESTION ACCEPTED Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Incorrect answer to question accepted .
In March 1999 , the Daily Mirror published a report that accused the show of allowing a contestant , Tony Kennedy , to win a question by giving an incorrect answer .
During Kennedy 's game , when he had reached the £ 64,000 question , he was asked " Theoretically , what is the minimum number of strokes with which a tennis player can win a set ? " , and given four possible answers - twelve , twenty four , thirty six , and forty eight .
Kennedy calculated that a player would need four shots to win a game , with six games in a set , giving an answer of twenty four , but the newspaper reported that this was incorrect , stating that a tennis player could win a game without playing a shot - if their opponent double - faulted on every serve , and the player aced each of their own serves , it would allow them to win with just 12 strokes .
Based on their findings , the production staff acknowledged the mistake and apologised for it , but allowed Kennedy to keep the prize money he won by the end of his game .
SCHEDULE RIGGING ALLEGATION Section::::Schedule rigging allegation .
When Judith Keppel 's victory as the first UK jackpot winner on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? was announced by ITV on the day of that the corresponding episode was to be broadcast , several allegations were made that Celador had rigged the show to spoil the BBC 's expected high ratings for the finale of One Foot in the Grave .
Richard Wilson , the lead star on the sitcom , was quoted in particular for saying that the broadcaster had " planned " the win , adding " it seems a bit unfair to take the audience away from Victor 's last moments on earth . "
David Renwick , writer of the sitcom , voiced annoyance that the episode would draw away interest from the sitcom 's finale , believing that a leaked press release on ITV 's announcement had been " naked opportunism " , and it " would have been more honourable to let the show go out in the normal way " , pointing out that it " killed off any element of tension or surprise in their own programme " , but that " television is all about ratings " .
Richard Webber 's account , in his 2006 book , cites " unnamed BBC sources " as those who " questioned the authenticity of Keppel 's victory " .
The allegations in turn led to eleven viewers making complaints against the quiz show , of a similar nature , to the Independent Television Commission ( ITC ) .
In response , ITV expressed distress to the allegations , claiming that it " undermined viewers ' faith in the programme . "
Leslie Hill , the chairman of ITV , wrote to Sir Christopher Bland , the chairman of the Board of Governors of the BBC , to complain about the issue .
The corporation apologised , saying that any suggestion of ' rigging ' " did not represent the official view of the BBC " , while the ITC 's investigation cleared the programme of any wrongdoing .
AMBIGUOUS
QUESTION
Section::::Ambiguous question .
On 11 February 2006 , celebrity couple Laurence Llewelyn - Bowen and his wife Jackie took on the game show to raise money for their chosen charity - The Shooting Star Children 's Hospice .
Having reached the final question of the quiz , they were asked " Translated from the Latin , what is the motto of the United States ? " , to which the Bowens answered with " In God , We Trust " , only to learn that the question 's correct answer was " One Out of Many " - the English translation for the Latin E pluribus unum .
However , Celador later admitted that the question had been ambiguous and not fair to the pair - although E pluribus unum is considered the de facto motto of the United States , it was never legally declared as such ; In God , We Trust is the official motto of the country since 1956 , although it is not translated from any form of Latin .
Following this revelation , the production company invited the Bowens back to tackle a new question , with their original winnings reinstated ; the couple chose not to risk the new question , and left with £ 500,000 for their charity .
INGRAM CHEATING SCANDAL Section::::Ingram cheating scandal .
In September 2001 , British Army Major Charles Ingram became a contestant on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , joined by his wife Diana , and a close friend and college lecturer , Tecwen Whittock .
After the first day of filming , the group devised a scheme that would allow Ingram to win the £ 1 million cash prize when he returned for the second day of recording , on 10 September - for each question he faced , the correct answer would be signalled to Ingram by a cough made by Whittock ; Ingram would differentiate the way he received this to avoid making the scheme too obvious , such as reading aloud all four answers , or dismissing an answer and then choosing it again later .
Although the scheme proved successful , by the time he had reached the final questions , production staff off - stage had become suspicious over the amount of background noise being made by Whittock 's coughing , while noting that Ingram seemed to show no specialist knowledge of any subjects he faced with each question .
After the second day of recording ended , the production staff ordered an immediate investigation on the grounds that cheating had occurred , suspending the broadcast of both episodes that had been filmed .
Ingram was subsequently informed that he was being investigated for cheating and would not receive his winnings .
While reviewing the recording , production staff began to see a pattern between Whittock 's coughing , and Ingram 's unusual behaviour when he answered questions ; at one point , they noticed Ingram gave an answer when Diana had coughed after he read it aloud .
By this point , Celador was convinced that cheating had occurred , and the matter was handed over to police .
Both the Ingrams and Whittock were charged with " procuring the execution of a valuable security by deception " , and taken to Southwark Crown Court in 2003 .
During the four - week long trial , the Prosecution provided evidence towards the charges , which included a recording of Ingram 's second day on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? , pager telephone records for a previous scheme the group intended to use , before deeming it too complicated - a system of four pagers intended to be hidden on Ingram 's body , in which a pager 's vibrations signalled the correct answer - and testimony from one of the production staff and a " Fastest Finger " contestant attending the recording , Larry Whitehurst .
Although the Defence provided evidence claiming Whittock 's coughing was a result of dust allergies and a hay fever he was suffering from , and Whittock himself testified against the accusations , the Prosecution refuted these claims with their evidence , including footage that showed Whittock stopped coughing when he became a contestant after Ingram .
On 7 April 2003 , the group were found guilty , with all three given suspended prison sentences and fines , with the Ingrams later ordered to pay legal costs within two months of the trial 's conclusion .
On 24 July 2003 , the British Army ordered Charles Ingram to resign his commission as a Major , in the wake of the trial .
In the aftermath of the trial , the scandal became the subject of a documentary entitled Millionaire : A Major Fraud , presented by Martin Bashir and broadcast on 21 April 2003 , with a follow - up two weeks later entitled Millionaire : The Final Answer .
The documentary featured excerpts from the recording that had been enhanced for the Ingrams ' trial , footage of the actions made by Ingram 's wife in the audience , and interviews with production staff and some of the contestants who had been present during the recording .
None of the defendants in the case took part , with Ingram later describing Major Fraud and a subsequent programme of the matter , shown on ITV2 , as " one of the greatest TV editing con tricks in history " .
Chess grandmaster James Plaskett later wrote an essay arguing in favour of the group 's innocence ; journalists Bob Woffinden , and Jon Ronson , each wrote a piece influenced by this essay , with Woffinden collaborating with Plaskett on a book entitled Bad Show :
The Quiz , The Cough , The Millionaire Major , published in 2015 , arguing that Ingram 's appearance on the show coinciding with Whittock 's was " chance " .
A play based upon the events of the scandal was written by James Graham , entitled Quiz , and was performed from 3 November 2017 to 9 December 2017 , before being performed in the West End from 31 March 2018 to 16 June 2018 .
PHONE - A - FRIEND Section::::Phone - a - Friend .
The Phone - a - Friend lifeline provided multiple instances of controversy during the show 's run .
A 2002 edition of the Daily Mail reported that many contestants had selected strangers who were " contacts among the quizzing fraternity " to act as their Phone - a - Friends .
Specifically , game show champion Daphne Fowler was approached by a man she had not previously met and asked if she would be his lifeline in exchange for £ 200 .
Fowler refused , adding : " I thought a fair price would be a quarter of whatever the man won , so if I helped him get from £ 32,000 to £ 64,000 I would expect to get £ 16,000 .
" The man was later revealed by ITV sources not to have made it onto the programme .
In March 2007 various UK newspapers reported that an organised syndicate had been getting quiz enthusiasts onto the show in return for a percentage of their winnings .
The person behind the syndicate was Keith Burgess from Northern Ireland .
Burgess admitted to helping around 200 contestants to appear on the show since 1999 ; he estimates those contestants to have won around £ 5,000,000 .
The show producers are believed to have been aware of this operation , with Burgess stating : "
The show knows about me and these types of syndicates , but they cover it up to keep the show going . "
An earlier version of a Phone a Friend syndicate was reported in the Northampton Chronicle and Echo during 2003 .
Paul Smith , the Managing Director of Celador Productions , stated : " We are aware of Paddy Spooner and what people similar to him are doing , and we have made a priority of changing our question procedure .
We are confident we have now made it impossible for anyone to manipulate the system . "
Since then , the options of people that can be called have a picture of themselves shown on - air .
REFERENCES FOOTNOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS