BASA ( FISH )
Basa ( Pangasius bocourti ) is a species of catfish in the family Pangasiidae .
Basa are native to the Mekong and Chao Phraya basins in Indochina .
These fish are important food fish with an international market .
They are often labelled in North America and Australia as " basa fish " , " swai " , or " bocourti " .
In the UK all species of Pangasius may legally be described as " river cobbler " , " cobbler " , " basa " , " pangasius " , " panga " , or any of these with the addition of " catfish " .
In the rest of Europe , these fish are commonly marketed as " pangasius " or " panga " .
Other related shark catfish may occasionally be incorrectly labeled as basa fish , including P. hypophthalmus ( iridescent shark ) and P. pangasius ( yellowtail catfish ) .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The body of the basa is stout and heavy .
The rounded head is broader than it is long , with the blunt snout having a white band on its muzzle .
This species grows to a maximum length of .
ECOLOGY AND LIFECYCLE Section::::Ecology and Lifecycle .
Basa fish feed on plants .
They spawn at the onset of flood season and the young are first seen in June , averaging about by mid - June .
MARKET " CATFISH WAR " IN THE U.S. Section::::Market .
Section::::"Catfish war " in the U.S ..
In 2002 , the United States accused Vietnam of dumping catfish , namely P. bocourti and P. hypophthalmus , on the American market , arguing that the Vietnamese exporters , who are subsidised by Vietnam 's government , constituted unfair competition .
With pressures from the U.S. catfish industry , the United States Congress passed a law in 2003 preventing the imported fish from being labelled as catfish , as well as imposing additional tariffs on the imported fish .
Under the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ruling , only species from the family Ictaluridae can be sold as true catfish .
As a result , the Vietnamese exporters of this fish now label their products sold in the U.S. as basa fish or bocourti .
At the height of the " catfish war " , U.S. catfish farmers and others were describing the imported catfish as an inferior product .
However , Mississippi State University researchers found imported basa were preferred three - to - one to US catfish in a small ( 58 testers ) blind taste test .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Basa has become common in the UK as " Vietnamese river cobbler " , " river cobbler " , or " basa " .
It is mainly sold by large supermarkets , in both fresh and frozen forms , as a more reasonably priced alternative to popular white fish such as cod or haddock .
Young 's uses it in some of its frozen fish products , under the name basa .
The import of basa is subject to the same stringent EU regulations as other food imports , as set out in the CBI pangasius product fact sheet UK Trading Standards officers said that cobbler was being fraudulently sold as cod by some fish - and - chip retailers to take advantage of the much lower price of cobbler , which was about half that of cod .
This practice was highlighted by the successful prosecution of two retailers , using DNA evidence , in 2009 and 2010 .
Sometimes pangasius is described , legally , simply as " fish " , as in " fish and chips " .
ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH CONCERNS
Section::::Environmental and health concerns .
Several environmental organisations concerned with marine ecosystems have raised concerns about basa .
OceanWise , an environmental organisation associated with the Vancouver Aquarium , has flagged farmed basa for its potential pollution of ecosystems and interference with wild species .
It writes , " Open cage farming in Southeast Asia is associated with disease transfer to wild basa .
There are also concerns about feed quality , farm operating standards and the biological impact of using wild stock for culturing .
"
The Monterey Bay Aquarium currently lists the basa in its " red flag " or
" avoid " category .
Both groups cite USA farmed catfish as a more sustainable alternative .
Tests by Asda and Tesco in the UK have found no trace of toxic contaminants .
Test from AQIS found trace levels of malachite green , but no other contaminants .
One case has been reported of a person without a general fish allergy having an anaphylactic reaction to pangasius .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Kulabtong , Sitthi .
"
Biology and Culture Techniques of Bocourti Catfish , Pangasius bocourti Sauvage , 1880 in Thailand " .
Veridian E - Journal , Silpakorn University , 5(3 ) : 411–419 , 2012 .
* Heavy Reham , A. Amin .
Heavy metal residues in imported frozen fish and Pangasius hypophthalmus ( Basa ) fish fillets
* Fish Molee , a popular Kerala fish curry made with Basa