HAIRLESS DOG
A hairless dog is a dog with a genetic disposition for hairlessness and hairloss .
There are two known types of genetic hairlessness , a dominant and a recessive type .
DOMINANT GENES Section::::Dominant genes .
Dogs with dominant genes for hairlessness can pass their attributes to their offspring in natural conditions , that is , not under the control of humans .
Therefore , it is possible that , in some parts of the world , groups of hairless dogs came into existence without human intervention .
Later in history , people developed these groups into a recognized breed .
Worldwide recognized breeds at this time
are the Chinese Crested Dog , the Mexican Hairless Dog , and the Peruvian Hairless Dog .
The Argentine Pila Dog is not a registered hairless dog breed .
Other breeds that were said to have existed in the past were the Abyssinian Sand Terrier ( also known as the African Hairless Dog , Egyptian Hairless Dog and Elephant Dog , the last being a reference to its grey skin ) and the Siamese Hairless Dog .
This type of genetic structure is said to be homozygous pre - natal lethal for the dominant gene .
This means that zygotes with two dominant genes can not live .
Therefore , all dominant - hairless dogs have a heterozygous gene structure .
This allows a homozygous recessive type to persist , which is the coated variety .
For dogs where hairlessness is a dominant gene , hairless to hairless matings will on average produce 66.6 % hairless and 33.3 % coated puppies .
For hairless to coated matings , there will be an average of 50%/50 % coated to hairless ratio , while for coated to coated matings , all puppies will be coated
The Chinese Crested Dog 's coated variety is called a " Powderpuff , " and is a recognized type .
The coated variety of Xoloitzcuintli ( Mexican Hairless Dog ) is recognized as a valid type for conformation showing with some registries , including the AKC .
Coated varieties of the other breeds may or may not be recognized as valid varieties for conformation showing , depending on the breed and show or registry organization .
RECESSIVE GENES Section::::Recessive Genes .
The American Hairless Terrier ( AHT ) is the only dog breed with a recessive hairless gene .
Unlike the hairlessness resulting from dominant genes , the AHT has no dental , skin or other health issues associated with the dominant gene hairless breeds .
The only AHT distinguishing characteristics from its coated Rat Terrier foundation stock is its hairlessness .
Other distinguishing features , such as colors and size , have been breeder - induced .
HAIRLESS
DOG BREEDS
* Chinese Crested Dog
* Mexican Hairless Dog ( Xoloitzcuintli )
* Peruvian Hairless Dog
* Ecuadorian Hairless Dog ( Perro calvo dorado ecuatoriano )
* American Hairless Terrier NON - REGISTERED BREEDS
*
American Crested Sand
Terrier
*
Argentine Pila Dog GALLERY REFERENCES