HYDROPHIS BELCHERI
Hydrophis belcheri , commonly known as the faint - banded sea snake or Belcher 's sea snake , is an extremely venomous species of elapid sea snake .
It has a timid temperament and would normally have to be subjected to severe mistreatment before biting .
Usually those bitten are fishermen handling nets , although only one - quarter of those bitten are envenomated since the snake rarely injects much of its venom .
Because of this , and its docile nature , it is generally not regarded as very dangerous .
Although not much is known about the venom of this species , its LD toxicity in mice has been determined to be 0.24 mg / kg when delivered intramuscularly .
Belcher 's sea snake , which many times is mistakenly called the hook - nosed sea snake ( Enhydrina schistosa ) , has been erroneously popularized as the most venomous snake in the world , due to Ernst and Zug 's published book " Snakes in Question : The Smithsonian Answer Book " from 1996 .
Associate Professor Bryan Grieg Fry , a prominent venom expert , has clarified the error : " The hook nosed myth was due to a fundamental error in a book called ' Snakes in question ' .
In there , all the toxicity testing results were lumped in together , regardless of the mode of testing ( e.g. subcutaneous vs. intramuscular vs intravenous vs intraperitoneal ) .
As the mode can influence the relative number , venoms can only be compared within a mode .
Otherwise , its apples and rocks . " .
Studies on mice and human cardiac cell culture shows that venom of the inland taipan , drop by drop , is the most toxic among all snakes ; land or sea .
The most venomous sea snake is actually Dubois ' seasnake ( Aipysurus duboisii " ) .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The belcher 's sea snake is of moderate size , ranging from 0.5 to 1 meter ( about 20–40 inches ) in adult length .
Its thin body is usually chrome yellowish in colour with dark greenish crossbands .
The dorsal pattern does not extend onto the venter .
The head is short and has bands of the same colours .
Its mouth is very small but suitable for aquatic life .
Its body , when viewed out of water , appears to have a faint yellow colour .
Its scales are different from most other snakes in that they overlap each other .
Each dorsal scale has a central tubercle .
The body is strongly laterally compressed posteriorly .
The ventral scales are very narrow , only slightly wider than the dorsal scales .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Indian Ocean ( Philippines : Visayan area , Panay ; New Guinea ) , Gulf of Thailand , Australia ( North Territory , Queensland ) , Solomon Islands [ McCoy 2000 ] .
Especially around the Ashmore Reef in the Timor Sea off northwest Australia .
Also New Caledonia TAXONOMIC HISTORY Section::::Taxonomic history .
This species was first described and named by John Edward Gray in 1849 .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Hydrophis comes from Greek ὕδωρ , hydōr = water + ὄφις , ophis = serpent .
The specific name , belcheri , commemorates the Nova Scotian , Royal Navy Captain , later Admiral , Sir Edward Belcher KCB , RN ( 1799 - 1877 ) who collected the holotype .
COMMON NAMES
Section::::Common names .
H. belcheri is also referred to as Belcher 's ocean snake .
Belcher 's sea snake has been mistakenly called the " hook - nosed sea snake " ( which is actually Enhydrina schistosa ) and in one instance was called the " blue - banded sea snake " ( which is actually one common name for Hydrophis cyanocinctus ) .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Boulenger GA ( 1896 ) .
Catalogue of the Snakes in the British Museum ( Natural History ) .
Volume III .
, Containing the Colubridæ ( Opisthoglyphæ and Proteroglyphæ ) ,
... London : Trustees of the British Museum ( Natural History ) .
( Taylor and Francis , printers ) .
xiv + 727 pp .
+ Plates I- XXV .
( Distira belcheri , pp .
296–297
+ Plate XVII , Figure 2 ) .
* Gray JE ( 1849 ) .
Catalogue of the Specimens of Snakes in the Collection of the British Museum .
London :
Trustees of the British Museum .
( Edward Newman , printer ) .
xv + 125 pp .
( Aturia belcheri , new species , p. 46 ) .
* McCarthy CJ , Warrel DA ( 1991 ) .
" A collection of sea snakes from Thailand with new records of Hydrophis belcheri ( Gray ) " .
Bull .
British Mus .
Nat .
Hist .
( Zool . ) 57 ( 2 ) : 161 - 166 .
* McCoy M ( 2000 ) .
Reptiles of the Solomon Islands .
Kuranda , Australia : ZooGraphics .
CD - ROM .