SHOULDER GIRDLE
The shoulder girdle or pectoral girdle is the set of bones in the appendicular skeleton which connects to the arm on each side .
In humans it consists of the clavicle and scapula ; in those species with three bones in the shoulder , it consists of the clavicle , scapula , and coracoid .
Some mammalian species ( such as the dog and the horse ) have only the scapula .
The pectoral girdles are to the upper limbs as the pelvic girdle is to the lower limbs ; the girdles are the parts of the appendicular skeleton that anchor the appendages to the axial skeleton .
In humans , the only true anatomical joints between the shoulder girdle and the axial skeleton are the sternoclavicular joints on each side .
No anatomical joint exists between each scapula and the rib cage ; instead the muscular connection or physiological joint between the two permits great mobility of the shoulder girdle compared to the compact pelvic girdle ; because the upper limb is not usually involved in weight bearing , its stability has been sacrificed in exchange for greater mobility .
In those species having only the scapula , no joint exists between the forelimb and the thorax , the only attachment being muscular .
IN HUMANS Section::::In humans .
The shoulder girdle is the anatomical mechanism that allows for all upper arm and shoulder movement in humans .
The shoulder girdle consists of five muscles that attach to the clavicle and scapula and allow for the motion of the sternoclavicular joint ( connection between sternum and clavicle ) and acromioclavicular joint ( connection between clavicle and scapula ) .
The five muscles that comprise the function of the shoulder girdle are the trapezius muscle ( upper , middle , and lower ) , levator scapulae muscle , rhomboid muscles ( major and minor ) , serratus anterior muscle , and pectoralis minor muscle .
JOINTS Section::::Joints .
The shoulder girdle is a complex of five joints that can be divided into two groups .
Three of these joints are true anatomical joints while two are physiological ( " false " ) joints .
Within each group , the joints are mechanically linked so that both groups simultaneously contribute to the different movements of the shoulder to variable degrees .
In the first group , the scapulohumeral or glenohumeral joint is the anatomical joint mechanically linked to the physiological subdeltoid or suprahumeral joint ( the " second shoulder joint " )
so that movements in the suprahumeral joint results in movements in the glenohumeral joint .
In the second group , the scapulocostal or scapulothoracic joint is the important physiological joint that can not function without the two anatomical joints in the group , the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints , i.e. they join both ends of the clavicle .
GLENOHUMERAL JOINT
Section::::Glenohumeral joint .
The glenohumeral joint is the articulation between the head of the humerus and the glenoid cavity of the scapula .
It is a ball and socket type of synovial joint with three rotatory and three translatory degree of freedom .
The glenohumeral joint allows for adduction , abduction , medial and lateral rotation , flexion and extension of the arm .
ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT Section::::Acromioclavicular joint .
The acromioclavicular joint is the articulation between the acromion process of the scapula and the lateral end of the clavicle .
It is a plane type of synovial joint .
The acromion of the scapula rotates on the acromial end of the clavicle .
STERNOCLAVICULAR JOINT Section::::Sternoclavicular joint .
The sternoclavicular joint is the articulation of the manubrium of the sternum and the first costal cartilage with the medial end of the clavicle .
It is a saddle type of synovial joint but functions as a plane joint .
The sternoclavicular joint accommodates a wide range of scapula movements and can be raised to a 60 ° angle .
SCAPULOCOSTAL JOINT
Section::::Scapulocostal joint .
The scapulocostal joint ( also known as the scapulothoracic joint ) is a physiological joint formed by an articulation of the anterior scapula and the posterior thoracic rib cage .
It is musculotendinous in nature and is formed predominantly by the trapezius , rhomboids and serratus anterior muscles .
The pectoralis minor also plays a role in its movements .
The gliding movements at the scapulocostal joint are elevation , depression , retraction , protraction and superior and inferior rotation of the scapula .
Disorders of the scapulocostal joint are not very common and usually restricted to snapping scapula .
SUPRAHUMERAL JOINT Section::::Suprahumeral joint .
The suprahumeral joint ( also known as the subacromial joint ) is a physiological joint formed by an articulation of the coracoacromial ligament and the head of the humerus .
It is formed by the gap between the humerus and the acromion process of the scapula .
This space is filled mostly by the subacromial bursa and the tendon of supraspinatus .
This joint plays a role during complex movements while the arm is fully flexed at the glenohumeral joint , such as changing a lightbulb , or painting a ceiling .
MOVEMENTS Section::::Movements .
From its neutral position , the shoulder girdle can be rotated about an imaginary vertical axis at the medial end of the clavicle ( the sternoclavicular joint ) .
Throughout this movement the scapula is rotated around the chest wall so that it moves laterally and the glenoid cavity is rotated 40–45 ° in the horizontal plane .
When the scapula is moved medially it lies in a frontal plane with the glenoid cavity facing directly laterally .
At this position , the lateral end of the clavicle is rotated posteriorly so that the angle at the acromioclavicular joint opens up slightly .
When the scapula is moved laterally it lies in a sagittal plane with the glenoid cavity facing anteriorly .
At this position , the lateral end of the clavicle is rotated anteriorly so that the clavicle lies in a frontal plane .
While this slightly closes the angle between the clavicle and the scapula , it also widens the shoulder .
The scapula can be elevated and depressed from the neutral position to a total range of ; at its most elevated position the scapula is always tilted so that the glenoid cavity is facing superiorly .
During this tilting , the scapula rotates to a maximum angle of 60 ° about an axis passing perpendicularly through the bone slightly below the spine ; this causes the inferior angle to move and the lateral angle .
INJURY
Section::::Injury .
Shoulders are a common place for tissue injuries , especially if the person plays overhead sports such as tennis , volleyball , baseball , swimming , etc .
According to Bahr 's major injury related statistics , shoulder dislocations or subluxations account for 4 % of injuries in adults ages 20–30 and 20 % of shoulder injuries are fractures .
Damage to the shoulder and adjacent features can fluctuate in severity depending on the person 's age , sport , position , recurring shoulder dysfunction , and many other factors .
Some other common shoulder injuries are fractures to any shoulder girdle bones
i.e. clavicle , ligamentous sprains such as AC joint or GH ligaments , rotator cuff injuries , different labral tears , and other acute or chronic conditions related to shoulder anatomy .
Shoulder girdle pain can be acute or chronic and be due to a number of causes .
Inflammation or injury of associated tendons , bone , muscles , nerves , ligaments , and cartilage can all cause pain .
Also , past injury compensation , and stress can result in complicated shoulder pain .
DISORDERS
WINGED SCAPULA
Section::::Disorders .
Section::::Winged Scapula .
A Winged Scapula occurs for different reasons the two main reasons : palsy of the serratus anterior caused by a lesion on the Long Thoracic Nerve which is the more common or a lesion on the Spinal accessory nerve causing palsy in the trapezius muscle .
These lesions can be caused by major trauma to the nerve , surgical procedure complication , as well as from under use of the serratus anterior or trapezius .
The occurrence of this can be Unilateral or Bilateral both scapulae do not have to both be affected .
SERRATUS ANTERIOR MUSCLE PALSY
Section::::Serratus Anterior Muscle Palsy .
As mentioned it is caused by a lesion on the long thoracic nerve this leads to a weakening of the serratus anterior on the medial border of the scapula .
This separates Long thoracic nerve from spinal accessory nerve lesions .
TRAPEZIUS MUSCLE PALSY Section::::Trapezius Muscle Palsy .
Major Cause is a lesion on the Spinal Accessory Nerve this palsy presents differently than a lesion to the LTN .
The issues caused in the trapezius show as a more mild detachment of the medial border of the scapula and a slide laterally away from the thoracic vertebrate .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
The shoulder girdle demonstrates an enormous variation in amniotes ( animals adapted to a terrestrial life ) , both among extant species and along evolutionary lines , and determining homologies for individual pectoral elements is difficult .
Except for the sternum , these elements were , however , present in early bony fishes before there were even limbs .
In digitless tetrapods the cleithrum , clavicle , and interclavicle are dermal and linked to the caudal part of the head while the humerus articulates with a small scapulocoracoid bone .
As the first digits appeared , the pectoral structure lost its direct connection to the head skeleton while the scapulocoracoid grew more prominent and started to face laterally .
In more derived tetrapods the dermal part of the girdle was gradually reduced and the scapulocoracoid split into a dorsal scapula and a ventral coracoid .
IN
DINOSAURS Section::::In dinosaurs .
In dinosaurs the main bones of the pectoral girdle were the scapula ( shoulder blade ) and the coracoid , both of which directly articulated with the clavicle .
The clavicle was present in saurischian dinosaurs but largely absent in ornithischian dinosaurs .
The place on the scapula where it articulated with the humerus ( upper bone of the forelimb ) is the called the glenoid .
The scapula served as the attachment site for a dinosaur 's back and forelimb muscles .
IN PRIMATES Section::::In primates .
Chimpanzees are far better adapted to brachiation than modern humans .
Their clavicles possess a cranially oriented twist on the acromial end , conducive to better force transfer through it - a very important function in arboreal locomotion .
Chimpanzee scapulas also possess a considerably larger supraspinous fossa , allowing for a larger supraspinatus muscle .
Through the process of evolution , humans have lost the Atlantoclavicularis muscle , originating on the atlas of the vertebral column , and inserting onto the acromial clavicle .
This muscle acts to elevate the clavicle .
SEE ALSO * Shoulder * Human skeletal changes due to bipedalism NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING