MOSSBERG MAVERICK
The Maverick 88 is a pump action shotgun manufactured by O.F. Mossberg & Sons .
The Maverick 88 is virtually identical to the Mossberg 500 .
Factory Maverick 88s feature a black , synthetic only stock and forearm , cylinder bore ( although interchangeable chokes are available on some hunting models ) , and cross - bolt safety .
Most accessories are interchangeable with a Mossberg 500 .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The Maverick line of shotguns is assembled in Eagle Pass , Texas , using some parts manufactured outside of the United States , mainly from Mexico , which contributes to their relatively lower price in comparison to the Mossberg 500 series of shotguns .
The trigger groups will not interchange between Maverick 88 and Mossberg 500 models , but the majority of other parts , including barrels , stocks , and magazine tubes , will ( the barrel and magazines must be the same length ) .
Maverick 88s do not come equipped with any sling mounts , as the Mossberg 500 series does .
Maverick 88 shotguns feature a trigger guard - mounted cross - bolt safety as opposed to a top tang safety , which is used on the Mossberg 500 series .
Early Model 88s were equipped with a single slide rail , but this was updated to a dual slide rail in 1990 .
Also the Maverick 88 does not have a receiver top pre - drilled and tapped for a Weaver scope mount rail .
Maverick 88s are factory finished with steel bluing only , whereas Mossberg 500s have factory - blued , nickel - plated or parkerized ( barrel / magazine ) options .
The are four models of the 88 , All - Purpose , Security , Security w/ Top - Folding Stock and Slug .
The All Purpose model comes in 12 gauge with a 28 inch barrel , or 20 gauge with 26 inch barrel or 22 inch barrel with vent rib ( youth version ) .
Security comes comes with an -inch or 20-inch non - vent - rib barrel .
The Security w/ Top - Folding Stock comes in -inch only , it features a pistol grip .
The Slug model comes with 24 inch barrels and is available Cylinder Bore or Fully Rifled Bore .
Both feature adjustable rifle sights , The 88s have a cartridge capacity of 5 in the tube magazine and 1 in the chamber and can not have their magazines easily extended without machining .
Magazine capacity is further limited , if loading 3-inch shells , to 4 in the tube magazine and 1 in the chamber .
The All - Purpose models comes from the factory with a black synthetic stock and fore - end .
Security models come in black or Flat Dark Earth stock and fore - end .
Sling swivels are not included .
However , they can be installed to allow the use of a sling .
SEE ALSO * Serbu Super - Shorty Compact derivative of the Mossberg Maverick REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS *
Official Maverick 88 product webpage * Official Mossberg product webpage