ENGLISH BREAKFAST TEA English breakfast tea is a traditional blend of teas originating from Assam , Ceylon , and Kenya .
It is one of the most popular blended teas , common in British tea culture .
English breakfast tea is a black tea blend usually described as full - bodied , robust , rich and blended to go well with milk and sugar , in a style traditionally associated with a hearty English breakfast .
The black teas included in the blend vary , with Assam , Ceylon and Kenyan teas predominating , and Keemun sometimes included in more expensive blends .
Common brands of English breakfast tea include Twinings , Dilmah , Taylors of Harrogate , Ahmad Tea , Tetley and PG Tips .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Accounts of its origins vary .
Drinking a blend of black teas for breakfast is indeed a longstanding British custom .
The practice of referring to such a blend as " English breakfast tea " appears to have originated not in England but America , as far back as Colonial times .
An additional account ( referencing a period - era Journal of Commerce article ) dates the blend to 1843 and a tea merchant named Richard Davies in New York City .
Davies , an English immigrant , started with a base of Congou and added a bit of Pekoe and Pouchong .
It sold for 50 cents a pound , and its success led to imitators , helping to popularize the name .
An investigation to find this source failed to locate it but did come upon an earlier reference to the same story in an 1876 edition of the Daily Alta California , citing " a New York commercial journal " and dating the tea 's origin to 1844 .
In an 1884 American publication it was noted that " Bohea teas ( are ) known to trade in this country as " English Breakfast " tea , from its forming the staple shipment to England " .
Accounts of the emergence of the blend in the UK give its origins in Scotland in 1892 , where it was initially known simply as " breakfast tea " .
It was in part popularised by Queen Victoria , having returned with a supply after tasting the tea at Balmoral and it subsequently acquired the prefix " English " .
SEE ALSO
* Irish breakfast tea * Full breakfast REFERENCES