LUPIN BEAN
Lupin or lupini beans are the yellow legume seeds of the genus Lupinus .
They are traditionally eaten as a pickled snack food , primarily in the Mediterranean basin ( L. albus ) and Latin America ( L. mutabilis ) .
The bitter variety of the beans are high in alkaloids and are extremely bitter unless rinsed methodically .
HISTORY AND DISTRIBUTION Section::::History and distribution .
The earliest archaeological reports on lupins are referred to the Twelfth Dynasty of Egyptian Pharaohs ( over 2 thousand years BCE ) .
In their tombs , seeds of Lupinus digitatus Forsk . , already domesticated in those times , were discovered .
Seven seeds of this species were also retrieved in the tombs of this dynasty dated back to the 22nd century BCE .
They are the most ancient evidence of lupin in the Mediterranean .
Lupini were popular with the Romans , who spread their cultivation throughout the Roman Empire .
Today , lupini are most commonly found in Mediterranean countries and their former colonies , especially in Spain , Portugal , Greece , and Brazil , as across the Middle East ( where it is part of Sham El Nessim holiday meals ) .
The Andean American variety of this bean , Lupinus mutabilis , was domesticated by pre - Incan inhabitants of present - day Peru .
Rock imprints of seeds and leaves , dated around 6th and 7th century BCE , are exhibited in the National Museum of Lima .
It was a food widespread during the Incan Empire .
Lupins were also used by Native Americans in North America , e.g. the Yavapai people .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Some varieties are referred to as " sweet lupins " because they contain much smaller amounts of toxic alkaloids than the " bitter lupin " varieties .
Newly bred variants of the narrow - leafed or ' Australian Sweet Lupin ' ( L. angustifolius ) lupins are grown in Australia , Germany and Poland ; they lack any bitter taste and require no soaking in salt solution .
The seeds are used for different foods from lupin flake , vegan sausages , lupin - tofu , and lupin flour .
Given that lupin seeds have the full range of essential amino acids and that they , contrary to soy , can be grown in more temperate to cool climates , lupins are becoming increasingly recognized as a cash crop alternative to soy .
Three Mediterranean species of lupin ( blue lupin , white lupin and yellow lupin ) are widely cultivated for livestock and poultry feed .
Bitter lupins in feed can cause livestock poisoning .
Lupins are currently under widespread cultivation in Australia , Europe , Russia , and the Americas as a green manure , livestock fodder and grazing plant , and high - protein additive for animal and human foods .
In Australia , the danger of cross - pollination of the wild bitter and cultivated sweet low - alkaloid variety is understood to be unacceptable when testing reveals the presence of one bitter bean per hundred sweet beans , and a wide quarantine zone is maintained around lupin - growing croplands to prevent wind - blown wild pollen from having a large influence on crop toxicity .
CUISINE Section::::Cuisine .
The Andean lupin L. mutabilis , the Mediterranean Lupinus albus ( white lupin ) , and Lupinus hirsutus are only edible after soaking the seeds for some days in salted water .
In Ecuador , the lupin is often consumed as a ceviche - like street food known as " cevichochos " .
Lupini beans are commonly sold in a brine in jars ( like olives and pickles ) .
They can be eaten by making a small tear in the skin with one 's teeth and " popping " the seed directly into one 's mouth , but can also be eaten with the skin on .
The skin can also be removed by rubbing the bean between forefinger and thumb .
In countries like Portugal , " tremoços " , are very popular in bars as a snack while drinking beer .
In Egypt , lupin is known by its Arabic name , " termes " ( ترمس ) , and it has been sold by street vendors , as a very popular snack .
Lupin beans can be ground into a flour , and this is widely used in parts of Europe and in Australia as an additive to wheat flour , enhancing the flavour and lending a rich , creamy colour to the resulting foods .
They can also be used as a key ingredient in animal - free milk and meat replacements NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
The lupin is devoid of starch , which is very unusual for a species of edible bean .
Lupins have a thick seed coat ( 25 % ) which consists mainly of cellulose ( insoluble bran fiber ) and is removed as the first step in processing .
The kernel ( split ) of lupin is rich in protein ( 40 % ) , fiber ( 40 % ) and moderate in fat ( 8 % ) made up largely of unsaturated fatty acids .
Intensive plant breeding programs have ensured that modern lupin varieties have relatively low levels of the alkaloids found in their ancestral genotypes .
Lupins also contain moderate amounts of the carotenoids beta carotene , lutein , zeaxanthin , and tocopherols ( vitamin E ) .
Australian sweet lupin features a higher calcium and phosphate content than cereals , with trace element content varying in line with the mineral content of the soil in which the lupin is grown .
Lupin oils have high antioxidant capacities due in part to the presence of tocopherol ( vitamin E ) .
The total vitamin E content is about 2.3 - 4.6 mg / kg of oil .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
Lupin poisoning is a nervous syndrome caused by alkaloids in bitter lupins , similar to neurolathyrism .
Lupin poisoning affects people who eat incorrectly prepared lupin beans .
Mediterranean cultures prefer the historic bitter lupin beans with the required toxin - removal by traditional leaching in water preparation methods due to the better flavour that results .
Improper preparation of bitter lupins with insufficient soaking allows pharmacologically significant amounts of the anticholinergic alkaloids to remain in the beans , and poisoning symptoms result .
While the alkaloids found in raw and dried beans are bitter and unpalatable to many , with soaking the level is reduced .
There are several references in medical literature to poisoning caused by errors in lupini preparation .
Symptoms of lupin bean poisoning ( from excess alkaloid in cooked food ) include dilated unresponsive pupils , confusion , slowed thought and disorientation , flushed face and/or fever , high heart rate and blood pressure , tremors , difficulty with or slurred speech , in - coordination , dizziness , burning dry mouth , stomach pain , and anxiety or " malaise " .
Many human symptoms are described in the Australian government 's evaluation of lupin food and livestock fodder export safety standards in the medical literature review section : Current media describes the symptoms when referring to recent Australian Medical Journal reports of poisoning from overly bitter lupin flour used in foods reported in the media .
Mycotoxic lupinosis is a disease caused by lupin material that is infected with the fungus Diaporthe toxica ; the fungus produces mycotoxins called phomopsins , which cause liver damage .
LUPIN ALLERGY Section::::Lupin allergy .
Lupin allergy may cause life - threatening anaphylaxis in sensitive individuals .
There is some cross - reactivity with peanut allergy , so nut allergy sufferers should exercise extreme caution with lupin - containing food .
In the EU , lupin must be listed as an allergen in pre - packed foods where it has been used , but may still be hidden in over - the - counter products .
This can be a significant problem for allergy sufferers since breads , pastries , pizzas , pasta , cakes and ice cream are all commonly sold over - the - counter , and all may contain lupin .
Lupin has even been found in some tomato ketchup sauces .
At present , no desensitization treatments are available , so avoidance is the only advice offered , alongside carrying an epi - pen and anti - histamine / anti - inflammatory medication .
SEE ALSO
* Lupinus luteus and Lupinus for species and genus information , and for other uses of the lupin bean .
NOTES
REFERENCES
* ( 1919 ) : " Sturtevant 's Edible Plants of the World
* ( [ 1998 ] ) :
Características y applicaciones de las plantas : ALTRAMUZ AZUL ( Lupinus angustifolius ) [ in Spanish ] .
Retrieved 2007 - 10 - 09 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Citation at plants.usda.gov Plant Profile .