PIRANHA II :
THE SPAWNING Piranha II : The Spawning , also known as The Spawning and Piranha II :
Flying Killers , is a 1982 Italian - American horror film directed by James Cameron in his theatrical feature film directorial debut .
Part of the Piranha film series , it is the sequel to the film Piranha ( 1978 ) directed by Joe Dante .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Off the coast of a Caribbean island , a young couple flee a hotel to have sex in the sea .
But they swim into a sunken wreck which is also a piranha lair and they are both killed and eaten by the unseen piranha .
The next day , a group of tourists , including Tyler Sherman , are taking the diving courses provided by Anne Kimbrough , an employee of the Hotel Elysium .
One of her divers swims into the wreck , which she has strictly forbidden to her divers .
Leaving Tyler to take over and lead the others to the surface , she discovers almost immediately that her ' missing ' student has been killed there when his badly chewed up body is found .
Anne 's estranged husband , Steve , a police officer , refuses to listen to Anne about her wanting to have a look at the body , because she needs to know what happened .
The death does not seem to match the attack pattern by any of the marine life in this area , which she knows better than anyone .
For her not to know what killed a diver is a dangerous sign .
Steve intercepts Gabby , a dynamite fisherman , and his son , and threatens to confiscate their boat , but as Gabby explains to Steve , Anne and he are old friends .
Meanwhile , as the guests begin to flirt with each other , Jai and Loretta , a pair of women , arrive on a large boat .
By their own admission , they are sea bandits .
Jai sneaks into the kitchen to steal food , but is intercepted by Mel , a cook .
She flirts with him , and he offers instead to make her a wonderful dinner .
But as he goes to their boat with the meal , they take the meal and then unlock , letting the boat drift .
Jai and Loretta try to convince Mel to jump , and he tries , and fails , so they mock him and sail off .
They sail too far out , and are attacked and killed by the piranha , who have developed the ability to fly .
Worried about what is going on , Anne finds that she is being frequently bothered by Tyler Sherman , so she takes him with her to the morgue to get a look at the body .
It is revealed there that she became a marine biologist before she married Steve , and so she begins taking pictures .
There , she finds that the bodies have been eaten in many parts .
A nurse comes in and kicks them out , unaware that a piranha was hiding in the body and escaped from it .
Armed with the power to fly , it kills the nurse and escapes through a window .
In her hurry , Anne left her credit card behind at the scene .
Anne and Tyler have a one - night stand , but in the morning , while he sleeps , she begins to study the pictures , and is horrified by what she discovers .
Steve arrives , throwing the card at her , angry first that she went to the morgue in defiance of him , and secondly that she has a man in her bed .
She tries to warn him of what she has discovered , but he ignores her and thinks she is a murderess .
Anne tries to tell the managers that she is canceling the dives because it is not safe .
He at first pretends to be concerned , but swiftly fires her , thinking she is crazy .
Attempting to capture one for further study , or at the very least take some pictures so she can prove what she is trying to tell Steve and the manager , she is intercepted by Tyler , who swiftly informs her that he is a biochemist and member of a team which has developed the ultimate weapon : a specimen of genetically modified piranha , with some other fish 's genes intermixed , capable of flying .
Earlier , and unfortunately , the team mistakenly deposited ( or lost ) a cylinder full of these fish in the water where the dead couple were found .
Gabby provides the proof Anne needs to Steve , calling him and showing him , not merely some flying piranha he has recently caught , and never seen before , but also that they are a serious danger , because they are turning on each other .
This is a sign that they are running out of food and will soon attack whatever they come near , including humans .
At a meeting , Anne tries her best to reason with the manager , to no avail .
Steve surprises her , standing up for her and proving her case for her a piranha wing in a bag onto the table .
Steve tells her that she can not trust Tyler , because the army says he is crazy .
She argued that Tyler has just been using her to get the message of the piranha out for him , to protect both himself and the residents of the hotel .
Later on , a piranha attacks Gabby 's son and kills him , leaving a bereft Gabby to vow revenge by killing the fish in the wreck in which they hide .
Anne tries to dissuade him , but it is too late .
Having ignored Anne 's advice , the manager , Raoul , hosts a nighttime fish party to capture grunion , who come up to the beach to spawn at this time , making them easy prey for humans to capture and kill .
Unfortunately for the residents , the piranha are also partially grunion and share the same instinct .
Anne gets a man named Aaron to patrol the beach but he is lured to the sea where the piranha mutilate and kill him .
During the fishing party promoted by the resort , the piranhas fly out of the water and attack and kill some of the guests on the beach and at the hotel 's courtyard pool .
Anne leads those who survive into the hotel , where they shut the doors and windows .
Gabby tries to attack the flying piranha , but they easily overwhelm and kill him , while the guests watch helplessly .
In the morning , the flying piranha withdraw back into the ocean , for Anne had discovered that they are not fond of daylight .
Tyler and Anne decide to undertake Gabby 's plan , and blow up the ship to destroy the predators .
Meanwhile , the situation gets even tenser , for not only can the piranha fly , but Anne and Steve 's son Chris has been hired , against their wishes , by a local ship ' Captain ' Dumont and his lovely daughter Allison .
They sail away and strand themselves on an island , leaving them vulnerable to piranha attacks that never actually happen .
Getting lost at sea , they try to set sail again , heading straight toward the wreck .
When Chris and Allison are stranded in a raft above the shipwreck , Anne and Tyler arrive in a motorboat and don scuba gear to dive down to the wreck to plant the timer charges that Gabby left behind .
With only 10 minutes to get out of the wreck before the bomb explodes , Anne and Tyler are trapped in one of the sunken ships rooms by the murderous piranha who all return to the wreck .
On the surface , Steve , piloting a police helicopter , ditches the chopper and swims to Anne and Tyler 's motorboat where Chris and Allison are .
With minutes left to spare before the bomb explodes , Steve powers up the boat and takes off .
Down in the wreck , while swimming through the vents , Tyler becomes stuck and is eaten by the piranhas .
Anne escapes out of a porthole , then ties a survival rope around her waist , allowing herself to be pulled away by the motorboat on the surface .
At the last second , Anne gets clear and the bomb detonates , destroying the sunken ship and all the piranha with it .
With all the piranhas dead , Anne swims to the surface and is picked up by Steve , Chris and Allison in their boat .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The original director of Piranha II was Miller Drake .
Drake was yet another Corman graduate who had labored alongside Joe Dante in the New World trailer departmentand had essayed the role of " First Mutant " in Dante 's directorial debut , Hollywood Boulevardbefore becoming Corman 's de facto head of postproduction .
" Jeff Schechtman said , ' Would you like to direct this movie ? '
and I said , ' Sure , ' " recalls Drake .
" We met with Ovidio Assonitis and he said ' Fine . '
" Drake set to work developing a script with writer Charles H. Eglee , who would later collaborate with James Cameron on the TV show Dark Angel .
Miller 's intention was that Piranha II should hinge upon Kevin McCarthy 's scientist from Piranha , even though he had seemingly perished in the first movie .
" I pitched this idea of bringing Kevin McCarthy back , all chewed up and mutilated from the previous movie , " says Drake .
"
He was on an abandoned oil rig and he was developing these flying piranhas out there to get revenge , or whatever .
I think we were going to bring Barbara Steele back and have him kill her by smashing her head through a fish tank . "
Assonitis removed Drake from the movie and decided to replace Drake with James Cameron .
The primary location for the film was the Mallards Beach - Hyatt Hotel , in Ocho Rios , JamaicaJames Cameron was originally hired as the special effects director for this film and took over the direction when the original director left ( Cameron also re - wrote the screenplay under the pseudonym H. A. Milton ) .
Due to budget limitations the crew was composed essentially of Italians , none of whom spoke English .
Some however did have prior experience on horror / fantasy movies so they were , to some extent , able to satisfy Cameron 's requirements .
After the first week of shooting , the set harmony was disturbed by some discussions about the work between the director and the producers ( the executive producer , Ovidio G. Assonitis , asked to verify the day - to - day activities , arguing with most of Cameron 's choices ) , so while Cameron was only responsible for the shooting , most of the decisions were under Assonitis ' authority .
According to Dreaming Aloud , a biography of Cameron by Christopher Heard , Cameron was not allowed to see his footage and was not involved in editing .
He broke into the editing room in Rome and cut his own version while the film 's producers were at Cannes , but was caught and Assonitis recut it again .
In a 2008 interview on The Hour , Cameron jokingly denied breaking into the editing room , then recounted the story as a " hypothetical scenario " , and told host George Stroumboulopoulos how he " would 've broken into the office " if he actually did it .
Cameron was able to make a deal with a distributor , who agreed to buy his footage and allow him to re - score and re - cut the picture - basically restructure it to what was originally intended - before release , so his alternative vision eventually came out on home video in some regions , which made a profit for the distributor .
As in the first film , which was one of many horror films inspired by the success of Steven Spielberg 's film Jaws ( 1975 ) , piranhas act as the antagonist monsters harming human life , and have developed the ability to fly , which they did not have in the first film .
On the commentary track , Cameron jokingly defended the film , tongue firmly in cheek , as " the finest flying killer fish horror / comedy ever made " .
He would later employ some of the same mechanisms used to make the piranhas fly in the facehugger animatronics for Aliens .
Most of the underwater scenes were filmed off Grand Cayman , and the stand - in for the Club Elysium is the Mallard Beach Hyatt , now the Sunset Jamaica Grande in Ocho Rios .
Interior scenes were filmed on a sound stage in Rome .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Some critics called the film " " , others opined that " the piranhas ... look as though they had been remaindered from a joke shop " and that they resembled " haddock with dentures " .
According to Tim Healey in The World 's Worst Movies ( 1986 )
the film is " a strong contender ... for anyone 's list of all - time horror turkeys " .
The film holds a 6 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 16 reviews .
It was a box - office bomb .
On Metacritic , the film has a 15/100 based on 5 reviews , meaning " overwhelming dislike " .
James Cameron refers to The Terminator as his first feature - length film , despite the fact that it was made in 1984 , three years after Piranha II : The Spawning .
However , Cameron acknowledged the film in a 60 Minutes segment with interviewer Morley Safer in 2010 , referring to Piranha II as " the best flying piranha film ever made " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS