CHOCOLATE LIQUEUR Chocolate liqueur is a liqueur that tastes like chocolate .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Chocolate liqueur is not a new invention .
There is mention , in French , of producing and selling chocolate en liqueur as early as 1666 .
Context suggests this is a chocolate liqueur , not a chocolate liquor or other chocolate beverage .
In New England prior to the 18th century American Revolution , a " chocolate wine " was popular .
Its ingredients included sherry , port , chocolate , and sugar .
A French manual published in 1780 also describes chocolate liqueur .
An 1803 French pharmacy manual includes a recipe for a chocolate liqueur ( ratafia de chocolat , also ratafia de cacao ) .
An early 19th - century American cookbook , published in 1825 and preserved in an historical archive in South Carolina , includes a similar recipe .
Throughout the 19th century and into the early 20th century , manuals and encyclopedias in French , English , and Spanish give similar recipes .
A late 19th century food science manual gives a recipe that includes techniques for clarifying and coloring the liqueur .
A similar early 20th century manual gives four recipes .
There are several brands of chocolate liqueur on the market ; this is attributed to a 1990s " chocolate craze " .
RECIPES Section::::Recipes .
Early 19th century recipes for chocolate liqueur featured whole cocoa beans .
A basic modern recipe for making chocolate liqueur at home lists the ingredients chocolate extract , vanilla extract , vodka , and simple syrup .
To keep the chocolate extract in suspension and make the liqueur thicker , glycerine may be added .
In its purest form , chocolate liqueur is clear ; coloring may be added .
Recipes for home - made chocolate liqueurs may also include raw eggs as an ingredient , presenting a risk of salmonellosis .
Reasonable safety may be achieved by combining the eggs with the alcohol before other ingredients .
Earlier , liquor was made by adding the cocoa beans to classic liqueur .
Modern chocolate wine can be considered as a subspecies of chocolate liquor .
USES Section::::Uses .
Chocolate liqueur can be consumed straight , as an after dinner drink rather than as aperitif .
It is used in mixed drinks and in desserts , especially in dessert sauces , cakes , and truffles .
A food writer notes that many recipes for chocolate truffle add a small amount of chocolate liqueur to melted chocolate , and warns that adding the liqueur often causes the chocolate to seize .
One of the more unusual uses is in chocolate rolled fondant .
Arguably the most controversial use may be in connection with a scandal concerning the provenance of certain 17th century bottles of wines said to have belonged to Thomas Jefferson , and traded by Hardy Rodenstock .
Benjamin Wallace writes in his book The Billionaire 's Vinegar that at a wine tasting of 19th century wines from Château Latour , provided by Rodenstock , several people noted the wines had a flavor of chocolate liqueur and were fakes .
Wine and chocolate are a classic flavor pairing , and this is reflected in some cocktails that combine a strong red wine with a dash of chocolate liqueur .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
There are three types of chocolate liqueur : liqueur , cream liqueur , and crème de cacao .
CHOCOLATE LIQUEUR
* Afrikoko ( coconut and chocolate ) * Ashanti Gold * Bicerin Di Giandujotto * Djangoa ( with a hint of anise ) * Godiva Dark Chocolate * Liqueur Fogg * Mozart Black ( dark chocolate ) * Royal Mint - Chocolate Liqueur ( French ) * Sabra liqueur ( dark chocolate and Jaffa oranges ) * Thornton 's Chocolate Liqueur CHOCOLATE CREAM LIQUEUR
* Cadbury Cream Liqueur
* Dooley 's White Chocolate Cream Liqueur
* Dwersteg 's Organic Chocolate Cream Liqueur * Godiva White Chocolate * Florcello Chocolate Orange Cream Liqueur
* Mozart Gold Chocolate Cream Liqueur
* Mozart White Chocolate Cream Liqueur
* Vana Tallinn Chocolate Cream
* Vermeer Dutch Chocolate Cream Liqueur CRÈME DE
CACAO Section::::Crème de cacao .
Crème de cacao may be either clear or a dark caramel color , which is often labeled " dark crème de cacao " .
The French word " crème " refers to the creamy texture of this very sweet liqueur , but there is no actual dairy cream in it .
The alcohol content of crème de cacao varies , but 20 % to 25 % ABV ( 40–50 proof ( U.S. ) ) is common .
SEE ALSO
* List of chocolate beverages REFERENCES