GREAT COMMANDMENT
The Great Commandment ( or Greatest Commandment ) is a name used in the New Testament to describe the first of two commandments cited by Jesus in and .
These two commandments are paraphrases taken from the Old Testament and are commonly seen as important to Jewish and Christian ethics .
In Mark , when asked " which is the great commandment in the law ?
" , the Greek New Testament reports that Jesus answered , " Hear , O Israel !
The Lord our God
, The Lord is One ; Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy mind " , before also referring to a second commandment , " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself .
"
Most Christian denominations consider these two commandments to be the core of correct Christian lifestyle .
NEW TESTAMENT ACCOUNTS GOSPEL OF MATTHEW GOSPEL OF MARK Section::::New Testament accounts .
Section::::Gospel of Mark .
In the Gospel of Mark , the Shema is included : GOSPEL OF LUKE GOSPEL OF JOHN OLD TESTAMENT
REFERENCES DEUTERONOMY
LEVITICUS
LOVE THE LORD THY GOD Section::::Love the Lord thy God .
Matthew Henry sums up the question of which
is the great commandment :
Adam Clarke , in his Commentary on the Bible , wrote : " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God " is explained to mean " Act in such a manner that God will be beloved by all His creatures . "
Consequently , Israel , being , as the priest - people , enjoined like the Aaronite priest to sanctify the name of God and avoid whatever tends to desecrate it
( Lev . xxii .
32 ) , is not only obliged to give his life as witness or martyr for the maintenance of the true faith ( see Isa .
xliii .
12 , μάρτυρες ; and Pesik . 102b ; Sifra , Emor , ix . )
, but so to conduct himself in every way as to prevent the name of God from being dishonored by non - Israelites .
Twice every day the Jew recites the Shema Yisrael , which contains the words : " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart , with all thy soul , and with all thy might " ( Deut .
vi . 5 ) .
This verse is understood to enjoin him to willingly surrender life and fortune whenever the cause of God demands it , while it at the same time urges him to make God beloved by all his creatures through deeds of kindness , as Abraham did ( Sifre , Deut . 32 ) .
Although only asked about the first commandment , Jesus included the second commandment in his answer .
This double reference has given rise to differing views with regard to the relationship that exists between the two commandments , although typically " love thy God " is referred to as " the first and greatest commandment " , with " love thy neighbour " being referred to as " the second great commandment " .
It may simply reflect the " seven rules ( Middot ) of Hillel " , in this case the first one , called Ḳal wa - ḥomer ( Hebrew : קל וחומר ) .
LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR
AS
THYSELF Section::::Love thy neighbour as thyself .
When asked which is the greatest commandment , the Christian New Testament depicts Jesus paraphrasing the Torah : " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy mind , " before also paraphrasing a second passage ; " Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself .
" Most Christian denominations view these two commandments as , together , forming the core of the Christian religion .
The second passage is considered to be a form of the Golden Rule ( circa 1300 BCE ) .
SEE ALSO
* Christian – Jewish reconciliation * Christianity and Judaism *
Judeo - Christian * Law of Christ
* New Commandment REFERENCES