FLEEING FELON RULE
At common law , the fleeing felon rule permits the use of force , including deadly force , against an individual who is suspected of a felony and is in clear flight .
According to David Caplan " Immediate stopping of the fleeing felon , whether actually or presumably dangerous , was deemed absolutely necessary for the security of the people in a free state , and for maintaining the " public security . " ...
" Indeed , it has been said that the social policy of the common law in this matter was not only to threaten dangerous felons and hence deter them , but was also to induce them to " surrender peaceably " if they dared commit inherently dangerous felonies , rather than allow them to " escape trial for their crimes . "
U.S. LAW Section::::U.S. law .
Under U.S. law the fleeing felon rule was limited in 1985 to non - lethal force in most cases by Tennessee v. Garner , .
The justices held that deadly force " may not be used unless necessary to prevent the escape and the officer has probable cause to believe that the suspect poses a significant threat of death or serious bodily harm to the officer or others . "
Fleeing felons may be followed into places not open to the public without a warrant if the officer is in " hot pursuit . "
Deadly force that is executed by a co - defendant against an accomplice is not justified by the fleeing felon rule .
CASE LAW
* Samuel Alito 's memo written while working in the Solicitor General 's office regarding Memphis Police v. Garner which was the Sixth Circuit appellate case leading to Tennessee v. Garner .
( May 18 , 1984 )
( PDF ) * People v. Couch ( 1990 ) in the Michigan Supreme Court held that Tennessee v. Garner was * civil rather than criminal action ;
* * did not affect Michigan 's Fleeing Felon Rule ; and * * that a citizen may use deadly force when restraining a fleeing felon in a criminal matter .
*
* State v. Weddell , The Nevada Supreme Court ruled that a private citizen may not use deadly force under the common law fleeing felon rule .
SEE ALSO
* Deadly force
* Felony murder * Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
*
Proactive policing REFERENCES