SQUARE D Square D is an American manufacturer of electrical equipment headquartered in Andover , Massachusetts .
Square D is a flagship brand of Schneider Electric , which acquired Square D in 1991 .
The company was listed on the New York Stock Exchange for 55 years prior to its acquisition without reporting financial loss in any calendar quarter , paying out 220 consecutive quarterly dividends to shareholders .
HISTORY 1900S Section::::History . Section::::1900s .
The company was founded on December 15 , 1902 by Bryson Dexter Horton and James B. McCarthy .
In 1903 they incorporated as the McBride Manufacturing Company .
During the first decade of business , the company expanded into various other electrical products .
In 1908 , the company was renamed Detroit Fuse and Manufacturing .
Horton , an 1895 electrical engineering graduate of the University of Michigan , was credited with the invention of the safety switch , which encased high voltage switches and started the company 's main line of business of circuit breakers and encased control panels .
Their first enclosed safety switch was introduced in 1909 .
Soon after their renaming to Detroit Fuse and Manufacturing , the company adopted their famous logo — a capital " letter D " for Detroit , enclosed in a square .
The logo was stamped on all Square D 's switches and products .
The combination of an easily remembered monogram logo and their great popularity resulted in customers referring their products as " Square D " .
Consequently , the company trademarked the logo and in 1917 they renamed the company Square D. Horton served as Square D 's president until 1928 1920S-1930S Section::::1920s-1930s .
In the early 1920s Square D sold the majority of their fuse business in order to focus more on their safety switches and other safety products .
The company began an aggressive marketing campaign to promote their safety switches .
Their advertisements , which became to be known as " Jones is Dead ! " , directed public attention to the safety hazards of exposed electrical switches in factories .
Square D hoped to capitalize on the growing concern of factory safety .
One such fully working Square D safety switch from 1922 was donated in November 2003 to the Smithsonian 's National Museum of American History .
By 1929 , Square D merged with a Milwaukee - based industrial controller company and began producing Westinghouse - licensed circuit breakers .
In 1935 Square D began producing its own range of circuit breakers for both commercial and residential uses .
1940S-1970S 1970S - PRESENT
Section::::1970s - present .
In 1991 , the company was acquired and became a subsidiary of Schneider Electric .
In 2003 , the Square D by Schneider Electric brand celebrated its 100th anniversary .
PRODUCT LINES
Section::::Product lines .
Introduced in 1955 , the Square D " QO " line of miniature 3/4-inch circuit breakers may be their best - known product line , used in the electrical distribution boards of many residences in North America .
The " QO " designation stands for " Qwik - Open " ; Square D claims these are the fastest - opening breakers in the industry , responding within 1/60th of a second , or just one full power cycle on a 60 Hz AC line .
QO breakers feature a window with a visual trip indication flag , making it easy to identify a tripped breaker in a panel .
A " QOB " version is also offered , which stands for " Qwik - Open Bolted " , featuring a screw that secures the breaker in the panel .
This is useful in industrial installations where vibration might cause a QO snap - in breaker to loosen and prevents them from accidentally being popped out while an adjacent breaker is being changed .
A QO breaker could easily be clipped into a QOB panel .
The QO and QOB series breakers are by far their most popular commercial products .
A second miniature circuit breaker line is sold under the brand name Homeline , marked " HOM " .
Designed for value , they lack the fast - trip feature and the visual trip flag of the " QO " series , cost one - third to half less , and are physically not interchangeable with " QO " breakers .
In the 1960s Square D introduced the Safety Line distribution centers for large industrial electrical power loads .
This design had solid or tubular busing with each large fused switch clamping onto the busing .
The company also sold the B line 277 - 480 volt panels , generally used for lighting in the 1970s and 1980s .
Another well - known Square D product line is the Powerlink circuit breaker , created for lighting control in commercial buildings .
B Line and D Line were the breaker panels in which Powerline breakers were used .
Eventually , the company branded Powerline and Powerlink panels and breakers .
Powerlink was a heavy duty 277-volt lighting breaker , used in large buildings with 277-volt lighting loads .
These were also favored for their robust design , and functional reliability .
This means less panel space and wire are needed , and why commercial buildings frequently utilize higher voltage for general task lighting .
The I - Line series of distribution panelboards is favored by many electricians for its ease and safety of adding new breakers .
The panel uses a stacked bus system that protects the energized bus from accidental contact and the breaker can be easily installed using a flat blade screwdriver contacting only de - energized parts of the backplane of the panel .
The design of the breakers and panel require that extra attention be paid to phase rotation , as the right ( even - numbered ) side of the panel will have the phases in a C - B - A configuration whereas the left ( odd - numbered ) side of the panel will have a more standard A - B - C arrangement .
Square D also made disconnect switches , both fused , and unfused , as well as Heating Air Conditioning and Refrigeration ( HACR ) rated switch boxes that held an HACR breaker for use as a disconnect .
The QO type breaker fits this disconnect box .
These were popular with food service , grocers , and other cold storage users .
Other companies used terms like " Quick Lag " and similar brand name letter coding on their circuit breakers , e.g. , QL , QLRB , etc .
No one knows who started the brand coding for sure .
These brand - specific letter codes had nothing to do with National Electrical Manufacturers Association ( NEMA ) specifications or coding , although they appear to have been intended to emulate NEMA codes .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Square D products at Schneider Electric