WEST VIRGINIA
IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
The U.S. state of West Virginia was formed out of western Virginia and added to the Union as a direct result of the American Civil War ( see History of West Virginia ) , in which it became the only state to declare its independence from the Confederacy .
In the summer of 1861 , Union troops , which included a number of newly - formed Unionist " Virginia " regiments under General George McClellan , drove off Confederate troops under General Robert E. Lee .
This essentially freed Unionists in the northwestern counties of Virginia to form a functioning government of their own as a result of the Wheeling Convention .
Prior to the admission of West Virginia
the government in Wheeling formally claimed jurisdiction over all of Virginia , although from its creation it was firmly committed to the formation of a separate state .
After Lee 's departure , western Virginia continued to be a target of Confederate raids , even after the creation of the new state in 1863 .
These actions focused both on supplying the Confederate Army with provisions as well as attacking the vital Baltimore and Ohio Railroad that linked the northeast with the midwest , as exemplified in the Jones - Imboden Raid .
Guerrilla warfare also gripped the new state , especially in the Allegheny Mountain counties to the east , where loyalties were much more divided than in the Unionist northwest part of the state .
Despite this , the Confederacy was never able to seriously threaten the Unionists ' overall control of West Virginia .
HISTORY POLITICAL EVENTS Section::::History .
Section::::Political events .
On April 17 , 1861 , the Virginia state convention in Richmond declared secession .
Nearly all delegates from counties west of the Allegheny Mountains voted against secession , and most people and officials in that area refused any directions from the secessionist state government .
On May 15 , western Virginia Unionists convened the first session of the Wheeling Convention .
Many of the delegates were informally or self - appointed , so the Convention only denounced secession and called for a formal election of delegates .
The elected delegates met in the second session on 11 June .
On 20 June the Convention declared that by acceding to secession , the officials of the state government in Richmond had forfeited their offices , which were now vacant .
The Convention then elected replacements for these state offices , creating the Restored Government of Virginia .
The " Restored " government was generally supported in areas where secession was opposed .
Union troops also held the three northernmost counties in the Shenandoah Valley , and despite the pro - secession views of most residents , these counties were also subjected to the " Restored " government .
At the Wheeling Convention , some delegates proposed the immediate establishment of a separate state .
However , other delegates pointed out that the creation of a new state would require the consent of Virginia , under Article IV of the Constitution .
Thus it was necessary to establish the Restored Government of Virginia to give that consent , which was granted 20 August 1861 .
A referendum in October 1861 approved statehood ; a constitutional convention met , and its work was approved by referendum in April 1862 .
Congress approved statehood that December , with the condition that slavery must gradually abolish in the new state .
This condition required a new constitutional convention and referendum , which was approved .
On 20 June 1863 , the newly proclaimed state of West Virginia was admitted to the Union , including all the western counties and the lower ( northern ) Shenandoah " panhandle " .
All the northern states had free public school systems before the war , but not the border states .
West Virginia set up its system in 1863 .
Over bitter opposition it established an almost - equal education for black children , most of whom were ex - slaves .
When Union troops occupied parts of eastern Virginia such as Alexandria and Norfolk , these areas came under the jurisdiction of the Restored Government .
They were not included in West Virginia .
With West Virginia statehood , the Restored government relocated to Alexandria .
The pro - Confederate state government in Richmond maintained its claim to the Commonwealth 's antebellum borders and , under the auspices of the state 's 1851 constitution , administered the regions of the Commonwealth still held under Confederate arms -
at the time of West Virginia 's statehood this included at least some measure of control in about thirteen counties claimed by the newly admitted state .
Many localities ( especially in the southeastern part of the state ) sent representatives to both the Wheeling and Richmond state legislatures .
As was the case with all regions the Confederacy claimed but did not control , the Confederate States Congress seated Representatives from districts encompassing the whole of Virginia 's antebellum borders until its dissolution .
In House districts where the Confederates could not hold conventional elections , the Confederate Congress accepted the fragmentary Congressional results from army and refugee camps as representative of the majority of residents .
While Confederate Congressional elections were ostensibly nonpartisan , especially in Virginian districts under Union occupation the administration of President Jefferson Davis manipulated the electoral process to ensure the election of pro - administration representatives , in large part to counteract the increasing tendency of House districts still under Confederate control to elect anti - administration candidates .
While the level of effective Confederate control over West Virginia would continue to diminish as the war progressed , authorities in Richmond were able to maintain at least a tenuous control over West Virginia 's southeastern border regions until the end of the war .
SLAVERY Section::::Slavery .
During the Civil War , a Unionist government in Wheeling , Virginia , presented a statehood bill to Congress in order to create a new state from 48 counties in western Virginia .
The new state would eventually incorporate 50 counties .
The issue of slavery in the new state delayed approval of the bill .
In the Senate Charles Sumner objected to the admission of a new slave state , while Benjamin Wade defended statehood as long as a gradual emancipation clause would be included in the new state constitution .
Two senators represented the Unionist Virginia government , John S. Carlile and Waitman T. Willey .
Senator Carlile objected that Congress had no right to impose emancipation on West Virginia , while Willey proposed a compromise amendment to the state constitution for gradual abolition .
Sumner attempted to add his own amendment to the bill , which was defeated , and the statehood bill passed both houses of Congress with the addition of what became known as the Willey Amendment .
President Lincoln signed the bill on December 31 , 1862 .
Voters in western Virginia approved the Willey Amendment on March 26 , 1863 .
President Lincoln had issued the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1 , 1863 , which exempted from emancipation the border states ( four slave states loyal to the Union ) as well as some territories occupied by Union forces within Confederate states .
Two additional counties were added to West Virginia in late 1863 , Berkeley and Jefferson .
The slaves in Berkeley were also under exemption but not those in Jefferson County .
As of the census of 1860 , the 49 exempted counties held some 6000 slaves over 21 years of age who would not have been emancipated , about 40 % of the total slave population .
The terms of the Willey Amendment only freed children , at birth or as they came of age , and prohibited the importation of slaves .
West Virginia became the 35th state on June 20 , 1863 , and the last slave state admitted to the Union .
Eighteen months later , the West Virginia legislature completely abolished slavery , and also ratified the 13th Amendment on February 3 , 1865 .
MILITARY EVENTS Section::::Military events .
In April 1861 , Virginia troops under Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson occupied Harpers Ferry and part of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad leading into western Virginia .
They seized many B&O locomotives and railcars on May 23 .
In May and June 1861 , Confederate forces advanced into western Virginia to impose control by the Richmond government and the Confederacy .
They got no further than Philippi , due to bad roads .
Then Union troops under McClellan drove them back in July .
There was additional campaigning further south , where Greenbrier County was pro - Confederate , enabling Confederate troops to enter Nicholas County to the west .
In September 1861 , Union troops drove the Confederates out of Nicholas County and defeated their counterattack at Cheat Mountain .
Thereafter all of the trans - Allegheny region was under firm Union control except for some of the easternmost counties .
Greenbrier County was occupied in May 1862 .
Pro - Confederate guerrillas burned and plundered in some sections , and were not entirely suppressed until after the war was ended .
There were two minor Confederate expeditions against the northeastern corner of the west later on : Jackson 's Romney Expedition in January 1862 ; and the Jones - Imboden Raid in May – June 1863 .
Union strategy for the region was to protect the vital B&O Railroad and also attack eastward into the Shenandoah Valley and southwestern Virginia .
This latter goal proved impossible , due to the poor roads across mountainous terrain .
The B&O passed across the lower ( northern ) end of the Shenandoah , east of the Alleghenies .
This area was therefore occupied by Union troops for nearly all of the war , and was a scene of frequent combat .
Harpers Ferry was the site of a major U.S. Army arsenal , and was taken by Confederates in the opening days of the war , and again during the Maryland Campaign of 1862 .
During the Maryland Campaign it was a route of invasion and retreat for the Army of Northern Virginia ; the campaign concluded there with the Battle of Shepherdstown .
Many soldiers from West Virginia served on both sides in the war .
Those in Confederate service were in " Virginia " regiments .
Those in Union service were also in " Virginia " regiments until statehood , when several Unionist " Virginia " regiments were redesignated " West Virginia " regiments .
Among these were the 7th West Virginia Infantry , famed for actions at Antietam and Gettysburg , and the 3rd West Virginia Cavalry , which also fought at Gettysburg .
On the Confederate side , Albert G. Jenkins , a former U.S. Representative , recruited a brigade of cavalry in western Virginia , which he led until his death in May 1864 .
Other western Virginians served under Brig .
Gen. John Imboden and in the Stonewall Brigade under Brig .
Gen. James A. Walker .
GUERRILLA WAR Section::::Guerrilla war .
On May 28 , 1861 one of the first trials of the Civil War for sabotage took place in Parkersburg , Virginia .
A group of men were found playing cards under a B&O railroad bridge and arrested by Federal authorities .
The trial was conducted by Judge William Lowther Jackson ( later , Gen. W.L. Jackson , C.S.A. ) .
The men were acquitted , since no actual crime had taken place , but Parkersburg was split over the verdict , and Judge Jackson left to join Col . Porterfield at Philippi .
With the defeat of Confederate forces at the Battle of Philippi and the Battle of Cheat Mountain only occasionally would they occupy parts of western Virginia .
Local supporters of Richmond were left to their own devices .
Many guerrilla units originated in the pre - war militia , and these were designated Virginia State Rangers and starting in June , 1862 , these were incorporated into Virginia State Line regiments .
By March , 1863 , however , many were enlisted in the regular Confederate army .
There were others though who operated without sanction of the Richmond government , some fighting on behalf of the Confederacy , while others were nothing more than bandits who preyed on Union and Confederate alike .
Early in the war captured guerrillas were sent to Camp Chase or Johnson Island in Ohio , Fort Delaware in Delaware and also the Atheneum in Wheeling .
Some were paroled after taking an oath , but many returned to their guerrilla activities .
The Union authorities began to organize their own guerrilla bands , the most famous of which was the " Snake Hunters " , headed by Capt . Baggs .
They patrolled Wirt and Calhoun counties through the winter of 1861–62 and captured scores of Moccasin Rangers , which they sent as prisoners to Wheeling .
The fight against the rebel guerrillas took a new turn under Gen. John C. Fremont and Col . George Crook , who had spent his pre - war career as an " Indian fighter " in the Pacific Northwest .
Col . Crook took command of the 36th Ohio Infantry , centered around Summersville , Nicholas County .
He trained them in guerrilla tactics and adopted a " no prisoners " policy .
On January 1 , 1862 , Crook led his men on an expedition north to Sutton , Braxton County , where he believed Confederate forces were located .
None were found , but his troops encountered heavy guerrilla resistance and responded by burning houses and towns along the line of march .
But by August , 1862 , Unionist efforts were severely hampered with the withdrawal of troops to eastern Virginia .
In this vacuum Gen. William W. Loring , C.S.A , recaptured the Kanawha valley , Gen. Albert Gallatin Jenkins , C.S.A. , moved his forces through central West Virginia , capturing many supplies and prisoners .
Confederate recruitment increased , Gen. Loring opening recruitment offices as far north as Ripley .
In response to rebel raids , Gen. Robert H. Milroy issued a command demanding reparations to be paid in cash and proceeded to assess fines against Tucker county citizens , guilty or not , and threatened them with the gallows or house - burning .
Jefferson Davis and Confederate authorities lodged formal complaints with Gen. Henry Wager Halleck in Washington , who censured Gen. Milroy .
However , Milroy argued in defense of his policy and was allowed to proceed .
By early 1863 Union efforts in West Virginia were going badly .
Unionists were losing confidence in the Wheeling government to protect them , and with the approaching dismemberment of Virginia into two states guerrilla activity increased in an effort to prevent organization of county governments .
By 1864 some stability had been achieved in some central counties , but guerrilla activity was never effectively countered .
Union forces that were needed elsewhere were tied down in what many soldiers considered a backwater of the war .
But Federal forces could not afford to ignore any rebel territory , particularly one so close to the Ohio River .
As late as January , 1865 , Gov. Arthur I. Boreman complained of large scale guerrilla activity as far north as Harrison and Marion counties .
In one last , brazen act of the guerrilla war , McNeill 's Rangers of Hardy County kidnapped Generals George Crook and Benjamin F. Kelley from behind Union lines and delivered them as prisoners of war to Richmond .
The Confederate surrender at Appomattox finally brought an end to guerrilla war in West Virginia .
SOLDIERY Section::::Soldiery .
On May 30 , 1861 , Brig .
Gen. George B. McClellan in Cincinnati wrote to President Lincoln : " I am confidently assured that very considerable numbers of volunteers can be raised in Western Virginia ... " .
After nearly two months in the field in West Virginia he was less optimistic .
He wrote to Gov. Francis Harrison Pierpont of the Restored Government of Virginia in Wheeling that he and his army were anxious to assist the new government , but that eventually they would be needed elsewhere , and that he urged that troops be raised " among the population " .
" Before I left Grafton I made requisitions for arms clothing etc for 10,000 Virginia troops – I fear that my estimate was much too large . "
On August 3 , 1861 , the Wellsburg " Herald " editorialized " A pretty condition Northwestern Virginia is in to establish herself as a separate state ...
after all the drumming and all the gas about a separate state she has actually organized in the field four not entire regiments of soldiers and one of these hails almost entirely from the Panhandle . "
Similar difficulties were experienced by Confederate authorities at the beginning of the war .
On May 14 , 1861 , Col . George A. Porterfield arrived in Grafton to secure volunteers , and reported slow enlistment .
Col . Porterfield 's difficulty ultimately , however , was lack of support by the Richmond government , which did not send enough guns , tents and other supplies .
He eventually turned away hundreds of volunteers due to lack of equipment .
Gen. Henry A. Wise also complained of recruitment in the Kanawha valley , though he eventually assembled 2,500 infantry , 700 cavalry , three battalions of artillery for a total of 4,000 men which became known as " Wise 's Legion " .
One regiment from the Wise legion , the 3rd Infantry ( later reorganized as the 60th Virginia Infantry ) was sent to South Carolina in 1862 , and it was from Maj .
Thomas Broun of the 3rd Infantry that Gen. Robert E. Lee bought his famous horse Traveller .
In April 1862 the Confederate government instituted a military draft , and nearly a year later the U.S. government did the same .
The Confederate draft was not generally effective in West Virginia due to the breakdown of Virginia state government in the western counties and Union occupation of the northern counties , although conscription did occur in the southern counties .
In the southern and eastern counties of West Virginia Confederate recruitment continued at least until the beginning of 1865 .
The Wheeling government asked for an exemption to the Federal draft , saying that they had exceeded their quota under previous calls .
An exemption was granted for 1864 , but in 1865 a new demand was made for troops , which Gov. Boreman struggled to fill .
In some counties , ex - Confederates suddenly found themselves enrolled in the U.S. Army .
The loyalty of some Federal troops had been questioned early in the war .
The rapid conquest of northern West Virginia had caught a number of Southern sympathizers behind Union lines .
A series of letters to Gen. Samuels and Gov. Pierpoint in the Dept . of Archives and History in Charleston , most dated 1862 , reveal the concern of Union officers .
Col . Harris , 10th Company , March 27 , 1862 , to Gov. Pierpoint : " The election of officers in the Gilmer County Company was a farce .
The men elected were rebels and bushwhackers .
The election of these men was intended , no doubt , as a burlesque on the reorganization of the militia . " Because the government in Richmond did not keep separate military records for what would become West Virginia , there has never been an official count of Confederate service in West Virginia .
Early estimates were very low , in 1901 historians Fast & Maxwell placed the figure at about 7,000 .
An exception to the low estimates is found in Why The Solid South ? , whose authors believed the Confederate numbers exceeded Union numbers .
In subsequent histories the estimates rose , Otis K. Rice placed the number at 10,000 - 12,000 .
Richard O. Curry in 1964 placed the figure at 15,000 .
The first detailed study of Confederate soldiery estimates the number at 18,000 , which is close to the 18,642 figure stated by the Confederate Dept . of Western Virginia in 1864 .
In 1989 a study by James Carter Linger estimated the number at nearly 22,000 .
The official number of Union soldiers from West Virginia is 31,884 as stated by the Provost Marshal General of the United States .
These numbers include , however , re - enlistment figures as well as out - of - state soldiers who enlisted in West Virginia regiments .
In 1905 Charles H. Ambler estimated the number of native Union soldiers to be about 20,000 .
Richard Current estimated native Union numbers at 29,000 .
In his calculations , however , he only allowed for a deduction of 2,000 out - of - state soldiers in West Virginia regiments .
Ohio contributed nearly 5,000 , and with the deduction of Pennsylvania and other state 's volunteers that estimate is reduced considerably .
The West Virginia Dept . of Archives and History believes that Confederate and Union numbers were about equal though they give no specific numbers .
The George Tyler Moore Center in Shepherdstown estimates the Union numbers to be 22,000 - 25,000 .
NURSING DURING THE CIVIL WAR
Section::::Nursing during the Civil War .
The Sisters of St. Joseph , who operated Wheeling Hospital in that city , were nurses during the war .
They treated soldiers brought to the hospital and prisoners at the Athenaeum in downtown Wheeling .
In 1864 , the Union army took control of the hospital , and the sisters went on the federal payroll as matrons and nurses , beginning that summer .
Several of them later received pensions in recognition of their service .
CIVIL WAR BATTLES IN WEST VIRGINIA
Section::::Civil War battles in West Virginia .
The Manassas Campaign : * Battle of Hoke 's Run ( July 2 , 1861 ) , Berkeley County – Stonewall Jackson successfully delays a larger Union force .
The Western Virginia Campaign : * Battle of Philippi ( June 3 , 1861 ) , Barbour County –
Union victory propels George McClellan into the limelight .
* Battle of Laurel Hill ( July 7–11 , 1861 ) , Barbour County – Morris routs Confederate troops in 5 days of skirmishing at Belington in a diversionary attack as the opening portion of the Battle of Rich Mountain .
* Battle of Rich Mountain ( July 11 , 1861 ) , Randolph County –
Another McClellan victory propels him to high command .
* Battle of Corrick 's Ford ( July 13 , 1861 ) , Tucker County – Confederate Brig .
Gen. Robert S. Garnett is the first general officer killed in the war .
* Battle of Kessler 's Cross Lanes ( August 26 , 1861 ) , Nicholas County – Confederates rout Tyler 's Union force ; Lee arrives soon after .
* Battle of Carnifex Ferry ( September 10 , 1861 ) , Nicholas County – Rosecrans drives back the Confederates and wins more territory .
* Battle of Cheat Mountain ( September 12–15 , 1861 ) , Pocahontas County – Lee is beaten and is recalled to Richmond .
* Battle of Greenbrier River ( October 3 , 1861 ) , Pocahontas County –
Inconclusive fight brings only bloodshed , but no resolution .
* Battle of Scary Creek ( July 17 , 1861 ) , Putnam County , West Virginia -
The Battle of Scary Creek was a minor battle fought during the American Civil War across the Kanawha River from present - day Nitro .
* Battle of Guyandotte ( November 10–11 , 1861 ) , Cabell County – Confederate cavalry attacks the town and the small untrained Union force stationed there .
In retaliation , much of the town is burned by the Union the next day .
* Battle of Camp Allegheny ( December 13 , 1861 ) , Pocahontas County – Union attack is repulsed and both sides camp for the winter .
Later actions : * Battle of Hancock ( January 5–6 , 1862 ) , Morgan County –
Stonewall Jackson 's operations against the B&O Railroad .
* Battle of the Henry Clark House ( May 1 , 1862 ) , Mercer County , West Virginia – Stonewall Jackson 's Shenandoah Valley Campaign – Cox 's actions against Princeton and the Virginia & Tennessee Railroad at Dublin , Virginia .
* Battle of Princeton Court House ( May 16–18 , 1862 ) , Mercer County , West Virginia – Jackson 's Shenandoah Valley Campaign – Cox 's actions against the Virginia & Tennessee Railroad at Dublin , Virginia .
* Battle of Harpers Ferry ( September 12–15 , 1862 ) , Jefferson County – Jackson surrounds the town and forces its garrison to surrender .
* Battle of White Sulphur Springs ( August 26–27 , 1863 ) , Greenbrier County , West Virginia – Col . George Patton turns back Averell 's raid against the Virginia & Tennessee Railroad .
* Battle of Charleston ( September 13 , 1862 ) , Kanawha County – Confederates take Charleston , occupying it for six weeks .
* Battle of Shepherdstown ( September 19–20 , 1862 ) , Jefferson County –
A. P. Hill 's counterattack secures Lee 's retreat from Sharpsburg .
* Battle of Bulltown ( October 13 , 1863 ) , Braxton County , West Virginia –
Union garrison holds against Confederate attack .
* Battle of Hurricane Creek ( 1863 ) , Putnam County – Skirmish between Union & Confederate forces .
* Battle of Droop Mountain ( November 6 , 1863 ) , Pocahontas County –
As a result of the Union victory , Confederate resistance in the state essentially collapsed .
* Battle of Moorefield ( August 7 , 1864 ) , Hardy County –
Union cavalry drives off John McCausland 's Confederate cavalry .
* Battle of Summit Point ( August 21 , 1864 ) , Jefferson County – Inconclusive action during Union Maj .
Gen. Philip Sheridan 's Shenandoah Valley Campaign .
* Battle of Smithfield Crossing ( August 25–29 , 1864 ) , Jefferson and Berkeley counties – Inconclusive .
Two of Jubal Early 's infantry divisions force back a Union cavalry division and are stopped by an infantry counterattack .
WEST VIRGINIANS IN THE CIVIL WAR Union * Arthur I. Boreman - Governor of West Virginia from 1863 to 1869
* Isaac H. Duval - Brigadier General and politician from Wellsburg ( Brooke County ) * Nathan Goff ,
Jr. - Major from Clarksburg ( Harrison County ) , became Secretary of the Navy and Governor of West Virginia
* Thomas M. Harris - Brigadier General from Harrisville ( Richie County )
* Daniel D. Johnson - Colonel ( infantry ) and Senator from Tyler County
* Benjamin F. Kelley - Brigadier General residing at Wheeling * George R. Latham - Colonel ( infantry ) and Congressman residing at Grafton ( Taylor County ) * Joseph A.J. Lightburn - Brigadier General residing in Lewis County
* Francis H. Pierpont - " Father of West Virginia " * Jesse L. Reno - Major General from Wheeling * David H. Strother - Colonel ( cavalry ) from Martinsburg ( Berkeley County )
* Joseph Thoburn - Irish - born Colonel ( infantry ) from Wheeling
*
John Witcher - Bvt .
Brigadier General ( cavalry ) from Cabell County , became U.S. Congressman Section::::West Virginians in the Civil War .
26 Medals of Honor were credited to West Virginians for actions during the war .
Another 6 medals were awarded to born West Virginias who relocated and were credited to other states .
A total of 14 medals were awarded to soldiers of the 1st West Virginia Cavalry ; making it the highest decorated regiment of the Union Army .
Confederate * Belle Boyd - female spy who provided intelligence to the Confederate States Army * Allen T. Caperton - one of the Confederate Senators for Virginia , later a U.S. Senator for West Virginia , from Monroe County * Raleigh E. Colston - Brigadier General residing in Berkeley County
* John Echols - Brigadier General residing at Union ( Monroe County )
* Charles J. Faulkner - Lieutenant Colonel , U.S. Congressman and diplomat detained as a prisoner early in the war * Birkett D. Fry - Brigadier General and former filibuster from Kanawha County * Walter Gwynn - Brigadier General from Jefferson County
* William Lowther Jackson - Brigadier General and former Lt . Governor from Clarksburg ( Harrison County )
* Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson - Lieutenant General from Clarksburg ( Harrison County ) * Albert G. Jenkins - Brigadier General former U.S. Congressman from Cabell County who led a brigade of western Virginia cavalrymen
* John McCausland - Brigadier General residing at Point Pleasant ( Mason County ) * Angus William McDonald - Colonel ( cavalry ) from Hampshire County * John Hanson McNeill - Captain and partisan commander from Moorefield ( Hardy County ) * Alexander W. Monroe - Colonel and politician from Hampshire County * John Q.A. Nadenbousch - Colonel ( infantry ) from Berkeley County * Edwin Gray Lee - Brigadier General from Shepherdstown ( Jefferson County ) * Charles T. O'Ferrall - Colonel ( cavalry ) and politician from Berkeley Springs ( Morgan Country ) , became Governor of Virginia * George A. Porterfield - Colonel ( infantry ) from Berkeley County * M. Jeff Thompson - Brigadier General in the Missouri State Guard from Harpers Ferry SEE ALSO
* Confederate States of America - Animated map of state secession and state formation
* Romney , West Virginia during the American Civil War
* West Virginia Civil War Union units
* West Virginia Civil War Confederate Units *
White Top
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Ambler , Charles H. Sectionalism in Virginia from 1776 to 1861 ( 1910 )
* Curry , Richard Orr . "
A Reappraisal of Statehood Politics in West Virginia " , Journal of Southern History 28 ( November 1962 ) : 403 - 21 .
in JSTOR
* Curry , Richard Orr . "
Crisis Politics in West Virginia , 1861–1870 , " in Richard O. Curry ed . , Radicalism , Racism , and Party Realignment : The Border States
During Reconstruction ( 1969 )
* Curry , Richard Orr .
A House Divided : A Study of Statehood Politics and Copperhead Movement in West Virginia ( 1964 )
* Fredette , Allison . "
The View from the Border :
West Virginia Republicans and Women 's Rights in the Age of Emancipation , " West Virginia History , Spring2009 , Vol .
3 Issue 1 , pp 57–80 , 1861–70 era
* Graham , Michael B.
The Coal River Valley in the Civil War : West Virginia Mountains , 1861 .
Charleston , SC :
The History Press , 2014 . .
* Link , William A. " ' This Bastard New Virginia ' :
Slavery , West Virginia Exceptionalism , and the Secession Crisis , " West Virginia History , Spring 2009 , Vol .
3 Issue 1 , pp 37–56
* MacKenzie , Scott A.
" The Slaveholders ' War : The Secession Crisis in Kanawha County , Western Virginia , 1860–1861 , " West Virginia History , Spring 2010 , Vol .
4 Issue 1 , pp 33–57 * McGregor , James C.
The Disruption of Virginia .
( 1922 ) full text
online
* Noe , Kenneth W. " Exterminating Savages : The Union Army and Mountain Guerrillas in Southern West Virginia , 1861–1865 . "
In Noe and Shannon H. Wilson , Civil War in Appalachia ( 1997 ) , pp 104–30 .
* Riccards , Michael P. " Lincoln and the Political Question : The Creation of the State of West Virginia
" Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol .
27 , 1997 online edition
* Rice , Otis K. West Virginia :
A History ( 1985 )
* Stealey , III , John Edmund . "
West Virginia 's Constitutional Critique of Virginia : The Revolution of 1861–1863 , " Civil War History , March 2011 , Vol .
57 Issue 1 , pp 9–47 * Talbott , F. " Some Legislative and Legal Aspects of the Negro Question in West Virginia during the Civil War and Reconstruction , " West Virginia History , Jan 1963 , Vol .
24 Issue 2 , pp 110–133 * Zimring , David R. " ' Secession in Favor of the Constitution ' :
How West Virginia Justified Separate Statehood during the Civil War , " West Virginia History , Fall 2009 , Vol .
3 Issue 2 , pp 23–51 EXTERNAL LINKS * Creation of West Virginia in Encyclopedia Virginia
* National Park Service map of Civil War sites in West Virginia * George Tyler Moore Center for the Study of the Civil War * West Virginia in the Civil War web site