FAR CRY ( FILM )
Far Cry is a 2008 English - language German action film loosely adapted from the video game of the same name .
The film is directed by Uwe Boll and stars Til Schweiger .
It was a major box office bomb and , like Boll 's other films , a critical disappointment .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins in a jungle at nighttime as a mercenary squad scouts the nearby area looking out for modified super soldiers , only to be slaughtered by a lone mutant .
Dr Krieger ( Udo Kier ) is informed by his men about the event and asked to stop the research , Krieger refusing to do so .
The film then skips to Valerie Cardinal , a journalist who is secretly receiving information about the events and the actual research by an informant .
They arrange a meeting with her at the Island .
To get to the island , Valerie hires skipper Jack Carver to take her to the Island .
Soon after , she reveals to Jack that her informant is named Max and he served in the Special Forces with him and that he is her uncle .
Jack denies having known him .
Jack then takes her to the island .
However , it turns out that the mercenaries caught Max and turned up at the spot he was going to meet Valerie .
The mercenaries capture Valerie and destroy Jack 's boat with a RPG , though Jack manages to escape .
Jack steals a gun from a nearby guard after knocking him out and rescues Valerie .
Jack suggests that they leave the island , though Valerie refuses to leave without Max .
They hijack a mercenary humvee containing two soldiers and take their uniforms and proceed to the central base where they both are captured .
Jack is jailed in an empty cell with a former member of the cooking staff .
While they attempt to escape , Valerie is forced to have dinner with Krieger , who orders the mercenaries to unleash Max ( who is now a mutant ) on Jack and Cook when he sees them on camera , trying to escape .
After a brief fight , Jack manages to convince Max who he really is .
Max who is convinced , but still mentally fragile , assaults the mercenaries and releases the other mutants .
The mutants attempt to kill all the humans on the Island .
After taking heavy casualties , half of the Mercenary Forces realize that there is no hope in sight of controlling the mutants and decide to team up with Jack and escape the island .
The other half of the Mercenaries remain loyal to Krieger and try to retain control of the island .
The two sides begin to battle each other and the mutants at the same time .
As the battle goes on , Max is shot and killed by Krieger 's sadistic female second - in - command , and most of the Mercenaries on the island are killed by the mutants .
This leaves only Krieger and his second - in - command , Jack and Valerie , and the cook alive .
While trying to find Valerie , Jack engages in a fight with Krieger 's second - in - command .
Jack finds Valerie and tells her about Max .
The cook , Jack , and Valerie hijack a boat at the docks .
When Krieger arrives at the docks shortly after while being chased by mutants , he finds the boat missing .
He turns around and screams as the screen fades to black .
The film ends with Jack in a relationship with Valerie , while also continuing his work as a skipper .
Valerie , like Jack , also continues her work with the CIA .
Jack hires the cook for his boat .
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The game - to - film enthusiast Uwe Boll gained the rights to a Far Cry movie from Crytek , purportedly before the game was released .
In an October 2006 interview , Uwe Boll said that production on Far Cry would begin in May 2007 .
The film was released on the second of October , 2008 , in Germany .
ScrewAttack creators " Stuttering Craig " and " Handsome Tom " had attempted for a month to raise money in order to buy a part for an extra Uwe Boll had created as an internet auction .
On July 4 , 2007 , Craig announced on the ScrewAttack podcast , Sidescrollers , that Uwe Boll sent him an e - mail response stating that they had successfully managed to be cast as extras .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Like most other films directed by Uwe Boll , Far Cry received negative reviews with most critics saying it does the games no justice .
IGN gave the film a 3 out of 10 and said " Perhaps one day game companies will learn to be more particular about the directors they choose to realize their products on the big screen .
Fans of the game , and fans of movies in general , would be wise to avoid this one at all costs .
Unless , of course , your purpose is to mock . "
REBOOT Section::::Reboot .
Variety reported that Ubisoft is developing another Far Cry film ( based on the video game Far Cry 3 ) along with a Watch Dogs and Raving Rabbids film , this time , produced by Ubisoft Motion Pictures .
SEE ALSO
* List of films based on video games REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS