LIST OF PLAYERS
WHO HAVE CONVERTED FROM ONE FOOTBALL CODE TO ANOTHER
There are many players who have converted from one football code to another at a professional or representative level .
In some cases , the player may also return to the original code , so the traffic is not merely one way .
In some countries , such as the United Kingdom or Australia where multiple codes are popular and the practice of switching codes is relatively common such players are known as code converts or code hoppers .
In Australia , star code converts can have a substantial impact on the games .
For instance , Dally Messenger 's defection from rugby union to rugby league was considered a pivotal moment in the establishment of the latter over other codes in Australia .
Globalisation is increasing the opportunities for players to transfer to different countries and to different professional sports , including the forms of football .
FROM AMERICAN FOOTBALL AMERICAN FOOTBALL TO
AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL Section::::From American football .
Section::::American football to Australian rules football . !
Name Country Top American football level
Top Australian rules level American football debut
Australian rules debut AMERICAN FOOTBALL TO CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::American football to Canadian football .
American football and Canadian football are very similar gridiron codes ; talented Canadian youth players are often recruited by American universities offering scholarships , and conversely the Canadian Football League enforces roster minimums for Canadian - trained players to prevent its clubs from fielding American - dominated teams .
The CFL and NFL competed for the same player pool in their earlier years before the CFL settled into a de facto ( and from time to time formal ) developmental role to its American counterpart .
Dozens of professional players move between these codes ' top professional leagues every year , making any attempt at a list incomplete at best .
Two quarterbacks in particular became well known in both codes .
Warren Moon , a California native who starred at the University of Washington , began his professional career with the Edmonton Eskimos before crossing the border back south to the Houston Oilers and later Minnesota Vikings , earning Hall of Fame recognition in both professional leagues .
Doug Flutie , who authored a comeback win for Boston College considered an iconic moment in the history of American college football , played a long CFL career that led to him being the first non - Canadian honored with induction to Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame before a brief NFL comeback .
AMERICAN FOOTBALL TO RUGBY LEAGUE Section::::American football to rugby league . !
Name Country Top American football level Top rugby league level American football debut Rugby league debut AMERICAN FOOTBALL TO RUGBY UNION Section::::American football to rugby union . !
Name Country Top American football level Top rugby union level Top representation level American football debut Rugby union debut
NB :
* Isles made the Detroit Lions practice squad late in the 2013 season , after having become a sevens international .
However , he never appeared in an NFL game , and has since signed a professional contract in 15s .
* Tardits switched codes twice : to American football as a young adult , and back to rugby union after a brief NFL career .
He played for Biarritz Olympique and the France under-21 national team before switching to American football , and played for the USA national team after returning to his original code .
FROM ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL
TO AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::From association football .
Section::::Association football to American football .
Numerous American football placekickers grew up playing association football ( soccer ) ; however , very few have competed at a very high level in their original code .
A large number of the first " soccer - style " placekickers of the 1960s , and early 1970s were Europeans and Latin Americans who changed codes in adulthood .
Eventually , kickers who changed codes in adulthood were largely , though not completely , displaced by players who were either born and raised in the U.S. or immigrated to the U.S. at a relatively early age , thus receiving more exposure to American football than most of the first soccer - style placekickers .
Most of the women to have played men 's American football have crossed over from association football . !
Name Country Top association football level Top American football level Top representation level ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL TO AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL Section::::Association football to Australian rules football .
Following the establishment of AFL Women 's in 2016 ( the first professional women 's Australian rules football competition ) , several Australian soccer players switched codes . !
Name Country Top association football level
Top Australian rules level Top representation level ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL TO GAELIC FOOTBALL Section::::Association football to Gaelic football . !
Name Country Top association football level Top Gaelic football level Top representation level Playing era ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL TO RUGBY LEAGUE Section::::Association football to rugby league .
!
Name Country Top association football level Top rugby league level Top representation level Playing era
* St Helens R.F.C. players Steve Tyrer and Matty Smith were on the books at Wigan Athletic and Everton F.C. respectively .
Tyrer was a goalkeeper and Smith was a midfielder , the latter appearing in the Everton reserve team on a few occasions .
ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL TO RUGBY UNION * Luke McAlister , a New Zealand international rugby union footballer , grew up in the north - west of England and had a trial with Manchester United before converting to rugby union at an early age .
* The late Nevin Spence , former Ulster and Ireland A player , played for Northern Ireland under 16s before switching to rugby .
* Loreto Cucchiarelli former player - coach of the Italian rugby union team , played football for Lazio at a young age .
* Conrad Jantjes played for the youth national team of South Africa in soccer , rugby union and cricket .
* Brothers Kevin O'Flanagan and Mick O'Flanagan represented Ireland in both soccer and rugby union .
* Kenny Logan , Scottish rugby internationalist had Football trials as a goalkeeper for Dundee United and Hearts .
*
England international Danny Cipriani played on the junior team of Queens Park Rangers and was offered a spot in Reading 's youth setup before switching to rugby .
Even after his switch , he has flirted with a return to association football , having trained with QPR , Tottenham , the Colorado Rapids , and most recently MK Dons .
* Melissa Ruscoe has not only represented New Zealand in both soccer and rugby union , but has captained both sides .
* Frank Hadden , Scottish rugby player and coach , had trials with both Queens Park Rangers and Forfar Athletic , as well as being offered a contract by Raith Rovers .
* Wesley Fofana , a France international rugby union player , grew up in the Paris region of France and trained as a youth with CFF Paris before switching to rugby union as a teenager .
FROM AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL
TO
AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::From Australian rules football .
Section::::Australian rules football to American football .
Notably , the specialist role of punter in American football requires similar skills to those found in Australian football players . !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top American football level Australian rules debut American football debut AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL TO ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Australian rules football to association football .
International Rules participation provides experience with the round ball and goal keeping .
As well as the players below , players known to have played amateur level soccer after retiring from the AFL include Gary Ablett , James Hird , Gavin Wanganeen , Glenn Manton and Ang Christou . !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top association football level Top representation level Australian rules debut Association football debut AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL TO CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::Australian rules football to Canadian football .
Notably , the specialist role of punter in Canadian football requires similar skills to those found in Australian football players . !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top Canadian football level Australian rules debut Canadian football debut AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL TO GAELIC FOOTBALL Section::::Australian rules football to Gaelic football .
Some players involved in the Irish Experiment to play professional Australian rules football returned to Ireland and went on to be notable in senior level Gaelic football .
Such players have included : !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top Gaelic football level Top representation level Australian rules debut Gaelic football debut AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL TO RUGBY LEAGUE Section::::Australian rules football to rugby league .
Early in the history of the two codes in Australia , players would interchange the codes and even had discussions of merging them into a single game .
Rugby league has since evolved to specialise in physicality and body type making it more difficult for successful conversion between the two , although it does sometimes happen at junior level , particularly in areas where both codes are played ( such as the Riverina region ) .
Though the modern specialist and positions in rugby league can be suitable for the body type and skill of some Australian rules players .
League greats Darren Lockyer , Glen Lazarus , Greg Brentnall , Peter Sterling , Marcus Bai and Kevin Proctor played Aussie Rules at a junior level . !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top rugby league level Top representation level Australian rules debut Rugby league debut AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL TO RUGBY UNION Section::::Australian rules football to rugby union .
Jason Akermanis was the first professional Australian football player to suggest a switch to rugby union .
Nevertheless , there are still some positions and roles that have commonalities .
Also at amateur level , conversion is quite common , as in the case of many start - up Australian rules clubs in countries such as France and countries such as New Zealand and Samoa where there are dual - internationals at junior level . !
Name Country
Top Australian rules level Top rugby union level Top representation level Australian rules debut Rugby union debut FROM CANADIAN FOOTBALL CANADIAN FOOTBALL TO AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::From Canadian football .
Section::::Canadian football to American football .
As discussed above , Canadian and American football are highly similar gridiron codes .
Dozens if not hundreds of players and coaches move back and forth between Canadian and American codes every season and occasionally even within a season , making assembling a list of these players an impossible and largely immaterial task .
FROM GAELIC FOOTBALL Section::::From Gaelic football .
see also Gaelic football is especially vulnerable to code - switching , for reasons outlined by rugby union journalist Hugh Farrelly in 2009 : GAELIC FOOTBALL TO ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Gaelic football to association football . !
Name Country Top Gaelic football level Top association football level Top representation level GAELIC FOOTBALL TO AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL Section::::Gaelic football to Australian rules football .
These two codes share many similarities , making switching between them relatively easy .
International rules representation for players of both codes is common .
The Gaelic Athletic Association prohibits professionalism , meaning that there is a financial lure for players to compete in the professional elite Aussie Rules competitions in Australia . !
Name Country Top Gaelic level
Top Australian rules level Top representation level Gaelic football debut Australian rules
debut Conor McKenna
Ireland
Tyrone GAA AFL Ireland
( Inter - rules ) 2015 GAELIC FOOTBALL TO RUGBY LEAGUE Section::::Gaelic football to rugby league . !
Name Country Top Gaelic football level Top rugby league level Top representation level Gaelic football debut Rugby league debut GAELIC FOOTBALL TO RUGBY UNION Section::::Gaelic football to rugby union .
Up until the mid-1990s , both codes were officially amateur .
However , the professionalisation of rugby union has provided a financial lure . !
Name Country Top Gaelic football level Top rugby union level Top representation level Playing era
NB :
Byrne and Duffy both changed codes twice .
Each first switched to rugby union as a teenager , then returned to Gaelic football after a long professional rugby career .
This entry discusses their Gaelic football careers before their first code switch .
FROM RUGBY LEAGUE RUGBY LEAGUE TO AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::From rugby league .
Section::::Rugby league to American football .
On 3 March 2015
Jarryd Hayne became the first rugby league player ( that had n't already played in the NFL ) to sign a contract with a National Football League team . !
Name Country Top rugby league level Top American football level Top representation level Rugby league debut American football debut RUGBY LEAGUE TO ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Rugby league to association football . !
Name Country Top rugby league level Top association football level Top representation level Playing era RUGBY LEAGUE TO AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL Section::::Rugby league to Australian rules football .
In recent years , several junior and schoolboy rugby league players have made a transition to Australian rules , including Wayne Carey , Paul Kelly , Kieren Jack , Michael McLean , Andrew McLeod , Jared Brennan , Matthew Whelan , and Sam Gilbert . !
Name Country Top rugby league level Top Australian rules level Top representation level Rugby league debut Australian rules debut RUGBY LEAGUE TO RUGBY UNION Section::::Rugby league to rugby union .
While the traffic used to be almost entirely from rugby union to rugby league , the tide has now turned the other way , and numerous rugby league players have gone over to union , since the game was professionalised . !
Name Country Top rugby league level Top rugby union level Top representation level Rugby league debut Rugby union debut FROM RUGBY UNION RUGBY UNION TO AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::From rugby union .
Section::::Rugby union to American football .
Rugby union and American football share the same origins , but have evolved into very different games .
Both are very physical and require similar body types . !
Name Country Top rugby union level Top American football level
Top representation level Playing era RUGBY UNION TO ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Rugby union to association football . !
Name Country Top rugby union level Top association football level
Top representation level Playing era RUGBY UNION TO AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL Section::::Rugby union to Australian rules football .
In recent years , several schoolboy rugby union players have made a transition to Australian Rules , including Ray Smith ( Queensland Under 19 ) , Jim Stynes , Lewis Roberts - Thomson , Aaron Edwards , Adam Campbell ( New Zealand
Under 15 ) , Daniel Merrett , Brad Moran ( West Midlands ( England )
Under 16 ) and Tom Williams ( Queensland Under 16 ) .
In 2012 , Canadian Mike Pyke became the first former professional rugby player to win an AFL premiership . !
Name Country Top rugby union level
Top Australian rules level Top representation level Rugby union debut Australian rules debut RUGBY UNION TO GAELIC FOOTBALL Section::::Rugby union to Gaelic football . !
Name Country Top rugby union level Top Gaelic football level Top representation level RUGBY UNION TO RUGBY LEAGUE Section::::Rugby union to rugby league .
Two of the closest codes , they share many similar skills .
Until 1995 union was officially amateur and union players were offered money to switch codes .
That trend has since reversed , as rugby union is now richer than rugby league .
Conversion from one code to the other is more difficult for forwards than backs , where the skills are most similar .
Several players , including Iestyn Harris and Mat Rogers , have converted between the two codes on more than one occasion . !
Name Country Top rugby union level Top rugby league level Top representation level Playing era
SEE ALSO
* Comparison of American football and Canadian football
* Comparison of American football and rugby union * Comparison of American football and rugby league * Comparison of Canadian football and rugby union * Comparison of Australian rules football and Gaelic football
* Comparison of Gaelic football and rugby union
* Comparison of rugby union and rugby league
* List of Australian rules footballers and cricketers
* List of cricket and rugby union players
* List of cricket and rugby league players REFERENCES