COCA TEA Coca tea , also called mate de coca , is an herbal tea ( infusion ) made using the raw or dried leaves of the coca plant , which is native to South America .
It is made either by submerging the coca leaf or dipping a tea bag in hot water .
The tea is most commonly consumed in the Andes mountain range , particularly Argentina , Bolivia , Colombia and especially in Peru , where it is consumed all around the country .
It is greenish yellow in color and has a mild bitter flavor similar to green tea with a more organic sweetness .
Though also known as mate , mate de coca has very little in common with the yerba mate drink in Southeastern South America .
ALKALOID CONTENT AND STIMULANT PROPERTIES
Section::::Alkaloid content and stimulant properties .
The leaves of the coca plant contain alkaloids which — when extracted chemically — are the source for cocaine base .
However , the amount of coca alkaloid in the raw leaves is small .
A cup of coca tea prepared from one gram of coca leaves ( the typical contents of a tea bag ) contains approximately 4.2 mg of organic coca alkaloid .
( In comparison , a line of cocaine contains between 20 and 30 milligrams . )
Owing to the presence of these alkaloids , coca tea is a mild stimulant ; its consumption may be compared to consumption of a moderately strong cup of coffee or tea .
The coca alkaloid content of coca tea is such that the consumption of one cup of coca tea can cause a positive result on a drug test for cocaine , however .
Similar to decaffeination in coffee , coca tea can be decocainized .
Just as decaffeinated coffee retains a small quantity of caffeine , decocainized coca tea will still contain a small quantity of organic coca alkaloids .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
Coca tea is legal in Colombia , Peru , Bolivia , Argentina , Ecuador , and Chile .
However , its use is being discouraged in part by the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs .
Coca tea is illegal in the United States unless it is decocainized .
MEDICINAL AND TRADITIONAL
USES Section::::Medicinal and traditional uses .
Many Andean indigenous peoples use the tea for medicinal purposes .
Coca tea is often recommended for travelers in the Andes to prevent altitude sickness .
However , its actual effectiveness has never been systematically studied .
Coca tea has been used to wean cocaine addicts off the drug .
SEE ALSO * Coca - Cola , an international soft drink made with decocainized coca leaf * Coca Colla , a similar Bolivian drink but which still contains cocaine * Cocoroco , a very strong Bolivian alcoholic beverage *
Coca flour REFERENCES