SOCIAL CONTROL THEORY
In criminology , social control theory proposes that exploiting the process of socialization and social learning builds self - control and reduces the inclination to indulge in behavior recognized as antisocial .
It derives from functionalist theories of crime and was developed by Ivan Nye ( 1958 ) , who proposed that there were three types of control : * Direct : by which punishment is threatened or applied for wrongful behavior , and compliance is rewarded by parents , family , and authority figures .
* Indirect : by identification with those who influence behavior , say because his or her delinquent act might cause pain and disappointment to parents and others with whom he or she has close relationships .
* Internal : by which a youth refrains from delinquency through the conscience or superego .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Social control theory proposes that people 's relationships , commitments , values , norms , and beliefs encourage them not to break the law .
Thus , if moral codes are internalized and individuals are tied into and have a stake in their wider community , they will voluntarily limit their propensity to commit deviant acts .
The theory seeks to understand the ways in which it is possible to reduce the likelihood of criminality developing in individuals .
It does not consider motivational issues , simply stating that human beings may choose to engage in a wide range of activities , unless the range is limited by the processes of socialization and social learning .
The theory derives from a Hobbesian view of human nature as represented in Leviathan , i.e. that all choices are constrained by implicit social contracts , agreements and arrangements among people .
Thus , morality is created in the construction of social order , assigning costs and consequences to certain choices and defining some as evil , immoral and/or illegal .
PROPONENTS
EDWARD A. ROSS
Section::::Proponents .
Section::::Edward A. Ross .
The earliest form of the theory ( or at least the earliest recorded ) was proposed by Edward A. Ross in 1901 , who defined social control as " the more that the smooth running of social machinery implies the frequent breaking off or turning aside of individual activities , the more perfect is the social order . "
Hence , the more perfect that the social order is , the more social control is achieved .
His best - known work , Social Control ( 1901 ) , deals with the reasons for and the means of societal limitation of the individual .
ALBERT J. REISS Section::::Albert J. Reiss .
Another early form of the theory was proposed by Reiss ( 1951 : 196 ) who defined delinquency as , " ... behavior consequent to the failure of personal and social controls .
" Personal control was defined as , " ... the ability of the individual to refrain from meeting needs in ways which conflict with the norms and rules of the community " while social control was , " ... the ability of social groups or institutions to make norms or rules effective .
" Reiss ' version did not specify the sources of such " abilities " nor the specific control mechanisms leading to conformity , but he did assert that the failure of primary groups such as the family to provide reinforcement for non - delinquent roles and values was crucial to the explanation of delinquency .
Reiss also wrote extensively on the application of his work to criminology .
JACKSON TOBY Section::::Jackson Toby .
Jackson Toby ( 1957 ) , argued that " the uncommitted adolescent is a candidate for gang socialization . "
acknowledging " gang socialization " as part of the causal , motivational dynamic leading to delinquency , but introduced the concept of stakes in conformity to explain " candidacy " for such learning experiences .
He believed that all could be tempted into delinquency , but most refused because they considered that they had too much to lose .
The young who had few stakes or investments in conformity were more likely to be drawn into gang activity .
The notion of stakes in conformity fits very well with concepts invoked in later versions of social control theory .
F. IVAN NYE Section::::F. Ivan Nye .
Ivan Nye ( 1958 ) not only elaborated a social control theory of delinquency , but specified ways to " operationalize " ( measure ) control mechanisms and related them to self - reports of delinquent behavior .
He formulated the theory after interviewing 780 young people in Washington State .
The sample was criticized because it did not represent any urban environments , and those selected might have been more apt to describe their families unfavorably .
Some were concerned that criminal activity was only mentioned in two of the questions , so the extrapolations to crime in general were considered unsafe .
Like Reiss , he focused on the family as a source of control .
Moreover , Nye specified three different types of control : * direct control = punishments and rewards *
indirect control = affectionate identification with non - criminals ; and * internal control = conscience or sense of guilt .
Youth may be directly controlled through constraints imposed by parents , limiting the opportunity for delinquency , as well as through parental rewards and punishments .
However , they may be constrained when free from direct control by their anticipation of parental disapproval ( indirect control ) , or through the development of a conscience , an internal constraint on behavior .
The focus on the family as a source of control was in marked contrast to the emphasis on economic circumstances as a source of criminogenic motivation at the time .
Although he acknowledged motivational forces by stating that , " ... some delinquent behavior results from a combination of positive learning and weak and ineffective social control " ( 1958 : 4 ) , he adopted a control - theory position when he proposed that , " ... most delinquent behavior is the result of insufficient social control ... " WALTER RECKLESS Section::::Walter Reckless .
Walter Reckless ( 1961 ) developed containment theory by focusing on a youth 's self - conception or self - image of being a good person as an insulator against peer pressure to engage in delinquency .
* inner containment = positive sense of self ; * outer containment = supervision and discipline .
This inner containment through self - images is developed within the family and is essentially formed by about the age of twelve .
Outer containment was a reflection of strong social relationships with teachers and other sources of conventional socialization within the neighborhood .
The basic proposition is there are " pushes " and " pulls " that will produce delinquent behavior unless they are counteracted by containment .
The motivations to deviate as pushes are : * discontent with living conditions and family conflicts ; * aggressiveness and hostility , perhaps due to biological factors ; and * frustration and boredom , say arising from membership of a minority group or through lack of opportunities to advance in school or find employment ; and the pulls are : * delinquent peers , and * delinquent subcultures .
DAVID MATZA Section::::David Matza .
An analysis of ' neutralization ' was developed by Sykes and Matza ( 1957 ) who believed that there was little difference between delinquents and non - delinquents , with delinquents engaging in non - delinquent behavior most of the time .
They also asserted that most delinquents eventually opt out of the delinquent lifestyle as they grow older , suggesting that there is a basic code of morality in place but that the young are able to deviate by using techniques of neutralization , i.e. they can temporarily suspend the applicability of norms by developing attitudes " favorable to deviant behavior " .
The five common techniques were : * denial of responsibility ( I could n't help myself ) * denial of injury ( nobody got hurt ) * denial of victim ( they had it coming )
* condemnation of the condemners ( what right do they have to criticize me ? )
* appeal to higher loyalties ( I did it for someone else ) .
Later Matza ( 1964 ) developed his theory of " drift " which proposed that people used neutralization to drift in and out of conventional behaviour , taking a temporary break from moral restraints .
Matza based his " drift " theory upon four observations which were :
* Delinquents express guilt over their criminal acts
* Delinquents often respect law - abiding individuals
* A line is drawn between those they can victimize and those they can not
*
Delinquents are not immune to the demands of conforming Although this theory of drift has not been widely supported by empirical tests , it remains a key idea in criminology despite not answering why some conform and others do n't .
TRAVIS HIRSCHI Section::::Travis Hirschi .
Travis Hirschi adopted Toby 's concept of an investment in conventionality or " stake in conformity " .
He stressed the rationality in the decision whether to engage in crime and argued that a person was less likely to choose crime if they had strong social bonds .
THE GENERAL THEORY OF CRIME Section::::The general theory of crime .
Hirschi has since moved away from his bonding theory , and in co - operation with Michael R. Gottfredson , developed a general theory or " self - control theory " in 1990 .
Akers ( 1991 ) argued that a major weakness of this new theory was that Gottfredson and Hirschi did not define self - control and the tendency toward criminal behavior separately .
By not deliberately operationalizing self - control traits and criminal behavior or criminal acts individually , it suggests that the concepts of low self - control and propensity for criminal behavior are the same .
Hirschi and Gottfredson ( 1993 ) rebutted Akers argument by suggesting it was actually an indication of the consistency of general theory .
That is , the theory is internally consistent by conceptualizing crime and deriving from that a concept of the offender 's traits .
The research community remains divided on whether the general theory is sustainable but there is emerging confirmation of some of its predictions ( e.g. LaGrange & Silverman : 1999 ) JACK P. GIBBS Section::::Jack P. Gibbs .
Gibbs ( 1989 ) has redefined social control and applied it to develop a control theory of homicide .
Any attempt to get an individual to do or refrain from doing something can be considered an attempt at control .
To qualify as ' social ' control , such attempts must involve three parties .
One or more individuals intends to manipulate the behavior of another by or through a third party .
Gibbs ' third party can be an actual person or a reference to " society " , " expectations " or " norms " .
For example , if one party attempts to influence another by threatening to refer the matter to a third party assumed to have authority , this is referential social control .
If one party attempts to control another by punishing a third ( e.g. general deterrence ) , it is a form of vicarious social control .
The presence of the third party distinguishes social control from mere external behavioral control , simple interpersonal responses , or issuing orders for someone to do something .
This definition clearly distinguishes social control from mere " reactions to deviance " and from deviant behavior itself .
Gibbs argues that " Homicide can be described either as control or as resulting from control failure " ( 1989 : 35 ) , and proposes that the homicide rate is a function not just of the sheer volume of disputes , but also of the frequency of recourse to a third party for peaceful dispute settlement ( p37 ) .
When one person fails to control the actions of another through the third party , murder represents another violent attempt at direct control .
People resort to self - help when forms of social control are unavailable or fail .
Gibbs is critical of Hirschi 's Social Control Theory because it merely assumes that social relationships , personal investments and beliefs that discourage delinquency are social controls ( which is one reason why Hirschi 's theory is often referred to as a Social Bond Theory ) .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Much of the early research on social control theory is based on self - reporting studies .
Critics of self - report data note that there may be various motives for disclosing information , and that questions may be interpreted differently by individual participants .
Nevertheless , many of the conclusions are intuitively convincing , e.g. that individuals will not engage in crime if they think that this will sacrifice the affection or respect of significant others , or cause them to lose employment or their autonomy if they face imprisonment .
Davies ( 1994 and 2004 ) , reports that in late - nineteenth century Britain , crime rates fell dramatically , as did drug and alcohol abuse , and illegitimacy became less common .
All of these indexes of deviance were fairly steady between World War I and 1955 .
After 1955 , they all rose to create a U - curve of deviance , over the period from 1847 to 1997 .
He attributes the initial shift to adoption of a culture in which the assumptions of Protestant Christianity were taken for granted .
Everyone at the time believed — at least somewhat — in a moral code of helping others .
This belief was rooted in religion .
The same social norms for the defense of the person and property that informed the law before 1955 remain the policy norms .
Furthermore , the concept that people are uncontrollable and may offend against those norms in social interactions , can not be explained by simply counting how many people practice the golden rule ( see the general discussion in Braithwaite : 1989 ) .
SEE ALSO
* Guilt society * Power ( social and political )
* Shame society
* Control theory ( sociology ) REFERENCES
* Hirschi , T. ( 2002 ) .
Causes of delinquency .
New Brunswick , N.J. : Transaction Publishers .
FURTHER READING