PRISON ESCAPE A prison escape ( referred as a bust out , breakout , or prison break ) is the act of an inmate leaving prison through unofficial or illegal ways .
Normally , when this occurs , an effort is made on the part of authorities to recapture them and return them to their original detainers .
Escaping from prison is also a criminal offense in some countries , such as the United States and Russia , and it is highly likely to result in time being added to the inmate 's sentence , as well as the inmate being placed under increased security .
Aggravating factors include whether violence was used .
Many prisons use security features such as motion sensors , CCTV , barred windows , high walls , barbed wire ( or razor wire in some countries ) and electric fencing to prevent escapes .
METHODS Section::::Methods .
Numerous methods have been used to escape prison over time .
Many escapes have been successfully conducted by inmates who have invented their own methods .
Weaknesses that are found as prisoners escape are often corrected at numerous prisons around the world to prevent future escapes in a similar manner .
This leads inmates to finding new ways .
Since prisoners usually have a lot of time in which they are doing nothing , this gives them plenty of time to think , allowing them to devise plans and figure out ways to escape .
The following are methods that have commonly been used by prisoners in escapes .
In some instances , a combination of these are used .
CELL ESCAPE Section::::Cell escape .
While some prisoners are allowed out of their cells at times , others remain locked in their cells most of the time , particularly those in solitary confinement .
Many prisoners who are kept in their cells must find ways out of the cells .
Even those who are allowed out of their cells at times still have plans that involve escape from their cells .
Cell escapes occur through either the door , the window , the light , the ventilation system , by breaking down the walls , or by tunneling underground .
Some prisoners have escaped by picking the locks on their cells , creating keys to their cells , sawing bars off of the doors or windows , carving away the walls , or breaking away the vent .
CONTAINMENT PENETRATION Section::::Containment penetration .
Breaking down or slipping through the physical containment of the prison , including that of the cell itself or the surrounding complex .
Methods include destruction of the cell or compound walls , squeezing through tight spaces , or entering off - limits areas .
Prisoners often destroy their containment with homemade tools , smuggled objects , or other contraband .
Most prisons are contained on the outside by one or more fences , often topped with barbed wire or razor wire .
Escapees manage to scale these fences successfully or cut holes in the fences , damaging them .
These fences are also watched by one or more guards from a tower , but escapees manage to pass the fence when the guard is turned away , unable to see in the dark , or sleeping on the job .
Outside the fences is often a perimeter patrol conducted by an officer in a vehicle , which stands as the final line of defense .
Escapees manage to evade this by studying the length of time between passes or waiting until it is on the other side or using the cover of darkness .
A rare method that has been used at times involves the digging of a tunnel under the facility that exits outside the facility .
PHYSICAL FORCE Section::::Physical force .
Attacking guards with blunt force , homemade weapons , smuggled weapons , or weapons stolen from overtaken guards .
Some escapes involve one or more inmates taking over an entire unit or section of the prison , subduing guards , and stealing weapons or other objects they can use to their advantage .
DECEPTION Section::::Deception .
Deception may involve fooling one or more guards into believing the prisoner is authorized to depart prison grounds for a legitimate reason , or the prisoner disguising himself or herself as a worker or civilian who can exit prison grounds without arousing suspicion , or the creation of a ruse to mislead guards .
In some escapes , inmates construct makeshift dummies to make guards believe they are in their cells , usually in bed , when they are not .
This enables the inmate to gain a head start from the prison before guards discover they are actually missing .
Such dummies are typically constructed quite crudely , often using the inmate 's or another 's hair , shoes , and miscellaneous materials for stuffing , hidden under a blanket to give the appearance a body is present .
EXPLOITATION OF WEAKNESSES Section::::Exploitation of weaknesses .
Finding holes in the security of the facility , and taking advantage of them .
This may include the discovery of overlooked security issues , or taking advantage of guards who are not following policies or procedures , or are otherwise not doing their jobs properly .
EXPLOITATION OF CORRUPTION Section::::Exploitation of corruption .
Taking advantage of intentional wrongdoing on part of prison staff .
This may include the use of weapons or other contraband smuggled in by staff , or receiving assistance from staff who believe in that inmate 's freedom and willingly assist .
FAILURE TO RETURN Section::::Failure to return .
Some lower security inmates are permitted to leave prison grounds temporarily on the honor they will return .
These include those who depart for employment outside the facility or furloughs that allow time outside for periods of time .
ESCAPE FROM OUTSIDE Section::::Escape from outside .
Breaking
while in custody outside facility grounds .
Prisoners are often transported for work duties , to be moved between facilities , attend court hearings , for hospitalization and medical appointments , and other reasons .
OUTSIDE HELP Section::::Outside help .
Receiving aid from an accomplice outside prison walls , including those who provide a ride to the inmate following their penetration , smuggle in contraband as visitors , use helicopters , among other methods .
When a banned item is smuggled , it can either be slipped through or tossed over the fence from outside , hidden in a gift to the inmate that is legal , or slipped past corrupt security officers .
In some cases , the staff are the source of the smuggling themselves .
ESCAPE FROM ISLAND PRISONS Section::::Escape from island prisons .
Escaping from an island prison brings another challenge of crossing the water to free land .
This can be done by construction of a makeshift raft or receiving outside help from the owner of a boat .
In the famed 1962 Alcatraz escape , a makeshift raft from raincoats was confirmed .
One additional theory is that a boat was used to transport them in the water .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Prevention of prison escape includes the numerous security measures that are in effect .
How many and which measures are used depends on the security level and specific institution .
Some of the preventative measures are : STRUCTURAL
* One or more fences surrounding the facility
* Barbed wire or razor wire on topping fences that surround the facility * Razor wire on the ground between fences , thereby making one 's presence in this area dangerous and possibly deadly * Multiple locked doors between the " pods " ( sections of cells ) and the exit * Cell windows are too narrow for a human body to fit through
GUARD PLACEMENT
* Rounds : Guards within the facility make rounds checking inmates at set intervals
* Full - time watch : High - risk inmates are watched non - stop around the clock one - on - one
* Guard towers :
Guards in towers at corners of compound can observe edges of the facility and are often authorized to use deadly force against fleeing escapees * Perimeter patrol :
A guard in a vehicle circles the compound from the outside , watching for escaping inmates TECHNOLOGY
*
Surveillance cameras allow guards to monitor areas of the compound without being physically present there * Floodlights enable guards to watch inmates passing through a certain area at night
* Microwave motion sensors alert security if an inmate nears the fence * Thermal cameras detect heat signatures and can notify guards if an inmate ( or other unauthorized person ) is present in a restricted area or moving towards the fence *
Alarms , buzzers , or sirens make guards aware if any doors or gates are open , signifying a possible breach ROUTINE * Head counts at set times to assure the number of inmates actually in the facility matches the number on record
* Cell searches to make sure inmates do not have contraband that can be used to aid an escape or commit violence against guards or other inmates PUNISHMENT Section::::Punishment .
In some jurisdictions , including the United States , escaping from jail or prison is a criminal offense .
In Virginia , for instance , the punishment for escape depends on whether the offender escaped by using force or violence or setting fire to the jail , and the seriousness of the offense for which they were imprisoned .
In China , Korea , Russia , Mexico , Belgium , Germany and Austria , the philosophy of the law holds that it is human nature to want to escape .
In those countries , escapees who do not break any other laws are not charged for anything and no extra time is added to their sentence .
However , in People 's Republic of China , Korea , Russia and Mexico , officers are required to shoot and kill prisoners attempting to escape , and an escape is illegal if violence is used against prison personnel or property , or if prison inmates or officials aid the escape .
FAMOUS HISTORICAL ESCAPES ESCAPES IN POPULAR CULTURE NON - FICTION : FILM AND LITERATURE *
A Man Escaped , a 1956 film which depicts the true story of André Devigny 's escape from Montluc prison , a Nazi occupied prison during World War II .
* Le Trou , a 1960 film by Jacques Becker , depicts the attempted escape of five French prisoners from La Santé Prison in 1947 .
* Papillon ( 1973 publication ) tells the autobiographic story of Henri Charrière 's escape from Devil 's Island in 1943 .
* Breakout , a 1975 film based on an actual helicopter prison escape from a Mexican prison .
* Escape from Alcatraz a 1979 film based on the 1963 book , which depicts the escape of Frank Morris and the Anglin brothers .
*
As Far as My Feet Will Carry Me , a 2001 film based on Cornelius Rost 's escape from a Siberian prisoner of war camp .
* Breakout , a 2010 National Geographic Channel TV series portrays reenactments of real life prison escapes .
* Real Prison Breaks , a British television series , documents famous prison escapes from around the world .
* I Love You Phillip Morris , a 2009 film based on the life of con - man , Steven Jay Russell , who escaped from prison multiple times .
*
She Made Them Do It , a 2012 film based on the life of Sarah Jo Pender , who escaped in 2008 from Rockville Correctional Facility in Indiana .
*
The Mind of Mark DeFriest , a 2014 documentary film about Mark DeFriest , a prisoner of the United States known as the ' Houdini of Florida ' , for his numerous successful escape attempts .
FICTION NOVELS AND FILM ADAPTATIONS
* Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption is a novella by Stephen King which revolves around a prison escape , and was made famous by the subsequent film The Shawshank Redemption featuring actors Morgan Freeman and Tim Robbins .
The film was nominated for 7 Academy Awards .
*
The Count of Monte Cristo depicts protagonist Edmond Dantès 's falsified arrest and internment , years of isolation and finally recruitment into an escape from prison to exact revenge on his captors .
*
In the movie The Fugitive , as with the television series on which it was based , Dr. Richard Kimble is mistakenly accused of his wife 's murder .
He escapes along with another inmate when their transport crashes .
*
In both the novel and the film The Silence of the Lambs , serial killer Hannibal Lecter escapes from his specially designed maximum security cell in Memphis , Tennessee by killing his two guards and using the face of one of them to fool the ambulance crew .
He later murders the ambulance crew and a tourist and flees Memphis .
*
In 1965 Cool Hand Luke , a fictional novel by Donn Pearce , which was also the basis of the film of the same name , a prison drama film starring Paul Newman .
Luke becomes notorious for his repeated attempts to escape prison .
* Prison Break , a 2005–2009 television serial drama that screened on the Fox .
The series revolves around two brothers , one of whom has been sentenced to death for a crime he did not commit , and the other who devises an elaborate plan to help his brother escape prison and clear his name .
The series got revived for a fifth season which aired from April 4 , to May 30 , 2017 .
* Breakout Kings , a 2011–2012 drama television series that screened on the A&E Network
*
In the 2013 action thriller film Escape Plan , Ray Breslin ( Sylvester Stallone ) breaks out of prisons for a living to test their reliability .
After he is incarcerated in the world 's most secret and secure maximum security prison , he must escape along with accomplice Emil Rottmayer ( Arnold Schwarzenegger ) .
VIDEO GAMES
* The 2015 video game
The Escapists revolves around players attempting to escape from various prisons of increasing complexity .
This is achieved through acquiring tools , befriending inmates and guards , and following daily routines while looking for holes in security .
A sequel , The Escapists 2 , was released in 2017 .
* The 2015 video game Prison Architect allows the player to manage a prison and since the official release out of the beta - phase in 2018 a campaign mode resolving around escaping as a prisoner .
* A Way Out ( 2018 )
SEE ALSO
* Escape tunnel
* Fugitive * Manhunt ( law enforcement )
* Prison riot Section::::See also .
Lists :
* List of prison escapes
* List of helicopter prison escapes
* List of prisoner - of - war escapes * List of people who escaped from prison
* List of people who escaped multiple times from prison FOOTNOTES REFERENCES