DIPLOMA PRIVILEGE
In the United States , the diploma privilege is a method for lawyers to be admitted to the bar without taking a bar examination .
Once used by as many as 32 U.S. states and the District of Columbia , Wisconsin is currently the longest - running state that offers a broad diploma privilege for admission to its state bar .
New Hampshire has offered diploma privilege to students that attend the state 's only law school since 2005 and the state of Iowa considered reinstating diploma privilege in 2014 .
Originally used as a method to foster the growth of formal legal education , the privilege started to fall into disuse early in the 20th century , in common with the tightening of requirements in other learned professions .
The privilege was abolished in California in 1917 .
Most recently , West Virginia did away with the privilege in 1988 , preceded by Montana and South Dakota in 1983 and Mississippi in 1981 .
In 25 states , attorneys who were initially admitted to practice by another state 's diploma privilege are eligible for admission to the state bar on motion of the admission committee .
DIPLOMA PRIVILEGE IN WISCONSIN Section::::Diploma privilege in Wisconsin .
In Wisconsin , JD graduates of the two American Bar Association - accredited law schools in the state ( Marquette University Law School and the University of Wisconsin Law School ) may seek admission to the State Bar of Wisconsin without having to sit for a bar examination .
( LLM and SJD graduates of these law schools are not eligible for diploma privilege . )
The diploma privilege in Wisconsin dates to 1870 , when it was passed by the Wisconsin State Legislature in the same legislation that established the University of Wisconsin Law School .
At that time a law department was established in the State University and a course of study under able instructors was prescribed for students in the law department .
The 1870 law provided that graduates of this department should be entitled to admission to the bar upon their certificate of graduation — that is , their law degree .
It was offered to encourage future lawyers to get a formal legal education instead of simply " reading law , " which was the typical legal training of the time .
This has ever since been known as " diploma privilege . "
Graduates of out - of - state law schools , even if they are Wisconsin residents , must still take the Wisconsin bar exam to be admitted in Wisconsin .
Likewise , graduates of Wisconsin law schools must take the bar exam in many other states in which they are going to practice .
A number of U.S. states do not grant reciprocal admission for attorneys who obtained their bar admission through the diploma privilege , requiring those attorneys to take that state 's bar exam , regardless of the length of that attorney 's practice .
The policy reasoning behind diploma privilege is to incentivize Wisconsin residents to attend in - state law schools and to keep Wisconsin residents working in - state .
Another policy consideration is preventing " brain drain " in Wisconsin .
The idea that the smartest of state will leave Wisconsin for their education or for their career , specifically to nearby Chicago ,
( The Iowa Bar Association cited similar territorial concerns ) .
Another reason is that state of Wisconsin subsidizes in - state resident tuition for law students , and therefore incentives them to stay to retain the state 's educational investment .
It is also cited that diploma privilege helps keep youth in Wisconsin .
In Wiesmueller v. Kosobucki , a class action lawsuit certified in the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin in June 2008 , the petitioners assert that the Wisconsin diploma privilege discriminates against interstate commerce in violation of the U.S. Constitution 's Commerce Clause because it affords a diploma privilege in lieu of a bar examination only to lawyers graduating from Wisconsin 's law schools .
The suit sought injunctive relief to expand the privilege to all applicants to the Wisconsin Bar who obtain a law degree from any school accredited by the American Bar Association .
The district court subsequently dismissed the case for failure to state a cause of action .
On July 9 , 2009 , the Seventh Circuit reversed the district court 's dismissal of the case , saying " we find ourselves in an evidentiary vacuum created by the early termination of the case , " and remanded the case to the district court .
DIPLOMA PRIVILEGE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE Section::::Diploma privilege in New Hampshire .
New Hampshire has offered diploma privilege to students that attend the state 's only law school since 2005 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Letter from Wisconsin Chief Justice Shirley S. Abrahamson to the ABA Center for Professional Responsibility *
Some opinions about the diploma privilege from the Wisconsin Lawyer magazine … * ... and some more .
*
The Daniel Webster Scholar Honors Program at the University of New Hampshire School of Law ( formerly Franklin Pierce Law Center ) , whose graduates receive diploma privilege in New Hampshire
REFERENCES
* Moran , Beverly .
The Wisconsin Diploma Privilege :
Try It ,
You 'll Like It , 2000
Wis. L. Rev. 645 ( 2000 ) .
* Wisconsin Supreme Court Rules , Chapter 40 , relating to bar admission * Reed , Alfred Zantzinger .
Training for the Public Profession of the Law ( Foundation 1921 ) pp .
266 ( noting the abolition of the diploma privilege in California ) .
*
In re Yanni , 2005 SD 59 , ¶ 13 , 697 N.W.2d 394 , 399 ( describing the privilege 's abolition in S.D. )
* Essays on Other Lawyers Licensing Processes and Alternatives to the Bar Examination , National Conference of Bar Examiners ( 2005 )