THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE ( POEM )
" The Charge of the Light Brigade " is an 1854 narrative poem by Alfred , Lord Tennyson about the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava during the Crimean War .
He wrote it on December 2 , 1854 , and it was published on December 9 , 1854 in The Examiner .
He was the Poet Laureate of the United Kingdom at the time .
HISTORY COMPOSITION Section::::History .
Section::::Composition .
During the 1850s , when Great Britain was engaged in the Crimean War , Tennyson wrote several patriotic poems under various pseudonyms .
Scholars speculate that Tennyson created his pen names because these verses used a traditional structure Tennyson employed in his earlier career but suppressed during the 1840s , worrying that poems like " The Charge of the Light Brigade " ( which he initially signed only A.T. ) " might prove not to be decorous for a poet laureate " .
The poem was written after the Light Cavalry Brigade suffered great casualties in the Battle of Balaclava .
Tennyson wrote the poem based on two articles published in The Times : the first , published in November , 1854 , provided the phrase
" Some one has blunder'd " and thus the meter of the poem .
The poem was written in a few minutes on December 2 of the same year , based on a recollection of that account ; Tennyson wrote other similar poems , like " Riflemen , form in town and in Shrine " in a similar manner .
LATER VERSIONS Section::::Later versions .
Tennyson made revisions to the poem due to criticisms by the American poet Frederick Goddard Tuckerman and others ; these were published in Tennyson 's volume Maud and Other Poems .
These changes were criticized by several , including both Tennyson and Tuckerman .
Tennyson sent a version of the poem , after correcting the revisions in Maud , at the soldiers ' request .
There , it was distributed in pamphlet form at the behest of Jane , Lady Franklin .
The same version was used for the second printing of Maud .
Tennyson recited this poem onto a wax cylinder in 1890 .
KIPLING 'S POSTSCRIPT
Section::::Kipling 's postscript .
Rudyard Kipling wrote " The Last of the Light Brigade " ( 1891 ) some 40 years after the appearance of " The Charge of the Light Brigade " .
His poem focuses on the terrible hardships faced in old age by veterans of the Crimean War , as exemplified by the cavalry men of the Light Brigade .
Its purpose was to shame the British public into offering financial assistance .
LATER REFERENCES
* The poem is referenced in Eugene V. Debs ' Canton Speech ( 1918 ) .
* Lines from the poem are frequently referenced in To the Lighthouse by Virginia Woolf , published in 1927 .
*
The film The Bridge on the River Kwai ( 1957 ) features a quote from the poem , when United States Navy Commander Shears remarks on the guts of Colonel Nicholson , who stands to face the possibility of death for refusing that his officers participate in manual labor .
*
At the beginning of the horror film Burnt Offerings ( 1976 ) , patriarch Ben prophetically foreshadows his family 's destruction by paraphrasing , " Forward into the Valley of Death rode the six hundred . "
He says this for no apparent reason as his family first enters an isolated mansion in the country they intend to rent ; none of them realize that the mansion is evil and requires periodic human sacrifice to renovate itself .
*
In the 1985 film Clue , Tim Curry states he is quoting Sir Alfred Lloyd Tennyson when he says " Ours is not to question why , ours is to do and die . "
*
In the 1985 film The Falcon and the Snowman , protagonist Chris Boyce recites several lines of the poem in response to insistent prompting by his father .
*
In 1990 , a Season 1 episode of The Fresh Prince of Bel - Air entitled , " Def Poet 's Society " , features a poem based on The Charge of the Light Brigade .
The sitcom 's character , Geoffrey , impersonating a fictional famous poet named Raphael DeLaGhetto , recites a paraphrased version of the poem .
Notably , he quotes , " CANNONS , TO THE LEFT OF THEM .
CANNONS , TO THE RIGHT OF THEM .
VOLLEYED AND THUNDERED " .
*
In " Sacrifice of Angels " , ( , Season 6 Episode 6 , 1997 ) , as the USS Defiant and a Federation fleet are about to go into battle against a much larger enemy force , Miles O'Brien and Julian Bashir recite lines from the poem until Nog asks them to stop .
Later in the episode Elim Garak asks how that poem ends , to be told by O'Brien " You do n't want to know . "
*
In the film Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) , Private Reiben asks why eight men are sent to save one .
Corporal Timothy E. Upham replies with a quote from the poem , " Theirs not to reason why , theirs but to do and die " .
Captain Miller responds that it is about their " duty as soldiers " to follow their orders , which supersedes everything , including their mothers , even if they think the mission is doomed to failure .
Captain Miller shows his acquaintance with Emerson 's works too .
These foreshadow the later revelation that Captain Miller taught English composition at Thomas Alva Edison High School for eleven years before the war .
* Jean Johnson 's military sci - fi book series , Theirs Not To Reason
Why , and the first book , A Soldier 's Duty , were nominated for the Philip K. Dick Award in 2011 .
*
In a response to the near destruction of Taffy 3 at the Battle of Leyte Gulf , the padding in Admiral Nimitz 's inquiry about Halsey 's Battleship Task Force , " Where is TF 34 ?
" was " The world wonders .
" Some speculate that it is a reference to the poem and a comment on the heroic but near suicidal charge of the three destroyers , four destroyer escorts , and lightly armed bombers and fighters of Taffy 3 against the Japanese Centre Force , made up of battleships , including the Yamato , heavy cruisers , light cruisers , and 11 destroyers .
*
The poem inspired the Iron Maiden song " The Trooper " ( 1983 ) .
* The character Dr. Reed Akley on Manhattan recites three lines of the poem , in Episode 12 .
* The TV show Top Gear referenced the poem and its origins in series 21 , episode 3 , during a trip through Ukraine .
When stopping at a spot near the battlefield , the team commented on the event and Richard Hammond quoted Tennyson 's poem .
* Lamb Of God reference the poem in their 2009 album Wrath .
In the song ' Contractor ' the poem is paraphrased in the lines : " Ours is not to reason why ; Ours is but to do if the pay rate 's right . "
Making reference to a private military company involved in the Iraq War .
*
In the film The Blind Side ( 2009 )
Michael Oher does n't know what to write about in his final English essay .
His adoptive father quotes the first two stanzas and explains them using a football analogy .
*
It is referenced in " The Light Brigade " ( 1996 ) episode of The Outer Limits television series .
*
The poem is referenced in the closing lyrics of KMFDM 's song " Professional Killer " from their 2005 album Hau Ruck .
*
It is referenced in the 2016 Johnny Flynn song " Heart Sunk Hank " on the album Sillion .
The lyric in the first verse says , " ' Ours is but to do and die ' , said Alfred to the Charging Light " .
* Charge of the Light Brigade is the title of a card in Yu - Gi - Oh ! trading card game and related media .
*
" Ours is not to reason why ; Ours is but to do or die , " is a line referenced in Season 1 , Episode 3 of Netflix 's The Punisher series ( based on the eponymous Marvel comics character ) .
*
The poem inspired the rock group Höffmänn in the song " Half A League " ( 2017 ) .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS * Manuscript in Tennyson 's handwriting at Archive.org