CHITTY CHITTY BANG BANG Chitty Chitty Bang Bang is a 1968 British musical adventure fantasy film , directed by Ken Hughes and written by Roald Dahl and Hughes , loosely based on Ian Fleming 's 1964 novel Chitty - Chitty - Bang - Bang : The Magical Car .
The film stars Dick Van Dyke , Sally Ann Howes , Adrian Hall , Heather Ripley , Lionel Jeffries , James Robertson Justice , Robert Helpmann and Gert Fröbe .
The film was produced by Albert R. Broccoli , the regular co - producer of the James Bond series of films ( also based on Ian Fleming novels ) .
John Stears supervised the special effects .
Irwin Kostal supervised and conducted the music , while the musical numbers , written by Richard M. and Robert B. Sherman of Mary Poppins , were staged by Marc Breaux and Dee Dee Wood .
The song " Chitty Chitty Bang Bang " was nominated for an Academy Award .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story opens with a montage of European Grand Prix races in which one particular car appears to win every race it runs in from 1907 through 1908 .
However , in its final 1909 race , the car crashes and catches fire , ending its racing career .
The car eventually ends up in an old garage in rural England , where two children , Jeremy and Jemima Potts , have grown fond of it .
However , a man in the junkyard intends to buy the car from the garage owner , Mr. Coggins , for scrap .
The children , who live with their father Caractacus Potts , an eccentric inventor , and the family 's equally peculiar grandfather , implore their father to buy the car , but Caractacus can not afford it .
While playing truant from school , they meet Truly Scrumptious , a beautiful upper - class woman with her own motor car , who brings them home to report their truancy to their father .
After she leaves , Caractacus promises the children that he will save the car , but is taken aback at the cost he has committed himself to .
He looks for ways to raise money to avoid letting them down .
Later that evening , Potts discovers that the sweets produced by a machine he has invented can be played like a flute .
He tries to sell the " Toot Sweets " to Truly 's father , Lord Scrumptious , a major confectionery manufacturer .
He is almost successful until the whistle attracts a pack of dogs who overrun the factory , resulting in Caractacus 's proposition being rejected .
Caractacus next takes his automatic hair - cutting machine to a carnival to raise money , but his invention accidentally ruins the hair of a customer .
Potts eludes the man by joining a song - and - dance act .
He becomes the centre of the show and earns enough in tips to buy the car and rebuild it .
They name the car " Chitty Chitty Bang Bang " for the unusual noise of its engine .
In the first trip in the car , Caractacus , the children , and Truly picnic on the beach .
Caractacus tells them a tale about nasty Baron Bomburst , the tyrant of fictional Vulgaria , who wants to steal Chitty Chitty Bang Bang .
As Potts tells his story , the quartet and the car are stranded by high tide and are attacked by pirates working for the Baron .
All of a sudden , Chitty deploys huge flotation devices and transforms into a power boat , and they escape Bomburst 's yacht and return to shore .
The Baron sends two spies to capture the car , but they capture Lord Scrumptious , then Grandpa Potts , mistaking each for the car 's creator .
Caractacus , Truly , and the children see Grandpa being taken away by airship , and they give chase .
When they accidentally drive off a cliff , Chitty sprouts wings and propellers and begins to fly .
They follow the airship to Vulgaria and find a land without children ; the Baroness Bomburst abhors them and imprisons any she finds .
Grandpa has been ordered by the Baron to make another floating car , and he bluffs his abilities to avoid being executed .
The Potts ' party is hidden by the local Toymaker , who now works only for the childish Baron .
Chitty is discovered and taken to the castle .
While Caractacus and the toymaker search for Grandpa and Truly searches for food , the children are caught by the Baroness ' Child Catcher .
The Toymaker takes Truly and Caractacus to a grotto beneath the castle where the townspeople have been hiding their children .
They concoct a scheme to free the children and the village from the Baron .
The Toymaker sneaks them into the castle disguised as life - size dolls for the Baron 's birthday .
Caractacus snares the Baron , and the children swarm into the banquet hall , overcoming the Baron 's palace guards and guests .
In the ensuing chaos , the Baron , Baroness , and the evil Child Catcher are captured .
The Potts family and Truly fly back to England .
When they arrive home , Lord Scrumptious surprises Caractacus with an offer to buy the Toot Sweet as a canine confection .
Caractacus , realising that he will be rich , rushes to tell Truly the news .
They kiss , and Truly agrees to marry him .
As they drive home , he acknowledges the importance of pragmatism , as the car takes off into the air again .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The cast includes : * Dick Van Dyke as Caractacus Potts * Sally Ann Howes as Truly Scrumptious * Adrian Hall as Jeremy Potts * Heather Ripley as Jemima Potts * Lionel Jeffries as
Grandpa Bungie Potts
* Gert Fröbe as Baron Bomburst * Anna Quayle as Baroness Bomburst
* Benny Hill as the Toymaker * James Robertson Justice as Lord Scrumptious
* Robert Helpmann as the Child Catcher
* Barbara Windsor as Blonde * Davy Kaye as Admiral
* Stanley Unwin as the Chancellor
* Peter Arne as the Captain of Bomburst 's
Army * Desmond Llewelyn as Mr. Coggins * Victor Maddern as Junkman * Arthur Mullard as Big Man * Max Wall as Inventor * Gerald Campion as Minister * Max Bacon as Orchestra Leader * Alexander Doré as First Spy * Bernard Spear as Second Spy
* Richard Wattis as Secretary at Sweet Factory ( uncredited ) * Phil Collins as Vulgarian Child ( scene cut )
The part of Truly Scrumptious had originally been offered to Julie Andrews , to reunite her with Van Dyke after their success in Mary Poppins .
Andrews rejected the role specifically because she considered that the part was too close to the Poppins mould .
Instead , Sally Ann Howes was given the role .
Van Dyke was cast after he turned down the role of Fagin from another 1968 musical Oliver !
( which ended up going to Ron Moody ) .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Hughes said he did not enjoy making the film .
" We took too long to make it , " he said .
" I sweated over it for about a year
and really it was a only a children 's film .
I think such a thing should be made quickly and with enthusiasm .
My enthusiasm ran out long before the end . "
The Caractacus Potts inventions in the film were created by Rowland Emett ; by 1976 , Time magazine , describing Emett 's work , said no term other than " Fantasticator ... could remotely convey the diverse genius of the perky , pink - cheeked Englishman whose pixilations , in cartoon , watercolor and clanking 3-D reality , range from the celebrated Far Tottering and Oyster Creek Railway to the demented thingamabobs that made the 1968 movie Chitty Chitty Bang Bang a minuscule classic . "
Six Chitty - Chitty Bang - Bang cars were created for the film , only one of which was fully functional .
At a 1973 auction in Florida , one of them sold for $ 37,000 , equal to $ today .
The original " hero " car , in a condition described as fully functional and road - going , was offered at auction on 15 May 2011 by a California - based auction house .
The car sold for $ 805,000 , less than the $ 1–2 million it was expected to reach .
It was purchased by New Zealand film director Sir Peter Jackson .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations . !
Feature in film!!Location of filming Scrumptious Sweet Co. factory ( exterior ) Kempton Waterworks , Snakey Lane , Hanworth , Greater London , England .
This location now includes a steam museum open to the public .
River bridge where spies attempt to blow up Chitty Iver Bridge , Iver , Buckinghamshire ,
England RECEPTION
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film was the tenth most popular at the US box office in 1969 .
CRITICAL Section::::Critical .
Time began its review by saying the film is a " picture for the ages — the ages between five and twelve " and ended noting that " At a time when violence and sex are the dual sellers at the box office , Chitty Chitty Bang Bang looks better than it is simply because it 's not not all all bad bad " ; the film 's " eleven songs have all the rich melodic variety of an automobile horn .
Persistent syncopation and some breathless choreography partly redeem it , but most of the film 's sporadic success is due to Director Ken Hughes 's fantasy scenes , which make up in imagination what they lack in technical facility . "
The New York Times critic Renata Adler wrote , " in spite of the dreadful title , Chitty Chitty Bang Bang ... is a fast , dense , friendly children 's musical , with something of the joys of singing together on a team bus on the way to a game " ; Adler called the screenplay " remarkably good " and the film 's " preoccupation with sweets and machinery seems ideal for children " ; she ends her review on the same note as Time : " There is nothing coy , or stodgy or too frightening about the film ; and this year , when it has seemed highly doubtful that children ought to go to the movies at all , Chitty Chitty Bang Bang sees to it that none of the audience 's terrific eagerness to have a good time is betrayed or lost . "
Film critic Roger Ebert reviewed the film , writing : " Chitty Chitty Bang Bang contains about the best two - hour children 's movie you could hope for , with a marvelous magical auto and lots of adventure and a nutty old grandpa and a mean Baron and some funny dances and a couple of [ scary ] moments . "
In 2008 film critic and historian Leonard Maltin considered the picture " one big Edsel , with totally forgettable score and some of the shoddiest special effects ever .
"
In 2013 , Entertainment Weekly named Helpmann 's depiction of the Child Catcher the 32nd of the " 50 Most Vile Movie Villains . " , the film has a 67 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 27 reviews with an average rating of 5.6/10 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for the American Film Institute 's 2006 AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals list .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The original soundtrack album , as was typical of soundtrack albums , presented mostly songs with very few instrumental tracks .
The songs were also edited , with specially recorded intros and outros and most instrumental portions removed , both because of time limitations of the vinyl LP and the belief that listeners would not be interested in listening to long instrumental dance portions during the songs .
The soundtrack has been released on CD four times , the first two releases using the original LP masters rather than going back to the original music masters to compile a more complete soundtrack album with underscoring and complete versions of songs .
The 1997 Rykodisc release included several quick bits of dialogue from the film between some of the tracks and has gone out of circulation .
On 24 February 2004 , a few short months after MGM released the movie on a 2-Disc Special Edition DVD , Varèse Sarabande reissued a newly remastered soundtrack album without the dialogue tracks , restoring it to its original 1968 LP format .
In 2011 , Kritzerland released the definitive soundtrack album , a 2-CD set featuring the Original Soundtrack Album plus bonus tracks , music from the Song and Picture Book Album on disc 1 , and the Richard Sherman Demos , as well as six Playback Tracks ( including a long version of international covers of the theme song ) .
Inexplicably , this release was limited to only 1,000 units .
In April 2013 , Perseverance Records re - released the Kritzerland double CD set with expansive new liner notes by John Trujillo and a completely new designed booklet by Perseverance regular James Wingrove .
HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang was released numerous times in the VHS format .
In 1998 the film saw its first DVD release .
The year 2003 brought a two - disc " Special Edition " release .
On 2 November 2010 , 20th Century Fox released a two - disc Blu - ray and DVD combination set featuring the extras from the 2003 release as well as new features .
The 1993 LaserDisc release by MGM / UA Home Video was the first home video release with the proper 2.20:1 Super Panavision 70 aspect ratio .
ADAPTATIONS NOVELISATION OF FILM Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Novelisation of film .
The film did not follow Fleming 's novel closely .
A separate novelisation of the film was published at the time of the film 's release .
It basically followed the film 's story but with some differences of tone and emphasis , e.g. it mentioned that Caractacus Potts had had difficulty coping after the death of his wife , and it made it clearer that the sequences including Baron Bomburst were extended fantasy sequences .
It was written by John Burke .
COMIC
BOOK ADAPTION
CHITTY CHITTY BANG BANG 'S ADVENTURE IN TINKERTOWN
Section::::Chitty Chitty Bang Bang 's Adventure in Tinkertown .
A , educational PC game was released in October , 1996 featuring the titular car where players have to solve puzzles to complete the game .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS