HONDA CRF SERIES
The Honda CRF series is a line of four - stroke motocross and trail motorcycles manufactured and marketed by Honda .
The CRF line was launched in 2000 as a successor to the Honda XR series .
The full sized motocross bikes are equipped with liquid - cooled , single - cylinder four - stroke engines that are available from 149 cc to 449 cc .
They now have dual - sport motorcycles .
The more trail friendly CRF 's have simple air - cooled engines , and are available from 50 cc to 230 cc .
The Honda CRF450R was the first in the series , followed with the CRF250R in 2004 .
Further down the line , the CRF450X and CRF250X bikes emerged , both designed for mostly off - road use .
They are considered among the best motorcross bikes of their class , and have been a leading seller since their introduction .
The CRF450R was CycleWorld 's Best Motocrosser for a record eight consecutive years from 2002 - 2009 .
ENGINE TECHNOLOGY Section::::Engine technology .
The engines in these bikes use an over - square design , which means that the diameter of the cylinder is larger than the stroke of the piston .
This allows for higher engine speeds and a reduction of reciprocating mass for a given displacemrnt .
Another technology that is used is short piston skirts .
The " skirt " area of the piston is the portion on the side of the piston which comes into contact with the cylinder wall and aids piston stability .
While the introduction of the shorter skirt on the piston helps to reduce reciprocating mass , it also leads to more " rocking " of the piston , or minute unwanted rotation of the piston around the axis of its wrist pin .
This leads to more frequent maintenance intervals for the pistons , piston rings , and cylinder walls .
MODEL OVERVIEW Section::::Model overview .
CRF - F Simple , air - cooled 4-stroke motorcycles .
Typically , these bikes come in low - power and confidence inspiring configurations for new market entrants .
CRF - R
These liquid - cooled four - stroke machines were designed to be utilized purely for closed - course motorcross racing .
The CRF - R lineup lacks any extra accessories ; like lights and electric start ( Although offered as an option on the 2017 CRF-450R ) .
CRF-450R Notable Changes 2017 Oil Forks , Optional Electric Start CRF - RX
This machine was built as a CRF-450R that was optimized for hare scramble , hard enduro , GNCC style racing .
Essentially the same as the CRF-450R except offered as standard equipment an electric start , larger fuel tank , and an 18-inch rear wheel .
This bike is to bridge the gap between the more mild X - model and the closed - course race style R model .
( First model year : 2017 )
CRF - X
These bikes have electric start , but are still considered race bikes , albeit for off - road rather than motocross .
Differences from the R models include lighting , electric start , suspension settings , engine and exhaust tuning for more low - end torque , larger fuel tanks , and a more rugged widespread ratio transmission .
Robby Bell won the San Felipe 250 in 2006 , 2007 and 2008 .
CRF - L
In 2008 , the CRF230L was introduced as an entry - level dual - purpose motorcycle .
It was discontinued , several years later , with the introduction of a completely redesigned dual - purpose motorcycle .
Being a dual - sport motorbike , these bikes are street legal from the factory , but still have a dirt - oriented design .
They have a completely different frame and engine from Honda 's other CRF formats , and most other components are not shared with the other CRF(non - street - legal ) motorcycles .
These different components meet emissions and government road regulations .
All have full lighting and electric starts .
Outside of the United States , the CRF230L was marketed as the XR230L.
In April 2012 , the completely redesigned dual - purpose CRF250L was launched in Japan .
It shares a liquid - cooled 249 cc 4-stroke DOHC single - cylinder EFI engine with the CBR250R.
It is manufactured in Thailand .
In November 2017 , the new model called CRF150L was launched in Indonesia .
It shares an air - cooled 149 cc 4-stroke SOHC single - cylinder EFI engine with the Verza .
It is manufactured by Astra Honda Motor .
CRF - M
In April 2013 , exactly one year after the initial launch of the CRF250L , Honda announced plans to sell a supermoto version of their dual - purpose motorcycle in Europe .
The CRF250 M is based on the popular dual - purpose CRF250L , with revised suspension , uprated front brake and 17-inch wheels with wider road tyres .
The CRF250 M adds another A2 licence - friendly machine to Honda 's line - up .
SEE ALSO
* Honda Motorcycle Database
* Honda Dual - Purpose Models
* XR Series
* CR Series REFERENCES