SARAH
MACKENZIE Lieutenant Colonel Sarah " Mac " MacKenzie USMC , is a fictional character played by Catherine Bell and is one of the main characters in the JAG TV series , introduced in the second season of the series .
In her first appearance on JAG , in the first episode of the second season , Mac holds the rank of Major , and is then promoted to Lieutenant Colonel offscreen between the 4th and 5th seasons .
Mac is a Judge Advocate in the Marine Corps , i.e. a uniformed lawyer serving in the military and assigned to the Office of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy in Falls Church , Virginia .
In the final episode of the series Mac is selected to head a Joint Legal Service Center Southwest , in San Diego , California .
It is not known if she takes this position since her future is left to the audience 's imagination .
She and Captain Harmon " Harm " Rabb become engaged during the show 's final episode , flipping a coin to see who will resign their commission .
CHARACTER ARC IN JAG Section::::Character arc in JAG .
Born in 1968 , Sarah MacKenzie had a troubled childhood ; her mother abandoned her and her alcoholic father on the night of Mac 's 15th birthday .
Her father , Joseph MacKenzie , was physically abusive towards her mother , and emotionally and verbally abusive to Mac .
As a partial result of this , Mac became an alcoholic in her mid - to - late teens and had no contact with her mother until she reappeared at her father 's deathbed .
She also learns at this time that her large white mutt , named Ruggles , was abandoned at a boarding house during her mother 's travels after fleeing from her abusive father .
She showed more sympathy for her father 's efforts to be a good dad , pathetic as they were , and more anger at her mother for leaving them to fend for themselves .
Mackenzie ran away from home when she was 17 ( her junior year of high school ) , and apparently married Christopher Ragle a year later .
They were both drunk for much of their married life .
He was later arrested and sent to prison for motor vehicle theft .
At some point , Mac finished high school .
On the night of her graduation , she was traveling in a car with her friend Eddie .
They were both drunk , and were involved in a car accident that killed Eddie .
Mac hit her low as an alcoholic , and her uncle USMC Colonel Matthew O'Hara took her to Red Rock Mesa , Arizona , to dry out .
Mac later repaid the debt owed to him by making sure he did not get killed during an incident where he and a group of rogue Marines hijacked a van transporting the Declaration of Independence .
After graduating from high school and earning a Bachelor 's degree , Sarah Mackenzie joined the Marines Corps and received her commission through Officer Candidate School .
The first known assignment for Mac in the canon was at the grade of first lieutenant at the Headquarters and Service Battalion in Okinawa , Japan , as an administrative officer under Lieutenant Colonel John Farrow .
It was under his recommendation that Mac was sponsored by the Marine Corps to earn a law degree at Duke University School of Law .
While stationed in Okinawa , Mac engaged in an affair with her superior officer John Farrow .
Unbeknownst to Mac , Chris Ragle followed her to Okinawa and discovered the affair .
She was stationed in Bosnia and Herzegovina a year before the events in We the People , with 2nd Battalion , 9th Marines ( " Two Nine " ) for unknown duration , and given the time - line , was likely part of the Implementation Force ( IFOR ) .
As a major , she was subsequently assigned to JAG headquarters when she was pulled off a double homicide to work on a case involving her uncle Matthew O'Hara ( her uncle 's involvement was unknown to Mac until later in the episode ) and the stolen Declaration of Independence .
Lured by the glamour of private legal practice , she resigned her commission to work as an attorney at the White - shoe law firm " Lowell , Hanson and Lowne " .
However , soon changing her mind after successfully defending Harm pro bono in a court martial , she asked Admiral Chegwidden to take her back at JAG .
The Admiral gave her back her letter of resignation , claiming he had been " too busy to process it " ( despite having had at least four weeks in which to do so ) .
When Chris Ragle caught up to Mac at JAG headquarters in 1998 , he attempted to use the information regarding her earlier affair with her superior officer John Farrowto to blackmail her for money .
John paid Chris the money he demanded , but Chris threatened to kill him anyway .
Mac tried to wrestle the gun out of Chris 's hand , but it accidentally went off and killed him instead .
Upon her return she was temporarily assigned many menial tasks as Head of Administration , and informed that the Admiral had withdrawn his recommendation that she be given an accelerated promotion .
However she was subsequently promoted to lieutenant colonel , after Admiral A.J. Chegwidden 's renewal of her recommendation for accelerated promotion .
Mac bears an uncanny resemblance to Lt . Diane Schonke , a Navy officer Harm had been dating before she was murdered , which initially made Harm uneasy , though he soon got past it .
( This was an in - universe explanation , as Catherine Bell had played Schonke in the last episode of Season 1 before joining the cast as Mac in the first episode of Season 2 ) .
However , Mac was unaware of the resemblance until the third season , when Harm had worked out who had really killed Schonke .
Harm , Bud , and later , Sturgis Turner , who were aware of the resemblance , had never mentioned it to Mac , who only found out by finding a picture of Schonke in Harm 's apartment , in an old shoebox ; it was then that Harm told her everything .
It was during that same episode that Mac kept Harm from throwing his career away , by inadvertently appearing as the long deceased Lt . Schonke , showing up on the pier wearing one of Harriet 's spare uniforms .
In addition to European ancestry , Mac also possesses both Cherokee and Iranian ancestry , and is fluent in Persian as well as speaking Russian and German at near native levels , while capable of recognizing a native Iranian speaker of the language by her accent .
Her grandmother was Muslim and taught her the basics of Muslim law , although her grandmother was not religious to the degree of ever wearing the abaya ( Bell , whose mother is Iranian , is fluent in Persian in real life ) .
She also always knows what the time is though she never wears a watch , and exhibited borderline psychic abilities in a few episodes .
She and Harm eventually ( after years of denial ) proclaimed their love to each other .
Mac has very little chance of having a child due to endometriosis
The couple decided to get married in the last episode , further deciding to be fair about who would remain in service , and who would resign , or retire , by way of a coin flip ( the outcome was never shown , therefore , no one is aware of Mac 's status in the Marines , nor of Harm 's status in the Navy . )
AWARDS AND DECORATIONS Section::::Awards and decorations .
Awards and decorations as worn by the character in the 10th Season of JAG : colspan="3
" align="center " colspan="3 " align="center " Meritorious Service Medal colspan="3 " align="center " Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal colspan="2 " align="center
" Combat Action Ribbon colspan="2 " align="center " Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation colspan="2 " align="center " National Defense Service Medal w/ 1 service star colspan="2 " align="center " Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal colspan="2 " align="center " Global War on Terrorism Service Medal colspan="2 " align="center " Navy & Marine Corps Overseas Service Ribbon colspan="3 " align="center"Expert Rifle Badge colspan="3 " align="center"Expert Pistol Badge
* Mac was presented her Meritorious Service Medal for organizing the defense and evacuation of a US Consulate in East Timor , after the Marine Guard Detachment suffered casualties and the consulate is overrun .
CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Casting and creation .
For its second season , JAG moved from NBC to CBS .
Bellisario had previously received offers from CBS and ABC to pick up the series , which was reworked to be one of both " legal [ drama ] and action " .
Following the departure of series co - star Tracey Needham , Catherine Bell was cast in the lead role of Major Sarah MacKenzie .
Executive Producer / showrunner Donald P. Bellisario and CBS President Les Moonves " cast Catherine Bell , and [ Bellisario ]
never heard another word from [ Moonves ] - who took great delight in the fact that it was part of the building block that started the CBS turnaround " .
Catherine Bell made her first appearance in JAG during the season 1 finale playing another character which was killed off in that episode .
" It was a really important character for Don Bellisario , who created the show , because Harm was in love with this woman , " she said .
Bell explained : " I went after the role and wrote Don a letter after I had read the breakdown for Mac and they brought me in .
Six callbacks later , I got the role . "
Bell co - starred in JAG as Sarah MacKenzie until the cancellation of the show in 2005 .
A possible spin - off / reformat of an 11th season of JAG , centering on Mac 's assignment in San Diego was pitched to CBS , but the network passed on the spin - off idea .
REFERENCES