THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA ( FILM SERIES )
The Chronicles of Narnia is a series of films based on The Chronicles of Narnia , a series of novels by C. S. Lewis .
From the seven books , there have been three film adaptations so far — ( 2005 ) , ( 2008 ) and ( 2010)—which have grossed over $ 1.5 billion worldwide among them .
The series revolves around the adventures of children in the world of Narnia , guided by Aslan , a wise and powerful lion that can speak and is the true king of Narnia .
The children heavily featured in the films are the Pevensie siblings , and a prominent antagonist is the White Witch ( also known as Jadis ) .
The first two films were directed by Andrew Adamson and the third film was directed by Michael Apted .
The fourth film was to be directed by Joe Johnston , but it was announced in 2018 that a new adaptation would be made for Netflix .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
C. S. Lewis never sold the film rights to the Narnia series during his lifetime , as he was skeptical that any cinematic adaptation could render the more fantastical elements and characters of the story realistically .
Only after seeing a demo reel of CGI animals did Douglas Gresham ( Lewis 's stepson and literary executor , and film co - producer ) give approval for a film adaptation .
Although the plan was originally to produce the films in the same order as the book series ' original publication , it was reported that The Magician 's Nephew , which recounts the creation of Narnia , would be the fourth feature film in the series , instead of The Silver Chair .
It was rumoured that The Magician 's Nephew was chosen as an attempt to reboot the series , after the release of The Voyage of the Dawn Treader grossed less when compared to the two previous films .
In March 2011 , Walden Media confirmed that they intended The Magician 's Nephew to be next in the series , but stressed that it was not yet in development .
In October 2011 , Douglas Gresham stated that Walden Media 's contract with the C. S. Lewis estate had expired , hinting that Walden Media 's lapse in renegotiating their contract with the C. S. Lewis estate was due to internal conflicts between both companies about the direction of future films .
On 1 October 2013 , The C. S. Lewis Company announced a partnership with The Mark Gordon Company , and that The Chronicles of Narnia : The Silver Chair was officially in pre - production .
FILMS
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA :
THE LION , THE WITCH AND THE WARDROBE ( 2005 ) Section::::Films . Section::::The Chronicles of Narnia : The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe ( 2005 ) . , based on the novel of the same title , is the first film in the series .
Directed by Andrew Adamson , it was shot mainly in New Zealand , though locations were used in Poland , the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom .
The story follows the four British Pevensie siblings , who are evacuated during the Blitz to the countryside , where they find a wardrobe that leads to the fantasy world of Narnia .
There , they must ally with the lion Aslan against the forces of the White Witch , who has placed Narnia in an eternal winter .
The film was released theatrically on 9 December 2005 and on DVD on 4 April 2006 and grossed over $ 745 million worldwide .
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA : PRINCE CASPIAN ( 2008 ) Section::::The Chronicles of Narnia : Prince Caspian ( 2008 ) .
, based on the novel of the same title , is the second film in the series and the last distributed by Walt Disney Pictures .
The story follows the same Pevensie children who were transported to Narnia in the as they return to Narnia , where 1,300 years have passed and the land has been invaded by the Telmarines .
The four Pevensie children aid Prince Caspian in his struggle for the throne against his corrupt uncle , King Miraz .
The film was released on 16 May 2008 .
It grossed $ 419 million worldwide .
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA : THE VOYAGE OF THE DAWN TREADER ( 2010 ) Section::::The Chronicles of Narnia : The Voyage of the Dawn Treader ( 2010 ) .
, based on the novel of the same title , is the first film in the series not to be co - produced by Disney , who dropped out over a budget dispute with Walden Media .
In February 2009 it was announced that 20th Century Fox ( which Disney is currently buying ) would replace Disney for future installments .
Directed by Michael Apted , the movie was filmed almost entirely in Australia .
The story follows the two younger Pevensie children as they return to Narnia with their cousin , Eustace Scrubb .
They join the old king of Narnia , Caspian , in his quest to rescue seven lost lords and save Narnia from a corrupting evil that resides on a dark island .
The film was released on 10 December 2010 ( in RealD 3D in select theatres ) and grossed over $ 415 million worldwide .
MAIN CAST CHILDREN * William Moseley as Peter Pevensie , title : High King Peter the Magnificent , the eldest Pevensie child and the High King of Narnia during the Golden Age .
* Anna Popplewell as Susan Pevensie , title : Queen Susan the Gentle , the elder Pevensie child and a Queen of Narnia during the Golden Age .
* Skandar Keynes as Edmund Pevensie , title :
King Edmund the Just ; the younger Pevensie child and a King of Narnia during the Golden Age .
* Georgie Henley as Lucy Pevensie , title : Queen Lucy the Valiant , the youngest Pevensie child and a Queen of Narnia during the Golden Age .
* Will Poulter as Eustace Scrubb , the Pevensie children 's arrogant cousin .
He will return to Narnia with his friend Jill Pole in The Silver Chair .
OTHER MAIN CHARACTERS * Liam Neeson as the voice of Aslan , the magnificent and majestically powerful lion who helps govern and maintain order in Narnia ; a mystical world of his own creation .
He is the only main character to appear in all seven books .
* Tilda Swinton as Jadis , the White Witch ; the former queen of Charn and a witch who ruled Narnia after being released in The Magician 's Nephew and during the events of The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe .
* Ben Barnes as Caspian X
( Also known as " Prince Caspian " ) , the Telmarine prince who becomes King of Narnia after overthrowing his evil uncle Miraz .
* Eddie Izzard and Simon Pegg as the voice of Reepicheep in Prince Caspian and The Voyage of the Dawn Treader , respectively : the noble and courageous mouse who fights for Aslan and the freedom of Narnia .
CREW RECEPTION BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office performance . !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Film !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Release date ! scope="col " colspan="3 " class = unsortable Box office
gross !
scope="col " colspan="2 " text="wrap " class = unsortable All - time ranking ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Budget ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " class = unsortable !
North America !
Other territories !
Worldwide !
class = unsortable North America !
class = unsortable Worldwide ! colspan="2 " Total !
$ ! colspan="2 " !
$ 560 million !
rowspan="2 " CRITICAL AND PUBLIC RESPONSE Section::::Critical and public response . !
Film !
Rotten Tomatoes !
Metacritic !
CinemaScore
The Chronicles of Narnia :
The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe
The Chronicles of Narnia :
Prince Caspian The Chronicles of Narnia :
The Voyage of the Dawn Treader FUTURE Section::::Future .
On October 3 , 2018 , it was announced that Netflix and the C. S. Lewis Company had made a multi - year agreement to develop a new series of film and TV adaptations of The Chronicles of Narnia .
THE SILVER CHAIR Section::::The Silver Chair .
After Walden Media 's contract of the series ' film rights expired in 2011 , The C. S. Lewis Company announced on 1 October 2013 that it had entered into an agreement with The Mark Gordon Company to produce an adaptation of The Silver Chair .
Mark Gordon and Douglas Gresham , along with Vincent Sieber , the Los Angeles based director of The C. S. Lewis Company , would serve as producers and work with The Mark Gordon Company on developing the script .
On 5 December 2013 , it was announced that David Magee would write the screenplay .
In July 2014 , the official Narnia website allowed the opportunity for fans to suggest names for the Lady of the Green Kirtle , the main antagonist .
The winning name was to be selected by Mark Gordon and David Magee for use in the final script of The Silver Chair .
The film 's producers have called the film a reboot in reference to the fact that the film has a new creative team not associated with those who worked on the previous three films .
On 9 August 2016 , it was announced that Sony 's TriStar Productions and Entertainment One Films will finance and distribute the fourth film with The Mark Gordon Company ( which eOne owns ) and The C. S. Lewis Company .
In April 2017 , it was announced that Joe Johnston had been hired to direct The Silver Chair .
During an interview with Red Carpet News TV , producer Mark Gordon revealed scarce details about the new technologies and setting that would be used for the upcoming film .
SEE ALSO
* Outline of Narnia
* The Chronicles of Narnia ( TV serial ) NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS