SCOTTY DOESN'T KNOW
" Scotty Does n't Know " is a song written and performed by the American rock band Lustra .
Originally written for the 2004 film EuroTrip , the song contains numerous lewd references to how Scotty 's girlfriend Fiona has been cheating on him for an extended period of time ; the song is written from the perspective of the person she is having the affair with .
The song was eventually released on their 2006 album Left for Dead .
The song peaked at # 53 on the U.S. Billboard Pop chart , # 39 on the Digital Songs chart and at # 75 on the Hot 100 , mainly due to the high amount of digital downloads .
In Australia , the song became infamous in 2018 after featuring in the hijacking of the official website of that country 's Prime Minister .
POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Political significance .
On October 18 2018 , the Prime Minister of Australia , Scott Morrison had his personal website taken over after his ownership of it was apparently allowed to lapse .
Instead of displaying information about the Prime Minister and his policies , the page displayed an image of Morrison with the rock song Scotty Does n't Know playing .
The man behind the hijacking of the website apparently only paid $ 50 for the domain name .
IN THE FILM Section::::In the film .
In the film EuroTrip , Scotty ( Scott Mechlowicz ) is dumped by his girlfriend Fiona ( Kristin Kreuk ) for the lead singer of a band ( played in the film by Matt Damon ) .
The band performs the song at a party Scotty is attending and is praised by many characters in the film ( including Scotty 's parents and eventually Scotty himself ) as being " catchy .
" The song becomes something of a popular phenomenon , appearing on the radio and across the world ; in Bratislava , the song has been remixed and is playing in a popular nightclub .
By the end of the film , it has become so widespread and popular that Scotty 's best friend Cooper is able to use it as his cell phone ring tone .
CHART POSITIONS Section::::Chart positions .
" Scotty Does n't Know " debuted at # 89 on the U.S.
Billboard Pop 100 for the chart week of July 22 , 2006 . !
Chart ( 2006 ) !
Peakposition U.S.
Billboard Pop 100 align="center"53 U.S.
Billboard Hot 100 align="center"75 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS