TIDAL RANGE Tidal range is the height difference between high tide and low tide .
Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels caused by gravitational forces exerted by the Moon and Sun and the rotation of Earth .
Tidal range is not constant but changes depending on the locations of the Moon and Sun .
The most extreme tidal range occurs during spring tides , when the gravitational forces of both the Moon and Sun are aligned ( syzygy ) , reinforcing each other in the same direction ( new moon ) or in opposite directions ( full moon ) .
During neap tides , when the Moon and Sun 's gravitational force vectors act in quadrature ( making a right angle to the Earth 's orbit ) , the difference between high and low tides is smaller .
Neap tides occur during the first and last quarters of the Moon 's phases .
The largest annual tidal range can be expected around the time of the equinox if it coincides with a spring tide .
Tidal data for coastal areas is published by national hydrographic services .
The data is based on astronomical phenomena and is predictable .
Sustained storm - force winds blowing from one direction combined with low barometric pressure can increase the tidal range , particularly in narrow bays .
Such weather - related effects on the tide , which can cause ranges in excess of predicted values and can cause localized flooding , are not calculable in advance .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The typical tidal range in the open ocean is about .
Closer to the coast , this range is much greater .
Coastal tidal ranges vary globally and can differ anywhere from near zero to over .
The exact range depends on the volume of water adjacent to the coast , and the geography of the basin the water sits in .
Larger bodies of water have higher ranges , and the geography can act as a funnel amplifying or dispersing the tide .
The world 's largest tidal range of occurs in Bay of Fundy , Canada , and the United Kingdom regularly experiences tidal ranges up to between England and Wales in the Severn Estuary .
The fifty coastal locations with the largest tidal ranges worldwide are listed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States .
Some of the smallest tidal ranges occur in the Mediterranean , Baltic , and Caribbean Seas .
A point within a tidal system where the tidal range is almost zero is called an amphidromic point .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The tidal range has been classified as : * Micromareal , when the tidal range is lower than 2 metres .
* Mesomareal , when the tidal range is between 2 metres and 4 metres .
* Macromareal , when the tidal range is higher than 4 metres .
REFERENCES