WALL 'S ( ICE CREAM )
Wall 's is an ice cream brand owned by the Anglo - Dutch food and personal care conglomerate Unilever .
Originating as an independent food brand in the United Kingdom , Wall 's is now part of the Heartbrand global frozen dessert subsidiary of Unilever , used in Australia , China , Hong Kong , Europe , Indonesia , India , Japan , Malaysia , Mauritius , New Zealand , Philippines , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , Pakistan , Singapore , Thailand , United Arab Emirates and Vietnam .
Unilever also uses a merged brand called Kwality Wall 's in South Asia .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Wall 's was founded in 1786 by Richard Wall , when he opened a butcher 's stall in St James 's Market , London .
In the 1900s the business was led by Richard 's grandson Thomas Wall II .
Every year the company had to lay off staff in the summer as demand for its sausages , pies and meat fell , so in 1913 Thomas Wall II conceived the idea of making ice cream in the summer to avoid those lay - offs ; the First World War meant that his idea was not implemented until 1922 .
Following his retirement in 1920 , Thomas Wall II created his Trust for the " encouragement and assistance of educational work and social service " .
Today , the Trust continues to assist in these areas by providing grants to individuals and organisations .
By 1922 the business had been jointly bought by Lever Brothers and Margarine Unie .
Maxwell Holt was put in charge and he revived the idea of producing ice cream , with near instant success .
Ice cream production commenced in 1922 at a factory in Acton , London .
In 1959 , Wall 's doubled capacity by opening a purpose built ice cream factory in Gloucester , England .
There is a garage on the corner of Aultone Way and Angel Hill in Benhilton , Sutton , London , built in about 1913 and still in use today , which was originally used for the storing of the ' Stop Me and Buy One ' bicycles of Thomas Wall 's business .
ICE CREAM Section::::Ice cream .
Unilever continues to use the brand for ice cream in the UK and it has become part of the company 's international Heartbrand strategy , where it retains its local ice cream brand but shares one logo and most of the product 's lineup with the various other Heartbrand brands across the world .
Whilst remaining ( 2006 ) the market leader in the UK for individual hand - held products such as Cornetto and Magnum , and value - added multi - portion products designed to be eaten at home , such as Viennetta , the Wall 's brand faces severe competition from the major supermarket brands and to a lesser extent from Nestlé ( absorbing the Rowntree 's and Lyons Maid brands ) and Mars spin - off ice cream products .
In 2013 Wall 's expanded into the UK confectionery market following a licensing deal with Kinnerton Confectionery , leading to the introduction of ambient chocolate bar variations for the Magnum , Cornetto and Mini Milk ice cream brands .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Thomas Wall Trust