SAFETY ( GRIDIRON FOOTBALL SCORE )
In gridiron football , the safety ( American football ) or safety touch ( Canadian football ) is a scoring play that results in two points being awarded to the scoring team .
Safeties can be scored in a number of ways , such as when a ball carrier is tackled in his own end zone or when a foul is committed by the offense in their own end zone .
After a safety is scored in American football , the ball is kicked off to the team that scored the safety from the 20-yard line ; in Canadian football , the scoring team also has the options of taking control of the ball at their own 35-yard line or kicking off the ball , also at their own 35-yard line .
The ability of the scoring team to receive the ball through a kickoff differs from the touchdown and field goal , which require the scoring team to kick the ball off to the scored upon team .
Despite being of relatively low point value , safeties can have a significant impact on the result of games , and Brian Burke of Advanced NFL Stats estimated that safeties have a greater abstract value than field goals , despite being worth a point less , due to the field position and reclaimed possession gained off the safety kick .
Safeties are the least common method of scoring in American football but are not rare occurrences – since 1932 , a safety has occurred once every 14.31 games in the National Football League ( NFL ) , or about once a week under current scheduling rules .
A much rarer occurrence is the one - point safety , which can be scored by the offense on an extra point or two - point conversion attempt ; those have occurred at least twice in
NCAA Division I football since 1996 , most recently at the 2013 Fiesta Bowl .
No conversion safeties have occurred since at least 1940 in the NFL .
A conversion safety by the defense is also possible , though highly unlikely ; although this has never occurred , it is the only possible way a team could finish with a single point in an American football game .
SCORING
A SAFETY
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Section::::Scoring a safety .
Section::::American football .
In American football , a safety is scored when any of the following conditions occur :
* The ball carrier is tackled or forced out of bounds in his own end zone .
*
The ball becomes dead in the end zone , with the exception of an incomplete forward pass , and the defending team is responsible for it being there .
*
The offense commits a foul in its own end zone .
CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::Canadian football .
In Canadian football , a safety touch is scored when any of the following conditions occur :
* The ball becomes dead in the goal area of the team in possession of the ball
*
The ball touches or crosses the dead line or a sideline in goal after having been directed from the field of play into the Goal Area by the team scored against or as the direct result of a blocked scrimmage kick .
*
The ball carrier is penalized for intentional grounding or an offside pass in his own goal area .
RESUMING PLAY AFTER A SAFETY
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Section::::Resuming play after a safety .
Section::::American football .
After a safety is scored , the ball is put into play by a free kick .
The team that was scored upon must kick the ball from their own 20-yard line and can punt , drop kick , or place kick the ball .
In professional play , a kicking tee can not be used – however , a tee can be used in high school or college football .
Once the ball has been kicked , it can be caught and advanced by any member of the receiving team , and it can be recovered by the kicking team if the ball travels at least 10 yards and bounces at least once or a player of the receiving team touches the ball .
CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::Canadian football .
After scoring a safety touch , the scoring team has the option of taking control of the ball and beginning play from their own 35-yard line , kicking the ball off from their 35-yard line , or accepting a kickoff from the 25-yard line of the team that conceded the score .
If a kickoff is chosen it must be a place kick , and the ball can be held , placed on the ground , or placed on a tee prior to the kick .
As in American football , the ball must go at least ten yards before it can be recovered by the kicking team .
ELECTIVE SAFETIES Section::::Elective safeties .
In American football , intentionally conceded safeties are an uncommon strategy .
Teams have utilized elective safeties to gain field position for a punt when pinned deep in their own territory and , when ahead near the end of a game , to run down the clock so as to deny the other team a chance to force a turnover or return a punt .
Teams have also taken intentional safeties by kicking a loose ball out the back of their end zone , with the intent of preventing the defense from scoring a touchdown .
Elective safeties are more common in Canadian football , where they can result in better field position than a punt .
The 2010 Edmonton Eskimos surrendered a Canadian Football League ( CFL)-record 14 safeties , a factor that led CFL reporter Jim Mullin to suggest increasing the value of the safety touch from two to three points as a deterrent .
CONVERSION SAFETIES ( ONE - POINT SAFETIES )
SCORED
BY THE OFFENSE Section::::Conversion safeties ( one - point safeties ) .
Section::::Scored by the offense .
In American football , if a team attempting an extra point or two - point conversion ( officially known in the rulebooks as a try ) scores what would normally be a safety , that attempting team is awarded one point .
This is commonly known as a conversion safety or one - point safety .
There are at least two known occurrences of the conversion safety in Division I college football – a November 26 , 2004 game in which Texas scored against Texas A&M , and the 2013 Fiesta Bowl in which Oregon scored against Kansas State .
In both games , the point - after - touchdown kick was blocked and recovered by the defense , which then fumbled or threw the ball back into its own end zone .
There are also at least two known NCAA Division III occurrences , the first being on November 11 , 2000 against St. Thomas - Minnesota and Hamline University , and the most recent against Bluffton University and Franklin College ( Indiana ) which took place on November 9 , 2013 .
No conversion safeties have been scored in the NFL since 1940 , although it is now slightly more likely after the rule change in 2015 which allowed the defense to take possession and score on a conversion attempt .
Before 2015 , the only scenario in which a one - point safety could have been scored in the NFL would have involved the defense kicking or batting a loose ball out the back of its own end zone without taking possession of the ball .
SCORED
BY THE DEFENSE
Section::::Scored by the defense .
In college football and the NFL , a conversion safety can also be scored by the defense , though this has never occurred .
To accomplish this , the team attempting the try would need to somehow be forced 98 yards back to their own end zone ; in theory , such a scenario might involve a turnover on a two - point conversion attempt , followed by a defensive player fumbling while en route to the attempting team 's end zone , with the attempting team finally recovering the ball and downing it in their own end zone .
While such a conversion safety has never been scored by the defense , it is the only possible way under current rules in which a team could finish with a single point in an American football game .
SEE ALSO
* List of safety records * Touchback
* Own goal
NOTES Notes Footnotes REFERENCES