MAJOR DEPRESSIVE EPISODE
A major depressive episode ( MDE ) is a period characterized by the symptoms of major depressive disorder .
Sufferers primarily have a depressed mood for two weeks or more , and a loss of interest or pleasure in everyday activities , accompanied by other symptoms such as feelings of emptiness , hopelessness , anxiety , worthlessness , guilt and irritability , changes in appetite , problems concentrating , remembering details or making decisions , and thoughts of suicide .
Insomnia or hypersomnia , aches , pains , or digestive problems that are resistant to treatment may also be present .
The description has been formalized in psychiatric diagnostic criteria such as the DSM-5 and ICD-10 .
Biological , psychological , and social factors are believed to be involved in the cause of depression , although it is still not well understood .
Factors like socioeconomic status , life experience , and personality tendencies play a role in the development of depression and may represent increases in risk for developing a major depressive episode .
There are many theories as to how depression occurs .
One interpretation is that neurotransmitters in the brain are out of balance , and this results in feelings of worthlessness and despair .
Magnetic resonance imaging shows that brains of people who have depression look different than the brains of people not exhibiting signs of depression .
A family history of depression increases the chance of being diagnosed .
Significant emotional pain and economic costs are associated with depression .
In the United States and Canada , the costs associated with major depression are comparable to those related to heart disease , diabetes , and back problems and are greater than the costs of hypertension .
According to the Nordic Journal of Psychiatry , there is a direct correlation between major depressive episode and unemployment .
Treatments for a major depressive episode include psychotherapy and antidepressants , although in more serious cases , hospitalization or intensive outpatient treatment may be required .
SIGNS & SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs & Symptoms .
The criteria below are based on the formal DSM - V criteria for a major depressive episode .
A diagnosis of major depressive episode requires that the patient has experienced five or more of the symptoms below , and one of the symptoms must be either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure ( although both are frequently present ) .
These symptoms must be present for at least 2 weeks and represent a change from the patient 's normal behavior .
DEPRESSED MOOD AND LOSS OF INTEREST ( ANHEDONIA )
Section::::Depressed mood and loss of interest ( anhedonia ) .
Either depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure must be present for the diagnosis of a major depressive episode .
Depressed mood is the most common symptom seen in major depressive episodes .
Interest or pleasure in everyday activities can be decreased ; this is referred to as anhedonia .
These feelings must be present on an everyday basis for two weeks or longer to meet DSM - V criteria for a major depressive episode .
In addition , the person may experience one or more of the following emotions : sadness , emptiness , hopelessness , indifference , anxiety , tearfulness , pessimism , emotional numbness , or irritability .
In children and adolescents , a depressed mood often appears more irritable in nature .
There may be a loss of interest in or desire for sex , or other activities once found to be pleasant .
Friends and family of the depressed person may notice that they have withdrawn from friends , or neglected or quit doing activities that were once a source of enjoyment .
SLEEP
Section::::Sleep .
Nearly every day , the person may sleep excessively , known as hypersomnia , or not enough , known as insomnia .
Insomnia is the most common type of sleep disturbance for people who are clinically depressed .
Symptoms of insomnia include trouble falling asleep , trouble staying asleep , or waking up too early in the morning .
Hypersomnia is a less common type of sleep disturbance .
It may include sleeping for prolonged periods at night or increased sleeping during the daytime .
The sleep may not be restful , and the person may feel sluggish despite many hours of sleep , which may amplify their depressive symptoms and interfere with other aspects of their lives .
Hypersomnia is often associated with an atypical depression , as well as seasonal affective disorder .
FEELINGS OF GUILT OR WORTHLESSNESS Section::::Feelings of guilt or worthlessness .
Depressed people may have feelings of guilt that go beyond a normal level or are delusional .
These feelings of guilt and/or worthlessness are excessive and inappropriate .
Major depressive episodes are notable for a significant , often unrealistic , drop in self - esteem .
The guilt and worthlessness experienced in a major depressive episode can range from subtle feelings of guilt to frank delusions or to shame and humiliation .
Additionally , self - loathing is common in clinical depression , and can lead to a downward spiral when combined with other symptoms .
LOSS OF ENERGY Section::::Loss of energy .
Persons going through a major depressive episode often have a general lack of energy , as well as fatigue and tiredness , nearly every day for at least 2 weeks .
A person may feel tired without having engaged in any physical activity , and day - to - day tasks become increasingly difficult .
Job tasks or housework become very tiring , and the patient finds that their work begins to suffer .
DECREASED CONCENTRATION
Section::::Decreased concentration .
Nearly every day , the person may be indecisive or have trouble thinking or concentrating .
These issues cause significant difficulty in functioning for those involved in intellectually demanding activities , such as school and work , especially in difficult fields .
Depressed people often describe a slowing of thought , inability to concentrate and make decisions , and being easily distracted .
In the elderly , the decreased concentration caused by a major depressive episode may present as deficits in memory .
This is referred to as pseudodementia and often goes away with treatment .
Decreased concentration may be reported by the patient or observed by others .
CHANGE IN EATING , APPETITE , OR WEIGHT Section::::Change in eating , appetite , or weight .
In a major depressive episode , appetite is most often decreased , although a small percentage of people experience an increase in appetite .
A person experiencing a depressive episode may have a marked loss or gain of weight ( 5 % of their body weight in one month ) .
A decrease in appetite may result in weight loss that is unintentional or when a person is not dieting .
Some people experience an increase in appetite and may gain significant amounts of weight .
They may crave certain types of food , such as sweets or carbohydrates .
In children , failure to make expected weight gains may be counted towards this criteria .
Overeating is often associated with atypical depression .
MOTOR ACTIVITY Section::::Motor activity .
Nearly every day , others may see that the person 's activity level is not normal .
People suffering from depression may be overly active ( psychomotor agitation ) or be very lethargic ( psychomotor retardation ) .
Psychomotor agitation is marked by an increase in body activity which may result in restlessness , an inability to sit still , pacing , hand wringing , or fidgeting with clothes or objects .
Psychomotor retardation results in an increase in body activity or thinking .
In this case , a depressed person may demonstrate a slowing of thinking , speaking , or body movement .
They may speak more softly or say less than usual .
To meet diagnostic criteria , changes in motor activity must be so abnormal that it can be observed by others .
Personal reports of feeling restless or feeling slow do not count towards the diagnostic criteria .
THOUGHTS OF DEATH AND SUICIDE Section::::Thoughts of death and suicide .
A person going through a major depressive episode may have repeated thoughts about death ( other than the fear of dying ) or suicide ( with or without a plan ) , or may have made a suicide attempt .
The frequency and intensity of thoughts about suicide can range from believing that friends and family would be better off if one were dead , to frequent thoughts about committing suicide ( generally related to wishing to stop the emotional pain ) , to detailed plans about how the suicide would be carried out .
Those who are more severely suicidal may have made specific plans and decided upon a day and location for the suicide attempt .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The cause of a major depressive episode is not well understood .
However , the mechanism is believed to be a combination of biological , psychological , and social factors .
A major depressive episode can often follow an acute stress in someone 's life .
Evidence suggests that psychosocial stressors play a larger role in the first 1 - 2 depressive episodes , while having less influence in later episodes .
People who experience a major depressive episode often have other mental health issues .
Other risk factors for a depressive episode include : * Family history of a mood disorder
* Recent negative life events
* Personality ( insecure , worried , stress - sensitive , obsessive , unassertive , dependent ) *
Early childhood trauma
* Postpartum
* Lack of interpersonal relationships
One gene by itself has not been linked to depression .
Studies show that depression can be passed down in families , but this is believed to be due to a combined effect of genetic and environmental factors .
Other medical conditions , like hypothyroidism for example , may cause someone to experience similar symptoms as a major depressive episode , however this would be considered a mood disorder due to a general medical condition , according to the DSM - V. DIAGNOSIS SCREENING Section::::Diagnosis .
Section::::Screening .
Healthcare providers may screen patients in the general population for depression using a screening tool , such as the Patient Healthcare
Questionnaire-2
( PHQ-2 ) .
If the PHQ-2 screening is positive for depression , a provider may then administer the PHQ-9 .
The Geriatric Depression Scale is a screening tool that can be used in the elderly population .
CRITERIA Section::::Criteria .
The two main symptoms in a major depressive episode are a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure .
From the list below , one bold symptom and four other symptoms must be present for a diagnosis of major depressive episode .
These symptoms must be present for at least 2 weeks and must be causing significant distress or impairment in functioning .
* Depressed mood
* Loss of interest or pleasure
* Change in appetite
* Change in sleep
* Change in body activity ( psychomotor changes )
* Loss of energy * Feelings of worthlessness and excessive or inappropriate guilt * Indecisiveness or a decrease in concentration
*
Suicidal ideation
To diagnose a major depressive episode , a trained healthcare provider must make sure that : * The symptoms do not meet the criteria for a mixed episode .
*
The symptoms must cause considerable distress or impair functioning at work , in social settings or in other important areas in order to qualify as an episode .
*
The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance ( e.g. , abuse of a drug or medication ) or a general medical condition ( e.g. , hypothyroidism ) .
WORKUP
Section::::Workup .
No labs are diagnostic of a depressive episode .
But some labs can help rule out general medical conditions that may mimic the symptoms of a depressive episode .
Healthcare providers may order some routine blood work , including routine blood chemistry , CBC with differential , thyroid function studies , and Vitamin B12 levels , before making a diagnosis .
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Section::::Differential Diagnosis .
There are other mental health disorders or medical conditions to consider before diagnosing a major depressive episode :
* Bipolar disorder * Cyclothymic disorder * Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder * Persistent depressive disorder * Anxiety disorder ( Generalized anxiety , PTSD , obsessive compulsive disorder ) * Substance abuse or Substance Use Disorder * Personality disorder with depressive symptoms
* Adjustment disorder
* Depression due to a general medical condition * Premenstrual dysphoric disorder TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Depression is a treatable illness .
Treatments for a major depressive episode may be provided by mental health specialists ( i.e. psychologist , psychiatrists , social workers , counselors , etc . ) , mental health centers or organizations , hospitals , outpatient clinics , social service agencies , private clinics , peer support groups , clergy , and employee assistance programs .
The treatment plan could include psychotherapy alone , antidepressant medications alone , or a combination of medication and psychotherapy .
For major depressive episodes of severe intensity ( multiple symptoms , minimal mood reactivity , severe functional impairment ) , combined psychotherapy and antidepressant medications are more effective than psychotherapy alone .
Meta - analyses suggest that the combination of psychotherapy and antidepressant medications is more effective in treating mild and moderate forms of depression as well , compared to either type of treatment alone .
Patients with severe symptoms may require outpatient treatment or hospitalization .
The treatment of a major depressive episode can be split into 3 phases :
* Acute phase : the goal of this phase is to resolve the current major depressive episode
*
* Continuation : this phase continues the same treatment from the acute phase for 4 - 8 months after the depressive episode has resolved and the goal is to prevent relapse *
* Maintenance : this phase is not necessary for every patient but is often used for patients who have experienced 2 - 3 or more major depressive episodes .
Treatment may be maintained indefinitely to prevent the occurrence and severity of future episodes .
* THERAPY Section::::Therapy .
Psychotherapy , also known as talk therapy , counseling , or psychosocial therapy , is characterized by a patient talking about their condition and mental health issues with a trained therapist .
Different types of psychotherapy are used as a treatment for depression .
These include cognitive behavioral therapy , interpersonal therapy , dialectical behavior therapy , acceptance and commitment therapy , and mindfulness techniques .
Evidence shows that cognitive behavioral therapy can be as effective as medication in the treatment of a major depressive episode .
Psychotherapy may be the first treatment used for mild to moderate depression , especially when psychosocial stressors are playing a large role .
Psychotherapy alone may not be as effective for more severe forms of depression .
Some of the main forms of psychotherapies used for treatment of a major depressive episode along with what makes them unique are included below :
* Cognitive psychotherapy : focus on patterns of thinking
* Interpersonal psychotherapy : focus on relationships , losses , and conflict resolution * Problem - solving psychotherapy : focus on situations and strategies for problem - solving * Psychodynamic psychotherapy : focus on defense mechanisms and coping strategies MEDICATION Section::::Medication .
Medications used to treat depression include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( SSRIs ) , serotonin - norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors ( SNRIs ) , norepinephrine - dopamine reuptake inhibitors ( NDRIs ) , tricyclic antidepressants , monoamine oxidase inhibitors ( MAOIs ) , and atypical antidepressants such as mirtazapine , which do not fit neatly into any of the other categories .
Different antidepressants work better for different individuals .
It is often necessary to try several before finding one that works best for a specific patient .
Some people may find it necessary to combine medications , which could mean two antidepressants or an antipsychotic medication in addition to an antidepressant .
If a person 's close relative has responded well to a certain medication , that treatment will likely work well for him or her .
Antidepressant medications are effective in the acute , continuation , and maintenance phases of treatment , as described above .
The treatment benefits of antidepressant medications are often not seen until 1 - 2 weeks into treatment , with maximum benefits being reached around 4 - 6 weeks .
Most healthcare providers will monitor patients more closely during the acute phase of treatment and continue to monitor at longer intervals in the continuation and maintenance phases .
Sometimes , people stop taking antidepressant medications due to side effects , although side effects often become less severe over time .
Suddenly stopping treatment or missing several doses may cause withdrawal - like symptoms .
Some studies have shown that antidepressants may increase short - term suicidal thoughts or actions , especially in children , adolescents , and young adults .
However , antidepressants are more likely to reduce a person 's risk of suicide in the long run .
Below are listed the main classes of antidepressant medications , some of the most common drugs in each category , and their major side effects : * Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ( citalopram , escitalopram , paroxetine , fluoxetine , sertraline ) : major side effects include nausea , diarrhea , and sexual dysfunction * Serotinin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors ( duloxetine , venlafaxine , desvenlafaxine ) : major side effects include nausea , diarrhea , increased heart rate , increased blood pressure , and tremor * Tricyclic antidepressants ( amitryptiline , desipramine , doxepin , imipramine , nortriptyline ) : major side effects include sedation , low blood pressure when moving from sitting to standing ( orthostatic hypotension ) , tremor , and heart issues like conduction delays or arrythmias * Monoamine oxidase inhibitors ( isocarboxazid , phenelzine , selegiline ) : major side effects include high blood pressure ( emergency ) if eaten with foods rich in tyramine ( e.g. cheeses , some meats , and home - brewed beer ) , sedation , tremor , and orthostatic hypotension
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS Section::::Alternative treatments .
There are several treatment options that exist for people who have experienced several episodes of major depression or have not responded to several treatments .
Electroconvulsive therapy is a treatment in which a generalized seizure is induced by means of electrical current .
The mechanism of action of the treatment is not clearly understood but has been show to be most effective in the most severely depressed patients .
For this reason , electroconvulsive therapy is preferred for the most severe forms of depression or depression that has not responded to other treatments , known as refractory depression .
Vagus nerve stimulation is another alternative treatment that has been proven to be effective in the treatment of depression , especially people that have been resistant to four or more treatments .
Some of the unique benefits of vagus nerve stimulation include improved neurocognitive function and a sustained clinical response .
Transcranial magnetic stimulation is also an alternative treatment for a major depressive episode .
It is a noninvasive treatment that is easily tolerated and shows an antidepressant effect , especially in more typical depression and younger adults .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
If left untreated , a typical major depressive episode may last for about six months .
About 20 % of these episodes can last two years or more .
About half of depressive episodes end spontaneously .
However , even after the major depressive episode is over , 20 % to 30 % of patients have residual symptoms , which can be distressing and associated with disability .
Fifty percent of people will have another major depressive episode after the first .
However , the risk of relapse is decreased by taking antidepressant medications for more than 6 months .
Symptoms completely improve in six to eight weeks in sixty to seventy percent of patients .
The combination of therapy and antidepressant medications has been shown to improve resolution of symptoms and outcomes of treatment .
Suicide is the 8th leading cause of death in the United States .
The risk of suicide is increased during a major depressive episode .
However , the risk is even more elevated during the first two phases of treatment .
There are several factors associated with an increased risk of suicide , listed below :
* Greater than 45 years of age
* Caucasian * Male * History of suicide attempt or self - injurious behaviors
* Family history of suicide or mental illness
*
Recent severe loss *
Poor health
* Detailed plan
* Inability to accept help * Lack of social support
* Psychotic features ( auditory or visual hallucinations , disorganization of speech , behavior , or thought )
* Alcohol or drug use or comorbid psychiatric disorder
* Severe depression EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Estimates of the numbers of people suffering from major depressive episodes and major depressive disorder ( MDD ) vary significantly .
Overall , 13 - 20 % of people will experience significant depressive symptoms at some point in their life .
The overall prevalence of MDD is slightly lower ranging from 3.7 - 6.7 % of people .
In their lifetime , 20 % to 25 % of women , and 7 % to 12 % of men will suffer a major depressive episode .
The peak period of development is between the ages of 25 and 44 years .
Onset of major depressive episodes or MDD often occurs to people in their mid-20s , and less often to those over 65 .
The prevalence of depressive symptoms in the elderly is around 1 - 2 % .
Elderly persons in nursing homes may have increased rates , up to 15 - 25 % .
African - Americans have higher rates of depressive symptoms compared to other races .
Prepubescent girls are affected at a slightly higher rate than prepubescent boys .
In a National Institute of Mental Health study , researchers found that more than 40 % of people with post - traumatic stress disorder suffered from depression four months after the traumatic event they experienced .
Women who have recently given birth may be at increased risk for having a major depressive episode .
This is referred to as postpartum depression and is a different health condition than the baby blues , a low mood that resolves within 10 days after delivery .
COMORBID DISORDERS Section::::Comorbid disorders .
Major depressive episodes may show comorbidity ( association ) with other physical and mental health problems .
About 20–25 % of individuals with a chronic general medical condition will develop major depression .
Common comorbid disorders include : eating disorders , substance - related disorders , panic disorder , and obsessive - compulsive disorder .
Up to 25 % of people who experience a major depressive episode have a pre - existing dysthymic disorder .
Some persons who have a fatal illness or are at the end of their life may experience depression , although this is not universal .
SEE ALSO * Depressive personality disorder
* Depression ( differential diagnoses ) * Major depressive disorder
* Mental breakdown
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance ( DBSA ) website from the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance * Depression information from the National Institutes of Health * The Truth About Depression