AANG Avatar Aang
( ) is a fictional character and the protagonist of Nickelodeon 's animated television series ( created by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko ) , voiced by Zach Tyler Eisen .
Aang is the last surviving Airbender , a monk of the Air Nomads ' Southern Air Temple .
He is an incarnation of the " Avatar " , the spirit of light and peace manifested in human form .
As the Avatar , Aang controls all four elements ( fire , water , earth and air ) and is tasked with keeping the at peace .
At 12 years old , Aang is the series ' reluctant hero , spending a century in suspended animation before joining new friends and Sokka on a quest to master the elements and save their world from the imperialist Fire Nation .
Aang 's character has appeared in other media , such as trading cards , video games , T - shirts , and web comics .
Aang has also been portrayed by Noah Ringer in the feature film The Last Airbender , and voiced by D.B. Sweeney in the sequel animated series The Legend of Korra .
CREATION AND CONCEPTION Section::::Creation and conception .
Aang 's character was developed from a drawing by Bryan Konietzko , depicting a bald man with an arrowlike design on his head , which the artist developed into a picture of a child with a flying bison .
Meanwhile , Michael Dante DiMartino was interested in a documentary about explorers trapped in the South Pole , which he later combined with Konietzko 's drawing .
The plot they described corresponds with the first and second episodes of Avatar : The Last Airbender , where the " water people " ( and Sokka ) rescue the " air guy " ( Aang ) while " trapped in a snowy wasteland " ( the Southern Water Tribe ) with " some fire people [ that ] are pressing down on them " ( Fire Nation Troops and Zuko ) .
The creators of the show intended Aang to be trapped in an iceberg for one hundred years , later to wake inside a futuristic world , wherein he would have a robot named Momo and a dozen bisons .
The creators lost interest in this theme , and changed it to one hundred years of suspended animation .
The robotic Momo became a flying lemur , and the herd of bison was reduced to one .
In the episode " Tales of Ba Sing Se " , Aang 's name was written as 安昂 ( ān áng ) in Chinese .
AIRBENDING
Section::::Airbending .
Airbending , the martial art
Aang primarily uses in the show , is based on an " internal " Chinese martial art called Baguazhang .
This fighting style focuses on circular movements , and does not have many finishing moves ; traits meant to represent the unpredictability of air and the peaceful character of Airbenders .
PERSONALITY AND CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Personality and characteristics .
Michael Dante DiMartino , the show 's co - creator , said : According to the show 's creators , " Buddhism and Taoism have been huge inspirations behind the idea for Avatar . "
As shown in " The King of Omashu " and " The Headband " , a notable aspect of Aang 's character is his vegetarian diet , which is consistent with Buddhism , Hinduism , and Taoism .
In the Brahmajala Sutra , a Buddhist code of ethics , vegetarianism is encouraged .
Furthermore , the writers gave Aang a consistent reluctance to fight and an aversion to killing .
In " The Spirit World ( Winter Solstice , Part 1 ) " , Aang encounters an angry spirit destroying a village and kidnapping villagers ; but instead of fighting the spirit , Aang negotiates .
He is also depicted showing ethical reluctance in killing Firelord Ozai , and eventually strips Ozai of his bending instead of murdering him .
APPEARANCES
AVATAR :
THE LAST AIRBENDER Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Avatar : The Last Airbender .
Upon death , Avatar Roku was reincarnated and Aang was born , and later raised by Monk Gyatso , a senior monk at the Southern Air Temple and friend of the late Avatar Roku .
Even prior to learning he was the Avatar , Aang distinguished himself by becoming one of the youngest Airbending Masters in history by inventing a new technique .
As a result of Fire Lord Sozin 's increasingly hostile attitude towards the other nations , the senior monks decided to reveal Aang 's nature as the Avatar four years before the traditional age ( Avatars are usually told of their status once they turn 16 ) and relocate him to one of the other Air Temples .
Learning that he was to be taken from Gyatso caused Aang to flee the monastery on his flying bison , Appa , before being caught by a storm ; the life - or - death conditions triggered the Avatar State , encasing the young Avatar and his bison in an air - pocket among icebergs , where he remained suspended for a century .
Although Monk Gyatso had snuck in the bed late night to tell Aang that he wo n't be relocated to the Eastern Air Temple , It had already been too late .
BOOK ONE :
WATER
Section::::Book
One : Water .
After one hundred years of suspended animation in an iceberg , twelve - year - old Aang was freed when found by and Sokka , yet unaware of the events that occurred during his rest .
His reawakening catches the attention of Zuko , the banished prince of the Fire Nation , and Aang is forced to leave , with Katara and Sokka accompanying him after they learn that he is the Avatar .
Aang and his new friends visit the Southern Air Temple , where they meet a winged lemur whom Aang later names Momo .
It is there that Aang learns that he was in the ice for a whole century , and that the Fire Nation wiped out his people , including Gyatso .
After a series of misadventures , Aang meets his previous incarnation , Roku , who informs him that he must master all four bending arts and end the war before the coming of Sozin 's Comet at the end of summer .
Upon arriving to the Northern Water Tribe , after a few conflicts , Aang became an apprentice of Waterbending Master Pakku alongside Katara .
After helping the Water Tribe drive off a Fire Nation invasion headed by Admiral Zhao , with Katara as his teacher , Aang and his group journey to the Earth Kingdom to find an Earthbending teacher .
BOOK TWO :
EARTH Section::::Book Two : Earth .
In the second season , Aang learns Earthbending from Toph Beifong after he has a vision of the blind Earthbending prodigy in a swamp telling him to find her .
On their journey , they are chased by Fire Princess Azula and her friends Mai and Ty Lee .
The group learns about the Day of Black Sun in a secret underground library , and they attempt to reveal the information to the Earth King at Ba Sing Se .
However , their flying bison , Appa , is captured by Sandbenders .
Aang grows upset and angry and confronts the Sandbenders , learning that Appa has been sold .
After stopping a Fire Nation drill threatening the safety of Ba Sing Se , they look for Appa only to find themselves dealing with the Dai Li before exposing their leader 's deception .
The group reunites with Jet helping them find Appa at Dai Li headquarters .
They expose the Hundred Year War to the Earth King , who promises to help them invade the Fire Nation .
Soon after , Aang meets a guru who attempts to teach Aang to open his seven chakras in order to control the defensive ' Avatar State ' ; but when Aang perceives Katara in danger , he leaves before the seventh chakra is opened , and thus loses his progress until the seventh is opened .
Though Aang manages to unlock the Seventh Chakra , he is mortally wounded by Azula , yet was saved by Katara before the injury became truly fatal .
BOOK THREE :
FIRE
Section::::Book Three : Fire .
In the third and final season , Aang is unable to use the Avatar State .
Although reluctant with the plan at first , Aang accepts to have everyone think he had died and his remaining allies attack the Fire Nation 's capital , but are thwarted by Azula .
However , Zuko has a change of heart , rebels against his father , and offers to teach Aang Firebending .
Aang and Zuko also improve their Firebending powers with the help of their world 's last two dragons .
During the finale , finding himself on a strange island , Aang is reluctant to actually kill Fire Lord Ozai , despite his four previous past lives convincing him it is the only way .
But upon learning that he was actually on the back of a Lion Turtle , one of four that made the first benders by manipulating humans ' chi , Aang receives the Lion Turtles ' Energybending ability .
With this ability , as he regained his Avatar State , Aang removes Ozai 's bending ability , rendering him harmless and ending the Hundred Year War .
Later , in the Fire Nation capital , Aang is seen beside Zuko , the new Fire Lord .
The series ends with Aang and his friends relaxing at Iroh 's tea shop at Ba Sing Se , where Aang and Katara share a kiss .
AVATAR :
THE LAST AIRBENDER ( COMICS ) Section::::Avatar :
The Last Airbender ( comics ) .
After beginning the Harmony Restoration Movement , an event that was meant to remove Fire Nation remnants from the Earth Kingdom , Aang agrees to end Zuko 's life should he go down a path similar to his father , after the latter requests it , being stopped by Katara from entering the Avatar State as he began a later encounter with Zuko and then tries to mediate protestors and the Yu Dao resistance , afterward assembling members of a fan club and forming the " Air Acolytes " , a group that he intends to teach the ways of the Air Nomads .
Aang then participated in a search for Zuko 's mother Ursa , successfully finding her and entering the Spirit World to assist in locating the Mother of Faces , convincing her to grant Rafa a new face .
After a period of entertainment , Aang is contacted by his former life Yangchen , who tried contacting him about Old Iron 's return .
Aang also has a fight with the Rough Rhinos when they try to oust him from the Eastern Fire Refinery .
Aang then aids in preventing Azula , disguised as the Kemurikage , from stealing any more children .
THE LEGEND OF KORRA Section::::The Legend of Korra .
Some sixty years prior to the series , Avatar Aang and Fire Lord Zuko founded the United Republic of Nations , and its capital Republic City .
In the following years , Aang married Katara and they have three children : Bumi ( named for Aang 's old friend ) , Kya ( after Katara 's deceased mother ) , and Tenzin .
In his adult years , Aang grew a neatly cropped chinstrap beard , which many statues of Aang 's adult form depict him with , including the one in the restored Southern Air Temple .
He also founded the Air Acolytes , a sect who eschewed their home cultures in favor of following the Air Nomads ' way of life ( the comics reveal that the first Air Acolytes were the reorganized Avatar Fan Club ) .
A forty - year - old Aang assisted Toph in arresting Water Tribe crime lord Yakone .
As Aang watched the trial where Yakone was convicted of using the rare and illegal technique Bloodbending , Yakone tried to escape Republic City , using his unique abilities to subdue everyone in the court room , thus leaving them unconscious .
Able to resist Yakone 's Bloodbending through the Avatar State , Aang used his Energybending abilities to put a halt to Yakone 's plans .
Being frozen in an iceberg for a hundred years while in the Avatar State drained much of Aang 's life energy .
While he did not feel the effects for many years , after he entered middle age in his 50s , the strain of this exertion increasingly weighed upon his body .
Ultimately , it resulted in Aang dying at the relatively young biological age of 66 , in 153 AG .
Aang was survived by his wife , Katara , and his three children , but he did not live to see his grandchildren , all of whom would be powerful Airbenders .
Prior to his death , Aang tasked the Order of the White Lotus with finding and guiding the new Avatar after him .
When Aang died , the Avatar spirit reincarnated into the Southern Water Tribe female Korra .
Aang intended for the Order to simply guide and guard Korra , but several mishaps in the aftermath of Aang 's death ( including a kidnapping attempt by the anarchist Zaheer ) and the still - fragile state of relations between the now - Five Nations resulted in Katara and Tenzin sequestering Korra in a compound at the South Pole , bringing teachers to her instead of allowing her to seek out her own .
BOOK ONE : AIR Section::::Book One : Air .
In the sequel series ' first season , Avatar Aang 's spirit occasionally serves as the spiritual advisor to seventeen - year - old Korra ( much like the previous Avatar incarnation , Roku , did for Aang ) .
Initially , Aang is only able to give Korra glimpses of his memory concerning Yakone in relation to her confrontations with his two sons , Amon and Tarrlok , the products of Yakone 's Bloodbending vendetta on the Avatar .
It is only after she loses her ability to bend that Korra allows herself to listen to her past lives , at which point Aang restores her powers by triggering the Avatar State and teaching her to Energybend .
BOOK TWO :
SPIRITS Section::::Book Two
: Spirits .
The sequel series ' second season reveals that Avatar Aang apparently treated Tenzin as his favorite child , due to his son 's Airbender status ; Kya and Bumi mentioned to Tenzin that Aang always took Tenzin on vacations with him , but never them .
Aang 's Air Acolytes also were unaware that Aang had two other children besides Tenzin .
Aang himself later appears , along with Roku , Kyoshi and Kuruk , before Korra in a vision and encourages her to learn the origins of Wan ( the first Avatar ) and Raava .
Aang , or possibly a vision of him , later appears in the Spirit World , encouraging Tenzin to move past the enormous legacy of being Aang 's son and find his own path .
Korra 's connection to Aang and the other preceding Avatars is severed when Vaatu extracts and subsequently kills Raava , the divine Avatar Spirit entity within her .
Even though Raava is reborn and fused again with Korra , she discovers , to her dismay , that her spiritual connection to Aang and all past Avatars is gone forever .
APPEARANCES IN OTHER MEDIA GAMES Section::::Appearances in other media .
Section::::Games .
Aang 's character appeared in the on a multitude of cards .
He appeared in the as one of the four playable characters .
Two sequels were made : , followed by .
Aang also appeared in Escape from the Spirit World , an online video game that can be found on Nickelodeon 's official website .
The game includes certain plot changes that are not shown in the show .
The show 's directors , Michael DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko , claim the events are canon .
FILMS
Section::::Films .
Tokyopop has published a films comic ( sometimes referred to as cine - manga ) , in which Aang , being the main character of the show , appears repeatedly .
In 2010 , director M. Night Shyamalan cast 12-year - old Tae Kwon Do practitioner Noah Ringer as Aang in the film adaptation of the series , The Last Airbender .
The casting of a presumed white actor in the role of Aang ( as well as a primarily Caucasian cast ) in the Asian - influenced Avatar universe triggered negative reactions from some fans , marked by accusations of racism , a letter - writing campaign , and a protest outside of a Philadelphia casting call for movie extras .
A counter - movement was spawned in response by other fans who believed the casting was appropriate .
The casting decisions were also negatively received by several critics , who stated that the original casting call expressed a preference for Caucasian actors over others .
Noah Ringer later identified himself to Entertainment Weekly as an American Indian .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
In the show 's intended demographics , Aang has been received exceptionally .
Kendall Lyons stated , " Aang seems to be the lighthearted kid that you can easily familiarize yourself with " , and that he " seems to bring comfort in the most dangerous or hostile situations .
" There are many similar descriptions about Aang as a childlike character who is " reckless and excitable " .
Reviews point out that " as the Avatar , Aang seems unstoppable , but as Aang , he is just another Airbender " ; the review states later that the show continues to focus on a more realistic character instead of a perfect one by revealing many character flaws .
In 2016 , ScreenRant ranked Aang # 15 on its " 30 Best Animated TV Characters Of All Time " list .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official TV Show Website at Nick.com
* Aang at Nick.com