ANATOMICAL TERMS OF MOTION Motion , the process of movement , is described using specific anatomical terms .
Motion includes movement of organs , joints , limbs , and specific sections of the body .
The terminology used describes this motion according to its direction relative to the anatomical position of the joints .
Anatomists use a unified set of terms to describe most of the movements , although other , more specialized terms are necessary for describing the uniqueness of the movements such as those of the hands , feet , and eyes .
In general , motion is classified according to the anatomical plane it occurs in .
Flexion and extension are examples of angular motions , in which two axes of a joint are brought closer together or moved further apart .
Rotational motion may occur at other joints , for example the shoulder , and are described as internal or external .
Other terms , such as elevation and depression , describe movement above or below the horizontal plane .
Many anatomical terms derive from Latin terms with the same meaning .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Motions are classified after the anatomical planes they occur in , although movement is more often than not a combination of different motions occurring simultaneously in several planes .
Motions can be split into categories relating to the nature of the joints involved :
* Gliding motions occur between flat surfaces , such as in the intervertebral discs or between the carpal and metacarpal bones of the hand .
* Angular motions occur over synovial joints and causes them to either increase or decrease angles between bones .
* Rotational motions move a structure in a rotational motion along a longitudinal axis , such as turning the head to look to either side .
Apart from this motions can also be divided into : * Linear motions ( or translatory motions ) , which move in a line between two points .
Rectilinear motion is motion in a straight line between two points , whereas curvilinear motion is motion following a curved path .
* Angular motions ( or rotary motions ) occur when an object is around another object increasing or decreasing the angle .
The different parts of the object do not move the same distance .
Examples include a movement of the knee , where the lower leg changes angle compared to the femur , or movements of the ankle .
The study of movement is known as kinesiology .
A categoric list of movements of the human body and the muscles involved can be found at list of movements of the human body .
ABNORMAL MOTION
Section::::Abnormal motion .
The prefix hyper- is sometimes added to describe movement beyond the normal limits , such as in hypermobility , hyperflexion or hyperextension .
The range of motion describes the total range of motion that a joint is able to do .
For example , if a part of the body such as a joint is overstretched or " bent backwards " because of exaggerated extension motion , then it can be described as hyperextended .
Hyperextension increases the stress on the ligaments of a joint , and is not always because of a voluntary movement .
It may be a result of accidents , falls , or other causes of trauma .
It may also be used in surgery , such as in temporarily dislocating joints for surgical procedures .
GENERAL MOTION
Section::::General motion .
These are general terms that can be used to describe most movements the body makes .
Most terms have a clear opposite , and so are treated in pairs .
FLEXION AND EXTENSION Section::::Flexion and extension .
Flexion and extension describe movements that affect the angle between two parts of the body .
These terms come from the Latin words with the same meaning .
Flexion describes a bending movement that decreases the angle between a segment and its proximal segment .
For example , bending the elbow , or clenching a hand into a fist , are examples of flexion .
When sitting down , the knees are flexed .
When a joint can move forward and backward , such as the neck and trunk , flexion refers to movement in the anterior direction .
Flexion of the shoulder or hip refers to movement of the arm or leg forward .
Extension is the opposite of flexion , describing a straightening movement that increases the angle between body parts .
When a joint can move forward and backward , such as the neck and trunk , extension refers to movement in the posterior direction .
For example , when standing up , the knees are extended .
Extension of the hip or shoulder moves the arm or leg backward .
When the chin is against the chest , the head is flexed , and the trunk is flexed when a person leans forward .
ABDUCTION AND ADDUCTION Section::::Abduction and adduction .
Abduction is the motion of a structure away from the midline while adduction refer to motion towards the center of the body .
The centre of the body is defined as the midsagittal plane .
These terms come from Latin words with similar meanings , ab- being the Latin prefix indicating " away , " ad- indicating " toward , " and ducere meaning " to draw or pull " ( cf .
English words " duct , " " conduct , " " induction " ) .
Abduction refers to a motion that pulls a structure or part away from the midline of the body .
In the case of fingers and toes , it refers to spreading the digits apart , away from the centerline of the hand or foot .
Abduction of the wrist is also called radial deviation .
For example , raising the arms up , such as when tightrope - walking , is an example of abduction at the shoulder .
When the legs are splayed at the hip , such as when doing a star jump or doing a split , the legs are abducted at the hip .
Adduction refers to a motion that pulls a structure or part toward the midline of the body , or towards the midline of a limb .
In the case of fingers and toes , it refers to bringing the digits together , towards the centerline of the hand or foot .
Adduction of the wrist is also called ulnar deviation .
Dropping the arms to the sides , and bringing the knees together , are examples of adduction .
Ulnar deviation is the hand moving towards the ulnar styloid ( or , towards the pinky / fifth digit ) .
Radial deviation is the hand moving towards the radial styloid ( or , towards the thumb / first digit ) .
ELEVATION AND DEPRESSION Section::::Elevation and depression .
The terms elevation and depression refer to movement above and below the horizontal .
They derive from the Latin terms with similar meanings Elevation refers to movement in a superior direction .
For example , shrugging is an example of elevation of the scapula .
Depression refers to movement in an inferior direction , the opposite of elevation .
ROTATION Section::::Rotation .
Rotation of body parts is referred to as internal or external , referring to rotation towards or away from the center of the body .
Internal rotation ( or medial rotation ) refers to rotation towards the axis of the body .
External rotation ( or lateral rotation ) refers to rotation away from the center of the body .
OTHER
* Anterograde and retrograde flow refer to movement of blood or other fluids in a normal ( anterograde ) or abnormal ( retrograde ) direction .
* Circumduction refers to a conical movement of a body part , such as a ball and socket joint or the eye .
Circumduction is a combination of flexion , extension , adduction and abduction .
Circumduction can be best performed at ball and socket joints , such as the hip and shoulder , but may also be performed by other parts of the body such as fingers , hands , feet , and head .
For example , circumduction occurs when spinning the arm when performing a serve in tennis or bowling a cricket ball .
* Reduction refers to a motion returning a bone to its original state , such as a shoulder reduction following shoulder dislocation , or reduction of a hernia .
SPECIAL
MOTION HANDS AND FEET FLEXION AND EXTENSION OF THE FOOT
Section::::Special motion .
Section::::Hands and feet .
Section::::Flexion and extension of the foot .
Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion refer to extension or flexion of the foot at the ankle .
These terms refer to flexion between the foot and the body 's dorsal surface , considered the front of the leg , and flexion between the foot and the body 's plantar surface , considered the back of the leg .
These terms are used to resolve confusion , as technically extension of the joint refers to dorsiflexion , which could be considered counter - intuitive as the motion reduces the angle between the foot and the leg .
Dorsiflexion where the toes are brought closer to the shin .
This decreases the angle between the dorsum of the foot and the leg .
For example , when walking on the heels the ankle is described as being in dorsiflexion .
Plantar flexion or plantarflexion is the movement which decreases the angle between the sole of the foot and the back of the leg ; for example , the movement when depressing a car pedal or standing on tiptoes .
FLEXION AND EXTENSION OF THE HAND Section::::Flexion and extension of the hand .
Palmarflexion and dorsiflexion refer to movement of the flexion ( palmarflexion ) or extension ( dorsiflexion ) of the hand at the wrist .
These terms refer to flexion between the hand and the body 's dorsal surface , which in anatomical position is considered the back of the arm ; and flexion between the hand and the body 's palmar surface , which in anatomical position is considered the anterior side of the arm .
The direction of terms are opposite to those in the foot because of embryological rotation of the limbs in opposite directions .
Palmarflexion refers to decreasing the angle between the palm and the anterior forearm .
Dorsiflexion refers to extension at the ankle or wrist joint .
This brings the hand closer to the dorsum of the body .
PRONATION AND SUPINATION Section::::Pronation and supination .
Pronation ( ) and supination ( ) refer most generally to assuming prone or supine positions , but often they are used in a specific sense referring to rotation of the forearm or foot so that in the standard anatomical position the palm or sole is facing anteriorly ( supination ) or posteriorly ( pronation ) .
Pronation at the forearm is a rotational movement where the hand and upper arm are turned inwards .
Pronation of the foot refers to turning of the sole outwards , so that weight is borne on the medial part of the foot .
Supination of the forearm occurs when the forearm or palm are rotated outwards .
Supination of the foot refers to turning of the sole of the foot inwards , shifting weight to the lateral edge .
INVERSION AND EVERSION Section::::Inversion and eversion .
Inversion and eversion refer to movements that tilt the sole of the foot away from ( eversion ) or towards ( inversion ) the midline of the body .
Eversion is the movement of the sole of the foot away from the median plane .
Inversion is the movement of the sole towards the median plane .
For example , inversion describes the motion when an ankle is twisted .
EYES Section::::Eyes .
Unique terminology is also used to describe the eye .
For example : * A version is an eye movement involving both eyes moving synchronously and symmetrically in the same direction .
* Torsion refers to eye movement that affects the vertical axis of the eye , such as the movement made when looking in to the nose .
JAW AND TEETH
* Occlusion refers to motion of the mandibula towards the maxilla making contact between the teeth .
* Protrusion and retrusion are sometimes used to describe the anterior ( protrusion ) and posterior ( retrusion ) movement of the jaw .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Other terms include : * Nutation and counternutation refer to movement of the sacrum defined by the rotation of the promontory downwards and anteriorly , as with lumbar extension ( nutation ) ; or upwards and posteriorly , as with lumbar flexion ( counternutation ) .
* Opposition refers to the movement that involves grasping of the thumb and fingers .
* Protraction and Retraction refer to an anterior ( protraction ) or posterior ( retraction ) movement , such as of the arm at the shoulders , although these terms have been criticised as non - specific .
* Reciprocal motion refers to alternating motions in opposing directions .
* Reposition refers to restoring an object to its natural condition .
SEE ALSO
* Anatomical terms of location
* Anatomical terms of muscle
* Anatomical terms of bone
* Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy NOTES
REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hypermuscle : Muscles in Action at med.umich.edu