FETAL SURGERY Fetal surgery also known as fetal reconstructive surgery , antenatal surgery , prenatal surgery , is a growing branch of maternal - fetal medicine that covers any of a broad range of surgical techniques that are used to treat birth defects in fetuses who are still in the pregnant uterus .
There are three main types : open fetal surgery , which involves completely opening the uterus to operate on the fetus ; minimally invasive fetoscopic surgery , which uses small incisions and is guided by fetoscopy and sonography ; and percutaneous fetal therapy , which involves placing a catheter under continuous ultrasound guidance .
Fetal intervention is relatively new .
Advancing technologies allow earlier and more accurate diagnosis of diseases and congenital problems in a fetus .
Most problems do not require or are not treatable through fetal intervention .
The exceptions are anatomical problems for which correction in utero is feasible and may be of significant benefit in the future development and survival of the fetus .
Early correction ( prior to birth ) of these problems will likely increase the odds of a healthy and relatively normal baby .
The pregnant woman bears as much , if not more , risk as her fetus during any form of fetal intervention .
Besides the general risk that any surgery bears , there is also a risk to the health of the mother 's uterus , potentially limiting her ability to bear more children .
The risk is higher than from an elective Cesarean section because : * the incision typically will be a classical vertical one , with a greater risk of complications in subsequent pregnancies * the longer duration of the surgery , while the fetal intervention is performed * delivery of the baby will require a second Cesarean section days or weeks later
TYPES
OPEN
FETAL
SURGERY TECHNIQUE Section::::Types .
Section::::Open fetal surgery .
Section::::Technique .
Tocolytics are generally given to prevent labor ; however , these should not be given if the risk is higher for the fetus inside the womb than if delivered , such as may be the case in intrauterine infection , unexplained vaginal bleeding and fetal distress .
An H antagonist is usually given for anaesthesia the evening before and the morning of the operation , and an antacid is usually given before induction to reduce the risk of acid aspiration .
Rapid sequence induction is often used for sedation and intubation .
Open fetal surgery is similar in many respects to a normal cesarean section performed under general anesthesia , except that the fetus remains dependent on the placenta and is returned to the uterus .
A hysterotomy is performed on the pregnant woman , and once the uterus is open and the fetus is exposed , the fetal surgery begins .
Typically , this surgery consists of an interim procedure intended to allow the fetus to remain in utero until it has matured enough to survive delivery and neonatal surgical procedures .
Upon completion of the fetal surgery , the fetus is put back inside the uterus and the uterus and abdominal wall are closed up .
Before the last stitch is made in the uterine wall , the amniotic fluid is replaced .
The mother remains in the hospital for 3–7 days for monitoring .
Often babies who have been operated on in this manner are born pre - term .
SAFETY AND COMPLICATIONS Section::::Safety and complications .
The main priority is maternal safety , and , secondary , avoiding preterm labor and achieving the aims of the surgery .
In 2008 , open fetal surgery was considered a possibility after approximately 18 weeks of gestation due to fetal size and fragility before that , and up to approximately 30 weeks of gestation due to increased risk of premature labor and , practically , the preference for delivering the child and performing the surgery in ex utero / pediatric surgery , instead .
The risk of premature labor is increased by concomitant risk factors such as multiple gestation , a history of maternal smoking , and very young or old maternal age .
Open fetal surgery has proven to be reasonably safe for the mother .
For the fetus , safety and effectiveness are variable , and depend on the specific procedure , the reasons for the procedure , and the gestational age and condition of the fetus .
The overall perinatal mortality after open surgery has been estimated to be approximately 6 % , according to a study in the United States 2003 .
All future pregnancies for the mother require cesarean delivery because of the hysterotomy .
However , there is no presented data suggesting decreased fertility for the mother .
INDICATIONS Section::::Indications .
Neural tube defects(NTD ) , which begin to become observable at the 28th day of pregnancy , occur when the embryonic neural tube fails to close properly , the developing brain and spinal cord are openly exposed to amniotic fluid and with this , causes the nervous system tissue to break down .
Prenatal repair of the most easily treated NTD , myelomeningocele ( spina bifida cystica ) is as of 2011 , a growing option in the United States .
Although the procedure is technically challenging , children treated with open fetal repair have significantly improved outcomes compared to children whose defects are repaired shortly after birth .
Specifically , fetal repair reduces the rate of ventriculoperitoneal shunt dependence and Chiari malformation , while improving motor skills at 30 months of age compared to post - natal repair .
Children having fetal repair are twice as likely to walk independently at 30 months of age than children undergoing post - natal repair .
As a result , open fetal repair of spina bifida is now considered standard of care at fetal specialty centers .
Other conditions that potentially are treated by open fetal surgery include : * Congenital diaphragmatic hernia ( if indicated at all , it is now more likely to be treated by endoscopic fetal surgery )
* Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation
* Congenital heart disease *
Pulmonary sequestration *
Sacrococcygeal teratoma
MINIMALLY INVASIVE FETAL SURGERY Section::::Minimally invasive fetal surgery .
Minimally - invasive fetoscopic surgery has proven to be useful for some fetal conditions .
* Twin - twin transfusion syndrome – Laser Ablation of Vessels
* Spina bifida –
Fetoscopic closure of the malformation .
Prenatal repair of the spina bifida lesion through this approach has been purported to result in less complications to the mother , whilst affording benefit to the baby .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Fetal surgical techniques were first developed at the University of California , San Francisco in 1980 using animal models .
On April 26 , 1981 , the first successful human open fetal surgery in the world was performed at University of California , San Francisco under the direction of Dr. Michael Harrison .
The fetus in question had a congenital hydronephrosis , a blockage in the urinary tract that caused the kidney to dangerously extend .
To correct this a vesicostomy was performed by placing a catheter in the fetus to allow the urine to be released normally .
The blockage itself was removed surgically after birth .
Further advances have been made in the years since this first operation .
New techniques have allowed additional defects to be treated and for less invasive forms of fetal surgical intervention .
The first two percutaneous ultrasound - guided fetal balloon valvuloplasties , a type of fetal surgery for severe aortic valve obstruction in the heart , were reported in 1991 .
Among the first dozen reported attempts at this repair in the 1990s , only two children survived long - term .
SEE ALSO * ECMO
* Fetoscopy * EXIT procedure * Maternal - fetal medicine , a discipline of high - risk obstetrics and gynecology ; most fetal surgeons were previously trained in OB - GYN and maternal - fetal medicine before their fetal surgical training * Neonatology and neonatal surgery , related to high risk OB - GYN and maternal - fetal medicine and fetal surgery , are branches of pediatrics and pediatric surgery that focus on the treatment of newborn infants ( less than one month of age )
* Pediatric surgery , a related but distinct discipline of surgery and pediatrics , involving surgery on infants , toddlers , and children and adolescents
* MOMS Trial * Spina Bifida * NAFTNet
* Samuel Armas REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pediatric Surgery Books Directory