POSSESSION AND ACQUISITION LICENCE
A possession and acquisition licence ( PAL ) is a firearms licence in Canadian law .
All of the following require a licence in Canada
* Possession of a firearm ( including long guns )
* Acquisition of a firearm ( including long guns )
* Possession or acquisition of ammunition for a firearm
* Borrowing any of the above ( technically possession / acquisition , but can be licensed separately ) .
A non - resident firearms declaration that has been confirmed by a customs officer is deemed to be a temporary licence for up to 60 days .
A non - resident firearms declaration is a specific form that should be reviewed in advance of travel , not an oral statement at the border .
The PAL is the primary licence for possession of a firearm and acquisition of ammunition , and it is both required and the only permissible document for a person to acquire or permanently import a firearm .
Applicants must be 18 years of age or more .
There is no requirement of citizenship or residency ( although different forms , and slightly different requirements apply ) .
There is a separate licensing system to transport restricted firearms ( authorization to transport ) .
In other words , while a PAL ( with appropriate endorsements ) may permit a person to purchase a restricted firearm , it does not in itself permit that person to transport it from the store to their home .
( This particular case can become an endorsement on a PAL . )
For non - restricted firearms separate authorization to transport is not required .
OTHER FIREARMS LICENCES
Section::::Other firearms licences .
Other firearm licences for individuals include : * Minors licence ( under 16 ) permits borrowing a firearm .
Usually applicant must be at least 12 , although exceptions can be made if one can demonstrate " need " .
( Requirements , including courses , are substantially the same as PAL . )
* Possession - only licences ( POL ) , which no longer exist .
All POLs were converted to PALs .
The POL was a grandfathered class of licence that permitted possession of firearms and acquisition of ammunition , but not acquisition of firearms .
* Non - resident temporary borrowing licence for non - restricted firearms * Non - resident temporary possession licence for minors
* Executor of will .
While not technically a licence , the executor of a will , in many cases , can temporarily have custody of firearms as part of an estate , without themselves having a firearms licence .
NOTE : While issued licences read either " Possession • Acquisition " or " Possession Only " , the Firearms Act and regulations refer to either " possession and acquisition licence " or " possession licence " , without the word only .
OBTAINING / APPLYING Section::::Obtaining / Applying .
All licensing of firearms in Canada is managed by the RCMP 's Canadian Firearms Program ( CFP ) .
In the Canadian system , there are three classes of firearms and firearm licences : non - restricted , restricted and prohibited .
See below for complete details on prohibited , restricted and non - restricted firearms .
A possession and acquisition licence is a licence that allows individuals in Canada to possess and acquire firearms as well as ammunition .
Licences are typically valid for five years and must be renewed prior to expiry to maintain all classes .
If an individual possessing a PAL is convicted of certain offences , a PAL can be revoked .
If an individual does not renew their PAL prior to its expiration date or if they have their PAL revoked , they must legally dispose of any firearms in their possession .
A licence for prohibited firearms can be issued to qualifying businesses , and very rarely to individuals ( firearms they own , as the gun laws changed over time . )
Previous convictions for serious violent , drug or weapons offences almost invariably result in the denial of the application .
A PAL is generally obtained in the following three steps :
Safety training : All PAL applicants are recommended to successfully complete the Canadian Firearms Safety Course ( CFSC ) for a Non - restricted licence , and the Canadian Restricted Firearms Safety Course ( CRFSC ) for a restricted licence .
In many provinces , however , applicants are also able to challenge the non - restricted and restricted licence examinations without completing the respective safety courses .
In most cases , the non - restricted class is a prerequisite to obtain the restricted licence , but both examinations can be challenged at the same time .
The examinations contain both a written and practical component .
Information on the locations and availability of these courses can be found at the RCMP website .
Formal application :
Submit completed application ( with supporting documents )
Security screening :
Background checks and investigations are performed .
All applicants are screened and a mandatory 28-day waiting period is imposed on first - time applicants .
Licences are typically valid for five years and must be renewed prior to expiry to maintain all classes .
Once licensed , an individual can apply for a firearm transfer ; and an authorization to transport ( ATT ) for restricted firearms .
CLASSIFICATION OF FIREARMS Section::::Classification of firearms .
Like licences , firearms are classified into prohibited , restricted and non - restricted categories , as defined by Part III of Criminal Code ( R.S. , 1985 , c. C-46 )
Prohibited firearms include : * Handguns with a barrel that is or less in length
* Handguns that are designed to discharge .25 or .32 calibre ammunition ( unless stated in the Regulations Prescribing Exclusions from Certain Definitions of the Criminal Code International Sporting Competition Handguns )
* Rifles and shotguns that have been altered by sawing , cutting or any other means , so that their barrel length be less than or their overall length less than
* Automatic firearms , whether or not they have been altered to discharge only one projectile with one pressure of the trigger
* Firearms prescribed as prohibited by the Regulations Prescribing Certain Firearms and other Weapons , Components and Parts of Weapons , Accessories , Cartridge Magazines , Ammunition and Projectiles as Prohibited or Restricted ( SOR/98 - 462 ) :
Restricted firearms are : * Handguns that are not prohibited * Semi - automatic firearms with a barrel shorter than 470 mm ( 18.5 in ) * Rifles and shotguns that can be fired when their overall length has been reduced by folding , telescoping or other means to less than
* Firearms prescribed as restricted by the Regulations Prescribing Certain Firearms and other Weapons , Components and Parts of Weapons , Accessories , Cartridge Magazines , Ammunition and Projectiles as Prohibited or Restricted ( SOR/98 - 462 ) , and any variant or modified version of them :
Non - restricted firearms are : * ordinary rifles and shotguns , other than those referred to above .
HISTORY Section::::History .
PALs were introduced in Canada in 1995 as part of Bill C-68 as a replacement for the FAC ( firearms acquisition certificate ) system .
Whereas the FAC was only required to acquire a firearm , a PAL is required to both acquire and possess firearms and to acquire ammunition .
A PAL for non - restricted firearms allows its holders to acquire and possess any non - restricted firearm , while a PAL for restricted firearms ( which also covers prohibited firearms to those eligible ) allows the holder to acquire and possess restricted firearms .
When first implemented , the PAL also allowed the holder to acquire a cross - bow , although no licence was required to possess one .
There is no longer a licensing requirement for purchasing cross - bows .
TRANSPORTATION OF FIREARMS Section::::Transportation of firearms .
The transportation regulations are broken down into two divisions : those for non - restricted firearms and those for restricted or prohibited firearms .
These rules are laid out in the Storage , Display , Transportation and Handling of Firearms by Individuals Regulations .
A non restricted firearm may be transported so long as it is unloaded .
Such a firearm does not need to be encased or trigger locked .
A restricted firearm must be disabled by use of a trigger , cable , or other locking device and locked in an opaque case .
An unattended non - restricted firearm left in a vehicle must be locked in the trunk or other compartment , if one is available .
In order to transport restricted or prohibited firearms , an individual must obtain an authorization to transport .
An ATT is generally approved only for individuals to transport a restricted or prohibited firearm to a shooting range for target practice , gun show for sale , to a gunsmith or gun shop or for a competition ( e.g. : IPSC ) .
An authorization to carry ( ATC ) allows a person to carry a restricted firearm or prohibited handgun concealed ( if specified as a condition of carry ) and loaded .
An ATC for open carry is usually only issued to employees of armoured car companies or for other limited employment reasons .
In very rare situations , an ATC may be issued for protection of life , which would allow the holder to have a loaded handgun with them , or at home , without violating safe storage rules that usually require an unloaded firearm to be trigger locked and secured .
SEE ALSO * Canadian Firearms Registry * Dominion of Canada Rifle Association
* Gun politics in Canada
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Canadian Firearms Program Website
* CAFC 921 - PAL application form * An overview of the licensing process
* Canada Firearms Test android app
* Canada Firearms Test iOS app