PLAYER - COACH A player - coach ( also playing coach , captain - coach , or player - manager ) is a member of a sports team who simultaneously holds both playing and coaching duties .
A player - coach may be a head coach or an assistant coach .
They may make changes to the squad and also play on the team .
Very few current major professional sports teams have head coaches who are also players , though it is extremely common for senior players to take a role in managing more junior athletes .
Historically , when professional sports had much less money to pay players and coaches or managers , it was much more common to find them .
Likewise , where player - coaches exist today , they are more common at the lower levels where money is less available , but not exclusively .
PLAYER - COACHES IN BASKETBALL Section::::Player - coaches in basketball .
The player - coach was , for many decades , a long - time fixture in professional basketball .
Many notable coaches in the NBA served as player - coaches , including Bill Russell and Lenny Wilkens .
This was especially true up through the 1970s , when the league was not as financially successful as it is today , and player - coaches were often used to save money .
The practice fell out of favor in the 1980s ( though Mike Dunleavy Sr . , while an assistant coach with the Milwaukee Bucks , once came out of retirement and played several games when a rash of injuries decimated the team ) .
Today , the collective bargaining agreement between the NBA and the players ' union prohibits the use of player - coaches , in order to avoid circumventing the league 's salary cap , as coaches ' salaries are not counted under the cap .
Therefore , if a player is to serve as a coach , he would have to receive commission from his contract as a player .
The player , then , is not technically an official coach of his team but instead simply a coach in name .
One example of a player in recent years who was groomed for eventual official coaching duties using this practice was Avery Johnson .
PLAYER - COACHES IN AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::Player - coaches in American football .
In the early days of professional American football , player - coaches were a necessity , as coaching from the sidelines at the time was not allowed under the rules of most leagues .
The National Football League eventually allowed sideline coaches in the late 1920s , and they quickly became the norm .
During the 1920s , legendary player - coaches in the NFL include Curly Lambeau ( who played for the Green Bay Packers from 1919–1929 , and served as their head coach from 1919–1949 ) and George Halas who held similar roles for the Chicago Bears , a team for which he was also part - owner and business manager .
Jimmy Conzelman was player - coach for four teams during the 1920s .
In the mid-1950s Tom Landry played defensive back while serving as defensive coordinator for the New York Giants .
In the early 1970s , when Landry was coach of the Dallas Cowboys , he made running back Dan Reeves a player - coach .
More modern players have acted as player - coaches in an unofficial capacity , such as journeyman quarterback Steve DeBerg , who served as an unofficial mentor for younger , more skilled arms while also serving as their backup .
PLAYER - COACHES IN CRICKET Section::::Player - coaches in cricket .
Player - coaches in cricket are almost unheard of , although professional coaches are a relatively recent innovation and a similar role was generally filled by the team captain ; this may still be the case in amateur competition .
Internationally , Shane Deitz was appointed non - playing coach of Vanuatu in 2014 and , after meeting the necessary residency qualifications , made his international playing debut in 2018 , at the age of 42 .
Similarly , former Australian international Ryan Campbell was appointed as a non - playing batting coach of Hong Kong in 2013 , and after meeting the residency qualifications made his playing debut for Hong Kong in 2016 , at the age of 44 .
PLAYER - MANAGERS IN ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Player - managers in association football .
In association football , this situation usually arises when a manager leaves a team suddenly , and the chairman has to make a quick decision to appoint someone new as a caretaker manager .
The chairman will usually either ask a coach to take temporary charge or turn to one of the club 's most senior players .
If this particular player gains good results for the team during his time in charge , he may be appointed full - time manager , which leaves him a player – manager .
However , there are instances when a free agent is appointed by a new team as a manager and offers his playing abilities .
Successful football player
– managers include Kenny Dalglish ( Liverpool ) , Graeme Souness ( Rangers ) , Glenn Hoddle ( Swindon Town and Chelsea ) , Bryan Robson ( Middlesbrough ) , Peter Reid ( Manchester City ) , Ruud Gullit ( Chelsea ) and Gianluca Vialli ( Chelsea ) .
Dalglish won the double of the league title and FA Cup in his first season as player - manager , and went on to win two more league titles and an FA Cup before giving up playing completely five years after becoming manager , while Souness won three Scottish league titles and several cup competitions when he was player - manager of Rangers .
He then succeeded Dalglish as Liverpool manager just before Rangers won another Scottish league title , but at the age of 38 he did not register himself as a player for Liverpool .
In 1997 , Ruud Gullit won the FA Cup with Chelsea in his first season as player - manager , also making history by being the first foreign and non - white manager to win a major trophy in English football .
He was sacked nine months later , and Chelsea appointed another player - manager ( Gianluca Vialli ) in his place .
Within weeks of taking over , Vialli guided Chelsea to victory in the League Cup , and two months after that , they won the European Cup Winners ' Cup .
A number of bigger clubs have appointed player - managers on a temporary basis but not given them permanent contracts .
Notable cases include Ossie Ardiles ( Tottenham Hotspur ) in 1987 and Dave Watson ( Everton ) a decade later , although Ardiles later returned to Tottenham as manager in 1993 after managing three other clubs .
During the first decade of the 21st century , however , the concept gradually fell into almost total disuse and was normally only practiced by smaller clubs .
In March 2013 , a BBC Sport article suggested that the concept of having a player - manager had gone out of fashion , with only two clubs in the English professional leagues using player - managers at that time .
The chief executive of the League Managers Association stated his belief that the increased workload for managers had made combining the two roles difficult .
The last permanent player - manager in the top flight of English football was Gianluca Vialli , who retired from playing in 1999 when he was the manager of Chelsea .
The governing bodies have also imposed requirements for managers to hold professional coaching qualifications , which few players obtain before retiring .
There have been four player - managers in the Premier League since 2000 :
Stuart McCall , who managed two Bradford City games on an interim basis in late 2000 , Garry Monk , who was appointed interim player - manager of Swansea City in February 2014 , after their manager , Michael Laudrup , was sacked , and Leon Britton who also became player - manager of Swansea City after the sacking of Paul Clement .
Ryan Giggs was appointed player - coach at Manchester United by David Moyes on 4 July 2013 and Giggs served as interim player - manager until the appointment of Louis van Gaal on 9 May 2014 as manager following Moyes ' dismissal .
On the 6 May 2014 , in what turned out to be his final game as a player , Ryan Giggs substituted himself on against Hull in the closing minutes at the age of 40 .
PLAYER - MANAGERS IN BASEBALL Section::::Player - managers in baseball .
While no Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team has been led by a player - manager since 1986 , they were once quite common .
Cap Anson , Connie Mack , John McGraw , Ty Cobb , Tris Speaker , Joe Cronin , Mickey Cochrane , Lou Boudreau , Joe Torre , and Frank Robinson are among those who spent time as player - managers .
In this capacity , Robinson became the first African - American manager in MLB history when he was named the Cleveland Indians ' player - manager in .
Fred Clarke spent the longest time as a major league player - manager , serving as such for the Louisville Colonels from to and the Pittsburgh Pirates from to .
The most recent player - manager in MLB was Pete Rose , who , upon being traded from the Montreal Expos to the Cincinnati Reds in August , was immediately named the Reds ' manager .
Rose managed and served as a backup infielder until the end of the season , when he retired as a player .
( He continued to manage the Reds until when he was suspended indefinitely by MLB for gambling on baseball . )
In , Chicago White Sox general manager Kenny Williams said that he had considered making veteran first baseman Paul Konerko a player - manager to replace departing manager Ozzie Guillén .
Williams instead hired retired player Robin Ventura for the position .
In their final game of the season , the Miami Marlins allowed Martin Prado to serve as player - manager .
Prado started the game at third base and played for three innings before taking himself out of the game .
Major league rules are somewhat different for trips to the mound by the manager if he is a player - manager ( this is with regard to being required to change pitchers ) , and a player - manager puts himself into or out of the lineup just as he would any other player .
SEE ALSO * Ryder Cup#Captains
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Wulf , Steve .
" The evolution of player - coaches " ESPN.com , 21 June 2013