AMPHIBIOUS FISH
Amphibious fish are fish that are able to leave water for extended periods of time .
About 11 distantly related genera of fish are considered amphibious .
This suggests that many fish genera independently evolved amphibious traits , a process known as convergent evolution .
These fish use a range of terrestrial locomotory modes , such as lateral undulation , tripod - like walking ( using paired fins and tail ) , and jumping .
Many of these locomotory modes incorporate multiple combinations of pectoral , pelvic and tail fin movement .
Many ancient fish had lung - like organs , and a few , such as the lungfish , still do .
Some of these ancient " lunged " fish were the ancestors of tetrapods .
However , in most recent fish species these organs evolved into the swim bladders , which help control buoyancy .
Having no lung - like organs , modern amphibious fish and many fish in oxygen - poor water use other methods such as their gills or their skin to breathe air .
Amphibious fish may also have eyes adapted to allow them to see clearly in air , despite the refractive index differences between air and water .
LIST OF AMPHIBIOUS FISH
LUNG BREATHERS
* Lungfish ( Dipnoi ) : Six species , have limb like fins , and can breathe air .
Some are obligate air breathers , meaning they will drown if not given access to breathe air .
Some species will bury in the mud when the body of water they live in dries up , surviving up to two years until water returns .
* Various other " lunged " fish : now extinct
, a few of this group were ancestors of the stem tetrapods that led to all tetrapods : Lissamphibia , sauropsids and mammals .
GILL OR SKIN BREATHERS
* Rockskippers : These blennies are found on islands in the Indian and Pacific oceans .
They come onto land to catch prey and escape aquatic predators , often for up to 20 minutes or more .
Leaping blennies ( Alticus arnoldorum ) are able to jump over land using their tails .
On Rarotonga , one species has evolved to become largely terrestrial .
* Woolly sculpin ( Clinocottus analis ) :
Found in tide pools along the Pacific coast , these sculpins will leave water if the oxygen levels get low and can breathe air .
* Mudskippers ( Oxudercinae ) : This subfamily of gobies is probably the most land adapted of fish .
Mudskippers are found in mangrove swamps in Africa and the Indo - Pacific , they frequently come onto land and can survive in air for up to three and a half days .
Mudskippers breathe through their skin and through the lining of the mouth ( the mucosa ) and throat ( the pharynx ) .
This requires the mudskipper to be wet , limiting mudskippers to humid habitats .
This mode of breathing , similar to that employed by amphibians , is known as cutaneous breathing .
They propel themselves over land on their sturdy forefins .
* Eels : Some eels , such as the European eel and the American eel , can live for an extended time out of water and can also crawl on land if the soil is moist .
Swamp eels can absorb oxygen through their highly vascularized mouth and pharnyx , and in some cases ( e.g. , Monopterus rongsaw ) through their skin .
* Snakehead fish ( Channidae ) : This family of fish are obligate air breathers , breathing air using their suprabranchial organ , which is a primitive labyrinth organ .
The northern snakehead of Southeast Asia can " walk " on land by wriggling and using its pectoral fins , which allows it to move between the slow - moving , and often stagnant and temporary bodies of water in which it lives .
* Airbreathing catfish ( Clariidae ) : Amphibious species of this family may venture onto land in wet weather , such as the eel catfish ( Channallabes apus ) , which lives in swamps in Africa , and is known to hunt beetles on land .
* Labyrinth fish ( Anabantoidei ) .
This suborder of fish also use a labyrinth organ to breathe air .
Some species from this group can move on land .
Amphibious fish from this family are the climbing perches , African and Southeast Asian fish that are capable of moving from pool to pool over land by using their pectoral fins , caudal peduncle and gill covers as a means of locomotion .
It is said that climbing gourami move at night in groups .
SEE ALSO
* Walking fish
* List of semiaquatic tetrapods REFERENCES