SUPER BOWL
XLVII Super Bowl XLVII was an American football game between the American Football Conference ( AFC ) champion Baltimore Ravens and the National Football Conference ( NFC ) champion San Francisco 49ers to decide the National Football League ( NFL ) champion for the 2012 season .
The Ravens defeated the 49ers by the score of 34–31 , handing the 49ers their first Super Bowl loss in franchise history .
The game was played on Sunday , February 3 , 2013 at Mercedes - Benz Superdome in New Orleans , Louisiana .
This was the tenth Super Bowl to be played in New Orleans , equaling Miami 's record of ten in an individual city .
For the first time in Super Bowl history , the game featured two brothers coaching against each other — Jim and John Harbaugh , head coaches of the San Francisco 49ers and Baltimore Ravens , respectively — earning it the nickname Harbaugh Bowl .
In addition , Super Bowl XLVII was the first to feature two teams that had undefeated records in previous Super Bowl games ( Baltimore , 1–0 ; San Francisco , 5–0 ) .
The 49ers , who posted a regular - season record of 11–4–1 , entered the game seeking their sixth Super Bowl win in team history ( and first since Super Bowl XXIX at the end of the 1994 season ) , which would have tied the Pittsburgh Steelers for the most by a franchise .
The Ravens , who posted a 10–6 regular - season record , made their second Super Bowl appearance in 12 years , having previously won Super Bowl XXXV .
Ray Lewis , the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) from that game , as well as the last remaining member of the inaugural Ravens roster from 1996 , also played in this game , his last before his retirement from professional football .
Baltimore built a 28–6 lead early in the third quarter before a partial power outage in the Superdome suspended play for 34 minutes ( earning the game the added nickname of the Blackout Bowl ) .
After play resumed , San Francisco scored 17 unanswered third - quarter points to cut the Ravens ' lead to 28–23 , and continued to chip away in the fourth quarter .
With the Ravens leading late in the game , 34–29 , the 49ers advanced to the Baltimore 7-yard line just before the two - minute warning but turned the ball over on downs .
The Ravens then took an intentional safety in the waning moments of the game to preserve the victory .
Baltimore quarterback Joe Flacco , who completed 22 of 33 passes for 287 yards and three touchdowns , became the fourth quarterback in a row to be named Super Bowl MVP , after Drew Brees at Super Bowl XLIV , Aaron Rodgers at Super Bowl XLV , and Eli Manning at Super Bowl XLVI .
CBS broadcast the game in the U.S. , and charged an average of $ 4 million for a 30-second commercial during the game , the highest rate for any Super Bowl .
According to Nielsen , Super Bowl XLVII was viewed by an estimated average of 108.69 million people in the United States , with a record 164.1 million tuning into at least six minutes of the game .
Beyoncé performed in the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show , which featured a reunion with fellow Destiny 's Child alumnae Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The game marked the first Super Bowl in which both of the teams had appeared in , but had not yet lost a previous Super Bowl ; the 49ers came into the game having won all five of their previous Super Bowl appearances , while the Ravens had won in their lone previous Super Bowl appearance in Super Bowl XXXV against the New York Giants .
Currently , this phenomenon can only be repeated if either the Ravens or the New York Jets play against either the Tampa Bay Buccaneers or the New Orleans Saints in a subsequent Super Bowl .
Baltimore 's victory made them the only current NFL franchise to have appeared in at least two Super Bowls without ever losing any of their appearances .
HOST - SELECTION PROCESS Section::::Host - selection process .
Three cities presented bids for the game :
* New Orleans , on behalf of Mercedes - Benz Superdome
* Glendale , Arizona , on behalf of University of Phoenix Stadium * Miami Gardens , Florida , on behalf of Sun Life Stadium
The league then selected the New Orleans bid during the NFL 's Spring Ownership Meetings in Fort Lauderdale , Florida on May 19 , 2009 .
This was the tenth time that the city has hosted the Super Bowl , by far the most by an individual city and once again tying with the Miami area for the most Super Bowls hosted by a metropolitan area .
It was the first Super Bowl to be held in New Orleans since the Superdome sustained damage from Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , as well as since the naming rights of the Superdome were sold to Mercedes - Benz while it was undergoing a major renovation in 2011 , including the addition of Champions Square .
New Orleans artist Ally Burguieres was selected to design the official medallion for Super Bowl XLVII , which was included on beads to commemorate the Mardi Gras tradition .
Because of the February 3 date of Super Bowl XLVII , the 2013 Mardi Gras calendar in Orleans Parish was changed .
Parades scheduled for February 3 and before were moved ahead one week .
The same situation occurred in 2002 when the 9/11 attacks caused a one - week delay in the 2001 NFL season , resulting in the Super Bowl XXXVI falling within the Mardi Gras parade calendar .
This was the 49ers ' second Super Bowl played at the Superdome — the first being Super Bowl XXIV when they beat the Denver Broncos 55–10 .
The 49ers , Broncos and New England Patriots are the only teams so far to play two or more Super Bowls at the Superdome .
The 49ers also joined the Broncos and the Colts in playing two Super Bowls at two different stadiums .
The 49ers won Super Bowls XXIII and XXIX in Miami at what is now known as Hard Rock Stadium .
NICKNAMES Section::::Nicknames .
Super Bowl XLVII earned many nicknames , including the " Bro Bowl " , " Harbaugh Bowl " , " HarBowl " , " Super Baugh " , " Brother Bowl " , and " Superbro " , as this was the first Super Bowl featuring brothers as opposing head coaches : Baltimore 's John Harbaugh and San Francisco 's Jim Harbaugh , whose clubs previously met in a 2011 Thanksgiving Day game , which John Harbaugh 's Ravens won 16–6 , which was also the first time that two brothers had met as rival head coaches in the NFL .
Due to a power outage affecting half the stadium during the third quarter , the game has also become known as the " Blackout Bowl " .
TEAMS BALTIMORE RAVENS
Section::::Teams .
Section::::Baltimore Ravens .
After going 12–4 and reaching the AFC Championship Game in 2011 , only to lose to the New England Patriots when wide receiver Lee Evans dropped a game - winning catch in the end zone and Billy Cundiff missed a potential game - tying 32-yard field goal , the Ravens advanced further in 2012 to the Super Bowl after recording a 10–6 regular season record .
Under head coach John Harbaugh , who was in his fifth season with the team , Baltimore upgraded their roster with players such as defensive backs Sean Considine and Corey Graham , and wide receiver Jacoby Jones .
In December 2012 , the Ravens fired offensive coordinator Cam Cameron and promoted quarterbacks coach Jim Caldwell , who was previously the head coach of the Indianapolis Colts from 2009 to 2011 , as the successor .
With personnel on both sides of the ball , they finished the season ranked 10th in points per game ( 24.9 ) , and 12th in fewest points allowed ( 21.5 )
In command of the offense was five - year veteran Joe Flacco , who finished the season with a career - high 3,817 passing yards and 22 touchdowns , with only 10 interceptions .
( Super Bowl XLVII would be one of only two years the AFC team 's quarterback would not be either Tom Brady , Ben Roethlisberger or Peyton Manning between Super Bowls XXXVI and LI ; the other was Super Bowl XXXVII
ten years prior , when the 2002 Oakland Raiders were helmed by Rich Gannon . )
His top targets were receivers Anquan Boldin ( 65 receptions , 921 yards , 4 touchdowns ) and Torrey Smith ( 49 receptions , 855 yards , 8 touchdowns ) , along with tight end Dennis Pitta ( 61 receptions , 669 yards , 7 touchdowns ) .
Their backfield featured two Pro Bowl selections : halfback Ray Rice and fullback Vonta Leach .
Rice rushed for 1,143 yards and 9 touchdowns , while also hauling in 61 receptions for 478 yards and another score .
Leach served effectively as his lead blocker and a receiver out of the backfield , catching 21 passes .
The Ravens ' offensive line was led by Pro Bowl guard Marshal Yanda .
On special teams , Jones returned 38 kickoffs for 1,116 yards and two touchdowns , giving him a whopping 30.7 yards per return average .
He also gained 341 yards and another touchdown returning punts , and caught 30 passes for 406 yards and a score .
Rookie kicker Justin Tucker ranked 7th in the NFL in field goal percentage ( 90.9 ) , kicking 30/33 field goals and making all 42 of his extra point attempts .
Baltimore 's defensive line was anchored by Pro Bowl defensive end Haloti Ngata , who compiled 51 tackles and 5 sacks , along with defensive tackle Arthur Jones ( 47 tackles , 4.5 sacks ) .
The Ravens also had an excellent set of linebackers , such as Paul Kruger , Dannell Ellerbe , Jameel McClain , Terrell Suggs , and Ray Lewis .
Kruger led the team in sacks with 9 , while Ellerbe added 92 tackles and 4.5 sacks .
McClain had 79 tackles .
Suggs , a ten - year veteran and five - time Pro Bowl selection , who had missed the first half of the regular season with a partially torn Achilles tendon , made a speedy recovery and was key in the Ravens ' win over the Broncos in the divisional round of the playoffs with 2 sacks on Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning .
Lewis , a 17-year veteran and 13-time Pro Bowl selection , had missed most of the season with an arm injury , but still managed to rack up 57 tackles in just 6 games .
Then shortly before returning for the playoffs , he announced his plans to retire after the postseason , and promptly went on to amass 44 tackles in Baltimore 's four playoff games .
The Ravens secondary featured Pro Bowl safety Ed Reed , the NFL 's all - time leader in interception return yardage .
Reed had another statistically successful season in 2012 , recording 58 tackles and 4 interceptions .
Cornerback Cary Williams was also a big contributor with 4 interceptions and 75 tackles .
The team dedicated their 2012 season to former owner and founder Art Modell , who died on September 6 , 2012 , four days before the first regular season game .
SAN FRANCISCO
49ERS Section::::San Francisco 49ers .
The 49ers had recently emerged as a dominant team after nearly a decade of ineptitude .
During the ' 80s and ' 90s , they had been one of the NFL top contenders , playing in ten conference championship games and winning five Super Bowls .
But after a strong 2002 season , San Francisco went into a dismal slump in which they failed to make the playoffs for eight consecutive seasons .
Following the end of the 2010 season , the 49ers hired Jim Harbaugh as their head coach .
Harbaugh , who played 14 years in the NFL , joined the team after an impressive 12–1 season as the coach of Stanford , and in his first season with San Francisco he managed to turn their fortunes around , aided by breakout seasons from quarterback Alex Smith and receiver Michael Crabtree .
Smith entered the 2012 season as the starting quarterback , but missed two starts mid - season after suffering a concussion , and second - year backup Colin Kaepernick successfully filled in .
A quarterback controversy then began because Smith was ranked third in the NFL in passer rating ( 104.1 ) , led the league in completion percentage ( 70 % ) , and had been 19–5–1 as a starter under Harbaugh , while Kaepernick was considered more dynamic with his scrambling ability and arm strength .
After Smith was fully recovered , Harbaugh chose Kaepernick as the starter for the 8–2–1 49ers , but also stated that the assignment was week - to - week and not necessarily permanent .
Kaepernick ended up being the starter for the rest of the season and led the team to an 11–4–1 record , throwing for 1,814 yards and 10 touchdowns , with just 3 interceptions and a 98.4 passer rating , while also rushing for 415 yards and 5 touchdowns .
San Francisco 's top receiver was Crabtree , who caught 85 passes for a career - high 1,105 yards and 9 touchdowns .
Other key contributors to the passing game included tight end Vernon Davis ( 41 receptions for 538 yards and 5 touchdowns ) along with offseason acquired receivers Mario Manningham and Randy Moss .
Manningham had been signed away from the defending Super Bowl champion New York Giants , while Moss , the NFL 's second all - time leader in receiving yards , had been signed out of retirement after missing the previous season .
The 49ers ' backfield featured Pro Bowl running back Frank Gore , who rushed for 1,214 yards and 8 touchdowns , while also catching 28 passes for 234 yards and another score .
The team also had a strong offensive line with two Pro Bowl linemen , left tackle Joe Staley and left guard Mike Iupati .
On special teams , punter Andy Lee led the NFL in net yards per punt ( 43.2 ) and ranked 5th in gross yards per punt ( 48.1 ) .
He planted 36 punts inside the 20-yard line with just 5 touchbacks .
Kicker David Akers had a relatively bad year overall , converting only 69 percent of his field goal attempts , but in the week 1 contest against the Green Bay Packers tied the NFL record for the longest field goal with a successful 63-yard attempt .
The 49ers ' strongest unit was their defense , which ranked 2nd in fewest points allowed per game ( 17.1 ) and sent 6 of their 11 starters to the Pro Bowl .
Pro Bowl defensive end Justin Smith led the line with 66 tackles and 3 sacks .
Behind him , all four of the team 's starting linebackers — Aldon Smith , NaVorro Bowman , Patrick Willis and Ahmad Brooks — were named to the 2012 All - Pro Team , and all but Brooks made the Pro Bowl .
Aldon Smith set a franchise record with 19.5 sacks , more than the rest of the team had combined .
Willis ranked second on the team with 120 tackles and picked off two passes , while Bowman 's 149 tackles were second most in the NFL .
The 49ers secondary featured Pro Bowl safeties Dashon Goldson and Donte Whitner . PLAYOFFS Section::::Playoffs .
Baltimore finished the season as the AFC North champion and the number 4 seed in the American Football Conference .
The Ravens began their playoff run at home against the number 5 seed Indianapolis Colts in the Wild - Card round in what would turn out to be Ray Lewis 's final career home game .
They defeated the Colts 24–9 , with Flacco throwing for 288 yards and two touchdowns , while their defense held the Colts to just 9 points , 13 below their regular season average .
In the divisional round , the Ravens would face the top - seeded Denver Broncos , who came into the game with an 11-game winning streak .
Baltimore fell behind late in the game , but with less than a minute left on the clock , Flacco 's 70-yard touchdown pass to Jacoby Jones sent it into overtime , a play that is known as the Mile High Miracle .
An interception by Corey Graham from Peyton Manning late in the first overtime period set up Tucker 's 47-yard field goal to win the game 1:42 into double overtime .
Finally , Baltimore advanced to the Super Bowl by overcoming a 13 - 7 halftime deficit and then beating the second - seeded New England Patriots in the AFC Championship Game 28–13 , vindicating the Ravens ' loss against New England in the 2011 AFC Championship game , forcing three turnovers total , intercepting two of Tom Brady 's passes , and keeping the Patriots scoreless in the second half .
By winning the game , the Ravens handed Brady his first AFC Championship Game loss at home .
As the NFC West champion and the number 2 seed in the National Football Conference , San Francisco earned a first - round bye .
The 49ers started their playoff run against the number 3 seed Green Bay Packers in the divisional round .
Jim Harbaugh 's decision to start Kaepernick for the playoffs came into immediate question when he threw an interception that was returned for a touchdown by Sam Shields on their opening drive , but this turned out to be the only miscue he would make for the rest of the game , as well as the only interception he would throw until the Super Bowl .
By the end of the game , Kaepernick racked up 444 total yards ( more than the entire Packers team ) , including 181 rushing yards , the NFL single game record for rushing yards by a quarterback , as the 49ers went on to win easily , 45–31 .
They then faced the top - seeded Atlanta Falcons in the NFC Championship Game , where they quickly fell behind 17–0 in the first half .
No team in NFC Championship Game history had ever overcome a deficit that large , but the 49ers proved up to the challenge , cutting the score to 24–21 going into the final quarter .
Late in the game , their comeback hopes suffered a setback when Crabtree lost a fumble on the 1-yard line as he was going in for the leading score .
However , their defense forced a punt , and Ted Ginn Jr. 's 20-yard return set up a touchdown run by Gore .
The defense then held firm , forcing a turnover on downs at their 10-yard line to secure the victory .
PREGAME NOTES
Section::::Pregame notes .
This was the first Super Bowl since Super Bowl XXXVII that did not feature the New England Patriots , Indianapolis Colts , or the Pittsburgh Steelers as the AFC representatives , and the only one as of the 2017 season , including the Denver Broncos , the team that Peyton Manning was brought to in the 2012 season .
Baltimore defeated the Colts and Patriots during the playoffs while the Steelers failed to make the playoffs .
By contrast , the NFC had a different member go to the Super Bowl almost every year during that same span , with the New York Giants ( who won Super Bowls XLII and XLVI ) being the only NFC team to make two appearances during that span .
With the 49ers making their first Super Bowl appearance since Super Bowl XXIX , this left the Dallas Cowboys ( last appeared in Super Bowl XXX ) , Detroit Lions ( never appeared in a Super Bowl ) , Minnesota Vikings ( last appeared in Super Bowl XI ) and Washington Redskins ( last appeared in Super Bowl XXVI ) as the only NFC teams not to play in a Super Bowl since 1998 , with only the Vikings ( on three occasions ) even advancing to the NFC Championship Game .
The 49ers attempted to follow the 2012 World Series championship victory of Major League Baseball 's San Francisco Giants .
The last time a metropolitan area won the World Series and Super Bowl in the same season was when the Boston Red Sox won the 2004 World Series followed by the Patriots winning Super Bowl XXXIX ( and the Patriots won Super Bowl XXXVIII earlier in 2004 ) .
As the 49ers – who were attempting to join the New York Giants and Green Bay Packers as the only teams to win a Super Bowl in three different decades – were the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams , San Francisco elected to wear their red jerseys , which they wore in Super Bowls XIX , XXIII , and XXIX ( wearing an alternate throwback red jersey with three - dimensional numerals in XXIX ) , and gold pants ( worn in their first four Super Bowl appearances ) for the first time since Super Bowl XXIV ( having worn white pants in XXIX along with the aforementioned throwback jerseys ) .
The Ravens wore white jerseys as they did in Super Bowl XXXV , but with black pants this time instead of white .
Due to the Ravens having their Art Modell memorial patch on the left side of their jerseys , the team wore their Super Bowl XLVII patch on the right side .
Much of the pregame media hype centered around the Harbaugh brothers , and how their father Jack , a former college football head coach , raised them .
On January 24 , Jack , along with his wife Jackie and daughter Joani , conducted a media conference call , answering questions about John and Jim .
Jackie jokingly asked if the game could end in a tie , before stating that the family was staying neutral but remain excited that both John and Jim brought their respective teams to the Super Bowl .
The Harbaugh brothers then conducted a joint press conference on the Friday before the game , which is unusual for opposing Super Bowl coaches , but it was done because of the historic nature of the game .
BROADCASTING
TELEVISION
UNITED STATES
Section::::Broadcasting .
Section::::Television .
Section::::United States .
The game was carried by CBS in the United States , with Jim Nantz calling play - by - play and Phil Simms as color analyst .
For the second consecutive year , a webcast was provided ; this time on CBSSports.com .
A special episode of Elementary would be the lead - out program of this Super Bowl .
The network 's owned and operated stations in Baltimore and San Francisco , WJZ - TV ( originally an ABC affiliate ) and KPIX - TV respectively , were for many years owned by Westinghouse Broadcasting , which merged with CBS in 1995 .
Thus , this became the first CBS - aired Super Bowl to involve two former Westinghouse markets since the merger .
Additionally , this Super Bowl gave CBS the distinction of televising both of the Ravens ' appearances ( and victories ) so far ( after Super Bowl XXXV in 2001 ) .
The game was later featured as one of the NFL 's Greatest Games under the title " Change of Momentum " .
INTERNATIONAL Section::::International .
A feed designed for areas less familiar with American football was produced by NFL Network , with Bob Papa ( the regular - season voice of the New York Giants ) calling play - by - play and Joe Theismann as color analyst .
The NFL claimed that their feed would go to 180 countries .
COMMERCIALS Section::::Commercials .
According to CBS , the price of a 30-second advertisement hit a record high US $ 4,000,000 .
General Motors announced it would not advertise on the game , citing the advertising costs .
Adbowl had a special theme this year for the Super Bowl , called " Catbowl 2013 " , which pitted the best commercials by votes with cat videos to see which one is more popular .
The advertisers for Super Bowl XLVII included Mercedes - Benz , Gildan , Samsung , BlackBerry , Kraft Foods , Subway , Taco Bell , Procter & Gamble , Best Buy , Coca - Cola , Sodastream , PepsiCo ( including entries in the Doritos Crash the Super Bowl contest ) , Axe , Audi , Kia Motors , Ford Motor Company , Wonderful Pistachios , GoDaddy , and perpetual Super Bowl advertiser Anheuser - Busch .
Ram Trucks and the Future Farmers of America ran a two - minute commercial based on the Paul Harvey speech " So God Made a Farmer . "
Movie studios Paramount Pictures , Universal Studios and Walt Disney Studios paying for movie trailers to be aired during the Super Bowl .
With Paramount paying for Star Trek Into Darkness and World War Z , Universal paying for the debut trailer for Fast & Furious 6 that followed Monsters vs. Aliens ' footsteps and Disney paying for Iron Man 3 , The Lone Ranger and Oz the Great and Powerful .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTERS Network Ten / One , ESPN on Foxtel .
All used CBS commentary and feed Puls 4 .
TV Esporte Interativo and ESPN .
CTV simulcast CBS ' coverage in Canada , with simultaneous substitution expected to be invoked .
The CTV coverage was simulcast online within Canada by TSN.ca , and in French on RDS .
Shanghai Media Group controls broadcast rights to the game .
Sport 1 .
TV3
+ .
Nelonen Pro 1 with Finnish commentary and Nelonen Pro 2 with English commentary .
W9 and BeIN Sport .
ESPN America , Sat.1 and Sport1
Sport 1 .
STAR Sports and ESPN India
.
But in reality , at the time of the Super Bowl , STAR Sports televised " Australian Ironman " and ESPN India televised " Football Asia . " BBC and Sky Sports .
Sport 5
Sportitalia 2
NHK
Azteca 7 , Canal 5 and ESPN .
Viasat 4 , Viasat Sport .
Fox Sports Asia and Solar Sports .
Both used the NFL Network feed .
Polsat Sport , ESPN America .
Sport TV .
Sport 1 .
NTV Plus .
ESPN America .
TV10 .
BBC and Sky Sports .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
In the United States , the game was carried nationwide over the Dial Global radio network , with Kevin Harlan as play - by - play announcer , Boomer Esiason as color analyst , and James Lofton and Mark Malone as sideline reporters .
Univision Radio broadcast the game in Spanish .
Each team 's flagship station also carried the game :
WIYY and WBAL broadcast the game in Baltimore , with Gerry Sandusky on play - by - play and Stan White and Qadry Ismail on color commentary .
In San Francisco , the game was broadcast on KSAN - FM and KNBR , with Ted Robinson on play - by - play , Eric Davis on color commentary , and Rod Brooks reporting from the sidelines .
Both WBAL and KNBR are clear - channel stations , which allowed the local commentaries to be heard throughout the Eastern and Western United States , respectively .
Per contractual rules , the rest of the stations in the 49ers ' and Ravens ' radio networks carried the Dial Global feed .
Internationally , the game was carried on radio as follows : TSN Radio ( Dial Global simulcast )
BBC Radio 5
Live Sports Extra Sirius XM Radio and NFL Audio Pass carried the local , Dial Global , and select international audio feeds .
ENTERTAINMENT PREGAME Section::::Entertainment .
Section::::Pregame .
On January 18 , 2013 , the league announced that Alicia Keys would sing the national anthem .
Keys stated that she would not perform the song traditionally and instead would perform it as if it were " a brand new song . "
Jennifer Hudson and a chorus of several students from Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown , Connecticut , the site of the shooting on December 14 , 2012 , performed " America the Beautiful " .
The coin toss ceremony featured the recent inductees to the Pro Football Hall of Fame : Larry Allen , Cris Carter , Curley Culp , Warren Sapp , Bill Parcells , Jonathan Ogden , and Dave Robinson .
HALFTIME Section::::Halftime .
On October 16 , 2012 , Beyoncé was chosen as the headline performer for the Super Bowl halftime show , with a reunited Destiny 's Child also appearing as part of the show .
Despite initial reports that mentioned that Beyoncé 's husband , Jay Z , was a potential collaborator on the show , he did not make an appearance .
Beyoncé was the second most - watched halftime show in history with 104 million viewers .
GAME SUMMARY
FIRST QUARTER Section::::Game summary .
Section::::First quarter .
San Francisco was hurt by penalties and turnovers early in the game as the Ravens built a 21–6 first - half lead .
On their first play of the opening drive , tight end Vernon Davis 's 20-yard reception was called back by an illegal formation penalty .
The team ended up punting after three more plays , and Jacoby Jones returned the ball 17 yards to the Ravens ' 49-yard line .
Baltimore then drove 51 yards , scoring on Joe Flacco 's 13-yard touchdown pass to receiver Anquan Boldin .
Flacco had previously thrown a third - down incompletion , but an offsides penalty against linebacker Ahmad Brooks gave him a second chance .
San Francisco responded on their next possession , moving the ball 62 yards in a 12-play drive , with quarterback Colin Kaepernick completing a 19-yard pass to Michael Crabtree and a 24-yarder to Davis .
David Akers finished the drive with a 36-yard field goal to cut the score to 7–3 .
Baltimore responded with a drive to the 49ers ' 37-yard line , featuring a 30-yard catch by Boldin , but came up empty after Flacco was sacked on third down for a 5-yard loss by defensive tackle Ray McDonald , pushing the Ravens out of field goal range .
SECOND QUARTER Section::::Second quarter .
Five plays into the 49ers ' next drive , linebacker Courtney Upshaw forced a fumble from running back LaMichael James , and Baltimore 's Arthur Jones recovered it on the Ravens ' 25-yard line .
Baltimore drove 75 yards on 10 plays , 52 of those came from a 23-yard and a 14-yard pass to tight end Ed Dickson , the second followed by a 15-yard facemask penalty on Donte Whitner .
Dennis Pitta caught a 1-yard touchdown catch on the final play of the drive and the extra point made the score 14–3 .
On the first play of the next drive , Ed Reed intercepted a pass by Kaepernick and returned the ball 6 yards to the 49ers ' 38-yard line .
This was the first interception thrown by San Francisco in any of their six Super Bowl appearances .
Unnecessary roughness charges were called after the play on players from both teams so the charges offset .
Baltimore reached the red zone on their next drive , but was unable to score .
Following a one - yard run by Bernard Pierce and two incomplete passes , rookie kicker Justin Tucker was tackled 1 yard short of a first down while running the ball on a fake field goal play .
San Francisco was forced to a three - and - out on the drive .
Jones muffed the punt , but recovered the ball and returned it 11 yards to the Ravens ' 44-yard line .
Two plays later , Jones made a falling catch deep down the field , then got back up and eluded two 49ers defensive backs en route to a 56-yard touchdown reception , making the score 21–3 with less than two minutes to go in the first half .
On the second play of San Francisco 's next drive , tight end Delanie Walker caught a 14-yard pass from Kaepernick , which was extended by a 15-yard roughing the passer penalty against Haloti Ngata .
After an incomplete first down attempt , Walker received another 28-yard pass , putting San Francisco on the Baltimore 17-yard line .
San Francisco reached the 9-yard line , but were unable to convert on three plays .
On the last play of the half , Akers kicked his second field goal to cut their deficit to 21–6 .
THIRD QUARTER
Section::::Third quarter .
On the second - half kickoff , Jacoby Jones fielded the kick and promptly returned it 108 yards for the longest play in Super Bowl history .
It broke the previous 104-yard record for the longest kickoff return in the playoffs ( set by Trindon Holliday of the Denver Broncos in the divisional playoff game earlier that year against Baltimore ) , and it tied an NFL record already held by Jones and shared with Ellis Hobbs and Randall Cobb for the longest kickoff return .
With the extra point , Baltimore was now leading 28–6 .
Shortly into the 49ers ' next drive , a power outage caused the lights to go out in half of the stadium , stopping play for 34 minutes .
The outage was caused by equipment failure at the stadium .
After play resumed , both teams punted once .
Then San Francisco drove 80 yards , with Kaepernick rushing for 15 yards and completing an 18-yard pass to Davis before finishing the drive with a pass to Crabtree , who broke through two potential Ravens tacklers on the way to a 31-yard touchdown reception .
Then Baltimore was forced to punt from their own 9-yard line following Brooks ' 8-yard sack of Flacco on third down , and Ted Ginn Jr. returned the ball 32 yards to the 20 before being shoved out of bounds by punter Sam Koch .
Kaepernick completed a 14-yard pass to Davis on the next play , and Gore followed it up with a 6-yard touchdown run , cutting the score to 28–20 .
On the second play of the fourth quarter , Baltimore committed their first turnover when defensive back Tarell Brown forced and recovered a fumble from Ray Rice on the Ravens ' 25-yard line .
Three plays later , Akers missed ( went wide left ) on a 39-yard field goal attempt , but Baltimore 's Chykie Brown was penalized for running into the kicker , and Akers ' second attempt was good from 34 yards , trimming the lead to 28–23 .
FOURTH QUARTER Section::::Fourth quarter .
The Ravens responded on their ensuing possession , moving the ball 77 yards and advancing to the San Francisco 1-yard line , with Boldin catching two passes for 39 yards .
But they were unable to reach the end zone and settled for Tucker 's 19-yard field goal to put them back up by 8 points , 31–23 .
San Francisco stormed back , scoring in just five plays .
Following a 32-yard reception by Randy Moss and a 21-yard burst by Gore , Kaepernick took the ball across the goal line on a 15-yard run , the longest touchdown run by a quarterback in Super Bowl history .
However , the ensuing two - point conversion failed , so the 49ers were unable to break the deficit , still trailing at 31–29 .
On the Ravens ' ensuing drive , Boldin caught two passes for 22 yards and Rice rushed for 11 yards as the team moved the ball 55 yards and scored on Tucker 's 38-yard field goal , making the score 34–29 with 4:19 left in regulation .
San Francisco used up two timeouts on their next drive , but managed to move the ball to a first and goal on the Ravens ' 7-yard line following a 24-yard catch by Crabtree and a 33-yard run by Gore .
With four chances to take the lead , San Francisco started out with a 2-yard run by James to the 5-yard line .
Then Kaepernick threw two incompletions , bringing up fourth down .
On their last chance , Kaepernick tried to throw the ball to Crabtree in the end zone , but it was too far ahead and the pass fell incomplete .
Defensive back Jimmy Smith and Crabtree both made contact prior to the ball arriving , but no penalty was called and the 49ers turned the ball over on downs with 1:46 left in the game .
San Francisco managed to force a three - and - out on the Ravens ' next drive , but as they had only one timeout remaining , the Ravens were able to run the clock down to twelve seconds .
On fourth down , and after the Ravens then called a timeout of their own , punter Sam Koch fielded the snap in his own end zone .
In an effort to kill as much of the twelve remaining seconds on the clock , Koch was instructed not to punt the ball but rather hang on to it and scramble around in the end zone .
Koch was able to scramble for eight seconds before giving up an intentional safety by running out of the side of the end zone , leaving just four seconds remaining .
On the ensuing free kick , Ginn returned the ball 31 yards , but was tackled at midfield by linebacker Josh Bynes as time expired .
POWER OUTAGE Section::::Power outage .
Play was interrupted for 34 minutes because of a 22-minute partial power outage .
The power failed with 13:22 remaining in the third quarter with the Ravens leading 28 - 6 .
Emergency generators provided backup lighting .
The fire department ( NOFD ) rescued people from elevator seven , but other elevators were brought to the ground uneventfully .
Attendees used double the usual amount of data for their cell phones .
AT&T reported 78 gigabytes ( GB ) downloaded from 8 to 9 PM , about double from the peak the year before .
NFL chief security officer Jeffrey Miller attributed fans ' calmness to their preoccupation with their electronics .
SMG , the Superdome 's management company , recently upgraded electrical systems at the facility .
In an October 15 , 2012 memo , Louisiana officials expressed concern that the equipment bringing electricity into the stadium from utility company Entergy had a " chance of failure " .
Authorities subsequently spent nearly $ 1 million on upgrades to the stadium , more than half of that paid to Allstar Electric to upgrade electrical feeder cables .
Entergy and SMG both said the problem was in interconnection equipment , and SMG has hired a third party to investigate .
Investigations homed in on a newly installed switchgear .
Entergy installed a pair of relays made by Rogers Park 's S&C Electric Company of Rogers Park , Chicago to ensure continued power supply in case one supply line failed .
One of those relays tripped .
Subsequent tests showed one of the relays functioned properly and the other did not .
S&C Electric Co. claims the relay 's trip setting was too low , but Entergy claims that the two were set identically .
Electricity usage during the game was on par with a regular New Orleans Saints game .
The halftime show was powered by a generator that did not impact the stadium 's power .
CBS - TV viewers were shown the half - lit Superdome interior .
The main broadcast booth was off line ; sideline reporter Steve Tasker informed the audience that " a click of the lights " had occurred and play had been halted .
Ray Lewis later stated in an interview that he believed the blackout was part of a conspiracy , saying " You 're a zillion dollar company and your lights go out ?
No .
No way .
"
49ers CEO Jed York responded to the claim on Twitter in jest , tweeting " There is no conspiracy .
I pulled the plug . "
BOX SCORE STATISTICAL OVERVIEW Section::::Statistical overview .
Both teams combined for 312 kickoff return yards , a Super Bowl record .
The Ravens scored the same amount of points ( 34 ) in both of their Super Bowl appearances .
Meanwhile , the 49ers became just the second team to lose the Super Bowl while scoring more than 30 points after the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl XIII ; in both cases , the losing team scored 31 points .
As such , these two Super Bowls are the only two times in NFL history ( including the pre - Super Bowl era ) in which both teams scored over 30 points in a Championship game .
Until Super Bowl 52 , having the New England Patriots being upset by the upstart Philadelphia Eagles ( Final Score 41 - 33 ) .
For the Ravens , Anquan Boldin was the leading receiver with 6 receptions for 106 yards and a touchdown .
Paul Kruger had three tackles and two sacks , while Ed Reed had five tackles and an interception .
Reed 's interception gave him 9 career postseason picks , tying the NFL record .
Dannell Ellerbe had nine tackles , while Ray Lewis had seven tackles in the final game of his 17-season career .
Baltimore 's Jacoby Jones returned 5 kickoffs for 208 yards and a touchdown , two punts for 28 yards , and caught a 56-yard touchdown pass .
He tied an NFL league record and set a Super Bowl record for longest kickoff return in a Super Bowl with a 108-yard return to open up the second half .
Jones also set or tied the following records : the record for most combined yards in a Super Bowl game with 290 , tied the record for most touchdown plays of 50 yards or more , with 2 and became the first player to score a receiving touchdown and return touchdown in a Super Bowl .
For San Francisco , Colin Kaepernick completed 16 of 28 passes for 302 yards and a touchdown , while also rushing for 62 yards and another score , but had 1 interception .
His 62 rushing yards were the second highest total by a quarterback in the Super Bowl , behind Tennessee Titans quarterback Steve McNair 's record of 64 in Super Bowl XXXIV .
Kaepernick also set a Super Bowl record for the longest rushing touchdown from a quarterback for his 15-yard touchdown run in the fourth quarter .
This beat the previous 6-yard record held by the 49ers ' Joe Montana achieved in Super Bowl XIX .
Frank Gore rushed for 110 yards and a touchdown .
Michael Crabtree caught 5 passes for 109 yards and a touchdown , while Davis caught 6 passes for 104 yards .
His 104 receiving yards tied Dan Ross 's record for the most ever by a tight end in a Super Bowl .
Patrick Willis was the top tackler of the game with 10 , while Brooks had five tackles and a sack .
Because of the power outage in the third quarter , the game set a Super Bowl record long running time of 4 hours and 14 minutes .
During the presentation of the Vince Lombardi Trophy , Hall of Fame defensive end Richard Dent brought the trophy to the stage .
Twitter announced that a record 24.1 million tweets were sent the night of the game .
FINAL STATISTICS
Section::::Final statistics .
Sources :
NFL.com Super Bowl XLVII ,
The Football Database Super Bowl XLVII
STATISTICAL COMPARISON Section::::Statistical comparison . !
Baltimore Ravens !
San Francisco 49ers
First downs2123 First downs rushing69
First downs
passing1313
First downs penalty21 Third down efficiency9/162/9 Fourth down efficiency0/20/1 Net yards
rushing93182
Rushing attempts3529 Yards per rush2.76.3 Passing – Completions - attempts22/3316/28
Times sacked - total yards2–133–16 Interceptions
thrown01 Net yards
passing274286
Total net
yards367468
Punt returns - total yards2–281–32 Kickoff returns - total yards5–2064–106 Interceptions - total return yards1–60–0 Punts - average
yardage3–47.03–53.0 Fumbles - lost2–11–1 Penalties - yards2–205–33
Time of possession32:2327:37 Turnovers12 !
colspan=3Records set Most Combined Yards , Game290 yardsrowspan=4 Jacoby Jones ,
Baltimore
Longest Play108 yard kick return
Longest Kick Return 108 yards
Longest Kick Return for TD 108 yards Longest TD Run , Quarterback15 yards Colin Kaepernick , San Francisco Most Kickoff - Return Yards , Both Teams312 yards Baltimore 206 , San Francisco
106 Longest Time Of Game4:14 !
colspan=3Records tied Most TDs , Plays of 50-or - More Yards , Game2 Jacoby Jones , Baltimore
Most Receiving Yards , Game , Tight End104 Vernon Davis , San Francisco Most TDs , Kickoff Returns , Game1 Jacoby Jones , Baltimore Most Safeties , Game 1 Chris Culliver , San Francisco
Most TDs , Kickoff Returns , Game , Team1 Baltimore Most Safeties , Game , Team 1 San Francisco Most Players , 100-or - More Receiving Yards , Game , Team2 San Francisco ( Michael Crabtree 109 , Vernon Davis 104 )
Most Points , Third Quarter , Both Teams24 San Francisco 17 , Baltimore 7 Most Field Goals , Game , Both Teams5 San Francisco 3 , Baltimore 2 Most Field Goals Without Miss , Game ,
Both Teams5
San Francisco 3 , Baltimore 2
Fewest Rushing Touchdowns , Game , Team0 Baltimore INDIVIDUAL LEADERS
STARTING LINEUPS OFFICIALS
* Referee – Jerome Boger
* Umpire – Darrell Jenkins
* Head Linesman – Steve Stelljes
* Line Judge – Byron Boston * Field Judge –
Craig Wrolstad
* Side Judge –
Joe Larrew *
Back Judge – Dino Paganelli * Alternate Referee –
Bill Vinovich * Alternate Umpire –
Bruce Stritesky * Alternate Flank – Tom Stephan * Alternate Deep – Scott Edwards
* Alternate Back Judge – Steve Freeman REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Super Bowl XLVII play - by - play : Ravens 34 , 49ers 31