SYLVANIAN FAMILIES HISTORY BEGINNING AND GROWTH
Section::::History .
Section::::Beginning and growth .
At the beginning of production , on March 20 , 1985 , Sylvanian Families were created and released in Japan by Epoch , which uses the concept of dollhouses and anthropomorphic animal figures .
The first releases of the dollhouses and other playsets were made of porcelain and the furniture was made of wood .
However , later releases replaced the materials with plastic and metal in the production .
The toys were later released in North America the same year , but with different packaging and minor differences to the characters themselves .
The toyline was originally titled .
However it was changed to its current name .
In October 1987 , the series spawned an animated series produced by DIC Animation City and TMS Entertainment , which ran for 13 episodes .
The series was popular in the UK and Spain .
The name of the television series based on Sylvanian Families was adapted in different countries .
It was also shown in the early 1990s in the US on
Nick Jr. Later that same year , the success in these markets led to expansion into Western Europe , beginning with the UK subsidiary of Tomy acquiring exclusive rights for the brand in the UK .
Tomy introduced Sylvanian Families into the UK market in 1987 , and it quickly became a bestseller .
By 1988 , Sylvanian Families had become a major success around the world , winning the British Association of Toy Retailers award for " Toy of the Year " three years consecutively , in 1987 , 1988 and 1989 .
In 1993 , Tomy , who had been distributing the toys worldwide , lost the rights to the name " Sylvanian Families " in Canada and the USA .
Tomy reintroduced the line under the new name Calico Critters of Cloverleaf Corners , now simply just called Calico Critters .
The Calico Critters line is currently distributed in the US and Canada by Epoch Everlasting Play , LLC .
DECLINE AND REINVENTION Section::::Decline and reinvention .
By the late 1990s , Sylvanian Families had been discontinued in the UK , although since 1999 , they have been reintroduced by Flair .
Subsequently , Sylvanian families have been reintroduced in Australia and are becoming more widely available there .
Tomy stopped selling Calico Critters , but a new company , International Playthings , now called Epoch Everlasting Play , picked up the line .
In 1999 , the toyline celebrated its 15th anniversary in Japan , with the opening of the themed restaurant , which was operated and managed by Epoch .
The restaurant not only served food , but also sold merchandise and toys based on the franchise .
The restaurant closed in February 2011 .
In 2004 , the franchise celebrated its 20th anniversary in Japan with the release of the Walnut Squirrel Family .
In July 2004 , Epoch announced a new attraction in Grinpa , a theme park managed by Fuji Kyuko .
The attraction , originally called before it was renamed to , began its construction with Epoch 's supervision .
In 2005 , the franchise hosted its very first live event titled which was hosted at the Gekidan Kogumaza Theatre .
It was later released on DVD in 2006 .
In 2006 , the characters in the toy line were chosen to be the mascots for the National Federation of Workers and Consumers Insurance Cooperativess national mutual aid .
By the end of the year , the toys sold a total of 78 million units .
In 2007 , Epoch teamed up with Itochu , Nippon Columbia and Shogakukan to produce a 3DCGI Original Video Animation series based on the toy line produced by Kōji Kawaguchi and Yumiko Muriai and directed by Akira Takamura .
All 3 episodes were released on June 20 , 2007 .
According to Epoch , more episodes were planned , but these were never produced for unknown reasons .
In the UK , Flair celebrated the franchise 's 20th anniversary with a selected number of new items .
The best selling was an Otter boat , and a reintroduced Dalmatian Family who now wore party hats that read " Happy 20th ! " .
In March 2009 , the series celebrated its 25th anniversary in Japan with the opening of the Sylvanian Gardens attraction in Grinpa .
Managed by Epoch , the attraction features real - life replicas of the houses and buildings from the toy line as well as a museum featuring an exhibition about the history of the toys .
The attraction also has a shop which sells items exclusive to the park .
In 2010 , the franchise again hosted two musicals , and , which both became a staple on promoting the toys in conventions .
On June 28 , 2013 , Flair confirmed that the rights for the toys in the UK will be transferred to the newly formed Epoch UK , and they began distributing the toys from January 1 , 2014 onwards .
Flair announced that they would stop distributing the toys on December 31 , 2013 .
In 2015 , a series of tableaux by the British artist Mimsy featuring Sylvanian Families being threatened by " MICIS " terrorists was banned from the " Passion for Freedom " exhibition .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
The description of the location of Sylvania is frequently described as being somewhere in England ( ! ) , especially by UK collectors , but , according to Epoch Co , Ltd. 1995 , the dream - village is in North American : " Sylvanian Village is located in deep forest of the vast North American continent .
This is a very very small dream - village , the most pleasant beautiful place in the world . "
By the following year , 1996 , the description of the location of the Sylvanians was updated to read : " Sylvanian Families include all the families of animals living in the Sylvanian forest .
They are leading comfortable and happy lives in Sylvanian Village surrounded by great nature . "
The entire franchise is set in , a fictional village based on 1950s Great Britain .
The majority of the families are all rural middle - class , with many of them owning localized but successful family businesses , or having white - collar jobs , such as doctor , teacher , artist , news reporter , carpenter or bus driver .
They are designed wearing very 1950s - like fashion .
They can live in large , multistory houses , or own dwellings based on the premise of a kind of holiday home .
The houses are designed very realistically and can be decorated and redesigned .
They can also indulge in many stereotypically middle - class leisure activities such as sailing or horse - riding , and often host garden parties or go on short camping holidays .
The characters , grouped into families , originally depicted typical woodland creatures such as bears , rabbits , cats , squirrels , foxes , raccoons , and mice , and later expanded to other animals such as dogs , hamsters , guinea pigs , penguins , monkeys , cows , sheep , pigs , elephants , pandas , kangaroos , koalas and meerkats .
Most families consist of a father , mother , sister and brother , and continue to add family members from there on such as grandparents , babies , and older siblings .
MEDIA ANIMATION Section::::Media .
Section::::Animation .
There are three animated series based on the Sylvanian Families world : Sylvanian Families , a syndicated series that premiered in 1987 ; Stories of the Sylvanian Families ( 1988 ) , a British series animated in stop motion ; and a 2007 original video animation series also called Sylvanian Families .
GAMES Section::::Games .
Aside from the animated series , the series also spawned seven video games , all produced by Epoch .
*
( Game Boy Color )
* ( Game Boy Color )
* ( Game Boy Color )
* ( Game Boy Color )
* ( Game Boy Advance )
* ( Game Boy Advance )
* ( Game Boy Advance ) SEE ALSO
* Maple Town
REFERENCES Citations Source
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official Epoch UK website * Official Japanese website * Calico Critters Official US Website
* Official Sylvanian Families Spain website ( in Spanish )
* Official Flair UK ( and ROI )
Collectors Club and shop
( now defunct )
* History of Sylvanian Families in Spain