THE SIGNATURE
AT
MGM GRAND
The Signature at MGM Grand is a condo - hotel at the MGM Grand Las Vegas resort , in Paradise .
It was built by a partnership between MGM Mirage and Turnberry Associates on the location of the former MGM Grand Adventures Theme Park , though it officially holds an off - strip address of 145 East Harmon Avenue .
It features three identical
38-story towers , each consisting of 576 fully furnished units .
Most of the condo units were to be privately owned .
If a unit owner chooses , he or she may join the " rental program " , placing their units into the hotel 's room inventory to be offered as luxury suites by The Signature when they are not occupied by the owner .
The owner , minus fees for hotel maintenance , marketing , and upkeep , receives a split of the rental rate of the owner 's unit .
Developer Turnberry / MGM Grand Towers filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy following the 2008 Great Recession .
Owners of 545 condo units in turn sued the developer for fraud , alleging units were rented out at less than luxury rates .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On December 20 , 2003 , MGM Resorts International and Turnberry Associates announced the formation of a partnership to build the luxury condo hotel , stating that they would build up to six towers each rising up to 40 stories .
The first phase of this project involved the sales of condo units to individuals and investors .
During this phase , the project was referred to as The Residences , The Residences at MGM Grand and/or
The Residences : A Condo Hotel by Turnberry .
The first tower sold out within 90 days , proving that the concept was well received .
The second tower was already 50 % sold by the time construction began in late 2004 .
In October 2004 , The Residences celebrated its ground - breaking , making it the first high - rise condo - hotel project overlooking the strip to begin construction .
Other ventures of this type have begun since in Las Vegas , with many of them failing to obtain necessary financing and/or support .
On May 12 , 2006 , the first tower opened for occupancy .
The successful opening of The Signature at MGM Grand appears to be aided by its connection to the resources and amenities of The MGM Grand Hotel & Casino .
AMENITIES Section::::Amenities .
Each tower has a private pool with a hot tub .
Tower 1 has a cocktail lounge .
Towers 1 and 3 have a workout room for the guests of all three towers .
Starbucks is available at Tower 1 .
Signature guests have full access to all MGM Grand amenities as well .
ACCESS TO THE MGM CASINO Section::::Access To The MGM Casino .
The Signature is connected to the main MGM Grand Casino via several moving walkways that traverse through two of the 3 towers ( Tower 1 & 2 ) .
Tower 3 is accessible via a hallway between tower 2 and 3 .
Time to the main casino to the furthest tower ( Tower 3 ) is about 8 minutes for the average walker .
PARKING Section::::Parking .
There is no self parking on the Signature property , all parking is by valet .
Each tower has valet parking on the ground level .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Signature at MGM Grand official website