SISTER CHROMATIDS
A sister chromatid refers to the identical copies ( chromatids ) formed by the DNA replication of a chromosome , with both copies joined together by a common centromere .
In other words , a sister chromatid may also be said to be ' one - half ' of the duplicated chromosome .
A pair of sister chromatids is called a dyad .
A full set of sister chromatids is created during the synthesis ( S ) phase of interphase , when all the chromosomes in a cell are replicated .
The two sister chromatids are separated from each other into two different cells during mitosis or during the second division of meiosis .
Compare sister chromatids to homologous chromosomes , which are the two different copies of a chromosome that diploid organisms ( like humans ) inherit , one from each parent .
Sister chromatids are by and large identical ( since they carry the same alleles , also called variants or versions , of genes ) because they derive from one original chromosome .
An exception is towards the end of meiosis , after crossing over has occurred , because sections of each sister chromatid may have been exchanged with corresponding sections of the homologous chromatids with which they are paired during meiosis .
Homologous chromosomes might or might not be the same as each other because they derive from different parents .
There is evidence that , in some species , sister chromatids are the preferred template for DNA repair .
Sister chromatid cohesion is essential for the correct distribution of genetic information between daughter cells and the repair of damaged chromosomes .
Defects in this process may lead to aneuploidy and cancer , especially when checkpoints fail to detect DNA damage or when incorrectly attached mitotic spindles do n't function properly .
MITOSIS
Section::::Mitosis .
Mitotic recombination is primarily a result of DNA repair processes responding to spontaneous or induced damages .
( Also reviewed in Bernstein and Bernstein , pp 220–221 ) .
Homologous recombinational repair during mitosis is largely limited to interaction between nearby sister chromatids that are present in a cell subsequent to DNA replication but prior to cell division .
Due to the special nearby relationship they share , sister chromatids are not only preferred over distant homologous chromatids as substrates for recominational repair , but have the capacity to repair more DNA damage than do homologs .
MEIOSIS Section::::Meiosis .
Studies with the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae indicate that inter - sister recombination occurs frequently during meiosis , and up to one - third of all recombination events occur between sister chromatids .
SEE ALSO * Biorientation
* Sister chromatid exchange REFERENCES