PARCELFORCE
Parcelforce Worldwide is a courier and logistics service in the United Kingdom .
Parcelforce Worldwide is a trading name of Royal Mail Group Ltd. , and is organised within the UK Parcels , International and Letters division of the group .
The company delivers to destinations worldwide , using an international partner network .
Its European delivery partner , General Logistics Systems ( GLS ) , is also a subsidiary of Royal Mail and delivers more than one million parcels a day across 34 countries in Europe .
Parcelforce Worldwide is a direct competitor of other worldwide delivery brands , such as DHL , DX Group , FedEx and UPS .
Parcelforce Worldwide operates a " hub and spoke " collection and delivery system with two hubs based at Coventry , adjacent to the airport .
One hub is for parcels for the United Kingdom , and the other for international parcels .
The hub of the United Kingdom , one of the country 's largest buildings , is a highly automated tracking and sorting centre covering and can handle up to 58,500 parcels an hour .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Parcel Post service of Royal Mail was started in 1883 , though parcel services operated by the railway companies , later Red Star Parcels and British Road Services , were also heavily used for many decades .
Royal Mail was separated into three divisions in 1986 , and in August 1990 , Royal Mail Parcels was rebranded as Parcelforce .
In July 1992 , the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry , Michael Heseltine , proposed a privatisation of the Parcelforce business .
He argued that the company provided most of its services to businesses rather than individuals , and that the competitive market it operated in meant there was no need for it to remain a publicly owned company .
In March 2002 , the universal parcels service was transferred to Royal Mail leaving Parcelforce to concentrate on time guaranteed , next day and two day express deliveries .
In January 2007 , Parcelforce Worldwide became the first express carrier in the United Kingdom to give its customers the option to offset the carbon emissions associated with the delivery of their parcels .
The company allowed customers to donate 5p for a delivery for the United Kingdom , or 10p for an international delivery to The Woodland Trust .
Parcelforce would then match the donation .
In October 2012 , Royal Mail announced an investment of £ 75 million in Parcelforce Worldwide planned over four years , which will involve the opening of new processing centres in Chorley , Lancashire , and Depots in Basingstoke , Hampshire and Bodmin , Cornwall .
DEPOT NETWORK Section::::Depot network .
Parcelforce Worldwide operates its collection and delivery services via a network of 54 local depots .
These have been strategically located around the United Kingdom from Inverness in the north of Scotland to Plymouth in the southwest of England .
There are two depots in Wales , one central depot in Northern Ireland ( serving Belfast ) and two smaller satellite depots .
The largest posters also have the option of a direct feed collection .
In other words , rather than a local depot collecting parcels for sorting , a trailer is left on site , filled up during the course of the working day and then taken directly to Coventry for processing .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS