BATBOY A batboy or batgirl in sports is an individual who carries the baseball bats around to a baseball team .
A batboy may also lay out the equipment and mud the baseballs to be used in the game .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Mascots and batboys had both been part of baseball since the 1880s .
Perhaps the most famous mascot / batboy was Eddie Bennett , who was supposedly hired as a mascot by the Chicago White Sox at the urging of Happy Felsch in 1919 , a tale Eddie told often but no White Sox player ever corroborated .
After the 1919 World Series scandal , he was hired by the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1920 .
When the Dodgers lost the 1920 World Series to the Cleveland Indians , some suggested the four straight losses on the road were due to leaving Bennett behind .
He then served for almost 12 years as mascot / batboy for the New York Yankees .
UNIFORMS Section::::Uniforms .
Batboys typically wear the same uniform design as their associated team .
They will also usually wear a batting helmet to protect them from flying balls or bats .
During any given major league game , both the home and visiting team batboys will be drawn from the city where the game is taking place ( batboys typically do not travel on the road with their team , unless they are relatives of a player ) .
Home batboys often have regular jobs with a team , and thus may wear their first names on their uniforms ; visiting teams , on the other hand , usually do not know who will be serving as their batboys on the road , and thus will send uniforms of various sizes to accommodate batboys of varying heights and weights .
A batboy may be provided his own number , but will usually wear 00 or ' BB ' in its place .
If a batboy uniform does not have a first name on it , it will usually have the term ' BAT BOY ' or no name at all .
BATBOYS IN THE NEWS
*
On August 3 , 2015 , a 9-year old bat boy for the Liberal Bee Jays in Kansas , Kaiser Carlile , was hit on the head by a batter who was practicing his swings .
The batter did not see Kaiser , who was running to retrieve a bat , when he did a warm - up swing .
Despite wearing a helmet , he died later in the hospital from the head injuries he sustained .
*
On June 30 , 2000 , police discovered steroids and syringes in the glove compartment of the Mercedes - Benz that had been loaned to Boston Red Sox batboy Carlos Cowart by infielder Manny Alexander .
*
In the 2002 World Series , a bat boy ( Darren Baker , the 3½ year old son of San Francisco Giants manager Dusty Baker ) was involved in an incident when he went out to get a bat while the play was still going on .
J.T. Snow grabbed the young boy at home plate while still in the middle of scoring his run for the Giants , saving him from a possible collision with runners behind him or players from the opposing team .
After the incident , MLB set a minimum age limit of 14 for bat boys .
*
In 2005 , a Florida Marlins batboy was suspended six games for accepting a dare from Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Brad Penny , a former Marlin , to drink a gallon of milk in less than an hour without vomiting .
*
Matthew McGough described his batboy experiences with the New York Yankees in Bat Boy :
My True - Life Adventures Coming of Age with the New York Yankees , a book published by Doubleday in 2005 .
McGough 's book served as the basis for Clubhouse , a prime - time television show that aired on CBS in the fall of 2004 and now in reruns on HDNet .
*
On April 27 , 2007 , former New York Mets batboy ( 1985 - 1995 )
Kirk Radomski pleaded guilty in United States district court to money laundering and illegal distribution of anabolic steroids , human growth hormone , Clenbuterol , amphetamines and other drugs to " dozens of current and former Major League Baseball players , and associates , on teams throughout Major League Baseball . "
He faced a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison and a $ 500,000 fine , but he was sentenced to 5 years probation and ordered to pay a fine of $ 18,575 due to his cooperation with the federal government and the Mitchell Report .
*
In a pregame ceremony on May 5 , 2007 , Stan Bronson , Jr. received recognition by the Guinness World Records as the " Most Durable Batboy " ever .
Bronson , known as " Stan The Man " , has served as the batboy for the University of Memphis baseball team since the 1958 season .
His 50 years of service is recognized in the 2008 edition of the Guinness Book of World Records .
*
On May 30 , 1984 Portland Beavers batboy Sam Morris was ejected from a Pacific Coast League game against the Vancouver Canadians after , acting on the instruction of Beavers players , Morris refused an umpire 's demand that he retrieve a chair that had been thrown on the field by Beavers manager Lee Elia after his own ejection from the game .
League president William Cutler subsequently announced that the league 's mandatory fine for being ejected would not be enforced against Morris .
* Dominick Ardovino wrote about his batboy experience with the New York Mets in The Bat Boy ( New York : McGraw - Hill , 1967 ) .
BATBOYS WHO BECAME MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL PLAYERS Section::::Batboys who became Major League Baseball players .
Drew Storen of the Cincinnati Reds was a batboy for the Montreal Expos .
Jesse Litsch who pitched for the Toronto Blue Jays , was a batboy for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays in 2001 and 2002 .
BATBOYS IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Batboys in popular culture .
The batboy , Bobby Savoy , is a supporting character in the 1984 film , The Natural .
At the finale , Bobby gives the main character , Roy Hobbs , a bat that he 's made with Hobbs ' help after Hobbs has broken his own personally made childhood bat .
Two Warner Brothers cartoons , Porky 's Baseball Broadcast and Baseball Bugs , feature sight - gags involving batboys who fly in on bat wings to deliver bats .
SEE ALSO
* Ball boy *
Water boy
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Morris , Peter Eddie Bennett via baseball biography project
* Excerpt from Matthew McGough 's book Bat Boy ( Part 1 )
* Excerpt from Matthew McGough 's book Bat Boy ( Part 2 ) * Grossfeld , Stan ( April 27 , 2005 ) .
Batboy finds it tough to pick up his life .
Boston Globe
* ESPN ( August 25 , 2005 ) .
Suspended batboy mulling two offers .