NIGHT
AT
THE MUSEUM Night at the Museum is a 2006 American fantasy - comedy film directed by Shawn Levy and written by Robert Ben Garant and Thomas Lennon , based on the 1993 children 's book of the same name by Croatian illustrator Milan Trenc .
The film stars Ben Stiller as Larry Daley , a divorced father who applies for a job as a night watchman at New York City 's American Museum of Natural History and subsequently discovers that the exhibits , animated by a magical Egyptian artifact , come to life at night .
It was released on December 22 , 2006 by 20th Century Fox .
The first installment in the Night at the Museum trilogy , the film was a box office success despite receiving mixed reviews from critics , grossing over $ 574 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Larry Daley is a divorced man from Brooklyn , hoping to find a good job to impress his ten - year - old son Nick , but his ex - wife Erica believes he is a bad example for their son .
Larry is hired at the American Museum of Natural History to replace the retiring security guards Cecil Fredericks , Gus , and Reginald .
Larry meets the museum 's neurotic curator Dr. McPhee , and very attractive museum docent Rebecca Hutman , who plans to write a dissertation on Sacagawea .
On his first night , Cecil hands Larry an instruction manual on what to do in the museum , warning him not to let anything " in or out . "
Larry soon discovers that at night , the museum 's exhibits come to life and cause havoc for him .
Amongst the lively exhibits are a playful Tyrannosaurus skeleton named Rexy ; a mischievous capuchin monkey named Dexter who destroys the instructions ; the warring miniature factions of cowboys and legionnaires led by Jedediah and General Octavius ; violent Attila the Hun and his army ; a talking Easter Island Head that desires gum who calls Larry " dum dum " ; the fire - seeking neanderthals ; and a wax model of Theodore Roosevelt , who is in love with Sacagawea .
Roosevelt explains to Larry that the exhibits have come to life every night since the arrival of an Egyptian artifact , the Tablet of Akhmenrah , the mummified pharaoh trapped in his sarcophagus .
He also explains to Larry that as night guard , it is his job to make sure that no exhibit sets foot out of the museum , otherwise they will disintegrate into dust if the sun rises while they are outside .
The next day , Cecil advises Larry to research history to make up for the instructions ' destruction .
He studies in libraries and from Rebecca .
Larry puts his new knowledge to good use on his second night , but some of his plans backfire and the neanderthals set their exhibit on fire , leading to one becoming dust after venturing outside .
After having doubts and almost getting fired the next day , Larry offers to introduce Sacagawea to Rebecca , but she thinks he is mocking her .
On his third night , Larry brings Nick to the museum to watch the exhibits come to life , but they strangely do not .
They catch Cecil , Gus , and Reginald stealing artifacts , who explain the tablet 's magic has allowed them to feel physically young in their old age , and plot to frame Larry for the theft while they enjoy a happy retirement .
Nick activates the tablet , but Cecil steals it , locking Larry and Nick in the Egyptian exhibit .
They free Akhmenrah , and rally the exhibits to stop the thieves and retrieve their colleagues who fled out into Central Park .
Gus and Reginald are captured , but Cecil escapes by stagecoach .
Larry and several exhibits give chase , where they stop Cecil and recover the tablet , using its magic to escort all of the exhibits back into the museum before sunrise .
Rebecca witnesses this and makes amends with Larry and is subsequently introduced to Sacagawea .
The next day , McPhee fires Larry after watching news reports of sightings of the exhibits last night , but once they start to leave the museum , they find out that the reports have caused an increased number of visitors , and Larry is immediately rehired .
Near the end of the film , Larry , Nick , and the exhibits throw a party in the museum .
During the credits , it is shown that Cecil , Gus , and Reginald have been forced to serve as museum janitors for their crimes .
CAST HUMANS * Ben Stiller as Larry Daley , a night - shift security guard at the American Museum of Natural History in New York .
* Dick Van Dyke as Cecil Fredericks , a veteran security guard * Carla Gugino as Rebecca Hutman , a museum docent * Mickey Rooney as Gus , a veteran security guard
* Bill Cobbs as Reginald , a veteran security guard * Jake Cherry as Nick Daley , Larry 's son * Ricky Gervais as Dr. McPhee , the curator of the Museum of Natural History and Larry 's boss
* Kim Raver as Erica Daley , Larry 's former wife and Nick 's mother * Charlie Murphy as the taxi - driver * Paul Rudd as Don , Erica 's fiancé
* Anne Meara as Debbie EXHIBITS
* Robin Williams as a wax model of Theodore Roosevelt * Patrick Gallagher as a wax model of Attila the Hun * Rami Malek as the mummy of Pharaoh Ahkmenrah * Pierfrancesco Favino as a bronze statue of Christopher Columbus * Owen Wilson ( uncredited ) as Jedediah , a miniature cowboy figure
* Steve Coogan as Octavius , a miniature Roman general figure * Mizuo Peck as a polyurethane model of Sacagawea * Kerry van der Griend , Dan Rizzuto , Matthew Harrison , and Jody Racicot as wax models of neanderthals
* Martin Christopher as a wax model of Meriwether Lewis * Martin Sims as a wax model of William Clark * Randy Lee , Darryl Quon , Gerald Wong , and Paul Chih - Ping Cheng as wax models of the Huns * Brad Garrett as the voice of the Easter Island Head
* Crystal the Monkey as Dexter , a stuffed capuchin monkey PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The building featured in the film , which was constructed on a sound stage in Burnaby , British Columbia , is based on the American Museum of Natural History in New York City , external shots of which were used in the movie .
Trainers spent several weeks training Crystal , who plays the troublemaking monkey Dexter , to slap and bite Stiller in the film .
Robin Williams ' Theodore Roosevelt costume closely resembles that of John Wayne 's character in The Shootist .
Director Shawn Levy credited Ben Stiller for the ensemble cast : " When actors hear that Ben Stiller is in a movie they want to work with him .
It [ 's ] a high - water mark
and it absolutely draws actors in
and I 'm convinced that 's a big part of why we got this cast . "
MUSIC SONGS *
" Friday Night " - performed by McFly ; not featured in American version of the film , but heard in some international cuts , used during the end credits .
It can be heard on the American DVD on the Spanish dub .
* " September " - performed by Earth , Wind and Fire ; used before the end credits where everyone in the museum is partying .
* " Weapon of Choice " - performed by Fatboy Slim ; used in the scene where Larry returns to the museum for his second night and is preparing for the chaos .
*
" Tonight " - performed by Keke Palmer and Cham ; used for the end credits .
* " Eye of the Tiger " - performed by Ben Stiller ; used in the scene where Larry is bored and messes around with the telephone at the front desk beatboxing the music .
*
An instrumental version of " Mandy " by Barry Manilow is used when Larry is standing in the elevator , while escaping from Attila the Hun .
*
" Ezekiel Saw Them Dry Bones " is the tune Larry whistles as he passes the empty T. rex exhibit on his first night .
* " Camptown Races " by Stephen Foster is sung by the townspeople of the American West miniature diorama .
This is a period - correct song .
SCORE Section::::Music .
Section::::Score .
Alan Silvestri replaced John Ottman as score composer .
Silvestri 's score was used for the teaser trailer of Horton Hears
a Who !
TRACK LIST Section::::Track list .
Varèse Sarabande released a soundtrack album of the score on December 19 , 2006 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Night at the Museum had its premiere in New York City on December 17 2006 , on December 22 , 2006 in the United States , December 26 , 2006 in UK , January 12 , 2007 in Brazil , on February 14 , 2007 in China and on March 17 , 2007 in Japan .
The film was released under the title of " Noche en el museo " in Spain , " Una note al museo " in Italy , " La nuit au musée " in France , "
Ночь в музее " in Russia and " Uma Noite no Museu " in Brazil .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
At the end of its box office run , Night at the Museum earned a gross of $ 250.9 million in the US and Canada and $ 323.6 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 574.5 million against a budget of $ 110 million .
It is the fifth highest - grossing film of 2006 and also the highest - grossing film worldwide of the trilogy .
It was the highest - grossing film in its opening weekend , grossing $ 30.8 million plating in 3,686 theaters , with a $ 8,258 per - theater average .
For the four - day Christmas holiday weekend , it took in $ 42.2 million .
The movie was also released in IMAX large screen format , often on site at museums of science or natural history such as the Pacific Science Center in Seattle .
In its second weekend , Night at the Museum expanded into 83 more theaters and took in approximately $ 36.7 million , out - grossing its opening weekend .
It maintained the top position in its third week , with an additional $ 23.7 million .
During its opening weekend of December 15 , 2006 , the film grossed a figure of estimated $ 5 million , with the highest debut coming from South Korea ( $ 5.04 million ) .
The biggest market in the other territories were the UK , Japan , South Korea , and Germany , where it grossed $ 40.8 million , $ 30 million , $ 25.7 million , $ 22.9 million .
CRITICAL REACTION
Section::::Critical reaction .
Night at the Museum received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 43 % , based on 132 reviews , with an average rating of 5.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Parents might call this either a spectacle - filled adventure or a shallow and vapid CG - fest , depending on whether they choose to embrace this on the same level as their kids " .
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 48 out of 100 , based on 28 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
James Berardinelli of Reelviews gave it 2 stars out of 4 , and commented on Stiller 's performance by stating " It might be fair to give Ben Stiller an ' A ' for effort , but to call what he does in this movie " acting " is a misnomer .
He does a lot of running around , occasionally falling down or bumping into things . "
One positive review by William Arnold of the Seattle Post - Intelligencer , gave it a B- , and stated that the film was " Out to impress and delight a family audience with the pageantry of human and natural history , and that 's a surprisingly worthy ambition for a Hollywood comedy .
" In a case of life imitating art , museum officials at the American Museum of Natural History have credited the film for increasing the number of visitors during the holiday season by almost 20 % .
According to a museum official , between December 22 , 2006 , and January 2 , 2007 , there were 50,000 more visitors than during the same period the prior year .
CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend , cinema audiences gave the film an average grade of " A- " on an A+ to F scale .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on a 2-Disc DVD edition in the United Kingdom on April 2 , 2007 .
It was released on 1-Disc and 2-Disc DVD editions and Blu - ray Disc format on April 24 , 2007 elsewhere .
The film became the first non - Disney film to be reviewed by Ultimate Disney ( now known as DVDizzy.com ) , due to the website dealing with other studios besides Disney . , the film has sold 9,191,694 DVDs and grossed $ 153,566,058 in DVD sales .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards . !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result !
Ref .
Kids ' Choice Awards MTV Movie Award National Movie Award Teen Choice Award Taurus Award Young Artist Award SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
The first installment in the trilogy , Night at the Museum was followed by a sequel titled Night at the Museum : Battle of the Smithsonian , which was released on May 22 , 2009 in North America .
The third and final installment , Night at the Museum : Secret of the Tomb , was released on December 19 , 2014 in North America .
In 2016 , The Hollywood Reporter stated that the Alibaba Pictures Group intended to remake the film .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Night At The Museum Review on Variety.com
* Independentfilm.com video interview with Mizuo Peck who played Sacagawea