KEROSENE HEATER
A kerosene heater , also known as a paraffin heater , is typically a portable , unvented , kerosene - fueled , space ( i.e. , convectional ) heating device .
In Japan and other countries , they are a primary source of home heat .
In the United States and Australia , they are a supplemental heat or a source of emergency heat during a power outage .
Most kerosene heaters produce between 3.3 and 6.8 kW ( 11000 to 23000 BTU per hour ) .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
A kerosene heater operates much like a large kerosene lamp .
A circular wick made from fiberglass and/or cotton is integrated into a burner unit mounted above a font ( tank ) filled with 1-K kerosene .
The wick draws kerosene from the tank via capillary action .
Once lit , the wick heats the Kerosene until it turns into a gas ( gasification ) and this gas is then burnt which heats air via convection or nearby objects via radiation .
The burner is designed to properly oxygenate and distribute the flames .
The flame height is controlled by raising or lowering the exposed wick height inside the burner unit via an adjusting mechanism .
The kerosene heater is extinguished by fully retracting the wick into a cavity below the burner , which will snuff out the flame .
There has been a technological advance in kerosene heaters : some now use electricity to power a fan to force the heated air out , making it possible to heat up rooms faster .
There is also thermostat controlled operation installed in modern kerosene heaters as well .
However , most kerosene heaters require no electricity to operate .
Most heaters contain a battery - operated or piezo - electric ignitor to light the heater without the need for matches .
If the ignitor should fail the heater can still be started manually .
The Japanese non - vented " fan " heater burns kerosene gas and is known as a gasification type heater .
The liquid kerosene fuel is pre - heated via an electric heating element to vaporize the fuel .
The resulting gas is collected and forced into the burn chamber where it is ignited and burns with a blue flame , similar to propane .
The unit is fuelled through a conventional side mount cartridge style tank just like other non - vented wick type radiant heaters .
The other type of Japanese kerosene heaters are the vented type with intake and exhaust piped through a dual pipe " chimney " through a side wall of a house .
These units burn roughly like the old 1950 's " pot " burners , but with fuel injection and computer control .
DETAILS OF OPERATION Section::::Details of operation .
A kerosene heater is an appliance in which kerosene is gasified by surface evaporation and burned .
The amount of kerosene evaporated and heat generated can be increased in direct proportion to the area of the contact surface between the kerosene and air .
The wick used in a kerosene heater consists of many bundles of fine fibers and , in accordance with the principle behind it , it is designed to provide a large evaporation area .
The kerosene is drawn up from the tank into the combustion area by these capillary tubes .
If the kerosene becomes viscous or dirt and dust find their way inside the heater , the capillary tubes will become clogged .
This will cause a deterioration in the drawing of the kerosene and combustion will no longer be possible .
ODORS
DURING OPERATION Section::::Odors during operation .
When filling a kerosene heater , there is an opportunity for the fuel to vaporize and create an odour in the air .
This is why it is important to fill the heater in a garage or outdoors .
When a kerosene heater is first ignited , it takes a few seconds to a few minutes for the fuel to mix with the air in the perfect ratio for complete combustion .
During that time , the fuel to air mixture is quite rich .
This results in a small amount of unburned kerosene , thus creating an odour .
A common strategy is to light the heater outdoors , on the patio for example , until the fumes dissipate , and then bring it indoors .
Once the heater is burning normally , no additional odour is created .
An improperly adjusted wick also causes smoke and odour .
This is corrected by adjusting the wick - height .
A wick with carbon build - up will also cause odour and should be replaced .
Odour may also be apparent when the heater is extinguished .
The wick holder remains quite warm , and as the wick continues to draw kerosene , it causes vaporization of the fuel which is detected as odour .
MAINTENANCE Section::::Maintenance .
The wicks require routine maintenance .
With fiberglass wicks , the kerosene heater is placed outdoors and allowed to operate until it runs out of fuel .
Tar and other leftover deposits on the wick are burned off .
This should be done at least once a week if operated 24hr a day .
With cotton wicks , the heater must never be run dry to clean the wick .
Cleaning is instead accomplished with a paper towel , wiping down the top of the wick to remove any residue .
The wick will eventually deteriorate to the point where it will need to be replaced .
SAFETY
HAZARDS
COMBUSTION GASES Section::::Safety hazards .
Section::::Combustion gases .
Because kerosene heaters are usually unvented , all combustion products are released into the indoor air .
Among these are low levels of nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide .
An improperly adjusted , fueled , or poorly maintained kerosene heater will release more pollutants , particularly through incomplete combustion .
Use of a kerosene heater in an improperly ventilated home poses an extreme risk to life .
If oxygen is burnt faster than the extraneous atmosphere can leak into the room to replenish the burnt oxygen , the proportion of carbon monoxide rapidly increases .
Since the monoxide can not escape , any person in the room will fatally succumb to the poisonous gas .
Human senses only detect an excess of carbon dioxide , and death occurs before any occupants of the room sense
there is something amiss .
Most manufacturers recommend that a window or door be left cracked open .
Kerosene heaters should not be left unattended , especially when sleeping .
A kerosene heater , as any heater that uses organic fuel , can produce dangerously high amounts of soot and carbon monoxide when running out of oxygen .
Failure to follow safety precautions could result in asphyxiation or carbon monoxide poisoning .
FIRE HAZARD Section::::Fire hazard .
Hot surfaces on the heater pose a fire and burn risk .
The open flame poses an explosion risk in environments where flammable vapors may be present , such as in a garage .
Use of improper or contaminated fuel could cause poor performance , a fire or an explosion .
There are the usual risks involved with the storage of kerosene and when refilling the heater .
INCORRECT FUEL Section::::Incorrect fuel .
Always use the fuel type indicated by the manufacturer ( usually clear 1-K kerosene ) .
The pink " off road " kerosene can be burned in the fiberglass wicked models as well as the Japanese vented heaters .
The Japanese gasification type as well as all the cotton wicked heaters should use clear 1-K. Use of impure fuel can cause extra soot .
A risk of explosion is present with even trace amounts of gasoline / petrol mixed in the fuel , which is why it is illegal in many jurisdictions to dispense gasoline / petrol into unauthorized containers such as kerosene jugs .
Be sure to store in a container that has not been used with gasoline / petrol .
MOISTURE PROBLEMS Section::::Moisture problems .
" For every gallon of kerosene burned in an unvented kerosene heater , 1.1 gallons of water is produced .
In very tightly sealed homes , such as those that are well insulated , weather - stripped and have storm windows , use of an unvented kerosene space heater can at least double the amount of moisture vapour generated in a house each day .
"No corroborated webpages and dead link at Clemson .
( Original source suspected to be typo . ) SEE ALSO * Gas heater REFERENCES