THE MAN FROM SNOWY
RIVER II
The Man from Snowy River II is a 1988 Australian drama film , the sequel to the 1982 film The Man from Snowy River .
It was released in the United States as Return to Snowy River , and in the United Kingdom as The Untamed .
Reprising their roles from the first film were Tom Burlinson as Jim Craig and Sigrid Thornton as Jessica Harrison , while Brian Dennehy appeared as Harrison instead of Kirk Douglas .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Some years after his dangerous ride down the steep mountain to capture the Brumby herd and regain the colt , Jim Craig , now with a large herd of mountain - bred horses of his own , returns to take up with his girl , Jessica Harrison .
She is still smitten with him , but opposition from her father remains as resolute as ever .
Further , she also has a rich would - be suitor , Alistair Patton ( son of the banker from whom Harrison is seeking a large loan ) , endeavouring to court her .
Before he returns from Harrison 's property to his home , Jim meets an army officer seeking quality horses for the remount service on a regular basis .
As he realizes Jessica 's affections remain for Jim , and that she does n't " give a damn " about him , Patton jealously and maliciously recruits a gang to steal Jim 's horses .
Jim gives chase and in so doing again rides his horse down the steep mountainside .
Patton shoots at him ; the horse is killed and Jim is injured but manages to recover and resume the pursuit .
Jim had earlier let the wild stallion which led the Brumbies loose into the wild again ; in a twist of fate , the stallion shows itself from the wild at this crucial moment , and Jim finally trains the horse that has been the enigma of the entire district for decades .
As Jim breaks him in and learns to ride him , they become friends , and together they catch up to Patton and his gang .
Jessica 's father has also relented during this time , and he eventually joins with Jim and his friends to hunt down Patton and his gang .
Jim Craig gets and wins his man - on - man duel with Patton , and Harrison gives his final approval for Jessica and Jim to marry .
CAST
* Tom Burlinson as Jim Craig * Sigrid Thornton as Jessica Harrison
* Brian Dennehy as Harrison * Nicholas Eadie as Alistair Patton
* Mark Hembrow as Seb * Bryan Marshall as Hawker
* Rhys McConnochie as Patton Snr .
* Peter Cummins as Jake * Cornelia Frances as Mrs. Darcy * Tony Barry as Jacko * Wynn Roberts as Priest
* Alec Wilson as Patton 's Croney
* Peter Browne as Reilly * Alan Hopgood as Simmons
* Mark Pennell as Collins PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Geoff Burrowes , who produced the first movie , decided to direct as he felt he would clash with any other director because he felt so strongly about the material .
A horse was injured during the making of the movie and had to be put down .
A government inquiry later found , contrary to allegations by the RSPCA , that the horse was put down in the most humane way possible under the circumstances .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The name of the soundtrack for this film is the same as the American name for the film .
Bruce Rowland , who composed the music for this film , also composed the music for the first film .
AWARD AND NOMINATIONS
* Won 1989 APRA Award for Best Original Music Score ( soundtrack title Return to Snowy River ) — ( awarded to Bruce Rowland )
* Nominated for 1988 AFI Award for Best Achievement in Sound * Nominated for 1989 Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing – Sound Effects BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Man from Snowy River II grossed $ 7,415,000 at the box office in Australia .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Man from Snowy River II at the National Film and Sound Archive
*
The Man from Snowy River II at Oz Movies