SEQUENCE ( MUSIC )
In music , a sequence is the restatement of a motif or longer melodic ( or harmonic ) passage at a higher or lower pitch in the same voice .
It is one of the most common and simple methods of elaborating a melody in eighteenth and nineteenth century classical music ( Classical period and Romantic music ) .
Characteristics of sequences :
* Two segments , usually no more than three or four *
Usually in only one direction : continuingly higher or lower *
Segments continue by same interval distance
It is possible for melody or harmony to form a sequence without the other participating .
There are many types of sequences , each with a unique pattern .
Listed below are some examples .
MELODIC SEQUENCES Section::::Melodic sequences .
In a melody , a real sequence is a sequence where the subsequent segments are exact transpositions of the first segment , while a tonal sequence is a sequence where the subsequent segments are diatonic transpositions of the first .
The following passage from J.S. Bach demonstrates both kinds of sequence at work :
Note :
In the example image above , the annotation " the intervals in the second sequence are the same as in the first " is not entirely correct .
The descending pitches in the first segment ( G to A ) , have different intervals than in the second segment ( C to D ) .
The difference being in the last three pitches ( C , Bb , A versus F , E , D ) .
We have whole - step + half - step intervals in the first , and half - step + whole - step in the second .
A rhythmic sequence is the repetition of a rhythm with free use of pitches : A modified sequence is a sequence where the subsequent segments are decorated or embellished so as to not destroy the character of the original segment : A false sequence is a literal repetition of the beginning of a figure and stating the rest in sequence :
A modulating sequence is a sequence that leads from one tonal center to the next , with each segment technically being in a different key in some sequences : The above passage starts in F major and modulates
to B flat major and then , via the chord of G to C major .
Sometimes sequential passages combine more than one of the above characteristics .
In the third and fourth bars of the " Air " from J.S. Bach 's Orchestral Suite No . 3 in D major , the violin part forms a tonal sequence with the notes modified to fit the harmony , while the intervals in the bass line are unchanged , creating a real sequence .
The whole passage also forms a modulating sequence , starting in D major and moving through E minor at the start of the fourth bar :
A sequence can be described according to its direction ( ascending or descending in pitch ) and its adherence to the diatonic scale — that is , the sequence is diatonic if the pitches remain within the scale , or chromatic ( or non - diatonic ) if pitches outside of the diatonic scale are used and especially if all pitches are shifted by exactly the same interval ( i.e. , they are transposed ) .
The non - diatonic sequence tends to modulate to a new tonality or to cause temporarily tonicisation .
At least two instances of a sequential pattern — including the original statement — are required to identify a sequence , and the pattern should be based on several melody notes or at least two successive harmonies ( chords ) .
Although stereotypically associated with Baroque music , and especially the music of Antonio Vivaldi , this device is widespread throughout Western music history .
Ritornellos and the amplification from melodies to Baroque lyrics are often built from sequences .
HARMONIC SEQUENCES
DESCENDING FIFTHS Section::::Harmonic sequences .
Section::::Descending fifths .
Descending fifths sequences , also known as " circle of fifths " sequences , are the most commonly used types of sequences , singular extended in some works of Claudio Monteverdi and Heinrich Schütz .
It usually consists of a series of chords whose bass or " root " notes follow a pattern of descending fifths ( or ascending fourths ) .
For example , if a descending fifths sequence in C major starts with the note C , the next note will be F , a perfect fifth below the first note .
The next few notes will be B , E , A , D and so on , following a pattern of descending fifths .
ASCENDING FIFTHS
Section::::Ascending fifths .
The ascending fifths sequence , contrary to the descending fifths sequence , consists of a pattern of ascending fifths ( or descending fourths ) .
It is much less common than the descending fifths sequence .
DESCENDING 5 - 6 Section::::Descending 5 - 6 .
The descending 5 - 6 sequences , also known as descending third sequences , consist of a series of chords whose root notes descend by a third each sequential repetition .
The sequence is almost never unadorned as shown above , but is generally filled in with intervening chords .
The standard way of filling in this descending thirds pattern is to interpolate a first inversion chord in between each of these descents by thirds .
The result is a bass line that moves down continuously stepwise , resulting in a figured bass of ' 5 - 6 ' , and therefore , the standard descending 5 - 6 sequence .
An important subtype of the descending 5 - 6 sequence is the root position variant , also known as the Pachelbel sequence , due to the use of this sequence in Pachelbel 's Canon .
The Pachelbel sequence changes the first inversion chords in the descending 5 - 6 sequence to root position chords , resulting in a bass pattern that moves down a fourth , and then up stepwise .
ASCENDING 5 - 6
Section::::Ascending 5 - 6 .
The ascending 5 - 6 sequence , like the ascending fifths sequence , adorns a stepwise ascent .
It follows a root movement pattern of down a third ( usually to a first inversion chord sharing the same bass note as the first note ) followed by a root movement up a fourth .
This is often accomplished through an alternation of root position and first inversion chords .
The figured bass is the same as the descending 5 - 6 sequence , but the bass itself follows an ascending pattern rather than a descending pattern .
The use of a similar 5 - 6 pattern outside of sequence is fairly common and is called 5 - 6 technique .
LESS COMMON SEQUENCES Section::::Less Common Sequences .
The Sound of Music ( also known as Rosalia )
sequence features root movement up a fourth followed by root movement down a third .
Both chords are in root position .
The sequence is very similar to the ascending 5 - 6 sequence since it also allows for an overall stepwise ascent between parallel triads , much like the ascending 5 - 6 .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
A well - known popular example of a threefold descending fifths diatonic sequence is found in the refrain from the Christmas carol " Angels We Have Heard on High , " as illustrated immediately below ( " Glo ... ria in excelsis Deo " ) .
The one - measure melodic motive is shifted downward at the interval of a second , and the harmonic aspect does so likewise by following the circle of fifths : The following threefold ascending
5 - 6 chromatic ( non - diatonic ) sequence occurs in the duet of Abubeker and Fatima from Act III of César Cui 's opera Prisoner of the Caucasus ( compare a similar passage in the famous Rodgers and Hammerstein song " Do - Re - Mi , " composed almost exactly 100 years later ) :
Handel 's " For Unto Us a Child is Born " ( HWV 56 ) relies heavily on both melodic and harmonic sequencing , as can be seen in the following excerpt .
In this vocal reduction , the soprano and alto lines reiterate a florid two - beat melodic motif for three and a half bars in a series of melodic sequences on the word " born .
" More subtle , though still present , is the underlying ascending 5 - 6 harmonic sequence .
Other examples include Handel 's " Ev'ry valley shall be exalted " ( " exalted " ) from Messiah , the opening unison ritornello of J.S. Bach 's D - minor harpsichord concerto .
Another can be found in Arcangelo Corelli 's sonata de camera gigue in Em .
Here the composer sequences up in pitch after cadencing on a V. SEE ALSO * Chord progression * Imitation ( music ) * Melodic pattern * Ostinato SOURCES