SANTA FE COLLEGE Santa Fe College is a state college located in Gainesville , Florida , and is a member institution of the Florida College System .
Santa Fe College is accredited by the Florida Department of Education and the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools .
Located in North Central Florida , its main campus is in Gainesville , Florida .
As of the 2015 - 2016 school year , the school reported 22,043 students , two - thirds of which were enrolled part - time .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Santa Fe Community College was established by the Florida Legislature in 1965 in response to a request from the Alachua and Bradford County Boards of Public Instruction , which had canvassed the area and learned that the community would be well served if all citizens have the opportunity for an education .
In 2008 , Santa Fe Community College officially changed its name to Santa Fe College to emphasize the bachelor 's degree programs that it began offering .
LOCATIONS CAMPUSES * Northwest Campus , located in the Northwest side of Gainesville next to I-75 , opened in 1972 .
The campus serves as the main campus for the college .
CENTERS * Andrews Center , located in Starke , opened in the renovated Bradford County Courthouse in 1985 .
It expanded in 1991 with the restored Cultural Building and in 2001 with the Lillian Stump Center .
* Blount Center , located in downtown Gainesville , opened in 1990 .
Originally in the renovated 6th Street railroad depot , it expanded in 1993 and again in 2006 with a new classroom building .
* Charles R. and Nancy V. Perry Center for Emerging Technologies , located in Alachua , opened in 2009 .
The Perry Center serves as the home for the new Clinical Laboratory Technology bachelor 's degree , as well as the biotechnology degrees .
* Davis Center , located in Archer , opened in 2003 .
* Kirkpatrick Center , located near the Gainesville Regional Airport , opened in 1972 .
This center , also referred to at the Institute of Public Safety , educates law enforcement and corrections officer recruits and offers programs to train sworn officers .
The Kirkpatrick Center also educates students in the Emergency Medical Services and Aviation Sciences programs .
* Watson Center , located in Keystone Heights , opened in 2005 , with a second building being added in 2006 .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
The college has more than 50 accredited technology and applied sciences programs , most which are two - year degrees .
+ Demographics of student body ( Fall 2018 ) ! ! !
Students ! !
Florida ! !
U.S. Census !
African American !
European American !
Hispanic American !
Other ARTS AND SCIENCES PROGRAM
Section::::Arts and Sciences Program .
Offering an Associate in Arts Degree , the Arts and Sciences Program consists primarily of liberal arts and sciences courses .
This program culminates in a two - year liberal arts degree that can be transferred to a university which offers a bachelor 's degree .
The descriptions , course numbers and content of classes at Santa Fe College are the same as those in the first two years at Florida 's public universities .
Santa Fe College 's liberal arts courses are also transferable to most public and private four - year schools in the US .
TECHNOLOGY AND APPLIED
SCIENCES PROGRAM
Section::::Technology and Applied Sciences Program .
Offering the Associate in Science degree or certificate , the Associate in Science program consists of technology and applied sciences courses designed to prepare students for careers in skilled professions .
Some of these programs enable them to transfer to a four - year college or university .
Programs offered include Dental Assisting , Air Conditioning Repair , Automotive Technology , Child Development , Construction , Public Safety , Zoo Animal Technology , Information Technology , Cardiovascular Technology , Aviation Safety and Nursing .
BACHELOR 'S DEGREES Section::::Bachelor 's degrees .
Santa Fe College offers nine bachelor 's degrees : Accounting , Clinical Laboratory Science , Early Childhood Education , Health Services Administration , Industrial Biotechnology , Information Systems Technology , Multimedia and Video Production Technology , Nursing , and Organizational Management .
LIBRARY Section::::Library .
Santa Fe College is supported by the Lawrence W. Tyree Library , which is located in Building Y on the main Northwest Campus .
Opened in January 2002 , the $ 10 million building includes a coffee shop , multiple group study rooms of varying sizes , DVD and video viewing stations , computerized classrooms , a conference room and two reference desks .
Additional technology and services available to Santa Fe College students and faculty through the Tyree Library include printers and copiers , multiple charging stations , and 87 computers distributed throughout the library 's ample study areas , as well as a thorough online library catalog through which patrons can also request books and other media from library collections throughout the state .
The library is named in honor of former Santa Fe Community College president , Lawrence W. Tyree .
ATHLETICS FIGHT SONG Section::::Athletics .
Section::::Fight Song .
In 2009 , Santa Fe College adopted a fight song .
"
Saints Forever " was performed for the first time on Tuesday , April 21 , 2009 between softball games in Gainesville .
The song was a collaboration between Chris Sharp , the college 's director of bands , and Ryan B. Leverone , a Santa Fe College student .
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION Section::::Awards and recognition .
In 2009 , Santa Fe College was listed 6th in the nation in awarding A.A. degrees by Community College Week .
In 2012 and 2014 , the college was named as one of the ten best community colleges in the United States by the Aspen Institute .
In 2015 , the Aspen Institute gave the school the Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence as top - rated community college in the United States .
In 2015 , Santa Fe College 's Lawrence W. Tyree Library received the 2015 Excellence in Academic Libraries Award from the Association of College & Research Libraries .
NOTABLE ALUMNI AND ATTENDEES * Debbie Boyd – – Former member of the Florida House of Representatives
* Robin Campbell – – U.S. Olympian from 1980 to 1984 * Dan Friendly – Author , bookseller * Craig Fugate – – Director of FEMA under President Barack Obama
* Sam St. John – – Sheriff of Branford , Florida .
Suwannee County council seat .
* Adam Kluger – – Businessman , Advertising executive and founder of The Kluger Agency * Connie Mack IV – – Former U.S. Representative and son of former U.S. Senator Connie Mack III
* Marco Rubio – – U.S. Senator , candidate in the 2016 U.S. presidential election , former Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives
* Commander , Robert L. Smith – – U.S. Coast Guard Former Deputy Director of Congressional Affairs ( 2003 - 2006 ) and Director of Financial Analysis Division ( 1997 - 2003 ) .
* Karen Thurman – – Former U.S. Representative and Chair of the Florida Democratic Party * Clovis Watson Jr. – – Member of the Florida House of Representatives SEE
ALSO
* Santa Fe College Teaching Zoo
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Santa Fe College