AREA CODES 408 AND 669 Area code 408 is a California telephone area code that was split from area code 415 as a flash - cut in 1959 .
Area code 669 is an overlay of 408 that became effective on November 20 , 2012 .
It covers most of Santa Clara County and Northern Santa Cruz County and includes Gilroy , Morgan Hill , Saratoga , Los Gatos , Monte Sereno , Milpitas , Sunnyvale , Santa Clara , Cupertino , and San Jose .
On July 11 , 1998 , it was split again , with area code 831 having been created for the counties of Santa Cruz , Monterey , and San Benito .
Despite this split , the 408 area code is still used in northern Santa Cruz County .
On November 20 , 2012 , numbers in a new overlay area code 669 began to be assigned to new customers , requiring the use of ten - digit dialing in the entire area .
LOS GATOS Section::::Los Gatos .
Los Gatos is one of three cities in Santa Clara County that was not served by the Bell System .
Gilroy and Morgan Hill were also outside the Regional Bell Operating Company ( RBOC ) service area .
These communities were served by what was referred to , in " Bell System circles " , as " independent " telephone companies .
According to historian Willys I. Peck , the Los Gatos Telephone Company was the first company to offer telephone service in town .
Later , the Western California Telephone Company provided service to Los Gatos and to Novato , Morgan Hill , and Kenwood .
In the 1970s , the utility was acquired by General Telephone and Electronics , which changed its name to GTE , and merged with Bell Atlantic in 2000 to become Verizon Communications .
Verizon served these areas until April 1 , 2016 , when Frontier Communications took over the service .
Los Gatos is served by three central offices .
Historically , these were called the Six Office , the Four Office , and the Mountain Office .
The first two of these designations come from the historic exchange names when the town converted from manual to dial service .
Phone numbers in these two offices were ELgato-6 and ELgato-4 numbers , respectively ( dialed as ELx - xxxx . )
As the area migrated to seven - digit numbers , these changed to 356- and 354-numbers .
In their earlier life , all numbers for the segment of town served by each office had the respective prefix or office code related to that office .
As late as the early 1980s , before the modern system of digital transcribing was widely available , billing information for calls placed from Los Gatos was recorded on magnetic tape and sent to a centralized processing center in Southern California .
As the tapes were processed , the charges found their way to subscribers ' bills .
The Mountain Office served the Summit Road community and areas of the Santa Cruz Mountains west of town .
Although the office code or prefix for service from this switch was ELgato-3 ( later 353 ) , it was not referred to as the Three Office .
During the 1970s and early 1980s , the area was served by Automatic Electric step - by - step ( SXS ) electromechanical switching equipment .
The step office was a maintenance headache ; it being in a rural area made the problem more difficult .
Users noticed crosstalk , and dial pulsing was audible during at least some of their calls .
Outside the plant in the mountain area was subject to a variety of tough environmental factors , including long loop lengths and the high humidity of the redwood forest .
The area is now served by remote equipment on Summit Road connected to the central office on Los Gatos Boulevard .
Before the late 1980s and the arrival of cellular and PCS mobile phone service , GTE offered Improved Mobile Telephone Service ( IMTS ) on VHF ( 152 MHz ) and UHF ( 454 MHz ) frequencies in Los Gatos .
The service included full - duplex dial service .
There were tight restrictions on call lengths because there were only a few channels available .
In the late 1970s , daytime calls longer than three minutes were billed at over $ 1 per minute to discourage the long - winded .
The VHF equipment was located near the Santa Clara Valley Water District 's Rinconada Water Treatment Plant on More Avenue at NAD27 coordinates .
The IMTS system included General Electric mobile radio voting equipment .
( Voting is a form of diversity combining used in mobile radio systems on land . )
One receiver for at least one of the voted IMTS channels was located in a pole mount - cabinet on a utility pole along Montevina Road off California State Route 17 .
These IMTS systems were dismantled after cellular systems became available to subscribers in the Bay Area .
SAN JOSE MANUAL SERVICE
Section::::San Jose .
Section::::Manual service .
Before 1949 , San Jose telephones were manual service .
A subscriber would lift the receiver and wait for the operator to inquire , " Number Please ?
" Most telephone numbers started with Ballard or Columbia .
Mayfair numbers served the east side .
The City Manager 's number was Ballard 1 while most numbers had four digits and a letter , ( for example : Ballard 2345 W ) .
One of four letters was appended to telephone numbers : J , M , R , or
W. These letters may have tipped off the operator as to the proper keys to press to ring a subscriber who was on a party line .
DIAL SERVICE AND NUMBERING PLAN Section::::Dial service and numbering plan .
After the conversion to dial service in 1949 , San Jose telephone numbers started with names including ALpine- , ANdrews- , BAldwin- , CLayburn- , and CYpress- .
As the North American Dialing Plan evolved in the 1950s , these became today 's 25x- , 26x- , 22x- , 258- , and 29x - numbers , respectively .
When area codes were introduced in 1947 San Jose was assigned to area code 415 along with the rest of the San Francisco Bay Area and much of northern California .
Area code 408 was created on January 1 , 1959 , and included most of Santa Clara , Santa Cruz , Monterey and San Benito Counties .
Until the late 1970s , there was permissive dialing between ( 408 ) and ( 415 ) .
At the time , the entire East Bay , peninsula , and on to Marin County was in area code ( 415 ) .
Phone numbers were not duplicated across ( 415 ) and ( 408 ) , so subscribers could dial seven - digit San Francisco or Berkeley numbers without dialing an area code and the call would go through .
Population growth , facsimile machines , and pagers caused demands for numbers to outrun the capacity of this permissive dialing plan .
The additional demands for PCS and cellular phone numbers helped necessitate the ( 831)/(408 ) area code split , the ( 650)/(415 ) split , and the earlier ( 510)/(415 ) split .
Part of the previous permissive dialing plan included a mass calling prefix for radio station contests , introduced in the 1960s because some contests put unacceptable loads on the Bay Area 's telephone switches .
Until the 1980s , radio station call - in contests throughout the Bay Area used 575-numbers .
Electromechanical switching equipment of the day had been engineered to accommodate large call volumes to 575-numbers .
Large numbers of calls would otherwise have overloaded switching equipment causing slow dial tone and blocked long distance circuits .
A patchwork quilt of electromechanical switching equipment handled San Jose calls between 1949 and the 1980s .
There were about eight Western Electric Crossbar switches , at least one Number 1 and mostly Number 5 .
There was a Western Electric 4A Crossbar that took up two floors of the Main telephone exchange .
In the mid-1980s , the 4A crossbar was replaced with a digital switch which took up part of a single floor and quadrupled calling capacity .
The 408 area code was the last area code in the United States to institute the requirement of dialing " 1 " before making a long - distance call .
MOBILE SERVICE
Section::::Mobile service .
Before the existence of cell phones , Improved Mobile Telephone Service ( IMTS ) was offered .
As of 1983 , three VHF and two UHF channels were available .
Subscribers had either a VHF or UHF vehicle - mounted phone , consequently they could access only two or three channels over the entire San Jose area .
On VHF , the maximum system capacity for the San Jose system was three simultaneous calls .
There was a roaming feature , but no registration scheme like the ones used by modern PCS and cell phones .
LIST OF PLACES Section::::List of places .
Alum Rock , Bell Station , Buena Vista , Burbank , Campbell , Casa Loma , Loma Chiquita , Chemeketa Park , Cupertino , East Foothills , Fruitdale , Glenwood , Gilroy , Holy City , Laurel , Lexington Hills , Los Gatos , Milpitas , Monte Sereno , Morgan Hill , a small part of Mountain View , Redwood Estates , Rucker , San Antonio Valley , San Jose , San Martin , Santa Clara , Saratoga , Sargent , Seven Trees , Sunnyvale ( except the western - most edge ) , Sunol - Midtown , Sveadal , Zayante CREATION OF THE 669 OVERLAY Section::::Creation of the 669 overlay .
Since the 408 area code was close to being exhausted , a new area code became necessary in the region .
The 408 area code was forecast to require a new area code by the second quarter of 2012 .
From May to October 2011 , public feedback was solicited to residents in the area .
On October 20 , 2011 the California Public Utilities Commission confirmed implementing 669 as an overlay to the existing 408 area code , the first in the San Francisco Bay Area .
The new area code became active in November 2012 , following a six - month permissive dialing period .
AT&T telephone bills shortly before the overlay was to go into effect included the following information for 408 area code customers : * Effective April 21 , 2012 , you should begin the new dialing procedures [ i.e. , to use the area code ] whenever you place a call from the 408 area code .
If you forget and dial just seven digits , your call will still be completed .
* Beginning October 20 , 2012 , you must use the new dialing procedures ( ... ) for all calls .
After this date , if you do not use the new dialing procedures , your call will not be completed and a recording will instruct you to hang up and dial again .
* Beginning November 20 , 2012 , new telephone lines or services may be assigned numbers using the 669 area code .
SEE ALSO
* List of California area codes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS