TIME IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
The United Kingdom uses Greenwich Mean Time or Western European Time ( UTC ) and British Summer Time or Western European Summer Time ( ) . HISTORY Section::::History .
Until the advent of the railways , the United Kingdom used Local Mean Time .
Greenwich Mean Time was adopted first by the Great Western Railway in 1840 and a few others followed suit in the following years .
In 1847 it was adopted by the Railway Clearing House , and by almost all railway companies by the following year .
It was from this initiative that the term " railway time " was derived .
It was gradually adopted for other purposes , but a legal case in 1858 held " local mean time " to be the official time .
On 14 May 1880 , a letter signed by ' Clerk to Justices ' appeared in ' The Times ' , stating that ' Greenwich time is now kept almost throughout England , but it appears that Greenwich time is not legal time .
This was changed later in 1880 , when Greenwich Mean Time was legally adopted throughout the island of Great Britain under the Statutes ( Definition of Time ) Act 1880 ( 43 & 44 Vict . ) .
GMT was adopted on the Isle of Man in 1883 , Jersey in 1898 and Guernsey in 1913 .
Ireland adopted GMT in 1916 , supplanting Dublin Mean Time .
Daylight saving time was introduced by the Summer Time Act 1916 ( 6 & 7 Geo .
V ) , which was implemented in 1916 as GMT plus one hour and Dublin Mean Time plus one hour .
The length of DST could be extended by Order in Council , and was extended for the duration of World War I. For 1916 , DST extended from 21 May to 1 October , with transitions at 02:00 standard time .
On 1 October 1916 , Greenwich Mean Time was introduced to Ireland .
At the beginning of the 20th century , Sandringham Time ( ) was used by the royal household .
This practice was halted by King Edward VIII , in an effort to reduce confusions over time .
The dates of British Summer Time are the subject of the Summer Time Act 1972 .
From 1972 to 1980 , the day following the 3rd Saturday in March was the start of British Summer Time ( unless that day was Easter Sunday , in which case BST began a week earlier ) , with the day following the 4th Sunday in October being the end of British Summer Time .
From 1981 to 2001 , the dates were set in line with various European Directives .
Since 2002 the Act has specified the last Sunday in March as the start of British Summer Time with the last Sunday in October being end of British Summer Time .
Since 1998 the start and end date are the same in both the United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union .
EXPERIMENTATIONS WITH CENTRAL EUROPEAN TIME Section::::Experimentations with Central European Time .
The United Kingdom experimentally adopted Central European Time by maintaining Summer Time throughout the year from 1968 to 1971 .
In a House of Lords debate , Richard Butler , 17th Viscount Mountgarret said that the change was welcomed at the time , but the experiment was eventually halted after a debate in 1971 , in which the outcome might have been influenced by a major accident on the morning of the debate .
Proposals to adopt CET have been raised by various politicians over the years , including a proposal in 2011 to conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits .
DEVOLUTION Section::::Devolution .
Authority over the time zone in Northern Ireland is devolved to the Northern Ireland Assembly but the power has never been used .
In Scotland and Wales , time zone is a reserved matter , meaning that only the Parliament of the United Kingdom has power to legislate .
IANA TIME ZONE DATABASE Section::::IANA time zone database .
The IANA time zone database contains one zone for the United Kingdom in the file zone.tab , named Europe / London .
This refers to the area having the ISO 3166 - 1 alpha-2 country code " GB " .
The zone names Europe / Guernsey , Europe / Isle_of_Man and Europe / Jersey exist because they have their own ISO 3166 - 1 alpha-2 but the zone.tab entries are links to Europe / London .
There are several entries for UK possessions around the world .
Data directly from zone.tab of the IANA time zone database .
Columns marked with * are the columns from zone.tab itself . !
c.c .
* !
Coordinates * !
TZ
* !
Comments * !
UTC offset !
UTC DST offset BRITISH TERRITORIES * —
Pitcairn Islands * — Cayman Islands
*
( AST when DST is not in effect ) —
Bermuda
*
( AST , DST never observed ) — Anguilla , British Virgin Islands , Montserrat , Turks and Caicos Islands
*
( AST when DST is in effect ) — Bermuda , ( FKST ) —
Falkland Islands * — South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
* UTC ( GMT when DST not in effect ) — The United Kingdom ( England and Wales , Scotland , Northern Ireland ) , Guernsey , Isle of Man , Jersey * UTC ( GMT , DST never observed ) — Saint Helena , Ascension and Tristan da Cunha * ( British Summer time when DST is in effect ) — The United Kingdom ( England and Wales , Scotland , Northern Ireland ) , Guernsey , Isle of Man , Jersey , ( CET when DST not in effect ) — Gibraltar * ( when DST not in effect )
Gibraltar , ( EET when DST is not in effect ) —
Akrotiri and Dhekelia * ( EET when DST is in effect ) —
Akrotiri and Dhekelia * — British Indian Ocean Territory SEE ALSO
* List of time zones REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Archive of Summer time dates from the National Physical Laboratory