DEBIT
CARD CASHBACK Debit card cashback ( also known as cash out in Australia and New Zealand ) is a service offered to retail customers whereby an amount is added to the total purchase price of a transaction paid by debit card and the customer receives that amount in cash along with the purchase .
Debit card cashback is offered either by various banks only to some card holders or by companies like VISA , Mastercard or American Express .
For example , a customer purchasing $ 18.99 worth of goods at a supermarket might ask for twenty dollars cashback .
They would pay a total of $ 38.99 ( $ 18.99 + $ 20.00 ) with their debit card and receive $ 20 in cash along with their goods .
This benefits the store as it reduces the amount of cash banking the store has to do .
Many customers find it a useful way to obtain cash as it avoids them having to use a cash machine , which may incur additional fees .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The idea was originally that of British retail chain Tesco in order to reduce the amount of cash banking the stores needed to carry out , the customer service aspect being a side effect of this .
COVERAGE Section::::Coverage .
The service is offered by both banks and merchants in countries such as the United States , United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , Belgium , Germany , Sweden , Norway , Canada , Poland , the Netherlands and Australia because of the fee structures in use in these countries :
* When accepting payment by debit card , merchants pay a fixed commission fee ( as opposed to a percentage ) to their bank or merchant service provider .
( This is because the commission paid by the merchant for accepting debit cards , unlike credit cards , does not need to fund interest free credit or other incentives ) .
*
* Accepting payments in cash can be costly for merchants , given that many British banks charge around 0.5 % for depositing cash into a business bank account , along with the costs of transporting and insuring the cash .
*
The combination of these two factors means that the retailer can save money by offering the cashback service .
It does not cost the retailer more in commission to add cashback to a debit card purchase , but in the process of giving cashback , the retailer can " offload " cash which they would otherwise have to pay to deposit at the bank . FEES , OPERATION AND ADVANTAGES Section::::Fees , operation and advantages .
The services are restricted to debit cards where the merchant pays a fixed fee for the transaction , it is not offered on payments by credit card because they would pay a percentage commission on the additional cash amount to their bank or merchant service provider .
Some vendors enforce a minimum purchase amount or add a fixed fee when providing cashback to a customer .
In many cases , retailers require customers to initial the cashback entry on the till receipt to confirm they have received the cash .
This system is used to prevent cashiers surreptitiously adding cashback amounts to a transaction and keeping the money for themselves ( or accusations of same ) , but more importantly , to ensure that customers can not return to the store with allegations that the attendant " forgot " to hand over the requested cash .
Cashback can have benefits for the customer in many scenarios .
In locations where there are no cash machines nearby , or the nearby machines are out of order or empty , a local retailer may be able to supply the required cash instead and to offer more flexibility in note denominations .
Sometimes it is simply more convenient to combine the transactions at the retailer and ATM into a single cashback transaction with the retailer .
Additionally , although fees for debit card ATM usage are very rare in countries such as the UK , this is not the case in some other countries .
In Canada and the United States , fees of $ 1~2 are typical when using an ATM from a different bank than the one with which the customer has an account .
The fees in some other countries are even higher .
In Germany , for instance , usual fees are € 4~5 when using an ATM of another bank network than the one of his bank .
This gives rise to another potential cashback advantage for the consumer : by making use of the cashback procedure , this ATM fee can be avoided for the cardholder .
Poland : For standard payment transactions merchants have to pay interest fees as a percentage of payment value , not as a fixed tax .
In opposite , for cashback service the merchant receive the fixed fee from the card issuer ( ~$0.15 - 0.30 ) , but the one time cashback withdrawal can not be higher than 300zł ( ~$80 ) .
The cashback service is available at ~1/6 of POS in Poland ( 2014 ) .
REFERENCES