DISHWASHER SALT
Dishwasher salt is a particular grade of granulated , crystalline sodium chloride intended for regenerating the water softener circuit of household or industrial dishwashers .
Analogous to water softener salt , dishwasher salt regenerates ion exchange resins , expelling the therein trapped calcium and magnesium ions that characterize hard water .
Dishwater salt granules are larger than those of table salt .
The granule size ensures that the salt dissolves slowly , and that fine particles do not block the softener unit .
In some countries , especially those in Europe , dishwashers include a built - in water softener that removes calcium and magnesium ions from the water .
Dishwasher salt , which is coarse - grained sodium chloride ( table salt ) , is used to regenerate the resin in the built - in ion - exchange system .
The coarse grains prevent it from clogging the softener unit .
Unlike certain types of salt used for culinary purposes , it does not contain added anticaking agents or magnesium salts .
The presence of magnesium salts will defeat the purpose of removing magnesium from the water softener .
Anticaking agents may lead to clogging or may contain magnesium .
Table salt may contain added iodine in the form of sodium iodide or potassium iodide .
These compounds will not affect the ion - exchange system , but adding table salt to the dishwasher 's water softening unit can damage it .
If a dishwasher has a built - in water softener there will be a special compartment inside the dishwasher where the salt is to be added when needed .
This salt compartment is separate from the detergent compartment , and generally located at the bottom of the wash cabinet ( this is below the bottom basket ) .
On most dishwashers , an automatic sensing system will notify the user when more dishwasher salt is required .
If the dishwasher has run out of the salt that regenerates the ion exchange resin that softens the water , and the water supply is " hard " , limescale deposits can appear on all items , but are especially visible on glassware .
REFERENCES