LIVER SPOT
Liver spots ( also known as age spot , solar lentigo , " lentigo senilis " , " old age spot " , " senile freckle " ) are blemishes on the skin associated with aging and exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun .
They range in color from light brown to red or black and are located in areas most often exposed to the sun , particularly the hands , face , shoulders , arms and forehead , and the scalp if bald .
The spots derive their name from the fact that they were once incorrectly believed to be caused by liver problems , but they are physiologically unrelated to the liver , save for a similar color .
From the age of 40 onward the skin is less able to regenerate from sun exposure , and liver spots are very common in this age group , particularly in those who spend time in the sun .
In the overwhelming majority of cases , liver spots pose no threat and require no treatment , though they occasionally have been known to obscure the detection of skin cancer .
However , despite being a benign condition , liver spots are sometimes considered unsightly and some people choose to have them removed .
This can be done by electrosurgery , laser treatment , cryotherapy , or the use of depigmentation agents , such as hydroquinone , tretinoin , topical cysteamine , azelaic acid or alpha hydroxy acids .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Differently from the melanotic nevi and the verrucous nevi on the skin , age spots change with time in color and in shape .
Misrepair - accumulation aging theory proposes a hypothesis on the development of age spots .
Firstly , the development of a flat spot is a result of accumulation of aged basal cells .
When the skin is aged , some aged cells that contain lipofuscin bodies can not be removed .
An aged cell will affect the functionality of the local tissue and promote the aging of its neighbor cells .
By a feedback loop , more and more neighbor cells become aged and lipofuscin - containing .
They aggregate and form a spot with an irregular shape .
Secondly , protruding of a flat spot is a result of the death of aged cells in the spot and release of lipofuscin bodies .
Isolation of the un - digestible lipofuscin bodies in a fibrotic capsule is essential for maintaining the structural integrity of the tissue .
Successive encapsulation of dead cells and lipofuscin bodies results in the growth of a spot in three dimensions .
The dense lipofuscin bodies in the capsule make a protruding spot soft and dark in color .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The diagnosis is usually done by a dermatologist .
SEE ALSO * Freckle
* Lentigo
* List of cutaneous conditions REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS