TURN
ON RED
A turn on red is a principle of law permitting vehicles at a traffic light showing a red signal to turn into the direction of traffic nearer to them ( almost always after a complete stop ) when the way is clear , without having to wait for a green signal .
It is intended to allow traffic to resume moving , with minimal risk provided that proper caution is observed .
It is commonly known as a right turn on red ( or simply right on red ) in countries that drive on the right side of the road , or a left turn on red in countries which drive on the left side of the road .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
Right turns on red are permitted in many regions of North America .
In the United States , western states have allowed it for more than 50 years , and eastern states amended their traffic laws to allow it in the 1970s as a fuel - saving measure in response to motor fuel shortages in 1973 .
The Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 required in § 362(c)(5 )
that in order for a state to receive federal assistance in developing mandated conservation programs , they must permit right turns on red lights .
All 50 states , the District of Columbia , Guam , and Puerto Rico have allowed right turns on red since 1980 , except where prohibited by a sign or where right turns are controlled by dedicated traffic lights .
( The last state with a right - on - red ban , Massachusetts , ended its ban on January 1 , 1980 )
The few exceptions include New York City , where right turns on red are prohibited , unless a sign indicates otherwise .
In some states , such as New York , Virginia , North Carolina , Nebraska , Minnesota , and California , a right turn on red is prohibited when a red arrow is displayed .
At intersections where U - turns are permitted and controlled by a U - turn arrow from the left - most lane , motorists turning right on red onto the same road must yield to those making U - turns before turning , as the motorists making U - turns have the right of way and a collision could easily occur .
At intersections where U - turns are prohibited in the same fashion , a green right turn arrow will sometimes appear for those turning right onto the road , allowing only traffic turning right to proceed without having to stop or yield to other vehicles or pedestrians .
Some states such as California have " No U - Turn " signs posted at these intersections because of the green right turn arrow .
Most Caribbean countries with right - hand traffic , such as the Dominican Republic , allow right turn on red unless a sign prohibits it .
Some vehicles , such as those carrying hazardous materials and school buses , are not allowed to turn on red under any circumstance and must wait for a green light or arrow .
During 1982–1992 , approximately 84 fatal crashes per year occurred in the U.S. where a vehicle was turning right at intersections where right turn on red was permitted .
As of 1992 , right turn on red is governed federally by ( c ) ( " Each proposed State energy conservation plan to be eligible for Federal assistance under this part shall include : ... ( 5 ) a traffic law or regulation which , to the maximum extent practicable consistent with safety , permits the operator of a motor vehicle to turn such vehicle right at a red stop light after stopping , and to turn such vehicle left from a one - way street onto a one - way street at a red light after stopping . " ) .
All turns on red are forbidden in New York City unless a sign is posted permitting it .
Through most of Canada , a driver may turn right at a red light after coming to a complete stop unless a sign indicates otherwise .
In the province of Quebec , turning right on a red was illegal until a pilot study carried out in 2003 showed that the right turn on red manoeuvre did not result in significantly more accidents .
Subsequent to the study , the Province of Quebec now allows right turns on red except where prohibited by a sign .
However , like in New York City , it remains illegal to turn right on a red anywhere on the Island of Montreal .
Motorists are reminded of this by large signs posted at the entrance to all bridges .
In Mexico , right turns on red are generally allowed unless a sign indicates otherwise .
Mexico City has implemented a new transit law which prohibits right turns and motorists can be issued a citation for noncompliance .
CENTRAL AMERICA Section::::Central America .
In Costa Rica , right turns on red are allowed in general , but a sign can forbid them .
SOUTH AMERICA Section::::South America .
In Chile , right turns on red are only allowed when a sign permitting it is shown .
In Paraguay , right turns on red are allowed in some towns .
In Argentina , Brazil , Peru and Uruguay , right turns on red are not allowed .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
In the European Union member states in general , it is illegal to turn on a red light , unless it is indicated otherwise , for example by a green arrow on a red light , a flashing amber arrow with a red light or a permanent green board next to the red light .
In Poland , right turns on red are permitted , only if an additional green arrow light ( apart from the main signal light ) is present and lit .
However , the regulations require drivers to stop completely , as their paths intersect with other vehicles or pedestrians in at least one direction .
Green arrow light can be also directed left ( the same regulations apply ) .
In Germany , right turns on red are only permitted , after a complete stop , when a specific sign is present .
This rule was first introduced in 1978 in East Germany and was originally supposed to become obsolete together with the East German highway code by the end of 1990 , following German reunification .
However , authorities were unable to remove the signs in time , and public opinion caused them to leave the regulation unchanged , even extending its scope to the areas of the former West Germany in 1994 .
By 1999 , there were 300 turn - on - red intersections on the territory of the former West Germany while that of the former East Germany featured 2,500 .
However , the numbers in the former West Germany have risen considerably since then and as of 2002 a total of 5,000 turn - on - red intersections were counted , representing 48 % of the national total .
In Russia , turns on red are prohibited unless a separate arrow - shaped green light allows it ; drivers must give way to any vehicle coming from a different direction .
When the arrow is not lit , turns in the arrow direction are prohibited .
However , in some cities , they have allowed turns on right provided there is a fixed green arrow with the writing below saying " Give way to everyone , you can turn on right " .
In the Netherlands , bicycles are occasionally allowed to turn right on a red light ( assuming that the design of the junction is such that the light is even applicable to right turning cyclists , which it often is not in the Netherlands ) .
Wherever this is the case , a sign " rechtsaf voor fietsers vrij " ( right turn free for cyclists ) or " rechtsaf voor ( brom)fietsers vrij "
( right turn free for cyclists and mopeds ) is present .
In France a right turn on red without stopping is allowed when a separate arrow - shaped amber light flashes , but drivers do not have priority .
They must check if any pedestrians are crossing before turning and must give way to vehicles coming from other directions ..
In France , cyclists are permitted to turn right on red if a sign indicates it .
In Belgium , road signs that allow cyclists to turn right on a red light have been added to traffic law in 2012 .
Such roads signs have been placed on intersections in the Brussels Capital Region .
Like in the Netherlands , Belgium and France have a road sign that allows cyclists to turn right on a red light .
The French and Belgian signs consist of a yield sign with a yellow bike and arrow inside .
Such signs are placed under traffic lights .
In the United Kingdom , which drives on the left , left turn on red is prohibited , but at some junctions there is a separate left arrow - shaped green " filter " light which , when lit , allows left - hand turns but conflicting traffic will always have a red signal .
Other non conflicting traffic movements may have their own left or right arrow - shaped green light .
Sometimes there are specific lanes without signals for turning left , separated from the through traffic signalled traffic by traffic islands , but give way signs are installed .
In the Republic of Ireland , which drives on the left , left turns on red are prohibited .
In Lithuania , drivers are allowed to turn right on red when a particular sign with a green arrow on a white background is mounted beside the red light of the traffic signal .
However , on 10 November 2014 , national traffic rules were altered meaning that this sign will be valid only until 31 December 2019 at the latest , by which time all such signs will have been eliminated .
These changes for reasons of road safety .
In Czech Republic and Slovakia right turns on red are allowed only when there is a lit green arrow present ( called S 5 in Czech Republic and S 10 in Slovakia ) .
Also in this case the car turning on red must give way to ongoing traffic , to pedestrians and other road users .
( According to Czech law § 70 of decree 30/2001 of Law Codex ; and Slovak law § 9 , part 3 g , decree 9/2009 of Law Codex )
In Romania , right turns on red are prohibited , except when there is a small green flashing light with a right turn arrow .
Drivers must yield to pedestrians and oncoming vehicles from their left .
In some one - way junctions , the same rule applies for left on red ( such as Cluj - Napoca Avram Iancu Square ) .
In Bulgaria , right turns on red are prohibited .
In Spain , right turns on red are allowed only if there 's either a flashing amber or lit green arrow - shaped traffic light .
Flashing amber arrow allows turning without priority ( turn must be done exercising caution , giving way to any other vehicles and pedestrians that may cross the path ) , while a lit green arrow grants priority .
If just a regular set of traffic lights is present ( no light arrows ) , then turning on red is prohibited .
In Iceland , right turn on red is allowed only when the " Hægri Kveiktu á Rauðum " sign is displayed at the traffic junction .
The driver will have to stop at the red light first and give way to pedestrians and oncoming vehicles from their left before turning .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
As in the United Kingdom , left turn on red is always prohibited in Hong Kong .
At some junctions , however , there may be separate sets of signals for left turns , or specific lanes for turning left separating from the through traffic by traffic islands and give way signs are installed .
One such example is at the junction of Queen 's Road East and Morrison Hill Road .
In China , a right turn on red is generally permitted , unless there is a red arrow pointing to the right .
However , certain cities such as Shantou prohibited right turn on red .
In India , which drives on the left , a " free left turn " is generally prohibited .
However , some cities specifically permit turning left on a red signal .
An explicit green or blinking orange left signal also permits a turn on red , which usually means that conflicting traffic is not permitted to enter the same road .
In Japan , which drives on the left , the only left turn allowed requires a green left arrow along with the red light .
In Singapore , which drives on the left , left turn on red is allowed only when the " Left Turn On Red " sign is displayed at the traffic junction .
The driver will have to stop at the red light first and give way to pedestrians and oncoming vehicles from their right before turning .
In Taiwan , right turn on red is always prohibited , except when there is a green arrow along with the red light .
In Thailand , which drives on the left , left turn on red is allowed unless a sign prohibits it .
In Saudi Arabia , right turn on red is generally permitted , unless there is a dedicated slip lane for right turn .
In Lebanon , unless sign or a red arrow prohibits it , right turning on red is permitted after coming to a full stop to give way to oncoming traffic and pedestrians .
OCEANIA
Section::::Oceania .
In Australia , which drives on the left , left turns on red are not permitted unless a sign indicating otherwise exists at the intersection .
At such intersections , a sign generally reads " left turn on red permitted after stopping , " meaning a vehicle can make a left turn only after coming to a complete stop first and giving way to approaching traffic and any crossing pedestrians or cyclists .
These intersections often take the form of a slip lane .
Such signs are only in limited locations in the states of New South Wales , Queensland , South Australia as well as the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory and are banned in other states .
In South Australia , there were just 6 such intersections allowing turns on red in the entire state as of 2016 .
There are conflicting views on the policy of left turns on red , with supporters pointing to lower vehicle emission and time savings , while opponents cite safety concerns .
In New Zealand , which drives on the left , left turns on red are not permitted .
However , some intersections have a slip lane passing to the left of the traffic light that then joins on to the main road with a give way sign , effectively allowing a left turn on red .
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY Section::::Pedestrian safety .
Turns on red are especially problematic for pedestrians due to drivers looking left for traffic on red light and not noticing a pedestrian waiting to cross the street to the driver 's right .
This may lead to a " right hook " collision when the driver and pedestrian both enter the intersection .
Right on red reduces perceived safety for pedestrians and hence walkability .
Suburbanization and car oriented development of the west has been a driving force behind right turn on red , although in some downtown core areas even in Western US right on red is explicitly prohibited with signs .
LEFT TURN ON RED IN COUNTRIES WITH RIGHT HAND TRAFFIC
( TURNING ACROSS TRAFFIC )
Section::::Left turn on red in countries with right hand traffic ( turning across traffic ) .
In the U.S. , 36 states and Puerto Rico allow left turns on red only if both the origin and destination streets are one way .
( See South Carolina law Section 56 - 5 - 970 C3 , for example . )
Five other states , namely Alaska , Idaho , Michigan , Oregon and Washington , allow left turns on red onto a one - way street even from a two - way street .
The following states and territories ban left turns on red : South Dakota ( unless permitted by local ordinance ) , Connecticut , Maine , Missouri , New Hampshire , New Jersey , North Carolina , Rhode Island , the District of Columbia , and Guam .
New York City also prohibits left turn on red lights , unless a sign indicates otherwise .
In Canada , left turn on red light from a one - way road into a one - way road is permitted except in some areas of Quebec , New Brunswick , and Prince Edward Island .
Left turn on red light from a two - way road into a one - way road is permitted in British Columbia after yielding to pedestrians and cross traffic .
SEE ALSO * Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Safety Impact Of Right Turn On Red : Report To Congress , National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Traffic Tech
* Sarkar , van Houten , and Moffatt , Using License Manuals To Increase Awareness About Pedestrian Hazards at Intersections , Transportation Research Record 1674 .
* Traffic Light Signals and Red Light Cameras : Turning on Red Light ( US ) , by Justin JIH .