HISTORY OF LIONS IN EUROPE
The history of lions in Europe is based on fossils of Pleistocene and Holocene lions excavated in Europe since the early 19th century .
Historical literature such as the Iliad of ancient Greece features lion similes .
The first lion fossil was excavated in southern Germany and described by Georg August Goldfuss under Felis spelaea , which probably dates to the Würm glaciation and is 191,000 to 57,000 years old .
Older lion skull fragments were excavated in Germany and described by under Felis fossilis in 1906 .
These are estimated at between 621,000 and 533,000 years old .
The modern lion inhabited parts of Southern Europe since the early Holocene .
Its diet probably included aurochs , red deer , tarpan , wild boar , and other herbivores .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Bone fragments of fossil spelaea lions indicate that they were bigger than the modern lion and had less specialized lower teeth , reduced lower premolars and smaller incisors .
As indicated by the numerous art depictions , modern lions in the Balkans despite the fact of cooler climate , had less developed mane , lacking abdominal and lateral manes and ulnar hair .
Οn the contrary , lions from Transcaucasia exhibited all these features .
DISTRIBUTION FOSSIL RECORDS Section::::Distribution .
Section::::Fossil records .
Lion fossils were excavated in Spain , Portugal , France , Italy , Belgium , United Kingdom , Germany , Poland , Czech Republic , Hungary and Russia .
The oldest fossils excavated near Pakefield in the United Kingdom are estimated at 680,000 years old and represent Panthera leo fossilis .
Late Pleistocene Panthera spelaea bone fragments date to between the Weichselian glaciation and the Holocene , and are between 109,000 and 14,000 years old .
This lion was widely distributed from the Iberian peninsula , Southeast Europe , across most of northern Eurasia into Alaska .
In Eurasia , it became extinct between 14,900 and 14,100 years ago , and survived in Beringia until 13,800 to 13,300 years ago .
SUBFOSSIL RECORDS Section::::Subfossil records .
The earliest subfossil lion remains to date were excavated in Basque Country and are about 9,600–7,000 years old , dating to the Boreal period .
There are doubts if this was a modern lion or a late surviving spelaea cave lion .
A neolithic lion tooth fragment representing the Atlantic Period was found in Karanovo , Bulgaria , and is estimated 6,000 years old .
In Greece lions first appeared around 6,500–6,000 years ago as indicated by a front leg bone found in Philippi .
Bone fragments of the modern lion were excavated in Hungary and in Ukraine 's Black Sea region , which are estimated at around 5,500 to 3,000 years old .
Remains were also found in Albania , Romania and European Turkey .
HISTORIC RANGE OF PANTHERA LEO Section::::Historic range of Panthera leo .
In Eastern Europe , the lion inhabited part of the Balkan peninsula up to Hungary and Ukraine during the Neolithic period .
It survived in Bulgaria until the 4th or 3rd century BC , and in mainland Greece until about 100 AD .
It became extinct in the Peloponnese around 1,000 BC .
It disappeared from Macedonia around the first century AD , and in Thessaly in the 4th century AD .
Possibly it survived longer farther south .
In the 4th century AD , Themistius regrets that in his time the lion disappeared in Thessaly and no more lions could be furnished for beast - shows .
In Transcaucasia , the lion was present until the 10th century .
The peak of its historic range covered all of the plains and foothills of eastern Transcaucasia westward almost to Tbilisi .
Northwards , its range extended through the eastern Caucasus , from the Apsheron Peninsula to the mouth of the Samur River near the current Azerbaijan - Russia border , extending to the Araks river .
From there , the boundary of its range narrowly turned east to Yerevan , with its northern boundary then extending westward to Turkey .
IN CULTURE Section::::In culture .
Lions feature in ancient Greek mythology and writings , including the myth of the Nemean lion , which was believed to be a supernatural lion that occupied the sacred town of Nemea in the Peloponnese .
Homer mentioned lions 45 times in his poems , but this could have been due to his experience in Asia Minor .
Phalaecus , a tyrant of Amvrakia ( modern - day Arta ) , was allegedly killed by a female lion due to his holding a newborn lion cub , after finding it on a hunting expedition .
According to Herodotus lions occurred between Achelous river and Nestus , being plentiful between Akanthos and Thermi .
When Xerxes advanced near Echedorus in 480 BC , the troops ' camels were attacked by lions .
Xenophon stated around 400 BC that lions were hunted around Mount Kissos , Pangaio , the Pindus mountains and elsewhere .
Aristotle in the 4th century BC provided some data on lion distribution , behaviour , breeding and also anatomy .
According to him , lions were more numerous in North Africa than in Europe ; they had approached towns , and attacked people only if they were old , or had poor dental health .
In the 2nd century AD , Pausanias referred to lion presence west of Nestus in Thrace , in the area of Abdera .
He also referred to a story about Polydamas of Skotoussa , an Olympic winner in the 5th century BC , who allegedly used his bare hands to kill a lion on Thessalian part of Mount Olympus ; and to one about Caranus of Macedon who according to the Macedonians , raised a trophy that was thrown down and destroyed by a lion that was rushing down from Mount Olympus .
The Romans used Barbary lions from North Africa for lion - baiting , and lions from Greece for gladiatorial games .
SEE ALSO
*
Panthera toscana
*
Panthera leo leo * Asiatic lion * Cape lion *
Barbary lion
* American lion * Cultural depictions of lions
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Panthera leo europaea