THE CHILD IN TIME
The Child in Time ( 1987 ) is a novel by Ian McEwan .
It won the Whitbread Novel Award for that year .
The story concerns Stephen , an author of children 's books , and his wife , two years after the kidnapping of their three - year - old daughter Kate .
Author Christopher Hitchens viewed the novel as McEwan 's masterpiece .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Stephen Lewis is , by his own admission , an accidental author of children 's books .
One Saturday , on a routine visit to the supermarket , during a moment 's distraction , he loses his only daughter , Kate .
Since then , the only purpose in his life is that he is a member of a committee on childcare .
Otherwise he spends his days lying on the sofa drinking scotch and watching mindless TV programmes and the Olympic games .
His wife , Julie , has moved away and become a recluse , and he visits her very rarely .
He has a close friend , Charles Darke , who published his first novel and who is now a junior Minister in the Cabinet , and the Prime Minister 's favourite .
Darke 's own wife , Thelma , is a quantum physicist .
She engages Stephen with her outlandish theories on time and space .
However , his friends ' lives change irrevocably in a way he can not understand , and he is a helpless bystander .
Charles Darke and his wife leave their life in London for a place in the countryside , where a few years later , Charles commits suicide .
Stephen experiences a strange event that he can not explain : he sees his parents as a young couple in a pub , before they married .
The book also deals with his grief and eventually his painful acceptance of the loss of his child .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
The book deals with the theory that time is relative , and can be fluid and unstructured .
In one respect it can be viewed as a time travelling story .
At the very core of the novel is the " child in time " — Stephen himself — appearing to his mother as a child 's face at a window , which makes his mother decide not to abort , but instead to continue the pregnancy .
It also explores the way both Stephen 's and Julie 's lives disintegrate after Kate 's disappearance , and how an unexpected event at the very end of the book may bring them back together .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
Author Christopher Hitchens viewed the novel as McEwan 's masterpiece .
Writing about McEwan when his novel Saturday was published , Hitchens remarked the break out successes of Amsterdam in 1998 and Atonement in 2001 and then says that The Child in Time was " still , in my view , his masterpiece " .
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ELEMENTS Section::::Autobiographical elements .
The novel is connected to McEwan 's personal life as during the writing of this novel he experienced the birth of his first child .
ADAPTATION Section::::Adaptation .
In February 2017 , BBC One commissioned a television film adaptation of the novel starring Benedict Cumberbatch and Kelly Macdonald .
It premiered on BBC One on September 24 , 2017 , to positive critical response .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Page on author 's website * Random House page
* Time and the Child in The Child in Time