THE HANDMAID 'S TALE ( FILM )
The Handmaid 's Tale is a 1990 film adaptation of Margaret Atwood 's novel of the same name .
Directed by Volker Schlöndorff , the film stars Natasha Richardson ( Kate / Offred ) , Faye Dunaway ( Serena Joy ) , Robert Duvall ( The Commander , Fred ) , Aidan Quinn ( Nick ) , and Elizabeth McGovern ( Moira ) .
The screenplay was written by Harold Pinter .
The original music score was composed by Ryuichi Sakamoto .
MGM Home Entertainment released an Avant - Garde Cinema DVD of the film in 2001 .
The film was entered into the 40th Berlin International Film Festival .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the near future , war rages across the Republic of Gilead — formerly the United States of America — and pollution has rendered 99 % of the population sterile .
Kate is a woman who attempts to emigrate to Canada with her husband and daughter .
As they take a dirt road , the Gilead Border Guard orders them to turn back or they will open fire .
Kate 's husband uses an automatic rifle to draw the fire , telling Kate to run , but he gets shot .
Kate gets captured , while their daughter wanders off into the back country , confused and unaccompanied .
The authorities take Kate to a training facility with several other women , where she and her companions receive training to become Handmaids — concubines for one of the privileged but barren couples who run the country 's religious fundamentalist regime .
Although she resists being indoctrinated into the cult of the Handmaids , which mixes Old Testament orthodoxy with scripted group chanting and ritualized violence , Kate is soon assigned to the home of " the Commander " ( Fred ) and of his cold , inflexible wife , Serena Joy .
There she is named " Offred"—"of
Fred " .
Her role as the Commander 's latest concubine is emotionless .
She lies between Serena Joy 's legs while being raped by the Commander in the collective hope that she will bear them a child .
Kate continually longs for her earlier life , but she is haunted by nightmares of her husband 's death and of her daughter 's disappearance .
A doctor tells her that many of Gilead 's male leaders are as sterile as their wives .
Serena Joy desperately wants a baby , so she persuades Kate to risk the punishment for fornication — death by hanging — in order to be fertilized by another man who may make her pregnant , and consequently , spare her life .
In exchange for Kate agreeing to this , Serena Joy provides information to Kate that her daughter is alive , and shows as proof a recent photograph of her living in the household of another Commander .
However , Kate is told she can never see her daughter .
The Commander also tries to get closer to Kate , in the sense that he feels if she enjoyed herself more she would become a better handmaid .
The Commander knows Kate 's background as a librarian .
He gets her hard - to - obtain items and allows her access to his private library .
However , during a night out , the Commander has sex with Kate in an unauthorized manner .
The other man selected by Serena Joy turns out to be Nick , the Commander 's sympathetic chauffeur .
Kate grows attached to Nick and eventually becomes pregnant with his child .
Kate ultimately kills the Commander , and a police unit then arrives to take her away .
She thinks that the policemen are members of the Eyes , the government 's secret police .
However , it turns out that they are soldiers from the resistance movement ( Mayday ) , of which Nick , too , is a part .
Kate then flees with them , parting from Nick in an emotional scene .
Kate is now free once again and wearing non - uniform clothes , but facing an uncertain future .
She is living by herself , pregnant in a trailer while receiving intelligence reports from the rebels .
She wonders if she will be reunited with Nick , but expresses hope that will happen , and resolves with the rebels ' help she will find her daughter .
CAST * Natasha Richardson as Kate
/ Offred * Robert Duvall as Commander * Faye Dunaway as Serena Joy * Elizabeth McGovern as Moira
* Aidan Quinn as Nick * Victoria Tennant as Aunt Lydia
* Blanche Baker as Ofglen * Traci Lind as Janine / Ofwarren * Reiner Schöne as Luke , Kate 's husband * Robert D. Raiford as Dick * Muse Watson as Guardian
* Bill Owen as TV Announcer # 2 * David Dukes as Doctor
* Blair Nicole Struble as Jill , Kate 's daughter
DEVELOPMENT WRITING Section::::Development .
Section::::Writing .
According to Steven H. Gale , in his book Sharp Cut , " the final cut of The Handmaid 's Tale is less a result of Pinter 's script than any of his other films .
He contributed only part of the screenplay :
reportedly he ' abandoned writing the screenplay from exhaustion . ' …
Although he tried to have his name removed from the credits because he was so displeased with the movie ( in 1994 he told me that this was due to the great divergences from his script that occur in the movie ) , … his name remains as screenwriter " .
Gale observes further that " while the film was being shot , director Volker Schlöndorff " , who had replaced the original director Karel Reisz , " called Pinter and asked for some changes in the script " ;
however , " Pinter recall[ed ] being very tired at the time , and he suggested that Schlondorff contact Atwood about the rewrites .
He essentially gave the director and author carte blanche to accept whatever changes that she wanted to institute , for , as he reasoned , ' I did n't think an author would want to fuck up her own work . ' …
As it turned out , not only did Atwood make changes , but so did many others who were involved in the shoot " .
Gale points out that Pinter told his biographer Michael Billington that It became … a hotchpotch .
The whole thing fell between several shoots .
I worked with Karel Reisz on it for about a year .
There are big public scenes in the story and Karel wanted to do them with thousands of people .
The film company would n't sanction that so he withdrew .
At which point Volker Schlondorff came into it as director .
He wanted to work with me on the script , but I said I was absolutely exhausted .
I more or less said , ' Do what you like .
There 's the script .
Why not go back to the original author if you want to fiddle about ? '
He did go to the original author .
And then the actors came into it .
I left my name on the film because there was enough there to warrant it — just about .
But it 's not mine ' .
In an essay on Pinter 's screenplay for The French Lieutenant 's Woman , in The Films of Harold Pinter , Gale discusses Pinter 's " dissatisfaction with " the " kind of alteration " that occurs " once the script is tinkered with by others " and " it becomes collaborative to the point that it is not his product any more or that such tinkering for practical purposes removes some of the artistic element " ; he adds : " Most notably The Handmaid 's Tale , which he considered so much altered that he has refused to allow the script to be published , and The Remains of the Day , which he refused to allow his name to be attached to for the same reason … " ( 84n3 ) .
PINTER 'S
SCREENPLAY Section::::Pinter 's screenplay .
Christopher C. Hudgins discusses further details about why " Pinter elected not to publish three of his completed filmscripts , The Handmaid 's Tale , The Remains of the Day , and Lolita , " all of which Hudgins considers " masterful filmscripts " of " demonstrable superiority to the shooting scripts that were eventually used to make the films " ; fortunately ( " We can thank our various lucky stars " ) , he says , " these Pinter filmscripts are now available not only in private collections but also in the Pinter Archive at the British Library " ; in this essay , which he first presented as a paper at the 10th Europe Theatre Prize symposium , Pinter : Passion , Poetry , Politics , held in Turin , Italy , in March 2006 , Hudgins " examin[es ] all three unpublished filmscripts in conjunction with one another " and " provides several interesting insights about Pinter 's adaptation process " .
RICHARDSON 'S VIEWS Section::::Richardson 's views .
In a retrospective account written after Natasha Richardson 's death , for CanWest News Service , Jamie Portman cites Richardson 's view of the difficulties involved with making Atwood 's novel into a film script :
Richardson recognized early on the difficulties in making a film out of a book which was " so much a one - woman interior monologue " and with the challenge of playing a woman unable to convey her feelings to the world about her , but who must make them evident to the audience watching the movie . …
She thought the passages of voice - over narration in the original screenplay would solve the problem , but then Pinter changed his mind and Richardson felt she had been cast adrift . …
" Harold Pinter has something specific against voice - overs , " she said angrily 19 years ago . "
Speaking as a member of an audience , I 've seen voice - over and narration work very well in films a number of times , and I think it would have been helpful
had it been there for The Handmaid 's Tale .
After all it 's HER story . "
Portman concludes that " In the end director Volker Schlondorff sided with Richardson " ; Portman does not acknowledge Pinter 's already - quoted account that he gave both Schlondorff and Atwood carte blanche to make whatever changes they wanted to his script because he was too " exhausted " from the experience to work further on it ; in 1990 , when she reportedly made her comments quoted by Portman , Richardson herself may not have known that .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
The scene where the hanging occurred was filmed in front of Duke Chapel on the campus of Duke University in Durham , North Carolina .
Several scenes were filmed at Saint Mary 's School in Raleigh , N.C. RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes reports that five of the sixteen counted critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating was 4.8/10 .
Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars and wrote that he was " not sure exactly what the movie is saying " and that by " the end of the movie we are conscious of large themes and deep thoughts , and of good intentions drifting out of focus . "
Owen Gleiberman , writing for Entertainment Weekly , gave the film a " C- " grade and commented that " visually , it 's quite striking " , but that it is " paranoid poppycock — just like the book " .
REFERENCES
WORKS CITED EXTERNAL LINKS