CERTIFIED
EMAIL
Certified email is a kind of email whose sending is certified by a neutral third - party , analogous to registered mail .
A certified email aims to guarantee the same legal validity as a certified mail .
For each certified email , the government will guarantee the legal validity with a delivery receipt that will be given to the sender .
The receiver will be able to verify the mail using a legally signed delivery receipt .
Certified mail aims to reduce postal costs and difficulties .
The development of this email service with added value shows conceptual variations .
These are dominated by two - party scenarios with only one sender and one receiver as well as a trusted third party ( TTP ) serving as a mediator .
Like in traditional certified mail , many certified email technologies call for the parties involved to trust the TTP , or the " postman " , because it has the capacity to reveal the identity of the sender to the recipient once the protocol is initiated .
There are , however , applications that are based on multi - party email protocols ; these include the technology first proposed by Markowitch and Kremer , which involved an online or offline trusted third party in addition to the sender and receiver .
There is also a multi - party version , wherein a sender can send the same email to multiple recipients .
In this system , those who acknowledge the receipt are able to view the data .
Some applications also offer add - in features , such as the integration of the concept of timeliness , wherein a participant to the process can terminate a session in finite time in order to avoid waiting for a reply forever .
A certified email system is currently used in Hong Kong and in Italy .
Italian certified email ( Posta elettronica certificata ) uses protocols described in the RFC 6109
( Request for Comments 6109 ) , which was drafted in order to make the protocols public to the Internet community .
SEE ALSO * Registered mail
* Email authentication
*
Secure messaging REFERENCES Section::::References .
Carlos Tico ( 2012 ) .
Method , a system and a computer program product for certifying that a destination email server has received an email message sent from a sender to at least one destination address .
US Patent 9,742,722 B2 ( 2017 ) and EP2805455B1 ( 2018 ) .