CHRIS HANI
BARAGWANATH HOSPITAL
Chris Hani
Baragwanath Hospital is the third largest hospital in the world after the West China Hospital of West China Medical Center of Sichuan University , and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou , occupying , with 3,400 beds and 6,760 staff members .
The hospital is in the Soweto area south of Johannesburg , South Africa .
It is one of the 40 Gauteng provincial hospitals , and is financed and managed by the Gauteng Provincial Department of Health .
It is a teaching hospital for the University of the Witwatersrand Medical School , along with the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital , Helen Joseph Hospital and the Rahima Moosa Mother and Child Hospital .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Imperial Military Hospital , Baragwanath , was built in what today is Diepkloof in 1942 for convalescing British and Commonwealth soldiers .
Field Marshal Jan Smuts noted during the opening ceremonies that the facility would be used for the area 's black population after the war .
In 1947 King George VI visited and presented medals to the troops there .
From this start grew Baragwanath Hospital ( as it became known after 1948 ) , reputedly the largest hospital in the southern hemisphere .
In 1997 another name change followed , with the sprawling facility now known as Chris Hani
Baragwanath Hospital in honour of the South African Communist Party leader who was assassinated in 1993 .
DAILY ADMISSIONS
Section::::Daily admissions .
More than two thousand patients check into the hospital 's specialised clinics and out - patient departments daily , from catchment areas as far as Klerksdorp .
SEE ALSO
* List of hospitals in South Africa REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Chris Hani
Baragwanath Hospital Website
* University of Witwatersrand .
* Just Another Day at the World 's Biggest Hospital on NPR 's All Things Considered , 1 December 2003 .
Includes an audio report and a flash presentation .
*
Baragwanath History in South Africa :
The Baragwanath family history in South Africa .
* 24 hours of trauma TV documentary on the trauma unit by Aljazeera English .
9 January 2009 .