SAFE - HAVEN LAW Safe - haven laws ( also known in some states as " Baby Moses laws " , in reference to the religious scripture ) are statutes in the United States that decriminalize the leaving of unharmed infants with statutorily designated private persons so that the child becomes a ward of the state . "
Safe - haven " laws typically let parents remain nameless to the court , often using a numbered bracelet system as the only means of linking the baby to the parent .
Some states treat safe - haven surrenders as child dependency or abandonment , with a complaint being filed for such in juvenile court .
The parent either defaults or answers the complaint .
Others treat safe - haven surrenders as adoption surrenders , hence a waiver of parental rights ( see parental responsibility ) .
Police stations , hospitals , and fire stations are all typical locations to which the safe - haven law applies .
Texas was the first state to enact a " Baby Moses Law " in 1999 , although the Safe Place originates in Mobile , Alabama after a string of infanticides .
The Texan legislation was sponsored by a newcomer Republican member of the Texas House of Representatives , Geanie Morrison of Victoria , who is still serving in the chamber .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Supporters of safe - haven laws argue that the laws save lives by encouraging parents to surrender infants safely , providing an alternative to abortion , infanticide , or child abandonment .
Detractors argue that , because safe - haven laws do not require parents to be under stress , one parent will use the law largely to avoid notice to the non - surrendering parent .
The laws have also been criticized due to the fact that in some states , safe - haven laws favor mothers .
Critics also argue that safe - haven laws undercut temporary - surrender laws , which were enacted specifically for parents who are unsure about whether to keep or relinquish their children .
Supporters counter by arguing that anonymity is the only way to convince certain parents not to harm their infants , and that the benefit outweighs any claimed detriment .
Various father 's rights groups have also criticized how safe - haven laws can shun fathers out of the child 's life without their knowledge , much less consent .
Controversy arose out of the safe - haven law enacted in Nebraska in July 2008 : the Nebraska law in force at the time was interpreted to define a child as anyone under 18 , and resulted in the desertion of children older than infants , some as old as teenage years .
Under the prior version of the law , at least 35 children were dropped off in Nebraska hospitals in a four - month span , at least 5 of them from other US states .
The law was changed in November 2008 , allowing only infants up to 30 days old to be surrendered .
CONSTITUTIONALITY Section::::Constitutionality .
As of January 8 , 2006 , only one case had challenged the constitutionality of a safe - haven law .
Unable to allege personal harm , the plaintiff argued that the public had to know in advance that the State would not help parents hide children from each other .
Also , because anonymity thwarted a non - surrendering parent from the outset , and could be used by any parent arbitrarily , the law threatened the public generally .
The court dismissed the case , finding that the alleged harm did not rise to the level needed to justify a public action .
Thus , the plaintiff 's claim that the safe - haven law violated the separation of powers doctrine by circumventing the Supreme Court 's rule - making authority remained unaddressed .
But in 2007 , an Ohio Court of Common Pleas ruled that the entire Ohio Deserted Child Act was void for violating the Supreme Court 's rule - making authority .
In re Baby Boy Doe , 145 Ohio Misc.2d 1 , 2007-Ohio-7244 .
There , the parent had left the child at the hospital , expressing an intent to leave the child and to have the child adopted .
The parent never contacted the hospital or the state agency afterward .
The non - surrendering parent 's identity and location were not fully known .
After being granted temporary custody , the state agency moved for permanent custody , as needed for adoption .
The attorney and the guardian ad litem for the child argued that certain statutes of the safe haven act violated the separation of powers doctrine under Art IV , Sec .
5(B ) of the Ohio Constitution .
The court agreed , finding that the safe - haven laws ' notice and anonymity statutes conflicted with the notice provisions of Juvenile Rule 15 and the due diligence requirements of other court rules .
Juv .
R. 15 required issuing summons to the parties ordering them to appear before the court .
Because the main purpose of the safe - haven law was to keep parents anonymous and immune from prosecution , Juvenile Rule 15 undermined the safe - haven laws ' purpose .
But the anonymity and notice statutes being procedural , the court rules governed .
Because the notice and anonymity statutes could not be reconciled with the remaining safe - haven statutes , the whole safe - haven act was void .
The original safe - haven complaint and permanent custody motion were dismissed .
The case was not appealed .
CURRENT STATUS
Section::::Current status .
By 2008 , all 50 states had a form of safe - haven law .
As of 2013 , no one has used the law in Alaska .
SEE ALSO * Baby hatch
* Child abandonment NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* National Safe Haven Alliance lists links to specific state laws regarding safe - haven , including a map with law summaries for each state .
* Georgia 's Story ( YouTube Video )
* Safe Haven Laws
* California 's Safe Surrender for Newborns Law Explained
* Alaska 's Safe Surrender Public Service Announcement wins Emmy nod