POCAHONTAS II : JOURNEY TO A NEW WORLD Pocahontas II : Journey to a New World is a 1998 straight - to - video sequel to the 1995 Disney film Pocahontas .
While the first film dealt with her meeting with John Smith and the arrival of the British settlers in Jamestown , the sequel focuses on Pocahontas 's journey to England with John Rolfe to negotiate for peace between the two nations , although her death is omitted from the film 's ending .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In London , John Smith is ambushed by a group of soldiers with a warrant for his arrest and presumed dead in the ensuing confrontation ; Governor Ratcliffe has lied to King James ( being a personal friend of the King ) and framed Smith as the traitor from the first film in a plot to declare war against the Powhatan Nation and get ahold of the gold he still believes them to possess , all while avoiding punishment for his own crimes .
In order to prevent this , the King sends a young diplomat , John Rolfe , to bring Chief Powhatan to England for negotiations .
In the New World , Pocahontas , Powhatan 's daughter , mourns John Smith 's death but is eventually able to move on .
John Rolfe soon arrives , greeted by English civilians ( who by now have settled in Jamestown ) and a curious Pocahontas .
Rolfe eventually speaks with Powhatan , but he refuses to accompany him to England , so Pocahontas goes in her father 's stead , believing that she can bring about peace between the two nations .
Powhatan sends a bodyguard , Uttamatomakkin ( Uti ) to accompany Pocahontas .
Rolfe and Pocahontas have a rocky start , but gradually warm up to each other .
In England , Rolfe leaves Pocahontas at his mansion and meets with King James and Queen Anne , but James refuses to meet with Pocahontas despite Rolfe 's pleas .
Instead , per Ratcliffe 's suggestion , James invites both Rolfe and Pocahontas to an upcoming ball and promises that if Pocahontas impresses him by acting " civilised " , he will prevent the armada from sailing to Jamestown , but if she does not , he will declare war .
Knowing that Ratcliffe deliberately manipulated the King , Rolfe and his maid , Mrs. Jenkins , educate Pocahontas in the ways of British etiquette to prepare her .
At the ball , Pocahontas wins over the King and Queen with flattery and almost manages to prevent war , but a bear - baiting arranged by Ratcliffe and greatly enjoyed by the snobbish nobility infuriates Pocahontas and she openly accuses the King of savage behaviour .
James angrily orders Pocahontas and Uti imprisoned in the Tower of London , and declares war on the Powhatan tribe .
At his home , a despondent Rolfe is approached by a hooded stranger who helps him break Pocahontas and Uti out of the tower and take them to an inn , where the man reveals himself to be John Smith .
Smith implores Pocahontas to stay hidden with him , but she instead takes Rolfe 's advice and decides to try and stop the war one last time .
She openly confronts the King in the palace and reveals Smith , thus proving that Ratcliffe had been lying the entire time .
Realizing Ratcliffe 's treachery , James sends a battalion ( consisting of Pocahontas , Smith , Rolfe , Uti , and their animal friends ) to stop the armada .
They are successful in stopping the ships before they can set sail , but Ratcliffe refuses to give up and tries to kill Pocahontas .
Smith appears and fights Ratcliffe one - on - one until Ratcliffe draws a gun , but before he can fire , Rolfe sends him overboard with the ship 's mast .
Ratcliffe makes it back to the port , where he is arrested by the King .
Smith receives a royal pardon and his own ship from the King as a sign of apology .
Pocahontas and Rolfe , meanwhile , appear on the verge of admitting that they love each other .
Before they can , Smith appears and implores Pocahontas to accompany him on his new journeys around the world , but Pocahontas chooses otherwise and she and Smith part ways as friends .
As Pocahontas later prepares to return to Jamestown , she finds Rolfe waiting for her on the ship , having chosen to go and live with her in Jamestown ( with Uti remaining in London in his stead ) .
They kiss as the ship sails into the sunset .
CAST * Irene Bedard ( Judy Kuhn singing ) as Pocahontas : the main character .
Desiring everlasting peace between England and her people , she travels to London as a diplomat , falling in love with John Rolfe on the way .
* Billy Zane as John Rolfe : the diplomat sent to bring Chief Powhatan to England and who falls in love with Pocahontas to the point that he stands up against Ratcliffe and King James .
* Donal Gibson as Captain John Smith :
Pocahontas 's one time love , presumed dead after a confrontation with Ratcliffe .
He later resurfaces to aid Pocahontas and John Rolfe against Ratcliffe .
Gibson replaces his older brother , Mel , who voiced Smith in the first film .
* David Ogden Stiers as Governor Ratcliffe : the main villain .
Having lied to King James about the events in Jamestown , Ratcliffe becomes more determined than ever to go to war with the Powhatans in order to find his falsely speculated treasure , even if it means influencing the King .
* John Kassir as Meeko : Pocahontas 's pet raccoon , ever looking for fun .
* Russell Means as Chief Powhatan : Pocahontas 's father and chief of the Powhatans .
He refuses to travel to England , so Pocahontas goes in his stead .
* Frank Welker as Flit : Pocahontas 's hummingbird friend , now warmer towards strangers than before .
* Linda Hunt as Grandmother Willow : Pocahontas 's spiritual guardian .
She advises Pocahontas to go to England for peace .
* Danny Mann as Percy : once Ratcliffe 's pet dog , now living with Pocahontas and Meeko in Jamestown .
* Michelle St. John as Nakoma :
Pocahontas 's best friend , now married to a Powhatan who somewhat resembles Kocoum .
* Jim Cummings as King James : King of England .
While well - meaning , he is portrayed as a simple - minded buffoon who is very easily manipulated by Ratcliffe .
* Finola Hughes as Queen Anne : James 's wife , somewhat more intelligent and open than her husband .
* Jean Stapleton as Mrs. Jenkins : John Rolfe 's well - meaning housemaid .
* Brad Garrett as Uttamatomakkin : Pocahontas 's bodyguard , sent by Powhatan to watch over her .
His nickname is " Uti " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 29 % based on 7 reviews , with an average rating of 4.4/10 .
David Keyes from Cinemaphile rated the movie with 3/4 saying : " Normally , I 'd refuse to review such a sequel , but this attention must be paid here , because the original " Pocahontas " movie was not that great .
Usually , a Disney sequel jumps back a step or two from its predecessors , as it did with " Aladdin " .
"
Pocahontas II : Journey To A New World " does not – it stays at the same level of the original , by creating entertaining and colorful new characters which have usually been the best things about Disney animated movies .
"
Keyes went on to criticize the historical inaccuracy of the film .
The Movie Report rates the movie with 2 out of 4 stars writing : " While Journey to a New World is the best of the crop of Disney 's direct - to - video animation sequels , it 's still a slapdash effort , with none of gorgeous colors and animation of the first film , and little of its emotional resonance . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The soundtrack of the movie was released on November 23 , 2009 , from the Walt Disney Records .
*
Where Do I Go From Here ?
– Sung by Pocahontas ( Judy Kuhn )
*
* What a Day in London – Sung by Pocahontas ( Judy Kuhn )
*
* Wait '
Till He Sees You – Sung by Mrs. Jenkins and John Rolfe ( Jean Stapleton and Billy Zane )
*
*
Things Are Not What They Appear-
Sung by Radcliffe ( David Ogden Stiers )
* * Between Two Worlds – Sung by Pocahontas and John Rolfe ( Judy Kuhn and Billy Zane )
* REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS