HAEMOPHILIA IN EUROPEAN ROYALTY Haemophilia figured prominently in the history of European royalty in the 19th and 20th centuries .
Britain 's Queen Victoria , through two of her five daughters , Princess Alice and Princess Beatrice , passed the mutation to various royal houses across the continent , including the royal families of Spain , Germany and Russia .
Victoria 's son Prince Leopold , Duke of Albany also suffered from the disease .
For this reason , haemophilia was once popularly called " the royal disease " .
Tests on the remains of the Romanov imperial family show that the specific form of haemophilia passed down by Queen Victoria was probably the relatively rare Haemophilia B.
The sex - linked X chromosome disorder manifests almost exclusively in males , even though the genetic mutation causing the disorder is located on the X chromosome and can be inherited from the mother by male children or from either mother or father by female children .
This is because the trait is recessive , meaning that only one correctly - functioning copy of the blood clotting factor gene is necessary for normal clotting .
Females have two X chromosomes , and hence redundant copies of the blood clotting factor gene located on them .
A female who inherits a mutated copy on one X chromosome has also inherited a second X chromosome from the other parent that is likely to carry a non - mutated copy of the gene , capable of directing appropriate clotting .
Such a female , with normal clotting but possessing a single mutated copy of the gene , is called a carrier .
Males only possess a single X chromosome , inherited from their mother , having received a Y chromosome from their father instead of a second X.
If their sole X chromosome contains the haemophilia mutation they possess no second copy to provide for normal function , as in carrier females .
Each child of a carrier will have a 50 % chance of inheriting their mother 's mutation , of being a haemophiliac ( sons ) or carrier ( daughters ) .
The daughter of a male haemophiliac will always inherit his mutation , while a son can not ever inherit it .
A female will only be affected with haemophilia in the rare circumstance that she inherits mutated X chromosomes from both a haemophiliac father and a carrier mother .
No case of such double inheritance is known among Queen Victoria 's descendants .
Although an individual 's haemophilia can usually be traced in the ancestry , in about 30 % of cases there is no family history of the disorder , and the condition is speculated to be the result of spontaneous mutation in an ancestor .
Victoria 's appears to have been a spontaneous or de novo mutation
and she is usually considered the source of the disease in modern cases of haemophilia among her descendants .
Queen Victoria 's father , Prince Edward , Duke of Kent , was not a haemophiliac , and the probability of her mother having had a lover who suffered from haemophilia is minuscule given the low life expectancy of 19th - century haemophiliacs .
Her mother , Victoria , Duchess of Kent , was not known to have a family history of the disease , although it is possible that she was a carrier , but among her children only Victoria received the mutated copy .
The rate of spontaneous mutation is known to increase with paternal age , and Victoria 's father was 51 at her birth .
Queen Victoria 's eldest daughter , Victoria , Princess Royal , apparently escaped the haemophilia gene as it did not appear in any of her matrilineal descendants .
Victoria 's fifth child , Helena , may or may not have been a carrier ; two healthy sons survived to adulthood , but two other sons died in infancy and her two daughters did not have issue .
Victoria 's sixth child , Louise , died without issue .
Queen Victoria 's sons Edward , Alfred , and Arthur were not haemophiliacs ; however , her daughters Alice and Beatrice were confirmed carriers of the gene , and Victoria 's son Leopold was a sufferer of haemophilia , making his daughter Princess Alice , Countess of Athlone a carrier as well .
QUEEN VICTORIA FAMILY TREE
Section::::Queen Victoria family tree .
Children Victoria , German Empress ( 1840–1901 ) Issue : Wilhelm II of Germany , Charlotte , Duchess of Saxe - Meiningen , Prince Henry of Prussia , Prince Sigismund of Prussia , Viktoria , Princess Adolf of Schaumburg - Lippe , Prince Waldemar of Prussia , Sophia , Queen of the Hellenes , Margaret , Landgravine of Hesse - Kassel Edward VII , King of the United Kingdom
( 1841–1910 ) Issue : Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale , George V , Louise , Princess Royal , Princess Victoria , Maud , Queen of Norway , Prince Alexander John Princess Alice , Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1843–1878 )
Issue :
Victoria Mountbatten , Marchioness of Milford Haven , Grand Duchess Elizabeth Feodorovna of Russia , Irene , Princess Henry of Prussia , Ernest Louis , Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine , Prince Friedrich , Alexandra Feodorovna , Empress of Russia , Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine Prince Alfred , Duke of Saxe - Coburg and Gotha ( 1844–1900 )
Issue : Alfred , Hereditary Prince of Saxe - Coburg and Gotha , Marie , Queen of Romania , Victoria Melita , Grand Duchess of Russia , Alexandra , Princess of Hohenlohe - Langenburg , Princess Beatrice , Duchess of Galliera Helena , Princess Christian of
Schleswig - Holstein ( 1846–1923 ) Issue : Prince Christian Victor , Albert , Duke of Schleswig - Holstein , Princess Helena Victoria , Princess Marie Louise , Prince Harald Princess Louise , Duchess of Argyll ( 1848–1939 )
No issue Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn
( 1850–1942 ) Issue : Margaret , Crown Princess of Sweden , Prince Arthur of Connaught , Princess Patricia , Lady Ramsay Prince Leopold , Duke of Albany
( 1853–1884 ) Issue :
Princess Alice , Countess of Athlone , Charles Edward , Duke of Saxe - Coburg and Gotha Beatrice , Princess Henry of Battenberg ( 1857–1944 )
Issue : Alexander Mountbatten , 1st Marquess of Carisbrooke , Victoria Eugenie , Queen of Spain , Lord Leopold Mountbatten , Prince Maurice of Battenberg PRINCESS ALICE Section::::Princess Alice .
Alice ( 1843–1878 ) , Victoria 's third child , and wife of the future Grand Duke Louis IV of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1837–1892 ) , passed it on to at least three of her children : Irene , Friedrich , and Alix .
* Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1863–1950 ) , later Marchioness of Milford Haven , wife of Prince Louis of Battenberg ( 1854–1921 ) and maternal grandmother to Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , apparently was not a carrier .
*
Princess Elizabeth of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1864–1918 ) , later Grand Duchess Elizabeth Feodorovna of Russia through her marriage to Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich ( 1857–1905 ) , may or may not have been a carrier .
Following her husband 's assassination , she became a nun and was childless when killed by the Bolsheviks in 1918 .
* Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1866–1953 ) , later Princess Heinrich of Prussia , through her marriage to Prince Heinrich of Prussia ( 1862–1929 ) , passed it on to two of her three sons :
* Prince Waldemar of Prussia ( 1889–1945 ) .
Survived to age 56 ; had no issue .
* Prince Heinrich of Prussia ( 1900–1904 ) .
Died at age 4 .
* Prince Friedrich of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1870–1873 ) .
Died before his third birthday of bleeding on the brain resulting from a fall from a third - story window ( which would almost certainly have been fatal even if he had not had haemophilia ) .
* Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1872–1918 ) , later Empress Alexandra Feodorovna of Russia through her marriage to Tsar Nicholas II ( 1868–1918 ) .
Alix had a marriage proposal from her first cousin , Prince Albert Victor ( 1864–1892 ) , eldest son of the then Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII ) ; had she accepted , haemophilia could have returned to the direct line of succession in Britain .
* Grand Duchess Maria ( 1899–1918 ) , Nicholas and Alexandra 's third daughter , was thought by some to have been a symptomatic carrier because she haemorrhaged during a tonsillectomy .
DNA testing of the Romanov family remains in 2009 showed that one of the four daughters , thought to be Maria by American researchers and Anastasia by Russian researchers , was a carrier .
* Tsarevitch Alexei ( 1904–1918 ) was murdered with his family by the Bolsheviks at the age of 13 .
Alexei 's haemophilia was one of the factors contributing to the collapse of Imperial Russia during the Russian Revolution of 1917 .
* Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1874–1878 ) , Alice 's seventh and last child , may or may not have been a carrier .
She died of diphtheria at the age of four .
PRINCE LEOPOLD Section::::Prince Leopold .
Leopold ( 1853–1884 ) , Victoria 's eighth child , was the first member of the family to manifest haemophilia ; he died at age 30 from bleeding after a minor fall , only two years after marrying Princess Helena of Waldeck and Pyrmont .
( 1861–1922 )
He passed the gene on to his only daughter , as all of the daughters of a haemophiliac father would inherit the gene : * Princess Alice of Albany ( 1883–1981 ) , later Countess of Athlone , who in turn passed it on to her elder son : * Prince Rupert of Teck ( 1907–1928 ) , who died at age 20 , bleeding to death after a car accident .
Alice 's younger son Prince Maurice of Teck died in infancy , so it is not known if he was a sufferer .
Her daughter Lady May Abel Smith ( 1906–1994 ) , Leopold 's granddaughter , has living descendants none of whom has been known to have or to transmit haemophilia .
Leopold 's posthumous son , Charles Edward ( 1884–1954 ) , was unaffected , as a father can not pass the gene to a son .
PRINCESS BEATRICE Section::::Princess Beatrice .
Beatrice ( 1857–1944 ) , Victoria 's ninth and last child , and wife of Prince Henry of Battenberg ( 1858–1896 ) passed it on to at least two , if not three , of her four children : * Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg ( 1887–1969 ) , later Queen Victoria Eugenia of Spain through her marriage to King Alfonso XIII ( 1886–1940 ) , who passed it on to * Infante Alfonso of Spain , Prince of Asturias ( 1907–1938 ) .
Died at age 31 , bleeding to death after a car accident .
* Infante Gonzalo ( 1914–1934 ) .
Died at age 19 , bleeding to death after a car accident .
* Victoria Eugenie 's two daughters , Infantas Beatriz ( 1909–2002 ) and Maria Cristina of Spain ( 1911–1996 ) , both have living descendants none of whom has been known to have or to transmit haemophilia .
* Prince Leopold of Battenberg ( 1889–1922 ) , later , Lord Leopold Mountbatten .
Died at age 32 during a knee operation .
* Prince Maurice of Battenberg ( 1891–1914 ) .
Killed in action in World War I at the age of 23 .
Maurice 's haemophilia is disputed by various sources : It seems unlikely that a known haemophiliac would be allowed to serve in combat .
TODAY Section::::Today .
No living member of the present or past reigning dynasties of Europe is known to have symptoms of haemophilia or is believed to carry the gene for it .
The last descendant of Victoria known to suffer from the disease was Infante Don Gonzalo , born in 1914 , although dozens of descendants of Queen Victoria 's ( including males descended only through females ) have been born since 1914 .
However , because the haemophilia gene usually remains hidden in females who only inherit the gene from one parent , and female descendants of Victoria have left many descendants in royal and noble families , there remains a small chance that the disease could appear again , especially among the female - line Spanish descendants of Princess Beatrice .
* Infanta Beatríz 's two sons were not affected by the disease .
Beatriz 's eldest daughter , Sandra , has two children , a son and daughter .
Her son is not affected , and her daughter has two sons , who are apparently unaffected .
Beatríz 's youngest daughter , Olimpia , had six children ; her two eldest daughters , Beatrice and Sibilla are both married with children , none of whom , in the case of their sons , appear to be haemophiliacs .
If Sibilla 's descendants were to express or transmit the gene , however , another reigning dynasty of Europe would , in the 21st century , join the rest of the reigning families that inherited the disease from Queen Victoria .
Olimpia 's youngest daughters are still unmarried , but there is still a chance they could be carriers .
Another daughter , Laura , died as a child , as did her only son , Paul , the latter of whom was apparently not a haemophiliac .
* Infanta Maria Cristina had four daughters , all potential carriers .
Her eldest daughter , Vittoria Eugenie , had a daughter and three sons , the latter all apparently unaffected .
The Infanta 's second daughter , Giovanna , had only one child , an unaffected son .
Her two youngest daughters , Donna Maria Teresa and Donna Anna Sandra , also have only daughters .
Of these , only one , Maria Teresa 's second daughter , Isabel , is married , but she also has only a daughter .
There is a chance the disease may remain in this branch of Princess Beatrice 's descendants .
CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER
Section::::Chronological order .
Queen Victoria died in 1901
so she lived to see her youngest son and a grandson die from the disease .
A great - grandson was diagnosed with the disease as well .
The gene can be passed down the female line without a haemophiliac son being born , but as the family line continues and no haemophiliac sons are born , it becomes less likely that a certain ancestor had the gene and passed it on through the female line .
+ Men who died of Haemophilia in Order of Death !
# ! !
Name ! !
Death!!Relation to Queen Victoria TYPE OF HAEMOPHILIA DISCOVERED Section::::Type of haemophilia discovered .
Because the last known descendant of Queen Victoria with haemophilia died in the 1940s , the exact type of haemophilia found in this family remained unknown until 2009 .
Using genetic analysis of the remains of the assassinated Romanov dynasty , and specifically Tsarevich Alexei , Rogaev et al . were able to determine that the " Royal Disease " is actually haemophilia B. Specifically , they found a single - nucleotide change in the gene for clotting Factor IX that causes incorrect RNA splicing and produces a truncated , nonfunctional protein .
NOTES REFERENCES AND EXTERNAL LINKS
* Potts , D. M. Queen Victoria 's Gene .
Sutton Publishing , 1999 . .
* " Hemophilia : The Royal Disease " * Family tree of Queen Victoria and her descendants
* Haemophilia in Queen Victoria 's Descendants .