CALOR GAS Calor Gas is a brand of bottled butane and propane which is available in Britain and Ireland .
It comes in cylinders , which have a special gas regulator .
The company was formed in 1935 , and is one of the UK 's largest suppliers of liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) .
It is currently servicing around 4 million homes and businesses , supplying LPG to power gas appliances from central heating and hot water , as well as cookers , fires and barbecues .
The company predominantly supplies LPG to homes in rural areas where there is no mains natural gas supply .
In the United Kingdom , Calor is part of the SHV Gas Group , a private Dutch company .
Calor originally dealt only with cooking and heating appliances , but now covers a wider range of products for home , business , and automotive fuels .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1934 , Ritchie Gill , a Cornishman who had been working in the US , returned to England .
He spotted an opportunity for a product successfully used in America – liquefied petroleum gas .
Gill coined the name Calor Gas and in January 1935 he set up Modern Gas & Equipment Co. Ltd , based in London .
In August 1935 the trade was transferred to the Calor ( Distributing )
Co. Limited .
The business expanded as people in rural areas of the UK realised the benefits of this new fuel – LPG .
So by 1939 the company had six offices in the UK : a head office in London and five regional offices .
Calor ( Scotland ) had been founded and in Ireland , Calor gas was being distributed by Messrs. McMullen Ltd. , which was later purchased by Calor .
In 1947 , there was an exceptionally hard winter which led to a major change in the way that Calor was distributed .
Up to this point Calor had been relying upon rail transport for the distribution of the LPG .
Calor signed a contract with PX ( Carriers ) Ltd. , to deliver cylinders by road .
The first wholly owned filling plant was built at Saxham , near Bury St. Edmunds , Suffolk and a further two filling plants were built in the 1950s to give Calor even wider coverage .
These two plants were at Millbrook near Southampton ( 1956 ) and Port Clarence near Middlesbrough ( 1959 ) .
The Millbrook filling plant was closed in 2001 ; however the sales and service centre remains , selling gas and gas appliances .
The 1950s saw the introduction of the Flavel B500 cooker , which used Calor gas ; it became a great success story with caravan owners and smaller households .
1956 saw the birth of Calor 's industrial division and installation of the first ' bulk propane ' tank at the Meredith & Drew biscuit factory in Newmarket .
In 1963 Calor Ltd. was formed .
1966 saw a new head office being acquired in Slough , which led to over 300 employees moving into this location .
In 1967 , Calor was granted a Royal Warrant for the supply of liquefied petroleum gas to Her Majesty the Queen .
The company was later granted a second Warrant , this time for supplying Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
The Queen Mother .
In 1969 the Imperial Continental Gas Association acquired all the shares in the Company that it did not already own .
From the early 1970s onwards sales of cabinet heaters , and with them sales of butane in cylinders , escalated enormously , beginning with Super Ser which rapidly replaced the paraffin heater as the nation 's number one choice for spot heating .
In a decade , the market for cabinet heaters and the gas they burned grew from nothing to £ 100 million p.a .
This led to increasing demand for storage space , which led to Calor investing in the two largest storage facilities .
The first was purchased in 1976 : a 30,000 tonne refrigerated storage tank at Felixstowe in Suffolk .
The second was a joint venture with Conoco to excavate a vast underground cavern on South Humberside , capable of containing some 100,000 tonnes of gas supplied from an adjacent sea terminal .
This facility , opened in 1985 , gave Calor the ability to overcome short term supply difficulties and to cope with major changes in demand brought on by extremes of weather .
During the 1980s , Calor 's domestic central heating and industrial markets continued to expand and in 1982 the company 's head office moved to a site near Slough .
Despite great efforts to establish a nationwide network of outlets , Calor Autogas ( vehicle propane ) never quite reached expectations , due largely to the Government 's inability to recognise its considerable environmental advantages by reducing duty .
However , the fuel did become very popular for fork lift trucks , helped greatly by the launch , in 1989 , of Calor 's exhaust purification system , EPS2000 , which enabled vehicles to be used both indoors and outside .
In 1986 the Company 's parent , Imperial Continental Gas Association plc , rejected a bid from Gulf Resources & Chemical Corporation , a company controlled by the Barclay brothers .
Instead in 1987 Imperial Continental Gas Association broke itself up into Calor Group and Contibel ( now owned by Tractebel ) .
In 1988 the privately owned Dutch company , SHV became a significant shareholder , acquiring 40 % of Calor Group 's equity .
In 1991 , a joint venture company involving Calor , SHV and Primagaz ( in which SHV holds a 50 % stake ) had been started in both Poland and Slovakia .
This was then followed by Hungary in 1992 .
In 1997 SHV acquired the rest of Calor 's shares .
In 2002 Calor opened 12 Customer Operations Centres at Grangemouth , Port Clarence , Stoney Stanton , Elland , Ellesmere Port , Coryton , Cranbrook , Saxham , Fawley , Neath , and Newbury .
In December 2005
The Canvey LNG project was announced which commenced with a feasibility study into the development of a strategic LPG import and regasification facility at the existing Calor LNG terminal at Canvey Island , Essex UK .
The project is led by Calor Gas and also includes LNG Japan Corporation , ( Joint Venture of Sumitomo Corporation and Sojitz Corporation ) .
Following this study Centrica has now been selected as a gas supply partner and would hold equity in the facility , together with capacity rights enabling it to deliver supplies to their British Gas customers from a range of international sources .
A full scale planning application and project plan is now being developed .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
Calor provide gas both for use in bulk tanks ( which may be stored above or below ground ) and in smaller gas cylinders .
BULK TANKS Section::::Bulk tanks .
Calor can provide a variety of sizes in both above- and below - ground formats .
Underground tanks are sometimes chosen so as not to detract from areas of natural beauty .
Tanks are available with a " Think Tank " monitor , which use Telemetry to automatically inform Calor when stocks are low so that the gas can then be refuelled without intervention by the tank 's owner .
GAS CYLINDERS Section::::Gas cylinders .
Calor 's largest cylinder ( 47 kg ) can be used in packs ( 4 x 47 kg gas cylinders ) which are able to supply central heating systems of up to 60 kW as well as cookers and fires .
When one pair runs low the valve automatically switches to the second pair so that the supply is continuous .
For leisure use such as caravanning and barbecuing , Calor retail butane , propane and Patio Gas ( an alternative brand name for propane ) cylinders , all of which come in a number of sizes .
A new Calor Lite cylinder , produced from lightweight steel , released in 2008 , was targeted at the caravan market .
Calor also provides LPG for business customers .
AUTOGAS Section::::Autogas .
Calor is involved in the supply of autogas in the UK and Ireland - LPG intended as a vehicle fuel .
There are 115,000 vehicles in the UK that run on LPG , which emits 20 % less carbon than petrol , and produces 120 times less particulate matter than diesel .
CALOR VILLAGE OF THE YEAR
Section::::Calor Village of the Year .
Calor fund and organise the Calor Village of the Year competition in England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , which over 1,000 villages enter every year .
Calor is a member of the Business in the Community ' PerCent Club ' investing more than 1 % of its pre - tax profit in community projects .
The first Calor UK Village of the Year 2008 was announced on 2 December 2008 as the Isle of Barra in the Western Isles of Scotland .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Calor Homepage * Calor Ireland Homepage