BUSINESS DAY
A business day is considered every official work day of the week ; another common term is work day .
These are the days between and holding from Monday through Friday , and do not include public holidays and weekends .
The definition of a business day varies by region .
It depends on the local workweek which is dictated by local customs , religions , and business operations .
For example , in the United States and much of the Western world , they are typically Monday to Friday .
Within the European Union , the normal business days are Monday to Friday based on the working time regulation of the EU .
The length of a business day varies by era , by region , by industry , and by company .
Prevalent norms have included the 8-hour day and the 10-hour day , but various lengths , from 4 to 16 hours , have been normal in certain times and places .
Business days are commonly used by couriers when determining the arrival date of a package .
If a courier ships a parcel on a Thursday that will be delivered in " two business days " , it will arrive on the following Monday if neither Friday nor Monday are a holiday .
In finance , how business days are defined are called business day conventions and determine how payments are settled on contracts such as interest rate swaps .
SHIFTS AND TRENDS Section::::Shifts and trends .
The introduction of flex time introduces the internet as a more easily globalized and offshored workforce .
The notion of a business day has come under a certain degree of challenge .
Information - based companies with a limited dependence on physical goods have less of a need to distinguish a weekend day from a weekday .
Indeed , to many , there is no difference at all .
These companies construe a business day to be any day on which they provide service .
Some businesses conduct business transactions and operations on a 24/7 basis due to the nature of the field .
Such businesses include hotels , hospitals , police and fire departments , gas stations , and airports .
With the introduction of flex time , the significance of the traditional business day is declining .
Although the 8 hour work day still remains as a standard for many industries , this trend is expected to decline further during the coming years .
GERMAN - SPEAKING COUNTRIES
Section::::German - speaking countries .
In Germany , Austria and Switzerland , two German words of somewhat different meaning are used to describe business or working days .
One is Werktag , a legal term applied to all calendar days except Sundays and public holidays ; it includes most Saturdays .
Werktage are days on which businesses such as retail shops and institutions such as schools are generally allowed to operate ( see also Ladenschlussgesetz ) .
In contrast , Arbeitstag refers to a day on which someone actually works .
For most employees , these are Monday to Friday .
However , for example , a firefighter might have an Arbeitstag on Sunday even though it is legally not a Werktag .
SEE ALSO
*
Calendar day
* Day count convention
* Workweek and weekend REFERENCES