PRIDE OF AMERICA MS Pride of America is a cruise ship built in the United States and is operated by Norwegian Cruise Lines .
Inaugurated during the 2005/2006 cruise season as the first new US - flagged cruise ship in nearly fifty years , Pride of America was designed to pay homage to the spirit of the United States of America , from the patriotic artwork on the hull to the American - themed public spaces .
HISTORY Section::::History .
For much of her early build history , Pride of America was known as Project America 1 ; the first of a pair of 70,000 ton cruise ships to be built at the Litton - Ingalls shipyard in Mississippi with heavy federal subsidies .
Project America was intended as a means of improving the competitiveness of American shipyards in performing commercial ( non - military ) construction , as well as creating the first U.S.-registered passenger ships of any real size in decades .
Project America program collapsed in 2001 , when American Classic Voyages , the company that was to operate the ships under its United States Lines division , filed for bankruptcy .
Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd acquired the unfinished ship and had her towed to Germany for completion as Pride of America for their newly launched NCL America division .
In the process , she was lengthened from .
to , increasing the gross tonnage from 72,000 to more than 80,000 .
Under NCL America , the ship was initially slated for completion in 2004 , but the delivery date was pushed back to 2005 after a major storm hit the Lloyd Werft shipyard and caused considerable damage to the vessel which also sank at her berth .
A special exemption on the part of the U.S. government allowed the modified ship , and her mostly German - built sister , to attain U.S. registry .
After the transfer of Pride of Aloha and Pride of Hawaii , she is currently the only U.S.-registered major cruise ship serving the Hawaiian market from Honolulu .
There are 15 food and beverage outlets and services on board :
Included restaurants : Liberty and Skyline Restaurants , Aloha Café , Cadillac Diner , Key West Bar & Grill , East Meets West and 24h Room Service .
Speciality restaurants ( for an additional cover charge ) :
John Adams Coffee Bar , Dolce Gelato Shop , Teppanyaki , Sushi Bar , Jefferson 's Bistro , Cagney 's Steakhouse , La Cucina and the Moderno Churrascaria .
MAJOR REFURBISHMENTS 2013 Section::::Major refurbishments .
Section::::2013 .
Pride of America entered a fourteen day dry dock on March 23 , 2013 in Honolulu , Hawaii and received the addition of twenty four suites , four studio staterooms and four inside staterooms ; Moderno Churrascaria , the line 's signature Brazilian - style steakhouse ; ship wide wireless internet connectivity ; new carpeting throughout ; flat screen televisions in all staterooms ; updated décor ; upgrades to the fitness center ; new directional signage ; renovations to the gift shop , photo gallery and art gallery ; and much more .
2016
Section::::2016 .
Pride of America entered a twenty four day dry dock period in February 2016 , at the BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair facility .
Normally , the ship uses facilities in Pearl Harbor , but these were already fully booked .
Described as " its first major refresh since the ship launched in 2005 " , the ship is due to receive improvements or renovations in the spa , passenger cabins , restaurants , and also to receive the addition of a wedding chapel .
VESSEL CLASS Section::::Vessel class .
Pride of America is a one - off ship design .
She was originally designed for United States Lines under the class name Project America .
Project America was originally to have two ships in the class .
LIVERY Section::::Livery .
Pride of America 's livery consists of red , white , and blue stars and stripes and a stylized bald eagle .
REFERENCES NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS