VIRAL TRANSFORMATION
Viral transformation is the change in growth , phenotype , or indefinite reproduction of cells caused by the introduction of inheritable material .
Through this process , a virus causes harmful transformations of an in vivo cell or cell culture .
The term can also be understood as DNA transfection using a viral vector .
Viral transformation can occur both naturally and medically .
Natural transformations can include viral cancers , such as human papillomavirus ( HPV ) and T - cell Leukemia virus type I. Hepatitis B and C are also the result of natural viral transformation of the host cells .
Viral transformation can also be induced for use in medical treatments .
Cells that have been virally transformed can be differentiated from untransformed cells through a variety of growth , surface , and intracellular observations .
The growth of transformed cells can be impacted by a loss of growth limitation caused by cell contact , less oriented growth , and high saturation density .
Transformed cells can lose their tight junctions , increase their rate of nutrient transfer , and increase their protease secretion .
Transformation can also affect the cytoskeleton and change in the quantity of signal molecules .
TYPE Section::::Type .
There are three types of viral infections that can be considered under the topic of viral transformation .
These are cytocidal , persistent , and transforming infections .
Cytocidal infections can cause fusion of adjacent cells , disruption of transport pathways including ions and other cell signals , disruption of DNA , RNA and protein synthesis , and nearly always leads to cell death .
Persistent infections involve viral material that lays dormant within a cell until activated by some stimulus .
This type of infection usually causes few obvious changes within the cell but can lead to long chronic diseases .
Transforming infections are also referred to as malignant transformation .
This infection causes a host cell to become malignant and can be either cytocidal ( usually in the case of RNA viruses ) or persistent ( usually in the case of DNA viruses ) .
Cells with transforming infections undergo immortalization and inherit the genetic material to produce tumors .
Since the term cytocidal , or cytolytic , refers to cell death , these three infections are not mutually exclusive .
Many transforming infections by DNA tumor viruses are also cytocidal .
Table 1 :
Cellular effects of viral infections ! ! ! ! !
Genetic ! !
Cell Fate ! !
Morphological ! !
Biochemical ! !
Physiological Rounding of the cell Fusion with adjacent cells Appearance of inclusion bodies Inhibit DNA , RNA , and protein synthesis Interfere with sub - cellular interactions
Insufficient movement of ions
Formation of secondary messengers Activation of cellular cascades Fusion with adjacent cells
Appearance of inclusion bodies Budding Immune responses limit viral spread
Antigen - antibody complexes can incorporate viral antigens causing inflammation Rare until stimulated Unlimited cell replication Inactivates tumor suppressor proteins Impairs cell cycle regulation Unlimited cell replication CYTOCIDAL INFECTIONS Section::::Cytocidal infections .
Cytocidal infections are often associated with changes in cell morphology , physiology and are thus important for the complete viral replication and transformation .
Cytopathic Effects , often include a change in cell 's morphology such as fusion with adjacent cells to form polykaryocytes as well as the synthesis of nuclear and cytoplasmic inclusion bodies .
Physiological changes include the insufficient movement of ions , formation of secondary messengers , and activation of cellular cascades to continue cellular activity .
Biochemically , many viruses inhibit the synthesis of host DNA , RNA , proteins directly or even interfere with protein - protein , DNA - protein , RNA - protein interactions at the subcellular level .
Genotoxicity involves breaking , fragmenting , or rearranging chromosomes of the host .
Lastly , biologic effects include the viruses ' ability to affect the activity of antigens and immunologlobulins in the host cell .
There are two types of cytocidal infections , productive and abortive .
In productive infections , additional infectious viruses are produced .
Abortive infections do not produce infectious viruses .
One example of a productive cytocidal infection is the herpes virus .
PERSISTENT INFECTIONS
Section::::Persistent infections .
There are three types of persistent infections , latent , chronic and slow , in which the virus stays inside the host cell for prolonged periods of time .
During latent infections there is minimal to no expression of infected viral genome .
The genome remains within the host cell until the virus is ready for replication .
Chronic infections have similar cellular effects as acute cytocidal infections but there is a limited number of progeny and viruses involved in transformation .
Lastly , slow infections have a longer incubation period in which no physiological , morphological or subcellular changes may be involved .
TRANSFORMING INFECTIONS
Section::::Transforming infections .
Transformation infections is limited to abortive or restrictive infections .
This constitutes the broadest category of infections as it can include both cytocidal and persistent infection .
Viral transformation is most commonly understood as transforming infections , so the remainder of the article focuses on detailing transforming infections .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
In order for a cell to be transformed by a virus , the viral DNA must be entered into the host cell .
The simplest consideration is viral transformation of a bacterial cell .
This process is called lysogeny .
As shown in Figure 2 , a bacteriophage lands on a cell and pins itself to the cell .
The phage can then penetrate the cell membrane and inject the viral DNA into the host cell .
The viral DNA can then either lay dormant until stimulated by a source such as UV light or it can be immediately taken up by the host 's genome .
In either case the viral DNA will replicate along with the original host DNA during cell replication causing two cells to now be infected with the virus .
The process will continue to propagate more and more infected cells .
This process is in contrast to the lytic cycle where a virus only uses the host cell 's replication machinery to replicate itself before destroying the host cell .
TRANSFORMATION OF THE HOST CELL Section::::Transformation of the host cell .
Viral transformation disrupts the normal expression of the host cell 's genes in favor of expressing a limited number of viral genes .
The virus also can disrupt communication between cells and cause cells to divide at an increased rate .
PHYSIOLOGICAL Section::::Physiological .
Viral transformation can impose characteristically determinable features upon a cell .
Typical phenotypic changes include high saturation density , anchorage - independent growth , loss of contact inhibition , loss of orientated growth , immortalization , disruption of the cell 's cytoskeleton .
BIOCHEMICAL
Section::::Biochemical .
Viral genes are expressed through the use of the host cell 's replication machinery ; therefore , many viral genes have promoters that support binding of many transcription factors found naturally in the host cells .
These transcription factors along with the virus ' own proteins can repress or activate genes from both the virus and the host cell 's genome .
Many viruses can also increase the production of the cell 's regulatory proteins .
GENETIC
Section::::Genetic .
Depending on the virus , a variety of genetic changes can occur in the host cell .
In the case of a lytic cycle virus , the cell will only survive long enough to the replication machinery to be used to create additional viral units .
In other cases , the viral DNA will persist within the host cell and replicate as the cell replicates .
This viral DNA can either be incorporated into the host cell 's genetic material or persist as a separate genetic vector .
Either case can lead to damage of the host cell 's chromosomes .
It is possible that the damage can be repaired ; however , the most common result is an instability in the original genetic material or suppression or alteration of the gene expression .
ASSAYS Section::::Assays .
An assay is an analytic tool often used in a laboratory setting in order to assess or measure some quality of a target entity .
In virology , assays can be used to differentiate between transformed and non - transformed cells .
Varying the assay used , changes the selective pressure on the cells and therefore can change what properties are selected in the transformed cells .
Three common assays used are the focus forming assay , the Anchorage independent growth assay , and the reduced serum assay .
The focus forming assay ( FFA ) is used to grow cells containing a transforming oncogene on a monolayer of non - transformed cells .
The transformed cells will form raised , dense spots on the sample as they grow without contact inhibition .
This assay is highly sensitive compared to other assays used for viral analysis , such as the yield reduction assay .
An example of the Anchorage independent growth assay is the soft agar assay .
The assay is assessing the cells ' ability to grow in a gel or viscous fluid .
Transformed cells can grow in this environment and are considered anchorage independent .
Cells that can only grow when attached to a solid surface are anchorage dependent untransformed cells .
This assay is considered one of the most stringent for detection of malignant transformation In a reduced serum assay , cells are assayed by exploiting the changes in cell serum requirements .
Non - transformed cells require at least a 5 % serum medium in order to grow ; however , transformed cells can grow in an environment with significantly less serum .
EXAMPLES OF NATURAL TRANSFORMATION Section::::Examples of Natural Transformation .
Natural transformation is the viral transformation of cells without the interference of medical science .
This is the most commonly considered form of viral transformation and includes many cancers and diseases , such as HIV , Hepatitis B , and T - cell Leukemia virus type I. VIRAL ONCOGENESIS Section::::Viral oncogenesis .
As many as 20 % of human tumors are caused by viruses .
Some such viruses that are commonly recognized include HPV , T - cell Leukemia virus type I , and hepatitis B. Viral oncogenesis are most common with DNA and RNA tumor viruses , most frequently the retroviruses .
There are two types of oncogenic retroviruses : acute transforming viruses and non - acute transforming viruses .
Acute transforming viruses induce a rapid tumor growth since they carry viral oncogenes in their DNA / RNA to induce such growth .
An example of an acute transforming virus is the Rous Sarcoma Virus ( RSV ) that carry the v - src oncogene .
v - Src is part of the c - src , which is a cellular proto - oncogene that stimulates rapid cell growth and expansion .
A non - acute transforming virus on the other hand induces a slow tumor growth , since it does not carry any viral oncogenes .
It induces tumor growth by transcriptionally activating the proto - oncogenes particularly the long terminal repeat ( LTR ) in the proto - oncogenes .
Viral Oncogonesis through transformation can occur via 2 mechanisms :
* The tumor virus can introduce and express a " transforming " gene either through the integration of DNA or RNA into the host genome .
*
* The tumor virus can alter expression on preexisting genes of the host .
* One or both of these mechanisms can occur in the same host cell .
HEPATITIS B Section::::Hepatitis B.
The Hepatitis B viral protein
X is believed to cause hepatocellular carcinoma through transformation , typically of liver cells .
The viral DNA is incorporated into the host cell 's genome causing rapid cell replication and tumor growth .
PAPILLOMAVIRUSES Section::::Papillomaviruses .
Papillomaviruses typically target epithelial cells and cause everything from warts to cervical cancer .
When human papillomavirus ( HPV ) transforms a cell , it interferes with the function of cellular proteins while degrading other cellular proteins .
HERPESVIRUSES Section::::Herpesviruses .
The herpesviruses , Kaposi 's sarcoma - associated herpesvirus and Epstein - Barr virus , are believed to cause cancer in humans , such as Kaposi 's sarcoma , Burkitt 's lymphoma , and nasopharyngeal carcinoma .
Although genes have been identified in these viruses that cause transformation , the manner in which the virus transforms and replicates the host cell is not understood .
RETROVIRUSES Section::::Retroviruses .
The retroviruses include T - cell Leukemia virus type
I , HIV , and Rous Sarcoma Virus ( RSV ) .
The viral gene tax is expressed when the T - cell Leukemia virus transforms a cell altering the expression of cellular growth control genes and causing the transformed cells to become cancerous .
HIV works differently by not directly causing cells to become cancerous but by instead making those infected more susceptible to lymphoma and Kaposi 's sarcoma .
Many other retroviruses contain the three genes , gag , pol , and env , which do not directly cause transformation or tumor formation .
HIV Section::::HIV .
Human immunodeficiency virus is a viral infection that targets the lymph nodes .
HIV binds to the immune CD4 cell and reverse transcriptase alters the host cell genome to allow integration of the viral DNA via integrase .
The virus replicates using the host cell 's machinery and then leaves the cell to infect additional cells via budding .
MEDICAL APPLICATIONS Section::::Medical Applications .
There are many applications in which viral transformation can be artificially induced in a cell culture in order to treat an illness or other condition .
A cell culture is infected with a virus causing the transformation ; transformed cells can then be used to either produce treatments or be directly introduced into the body .
PERSONALIZED TYPE
I INTERFERONS
Section::::Personalized type
I interferons .
Type I interferons ( IFNs ) are used to treat a wide variety of medical conditions including hepatitis C , cancers , viral and inflammatory diseases .
IFNs can either be extracted from a natural source , such as cultured human cells or blood leukocytes , or they can be manufactured with recombinant DNA technologies .
Most of these IFN treatments have a low response rate .
The use of viral transformation of the Epstein - Barr virus ( EBV ) has been recommended to create personalized IFNs .
In this process , primary B lymphocytes are transformed with EBV .
These cells can then be used to produce IFNs specific for the patient from which the B lymphocytes were extracted .
This personalization decreases the likelihood of an antibody response and therefore increases the effectiveness of the treatment .
CANCER TREATMENTS Section::::Cancer treatments .
When a virus transforms a cell it often causes cancer by either altering the cells ' existing genome or introducing additional genetic material which causes cells to uncontrollably replicate .
It is rarely considered that what causes so much harm also has the capability of reversing the process and slowing the cancer growth or even leading to remission .
Viruses transform host cells in order to survive and replicate ; however , the immune responses of the host cell are typically compromised during transformation making transformed cells more susceptible to other viruses .
The idea of using viruses to treat cancers was first introduced in 1951 when a 4-year - old boy suddenly went into a temporary remission from leukemia while he had chickenpox .
This led to research in the 1990s where scientists worked to create a strain of the herpes simplex virus strong enough to infect and transform tumor cells but weak enough to leave healthy cells unharmed .
Treating patients with viral transformation has the possibility of treating patients more safely and more effectively than using traditional methods , such as chemotherapy .
Viruses used in the treatment of cancer gain strength and increase their effectiveness as the multiply in the body while causing only minor side effects , such as nausea , fatigue , and aches .
SEE ALSO
* Transduction
*
Transfection
* Transgenesis REFERENCES