SHEEP – GOAT HYBRID
A sheep – goat hybrid ( called a geep in popular media or sometimes a shoat ) is the hybrid offspring of a sheep and a goat .
Although sheep and goats seem similar and can be mated , they belong to different genera in the subfamily Caprinae of the family Bovidae .
Sheep belong to the genus Ovis and have 54 chromosomes , while goats belong to the genus Capra and have 60 chromosomes .
The offspring of a sheep - goat pairing is generally stillborn .
Despite widespread shared pasturing of goats and sheep , hybrids are very rare , indicating the genetic distance between the two species .
Though sometimes called " geep " , they are not to be confused with sheep –
goat chimera , which are artificially created by combining the embryos of a goat and a sheep .
CASES Section::::Cases .
At the Botswana Ministry of Agriculture in 2000 , a male sheep impregnated a female goat resulting in a live offspring .
This hybrid had 57 chromosomes , intermediate between sheep ( 54 ) and goats ( 60 ) and was intermediate between the two parent species in type .
It had a coarse outer coat , a woolly inner coat , long goat - like legs and a heavy sheep - like body .
Although infertile , the hybrid had a very active libido , mounting both ewes and does even when they were not in heat .
He was castrated when he was 10 months old , as were the other kids and lambs in the herd .
A male sheep impregnated a female goat in New Zealand resulting in a mixed litter of kids and a female sheep - goat hybrid with 57 chromosomes .
The hybrid was subsequently shown to be fertile when mated with a ram .
In France natural mating of a doe with a ram produced a female hybrid carrying 57 chromosomes .
This animal backcrossed in the veterinary college of Nantes to a ram delivered a stillborn and a living male offspring with 54 chromosomes .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
There is a long - standing belief in sheep – goat hybrids , which is presumably due to the animals ' resemblance to each other .
Some primitive varieties of sheep may be misidentified as goats .
In Darwinism – An Exposition Of The Theory Of Natural Selection With Some Of Its Applications ( 1889 ) , Alfred Russel Wallace wrote : [ ... ]
the following statement of Mr. Low : " It has been long known to shepherds , though questioned by naturalists , that the progeny of the cross between the sheep and goat is fertile .
Breeds of this mixed race are numerous in the north of Europe .
" Nothing appears to be known of such hybrids either in Scandinavia or in Italy ; but Professor Giglioli of Florence has kindly given me some useful references to works in which they are described .
The following extract from his letter is very interesting : " I need not tell you that there being such hybrids is now generally accepted as a fact .
Buffon ( Supplements , tom . iii .
p. 7 , 1756 ) obtained one such hybrid in 1751 and eight in 1752 .
Sanson ( La Culture , vol .
vi .
p. 372 , 1865 ) mentions a case observed in the Vosges , France .
Geoff .
St. Hilaire ( Hist .
Nat .
Gén .
des reg .
org . , vol .
iii .
p. 163 ) was the first to mention , I believe , that in different parts of South America the ram is more usually crossed with the she - goat than the sheep with the he - goat .
The well - known ' pellones ' of Chile are produced by the second and third generation of such hybrids ( Gay , ' Hist , de Chile , ' vol .
i. p. 466 , Agriculture , 1862 ) .
Hybrids bred from goat and sheep are called ' chabin ' in French , and ' cabruno ' in Spanish .
In Chile such hybrids are called ' carneros lanudos ' ; their breeding inter se appears to be not always successful , and often the original cross has to be recommenced to obtain the proportion of three - eighths of he - goat and five - eighths of sheep , or of three - eighths of ram and five - eighths of she - goat ; such being the reputed best hybrids . "
Supposedly , most sheep – goat hybrids die as embryos .
Hybrid male mammals are often sterile , demonstrating a phenomenon known as Haldane 's rule .
The Haldane phenomenon may apply even when the parent species have the same number of chromosomes , as in most cat - species hybrids .
It sometimes does not apply when the species chromosome number is different , as in wild horse ( chromosome number = 66 ) with domestic horse ( chromosome number = 64 ) hybrids .
Hybrid female fertility tends to decrease with increasing divergence in chromosome similarity between parent species .
Presumably , this is due to mismatch problems during meiosis and the resulting production of eggs with unbalanced genetic complements .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Farmersjournal.ie