SIMMONS BEDDING COMPANY
The Simmons Bedding Company is an American major manufacturer of mattresses and related bedding products , based in Atlanta , Georgia .
The company was founded in 1870 , and is one of the oldest companies of its kind in the United States .
Simmons ' flagship brand is Beautyrest .
In addition to operating 18 manufacturing facilities in the United States and Puerto Rico , the company licenses its products internationally .
According to a Simmons press release , net sales for 2005 were $ 855 million , and its revenue was $ 1.13 billion in 2007 and $ 1.228 billion in 2013 .
As of 2011 , Simmons ranked in third place among U.S. mattress manufacturers , with a 15.7 percent market share .
In 2012 , Simmons and its sister company Serta International were acquired by American private equity company Advent International .
HISTORY EARLY HISTORY Section::::History .
Section::::Early history .
In 1870 , Zalmon G. Simmons opened his first factory in Kenosha , Wisconsin .
He started out by manufacturing wooden telegraph insulators and cheese boxes .
He branched into making bedsprings after receiving a patent for a woven - wire bedspring in payment of a debt .
In 1876 , Simmons became the first manufacturer to mass - produce woven wire mattresses .
This process helped the company produce beds faster and cheaper , and by 1889 , with the introduction of spiral coil springs into woven mattresses , Simmons ' mattress prices dropped from $ 12 to 95 cents , making mattresses more widely affordable .
The business was incorporated in 1884 as the Northwestern Wire Mattress Company , adopting Simmons Manufacturing Company as its name in 1889 .
According to company records , by 1891 it was the largest company " of its kind in the world " .
NATIONAL BUSINESS Section::::National business .
Zalmon Simmons , Jr. , who took charge of the business after his father 's death in 1910 , was to oversee additional growth .
In 1916 Simmons began advertising nationally , initiating its first national advertising campaign with a double - spread ad in the Saturday Evening Post .
By 1919 growth was fast .
In response , Simmons acquired manufacturing plants in San Francisco , California ; Los Angeles , California ; Montreal , Quebec ; Toronto , Ontario ; Winnipeg , Manitoba ; Vancouver , British Columbia ; Elizabeth , New Jersey ; Seattle , Washington ; and Atlanta , Georgia .
The following year , Simmons started a new sales arrangement .
Instead of purchasing a mattress directly off the retail floor , customers could test the product on in - store samples , order a mattress through the retailer , and receive direct delivery within the next 24 hours from one of Simmons ' 64 warehouses .
This arrangement reduced the need for retailers to own and store their own product inventories .
In 1923 , Simmons moved its corporate headquarters to New York City .
Equipment developed by Simmons in 1925 automated the process of coiling wire and inserting it into fabric sleeves , called encasements .
This allowed mass production of pocketed coils , a type of coil that had been available only in very high - priced luxury mattresses .
The pocketed coil is the basis for the Simmons Beautyrest mattress brand , which was introduced in 1925 .
Although the new manufacturing technology greatly reduced its cost , at the time of its introduction a Beautyrest mattress sold for $ 39.50 , three to four times more than the typical price for a standard wire mattress .
Simmons promoted its products aggressively with ads that included testimonials from famous people such as Eleanor Roosevelt in 1927 and Henry Ford , H.G. Wells , Thomas Edison , Guglielmo Marconi and George Bernard Shaw in 1929 .
Eleanor Roosevelt continued to promote the brand into the 1930s , through her radio show .
Cole Porter mentioned the Beautyrest brand in the lyrics of his 1934 song " Anything Goes " .
In 1940 , Simmons introduced the Hide - A - Bed , a sofa that incorporates a fold - out spring and mattress that pull out to form a bed .
This was to become one of the company 's best known products and was manufactured until the 1980s .
During World War II , Simmons ' facilities were diverted to military production , making cots , parachutes , bazooka rockets and other products .
By the post - war year of 1947 , the company was back in the mattress business and started using advertising to associate its products with the Hollywood glamor of actresses including Dorothy Lamour and Maureen O'Hara .
A research and development facility was established in Munster , Indiana , in 1957 , building upon pioneering studies on human sleep behavior that Simmons had sponsored in the 1930s .
In 1958 , the company became the first U.S. mattress maker to produce mattresses in king and queen sizes , an innovation that was promoted as solving the " space battle in the bedroom " .
ERA OF CORPORATE CHANGE Section::::Era of corporate change .
In 1975 , the Simmons corporate headquarters moved to Atlanta , Georgia .
Shortly thereafter , the company research and development team also relocated to Georgia , to a building in what is today Peachtree Corners but was then an unincorporated part of Gwinnett County , near Norcross .
In 1995 , the company 's R&D division moved into a new home , the Simmons Institute for Technology and Education ( SITE ) .
Simmons underwent the first in a series of corporate mergers and acquisitions in 1979 , when the company was acquired by Gulf+Western .
Six years later , Gulf+Western sold Simmons to Wickes Corporation .
Wesray Capital bought the business in 1986 , and sold it to the Simmons employee stock ownership plan in 1989 .
Merrill Lynch Capital Partners obtained a majority interest in Simmons in 1991 , and sold to Investcorp in about 1996 .
Fenway Partners bought the company about two years later , then sold to Thomas H. Lee Partners in 2003 .
In the 1990s a commercial for the Simmons Beautyrest featured a bowling ball being dropped on a Beautyrest mattress and a standard open - coil mattress to illustrate the company 's claim that a person 's nighttime movements are less likely to disturb a sleep partner if their mattress is a Beautyrest .
The bowling ball demonstration , which was popular with Simmons dealers , consumers , and industry experts , was revived in 2006 .
In 2003 , Fenway Partners made the Sleep Country USA chain of retail stores a part of Simmons ; in 2006 Simmons sold the chain to The Sleep Train of Citrus Heights , California .
The following year , the company added memory foam products to its offerings by acquiring the Comfor – Pedic line of memory foam mattresses and pillows from Comfor Products of Kent , Washington .
The company suffered financially under the successive ownership of multiple private equity firms and other private investors .
The private equity owners extracted $ 750 million in profits out of Simmons , while the company 's debt increased from $ 164 million in 1991 to $ 1.3 billion in 2009 .
On September 25 , 2009 , Simmons announced a Chapter 11 restructuring plan and signed a purchase agreement with an investor group led by Ares Management and Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan .
The bankruptcy court approved the deal , reducing the company 's total debt from about $ 1 billion to $ 450 million .
The bankruptcy did not include subsidiaries in Canada and Puerto Rico , but those units were included in the deal with Ares Management and the Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan .
Ares and the Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan were also the owners of the Serta brand name under National Bedding Company LLC .
They operated Serta and Simmons Bedding as independent entities that continued to compete with one another .
On October 2 , 2012 , private equity firm Advent International acquired a majority interest in AOT Bedding Super Holdings ( now Serta Simmons Holdings , LLC ) , the parent company of Simmons and Serta .
Ares Management and the Ontario Teachers ' Pension Plan continued to own a " significant " share of company equity .
At the time of the Advent acquisition , Simmons and Serta together held a 34 percent share of the U.S. mattress market .
Simmons and Serta retained separate sales , marketing , research and development , and merchandising departments , and continue to remain separate .
In August of 2018
Simmons Bedding 's parent company Serta Simmons Holdings LLC announced a merger with online retailer Tuft & Needle to increase their online presence .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Simmons web site