STATUE OF LIBERTY NATIONAL MONUMENT
The Statue of Liberty National Monument is a United States National Monument located in the U.S. states of New Jersey and New York comprising Liberty Island and Ellis Island .
It includes Liberty Enlightening the World , commonly known as the Statue of Liberty , situated on Liberty Island , and the former immigration station at Ellis Island , including the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital .
The monument is managed by the National Park Service as part of the National Parks of New York Harbor office .
HISTORY Section::::History .
President Calvin Coolidge used his authority under the Antiquities Act to declare the statue a national monument in 1924 .
In 1937 , by proclamation 2250 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt expanded the monument to include all of Bedloe 's Island , and in 1956 , an act of Congress officially renamed it Liberty Island .
Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by proclamation of President Lyndon Johnson in 1965 .
The United States historic district , a single listing on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places , was designated in 1966 .
The islands were closed during Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 and suffered severe damage .
Liberty Island reopened July 4 , 2013 ; Ellis Island re - opened October 24 , 2013 .
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
Inside the statue , a plaque is engraved with words from " The New Colossus " , the poem by Emma Lazarus : LOCATION AND ACCESS Section::::Location and access .
The national monument is located in Upper New York Bay east of Liberty State Park in Jersey City , New Jersey and southwest of Battery Park at the tip of Manhattan in New York City .
Entrance is free , but there is a charge for the ferry service that all visitors must use .
In 2007 , a concession was granted to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities , replacing the Circle Line which had operated the service since 1953 .
The waters are patrolled by the U.S. Park Police to enforce the restriction on private boat landings .
Ferries depart from both parks and all boats stop at both islands , enabling passengers to visit both islands and choose either destination on the return trip .
Tickets can be purchased at Castle Clinton in Battery Park or at the Communipaw Terminal in Liberty State Park .
Along with the ferry ticket , visitors intending to enter the statue 's pedestal must also obtain a complimentary ticket Those wishing to climb the 154 stairs to the crown within the statue must obtain a special ticket , which may be reserved up to a year in advance .
Ten people per group , three groups per hour , are permitted to ascend , allowing for a total of 240 per day .
After an obligatory second security screening , they may bring only medication and cameras , leaving all other items in lockers provided .
JURISDICTION Section::::Jurisdiction .
Liberty Island and Ellis Island have been the property of the United States government since 1800 and 1808 , respectively .
Historical circumstances have led to the unusual situation of Liberty Island and of Ellis Island being exclaves of one state , New York , located completely within another state , New Jersey .
The dominion , jurisdiction , and sovereignty of the islands have variously been the subject of a colonial land grant , a provincial governor 's directive , and an interstate compact , as well as several court cases and U.S. Supreme Court decisions .
Liberty Island and the acreage on Ellis Island are part of New York City which are completely surrounded by the municipal borders of Jersey City , including created by land reclamation at Ellis Island and riparian areas .
Jurisdiction not superseded by the federal government falls to the appropriate state .
RELATED SITES
* Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital *
Communipaw Terminal * Castle Clinton
* Liberty State Park
* Battery Park * Governors Island SEE ALSO * Conservation - restoration of the Statue of Liberty * List of National Monuments of the United States * Geography of New York Harbor * National Register of Historic Places listings in Hudson County , New Jersey * National Register of Historic Places listings in New York County , New York
REFERENCES
NOTES FURTHER READING
Section::::References .
Section::::Further reading .
Statue of Liberty :
* PBS documentary about statue of liberty
* American Classic : Lady Liberty - slideshow by Life magazine * The Statue of Liberty article by Alexandra Kollontay , 1916 .
* Historical Information and Photographs * Gallery Images of the Statue of Liberty Ellis Island :
* Ellis Island Historical Timeline
* Ellis Island timeline
* Free Search of Ellis Island Database - Port of New York Arrivals
1892–1924
* The Myth of Ellis Island Name Changes Jurisdiction :
* Supreme Court opinion in New Jersey v. New York ( 1998 )
* National Park Service map showing portions of the island belonging to New York and New Jersey * American Memory from the Library of Congress EXTERNAL LINKS
* Statue of Liberty National Monument
The official Historical Site handbook .
* Statue of Liberty National Monument Visitor information .
Section::::External links .
Ellis Island : * Ellis Island home page * Ellis Island Immigration Museum * Ellis Island Visitor information