J.D. ( SCRUBS ) John Michael " J.D. " Dorian , M.D. is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the American comedy - drama television series Scrubs .
Played by Zach Braff , he acts as narrator and main character of the series from the first season to the eighth , providing voice - overs that reveal his internal thoughts and an overall narration in the show , often linking the story arcs in each episode thematically .
J.D. appears in every episode during the first eight seasons except two season 8 episodes : "
My Absence , " in which he is only heard through a cellphone , and " My Full Moon " ; he later partially returns as a major character in the first six episodes of the ninth and final season to help transition the series into its new format .
Braff also briefly portrayed the character in the spin - off series and the Muppets film
It 's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie .
Both the character and Braff 's performance were positively received .
Braff was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series in 2005 and received three consecutive Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy nominations from 2005 to 2007 .
CHARACTER BACKGROUND Section::::Character background .
J.D. 's name is based on that of Dr. Jonathan Doris , a college friend of series creator Bill Lawrence .
Doris served as a medical advisor on the show .
According to Zach Braff , he feels that after seven years , there is not much of J.D. 's personality left to be explored , except for his relationship with best friend Christopher Turk , while Lawrence has stated that the seventh season was to show J.D. finally growing up , in order to satisfy many fans who did not want to see him stay the same .
However , Braff also says that J.D. has gradually evolved over the series , but at the same time can not evolve too much , as they need to " [ give ] the fans what they want , which is to see the characters be themselves . "
In a 2008 interview , Braff stated that while he feels " most at home when I 'm playing a Jewish character " , the writers for Scrubs chose to imply that Dorian was Christian because the show needed " to appeal to the most massive audience possible " out of concern that some people might not watch a show featuring a Jewish main character .
FICTIONAL CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY
PERSONALITY
Section::::Fictional character biography .
Section::::Personality .
J.D. 's most prominently featured quirk is his habit of daydreaming .
When this happens , he tilts his head back and to his left , blankly looking upwards .
The sequences played out in his daydreams are of surreal scenarios and situations that have just been mentioned or wondered about , often in an exaggerated manner .
Many of these are followed by a comment from him which , although in keeping with his daydream , sounds strange and is often highly unrelated to the initial topic , very often earning him odd looks from nearby characters in the scene .
Despite his numerous mistakes , quirks and personal neurosis , J.D. is shown throughout the series to be a very skilled doctor .
He is described as having compassion for his patients , and a lot of determination and enthusiasm for his job .
FAMILY
LIFE Section::::Family life .
He grew up in Trotwood , Ohio .
In a season 1 episode ( 2001 ) , JD states that 20 years ago he " had a little trouble with his " esses " " because he was five .
In season five JD turns 30 .
His father , Sam ( John Ritter ) , a failed office supply salesman , was absent for most of J.D. 's childhood , and often mooched off his son when he was around ; after Sam dies , however , J.D. realizes that his father loved him and was proud of him .
His mother is Barbara Turner Dorian .
He has an older brother , Dan ( Tom Cavanagh ) , with whom he has a love / hate relationship .
WORK Section::::Work .
J.D. begins the show as an intern at Sacred Heart Hospital .
After a year , he becomes a resident , then an attending physician in internal medicine , and eventually residency director of another hospital .
J.D. begins work at Sacred Heart under Attending Physician Dr. Perry Cox ( John C. McGinley ) , who generally refers to J.D. as " Newbie " or by a variety of girls ' names .
J.D. thinks of Cox as his mentor , which Cox adamantly denies .
As much as he hates to admit it , however , Cox respects J.D. as a doctor and even cares about him as a person , even offering him personal advice on a few occasions .
J.D. 's faith in Cox is shaken when the latter has a breakdown following the death of three patients .
After a deeply depressed Cox shows up to work drunk , J.D. refuses to see him , claiming that he does not approve of Cox 's behavior .
However , he later confesses to Cox that he still looks upon him as a hero , and admires him for caring so much about his patients that he takes it hard when things go badly for them .
At the end of the episode , Cox thanks J.D. — and , atypically , calls him by his real name — for helping him forgive himself and get on with his life .
After Cox is promoted to Chief of Medicine in season 8 , he and J.D. are often at odds over hospital matters , mirroring Cox 's relationship with the former chief , Dr. Bob Kelso ( Ken Jenkins ) , in earlier seasons .
Kelso advises J.D. that he is the one who will have to press for hospital matters if they 're important enough , even if it means fighting Cox to do it .
On J.D. 's last day Sacred Heart , Cox finally admits that J.D. is an exceptional physician , an exceptional person , and a friend — albeit only when he thinks J.D. is n't around to hear it .
J.D. is also engaged in a constant battle with the Janitor ( Neil Flynn ) from the very first episode .
The Janitor is trying to open a jammed door when J.D. suggests there may be a penny stuck in it .
When it turns out that there is a penny stuck in the door , the Janitor vows revenge .
Throughout the series , the Janitor is constantly playing tricks and pranks on J.D.
In the eighth - season finale , it is revealed that J.D. did accidentally put the penny in the door .
The Janitor saw him drop the penny , but because he never admitted it , decided that J.D. had failed a " test of character , " thus igniting their feud .
J.D. leaves Sacred Heart for a job at another hospital in order to be closer to his son , Sam .
In season 9 , J.D. becomes a visiting professor at Winston University , a medical school built on the old site of Sacred Heart , which has been torn down .
He forms a bond with the series ' new main character , Lucy Bennett ( Kerry Bishé ) , whom he counsels through the rigors of life as a doctor .
After a few months , however , he tells her that he eventually plans to move on , and that she must find a new mentor before he leaves .
Finally , he leaves his teaching position and steps back from mentoring Lucy , determined that she must learn to function on her own .
FRIENDS Section::::Friends .
He often spends time with Chris Turk ( Donald Faison ) , his best friend and surrogate brother , whom he first met when they were roommates at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg , Virginia .
The pair continue to be roommates even as they progress to become interns and residents .
J.D. is often shown to have a codependent relationship with Turk , regularly going through some stages of depression whenever he ca n't be with him .
By their own admission , their relationship is a " bromance . "
In the first episode , when Turk suggests the two of them seek separate apartments to " branch out , " J.D. 's inner monologue tells himself to " Tell him you think that 's stupid .
Tell him you need him , " but they end up roommates again by the episode 's end .
Their friendship is often depicted as being closer and more loving than a marriage ; they sum up their feelings in the song " Guy Love " : "
It 's Guy Love /
That 's all
it is /
It 's Guy Love
/
He 's mine , I 'm his /
There 's nothing gay about it in our eyes . "
On his first day , he also meets Carla Espinosa ( Judy Reyes ) , a nurse who looks out for him and affectionately nicknames him " Bambi . "
On his last day at Sacred Heart , she reveals that she calls him this because he needed to learn how to walk ( meaning to become a doctor ) .
ROMANTIC HISTORY Section::::Romantic history .
He meets and forms a connection with Elliot Reid ( Sarah Chalke ) in the pilot episode and finds himself attracted to her .
In seasons 1 to 3 , a running joke in the series was that J.D. would sleep with Elliot at least once in each season , although the show 's producers have indicated that this ended to prevent the characters ' development being constrained by clichés .
The two form a romantic relationship in the first season , but their romance quickly falls apart when they realize that they do not work as a couple .
He has had romantic and sexual liaisons with various women besides Elliot , including Dr. Cox 's ex - wife Jordan Sullivan ( Christa Miller ) , and Jordan 's younger sister Danni Sullivan ( Tara Reid ) .
In season five , he meets Dr. Kim Briggs ( Elizabeth Banks ) , the hospital 's urologist , and they are immediately attracted to each other .
They go on a date that ends with J.D. getting her pregnant via premature ejaculation .
In season 6 , they decide to keep the child and try to make a relationship work , but they break up when Kim announces that she had a miscarriage .
Soon afterward , however , J.D. discovers that she is still pregnant , having lied about losing the baby to get out of the relationship .
He decides to stay with her for the sake of their child .
J.D. realizes that he does n't love her , however , and they break up for good while she is giving birth to their son , Sam Perry Gilligan Dorian .
While J.D. and Elliot had an on - and - off romance throughout the series , it is not until the conclusion of Season 6 that they appear ready to get back together .
The episode
" My Point of No Return " ends with J.D. and Elliot lying on a bed in the on - call room , leaning in for a kiss .
The action remains unresolved until Season 7 , when Elliot backs out .
They both then say that the almost - kiss had nothing to do with their feelings for each other .
In Season 8 , they become a couple again after they talk about their history together , and Dr. Kelso advises them to do whatever makes them happy .
During the filming for Season 8 , Sarah Chalke said in an interview that she could n't imagine J.D. and Elliot not being together romantically .
In the Season 8 finale , it is suggested through a flash forward in the style of a home movie that J.D and Elliot will marry and have a child .
In Season 9 , it is revealed that J.D. and Elliot are in fact married and expecting a child .
This is punctuated by an extremely awkward morning ritual in front of Elliot 's class where J.D. kisses her stomach for every month she is pregnant and says " and thank you for making mommy 's boobs bigger " ; Elliot then puts her breasts on his head .
In their final appearance together , they go on a " babymoon " , a romantic getaway for expecting parents .
CAMEO Section::::Cameo .
Like Elliot , Carla , Cox and the Janitor , the J.D. character makes a cameo appearance in
It 's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie , trying to reanimate Miss Piggy .
However , Piggy and the Scrubs cast finally break the fourth wall , with the actors portraying themselves .
REFERENCES