WINDSHIELD WASHER FLUID Windshield washer fluid ( also called windshield wiper fluid , wiper fluid , screen wash ( in the UK ) , or washer fluid ) is a fluid for motor vehicles that is used in cleaning the windshield with the windshield wiper while the vehicle is being driven .
DELIVERY SYSTEM
Section::::Delivery system .
A control within the car can be operated to spray washer fluid onto the windshield , typically using an electrical pump via jets
mounted either beneath the windshield or beneath the wiper blade(s ) .
The windshield wipers are automatically turned on , cleaning dirt and debris off the windshield .
Some vehicles use the same method to clean the rear window or the headlights .
The first windshield cleaner unit offered for automobiles was in 1936 , as an aftermarket option to be installed on cars after they were bought .
Washer fluid may sometimes be preheated before being delivered onto the windshield .
This is especially desirable in colder climates when a thin layer of ice or frost accumulates on the windshield 's surface , because it eliminates the need to manually scrape the windshield or pour warm water on the glass .
Although there are a few aftermarket preheat devices available , many automobile makers offer this feature factory installed on at least some of their vehicles .
For example , General Motors had begun equipping vehicles with heated washer fluid systems from the factory beginning in 2006 with the Buick Lucerne sedan .
The system emits a fine mist of heated water that clears frost without damaging the windshield itself .
GM also claims heated washer fluid helps in removing bug splatters and other road accumulation .
The company halted the production of these mechanisms after they found that it was prone to start engine fires .
A different system patented by BMW first sprays " intensive " washer fluid and then standard washer fluid on to the windscreen .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Windshield washer fluid is sold in many formulations , and some may require dilution before being applied , although most solutions available in North America come premixed with no diluting required .
The most common washer fluid solutions are given labels such as " All - Season " , " Bug Remover " , or " De - icer " , and usually are a combination of solvents with a detergent .
Dilution factors will vary depending on season , for example in winter the dilution factor may be 1:1 , whereas during summer the dilution factor may be 1:10 .
It is sometimes sold as sachet of crystals , which is also diluted with water .
Distilled water is the preferred diluent , since it will not leave trace mineral deposits on the glass .
Anti - freeze , or methylated spirits , may be added to a mixture to give the product a lower freezing temperature .
Methanol vapor is harmful when breathed in , and methanol poisoning presents a risk of death , severe ocular toxicity , and other severe effects if ingested .
As of May 9 , 2018 , methanol was banned from use in windscreen washing and defrosting products in the European Union .
More popular now is an ethanol winter mix , e.g. PAV , water , ethanol ( or isopropanol ) , and ethylene glycol .
Many cars display a warning when the fluid level is low , and some car makers have replaced the float sensor generating this signal with a simple two - pin probe in the tank .
This requires a ( slightly ) conductive fluid , but most common windshield washer fluid mixtures will work .
Mercedes sells a special fluid for their cars .
Concerns have been raised about the overall environmental aspects of washer fluid .
Widespread use of wiper fluid ( amounting to billions of liters each year ) can lead to cumulative air pollution and water pollution .
Consumer advocacy groups and auto enthusiasts believe that the alcohols and solvents present in some , but not all , windshield washer fluid can damage the vehicle .
These critics point to the corrosive effects of ethanol , methanol , and other components on paint , rubber , car wax , and plastics , and groups propose various alternatives and homemade recipes to protect the finish and mechanics of the motor vehicle .
LEGIONNAIRES ' DISEASE Section::::Legionnaires ' disease .
On 14 June 2010 , the UK 's Health Protection Agency announced the results of a preliminary study of 75 patients , which found an association between the use of plain water as wiper fluid and Legionnaires ' disease , which is spread by breathing in aerosolized bacteria from infected water .
It had been noticed that prevalence of the disease was five times higher among professional drivers .
SEE ALSO
* Antifreeze REFERENCES FURTHER READING