THE WALKING DEAD : THE RIDE
The Walking Dead :
The Ride ( formerly known as X:\
No Way Out and X ) is an indoor roller coaster located at Thorpe Park , England .
It was the park 's first non - powered roller - coaster .
It was themed around a rave and had the strapline " Ride on a wave of light and sound " —
when it was titled X — but currently The Walking Dead : The Ride 's slogan is " Those who ride , survive " .
The X roller coaster combined a variety of lights , lasers and music with a completely indoor ride circuit , featured inside a large blue and terracotta pyramid structure .
On 1 December 2017 plans to drastically change the entrance of the attraction were filed .
The name " X:\ NWO WD " written on the documents sparked rumours of a The Walking Dead re - theme .
On 20 February 2018 , it was announced that the ride was to become The Walking Dead : The Ride .
On 27 March 2018 , Thorpe Park announced that the ride would open on 31 March 2018 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The ride opened as X:\ No Way Out on March 23 , 1996 as Thorpe Park 's first non - powered roller coaster .
It was marketed as the " world 's first backwards roller coaster in the dark " and featured an elaborate queue system through multiple interactive themed rooms , such as a trommel tunnel , " decontamination " area and illusionary rooms .
The ride 's cyberpunk theme was drastically toned down by the mid 2000s when most the interior rooms became disused , and many in - ride effects removed .
In March 2013 the ride underwent further significant changes , which removed the remnants of the computer horror theme and shortened its name simply to ' X ' .
The trains were refurbished by Vekoma to now run forwards , to resolve the common issue of motion sickness .
The addition of lighting and lasers from 2013
onwards removes the pitch black darkness that riders originally rode in .
In the exit queue line , there was a 5 ft - long model of an Eveready AA battery labelled ' Thorpe Park Power Supply ' ; this was removed in 2013 .
The ride layout has also had many features removed since its opening .
There was an on - ride photo camera which allowed riders to purchase their on - ride photo ; this was removed in 2005 .
The lift hill of the ride had multi - coloured flashing LED light strips added in 2000 ; these were removed in 2013 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In 2013 the ride was given an original soundtrack to accompany the new lights and lasers , this was removed in 2014 and was replaced with a playlist of dance music .
In 2016 the selection of songs was updated .
In June 2017 the dance music was removed from the ride and area and the ride was given a new original soundtrack , this time composed by IMAscore and in the style of an upbeat version of the park 's new ' Island Theme ' , and the queue line has retained the music used before .
As part of the ride 's refurbishment into The Walking Dead : The Ride in 2018 , a new IMAscore soundtrack was composed .
RIDE EXPERIENCE Section::::Ride experience .
When the ride was X , riders entered the queue line inside the pyramid and proceeded down a long and narrow corridor with neon lights and lasers in the ceiling .
Dance music played throughout the corridor .
After turning a few corners , riders were asked to secure any loose belongings in a baggage area before proceeding into a large room with a segment of switchback queue line , which was put into operation on busier days .
After queuing in this room , riders entered the station .
After riders were seated and secured , the train exited the station into a tight right hand turn that leads up onto the lift hill .
It was mandatory for both seats in a row to be occupied and single riders are not allowed .
After reaching the top of the hill , the train plummeted down at speeds of up to 28 mph into various helixes and tight turns .
While the ride negotiated its circuit , there were bright multi - coloured disco lights and laser effects combined with a dance version of the park 's ' Island Theme ' , composed by IMAscore .
Once the ride reached the end of the circuit the train arrived at an exit platform where riders disembarked , before collecting their belongings and heading outside .
As ' The Walking Dead : The Ride ' , riders use the bag drop at the end of the queue line , and are then led into a small room where a man begins asking them three questions , as a voice from a speaker answers them .
An emergency alert is issued , cutting the questioning short and alerting everyone to a zombie breach , and he instructs the riders to make their way to the loading zone , which the riders reach after walking through narrow corridors covered with red flashing lights and " blood " smeared on the walls .
Riders then emerge in the loading room with loud music and the occasional air horn going off .
Riders get on the ride and are taken up on the tire drive lift to the main ride .
after a few twists and turns , the ride comes to a stop and the man from the video at the beginning tries to start the ride up again , eventually it gets going again .
after some more twists and turns , the ride goes to the end and riders are instructed to get off the ride and go through the famous " do n't open dead inside " doors .
in this room actors then start to get up and scare the crowd of people and chase them briefly down the corridor to the end .
BRAKE RUNS Section::::Brake Runs .
Throughout the ride , there are three mid - course brake runs .
Originally , while the ride was X:\
No Way Out , these would stop the train for a few seconds while misters sprayed above the riders ' heads ( these were removed by 2013 ) and sound effects were played through speakers , to disorientate the riders .
On the third brake run , the train moved backwards ( although from a rider 's point of view , it moved forwards , since the trains were reversed ) by a few metres before being propelled forwards .
Also on this third brake run , since the ride was refurbished in 2007 , two of the robot mannequins from the old queue line were positioned on the brake run and lit up to give the riders a surprise .
These were removed a few weeks into the 2013 season .
Nowadays , the brake runs simply allow the trains to run through the circuit without stopping .
As The Walking Dead : The Ride , the break runs stop the train once again at a certain point .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
X at Total Thorpe Park
* X:\No Way Out at ThemeParks - UK