PRIMARY PRODUCERS secondary producers convert an abiotic source of energy ( e.g. light ) into energy stored in organic compounds , which can be used by other organisms ( e.g. heterotrophs ) .
The primary producers can convert the energy in the light ( phototroph and photoautotroph ) or the energy in inorganic chemical compounds ( chemolithotrophs ) to build organic molecules , which is usually accumulated in the form of biomass and will be used as carbon and energy source by other organisms ( e.g. heterotrophs and mixotrophs ) .
The photoautotrophs are the main primary producers , converting the energy of the light into chemical energy through photosynthesis , ultimately building organic molecules from carbon dioxide , an inorganic carbon source .
Examples of chemolithotrophs are some archaea and bacteria ( unicellular organisms ) that produce biomass from the oxidation of inorganic chemical compounds , these organisms are called chemoautotrophs , and are frequently found in hydrothermal vents in the deep ocean .
Primary producers ares at the lowest trophic level , and are the reasons why Earth is sustainable for life to this day .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
There are many different types of primary producers out in the Earth 's ecosystem at different states .
Fungi and other organisms that gain their biomass from oxidizing organic materials are called decomposers and are not primary producers .
However , lichens located in tundra climates are an exceptional example of a primary producer that , by mutualistic symbiosis , combine photosynthesis by algae ( or additionally nitrogen fixation by cyanobacteria ) with the protection of a decomposer fungus .
Also , plant - like primary producers ( trees , algae ) use the sun as a form of energy and put it into the air for other organisms .
There are of course H2O primary producers , including a form of bacteria , and phytoplankton .
As there are many examples of primary producers , two dominant types are coral and one of the many types of brown algae , kelp .
PHOTOSYNTHESIS Section::::Photosynthesis .
Gross primary production occurs by photosynthesis .
This is also a main way that primary producers take energy and produce / release it somewhere else .
Plants , coral , bacteria , and algae do this .
Bacteria is a more recent find in the process of photosynthesis with primary producers , as they were just discovered in the soil .
During photosynthesis , primary producers take energy from the sun and produce it into energy , sugar , and oxygen .
Primary producers also need energy to convert this same energy elsewhere , so they get it from nutrients .
One type of nutrient is nitrogen .
IMPORTANCE OF PRIMARY PRODUCERS Section::::Importance of primary producers .
Without primary producers , organisms that are capable of producing energy on their own , the Earth would be unable to sustain itself .
Plants , along with other primary producers , produce the energy that beings consume , and the oxygen that they breathe .
It is thought that the first organisms on Earth were primary producers located on the ocean floor .
PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN TROPICAL STREAMS AND RIVERS
Section::::Primary production in tropical streams and rivers .
Aquatic algae are a significant contributor to food webs in tropical rivers and streams .
This is displayed by net primary production , a fundamental ecological process that reflects the amount of carbon that is synthesized within an ecosystem .
This carbon ultimately becomes available to consumers .
Net primary production displays that the rates of in - stream primary production in tropical regions are at least an order of magnitude greater than similar temperate systems .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS