CHRONIC CONDITION
A chronic condition is a human health condition or disease that is persistent or otherwise long - lasting in its effects or a disease that comes with time .
The term chronic is often applied when the course of the disease lasts for more than three months .
Common chronic diseases include arthritis , asthma , cancer , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , diabetes and some viral diseases such as hepatitis C and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome .
An illness which is lifelong because it ends in death is a terminal illness .
In medicine , a chronic condition can be distinguished from one that is acute ( recent in onset ) ; additionally , a recurrent condition can relapse repeatedly , with periods of remission in between .
The non - communicable diseases are also usually lasting medical conditions but are distinguished by their non - infectious causes .
In contrast , some chronic diseases , such as HIV / AIDS , are caused by transmissible infections .
In the United States 25 % of adults have at least two chronic conditions .
Chronic diseases constitute a major cause of mortality , and the World Health Organization ( WHO ) attributes 38 million deaths a year to non - communicable diseases .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Chronic conditions have often been used to describe the various health related states of the human body such as syndromes , physical impairments , disabilities as well as diseases .
Epidemiologists have found interest in chronic conditions due to the fact they contribute to disease , disability , and diminished physical and/or mental capacity .
For example , high blood pressure or hypertension is considered to be not only a chronic condition itself but also correlated to diseases such as heart attack or stroke .
Additionally , some socioeconomic factors may be considered as a chronic condition as they lead to disability in daily life .
An important one that public health officials in the social science setting have begun highlighting is chronic poverty .
The list below includes these chronic conditions and diseases :
In 2015 the World Health Organization produced a report on non - communicable diseases , citing the four major types as : * Cancers * Cardiovascular diseases , including cerebrovascular disease , heart failure , and ischemic cardiopathy * Chronic respiratory diseases , such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD )
* Diabetes mellitus Other examples of chronic diseases and health conditions include : *
Addiction
* Alzheimer 's disease * Atrial fibrillation
* Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
* Autoimmune diseases , such as ulcerative colitis , lupus erythematosus , Crohn 's disease , coeliac disease , Hashimoto 's thyroiditis , and relapsing polychondritis
* Bipolar disorder *
Blindness
* Cerebral palsy ( all types )
* Chronic graft - versus - host disease *
Chronic hepatitis
*
Chronic kidney disease
* Chronic osteoarticular diseases , such as osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis
* Chronic pain syndromes , such as post - vasectomy pain syndrome and complex regional pain syndrome
* Depression * Deafness and hearing impairment
* Eating disorders
* Ehlers – Danlos syndrome ( various types ) *
Endometriosis * Epilepsy
* Fibromyalgia * HIV / AIDS * Huntington 's disease * Hypertension * Lyme disease
* Multiple sclerosis * Myalgic encephalomyelitis ( chronic fatigue syndrome ) *
Narcolepsy * Obesity
* Osteoporosis * Parkinson 's disease * Periodontal disease
* Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
* Sickle cell anemia and other hemoglobin disorders
* Sleep apnea *
Thyroid disease
* Tobacco Use and Related Conditions RISK FACTORS Section::::Risk factors .
While risk factors vary with age and gender , most of the common chronic diseases in the US are caused by dietary , lifestyle and metabolic risk factors that are also responsible for the resulting mortality .
Therefore , these conditions might be prevented by behavioral changes , such as quitting smoking , adopting a healthy diet , and increasing physical activity .
Social determinants are important risk factors for chronic diseases .
Social factors , e.g. , socioeconomic status , education level , and race / ethnicity , are a major cause for the disparities observed in the care of chronic disease .
Lack of access and delay in receiving care result in worse outcomes for patients from minorities and underserved populations .
Those barriers to medical care complicate patients monitoring and continuity in treatment .
In the US , Minorities and low - income populations are less likely to access and receive preventive services necessary to detect conditions at an early stage .
The majority of US health care and economic costs associated with medical conditions are for the costs of chronic diseases and conditions and associated health risk behaviors .
Eighty - four percent of all health care spending in 2006 was for the 50 % of the population who have one or more chronic medical conditions ( CDC , 2014 ) .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
A growing body of evidence supports that prevention is effective in reducing the effect of chronic conditions ; in particular , early detection results in less severe outcomes .
Clinical preventive services include screening for the existence of the disease or predisposition to its development , counseling and immunizations against infectious agents .
Despite their effectiveness , the utilization of preventive services is typically lower than for regular medical services .
In contrast to their apparent cost in time and money , the benefits of preventive services are not directly perceived by patient because their effects are on the long term or might be greater for society as a whole than at the individual level .
Therefore , public health programs are important in educating the public , and promoting healthy lifestyles and awareness about chronic diseases .
While those programs can benefit from funding at different levels ( state , federal , private ) their implementation is mostly in charge of local agencies and community - based organizations .
Studies have shown that public health programs are effective in reducing mortality rates associated to cardiovascular disease , diabetes and cancer , but the results are somewhat heterogeneous depending on the type of condition and the type of programs involved .
For example , results from different approaches in cancer prevention and screening depended highly on the type of cancer .
The rising number of patient with chronic diseases has renewed the interest in prevention and its potential role in helping control costs .
In 2008 , the Trust for America 's Health produced a report that estimated investing $ 10 per person annually in community - based programs of proven effectiveness and promoting healthy lifestyle ( increase in physical activity , healthier diet and preventing tobacco use ) could save more than $ 16 billion annually within a period of just five years .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
In the treatment of HIV , the success of antiretroviral therapies means that many patients will experience this infection as a chronic disease that for many will span several decades of their life .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , nearly one in two Americans ( 133 million ) has at least one chronic medical condition , with most subjects ( 58 % ) between the ages of 18 and 64 .
The number is projected to increase by more than one percent per year by 2030 , resulting in an estimated chronically ill population of 171 million .
The most common chronic conditions are high blood pressure , arthritis , respiratory diseases like emphysema , and high cholesterol .
According to research by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , chronic disease is also especially a concern in the elderly population in America .
Chronic diseases like stroke , heart disease , and cancer were among the leading causes of death among Americans aged 65 or older in 2002 , accounting for 61 % of all deaths among this subset of the population .
While the majority of chronic conditions are found in individuals between the ages of 18 and 64 , it is estimated that at least 80 % of older Americans are currently living with some form of a chronic condition , with 50 % of this population having two or more chronic conditions .
The two most common chronic conditions in the elderly are high blood pressure and arthritis , with diabetes , coronary heart disease , and cancer also being reported among the elder population .
In examining the statistics of chronic disease among the living elderly , it is also important to make note of the statistics pertaining to fatalities as a result of chronic disease .
Heart disease is the leading cause of death from chronic disease for adults older than 65 , followed by cancer , stroke , diabetes , chronic lower respiratory diseases , influenza and pneumonia , and , finally , Alzheimer 's disease .
Though the rates of chronic disease differ by race for those living with chronic illness , the statistics for leading causes of death among elderly are nearly identical across racial / ethnic groups .
Chronic illnesses cause about 70 % of deaths in the US and in 2002 chronic conditions ( heart disease , cancers , stroke , chronic respiratory diseases , diabetes , Alzheimer 's disease , mental illness and kidney diseases ) were 6 of the top ten causes of mortality in the general US population .
In the United States , 90 % of seniors have at least one chronic disease , and 77 % have two or more chronic conditions .
ECONOMIC IMPACT UNITED STATES Section::::Economic impact .
Section::::United States .
Chronic diseases are a major factor in the continuous growth of medical care spending .
Healthy People 2010 reported that more than 75 % of the $ 2 trillion spent annually in US medical care are due to chronic conditions ; spending are even higher in proportion for Medicare beneficiaries ( aged 65 years and older ) .
Spending growth is driven in part by the greater prevalence of chronic illnesses , and the longer life expectancy of the population .
Also improvement in treatments has significantly extended the life spans of patients with chronic diseases but results in additional costs over long period of time .
A striking success is the development of combined antiviral therapies that led to remarkable improvement in survival rates and quality of life of HIV - infected patients .
In addition to direct costs in health care , chronic diseases are a significant burden to the economy , through limitations in daily activities , loss in productivity and loss of days of work .
A particular concern is the rising rates of overweight and obesity in all segments of the US population .
Obesity itself is a medical condition and not a disease , but it constitutes a major risk factor for developing chronic illnesses , such as diabetes , stroke , cardiovascular disease and cancers .
Obesity results in significant health care spending and indirect costs , as illustrated by a recent study from the Texas comptroller reporting that obesity alone cost Texas businesses an extra $ 9.5 billion in 2009 , including more than $ 4 billion for health care , $ 5 billion for lost productivity and absenteeism , and $ 321 million for disability .
SEE ALSO
* Acute on chronic * Chronic disease in China
* Chronic disease in Northern Ontario
* Chronic Illness ( journal )
*
Chronic pain * Course ( medicine ) * Disease management ( health ) * Dynamic treatment regimes
* Medical tattoo
* Multiple morbidities * Natural history of disease
* Virtual Wards ( a UK term )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of Chronic Human Diseases Linked to Infectious Pathogens
* Bone Marrow Transplantation journal
* Center for Managing Chronic Disease , University of Michigan * CHRODIS : EU Joint Action on Chronic Diseases and Promoting Healthy Ageing Across the Life - Cycle * MEDICC Review theme issue on Confronting Chronic Diseases With longer life expectancies in most countries and the globalization of " Western " diets and sedentarism , the main burden of disease and death from these conditions is falling on already - disadvantaged developing countries and poor communities everywhere .
* Public Health Agency of Canada :
Chronic Disease
* World Health Organization :
Chronic Disease and Health Promotion