KATHRYN BEAUMONT
Kathryn Beaumont ( born 27 June 1938 ) is an English actress , voice actress , singer and school teacher .
She is best known for providing Disney animated films with the voices of both Alice in Alice in Wonderland ( 1951 ) and Wendy Darling in Peter Pan ( 1953 ) , for which she was named a Disney Legend in 1998 .
Walt Disney personally cast Beaumont after seeing the film On an Island with You ( 1948 ) , in which she had a small role .
Beaumont reprised her voice acting role as Alice in two episodes of the animated series Disney 's House of Mouse ( 2001–2003 ) and as both Alice and Wendy in the 2002 video game Kingdom Hearts .
In 2005 , Beaumont retired as the voice of Alice and Wendy ; the roles were taken over by Hynden Walch .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Beaumont was born to Evelyn and Kenneth Beaumont in London , England on 27 June 1938 .
Her mother was a professional dancer , while her father was a singer .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Beaumont made her feature film debut in an uncredited role in It
Happened One Sunday ( 1944 ) , which drew interest from Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer , who offered her a contract .
She recalled : " MGM was planning to have films with British characters and British - type stories .
However , as ideas come and go , they must have shelved the idea because they brought me over and put me under contract , then nothing happened . "
After Beaumont had relocated to Los Angeles , Walt Disney Pictures began auditioning young British actresses to portray Alice in their animated version of Alice in Wonderland ( 1951 ) .
Beaumont auditioned and received the role , working under voice director Winston Hibler .
Disney subsequently cast her in the voice role of Wendy Darling in their following feature , Peter Pan ( 1953 ) .
In addition to providing her voice , Beaumont also served as the performance model for both characters for live - action reference to help the animators .
When performing as Wendy , Beaumont was suspended in the air to simulate flight , although Beaumont had a fear of heights .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
After completing Peter Pan , Beaumont graduated from high school and enrolled at the University of Southern California , where she graduated with a degree in education .
Upon graduating from college , Beaumont worked as an elementary school teacher in Los Angeles .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM AND TELEVISION
Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film and television . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS