STUDIO TOUR
The Studio Tour ( also known as The Backlot Tour ) is a ride attraction at the Universal Studios Hollywood theme park in the Los Angeles area of Universal City , California .
The Tour is the signature attraction at the park , and goes into a working movie studio , with various film sets on the lot .
In recent years , guests have sat in multi - car trams for the duration of the ride .
The Tour lasts about 45–60 minutes and is led by a live tour guide who can be seen throughout the tram on video screens .
It travels through the Front Lot , Backlot and various attractions , passing sets and props from movies along the way .
The tour inspired a smaller but similar version at Universal Studios Florida , which was removed in 1995 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The tour has always been at the heart of Universal .
From 1915 , when visitors sat on bleachers for 25 cents , to the 1964 introduction of pink and white GlamorTrams , to the current technological sophistication , the behind - the - scenes view of a working movie studio has been a large attraction .
During the early years of the tram tour ( 1964–1965 ) all of the attractions at Universal were reached via the tram .
The tour originally departed from the front lot commissary .
In 1965 , the upper lot studio tour center opened .
As the movie studio has continued to evolve , the tour has evolved along with it .
In late 1989 , CD players finally gave the tour guides a chance to rest their voices .
In 2000 , the CD players were replaced by DVD players and LCD screens , allowing the tour guides to show scenes from movies filmed at the locations which the tram passes .
In 2011 , Jimmy Fallon joined the tour as a video host to supplement the live - action narration and also appeared in some filming scenes .
Since 2006 , some studio tours have bypassed the Collapsing Bridge , due to aging and wearing .
However , the bridge has since undergone renovations , and was added back to the tour schedules in August 2008 .
Since July 2010 , the Collapsing Bridge has been used as a representation of the Skull Island area for the new attraction .
FILM SETS Section::::Film sets .
Sets from the Universal movies Psycho , Back to the Future , The Sting , The Great Outdoors , and Dr. Seuss '
How The Grinch Stole Christmas , and the Paramount / DreamWorks film War of the Worlds are visited in the tour .
Walt Disney Studios has also used the backlot for movies such as the Pirates of the Caribbean film series , 101 Dalmatians , 102 Dalmatians , and , specifically for town scenes .
There are also ' general purpose ' sets visited , such as the neighborhood Wisteria Lane from Desperate Housewives , and a neighborhood that is made to look like an old west town .
This neighborhood has six streets , each with the essentials of a saloon and sheriffs station .
Before the advent of sound , up to six westerns could be shot at once .
The tour also winds through sound stages , and the tour guide explains what movies , television shows , music videos , commercials , and/or still camera photo shoots are currently shooting on the lot .
Stage One , where The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien was filmed from June 2009 to January 2010 , was added to the tour .
O'Brien and announcer Andy Richter staged events outside the studio on occasion as part of The Tonight Show 's Tour - ific Tramtacular sketch .
The tram also passes by miniature models of the ship and Skull Island from the 2005 King Kong remake .
Until June 1 , 2008 , the tour also passed through a group of facades resembling city streets of New York ( used in the filming of Bruce Almighty and some elements in Transformers ) , , and New England , as well as the Courthouse Square set famously seen in the Back to the Future trilogy .
However , these sets were constructed mainly of wood and therefore were highly flammable , and burned to the ground in an early morning fire .
All the sets have been rebuilt and a new attraction at the Studio features , which opened July 1 , 2010 .
The area beside the Psycho house ( known as Psycho Flats ) used to be the site of Falls Lake — a large water - tank and waterfall used in numerous productions .
Falls Lake was moved over the summer of 2018 , and the area is currently occupied by the huge outdoor airplane - crash set built for War Of The Worlds , directed by Steven Spielberg .
Spielberg and crew were on the Universal backlot for three days shooting on the massive outdoor set .
A commercial Boeing 747 aircraft was chopped into pieces and transported to Universal , where the full set has been left fully dressed as it was during filming .
The only change made to the set following filming was to move the houses on the right of the tram off the road ( so the tram can pass safely ) .
As in the movie , there are no bodies in the plane wreckage , but during Halloween Horror Nights , a combination of cast members and dummies have been put in place as crash victims .
This set has also been used for two music videos , The Fray 's " Never Say Never " and " Fly " by Nicki Minaj .
STAGED EVENTS Section::::Staged events .
The Studio Tour includes some special demonstrations , as well as some small segments .
For example , an encounter with King Kong ( ) , a simulated flash flood , an 8.3 earthquake , a short encounter with Jaws , and a high speed car chase featuring the cast from the Fast & Furious movie franchise ( ) .
Jurassic Park
When the tram passes through the Isla Nublar set , guests are sprayed by animatronic Dilophosaurus .
It is very similar to the end of the Jurassic Park ride .
Psycho :
Bates Mansion ( 1964 )
The Psycho house was one of the big draws of the Universal Tram Tour , back in 1964 , and has continued to be instantly recognizable in recent years .
In 1984 , the Psycho house was used in the Knight Rider episode " Halloween Knight " .
The episode mentions of a man named Norman Baines who is supposed to be the murder suspect at a Halloween party .
Also , when Michael Knight , Bonnie and KITT arrive at the house , Michael mentions that " Boy , this place looks really familiar " before he says " Nah ! " .
The film Man on the Moon , a biopic about Andy Kaufman 's life story , was filmed in 1999 at an area near the house .
While in production , Jim Carrey , who portrayed Kaufman in the film , dressed up as " mother " and leapt out from behind the Psycho house with a rubber knife and jumped on the tram , scaring the passengers , including the guides .
The tour guides and tram operators reported the incident to the film crew who told them that the person in the costume was none other than Carrey himself .
It was break time during filming and he got bored and was trying to channel the creative energy of Kaufman .
Carrey wanted to repeat the stunt one year later while filming How The Grinch Stole Christmas which was being filmed behind the house , but this time in full Grinch costume .
However , he was stopped by the production that wanted to keep his costume and make - up under wraps until the film came out .
The park however kept Carrey 's idea and have cast actors dressed as Norman Bates slowly approach the tram with a rubber knife .
Flash Flood ( 1968 )
The downhill flood effect has appeared in many films , including Big Fat Liar and Fletch Lives .
There is a story that when a group of dignitaries and celebrities including John Wayne visited the Flash Flood in the early days , the water levels were still being perfected and the group got soaked .
JAWS ( 1976 )
The Jaws event opened a year after the release of Steven Spielberg 's 1975 film .
It is an animatronic attraction that features the moving shark and other sets .
The actual hero prop boat ' Orca ' was placed in the lagoon as a center piece , but was removed between 1991 and 1992 and chopped up for timber ( Jaws director Steven Spielberg learned of the fate of the ' Orca ' , much to his anger , after noticing it gone while he was on the ride ) .
The shark as seen in the attraction has had cameos in multiple television shows and films including the made - for - TV film The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan 's Island in 1981 , the episode " Hooray for Hollywood " from Diff'rent Strokes in 1984 , and the episode " Fright Knight " from Knight Rider in 1986 .
The Amity Harbor / Village area that is associated with the Jaws attraction ( minus the moving shark ) was the set used in two Airwolf episodes " The American Dream " ( Season 2 ) and " Where Have All the Children Gone " ( Season 3 ) .
Earthquake ( 1988 )
The Earthquake event is an 8.3 earthquake inside a soundstage , designed to make it look like a San Francisco subway station .
They have a hot set ; a hot set is a stage in which various props stay in use and can not be moved .
The attraction features a gimbal which allows it to shake the tram , a burning gasoline truck that collapses through the roof , fire and spark effects , a derailing subway train , and a flood of water .
The attraction resets itself within just 15 seconds to prepare itself for the next tramload of guests .
Psycho :
Bates Motel ( 2008 )
As the tram passes the Bates Motel , the guests witness Norman Bates carrying a corpse to a car .
After placing the body in the trunk , he notices the tram and walks towards it with a kitchen knife as the tram leaves just in time to escape .
Bates is portrayed by an Anthony Perkins lookalike .
If the actors are not available , a cardboard cutout of Anthony Perkins as Bates is used in the Cabin 1 window .
Whoville Comes To Life ( 2008 )
During the holiday season , at the Whoville set all of the Who s , even Max the dog , perform a musical spectacular for the guests ' enjoyment .
The songs are remixes of songs from the movie .
This is part of Universal 's Grinchmas celebration .
King Kong : 360 3-D ( 2010 )
Studio Tour guests wear 3-D glasses as the tram enters a sound stage dressed as a recreation of Skull Island .
Two Venatosaurus creatures attack and begin to chase the tram , which disturbs King Kong , who begins to fight them .
The fight continues from one side of the tram to the other , as air and water effects are blown onto guests to further the illusion .
Near the end of the experience , a V - Rex gets a hold of what is supposed to be the last tram car and pulls it from the train , throwing it down a pit .
Kong defeats the V - Rex and roars in triumph .
Previously , the tour showed a large pond area with a small scale boat to show how the filming of the boat arriving to Skull Island was done .
The Collapsing Bridge ( 1974–2006 , 2008–2010 , 2013 , 2014 )
The tour guide tries to take the tram around a bridge rather than going over it , but suddenly the tram driver takes the tram towards the bridge .
Just as the tram reaches the midpoint of the bridge , it creaks and massive timbers fall away , causing the bridge to " drop " the tram a short distance .
The tram drives on and guests can see the bridge rebuild itself for the next tram .
The bridge was used less - frequently starting in 2005 , and by March 2006 was no longer part of the regular tram tour due to mechanical problems .
The Collapsing Bridge was repaired and returned as part of the Studio Tour in August 2008 , after the June fire had closed much of the normal tram route .
As of July 2010 , King Kong : 360 3-D is located in front of the Collapsing Bridge .
The bridge itself is still there , but King Kong : 360 3-D has replaced it .
The current route is blocked by a crushed tram , used as set dressing for King Kong .
Fast & Furious :
Supercharged ( 2015 ) Fast & Furious :
Supercharged is located at the former site of the Curse of the Mummy 's Tomb tunnel .
This ride opened on June 25 , 2015 .
Nighttime Studio Tours ( 2015 )
In celebration of Universal Studios Hollywood 50th anniversary , the Nighttime Studio Tour complements the popular daytime experience by offering a nighttime tour of the famous studio backlot .
FORMER EVENTS Section::::Former events .
Rockslide ( 1974–1979 )
The tram stops inside a rock cliff which begins to collapse .
The tram gets past the cliff safely , but not before having a collision with the rocks .
The attraction was replaced by Battle of Galactica in 1979 .
Battle of Galactica ( 1979–1992 )
This high - technology attraction featured animatronics and live actors in a spectacular laser battle based on the television series Battlestar Galactica .
This was the first themed attraction to feature Audio - Animatronics characters outside a Disney park , and was the first dark ride to combine sophisticated animatronics and lasers with live actors .
It was replaced in 1992 by the foundations of .
Runaway Train ( 1974–1985 )
The tour guide leads the tram across a train track , thinking it is safe to cross .
However , a train suddenly rushes from the tracks and stops just in time before colliding with the tram .
The guide leads the tram away from the tracks to safety .
The train is now a stationary train in the backlot .
Avalanche Tunnel ( 1974–2001 )
The tour guide leads the tram into a revolving tunnel , simulating an avalanche , including fake snow spinning around the tram , and damaged signs , along with special sound effects .
It was replaced by Curse of the Mummy 's Tomb .
King Kong Encounter ( 1986–2008 )
The tram enters 1976 New York City where King Kong is on the loose and grabs and shakes the tram , which eventually escapes his grasp and gets out of the city safely .
The 7-ton , Kong figure was the largest and most complex animatronic figure in existence for many years .
The sophistication of the attraction broke new ground and paved the way for today 's themed attractions , including a Universal Studios Florida version .
The Kong sequence was also featured in the film
The Wizard starring Fred Savage and Indie singer Jenny Lewis .
This attraction opened on June 14 , 1986 , and was completely destroyed by a fire in the early morning of June 1 , 2008 .
As of June 3 , 2008 , Universal Studios officials stated that the experience would not be rebuilt , and instead was replaced by the new attraction , based on the 2005 film .
The Fast & The Furious :
Extreme Close - Up ( 2006–2013 ) ↵ Extreme Close - up is a demonstration of some of the special effects used in .
The attraction started construction in March 2006 and opened on June 15 , 2006 .
The area was formerly occupied by a model used in Dante 's Peak .
The section was closed in late July 2013 .
The studio had become increasingly frustrated with the portrayal of its Fast and Furious franchise at Universal Studios Hollywood after the blockbuster success of the sixth film .
This frustration eventually led to the unplanned closure of Fast and Furious on the Studio Tour after producers from the film witnessed the attraction first - hand .
On April 8 , 2014 it was confirmed that a new Fast & Furious " attraction would be built on the former site of the Curse of the Mummy Tunnel .
Curse of the Mummy 's Tomb ( 2001–2013 )
The tram guide tells guests that they are going to take a look at some props from the film The Mummy , but instead the tram is led into Imhotep 's cursed tomb , where he sucks them into a powerful revolving sandstorm .
The guide eventually leads the tram out of the sandstorm , and Imhotep is defeated .
The Curse of the Mummy 's Tomb closed on September 3 , 2013 and was later demolished in the same month .
It was confirmed on April 8 , 2014 that the site would become home to the new Fast and Furious attraction , replaced by , which opened on June 25 , 2015 .
King Kong Sea ( 2006 - 2016 )
The guide leads the tram to a body of water around Skull Mountain Island .
Suddenly , the waves part , and the tram travels between them , and guests get a view of the mini island .
Prior to the promotion of King Kong , guides informed guests that the waterfall effect was originally installed for the " parting of the Red Sea " scene from The Ten Commandments .
The surrounding pond was also featured as part of the film set from The Creature from the Black Lagoon .
For many years a mock - up of the creature stood in the pond .
NOTABLE TOUR GUIDES
* John Badham , Director * Michael Hitchcock , Actor * Michael Ovitz , Entertainment Executive *
Randy Pitchford , Video Game Developer
* Benjamin Salisbury , Actor * Tony Sepulveda , Vice President of Casting ,
Warner Bros. * Ryan Slattery , Actor * Jack Wagner , Singer and Actor * James Kyson Lee , Actor
* Conan O'Brien , Host of Conan and former host of The Tonight Show
* Ron Howard , Director * Jimmy Fallon , actor and current host of The Tonight Show * Ceilia Peck , Actress , Director , Daughter of Gregory Peck
* Brian Clark , Actor * Whoopi Goldberg , Actress PHOTO GALLERY SEE ALSO * Universal Studios Studio Tour ( Florida )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * theStudioTour.com - Unofficial website covering the development and history of Universal Studios .
* Inside Universal - Fan website covering Universal Studios Hollywood .
* Souvenir Books Studio Tour - Inside Universal - History