2007 NBA FINALS
The 2007 NBA Finals was the championship series of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) 's 2006–07 season , and was the conclusion of the season 's playoffs .
The best - of - seven series was played between the Western Conference champion San Antonio Spurs and the Eastern Conference champion Cleveland Cavaliers .
This was Cleveland 's first trip to the NBA Finals in their franchise history and San Antonio 's fourth .
The Spurs swept the Cavaliers 4 games to 0 .
Tony Parker was named the series ' MVP .
The series was televised on ABC under the ESPN on ABC branding , and produced low television ratings comparing to the 2002 NBA Finals , when the Los Angeles Lakers swept the New Jersey Nets .
This series was the last sweep in the NBA Finals until 2018 , where the losing team was once again the Cleveland Cavaliers .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
The Finals were played using the 2 - 3 - 2 format , where the first two and last two games are held at the team with home court advantage .
The NBA , after experimenting in the early years , restored this original format for the Finals in 1985 .
The other playoff series were played in the 2 - 2 - 1 - 1 - 1 format .
The best - of - seven series began on June 7 , 2007 , with the Western Conference champion San Antonio Spurs playing the Eastern Conference champion Cleveland Cavaliers .
Because the San Antonio Spurs had a better regular season win - loss record , they had home court advantage .
SERIES SUMMARY Section::::Series summary . !
Game ! !
Date ! !
Home Team ! !
Result ! !
Road Team
BACKGROUND
2007
NBA PLAYOFFS
San Antonio Spurs ( Western ConferenceCleveland Cavaliers ( Eastern Conference champion ) align =
right3rd seed in the West ,
3rd best league record !
colspan=2Regular season align =
left2nd seed in the East ,
7th best league record align =
rightDefeated the ( 6 ) Denver Nuggets , 4–1 !
colspan=2First
Round align
= leftDefeated
the ( 7 ) Washington Wizards , 4–0 align = rightDefeated the ( 2 ) Phoenix Suns , 4–2 !
colspan=2Conference
Semifinals align
= leftDefeated
the ( 6 ) New Jersey Nets , 4–2 align = rightDefeated the ( 4 ) Utah Jazz , 4–1 !
colspan=2Conference
Finals align
= leftDefeated the ( 1 ) Detroit Pistons , 4–2 REGULAR SEASON SERIES Section::::Regular season series .
The Cleveland Cavaliers won both games in the regular season series : SAN ANTONIO SPURS Section::::San Antonio Spurs .
The previous season saw the San Antonio Spurs drop a heartbreaking seventh game at home to the rival Dallas Mavericks in the second round .
As the new season began , the Spurs saw the Mavericks rolling through their regular season , on their way to a franchise best 67 win campaign .
Meanwhile , the Spurs struggled through their season through January .
With the main focus lying on Dallas and the Phoenix Suns , the Spurs found themselves flying under the radar .
A late - season surge resulted in a 58–24 regular season record , good enough for third seed in the Western Conference .
In the playoffs , the Spurs met the Denver Nuggets and their duo of Allen Iverson and Carmelo Anthony .
The Nuggets took game 1 , but the Spurs reeled off 4 straight wins to take the series in five games .
As San Antonio prepared to face off against the second seed Suns , the top - ranked Mavericks suffered a stunning first - round exit at the hands of the Golden State Warriors .
With the Mavericks gone , the stakes of the Suns - Spurs series shot up dramatically , and it was a closely competitive and controversial series .
The Suns had homecourt advantage , but that did not last past game 1 .
In a hotly contested battle of Western Conference heavyweights , each team tried to deliver a knockout blow .
The Spurs finally landed it , but by accident .
With the game in the balance Tony Parker and Steve Nash collided head - to - head .
A large gash opened along Nash 's nose and the medical staff could not stop the bleeding .
He was forced to sit out the final 45 seconds and watch the Spurs win , 111–106 .
Game 2 saw the Suns rebound and blow out the Spurs , 101–81 .
After this game , Suns center Amar'e Stoudemire called the Spurs a dirty team .
Game 3 switched back to San Antonio and saw a return of physical play , with Manu Ginóbili receiving a bruised and bloodied eye and Bruce Bowen kneeing Nash in the groin .
Tim Duncan led the Spurs to a 108–101 victory .
Games 4 and 5 were the most controversial of the series .
The Spurs , after being comfortably in control of game 4 , saw their 11-point fourth - quarter lead dwindle away to a 2-point Suns lead .
With 18 seconds left , Robert Horry bodychecked Nash into the scorers ' table .
Nash 's teammates jumped to his defense ; during the ensuing altercation , Stoudemire and Boris Diaw left the bench .
Their action violated NBA rules , and league commissioner David Stern suspended both players for game 5 .
Horry was also suspended two games for his flagrant foul on Nash .
In game 5 , in Phoenix , the short - handed Suns jumped out early to a 16-point lead , but in a reversal of game 4 , the Spurs came back in the final seconds and won the game 88–85 , giving San Antonio a 3–2 series lead .
The Spurs won game 6 of the series 114–106 in San Antonio , sending them to their fifth Western Conference finals since 1999 .
San Antonio went on to beat the Utah Jazz in five games to advance to the franchise 's fourth NBA Finals .
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS Section::::Cleveland Cavaliers .
In the replay of the previous year 's playoffs with the Cavaliers holding home court advantage against Washington Wizards , the Cavaliers swept the Wizards after the season - ending injuries of both Gilbert Arenas and Caron Butler .
In the second round of the playoffs , the Cavaliers faced the New Jersey Nets .
Again , the Cavaliers had home court advantage , and battled the Nets through 6 games before winning the series .
The Cavaliers advanced to the conference finals for only the third time in franchise history , and faced a familiar foe : the Detroit Pistons , the number one seed in the Eastern Conference , with their home court advantage .
This was the same Detroit team that knocked the Cavaliers out of the second round the previous year .
Expectations were high after a 7-game series the previous year and the two teams did not disappoint .
The first two games were close and saw Cleveland fall by identical 79–76 scores .
Down 0–2 in the series , the spotlight shifted back to Cleveland and LeBron James .
Another hard - fought set ensued , with the Cavaliers taking the two games at home 88 - 82 and 91 - 87 respectively .
Game 5 switched back to Detroit and produced one of the greatest moments in NBA history .
With 6:14 to go in regulation and his team clinging to a one - point 79–78 lead , James took over the game .
He scored 11 of the final 12 points to end regulation tied 91 - 91 .
In the first overtime , James scored all nine of the Cavaliers ' points , ending the period tied 100 - 100 .
In the second overtime , James again scored all nine of the team 's points to win , 109 - 107 .
Thus , in the last 16:14 of play , James scored 29 of the Cavaliers ' last 30 points , as well as all of their last 25 points .
The Cavaliers beat the Pistons at home in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals to earn the franchise 's first trip to the NBA Finals .
Cleveland became the third team in NBA history to win a best - of - seven conference finals series after trailing by 2 games .
STARTING LINEUPS
ROSTERS SAN ANTONIO
SPURS CLEVELAND CAVALIERS
PLAYER STATISTICS
San Antonio Spurs Cleveland Cavaliers align="left
" 1 0 0.0 .000 .000 .000 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 GAME SUMMARIES GAME 1 Section::::Game summaries .
Section::::Game 1 .
The Cleveland Cavaliers entered the 2007 Finals as newcomers .
Game 1 was their first NBA Finals game in franchise history , and the first for each of its players ( other than reserve point guard Eric Snow ) .
However , the San Antonio Spurs had been to the Finals in three of the past eight seasons , winning a championship each time .
With solid performances by Tim Duncan , Tony Parker , and Manu Ginóbili , the Spurs won the series opener in convincing fashion , limiting LeBron James to 14 points on 4–16 shooting .
GAME 2 Section::::Game 2 .
The Spurs took a stranglehold on momentum in Game 2 .
The Spurs ' big three overwhelmed the Cavs and the Spurs led by as many as 29 points in the third quarter .
They dominated the game during the first 3 quarters and played show - time basketball .
A furious 25–6 rally by Cleveland in the final quarter was n't enough as the Spurs took a 2–0 lead in the series .
GAME 3 Section::::Game 3 .
Rookie Daniel Gibson started Game 3 in place of the injured Larry Hughes but scored a series - low 2 points on 1 - 10 shooting .
As a team the Cavs shot only .367 , but out - rebounded the Spurs 48–41 .
Zydrunas Ilgauskas had a 2006–07 season high 18 rebounds .
On the game 's final play , LeBron James missed a potential game - tying 29 foot 3-pointer . Game 3 was the lowest scoring Finals game since 1955 , with Tim Duncan of the Spurs having his lowest scoring game in his NBA Finals career , with 14 points .
GAME 4 Section::::Game 4 .
San Antonio started out strong through the first three quarters , leading by as many as 11 .
Cleveland would stage a rally near the end of the third quarter and the first five minutes of the fourth , scoring 14 consecutive points to take its first second - half lead of the series .
However , the Spurs would stage a 12–3 rally of their own to retake the lead and win the series in a 4–0 sweep .
Twelve - year veteran Larry Nance was awarded the NBA championship game ball .
BROADCASTING
Section::::Broadcasting .
Coverage was produced by ESPN and televised on ABC in the United States , TSN in Canada , Sky Sports in the United Kingdom , Canal+ in France , Premiere in Germany , and more than 100 other broadcasters in over 200 countries .
Play - by - play announcer Mike Breen , analysts Mark Jackson & former Rockets head - coach Jeff Van Gundy , and courtside reporters Michele Tafoya & Stuart Scott provided commentary and analysis for the North American market .
The radio coverage on ESPN Radio features play - by - play man Mike Tirico and color analysts Dr. Jack Ramsay and Hubie Brown .
The featured song , aired throughout the playoffs , was The Pussycat Dolls " Right Now . "
Another song featured in the 2007 NBA Finals series , " It Ends Tonight " by The All - American Rejects , was aired at the end of the pre - game promo for Game 4 .
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
According to ESPN , the NBA Finals series was a television bust in the United States .
San Antonio 's four - game sweep of Cleveland finished with a record - low 6.2 television rating and 11 share on ABC , Nielsen Media Research said on June 15 , 2007 .
That was down 27 percent from the 8.5/15 for Miami 's six - game victory over Dallas from the previous year and 5 percent under the previous low , a 6.5/12 for San Antonio 's six - game win over New Jersey in .
San Antonio 's series - winning 83 - 82 victory on Thursday night got a 6.5/12 , down 17 percent from the 7.8/14 for Game 4 in 2006 .
Despite having the lowest ratings of any NBA championship series , game two of the 2003 series between San Antonio and New Jersey remains the lowest - rated game of all time in the history of the NBA Finals .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
The Spurs won 56 games in the succeeding 2007–08 season , but relinquished the Southwest Division title to the New Orleans Hornets due to a tie - breaker .
The Spurs had the last laugh , though , defeating the Hornets in seven games .
But their chance of defending their title was denied by the Los Angeles Lakers in five games of the conference finals .
After that , age and injury took its toll on the Spurs , as they proceeded to win only a single playoff series in three years ( 2010 , vs. Dallas 4–2 of the first round ) , before getting upset by the Memphis Grizzlies in the first round of the 2011 NBA Playoffs despite finishing with 61 wins .
The Spurs then retooled their roster , after which they appeared in three consecutive conference finals , beginning in 2012 , before making the NBA Finals in and against James and the Miami Heat .
The Spurs split the two Finals meetings against the Heat .
The Cavaliers won 45 games in the 2007–08 season , despite early - season contract issues involving center Anderson Varejão and guard Sasha Pavlović , and a mid - season trade for Ben Wallace .
They fell in the second round to the eventual NBA champions Boston Celtics in seven games , after a hard - fought duel involving LeBron James and Paul Pierce .
The Cavaliers would earn the league 's best record for the next two years ( 66 and 61 wins , respectively ) and boast the NBA 's MVP in James .
However , they were unable to win it all , losing to the Orlando Magic in six games of the 2009 Eastern Conference Finals and the Celtics in six games of the 2010 Eastern Conference Semifinals ( allowing the Lakers to win the Finals twice against the Magic and Celtics ) .
The latter playoff defeat would cost head coach Mike Brown his job , though he was later re - hired ( and fired again ) in the 2013–14 NBA season .
After that season , as a free agent , James left for the Miami Heat and helped them to four successive NBA Finals appearances , winning in and 2013 , while the Cavaliers sunk to an Eastern Conference - low 19 wins in the 2010–11 NBA season , which included a 26-game losing streak .
The Cavaliers then appeared in the NBA draft lottery four consecutive times , earning the top pick in three of them .
Those three top picks became Kyrie Irving ( 2011 ) , Anthony Bennett ( 2013 ) and Andrew Wiggins ( 2014 )
( Bennett and Wiggins were later traded to Minnesota for Kevin Love ) .
In July 2014 , James announced his return to the Cavaliers after the hiring of coach David Blatt , and they reached the against the Atlanta Hawks with a flawless 4 - 0 victory before falling to the Golden State Warriors in the finals 4 - 2 .
The following season , the Cavaliers returned to the Finals in a rematch against the Golden State Warriors and won the finals over the Warriors 4 - 3 with LeBron James winning the Finals MVP .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS