CATHERINE TRAMELL Catherine Tramell is a fictional character and main antagonist in the film Basic Instinct ( 1992 ) and its sequel , Basic Instinct 2 ( 2006 ) .
Catherine Tramell , created by writer Joe Eszterhas , is played by Sharon Stone in both films .
In Basic Instinct , Tramell is a serial killer and love interest of washed - up detective Nick Curran ; Basic Instinct 2 pairs her with the similarly troubled British psychologist Michael Glass .
One European critic defined Catherine Tramell as " a mix between the classic femme fatale and the new psycho killers , one of the most evil characters ever created , on Hannibal Lecter 's level " .
She was nominated to be a member of the American Film Institute 's " Best Villains " list .
She was also included as one of the best 250 fiction villains ever created .
In June 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named her one of the 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years .
APPEARANCES
BASIC INSTINCT
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Basic Instinct .
Basic Instinct establishes Tramell as a successful crime novelist who is connected to the violent stabbing death of a washed up rock musician , Johnny Boz who was found in his bed tied to the bed posts with a white silk scarf .
She is subsequently investigated by San Francisco homicide detectives Nick Curran ( Michael Douglas ) and Gus Moran ( George Dzundza ) , who learn that Boz died in exactly the same manner as a character in Tramell 's most recent novel .
Tramell shows little emotion upon hearing of Boz 's death and , under questioning by the police , behaves provocatively ; in the film 's most famous scene , Tramell re - crosses her legs to show that she is not wearing underwear beneath her short skirt .
Curran looks into Tramell 's troubled history and links her to the deaths of her parents , her counselor at UC Berkeley , and her former fiancé ; she also has a habit of befriending imprisoned murderers .
However , when he confronts Tramell , she taunts him with knowledge of his drug addiction .
Thinking that Tramell received the confidential information from an adversarial Internal Affairs investigator , Marty Nilsen , a violent Curran gets himself suspended and falls into a drunken stupor .
After Nilsen is found dead , he becomes the prime suspect .
Curran , increasingly seduced by Tramell , becomes sexually involved with her ; she tells him that he will be the basis of the character in her next novel .
A torrid affair between Tramell and Curran begins with the air of a cat - and - mouse game .
Curran shows up at a club and witness her sniffing cocaine in a bathroom stall .
Later , they have aggressive sex at Tramell 's apartment .
Tramell 's lesbian lover , Roxy , unsuccessfully attempts to kill Curran and dies in a car crash .
Tramell 's apparent grief over Roxy 's death leads Curran to doubt her guilt .
Curran then learns that as a college student , Tramell had a lesbian encounter with Beth Garner , a police psychologist he previously had an affair with .
Upon finding the manuscript to Tramell 's latest novel , Curran realizes that Moran is in danger ; he is too late to stop Moran 's apparent murder by Garner , whom he shoots when he thinks she is retrieving a weapon .
Evidence collected in Garner 's apartment points to her as the killer of Boz , Nilsen , Moran , and her own husband .
She is ultimately branded as the killer .
Curran is left confused and dejected , knowing from the manuscript that Tramell was involved in Moran 's murder and somehow set up Garner .
When he tries to confront her , the two end up making love .
During a session of pillow talk , Tramell reaches for something under the bed before abruptly resuming sex .
The camera pans below the bed to show Tramell 's weapon of choice — an ice pick — implying that she could kill Curran and wants to do it .
BASIC INSTINCT 2 Section::::Basic Instinct 2 .
Fourteen years after the events of the first movie , Tramell speeds through London in a sports car with Kevin Franks , an English football player .
After taking Franks ' hand to masturbate herself and reach climax , Tramell crashes the car into the River Thames and ultimately leaves Franks to drown .
When Scotland Yard finds evidence of her culpability in the death , Tramell is made to attend therapy sessions with a court - appointed psychologist , Dr. Michael Glass ( David Morrissey ) .
At her trial , Glass testifies that Tramell is a narcissist who suffers from a pathological " risk addiction " , showing no regard for right or wrong .
However , Glass ' testimony is deemed insufficient , and Tramell goes free .
Tramell begins playing mind games with Glass , who finds himself becoming both frustrated and increasingly intrigued by her .
Eventually , he succumbs to temptation and begins an illicit affair with Tramell .
However , following the murder of his ex - wife 's partner — a journalist planning to write a negative story about Glass — he suspects that she is trying to frame him for the killing .
As more people close to Glass turn up dead , his obsession with Tramell grows to the point where it threatens his career and livelihood .
In the meantime , Glass conducts a survey for the detective
Spt .
Roy Washburn ( David Thewlis ) , who has taken the Trammell 's case and he is now investigating the murders , and discovers aggravating elements for his earlier professional life .
Eventually , Glass himself can no longer tell right from wrong and now he suspects that everything was designed by the corrupt officer in order the latter to nail the writer .
During Glass ' confrontation with Tramell , she reveals that her latest novel is based on the present situation , featuring characters based on herself , Glass , and the victims .
Tramell gives to Glass a draft of her new book , in which suggests that her next victim is his colleague , Dr. Gardosh ( Charlotte Rampling ) .
However , this turns out to be a ruse tricking Glass into having a violent confrontation with Gardosh and subsequently shooting Detective Washburn .
Glass is subsequently committed to a mental hospital where Tramell reveals him the whole plot of her latest book called The Analyst , which had a better ending thanks to him , and flashbacks are shown of Glass committing all the murders .
The novelist tells him to come back soon , because she misses him , and leaves with a wicked smirk on her face .
Glass still sitting in his wheelchair takes the book on his hands and an enigmatic spasmodic movement is erased on his lips .
TRAMELL 'S VICTIMS IN BASIC INSTINCT Section::::Tramell 's victims in Basic Instinct .
Prior to and during Basic Instinct , the following people met a violent death , almost all of them killed by Catherine : !
Name ! !
Identity ! !
Method ! !
Catherine 's motive
A potential victim of hers is Nick Curran , who is almost stabbed during the film 's final scenes .
The ending is ambiguous : either Catherine retires from her criminal career for good or only postpones killing Nick .
Incidentally , Nick Curran has disappeared by the second movie .
During an interview in Spain , Sharon Stone commented that " poor Nick is dead , " implying with a swift stabbing motion that an ice pick was indeed used .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS