HEAD GASKET
A head gasket is a gasket that sits between the engine block and cylinder head(s ) in an internal combustion engine .
Its purpose is to seal the cylinders to ensure maximum compression and avoid leakage of coolant or engine oil into the cylinders ; as such , it is the most critical sealing application in any engine , and , as part of the combustion chamber , it shares the same strength requirements as other combustion chamber components .
TYPES
* Multi - Layer Steel ( MLS ) – Most modern head engines are produced with MLS gaskets .
These consist of two to five ( typically three ) thin layers of steel , interleaved with elastomer .
The contact faces are usually coated with a rubber - like coating such as Viton which adheres to the cylinder block and cylinder head while the inner layers are optimized for resilience .
* Solid copper – a solid sheet of copper , and typically requires special machining called ' o - ringing ' that places a piece of wire around the circumference of the cylinder to bite into the copper .
When this is performed copper gaskets are extremely durable .
Recently companies have started producing copper gaskets with integral sealing wires permitting their retrofit into engines without the removal of the engine block for machine work .
* Composite – an older technology .
Typically these are made from asbestos or graphite but are more prone to blowouts than newer gaskets .
Asbestos gaskets are becoming increasingly rare due to health concerns .
* Elastomeric – a gasket type used by Rover on their K Series engines .
It used a steel core plate with molded in place silicone rubber beads to seal oil and coolant passages .
The bores were sealed by rolled steel fire rings in a more conventional manner .
The idea behind the gasket design was to produce a production version of the technology used in F1 engines at the time .
The original application of the gasket on the smaller versions of the K Series was very successful .
However , an engine redesign resulted in persistent problems with the design – the joint interface became unstable and the gasket could not cope .
Section::::Types .
The cost of a replacement gasket is usually not extreme , but the price of total repair is significantly high .
This is because the process of removing / replacing an engine head is very time consuming - around 75 % of cost will be labor .
Furthermore , untreated blown gaskets usually seriously damage the engine , then requiring even more expensive work .
GASKET PROBLEMS Section::::Gasket problems .
The usual internal combustion engine is a water - cooled four - stroke gasoline design .
It uses three circuits of working fluids : * Combustible air / fuel mixture * * Water - based coolant , usually with glycol mixed * * Motor oil for lubrication *
These are all vital , but must never be allowed to intermix .
Apart from sealing the cylinder , the head gasket also seals water and oil conduits between the head and block .
Any connectivity between them will cause engine failure , or significant problems like burning oil ( smoke from the exhaust ) .
Blue exhaust smoke may be indicative of oil burning .
White exhaust smoke is an indicator of coolant burning , another sign of head gasket wear .
Occasionally , the compression in the cylinder will cause a leak to form in the gasket and the gasket will have to be replaced , or severe damage can take place ( a " blown " head gasket ) .
This problem has been exacerbated by the use of aluminum rather than iron cylinder heads ; while lighter than iron , aluminum has a much greater thermal expansion rate , which in turn causes a great deal more stress to be placed on the head gasket .
Engine makers have responded to this by adding a non - stick coating such as Teflon to the surface of the head gasket .
If the gasket fails , a variety of problems can occur , from compression loss ( leading to power reduction , or a rough engine ) , to exhaust gases being forced into the cooling system , leading to the engine overheating and increased engine wear due to the motor oil being mixed with antifreeze .
Coolant can leak into the cylinders , causing the exhaust to issue steam and the catalytic converter to be damaged .
If a very large amount of coolant does this , hydrolock can occur , causing extensive engine damage .
Sometimes , all that may happen when a head gasket is blown is excessive steam erupting from the tailpipe ; yet the engine may act and drive like normal , until all the coolant is gone and the engine overheats .
In other occurrences compression leaks into small spaces between the gasket , and either the cylinder head or engine block traps air that is then released when the engine is turned off .
The air then escapes into the coolant and creates air pockets .
Sometimes these air pockets can get trapped in the engine 's coolant thermostat , causing it to stay closed and cause further overheating , thereby creating still more voids between the gasket and the engine .
Air pockets can also cause the engine to expel coolant into the overflow or expansion tank , thereby reducing the amount of coolant the engine has available to stay cool .
The condition of a head gasket is typically investigated by checking the compression pressure with a pressure gauge , or better , a leak - down test , and/or noting any indication of combustion gases in the cooling system on a water - cooled engine .
Oil mixed with coolant and excessive coolant loss with no apparent cause , or presence of carbon monoxide or hydrocarbon gases in the expansion tank of the cooling system can also be signs of head gasket problems .
A good sign of head gasket failure on water - cooled engines is the presence of a substance that resembles mayonnaise in the oil , often to be seen on the dipstick , or oil filler cap .
However , the presence of this substance is not conclusive proof of head gasket failure , since oil could mix with the coolant via other routes .
A leaking head gasket can be classified as either external or internal .
An external leak can be identified as oil and coolant accumulating underneath the engine .
The presence of coolant can be detected by shining a black light on what appears to be an oil leak ; the appearance of coolant will show up under the black light .
External leaks can also appear as previously described in the oil .
An internal leak can usually be diagnosed by excessive coolant accumulating in the expansion tank along with the presence of hydrocarbons in the form of foam .
The possibility of vapors or condensation and/or water ( from the road or rain ) building up ( in aftermarket product installation ) from an external breather or catch tank from the head ( rocker cover ) can also cause a buildup of froth or foam in the oil but is highly unlikely .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ask 's Head Gaskets and Valve Covers Q&A
* How to Repair Your Head Gasket -
An example of how a head gasket was replaced .