GET RICH OR DIE TRYIN ' Get
Rich or Die Tryin is the debut studio album by American rapper 50 Cent .
It was released on February 6 , 2003 , by Shady Records , Aftermath Entertainment and Interscope Records .
Prior to the album , 50 Cent gained initial recognition as a producer , producing several songs alongside the Trackmasters on an unreleased album widely believed to be his debut in 2000 .
However , after suffering legal troubles and being blackballed from the music industry , 50 Cent found difficulty in securing another major - label recording contract , until he signed with Eminem 's Shady Records in 2002 .
After signing with Eminem , he also worked heavily with Dr. Dre , with the duo acting as the album 's executive producers , who worked to combine the gangsta rap and R&B combo prevalent in New York hip hop .
Additional production is provided by Mike Elizondo , Sha Money XL , Mr. Porter , Rockwilder , Dirty Swift , and Megahertz .
The album also contains guest appearances from Eminem , Young Buck , and Nate Dogg , as well as features from G - Unit co - members Lloyd Banks and Tony Yayo .
Released a week in advance to combat bootlegging and internet leakage ,
Get Rich or Die Tryin ' debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling over 872,000 copies in its first week of sales .
The album 's singles also saw commercial success , with both "
In da Club " and " 21 Questions " reaching number one on the Billboard Hot 100 ,
while " P.I.M.P. " became a number one hit in several countries .
The album would eventually sell over 8 million copies in the United States , and has become certified 6× platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) .
It also saw widespread critical success , becoming nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 46th Grammy Awards .
It is considered to be 50 Cent 's best album , and is ranked by Rolling Stone as one of the best albums of the 2000s .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Prior to the release of his mix - tape , 50 Cent was shot 9 times in Queens , New York in 2000 .
He managed to survive , but was dropped from his label , Columbia , and remained unsigned and in need of producing new music .
In 2002 , Eminem listened to a copy of 50 Cent 's Guess Who 's Back ?
mix - tape album through Jackson 's attorney , who was working with Eminem 's manager Paul Rosenberg .
After being impressed with the mixtape , Eminem invited 50 Cent to Los Angeles where he was introduced to producer Dr. Dre .
50 Cent signed a one million dollar record deal with Dr. Dre and released his next mixtape , No Mercy , No Fear .
It featured the 8 Mile single , " Wanksta " , which was later put on Get Rich or Die Tryin .
Both Eminem and Dr. Dre had started working - productions on his debut album with additional help from producers Mike Elizondo , Sha Money XL among others .
The first single "
In da Club " was the first of seven tracks he recorded in five days with Dr. Dre .
Eminem was featured on a couple songs , such as " Patiently Waiting " and " Do n't Push Me " .
His songs also featured rappers within G - Unit , such as Lloyd Banks ( " Do n't Push Me " ) , Tony Yayo ( " Like My Style " ) , or Young Buck ( " Blood Hound " ) .
The next single " 21 Questions " was not in line to be on the album to Dr. Dre , he stated that he did not want the song on the album .
According to 50 Cent , " Dre was , like , ' How you goin' to be gangsta this and that and then put this sappy love song on ? ' "
50 Cent responded saying , " I 'm two people .
I 've always had to be two people since I was a kid , to get by .
To me that 's not diversity , it 's necessity . "
" Back Down " was an instrumental originally composed by Dr. Dre .
It was originally intended to be used on Rakim 's debut Aftermath album , Oh My God , but due to creative differences was not released .
Early pressings of Get Rich or Die Tryin included a limited edition bonus DVD .
A music video for " Many Men ( Wish Death ) " was made .
The song was also certified Gold by the RIAA on June 14 , 2006 .
SINGLES Section::::Singles .
The album 's lead single , " In da Club " , was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , becoming 50 Cent 's first song to top the Billboard Hot 100 for nine weeks and remained on the charts for twenty - two weeks .
The track also reached number one on the Top 40 Tracks , Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs , and Hot Rap Tracks charts .
The song reached number one in Denmark , Germany , Ireland , and Switzerland and the top five in Austria , Belgium , Finland , Greece , Norway , Sweden , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom .
It received two Grammy nominations for Best Male Rap Solo Performance and Best Rap Song .
This is considered to be one of the best rap songs of all time , introducing a new sound and rhythm to rap .
It was listed at number 18 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Hip - Hop Songs of All Time " .
Its second single , " 21 Questions " , became 50 Cent 's second chart topper on the Billboard Hot 100 , where it remained for four non - consecutive weeks .
It spent seven weeks on top of the Billboard Hot R&B /
Hip - Hop Songs charts .
Outside the States , " 21 Questions " reached number six in the United Kingdom .
It was certified gold by the RIAA .
The third single " P.I.M.P. " was shipped with a remix featuring rapper Snoop Dogg and trio - group G - Unit .
It was the third single that peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on " Hot Rap Tracks " , becoming the third single from the album to peak in the top then on the " Hot 100 " chart .
It also reached number one in Canada .
It was certified Gold by RIAA .
The album 's final single , " If I Ca n't " , peaked at number seventy - six on the Billboard Hot 100 and thirty - four on the Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs charts .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Get Rich or Die Tryin received favorable reviews from contemporary music critics .
At Metacritic , it holds an aggregate score of 73 out of 100 , based on 19 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
In his review for USA Today , Steve Jones believed that the album is worthy of the hype 50 Cent had attracted because of how he " delivers , in vivid detail , stories of the violent life he led as a crack dealer and speaks with the swagger of one who has been shot nine times and lived to tell about it . "
AllMusic 's Jason Birchmeier described it as " impressive " and " incredibly calculated " , and identified it as " ushering in 50 as one of the truly eminent rappers of his era " .
Rolling Stone magazine 's Christian Hoard praised the album 's production and 50 Cent 's " thug persona " and rapping ability .
Brett Berliner of Stylus Magazine felt that he is versatile as a rapper and wrote that , " while not even close to perfection , [ the album ] is one of the freshest to come out in years .
" It is one of only 19 rap albums to receive a perfect rating from XXL magazine .
Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic in his consumer guide for The Village Voice and gave it a two - star honorable mention , indicating a " likable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well enjoy . "
He cited " What Up Gangsta " and " Patiently Waiting " as highlights and said that 50 Cent " gets no cuter as his character unfolds " on the album .
Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times wrote that 50 Cent is " an appealing , mischievous character " whose talent for threatening raps aimed toward rivals is also limiting thematically .
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE AND ACCOLADES Section::::Commercial performance and accolades .
Get Rich or Die Tryin debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 872,000 copies in its first week .
In its second week , the album sold an additional 822,000 copies .
It was the best - selling album of 2003 , selling 12 million copies worldwide by the end of the year .
It remains 50 Cent 's best - selling album , with sales of 8.4 million copies in the United States , and the tenth highest - selling rap album of all time in the country .
The album was certified 6× platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2003 for shipping six million copies in the US .
In December 2009 , Billboard magazine ranked Get Rich or Die Tryin at number 12 on its list of the Top 200 Albums of the Decade .
In 2012 , Complex named the album one of the classic releases of the last decade .
The single , " In da Club " , earned the number - one spot on Billboard 2003 's single and album of the year , the first since Ace of Base had both in the same year . "
Back Down " was listed on XXL 's list of the greatest diss tracks of all time .
The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
In 2003 , Get Rich or Die Tryin ' was ranked as the number one album of the year on the Billboard 200 .
Get Rich or Die Tryin ' was also ranked as the 139th best album of all time on the Billboard Top 200 Albums of All Time .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
Notes * –
additional production * – co - producer Sample credits *
" Patiently Waiting " contains an interpolation of " Gin and Juice " by Snoop Dogg .
* " Heat " does not appear on the clean version of the album .
* " Many Men ( Wish Death ) " contains a sample of " Out of the Picture " by Tavares .
*
" In da Club " contains an interpolation of " It 's Your Birthday " by Luther Campbell .
* " High All the Time " contains an interpolation of " Ready or Not " by Fugees .
*
" If I Ca n't " contains an interpolation of " Peter Piper " by Run – D.M.C. * " Poor Lil Rich " contains an interpolation of " Life 's On the Line " by 50 Cent .
* " 21 Questions " contains a sample of " It 's Only Love Doing Its Thing " by Barry White .
PERSONNEL Section::::Personnel .
Credits are adapted from AllMusic .
* 50 Cent – executive producer
* Justin Bendo – engineer * Sean Blaze – producer , engineer * Darrell Branch – producer * Tommy Coster – keyboards * Terence Dudley – producer
* Mike Elizondo – bass , guitar , keyboards , producer * Eminem – producer , executive producer , mixing * John " J. Praize " Freeman – producer * Marcus Heisser – A&R * Steven King – producer , mixing * Tracy McNew – A&R
* Megahertz – producer * Red Spyda – producer * Luis Resto – keyboards * Ruben Rivera – keyboards , assistant engineer
* Rockwilder – producer * Tom Rounds – engineer * Sha Money XL – producer , engineer , executive producer
*
Tracie Spencer – vocals
* Rob Tewlow – producer * Patrick Viala – engineer
* Sacha Waldman – photography
* Ted Wohlsen – engineer
* Carlisle Young – engineer , digital editing CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2003 ) !
Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2003 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row"Australian Albums Chart ! scope="row"UK
Albums Chart ! scope="row"US
Billboard 200 !
scope="col " Chart ( 2004 ) ! scope="col " Position ! scope="row"UK
Albums Chart ! scope="row"US
Billboard 200 CERTIFICATIONS IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
In his 2015 Netflix comedy special , Chris Tucker spoke about how Michael Jackson was a huge fan of "
In da Club " .
In the 2017 video game Paradigm , one of the records found inside Paradigm 's home is Get Rich or Die of Natural Causes , a reference to the album .
SEE ALSO
* List of Billboard 200 number - one albums of 2003 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS