THE BLUES BROTHERS ( FILM )
The Blues Brothers is a 1980 American musical comedy film directed by John Landis .
It stars John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd as " Joliet " Jake and Elwood Blues , characters developed from " The Blues Brothers " recurring musical sketch on the NBC variety series Saturday Night Live .
The film 's screenplay was written by Aykroyd and Landis .
It features musical numbers by rhythm and blues ( R&B ) , soul , and blues singers James Brown , Cab Calloway , Aretha Franklin , Ray Charles , and John Lee Hooker .
The film is set in and around Chicago , Illinois , where it was filmed .
It features non - musical supporting performances by Carrie Fisher , Henry Gibson , Charles Napier and John Candy .
The story is a tale of redemption for paroled convict Jake and his brother Elwood , who set out on " a mission from God " to save the Catholic orphanage in which they were raised from foreclosure .
To do so , they must reunite their R&B band and organize a performance to earn $ 5,000 needed to pay the orphanage 's property tax bill .
Along the way , they are targeted by a destructive " mystery woman " , Neo - Nazis , and a country and western band — all while being relentlessly pursued by the police .
Universal Studios , which had won the bidding war for the film , was hoping to take advantage of Belushi 's popularity in the wake of Saturday Night Live , Animal House , and the Blues Brothers ' musical success ; it soon found itself unable to control production costs .
The start of filming was delayed when Aykroyd , new to film screenwriting , took six months to deliver a long and unconventional script that Landis had to rewrite before production , which began without a final budget .
On location in Chicago , Belushi 's partying and drug use caused lengthy and costly delays that , along with the destructive car chases depicted onscreen , made the final film one of the most expensive comedies ever produced .
Concerns that the film would fail limited its initial bookings to less than half those a film of its magnitude normally received .
Released in the United States on June 20 , 1980 , it received mostly positive reviews .
It earned just under $ 5 million in its opening weekend and went on to gross over $ 115 million in theaters worldwide before its release on home video .
It has become a cult classic , spawning the sequel , Blues Brothers 2000 , 18 years later , which was a critical and commercial failure .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Jake Blues is released from Joliet Correctional Center after serving three years , and is picked up by his brother Elwood in his Bluesmobile , a battered , decommissioned police car .
Elwood demonstrates its capabilities by jumping an open drawbridge .
The brothers visit the Roman Catholic orphanage where they were raised , and learn from Sister Mary " the Penguin " Stigmata that it will be closed unless $ 5,000 in property taxes is collected .
During a sermon by the Reverend Cleophus James at the Triple Rock Baptist Church , Jake has an epiphany : they can re - form their band , " The Blues Brothers " – which disbanded while Jake was in prison – and raise the money to save the orphanage .
That night , state troopers attempt to arrest Elwood for driving with a suspended license due to 116 parking tickets and 56 moving violations .
After a high - speed chase through the Dixie Square Mall , the brothers escape .
The next morning , as the police arrive at the flophouse where Elwood lives , a mysterious woman detonates a bomb that demolishes the building , but miraculously leaves Jake and Elwood unharmed , and saves them from being arrested .
Jake and Elwood begin tracking down members of the band .
Five of them are playing a Holiday Inn lounge , and quickly agree to rejoin .
Another turns them down as he is the maître d ' at an expensive restaurant , but the brothers refuse to leave the restaurant until he relents .
On their way to meet the final two band members , the brothers find the road through Jackson Park blocked by an " American Socialist White People 's Party " – " the Illinois Nazis " – demonstration on a bridge ; Elwood runs them off the bridge into the East Lagoon .
The last two band members , who now run a soul food restaurant , rejoin the band against the advice of one 's wife .
The reunited group obtain instruments and equipment from Ray 's Music Exchange in Calumet City , and Ray , as usual , takes an IOU .
As Jake attempts to book a gig , the mystery woman blows up the phone booth he is using ; once again , he is miraculously unhurt .
The band stumbles into a gig at Bob 's Country Bunker , a local honky - tonk .
They win over the rowdy crowd , but run up a bar tab higher than their pay , and infuriate the country band that was actually booked for the gig , the Good Ol' Boys .
Realizing that they need one big show to raise the necessary money , the brothers persuade their old agent to book the Palace Hotel Ballroom , north of Chicago .
They mount a loudspeaker atop the Bluesmobile and drive the Chicago area promoting the concert — and alerting the police , the Nazis , and the Good Ol' Boys of their whereabouts .
The ballroom is packed with blues fans , police officers , and the Good Ol' Boys .
Jake and Elwood perform two songs , then sneak offstage , as the tax deadline is rapidly approaching .
A record company executive offers them a $ 10,000 cash advance on a recording contract — more than enough to pay off the orphanage 's taxes and Ray 's IOU — and then shows the brothers how to slip out of the building unnoticed .
As they make their escape via a service tunnel , they are confronted by the mystery woman : Jake 's vengeful ex - fiancée .
After her volley of M16 rifle bullets leaves them miraculously unharmed , Jake offers a series of ridiculous excuses that she accepts , allowing the brothers to escape to the Bluesmobile .
Jake and Elwood race back toward Chicago with dozens of state / local police and the Good Ol' Boys in pursuit .
They eventually elude them all with a series of improbable maneuvers , including a miraculous gravity - defying escape from the Illinois Nazis .
At the Richard J. Daley Center , they rush inside the adjacent Chicago City Hall building , soon followed by hundreds of police , state troopers , SWAT teams , firefighters , Illinois National Guardsmen , and the Military Police .
Finding the office of the Cook County Assessor , the brothers pay the tax bill .
Just as their receipt is stamped , they are arrested by the mob of law officers .
In prison , the band plays " Jailhouse Rock " for the inmates .
CAST
* John Belushi as " Joliet " Jake Blues * Dan Aykroyd as Elwood Blues * James Brown as Reverend Cleophus James * Cab Calloway as Curtis
* Ray Charles as Ray * Aretha Franklin as Mrs. Murphy
* Steve " the Colonel " Cropper –
lead guitar * Donald " Duck " Dunn – bass guitar
* Murphy Dunne ( " Murph " ) –
keyboards * Willie " Too Big " Hall – drums * Tom " Bones " Malone – trombone * " Blue Lou " Marini – saxophone
* Matt " Guitar " Murphy – lead guitar
* " Mr. Fabulous " Alan Rubin – trumpet * Carrie Fisher as Mystery Woman * Henry Gibson as Head Nazi
* John Candy as Burton Mercer * John Lee Hooker as Street Slim * Kathleen Freeman as Sister Mary Stigmata
* Steve Lawrence as Maury Sline
* Twiggy as chic lady
* Frank Oz as corrections officer * Jeff Morris as Bob * Charles Napier as Tucker McElroy * Steven Spielberg as Cook County Assessor
* Steven Williams as Trooper Mount
* Armand Cerami as Trooper Daniel
* Joe Walsh as Prison Inmate PRODUCTION ORIGINS Section::::Production .
Section::::Origins .
The characters , Jake and Elwood Blues , were created by Belushi and Aykroyd in performances on Saturday Night Live .
The name " The Blues Brothers " was the idea of Howard Shore .
The fictional back story and character sketches of blood brothers Jake and Elwood were developed by Aykroyd in collaboration with Ron Gwynne , who is credited as a story consultant for the film .
As related in the liner notes of the band 's debut album , Briefcase Full of Blues , the brothers grew up in an orphanage , learned the blues from a janitor named Curtis , and sealed their brotherhood by cutting their middle fingers with a steel string said to have come from the guitar of Elmore James .
Belushi had become a star in 1978 as a result of both the Blues Brothers ' musical success and his role in National Lampoon 's Animal House .
At one point , he managed the triple feat of being the star of the week 's top - grossing film , top - rated television show , and singing on the number - one album within a year .
When Aykroyd and Belushi decided they could make a Blues Brothers film , the bidding war was intense .
Universal Studios narrowly beat Paramount Pictures for the project .
John Landis , who had directed Belushi in Animal House , was aboard as director .
However , the project had neither a budget nor a script .
On the former issue , Universal head Lew Wasserman thought the film could be made for $ 12 million ; the filmmakers wanted $ 20 million .
It would be impossible to settle on a specific amount without a screenplay to review , and after Mitch Glazer declined to help him , Aykroyd wrote one on his own .
Aykroyd had never written a screenplay before , as he admitted in the 1998 documentary , Stories Behind the Making of The Blues Brothers , or even read one , and he was unable to find a writing partner .
Consequently , he put together a very descriptive volume that explained the characters ' origins and how the band members were recruited .
His final draft was 324 pages , which was three times longer than a standard screenplay , written not in a standard screenplay format , but more like free verse .
To soften the impact , Aykroyd made a joke of the thick script and had it bound with the cover of the Los Angeles Yellow Pages directory for when he turned it in to producer Robert K. Weiss .
He titled it The Return of the Blues Brothers , and credited it to " By Scriptatron GL-9000 " .
Landis was given the task of editing the script into a usable screenplay , which took him about two weeks .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in July 1979 , with the film 's budget still not settled .
For the first month , things ran smoothly on and off the set .
When Weiss saw the supposedly final $ 17.5 million budget , he reportedly joked , " I think we 've spent that much already . "
In the next month , the production began falling behind schedule .
Much of the delay was due to Belushi 's partying and carousing .
When not on the set , he went out to his familiar Chicago haunts such as Wrigley Field and the Old Town Ale House .
People often recognized him and slipped him cocaine , a drug he was already using heavily on his own , hoping to use it with him .
"
Every blue - collar Joe wants his John Belushi story " , said Smokey Wendell , who was eventually hired to keep it away from the star .
As a result of his late nights and drug and alcohol use , Belushi would often miss unit calls ( the beginning of a production day ) or go to his trailer after them and sleep , wasting hours of production time .
One night , Aykroyd found him crashing on the sofa of a nearby house , where Belushi had already helped himself to food in the refrigerator .
Cocaine was already so prevalent on the set ( like many other film productions of that era ) that Aykroyd , who used far less than his partner , claims a section of the budget was actually set aside for purchases of the drug during night shooting .
The stars had a private bar , the Blues Club , built on the set , for themselves , crew , and friends .
Carrie Fisher , Aykroyd 's girlfriend at the time , said most of the bar 's staff doubled as dealers , procuring any drug patrons desired .
The original budget was quickly surpassed , and back in Los Angeles , Wasserman grew increasingly frustrated .
He was regularly confronting Ned Tanen , the executive in charge of production for Universal , in person over the costs .
Sean Daniel , another studio executive , was not reassured when he came to Chicago and saw the production had set up a special facility for the 70 cars used in the chase sequences .
Filming there , which was supposed to have concluded in the middle of September , continued into late October .
On the set , Belushi 's drug use worsened .
Fisher , who herself later struggled with cocaine addiction , said Landis told her to keep Belushi away from the drug .
Wendell was hired to clear any from the places Belushi visited off - camera .
Nevertheless , at one point , Landis found Belushi with what he described as a " mountain " of cocaine on a table in his trailer , which led to a tearful confrontation in which Belushi admitted his addiction and feared it could eventually kill him .
After Belushi 's wife Judy and Aykroyd had a talk with Belushi about his antics , the production returned to Los Angeles .
Filming there again ran smoothly , until it came time to shoot the final sequence at the Hollywood Palladium .
Just beforehand , Belushi fell off a borrowed skateboard and seriously injured his knee , making it unlikely he could go through with the scene , which required him to sing , dance , and do cartwheels .
Wasserman persuaded the city 's top orthopedic surgeon to postpone his weekend plans long enough to stop by and sufficiently anesthetize Belushi 's knee , and the scene was filmed as intended .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
Much of the film was shot on location in and around Chicago between July and October 1979 , including Joliet Correctional Center in nearby Joliet , Illinois and Wauconda , Illinois , where the car crashes into the side of Route 12 .
Made with the cooperation of Mayor Jane M. Byrne , it is credited for putting Chicago on the map as a venue for filmmaking .
Nearly 200 movies have been filmed in Chicago .
" Chicago is one of the stars of the movie .
We wrote it as a tribute " , Dan Aykroyd told the Chicago Sun - Times in an article written to mark the film 's 25th - anniversary DVD release .
The first traffic stop was in Park Ridge , Illinois .
The shopping mall car chase was filmed in the real , albeit shuttered , Dixie Square Mall , in Harvey , Illinois .
The bridge jump was filmed on an actual drawbridge , the 95th Street bridge over the Calumet River , on the southeast side of Chicago .
The main entrance to Wrigley Field ( and its sign reading " Save lives .
Drive safely , prevent fires . " ) makes a brief appearance when the " Illinois Nazis " visit it after Elwood falsely registers the ballpark 's location , 1060 West Addison , as his home address on his driver 's license .
( Elwood 's Illinois driver 's license number is an almost - valid encoded number , with Dan Aykroyd 's own birth date embedded . )
Jake 's final confrontation with his girlfriend was filmed in a replica of a section of the abandoned Chicago freight tunnel system .
The other chase scenes included lower Wacker Drive , Lake Street , and Richard J. Daley Center .
In the final car chase scene , the production actually dropped a Ford Pinto , representing the one driven by the " Illinois Nazis " , from a helicopter at an altitude of about 1,200 feet — and had to gain a Special Airworthiness Certificate from the Federal Aviation Administration to do it .
The FAA was concerned that the car could prove too aerodynamic in a high - altitude drop , and pose a threat to nearby buildings .
The shot leading up to the car drop , where the " Illinois Nazis " drive off a freeway ramp , was shot in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , near the Hoan Bridge on Interstate 794 .
The Lake Freeway ( North ) was a planned but not completed six - lane freeway , and I-794 contained an unfinished ramp off which the Nazis drove .
Several Milwaukee skyscrapers are visible in the background as the Bluesmobile flips over , notably the U.S. Bank Center .
The Palace Hotel Ballroom , where the band performs its climactic concert , was at the time of filming a country club , but later became the South Shore Cultural Center , named after the Chicago neighborhood where it is located .
The interior concert scenes were filmed in the Hollywood Palladium .
The filming in downtown Chicago was conducted on Sundays during the summer of 1979 , and much of the downtown was cordoned off from the public .
Costs for filming the largest scene in the city 's history totaled $ 3.5 million .
Permission was given after Belushi and Aykroyd offered to donate $ 50,000 to charity after filming .
Although the Bluesmobile was allowed to be driven through the Daley Center lobby , special breakaway panes were temporarily substituted for the normal glass in the building .
The speeding car caused $ 7,650 in damage to 35 granite paver stones and a bronze air grille in the building .
Interior shots of the elevator , staircase , and assessor 's office were all recreated in a film set for filming .
BLUESMOBILE Section::::Bluesmobile .
The film used 13 different cars bought at auction from the California Highway Patrol to depict the retired 1974 Mount Prospect , Illinois Dodge Monaco patrol car .
The vehicles were outfitted by the studio to do particular driving chores ; some were customized for speed and others for jumps , depending on the scene .
For the large car chases , filmmakers purchased 60 police cars at $ 400 each , and most were destroyed at the completion of the filming .
More than 40 stunt drivers were hired , and the crew kept a 24-hour body shop to repair cars .
For the scene when the Blues Brothers finally arrive at the Richard J. Daley Center , a mechanic took several months to rig the car to fall apart .
At the time of the film 's release , it held the world record for the most cars destroyed in one film until it was surpassed by its own sequel .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
At Aykroyd 's demand , soul and R&B stars James Brown , Cab Calloway , Ray Charles and Aretha Franklin were cast in speaking parts to support musical numbers built around them .
This caused friction between Landis and Universal later in the production , as its costs far exceeded the original budget .
Since none of them except Charles had had any hits in recent years , the studio wanted the director to replace them with or add performances by younger acts , such as Rose Royce , whose " Car Wash " had made them disco stars after its use in the 1976 film of that name .
Other musicians in the cast include Big Walter Horton , Pinetop Perkins , and John Lee Hooker ( who performed " Boom Boom " during the Maxwell Street scene ) .
The members of The Blues Brothers band are notable for their musical accomplishments , as well .
Steve Cropper and Donald Dunn are architects of the Stax Records sound ( Cropper 's guitar can be heard at the start of the Sam & Dave song " Soul Man " ) and were half of Booker T. & the M.G. 's .
Horn players Lou Marini , Tom Malone , and Alan Rubin had all played in Blood , Sweat & Tears and the Saturday Night Live band .
Drummer Willie Hall had played in The Bar - Kays and backed Isaac Hayes .
Matt Murphy is a veteran blues guitarist .
As the band developed at Saturday Night Live , pianist Paul Shaffer was part of the act and was cast in the film .
However , due to contractual obligations with SNL , he was unable to participate , so actor - musician Murphy Dunne ( whose father , George Dunne , was the Cook County Board President ) was hired to take his role .
Fisher , Freeman , Gibson , and Candy were cast in non - musical supporting roles .
The film is also notable for the number of cameo appearances by established celebrities and entertainment - industry figures , including Steve Lawrence as a booking agent , Twiggy as a " chic lady " in a Jaguar convertible whom Elwood propositions at a gas station , Steven Spielberg as the Cook County Assessor 's clerk , John Landis as a state trooper in the mall chase , Paul Reubens ( before Pee - wee Herman ) as a waiter in the Chez Paul restaurant scene , Joe Walsh in a cameo as the first prisoner to jump up on a table in the final scene , and Chaka Khan as the soloist in the Triple Rock choir .
Muppet performer Frank Oz plays a corrections officer , and in the scene where the brothers crash into Toys R Us , a Grover and Kermit
the Frog toy can be spotted and a customer ( played by stunt coordinator Gary McLarty ) asks the cashier if they have a Miss Piggy doll , a Muppet character that is voiced by Oz .
Singer / songwriter Stephen Bishop is a deputy sheriff who complains that Jake and Elwood broke his watch ( a result of the car chase in the mall ) .
Makeup artist Layne Britton is the old card player who asks Elwood , " Did you get me my Cheez Whiz , boy ? "
The character portrayed by Cab Calloway is named Curtis as an homage to Curtis Salgado , a Portland , Oregon , blues musician who inspired Belushi while he was in Oregon filming Animal House .
Over 500 extras were used for the next - to - last scene , the blockade of the building at Daley Center , including 200 National Guardsmen , 100 state and city police officers , with 15 horses for the mounted police ( and three each Sherman tanks , helicopters , and fire engines ) .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Landis ' difficulties continued even after principal photography was completed .
The first cut of the film lasted two and a half hours , with an intermission .
After one early screening , Wasserman demanded it be shortened , and 20 minutes were cut .
The film 's final budget was $ 27.5 million ( equivalent to $ million in ) , $ 10 million over its original budget .
Prospects for a successful release did not look good .
Aykroyd and Belushi had left SNL at the end of the previous season , reducing their bankability .
Belushi 's fame had taken a further hit after the commercial and critical failure of 1941 at the end of the year .
One day after the editing was done , Wasserman invited Landis up to his office to speak with Ted Mann , head of the Mann Theatres chain , which dominated film exhibition in the Western United States .
He told Landis that he would not book the film at any theaters in predominantly white neighborhoods , such as Westwood .
Not only did Mann not want black patrons going there to see the film , he surmised that white viewers were unlikely to see a film featuring older black musical stars .
Ultimately The Blues Brothers got less than half the bookings nationwide for its initial release than a typical big - budget studio film of the era , which did not bode well for its success at the box office .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Blues Brothers opened on June 20 , 1980 , with a release in 594 theaters .
It took in $ 4,858,152 , ranking second for that week ( after The Empire Strikes Back ) and 10th for the entire year .
Over the years , it has retained a following through television and home video .
The film in total grossed $ 57,229,890 domestically and $ 58,000,000 in foreign box offices for a total of $ 115,229,890 .
By genre , it is the ninth - highest grossing musical and the 10th - highest earner among comedy road movies .
It ranks second , between Wayne 's World and Wayne 's World 2 , among films adapted from Saturday Night Live sketches .
Director John Landis claimed The Blues Brothers was also the first American film to gross more money overseas than it did in the United States .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The Blues Brothers received mostly positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an 85 % " Certified Fresh " rating , based on 53 reviews , with an average rating of 7.1/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Too over the top for its own good , but ultimately rescued by the cast 's charm , director John Landis ' grace , and several soul - stirring musical numbers .
" It won the Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing and Sound Effects , is 14th on Total Film magazine 's " List of the 50 Greatest Comedy Films of All Time " and is number 69 on Bravo 's " 100 Funniest Movies " .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three out of four stars , praising it for its energetic musical numbers and said the car chases were " incredible " if so over - the - top that they finally became numbing .
Ebert further noted " Belushi and Aykroyd come over as hard - boiled city guys , total cynics with a world - view of sublime simplicity , and that all fits perfectly with the movie 's other parts .
There 's even room , in the midst of the carnage and mayhem , for a surprising amount of grace , humor , and whimsy .
" In his review for The Washington Post , Gary Arnold criticized Landis for engorging " the frail plot of The Blues Brothers with car chases and crack - ups , filmed with such avid , humorless starkness on the streets of Chicago that comic sensations are virtually obliterated " .
Time magazine 's Richard Corliss wrote , " The Blues Brothers is a demolition symphony that works with the cold efficiency of a Moog synthesizer gone sadistic " .
Janet Maslin of The New York Times criticized the film for shortchanging viewers on more details about Jake and Elwood 's affinity for African - American culture .
She also took director Landis to task for " distracting editing " , mentioning the Soul Food diner scene in which saxophonist Lou Marini 's head is out of shot as he dances on the counter .
In the documentary , Stories Behind the Making of The Blues Brothers , Landis acknowledges the criticism , and Marini recalls the dismay he felt at seeing the completed film .
Kim Newman , writing for Empire in 2013 , considered The Blues Brothers to be " an amalgam of urban sleaze , automobile crunch and blackheart rhythm and blues " with " better music than any film had had for many years " .
He noted that Belushi and Aykroyd pack in their heroes : " Aretha storming through ' Think ' , Cab Calloway cruising through ' Minnie the Moocher ' , John Lee Hooker boogying through ' Boom Boom ' and Ray Charles on electric piano , not to mention the hottest band . "
He observed that " the picture had revived the careers of virtually all the musicians that appeared in it " and concluded " it still sounds great and looks as good as ever through Ray Bans " .
On the 30th anniversary , L'Osservatore Romano , the daily newspaper of Vatican City State , wrote that the film is filled with positive symbolism and moral references that can be related to Catholicism .
They went further , stating , The Blues Brothers " is a memorable film , and , judging by the facts , a Catholic one . " CULT - FILM STATUS Section::::Cult - film status .
The Blues Brothers has become a staple of late - night cinema , even slowly morphing into an audience - participation show in its regular screenings at the Valhalla Cinema , in Melbourne , Australia .
John Landis acknowledged the support of the cinema and the fans by a phone call he made to the cinema at the 10th - anniversary screening , and later invited regular attendees to make cameo appearances in Blues Brothers 2000 .
The fans act as the members of the crowd during the performance of " " .
In August 2005 , a 25th - anniversary celebration for The Blues Brothers was held at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles .
Attendees included Landis , former Universal Studios executive Thom Mount , film editor George Folsey , Jr. , and cast members James Brown , Henry Gibson , Charles Napier , Steve Cropper , and Stephen Bishop .
It featured a press conference , a panel discussion where Dan Aykroyd joined by satellite , and a screening of the original theatrical version of the film .
The panel discussion was broadcast direct to many other cinemas around the country .
The popularity of the film has also spread overseas .
The film was an inspiration for Japanese companies Studio Hibari and Aniplex , which led to the creation of the manga and anime franchise Nerima Daikon Brothers , which contain heavy references to the film .
AMERICAN FILM INSTITUTE
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Laughs - Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs : * Think - Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movie Quotes : *
" We 're on a mission from God . "
- Nominated RELEASE HOME MEDIA Section::::Release .
Section::::Home media .
When the film was first screened for a preview audience , a producer demanded that director Landis cut 25 minutes from the film .
After trimming 15 minutes , it was released in theaters at 132 minutes .
It was first released on VHS and Betamax from MCA Videocassette Inc. in 1983 .
A Laserdisc from MCA Videodisc was released the same year .
It was re - released on VHS , Laserdisc , and Betamax in 1985 from MCA Home Video , and again in 1990 from MCA / Universal Home Video .
It was also released in a 2-Pack VHS box set with Animal House .
The film 's original length was restored to 148 minutes for the " Collector 's Edition " DVD and a Special Edition VHS and Laserdisc release in 1998 .
The DVD and Laserdisc versions included a 56-minute documentary called " The Stories Behind The Making Of The Blues Brothers " .
Produced and directed by JM Kenny ( who also produced the Animal House Collector 's Edition DVD the same year ) , it included interviews with Landis , Aykroyd , members of The Blues Brothers Band , producer Robert K. Weiss , editor George Folsey Jr. , and others involved with the film .
It also included production photographs , the theatrical trailer , production notes , and cast and filmmaker bios .
The 25th - anniversary DVD release in 2005 included both the theatrical cut and the extended version .
The film was released on Blu - ray on July 26 , 2011 , with the same basic contents as the 25th - anniversary DVD .
In a March 2011 interview with Ai n't it Cool News , Landis also mentioned he had approved the Blu - ray 's remastered transfer .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The Blues Brothers : Original Soundtrack Recording ( later re - released as The Blues Brothers :
Music from the Soundtrack ) was released on June 20 , 1980 as the second album by the Blues Brothers Band , which also toured that year to promote the film .
"
Gimme Some Lovin' " was a Top 20 Billboard hit , peaking at number 18 .
The album was a followup to their debut , the live album , Briefcase Full of Blues .
Later that year they released a second live album , Made in America , which featured the Top 40 track , " Who 's Making Love " .
The songs on the soundtrack album are a noticeably different audio mix than in the film , with a prominent baritone saxophone in the horn line ( also heard in the film during " Shake a Tail Feather " , though no baritone sax is present ) , and female backing vocals on
" Everybody Needs Somebody to Love " , though the band had no other backup singers , besides Jake & /or Elwood , in the film .
A number of regular Blues Brothers ' members , including saxophonist Tom Scott and drummer Steve Jordan , perform on the soundtrack album , but are not in the film .
According to Landis in the 1998 documentary The Stories Behind the Making of ' The Blues Brothers , filmed musical performances by Franklin and Brown took more effort , as neither artist was accustomed to lip - synching their performances on film .
Franklin required several takes , and Brown simply rerecorded his performance live .
Cab Calloway initially wanted to do a disco variation on his signature tune , " Minnie the Moocher " , having done the song in several styles in the past , but Landis insisted that the song be done faithful to the original big - band version .
CERTIFICATIONS OTHER SONGS IN THE FILM Section::::Certifications .
Section::::Other songs in the film .
The film 's score includes " God Music " ( instrumental with choir vocalese ) composed by Elmer Bernstein , who previously had worked with John Landis on National Lampoon 's Animal House .
Other songs in the film include : SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
The 1998 sequel , Blues Brothers 2000 , had similar traits to the original , including large car - chase scenes and musical numbers .
Landis returned to direct the film and Aykroyd reprised his role , joining John Goodman , Joe Morton , and 10-year - old J. Evan Bonifant as the new Blues Brothers .
Franklin and Brown were among the celebrities returning from the first film .
There were also musical performances by Sam Moore , Wilson Pickett , Paul Shaffer , B.B. King , and Eric Clapton , among others .
Dozens of artists were packed into an all - star band called The Louisiana Gator Boys .
Even with many returning cast members , the film was considered a box - office failure , only generating a little over $ 14 million in sales , and critics ' reactions were negative .
SEE ALSO
* The Blues Brothers Video Game REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS