5
A DAY 5
A Day is any of various national campaigns in countries such as the United States , the United Kingdom , France , and Germany , to encourage the consumption of at least five portions of fruit and vegetables each day , following a recommendation by the World Health Organization that individuals consume " a minimum of 400 g of fruit and vegetables per day ( excluding potatoes and other starchy tubers ) .
" A meta - analysis of the many studies of this issue was published in 2017 and found that consumption of double the minimum recommendation – 800 g or 10 a day – provided an increased protection against all forms of mortality .
EVIDENCE
Section::::Evidence .
It is clear that eating fruit and vegetables improves health .
Increasing vegetable intake to this desired level has a variety of major and minor health benefits .
Benefits include reduction in the risk of many types of cancer , hypertension , heart disease , stroke , and diabetes .
The National Cancer Institute Provided research for the program , while the Produce for Better Health Foundation implemented the program into the food service industry .
INTERNATIONAL VIEWS
AUSTRALIA Section::::International views .
Section::::Australia .
Go for 2 & 5 is the equivalent campaign in Australia , in which adults are said to need to eat at least two serves of fruit and five serves of vegetables each day .
A " standard serve of fruit " is 150 grams of fresh fruit , whereas a " standard serve of vegetables " is 75 grams .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , the Canadian Produce Marketing Association ( CPMA ) , the Heart and Stroke Foundation 's Health Check Program , and the Canadian Cancer Society have partnered together to create the Fruits and Veggies — Mix it up !
campaign , encouraging Canadian families to eat more healthily .
The campaign focuses on easy ways for people to eat healthy wherever and whenever they can .
FRANCE Section::::France .
The French PNNS ( Programme national nutrition santé , National nutrition health programme ) recommends at least 5 portions of fruit and/or vegetables per day .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
The 5 am Tag ( 5 a Day ) program operates in Germany .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
The 5 A Day campaign in Japan is administered by an NPO : 5 A DAY Association - Japan ( 一般社団法人 ファイブ・ア・デイ協会 ) .
The program recommends five servings a day totaling 350 grams of vegetables and 200 grams of fruit .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
5
A Day is also known as 5 + A Day in New Zealand .
5
+ A Day was founded in New Zealand in 1994 by non - profit United Fresh New Zealand and became a Charitable Trust in 2007 .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
Fem om dagen ( five a day ) is the Norwegian Directorate for Health recommendation to eat five portions of fruit , berries or vegetables each day .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The National Health Service explains a " portion " to be : two or more small - sized , one piece of medium - sized or half a piece of large fresh fruit ; or two broccoli spears or four heaped tablespoons of cooked kale , spinach , spring greens or green beans ; or three heaped tablespoons of cooked vegetables ; or three sticks of celery , a 5 cm piece of cucumber , one medium tomato or seven cherry tomatoes ; or three or more heaped tablespoons of beans or pulses .
The programme was introduced by the UK Department of Health in the winter of 2002–2003 , and received some adverse media attention because of the high and rising costs of fresh fruit and vegetables .
After ten years , research suggested that few people were meeting the target .
The campaign has come under criticism from Channel 4 because of government failure to prevent the food industry from claiming that their products constitute part of a five a day despite having added salt , sugar or fat .
In April 2014 , a study by University College London concluded that ' 5 a day ' was not enough and that a healthy diet should contain 10 portions of fruit and vegetables .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The 5 a Day program in the United States was originally the National Fruit and Vegetable Program but was rebranded Fruits & Veggies – More Matters in March 2007 .
SEE ALSO
* Food and Nutrition Service *
Food Balance Wheel * Food groups
* Food pyramid
* Fruits & Veggies - More Matters
* Healthy diet *
Healthy eating pyramid
* History of USDA nutrition guides * Human nutrition
* MyPlate * MyPyramid REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * UK NHS site * UK Department of Health site
* US CDC site * World Health Organization press release
* Japan 5 A Day