BIRMINGHAM BRIDGE
The Birmingham Bridge ( known during construction as the Brady Street Bridge ) is a bowstring arch bridge in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , which crosses over the Monongahela River .
The bridge connects East Carson Street on the South Side with Fifth and Forbes Avenues going to Uptown , Oakland , and the Hill District .
It is named in honor of the English city of Birmingham and also for the neighborhood it connects to , which was once called Birmingham , now a part of the South Side .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Birmingham Bridge was built in 1976 .
It replaced the South 22nd Street Bridge ( aka Brady Street Bridge ) , which was demolished on May 29 , 1978 .
Six days before the demolition , Pittsburgh Police , Fire , and EMS responded to a construction worker who had pinned his leg near the top of the span .
After attempting unsuccessful rescues , they finally hoisted a surgeon to the site and were forced to amputate on site to save the worker 's life .
After the Brady Street Bridge came down , railings from its remains were rescued by the Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation and utilized in the construction of the Station Square station .
The Birmingham Bridge is notable for the dead end lanes that were originally to be part of a city belt system .
The project was canceled and the bridge rerouted .
A pedestrian walkway runs along the downstream side of the bridge , ending at steps at the south abutment of the bridge .
On April 2 , 2007 large sections of the bridge were shut down for repair .
The repair project was expected to finish on November 1 , 2007 .
While the project did not complete on time , by late November all barricades had been removed and all lanes were again open .
During the bridge rehabilitation , bike lanes were added along the outer sides of both the northbound and southbound traffic lanes .
On February 8 , 2008 the bridge was closed for inspection after a motorist called 911 when the deck dropped several inches .
PennDOT indicated that one of the rockers that support bridge beams slipped and " feels it is in the best interest of the traveling public to close the outbound lanes at this time and conduct a thorough inspection to ensure the integrity of the structure .
In the early morning hours of Monday , March 3 , 2008 , the southbound deck reopened for to serve traffic in both directions , cars and buses only .
On September 8 , 2008 , the northbound deck fully reopened and northbound traffic was relocated to it .
The inner lane of the southbound deck remained closed , and southbound trucks were still barred from the span .
It was originally called the Brady Street Bridge during construction , but in March 1977 the Pennsylvania General Assembly renamed it the Birmingham Bridge at the behest of State Senator James A. Romanelli .
IN THE MEDIA Section::::In the media .
In the TV show Fringe , the Birmingham Bridge collapsed in September 2007 from an unknown cause .
SEE ALSO * Brady Street Bridge , the previous bridge at the same location *
List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in Pennsylvania
* List of crossings of the Monongahela River
* Birmingham , Allegheny County , Pennsylvania , the former borough which it served and bearing its namesake .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Brady Street Bridge at pghbridges.com
* Birmingham Bridge at pghbridges.com