BABY BOOM ( FILM )
Baby Boom is a 1987 romantic comedy film directed by Charles Shyer , written by Nancy Meyers and Shyer , and produced by Meyers and Bruce A. Block for United Artists .
It stars Diane Keaton as a yuppie who discovers that a long - lost cousin has died , leaving her a six - month - old baby girl as inheritance .
The film received generally favorable reviews and was a modest box - office success during its original run , eventually grossing $ 26 million .
The film launched a subsequent television show , running from 1988 to 1989 , and was nominated for two Golden Globe Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
J. C. Wiatt ( Diane Keaton ) is a driven Manhattan career woman ( nicknamed the " Tiger Lady " ) typical of the 1980s whose fast - paced life leaves her with no time for romance or relaxation ( or as the narrator in the beginning puts it she works " 5 to 9 " ) , though she derives pleasure from her frantic schedule and demanding job .
She works as a management consultant and lives with an investment banker , Steven Buchner ( Harold Ramis ) , whose job and life are likewise hectic .
Her life is thrown into turmoil when she inherits a toddler , Elizabeth ( twins Kristina and Michelle Kennedy ) , from a deceased cousin whom she had not seen in over 30 years .
J.C. tries to give Elizabeth up for adoption but finds that she has grown too attached to the child , forcing a reevaluation of her priorities .
When Steven learns of this , he is not thrilled .
J.C. explains to Steven that a lot of working people raise kids and she believes she can , too .
Steven is aware of that but tells J.C. that he just ca n't raise the baby with her as raising children just does n't fit into his hectic life .
Steven packs his belongings and moves out .
J.C. is left to raise the child on her own , though she hires a nanny to watch Elizabeth while she 's at work .
Her boss , Fritz Curtis ( Sam Wanamaker ) tells her that Hughes Larrabee ( Pat Hingle ) , the head of " The Food Chain , " a major organization that owns and operates many brands of foods , is looking for someone to manage The Food Chain account .
Fritz tells J.C. that landing this account could make her a partner .
J.C. manages to land the account with her tough business attitude and is put in charge of it .
Fritz also decides that Ken Arrenberg ( James Spader ) , J.C. 's young apprentice whom she also recruited 2 years ago , is ready for the big time and will be on her team with the Food Chain account .
Caring for the child soon occupies much of her time and her career begins to suffer , especially when she starts bringing Elizabeth to classes that are intended to help boost babies ' intelligence .
As a result , Ken starts taking up the slack on the Food Chain account without J.C. 's consent , though it pleases Fritz and Larrabee .
This starts to get on J.C. 's nerves , especially when Ken starts making decisions without her .
J.C. tells Fritz that she wants Ken off the Food Chain account but instead to her surprise , Fritz tells her that he 's decided that for the good of the account and the company , he 's going to take her off the Food Chain account and
have Ken take over as the one in charge of it .
J.C. is offended as she got them the account in the first place .
Fritz , knowing how unstable J.C. has become , tells her that he ca n't afford to take risks with the Food Chain account .
He tells J.C. that he wants her to do low profile accounts from now on as he feels they would be better suited for her now that she is raising a child .
J.C. has too much pride to take such a big step down and quits her job instead .
She moves into a house in the country in Vermont .
Purchasing the home without first having seen it in person or having it inspected
she finds it is riddled with problems ( failing plumbing and heating , lack of water , bad roof ) .
Suffering a nervous breakdown and on the brink of financial collapse , she sees an opportunity to sell baby food applesauce she had concocted for Elizabeth from fresh ingredients .
Amid the clamor for her new products she develops a relationship with local veterinarian Jeff Cooper ( Sam Shepard ) .
At first annoyed by him , she is opposed to Jeff 's overtures and is focused now on returning to New York as fast as possible .
Finding a buyer for the house proves almost impossible as it was for sale for 5 years and she was the only interested buyer .
After a rough start she succeeds in selling " Country Baby " , her gourmet baby food , and soon business is booming .
Orders for it start pouring in from all over America .
J.C. and Jeff start to grow closer , even Elizabeth grows fond of him .
Finally , her old boss Fritz and his client , Larrabee take notice .
The Food Chain offers to buy her company for millions , take her product nationwide , and give her back her career and high - prestige life .
On the brink of accepting , she decides that she can grow her enterprise on her own without having to sacrifice her personal life .
She returns to Vermont , to her new lover and adopted daughter .
CAST
* Diane Keaton as J.C. Wiatt * Sam Shepard as Dr. Jeff Cooper
* Harold Ramis as Steven Buchner * Sam Wanamaker as Fritz Curtis
* James Spader as Ken Arrenberg
* Pat Hingle as Hughes Larrabee
* Britt Leach as Verne Boone * Annie Golden as a Nanny * Linda Ellerbee as Narrator * Kim Sebastian as Robin
* Mary Gross as Charlotte Elkman
* Kristina & Michelle Kennedy as Baby Elizabeth PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was shot on location in Los Angeles , New York City and Peru , Vermont .
Filming took place between November 5 , 1986 and February 3 , 1987 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Baby Boom was favorably received by audiences and critics alike .
The Rotten Tomatoes criticism aggregation website gives it an approval rating of 79 % based on 19 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
Diane Keaton 's performance was singled out by Pauline Kael from The New Yorker , who described it as " a glorious comedy performance that rides over many of the inanities in this picture ( ... )
Keaton is smashing :
the Tiger Lady 's having all this drive is played for farce and Keaton keeps you alert to every shade of pride and panic the character feels .
She 's an ultra - feminine executive , a wide - eyed charmer , with a breathless ditziness that may remind you of Jean Arthur in THE MORE THE MERRIER . "
Baby Boom 's writers combat a one - dimensional review in which American journalist , writer , and university professor Caryn James expresses her distaste in J.C.
" abandon[ing ] a high - powered Manhattan career for the joys of life in Vermont with a baby and Sam Shepard . "
The article , published on August 13 , 1989 by the New York Times , calls forth the intersectionality of a working mother and explains how J.C. 's search for equality prompted her to leave her elite New York position .
According to its writers , Baby Boom depicts " the increasing prejudice women face today " stereotyped into two categories - the sweet caregiver or the self - reliant businesswoman - and aims to destroy that outdated mindset .
NOMINATIONS
* Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Comedy or Musical - Diane Keaton ( Nominated ) * Golden Globe Best Motion Picture Comedy or Musical ( Nominated )
* National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress - Diane Keaton ( Nominated ) * American Comedy Awards Funniest Actress in a Motion Picture - Diane Keaton ( Nominated ) BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
It earned a respectable USD$1,608,924 in its opening weekend in the U.S. and earned approximately $ 26,712,476 in its entire run .
HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
The film debuted strongly on VHS .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS