FIREARM LEGISLATION IN SOUTH AFRICA
In South Africa , the Firearms Control Act 60 of 2000 regulates the ownership of firearms by civilians .
Ownership of a firearm is conditional on a competency test and several other factors , including background checking of the applicant , inspection of an owner 's premises , and licensing of the weapon by the police introduced in July 2004 .
The process is currently undergoing review , as the police are at present , not able to adequately or within reasonable time , process either competency certification , new licences or renewal of existing licences .
Minimum waiting period used to exceed 2 years from date of application .
The Central Firearms Registry implemented a turnaround strategy that has significantly improved the processing period of new licences .
The maximum time allowed to process a licence application is now 90 days .
CURRENT LAW Section::::Current law .
In South Africa , citizens or permanent residents ( over the age of 21 years generally ,
but if need can be shown then technically no age limit applies ) who wish to own firearms are required to obtain a licence per individual firearm , and may own a maximum amount of only four firearms , and a maximum of 200 rounds of ammunition per license .
Should the individual acquire ' dedicated status ' conferred by registered shooting club , the individual can theoretically license an unlimited amount of firearms and ammunition limits also then fall away .
LICENCE TYPES LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM FOR SELF - DEFENCE Section::::Licence types .
Section::::Licence to possess firearm for self - defence .
This licence under chapter 6 section 13 , allows the holder to possess any :
* shotgun which is not fully or semi - automatic ; or * handgun which is not fully automatic .
The Registrar may issue a licence under this section to any natural person who — * needs a firearm for self - defence ; and * can not reasonably satisfy that need by means other than the possession of a firearm LICENCE TO POSSESS RESTRICTED FIREARM FOR SELF - DEFENCE Section::::Licence to possess restricted firearm for self - defence .
This licence under chapter 6 section 14 , allows the holder to possess any : * semi - automatic rifle or shotgun , which can not readily be converted into a fully automatic firearm ; or * firearm declared by the Minister , by notice in the Gazette , to be a restricted firearm .
The Registrar may issue a licence in terms of this section to any :
* natural person who shows that a firearm contemplated in section 13(1 ) will not provide sufficient protection , and who submits reasonable information to motivate the need for a restricted firearm for self - defense purposes .
LICENCE
TO POSSESS FIREARM FOR OCCASIONAL HUNTING AND SPORTS - SHOOTING
Section::::Licence to possess firearm for occasional hunting and sports - shooting .
This licence under chapter 6 section 15 , allows the holder to possess any : * handgun which is not fully automatic ; * rifle or shotgun which is not fully or semi - automatic ; The Registrar may issue a licence in terms of this section to any :
* natural person who is an occasional hunter or occasional sports person ( ex .
A person who participates in target shooting but is not an official member of an official target shooting club or a person who participates in hunting but is not an official member of an official hunting club ) LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM FOR DEDICATED HUNTING AND DEDICATED SPORTS - SHOOTING Section::::Licence to possess firearm for dedicated hunting and dedicated sports - shooting .
This licence under chapter 6 section 16 , allows the holder to possess any : * handgun which is not fully automatic ; * rifle which is not fully automatic ;
* shotgun which is not fully automatic ; * semi - automatic shotgun ; The Registrar may issue a licence in terms of this section to any :
* natural person who is a dedicated hunter or dedicated sports person if the application is accompanied by a sworn statement or solemn declaration from the chairperson of an accredited hunting association or sports - shooting organisation , or someone delegated in writing by him or her , stating that the applicant is a registered member of that association ( ex .
A person who goes target shooting and is an official member of an official target shooting club or a person who goes hunting and is an official member of an official hunting club ) LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM FOR PROFESSIONAL HUNTING
Section::::Licence to possess firearm for professional hunting .
This licence under chapter 6 section 16 LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM IN PRIVATE COLLECTION PERMIT TO POSSESS AMMUNITION IN PRIVATE COLLECTION Section::::Permit to possess ammunition in private collection .
This permit allows the holder to possess any : * piece or pieces of firearms ammunition ( NOTE : Not required for people who have licences for other guns ) LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM , AND PERMIT TO POSSESS AMMUNITION , IN PUBLIC COLLECTION LICENCE TO POSSESS FIREARM FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES Section::::Licence to possess firearm for business purposes .
This licence allows the holder to possess any : * firearm that is n't prohibited
The Registrar may issue a licence in terms of this section to : * a security company ; * a person who is accredited to provide training in the use of firearms ; * a person who is accredited to provide firearms for use in theatrical , film or television productions ; * a person who is accredited as a professional hunter ; * a person who is accredited to conduct business in hunting ; or * any person who is accredited to use firearms for such other business purpose as the Registrar may determine PROHIBITED FIREARMS Section::::Prohibited firearms .
Prohibited firearms are : *
Any fully automatic firearm ; * any gun , cannon , recoilless gun , mortar , light mortar or launcher manufactured to fire a rocket , grenade , self - propelled grenade , bomb or explosive device ; * any frame , body or barrel of such a fully automatic firearm , gun , cannon , recoilless gun , mortar , light mortar or launcher ; * any projectile or rocket manufactured to be discharged from a cannon , recoilless gun or mortar , or rocket launcher ; * any imitation of any device contemplated in paragraph ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , or ( d ) ; * any firearm — * the mechanism of which has been altered so as to enable the discharging of more than one shot with a single depression of the trigger ; * the calibre of which has been altered without the written permission of the Registrar ; * the barrel length of which has been altered without the written permission of the Registrar ; SEMI - AUTOMATIC RIFLES AND SHOTGUNS Section::::Semi - automatic rifles and shotguns .
Semi - automatic firearms are not prohibited under law .
However , semi - automatic long guns are only permitted with a business licence , restricted firearms licence for self - defence , and dedicated hunting and shooting licences .
There is no official magazine capacity restriction for semi - automatic rifles .
HANDGUNS Section::::Handguns .
Handguns of all firing actions ( except fully automatic ) are legal under all licences .
There is no magazine capacity restriction for handguns .
CARRYING OF FIREARMS IN PUBLIC Section::::Carrying of firearms in public .
Carrying legally owned firearms in South Africa is legal under all licence types and requires no additional permit .
No person may carry a firearm in a public place unless the firearm is carried : * in the case of a handgun — * in a holster or similar holder designed , manufactured or adapted for the carrying of a handgun and attached to his or her person ; or * in a rucksack or similar holder ; or * in the case of any other firearm , in a holder designed , manufactured or adapted for the carrying of the firearm .
A firearm contemplated in subsection * must be completely covered and the person carrying the firearm must be able to exercise effective control over such firearm ( carrying firearms in public is allowed if done in that manner ) .
PROHIBITED PLACES ( GUN FREE ZONES )
Section::::Prohibited places ( Gun Free Zones ) .
In South Africa , private guns are prohibited by law as per the Control of Access to Public Premises and Vehicles Act of 1985 ( CAPPVA ) , in government buildings .
The Firearms Control Act of 2000 does allow for firearm - free zones , but this must not be confused with the mandate of the CAPPVA of 1985 , which has effectively made all government buildings and vehicles firearm - free by law without the input of the FCA which came about almost two decades later .
According to the FCA under section 140 , firearm - free zones can be applied for and must be granted FFZ status by the minister .
To date , there have been no firearm - free zone declared by the minister .
LEGAL FRAMEWORK Section::::Legal framework .
The Firearm Control Act 60 of 2000 & Regulations , together with amendments and regulations form the legal framework for gun ownership in South Africa .
All current firearms owners , approximately 2.6 to 3 million according to the SA Central Firearm Registry ( which is less than 6 % of the population ) , are required by the Act to re - register their firearms .
Its constitutionality is currently being challenged in two high - profile cases .
The South African Hunters Association has successfully challenged the transitional provisions to the implementation of the act , meaning that the full implementation of the Act has been placed on hold for several years now .
The government has failed to challenge the interim ruling of North Gauteng High Court Judge Bill Prinsloo .
The South African Gunowners Association ( SAGA ) have applied to have Bill Prinsloo 's interim judgement confirmed and made permanently binding .
Other parties including Gun Owners of South Africa ( GOSA ) have raised constitutional challenges to aspects of the FCA in particular the government 's non - compliance with compensation aspects of the law .
The argument is that if a citizen is deprived of property , e.g. the surrender of a firearm , due to compliance with the act , the government must compensate the citizen for lost property , as is provided for in the act .
CRITICISM AND LEGAL CHALLENGES Section::::Criticism and legal challenges .
The Black Gun Owners Association of South Africa is challenging the loss of revenue and employment , and is seeking compensation for the loss of income .
Furthermore , it is challenging the political motivations of the act as Abios Khoele , chairperson of the Black Gun Owners Association , told a press briefing in Johannesburg : " This government is hell - bent on disarming black people because they 've made so many service delivery promises to them which they have not fulfilled .
They are scared that if blacks are armed they will turn on the government . "
In July 2010 , the Black Gun - Owners Association of South Africa ( BGOASA ) , filed a R3.2 Billion lawsuit against the government in regards to the poor implementation of the firearms act , claiming 40,000 Black people were refused firearm licences between 2004 and 2010 .
which is claimed to have cost 10,000 jobs in the firearms sector and closed 800 shops .
Licensing takes over 2 years to process before revenue can be recognised or is arbitrarily dismissed and rejected by the police .
These two factors lead to many dealers not being able to maintain their businesses , in light of greatly reduced revenues .
On 30 November 2012 , the Supreme Court of Appeal dismissed an order brought by a group of gun owners that would have compelled the minister of police to pay compensation for all firearms voluntarily surrendered for destruction under the Firearms Control Act 2000 .
SEE ALSO * Gun Owners of South Africa ( GOSA )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Firearms Control Act , 2000 ( Act 60 of 2000 )
* Gun Free South Africa * Gun Owners of South Africa
* South African Gunowners Association