SYMBIOTIC BACTERIA Symbiotic bacteria are bacteria living in symbiosis with another organism or each other .
For example , Zoamastogopera , found in the stomach of termites , enable them to digest cellulose .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Symbiosis was first defined by Anton de Bary in 1869 in a work entitled " Die Erscheinung der Symbiose " in which he defined the term as " namely , the living together of parasite and host " .
TERMS ASSOCIATED WITH " SYMBIOSIS " Section::::Terms associated with " symbiosis " .
Associated with the term " symbiosis " are terms : mutualism , commensalism , parasitism , and amensalism .
This may define or limit the type of " living together " of two organisms , be they plant , animal , protist or bacteria they practice .
TYPES OF SYMBIOSIS Section::::Types of symbiosis .
Some types of cyanobacteria are endosymbiont .
SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Symbiotic relationships .
Certain plants establish a symbiotic relationship with bacteria , enabling them to produce nodules that facilitate the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia .
In this connection , cytokinins have been found to play a role in the development of root fixing nodules .
It appears that not only must the plant have a need for nitrogen fixing bacteria , but they must also be able to synthesize cytokinins which promote the production of root nodules , required for nitrogen fixation .
Symbiotic bacteria are able to live in or on plant or animal tissue .
In digestive systems , symbiotic bacteria help break down foods that contain fiber .
They also help produce vitamins .
Symbiotic bacteria can live near hydrothermal vents .
They usually have a mutual relationship with other bacteria .
Some live in tube worms .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Corals have been found to form characteristic associations with symbiotic nitrogen - fixing bacteria .
Corals have evolved in oligotrophic waters which are typically poor in nitrogen .
Corals must therefore form a mutualistic relationship with nitrogen fixing organism , in this case the subject of this study , namely Symbiodinium .
In addition to this dinoflagellate , coral also form relationships with bacteria , archae and fungi .
The problem is that these dinoflagellates are also nitrogen limited and must form a symbiotic relationship with another organism ; here it is suggested to be diazotrophs .
In addition , cyanobacteria have been found to possess genes that enable them to undergo nitrogen fixation .
This particular study goes further to investigate the possibility that in addition to the named dinoflagellate and certain cyanobacteria , endosymbiotic algae and the coral contain enzymes enabling them to both undergo ammonium assimilation .
Due to the small size of the genome of most endosymbionts , they are unable to exist for any length of time outside of the host cell , thereby preventing a long - term symbiotic relationship .
However , in the case of the endonuclear symbiotic bacterium Holospora , it has been discovered that Holospora species can maintain their infectivity for a limited time and form a symbiotic relationship with Paramecium species .
It is well accepted and understood that there is a mutualistic relationship between plants and rhizobial bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi enabling the plants to survive in an otherwise nitrogen - poor soil environment .
Co - evolution is described as a situation where two organisms evolve in response to one another .
In a study reported in Functional Ecology , these scientists investigated whether such a mutualistic relationship conferred an evolutionary advantage to either plant or symbiont .
They did not find that the rhizobial bacteria studied had any evolutionary advantage with their host but did find great genetic variation among the populations of rhizobial bacteria studied .
Organisms typically establish a symbiotic relationship due to their limited availability of resources in their habitat or due to a limitation of their food source .
Triatomine vectors have only one host and therefore must establish a relationship with bacteria to enable them to obtain the nutrients required to maintain themselves .
A use for symbiotic bacteria is in paratransgenesis for controlling important vectors for disease , such as the transmission of Chagas disease by Triatome kissing bugs .
Symbiotic bacteria in legume roots provide the plants with ammonia in exchange for the plants ' carbon and a protected home .
Symbiotic , chemosynthetic bacteria that have been discovered associated with mussels ( Bathymodiolus ) located near hydrothermal vents have a gene that enables them to utilize hydrogen as a source of energy , in preference to sulphur or methane as their energy source for production of energy .
REFERENCES