YOU CAN CALL ME AL
" You Can Call Me Al " is a song by the American singer - songwriter Paul Simon .
It was the lead single from his seventh studio album , Graceland ( 1986 ) , released on Warner Bros. Records .
Written by Simon , its lyrics follow an individual seemingly experiencing a midlife crisis .
Its lyrics were partially inspired by Simon 's trip to South Africa and experience with its culture .
Released in September 1986 , " You Can Call Me Al " became one of Simon 's biggest solo hits , reaching the top five in seven countries .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The names in the song came from an incident at a party that Simon went to with his then - wife Peggy Harper .
French composer and conductor Pierre Boulez , who was attending the same party , mistakenly referred to Paul as " Al " and to Peggy as " Betty " , inspiring Simon to write a song .
RECORDING AND PRODUCTION Section::::Recording and production .
" You Can Call Me Al " was recorded entirely at The Hit Factory in New York City in April 1986 ; it differs from much of Graceland in this regard , as most songs on the record were recorded in numerous locales worldwide .
After the song 's completion , it was mixed at The Hit Factory alongside the rest of Graceland , at an average of two days per song .
Simon 's vocals on the song are rather quick - paced , which made them difficult to mix over the numerous instruments in the backing track .
After much work on the track , Simon 's long - time engineer Roy Halee used tape delays feeding separately into the two audio channels , which made the vocals clear .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
The lyrics can be interpreted as describing a man experiencing a midlife crisis ( " Where 's my wife and family ?
What if I die here ?
Who 'll be my role model ? " ) .
However , as Paul Simon himself explained during the Graceland episode of the Classic Albums documentary series , by the third verse the lyrics move from a generic portrait - like perspective to a personal and autobiographical one , as he describes his journey to South Africa which inspired the entire album .
The song opens simply , with its protagonist wondering aloud why his life is difficult , amid other questions .
Simon structured the song 's lyrics in a way that listeners would be given the simplest information first , before getting abstract with his imagery in the song 's third verse : " Because there 's been a structure , [ ... ]
those abstract images , they will come down and fall into one of the slots that the mind has already made up about the structure of the song . "
Synthesizer player Rob Mounsey arranged and conducted the horn section , and contributed heavily to the track 's arrangement and groove .
The song features a bass run performed by Bakithi Kumalo ; the solo is palindromic as only the first half was recorded , and was then played backwards for the second half .
The decision to reverse the recording was made by Halee , who noted in a later interview that this type of experimentation was common in order to make the songs more interesting .
The penny whistle solo was performed by jazz musician Morris Goldberg .
MUSIC VIDEOS Section::::Music videos .
Paul Simon did not like the original music video that was made , which was a performance of the song Simon gave during the monologue when he hosted Saturday Night Live in the perspective of a video monitor .
A replacement video was conceived partly by Lorne Michaels and directed by Gary Weis , wherein Chevy Chase lip - synced Simon 's vocals , with gestures punctuating the lyrics .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
" You Can Call Me Al " became Simon 's biggest hit single as a solo act .
In the United States , however , it initially fared poorly , reaching number 44 on the Billboard Hot 100 in September 1986 .
As sales and acclaim for Graceland grew , culminating in a win for Album of the Year at the 29th Annual Grammy Awards in February 1987 , the single began to re - enter the charts .
After making a second entry in March , the song rose to a peak of number 23 in May 1987 .
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL
*
Paul Simon — lead vocals , six - string electric bass , background vocals
* Ray Phiri —
guitar *
Adrian Belew —
guitar synthesizer
* Bakithi Kumalo — bass * Isaac Mtshali — drums * Ralph MacDonald — percussion * James Guyatt — percussion * Rob Mounsey — synthesizer , horn arrangement ( uncredited on album )
* Ronnie Cuber — bass and baritone
saxophone
* Jon Faddis — trumpet * Randy Brecker — trumpet
* Lew Soloff — trumpet * Alan Rubin — trumpet * Dave Bargeron — trombone * Kim Allan Cissel — trombone * Morris Goldberg — penny whistle * Ladysmith Black Mambazo — background vocals ( uncredited ) IN POPULAR CULTURE
* A live performance of " You Can Call Me Al " by Paul Simon is included in the DVD release The 25th Anniversary Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Concerts / Time Life presents Ravin ' Films , Tenth Planet ; directed by Joel Gallen .
Imprint New York :
Time Life , c2010 .
This videodisc features live and previously unseen performances from two New York concerts at Madison Square Garden that aired originally on HBO .
*
The song is the basis for a karaoke sketch in the Portlandia season 5 episode of the same name , which also features a guest spot from Simon himself .
*
In the Family Guy season 10 episode " Grumpy Old Man " ( 2011 ) , Lois plays the song with her saxophone , in so - called " phone sax " with Peter .
*
Simon appeared on a Late Show with Stephen Colbert episode , as " Alan " , leader of a supposed Paul Simon tribute band named " Troubled Waters " , and on being addressed as " Alan " by Colbert , who then asked Simon , " Can I call you Al ? "
* Vance Joy performed the song mixed with " Cheerleader " by OMI during his Fire and the Flood tour in 2016 .
*
The song is featured in the season 1 episode " Pilgrim Rick " of This Is Us .
*
In The Office season 5 episode " Heavy Competition " ( 2009 ) , an a cappella version of the song is sung by Andy Bernard and his band .
* The University of Florida 's marching band , The Pride of the Sunshine , plays the song at Florida Gators football games .
The school 's mascot is an alligator named Albert .
CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Chart ( 1986–87 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( Kent )
align="center"2 Canada ( RPM )
align="center"11
South Africa Top 20 align="center"2 CERTIFICATIONS AND SALES NOTES Section::::Notes .
References Sources EXTERNAL LINKS