WILDERNESS STATE PARK
Wilderness State Park is a public recreation area bordering Lake Michigan , five miles southwest of Mackinaw City in Emmet County in Northern Michigan .
The state park 's include of shoreline , diverse forested dune and swale complexes , wetlands , camping areas , and many miles of hiking trails .
The state park is operated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources , which has , as of 2006 , approved a proposal that be officially dedicated as a wilderness area .
Wilderness State Park was designated a Michigan " dark sky preserve " in 2012 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
One of the most prominent physical features of the park is Waugoshance Point , which juts westward into northern Lake Michigan .
Beyond the tip of the point , Temperance Island and Waugoshance Island are also parts of the state park .
Four Lake Michigan lighthouses sit near the park 's western boundary .
Stations at Grays Reef , Skillagalee Island , Waugoshance , and White Shoal warn shipping away from the dangerous reefs and shoals of Waugoshance Point .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The state began acquiring the park 's lands in 1896 through purchase and tax reversion proceedings .
After the reversion of additional acreage for tax nonpayment in the early years of the twentieth century , the site became the Emmet State Game Refuge in 1922 , with the land set aside for the breeding of game birds and other animals .
When the game reserve was placed under the administration of the Parks Division in 1927 , it officially became Wilderness State Park .
The Civilian Conservation Corps was active in the park for six years during the 1930s .
The corps ' workers built various structures , eight miles of trails , a public campground , and four - acre Goose Pond .
WILDLIFE Section::::Wildlife .
The park supports populations of many animals that are part of the traditional image of the northern Great Lakes ecosystem , including American black bear , beaver , bobcats , mink , muskrats , and otter .
The park 's cobble beach areas provide an excellent habitat for the federally endangered piping plover .
As of 2002 , approximately one - third of Michigan 's nesting pairs of piping plovers were found in Wilderness State Park .
One of the first sightings of wolves in the Lower Peninsula was reported along the park 's shoreline by a Coast Guard pilot in 1997 .
In 2015 , MDNR officials confirmed the presence of wolves in the Lower Peninsula .
ACTIVITIES AND AMENITIES Section::::Activities and amenities .
The state park offers swimming , picnicking , boat launch , fishing , a 250-site campground and cabins .
The state park contains of trails for hiking , mountain biking , cross - country skiing and snowmobiling , that include a section of the North Country Trail .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Wilderness State Park Michigan Department of Natural Resources *
Wilderness State Park Map Michigan Department of Natural Resources * Wilderness State Park Protected Planet