WE ARE MARSHALL
We Are Marshall
is a 2006 American historical drama biopic film directed by McG.
It depicts the aftermath of the 1970 plane crash that killed 75 people : 37 football players on the Marshall University Thundering Herd football team , along with five coaches , two athletic trainers , the athletic director , 25 boosters , and a crew of five .
Matthew McConaughey stars as head coach Jack Lengyel , with Matthew Fox as assistant coach William " Red " Dawson , David Strathairn as university president Donald Dedmon , and Robert Patrick as ill - fated Marshall head coach Rick Tolley .
Then - governor of Georgia Sonny Perdue has a cameo role as an East Carolina University football coach .
It was scored by Christophe Beck and written by Jamie Linden .
The film addressed rebuilding the program and the healing that the community undergoes .
Dr. Keith Spears was the Marshall University consultant .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On the evening of November 14 , 1970 , Southern Airways Flight 932 , a McDonnell Douglas DC-9 chartered by Marshall University to transport the Thundering Herd football team back to Huntington , West Virginia following their 17–14 defeat to the East Carolina University Pirates , clips trees on a ridge just one mile short of the runway at Tri - State Airport in Ceredo , West Virginia , and crashes into a nearby gully , killing all 75 people on board .
The deceased include the 37 players ; head coach Rick Tolley and five members of his coaching staff ; Charles E. Kautz , Marshall 's athletic director ; team athletic trainer Jim Schroer and his assistant , Donald Tackett ; sports information director and radio play - by - play announcer Gene Morehouse ; 25 boosters ; and five crew members .
In the wake of the tragedy , University President Donald Dedmon leans towards indefinitely suspending the football program , but he is ultimately persuaded to reconsider by the pleas of the Marshall students and Huntington residents , and especially the few football players who did n't make the flight , led by Nate Ruffin .
Dedmon hires Jack Lengyel as head coach who , with the help of Red Dawson ( one of two surviving members of the previous coaching staff ) manages to rebuild the team in a relatively short time , despite losing many of their prospects to West Virginia University .
Dedmon travels to Kansas City , where he pleads with the NCAA to waive their rule prohibiting freshmen from playing varsity football ( a rule which had been abolished in 1968 for all sports except for football and basketball , and would be permanently abolished for those sports in 1972 ) .
Dedmon returns victorious .
The new team is composed mostly of the 18 returning players ( three varsity , 15 sophomores ) and walk - on athletes from other Marshall sports programs .
Due to their lack of experience , the " Young Thundering Herd " ends up losing its first game , 29–6 , to the Morehead State Eagles .
The loss weighs heavily on Dawson and Ruffin , who had been hurt in the first play of the game .
The Herd 's first post - crash victory is a 15–13 win against Xavier University in the first home game of the season .
CAST
* Matthew McConaughey – Jack Lengyel
* Matthew Fox
– William " Red " Dawson * Anthony Mackie –
Nate Ruffin
* Arlen Escarpeta –
Reggie Oliver
* David Strathairn –
Donald Dedmon
* Ian McShane – Paul Griffen * Kate Mara – Annie Cantrell * January Jones – Carole Dawson * Kimberly Williams - Paisley – Sandy Lengyel * Brian Geraghty – Tom Bogdan * Tommy Cresswell – Gene Morehouse * Christian Kanupke – Keith Morehouse * Nina Jones – Mrs. Morehouse * Mike Pniewski –
Bobby Bowden
* Wilbur Fitzgerald – Fireman * Robert Patrick – Coach Rick Tolley ( uncredited )
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming of We Are Marshall commenced on April 3 , 2006 , in Huntington , West Virginia , and was completed in Atlanta , Georgia .
The premiere for the film was held at the Keith Albee Theater on December 12 , 2006 , in Huntington ; other special screenings were held at Pullman Square .
The movie was released nationwide on December 22 , 2006 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
We Are Marshall was released on DVD , HD DVD , and Blu - ray in the United States on September 18 , 2007 .
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit . Deborah Novak and John Witek , who produced the 2000 documentary , filed a $ 40 million lawsuit in federal court in California accusing Warner Bros. and others associated with the
We Are Marshall film of fraud , copyright infringement , and breach of contract .
Novak , who directed Marshall University : Ashes to Glory , is a Huntington native and Marshall alumnus .
In October 2008 , a federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in a summary judgment in favor of Warner Bros. CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mixed reviews from critics .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 49 % out of 124 professional critics gave the film a positive review , with an average rating of 5.8/10 and the site consensus stating : "
Matthew McConaughey almost runs We Are Marshall to the end zone , but ca n't stop it from taking the easy , feel - good route in memorializing this historic event in American sports . "
The film 's directing was criticized by many reviewers .
Peter Hartlaub , from the San Francisco Chronicle , blamed director McG for " half of the movie problems " and went further on saying that " He has a kinetic and kitschy style that could make next year 's " Hot Wheels " movie a surprise hit , but he 's completely out of place here . "
Peter Howell from the Toronto Star said the film lacked genuine drama or conflict .
McConaughey 's performance was , according to some critics , one of the film 's highlights .
Roger Moore from the Orlando Sentinel gave it 4 stars out of 5 and said in his review that " We Are Marshall ( it 's the rally cry of the team ) does n't always have a handle on the grief , but it does keep emotions close to the surface .
That allows McConaughey to be the most refreshing , funny and believable he ever has been . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
We Are Marshall at Marshall University