ROCKY BALBOA Robert " Rocky " Balboa is the title character of the Rocky film series .
The character was created by Sylvester Stallone , who also portrayed him in all eight Rocky films .
He is depicted as an everyman who started out by going the distance and overcoming obstacles that had occurred in his life and career as a professional boxer .
While he is loosely based on Chuck Wepner , a one - time boxer who fought Muhammad Ali and lost on a TKO in the 15th round , the inspiration for the name , iconography and fighting style came from boxing legend Rocky Marciano .
The character is widely considered to be Stallone 's most iconic role and is often considered the role that started his film career .
He received critical acclaim for his performance in the first movie , earning Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations .
When Stallone reprised his role once again in 2015 for Creed , his performance received wide acclaim and he received his first Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor , along with his third Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor , the National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor and several other accolades .
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Biography .
Robert " Rocky " Balboa was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , on July 6 , 1945 .
He was the only child in a Roman Catholic Italian - American family .
However , the surname Balboa / Valboa ( roughly meaning " beautiful valley " ) originates from a Galician - speaking town in northwestern Spain .
When Rocky is spoken to by his priest , Father Carmine , it is apparent that he understands Italian very well , including a scene in which he translates for Tommy Gunn .
It is undetermined how well he actually speaks the language , as his responses are always in English .
During the scene in which Rocky takes Adrianna " Adrian " Pennino skating on Thanksgiving , he tells her , " Yeah – My ol' man , who was never the sharpest , told me – I were n't born with much brain ,
so I better use my body .
" This encouraged him to take up boxing .
He trained very hard so he could grow up to be like his idol Rocky Marciano .
Unable to live on the small pay of club fights , and being unable to find work anywhere else , Rocky got a job as a collector for Tony Gazzo , the local loan shark , just to make ends meet .
By late 1975 , Rocky had fought in 64 fights , winning 44 ( 38 KO 'S ) and losing 20 .
Rocky was proud that he never had his nose broken in a professional fight .
His nickname is " The Italian Stallion " , spawning from his Italian - American heritage .
ROCKY ( SETTING 1975–1976 )
Section::::Rocky ( setting 1975–1976 ) .
The film begins on November 25 , 1975 , in the slums of the Kensington section of Philadelphia .
Rocky Balboa is fighting Spider Rico in a local boxing ring called the Cambria Fight Club ( nicknamed " The Bucket of Blood " ) inside a chapel .
In the second round , Rico hits Balboa with a headbutt , leaving a gash on his forehead .
Rocky then delivers a vicious barrage of punches , knocking Rico out .
The next day , Rocky stops by the J&M Tropical Fish pet shop , where he meets Adrian Pennino .
Adrian is very shy and scared of Rocky 's tough appearance .
Afterwards , Rocky goes to collect a loan for his loan shark boss , Tony Gazzo .
Even though the client , Bob , does not have all the money , Rocky does not break his thumb , even though Gazzo orders him to do so .
Later , Rocky stops by the local boxing gym and finds out that his locker has been replaced by another local contender .
Unknown to him , the gym 's owner and grizzled former boxer , Mickey Goldmill , does n't dislike him , but instead , always considers Rocky 's potential to be better than his effort .
When Rocky leaves for home that night , he sees a young girl named Marie , hanging around a bad crowd and walks her home .
On the way , Rocky lectures her about staying away from the wrong people .
However , once they get to her house , she tells Rocky " Screw you , creep'o " .
Rocky walks home , frustrated how nothing is going right in his life .
Rocky gets his dream come true when the undisputed World Heavyweight Champion , Apollo Creed , decides that he wants to give an unknown fighter a chance to fight for the title after his intended challenger , Mac Lee Green , broke his hand while training .
Apollo was told that no other contender was available for a fight on New Years Day , which is only a month away in commemoration for the United States Bicentennial , it was inferred by Apollo , with the accompanying worldwide audience .
Apollo chooses Rocky , because he likes Balboa 's nickname , ' The Italian Stallion ' .
After getting picked by Apollo , Rocky reunites with his estranged trainer , Mickey Goldmill , who convinces Rocky that he can help prepare him for this match .
Mickey reveals that his career never got anywhere either , because he did not have a manager and he does not want the same thing to happen to Rocky .
At the same time , Rocky begins dating Adrian .
Rocky helps Adrian to become more self - confident and stand up for herself .
Rocky confides in Adrian before the fight that , although he figures that he may not win , he wants to at least " go the distance . "
On January 1 , 1976 , at the Philadelphia Spectrum , Rocky has his match with Apollo , who did not take the fight seriously during training .
In the first round , Rocky knocks Apollo down , the first time he had ever been knocked down in his career and Apollo breaks Rocky 's nose , also for the first time in his career .
Apollo soon realizes that , although Rocky does not have his skill , he could deliver crippling , sledge - hammer like punches and is stubbornly determined to keep fighting .
The match becomes a long and grueling battle for both competitors .
Up into the 14th round , Rocky is nearly knocked down , but manages to get back up and delivers some hard body shots , breaking Apollo 's ribs just before the bell rings .
The 15th round comes to naught and Rocky manages to pummel Apollo until the bell rings once more .
Although Apollo wins the match by a split decision , it is the first time an opponent lasts the full 15 rounds against him .
Both combatants , battered beyond belief , agree that there would be no rematch .
Rocky clearly does n't mind about the outcome , as he only wanted to go the distance with Apollo .
After the match , Adrian climbs into the ring and embraces Rocky saying , " I love you ! "
ROCKY II
( SETTING 1976 )
Section::::Rocky II ( setting 1976 ) .
After the match , Apollo changes his mind and demands a rematch under the stress of being humiliated by the press for failing to beat Rocky convincingly , as well as his own knowledge that he did n't give his best in the match .
Apollo demands a rematch with Rocky , stating that he would fight him ' anywhere , any place , anytime ' to prove to the world that Rocky 's feat was merely a fluke .
Rocky initially declines and retires from boxing , having surgery for retinal detachment , a condition that could lead to permanent blindness .
He marries Adrian , who convinces him to live outside boxing .
However , Rocky , a grade - school drop - out , soon realizes that he has no white - collar skills beyond the eighth grade and , in fact , he has dyslexia .
The money he made in his real first match is easily and quickly frittered away , so Adrian re - claims her part - time job at the J&M Tropical Fish pet shop .
At first , Rocky seems to be unaffected by Apollo 's smear campaign , but his inexperience with money causes him to run into financial troubles .
Rocky struggles to find employment with decent pay , when he is fired from a commercial studio , turned down for an office job and even laid off at the Shamrock Meat Packing facility .
Despite Adrian 's objections , and after Apollo insults Rocky on national television and the newspaper , he agrees to the rematch .
Without Adrian 's support , however , Rocky becomes greatly discouraged and can not not draw any concentration into his training whatsoever , leaving Mick frustrated and worried .
The now - pregnant Adrian goes into mental labor on the job due to stress and slips into a coma after giving birth to her first child , Robert Jr. When Adrian is out of the coma , she promises her full support to Rocky .
Together , Mickey and Rocky train hard , focusing on Rocky 's speed and improving his right - handed punching ( Rocky being a southpaw ) .
At the same time , Apollo is also focused on his training , taking this match much more seriously than the previous time .
The rematch is set for Thanksgiving .
The match goes on for the full 15 rounds again , with both Rocky and Apollo falling to the canvas after Rocky lands a succession of left hands .
As referee Lou Fillipo exercises his 10-count to the limit , both Apollo and Rocky struggle to get back up and Apollo falls back down in exhaustion .
Rocky is able to get back up , from sheer determination beating the 10-count and winning the rematch by knockout , thus becoming heavyweight champion of the world .
ROCKY III
( SETTING 1976–1982 )
Section::::Rocky III ( setting 1976–1982 ) .
Over the next three years , Rocky has successfully defended his title in 10 consecutive defenses against various contenders , amassing fortune and worldwide fame in the process .
In addition , Rocky also has an exhibition match against the World Heavyweight Wrestling Champion , " Thunderlips " ( Hulk Hogan ) , with the match ending in a draw .
However , in 1981 , Rocky is challenged by an intense newcomer named James " Clubber " Lang ( Mr. T ) , who has risen to the top of the rankings .
Rocky begins having some issues with his trainer , Mickey Goldmill , due to his revelation of having faced " hand - picked " challengers that were " good fighters , but not ' killers ' " which Lang seemingly is .
Mickey insists that he would step down as Rocky 's manager if he chooses to fight Lang , but Rocky convinces him to train him for one last match .
However , just like Apollo in the first film , Rocky does not put his heart into the training properly and this reinforces Mickey 's belief that Rocky has become too comfortable ( or " civilized " ) as champion .
Before the match , pandemonium erupts backstage , with Lang shoving Mickey out of the way during a violent exchange of words with Balboa , sending Mickey into cardiac arrest .
Distraught over Lang 's cold indifference , Rocky requests to call the match off , but Mickey and others urge him on , so Rocky goes to fight Lang no matter what .
During the match , Rocky is brutalized by Lang and knocked out in the second round , losing his title .
Adding to his defeat , Mick dies of a heart attack after the match , devastating Rocky .
After the funeral , a depressed Rocky wanders the streets of Philadelphia until seeing the statue at the steps .
In a fit of rage , Rocky throws his motorcycle helmet at the statue and takes off until he comes to Mickey 's now - abandoned gym .
Despaired and lost , Rocky meets Apollo Creed in the darkened gym , who explains to Rocky that when they fought , he won because he was competitive .
He has the ' fire ' Apollo no longer has and the former champion convinces Rocky that he needs to get his fire ( " the eye of the tiger " ) back .
Along with his old trainer , Tony " Duke " Evers , Apollo offers to train Rocky for a rematch against Lang , taking Rocky to Los Angeles .
While training on the beach , Adrian and Rocky furiously debate , while Apollo trains Rocky to help get him " back to basics .
" After a while , Rocky manages to put his doubts behind him and retain his spirit .
Fighting with a style very reminiscent of Apollo 's own boxing technique mixed with his own style , Rocky wins the rematch against Lang by KO , dodging and absorbing Lang 's best blows and still standing , regaining his world heavyweight title .
After the match , Rocky and Apollo meet again in Mickey 's Gym , with Creed taking his " payment " for his training services :
one last rematch , just the two of them , no spectators .
ROCKY IV ( SETTING 1982–1985 )
Section::::Rocky IV ( setting 1982–1985 ) .
In 1985 , Apollo Creed agrees to have an exhibition match against Soviet World Amateur Champion and Olympic Gold Medalist - turned - professional fighter Ivan Drago
( Dolph Lundgren ) in Las Vegas , with Rocky Balboa and Tony " Duke " Evers in his corner .
Apollo , past his prime but in the best shape , again not taking his opponent seriously , takes a serious beating by Drago in the first round , despite Rocky 's orders to stop the fight .
In the second round , Apollo continues to be brutally beaten by Drago , falling limp in the ring and dies .
Feeling responsible for Apollo 's death and riddled with guilt by Drago 's cold indifference , Rocky decides to take on Drago himself , but to do so , he has to surrender his championship .
Rocky travels to the cold mountains of Russia and undergoes rigorous training .
After much - needed training , his match against Drago takes place on Christmas Day in Moscow .
With Evers assuming the role as his new trainer , Rocky trains hard using old - school methods within the mountainous terrain of Krasnoyarsk , Siberia , while Drago trains with state - of - the - art equipment and steroid enhancement .
During the match , Drago gains the upper hand in the early moments of the match , but in the second round , Rocky strikes back against Drago with a haymaker to the eye , cutting him .
The match goes on in a bloody back - and - forth battle , with the Soviet crowd , who originally roots for Drago , beginning to cheer for Rocky , while Drago 's handler becomes increasingly upset over his inability to finish Rocky .
In the end , Rocky 's superior stamina and determination to win perseveres and defeats the heavily favored Russian in the fifteenth round .
After the match , Rocky gives a passionate ' thank you ' speech to the crowd while receiving a standing ovation both from the crowd and the politicians in attendance , effectively ending the Cold War by catalyzing the thaw in relations that would occur between the United States and the Soviet Union .
ROCKY V
( SETTING 1985–1986 )
Section::::Rocky V ( setting 1985–1986 ) .
After the bout with Ivan Drago , Rocky realizes that while he is showering , he has sustained some type of injury from the fight .
His hands tremble relentlessly , and he tells Adrian that he is tired and wants to go home , but accidentally addresses her as Mickey .
Upon returning to the United States ( in a Soviet airplane ) , his press conference is interrupted by promoter George Washington Duke and Union Cane ( Michael Williams ) .
They challenge him to a title fight called " Lettin ' it Go in Tokyo . "
Rocky hints about retirement and leaves without accepting the challenge .
Once returning home , Rocky goes to say goodnight to his son , Robert Jr. , but when Rocky goes downstairs , he overhears Adrian and Paulie arguing , which turns out to be a dramatic life - changing situation .
Paulie unknowingly had Rocky sign a power of attorney over to Rocky 's investment accountant , who had embezzled and squandered all of his money on real estate deals gone sour .
In addition , the accountant had failed to pay Rocky 's taxes over the past six years and his mansion had been mortgaged for $ 400,000 .
Unwilling to go bankrupt , Rocky decides to participate in a few more fights , including the one against Union Cane , but Adrian demands Rocky to see a doctor first before doing so .
Balboa 's doctor , Presley Jensen , performs computer - simulated examinations , which reveals that Rocky is diagnosed with a condition called Cavum septi pellucidi , which is brain damage caused by extremely heavy blows to the head .
The effects are seemingly permanent and irreversible .
With such a condition , it would make it impossible for Rocky to continue boxing in any state .
At Adrian 's urging , as well as with the doctor 's support , Rocky acknowledges that it is time to retire and he reluctantly does so .
His only remaining asset is the now - closed Mickey 's Gym , which had been willed by Mickey to Robert , making it untouchable by the IRS .
After selling their mansion and auctioning some of their belongings , Rocky and the family now return to the old neighborhood , moving back into Adrian and Paulie 's old house in South Philadelphia .
Rocky reopens Mickey 's Gym as a means of income , while Adrian returns to work at the J&M Tropical Fish pet shop , where she was employed when she first met Rocky .
Rocky asks Adrian , " Did we ever leave this place ? " .
One day , Rocky meets a young ruffian boxer from Oklahoma named Tommy Gunn ( Tommy Morrison ) and begins training him .
Tommy slowly becomes an excellent fighter , but suffers from constantly being put in Rocky 's shadow ; he is nicknamed " Rocky 's Robot " by the media .
As Rocky is training Tommy , he becomes so distracted that he ends up neglecting Robert .
By Christmas Eve , Duke visits the Balboa residence , but Rocky explains that dealing with Duke would be dirty business .
Late at night , Tommy regrets being Rocky 's protégé , drives off in a huff and leaves him for good .
Adrian attempts to comfort Rocky , but Rocky 's frustration boils over .
After they reconcile , Rocky meets Robert and they finally pick up the pieces .
Rocky is still anxious as he watches the match with Tommy facing off against Union Cane on television with Paulie .
As the match starts out small , Rocky begins to emote through the first couple of seconds of the fight as Cane becomes effective in hurting Tommy .
As Tommy begins to make his adjustments as Rocky taught him , Rocky then mirrors his punches on a punching bag , which leaves his family concerned .
Tommy wins the World Heavyweight title from Union Cane by knockout .
Visibly proud of Tommy , Rocky is surprised that Tommy credited his success to Duke instead .
However , Tommy is booed and ridiculed in the press , since he had never gone up against a " real contender " he is not regarded as a real champion or heir to the belt .
This motivates Tommy , with prodding from Duke , to publicly challenge Rocky to a fight .
While Rocky is at a local bar , Tommy steps in and insults
Rocky .
Paulie insults Tommy back and is sucker punched by Tommy .
Rocky confronts Tommy and challenges him .
Rocky explains to him that his ring is at the alley right outside .
As both fighters head to the alley , Duke tries to persuade Tommy to not fight a street fighter , but
Tommy squares up on him , saying that he does not own him and wants his respect .
Rocky then quickly starts to beat Tommy without giving him a chance , knocking him down .
Rocky tells Tommy that , even though he admires him , he actually ruined their relationship .
With Rocky 's back turned , Tommy sucker punches him and starts attacking some of the bystanders on the side .
Tommy gains the upper hand and tackles Rocky through a steel door into the street .
The two engage in a street fight , which quickly garners the attention of the media , while also catching Robert and Adrian 's attention as well .
As the neighborhood gathers round to witness the fight , Tommy 's punches begin to slow Rocky in his tracks due to his condition and he is knocked down , disoriented with Paulie at his side .
Tommy is then restrained from finishing Rocky off .
Glimpses of Ivan Drago , his loss to Clubber Lang during his first fight with him and Mickey 's burial start to cloud his mind until he hears Mickey 's voice , telling him that he is the champion and to get up .
As Tommy walks away , convinced that he finally got what he wanted , Rocky rises up and calls him out for one more round and Tommy happily obliges .
An adamant Duke reminds Tommy that if he loses this , he will terminate their association .
In a shocking turn of events , Rocky uses his brawling abilities to punish and humiliate Tommy .
With his back towards a gate , Rocky dodges several hooks from Tommy and manages to push him towards the gate , shoving him with brute force and a powerful left hook knocking Tommy down again .
Duke threatens to sue Rocky if he touches him and becomes infuriated at Tommy .
Tommy gets up and tackles Balboa to the ground and later lifts him up .
Just as Robert joins the crowd , Rocky breaks free from Tommy 's grip , performs a reversal that sends Tommy spiraling into a pile of trash cans .
Both men now exchange punches with Rocky being the aggressor , making Tommy miss his shots .
Rocky is then caught by a series of punches by Tommy , just as Adrian joins the crowd , but manages to parry Tommy and begins to walk him down with his devastating shots .
Seeing the opportunity , Rocky goes to Tommy 's body , then lands perfect headshots and finishes with a right uppercut sending Tommy to the grill of a bus , defeating his former protégé .
As Adrian and Robert tend to him , Rocky tells Adrian that she was right .
The neighborhood 's cheer is then silenced by Duke as he tries to sarcastically commend Rocky .
He confronts Duke , who still continues to threaten him with a lawsuit .
Clenching his fist , he uppercuts Duke to the gut which lifts him off the ground , sending him to the hood of his own limousine , telling him " Sue me for what ? " .
Rocky , Adrian , Robert and Paulie walk away in good spirits as the neighborhood continues to cheer him on .
Sometime later , Rocky and his son run up the Philadelphia Museum of Art , where Rocky gives him a valuable possession of Mickey Goldmill 's , that had been passed on to him by Rocky Marciano .
The two make up for the tensions of the past few years and head into the museum together .
ROCKY BALBOA ( SETTING 2006 )
Section::::Rocky Balboa ( setting 2006 ) .
In 2006 , 20 years after the events of Rocky V , Rocky , now in his late fifties , lives a quiet life as a widower .
He runs a small but rather successful restaurant called ' Adrian 's ' , named after his wife who , on January 11 , 2002 , died of ovarian cancer .
Rocky is no longer depressed and broke , and is doing far better than he was in the years prior .
Rocky visits Adrian 's graveside regularly and each year , on the anniversary of her death , takes a tour of the old places , where their relationship began and blossomed : the now - closed J&M Tropical Fish pet shop where Adrian worked , the former site of the ice skating rink where they had their first date and Rocky 's old apartment , where they fell in love .
Rocky 's son , Robert Jr. , is now working as a struggling mid - level corporate employee and grows farther apart from his family over the years , but reluctantly joins Rocky to commemorate the anniversaries of his mother 's death .
An episode of ESPN 's program , Then and Now , airs featuring a computer - simulated fight between Rocky ( in his prime ) and the current champion , Mason " The Line " Dixon ( Antonio Tarver ) .
The simulation result sees Rocky winning by knockout in the thirteenth round , which stirs up discussion about the result if such a fight ever occurred .
Inspired by the simulation and feeling he still has some issues to deal with ( " stuff in the basement " ) , Rocky decides to return to the ring and applies to renew his boxing license .
Though Rocky passes the required physical with flying colors , the licensing committee denies his application , citing his advanced age and their moral duty to protect him from himself .
Rocky responds to this with an impassioned speech of his own and
the committee change their minds to renew his license .
The brain damage Balboa is diagnosed with in Rocky V is not addressed in this film , but in interviews , Stallone has said that the storyline explanation would have been that Rocky 's brain damage was within the normal range for boxers .
When tested for brain damage in Rocky V , Rocky was suffering the effects of a severe concussion as a result of the Drago fight , but he never sought a second or more informed opinion because he intended to retire anyway .
Rocky 's intentions were originally just to compete in small , local fights for fun and charity , but with the publicity of Rocky 's return right on the heels of the embarrassing computer simulation , Mason Dixon 's promoters convince Rocky to challenge the champ in an exhibition match at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas .
Originally , also against fighting an aged Balboa , Dixon recognizes the opportunity to fight a legend and hopes to end all prognosticating about who would win as well as contentions that he has never had a truly great opponent or memorable match .
In the press , commentators dismiss Rocky 's chances and the merits of the fight , assuming that it will be one - sided due to Rocky 's age , despite their original excitement with Rocky 's return to the ring , and their doubts regarding Dixon 's ability .
As news of the bout spreads , Robert begins to feel more pressure from being Rocky 's son and makes an effort to discourage Rocky from fighting , blaming his own personal failings on his father 's celebrity shadow , but Rocky rebukes him with some profound advice : to succeed in life
, " it ai n't about how hard you hit ; it 's about how hard you can get hit , and keep moving forward " and that blaming others wo n't help him .
The day after this debate , father and son meet over Adrian 's grave and reconcile , which is when Robert announces that he has resigned from his job to be at Rocky 's ringside .
Rocky also reunites with his old trainer , Duke , and both men quickly realize that age and arthritis have sapped Rocky of any speed he once possessed .
They decide to focus on his one major remaining weapon : power .
When the match finally begins , it appears to go as lopsided as everyone predicted , with Dixon 's speed allowing him to dominate Rocky at will , knocking him down twice early on .
However , the champion soon realizes that Rocky will not back down and that the elderly Rocky " has bricks in his gloves " .
The tide turns when Dixon injures his hand while punching Rocky .
This evens the playing field and allows Rocky to mount an offense , knocking Dixon down for the first time in the latter 's career .
During the subsequent rounds , Dixon 's injury numbs up , which enables him to throw much harder punches and thereby pose a threat to Rocky .
In the final round , it starts out slow for both combatants .
After a brief exchange of punches , Dixon catches Rocky with a strong blow , knocking down Rocky for the third time .
As Rocky takes the knee , he looks to Robert in the corner and has flashbacks of his time with Adrian , remembering what she said to him about never giving up .
As he slowly gets up , the crowd , along with Marie , starts to chant his name and he rises to Dixon 's surprise .
As the final thirty seconds unfold , Dixon manages to catch Rocky with quick punches ; however , an emotional Rocky retaliates with devastating punches of his own .
The two exchange punches , but Rocky gets the final blow before the bell rings .
In the end , the two fighters go the distance and show their appreciation for each other .
Before the winner is announced , Rocky and his entourage make their way out of the ring in celebration .
As Dixon is announced the winner by split decision ( Dixon wins in the theatrical release , Balboa wins in an alternate ending ) ,
Rocky thanks each and every one of his group and , with Robert and Paulie by his side , they turn Rocky around and raise his arms as the audience gives him a heartfelt standing ovation .
Dixon is finally recognized as being a warrior for fighting through every round and Rocky proves to the world that he is no joke , mirroring the ending of the first film .
After the fight , Rocky visits Adrian 's grave and puts flowers on top , telling her , " Yo , Adrian , we did it " , which is a play on the second film 's line , " Yo , Adrian , I did it ! " .
Rocky is last seen walking away from the grave and waving goodbye one last time .
CREED ( SETTING 2015 )
Section::::Creed ( setting 2015 ) .
Since Rocky 's very last fight , his brother - in - law , Paulie has died on February 22 , 2012 .
In addition , his statue has been re - installed at the Philadelphia Museum of Art at the very bottom of the steps .
Three years later , Rocky is visited at Adrian 's by Adonis " Donnie " Johnson Creed ( Michael B. Jordan ) – Apollo 's illegitimate son , who grew up serving time in a juvenile detention center in Los Angeles .
After Donnie grew up , he worked at a securities firm , but eventually resigned to be a boxer , and moved to Philadelphia .
Donnie meets Rocky at Adrian 's restaurant , and requests him to train him , but Rocky is reluctant to come back to the sport of boxing after his severe brain trauma and a one - off comeback .
Days after his initial offer , Rocky recommends him to his friend , Pete Sporino ( Ritchie Coster ) , who currently runs Mighty Mick 's Gym .
After deep thought , Rocky finally agrees to takes Donnie as his new protégé .
Wanting to train in the old - school style , Donnie moves in with Rocky , staying in Paulie 's former room .
Donnie notices an old picture of Rocky and his son , Robert ( an actual picture of Sylvester Stallone and a young Sage Stallone )
, Rocky reveals that Robert had moved to Vancouver with his girlfriend , because of the difficulties he faced trying to be independent in Philadelphia , but does check on his father every now and then .
Pete , who initially wanted Rocky to be a part of his son , Leo 's ( Gabriel Rosado ) team , challenges Adonis to fight his son , in which Rocky shows reluctance again , but then both agree .
Instead of training at Mighty Mick 's Gym , Rocky takes Adonis to train at the Front Street Gym , where he surprises Donnie with a corner team and apparel .
Before the fight , Pete pulls Rocky aside to address the rumors of Donnie being Apollo 's son , which Rocky confirms , and tells him that he should not speak of it to anyone else .
After Donnie 's win , the media heavily publicized the story of Apollo 's infidelity , which catches the eye of Tommy Holiday ( Graham McTavish ) , who is looking for the final person to fight his trainee , light - heavyweight champion " Pretty " Ricky Conlan ( Tony Bellew ) .
While training , Rocky suddenly stalls , vomits , and collapses in the gym .
After doing a string of test ordered by the doctors at the emergency room , Rocky is diagnosed with an early case of non - Hodgkin lymphoma , making him confront his own mortality ; the deadliest fight he 's ever been in .
At first , Rocky is hesitant to the option of chemotherapy , as he remembers the pain Adrian experienced as she underwent treatment for ovarian cancer .
After a bitter argument with the former heavyweight champion , Donnie , greatly impacted by his coach 's diagnosis , makes a pact with Rocky that they would fight their battles together , as Donnie prepares for his bout with Conlan and as Rocky undergoes treatment .
As Donnie moves on in training , the effects of treatment begin to weaken Rocky , and because of this , Donnie acts as a caregiver to Rocky while helping him get up and go to the restroom , and uses the medical facility to his advantage ; shadowboxing in the corridors and running up the stairs , passing doctors and nurses .
With the match taking place in Liverpool , a calm Rocky teaches Donnie the hysterics that would ensue during the pre - fright press conference when Conlan tries to play mind games , and later helps in Donnie 's girlfriend
Bianca ( Tessa Thompson )
surprising Donnie in his hotel room .
During the match , Balboa stands in Donnie 's corner along with Bianca .
Before the final round , Rocky grows concerned about the injuries that Donnie has sustained and tells him he 's stopping the fight .
However , Donnie wants to prove that he is " not a mistake " , which emotionally impacts Rocky .
He then tells Donnie that he wishes he had the chance to thank Apollo when Mickey died , but it does n't match his appreciation of Donnie 's tenacity that motivated him in his battle against his illness , and tells him that he admires him .
The film concludes with Donnie taking a frail , but rather improving , Rocky back to the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art , which Rocky he says is his " most favorite place .
"
Both look toward the Philadelphia skyline , remaining positive about their futures .
CREED II ( SETTING 2018 ) Section::::Creed II
( setting 2018 ) .
Three years since his diagnosis , Rocky has recovered from his cancer and coached Donnie until he becomes the new WBC World Heavyweight Championship .
Rocky gives Donnie advice in proposing to Bianca , and uses his proposal with Adrian as an example .
Rocky struggles with contacting Robert , whom he has become estranged with .
Later on , Rocky drops by Adrian 's and finds Ivan Drago waiting for him there .
Drago tells him how his loss to Rocky thirty - three years earlier shattered his reputation , evicted him from Russia into Ukraine , and led to his divorce from his wife , Ludmilla .
Drago threatens him by saying his son , Viktor ( Florian Munteanu ) , has trained all his life and will " break " Donnie , having issued a challenge to Donnie earlier that morning .
Rocky , clearly shaken , politely tells Drago to leave .
Wanting to avenge his father and forge his own legacy , Donnie decides to take up Viktor 's challenge , and goes to Rocky 's place for his approval .
Rocky refuses to support Donnie , noting that Viktor was raised in hate and has nothing to lose , and that makes him dangerous .
Despite Donnie 's pleas , Rocky declines to train him out of fear and guilt from Apollo 's fateful match years prior .
Rocky decides to watch Donnie and Viktor 's match , where he watches Viktor pummels Donnie repeatedly .
Viktor hits Donnie while he is down , which knocks him unconscious ; Rocky closes his television in horror at what he has witnessed .
Rocky travels to Los Angeles to visit a hospitalized Donnie , who lashes out at him for abandoning him .
With Adonis becoming detached from his family , Donnie 's stepmother and Apollo 's widow Mary Anne ( Phylicia Rashad ) contacts Rocky in helping him out of his slump .
Donnie and Rocky make amends , and Rocky accompanies Donnie as Bianca gives birth to their daughter , Amara .
When Amara is revealed to be deaf , Rocky advises him that they should not pity her condition , and instead treat her fully with their love .
Rocky and Tony
" Little Duke " Evers ( Wood Harris ) take Donnie to a decrepit location in the California desert to retrain , describing it as a place where fighters are " reborn " .
Donnie undergoes a rigorous and brutal training regimen with Rocky , focusing on fighting from the inside and training his body to repeatedly absorb the heavy impact he knows he 'll receive from Viktor in the ring .
Rocky accompanies Donnie as they hold their rematch with Viktor in Moscow ; Donnie withstands Viktor 's blows and wins the match after Drago throws in the towel .
Rocky does n't join Donnie 's celebration , saying that it 's " his time , " and watches in contentment from outside the ring .
Rocky later travels to Vancouver where he reunites with Robert and meets his grandson , Logan , for the first time .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Balboa resides in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and married Adriana " Adrian " Pennino in 1976 .
They were married for 26 years .
The two have a son , Robert " Rocky " Balboa Jr. , who unlike his father goes by Robert .
After Adrian 's death in 2002 , Rocky and his brother - in - law Paulie live together for a short time , then Paulie moves in with an unnamed girlfriend .
Now living completely alone again , Rocky can not come to terms with present - day living and constantly thinks about the past .
With the help of Paulie and reunited long - time acquaintance Marie , Rocky begins to move on with his life and in the process restores his relationship with his only child , Robert .
Rocky 's relationship with Marie is established as platonic in the film , but a hint of romantic interest is revealed with a kiss on the lips the night before the last fight of his life .
CHARACTER ORIGIN
Section::::Character origin .
The name , iconography , and fighting style of Rocky Balboa were inspired by the legendary heavyweight champion Rocky Marciano from Brockton , Massachusetts and from the 5 times world champion Roberto ' Manos de Piedra ( Hands of Stone ) '
Duran , from Panama , where the Balboa is the official currency .
Balboa was also inspired by other fighting legends : Joe Frazier , for his Philadelphia origin , training methods and victory against Muhammad Ali ( the inspiration for Apollo Creed ) , and Jake LaMotta , for his Italian - inner city roots , ability to absorb many blows and his rivalry with Sugar Ray Robinson , which heavily resembled Rocky and Apollo 's .
However , it was the not - so - legendary Chuck Wepner who inspired the movie and Balboa 's underdog personality .
BOXING STYLE
Section::::Boxing style .
Rocky Balboa fights as a southpaw ( left - handed ) .
In the second film , against Apollo Creed , he comes out orthodox and Mickey intends for him to switch back to southpaw late in the last round , but Balboa refuses saying " no tricks , I ai n't switching " .
Mickey tells him that Apollo is ready for him ( if he continues using his right ) and so towards the end of the round , he does indeed lead with his left .
The real reason for this is Sylvester Stallone tore his pectoral muscles in training , but the idea was probably taken from the great left - handed boxer " Marvelous " Marvin Hagler who would sometimes come out orthodox to confuse opponents .
Rocky was an all - or - nothing brawler coming into his first bout with Creed ; however , under the training of Mickey , he began to develop his boxing skills which he eventually mastered .
During his reign as world champion , he became a class hybrid fighter , possessing the qualities of an inside fighter , brawler , and swarmer .
With the exception of his rematch against Clubber Lang ( where he fights as an outside fighter ) , he often advances quickly upon his opponents , driving them into the ropes in order to attack the body .
Balboa 's best attribute is without question his near - superhuman ability to absorb a multitude of the hardest hits without falling — an attribute he often employs on purpose to wear down his opponents , sacrificing defensive strategy to land his own punches .
Because of this rare talent , Balboa can afford to keep his hands in position to strike rather than up high to block .
Because he takes more punches than he throws , it is easy to overlook his incredible punching power .
Rocky also has an uncanny ability to sense weakness in his opponents , often capitalizing on every shift in momentum possible .
He is acknowledged as having the most devastating body attack in the sport , with his body blows causing internal bleeding in Creed and breaking Drago 's ribs .
After going two rounds with Balboa , Ivan Drago told his trainer ( in Russian ) , " He 's not human , he 's like a piece of iron . "
Mason Dixon once remarked about Balboa : " that guy 's got bricks in his gloves .
" These qualities , in concert , helped land him a high percentage of KO victories over the course of his career .
HONORS Section::::Honors .
Rocky Balboa was named the 7th greatest movie hero by the American Film Institute on their 100 Years ...
100 Heroes and Villains list .
Additionally , he was ranked # 34 on Empire Magazine 's compilation of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters .
Premiere magazine ranked Rocky Balboa # 64 on their list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time .
The Rocky character is immortalised with a bronze statue erected near the Rocky Steps in Philadelphia recalling the famous scene from the original Rocky movie .
In 2011 , Sylvester Stallone was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame for his work on the Rocky Balboa character , having " entertained and inspired boxing fans from around the world " .
Additionally , Stallone was awarded the Boxing Writers Association of America award for " Lifetime Cinematic Achievement in Boxing . "
A poll of former heavyweight champions and boxing writers ranked Balboa as the best boxer in the film series .
In 2014 , Rocky Balboa was the Inaugural Induction to the Fictitious Athlete Hall of Fame .
MERCHANDISING Section::::Merchandising .
Hasbro intended to license Rocky and make him a member of the toyline , as they had with wrestler Sgt .
Slaughter and began negotiations with Stallone 's representation .
Marvel Comics ' G.I. Joe :
Order of Battle profile book came out during the negotiations and included Rocky as a current Joe member , specializing in hand - to - hand combat training and an example of what it means to persevere under seemingly impossible odds .
Balboa also appeared on the cover of the issue .
In the meantime , Stallone 's agents made a deal with Coleco to produce Rambo figures in order to compete with the G.I. Joe line .
Hasbro , who was working on a toy prototype at the time , decided to end negotiations at that point , turning the prototype Rocky Balboa action figure into the masked Cobra villain known as " Big Boa , " complete with boxing gloves and a punching bag .
Marvel then ran a retraction in the third issue of the limited - run series indicating that the character was not , and never had been , a part of G.I. Joe .
The trade paperback edition of the series , published in July 1987 , omitted the page featuring Balboa altogether .
Between 2006 and 2009 , Jakks Pacific released six series of figures , each focused on one of the movies in the film series .
Additionally , two " Best Of " series were released , as well as several collector 's box sets , boxing ring playsets , and limited edition exclusive figures . SEE ALSO * Little Mac REFERENCES