WAR SCYTHE
A war scythe or military scythe is a form of pole weapon with a curving single - edged blade with the cutting edge on the concave side of the blade .
Its blade bears some superficial resemblance to that of an agricultural scythe from which it likely evolved , but the war scythe is otherwise unrelated to agricultural tools and is a purpose - built infantry melee weapon .
The blade of a war scythe has regularly proportioned flats , a thickness comparable to that of a spear or sword blade , and slightly curves along its edge as it tapers to its point .
This is very different from farming scythes , which have very thin and irregularly curved blades , specialised for mowing grass and wheat only , unsuitable as blades for improvised spears or polearms .
Compared to a fauchard ( which is believed to have evolved from the war scythe ) , the blade of the war scythe has the cutting edge on the concave side like the agricultural tool whereas the fauchard has the edge along the convex side .
As an infantry weapon , the military scythe had practical applications both in offensive actions against enemy infantry and as a defensive measure against enemy cavalry .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The scythe and pitchfork , farming tools , have frequently been used as a weapon by those who could not afford or did not have access to more expensive weapons such as pikes , swords , or later , guns .
Scythes and pitchforks were stereotypically carried by angry mobs or gangs of enraged peasants .
The process usually involved reforging the blade of a scythe at a 90 degree angle , strengthening the joint between the blade and the shaft with an additional metal pipe or bolts and reinforcing the shaft to better protect it against cuts from enemy blades .
At times , instead of a scythe blade , a blade from a hand - operated chaff cutter was used .
War scythes were a popular weapon of choice and opportunity of many peasant uprisings throughout history .
The ancient Greek historian Xenophon describes in his work ( Anabasis ) the chariots of Artaxerxes II , which had projecting scythes fitted .
Later , Jan Žižka 's Hussite warriors , recruited mostly from peasantry , used modified scythes .
Called originally ' kůsa -scythe ' and later " sudlice " , it doubled as both a stabbing and cutting weapon , developing later into the " ušatá sudlice"—Bohemian earspoon , more suitable for combat — thanks to side spikes ( ears ) , acting as end stops , it did not penetrate too deep , and so was easier to draw from fallen foes .
War scythes were widely used by Polish and Lithuanian peasants during revolts in the 18th and 19th centuries .
Polish peasants used war scythes during the 17th - century Swedish invasion ( The Deluge ) .
In the 1685 battle of Sedgemoor , James Scott , 1st Duke of Monmouth , fielded a 5000 strong peasant unit armed with war scythes .
They were used in the 1784 Transylvanian peasants ' Revolt of Horea , Cloşca and Crişan , in the war in the Vendée by royalist peasant troops , in the 1st War of Schleswig in 1848 in Denmark , and again in various Polish uprisings : the Kościuszko Uprising in 1794 and the battle of Racławice , in which scythe wielders successfully charged and captured Russian artillery .
In that year Chrystian Piotr Aigner published a field manual , Short Treatise on Pikes and Scythes , detailing the training and operation of scythe - equipped forces , the first and probably only such book in the history of warfare .
War scythes were later used in the November Uprising in 1831 , January Uprising in 1863 , and Silesian Uprising in 1921 .
The description of a fighting unit as " scythemen " was used in Poland as late as 1939 ; however , the Gdynia " kosynierzy " were armed with hunting guns rather than scythes .
SPECIFICS Section::::Specifics .
As a pole weapon , the war scythe is characterised by long range and powerful force ( due to leverage ) : there are documented instances where a scythe cut through a metal helmet .
They could be used , depending on construction and tactics , to make slashing or stabbing attacks , and with their uncommon appearance and considerable strength could have a psychological impact on an unprepared enemy .
However , like most pole weapons , their disadvantages were weight ( which could quickly exhaust the user ) and slow speed .
After the German Peasants ' War during 1524–1525 , a fencing book edited by Paulus Hector Mair described in 1542 techniques how to fence using a scythe .
GALLERY
SEE
ALSO
* Fauchard * Kama – Japanese hand scythe , sometimes also adapted to combat
* Falx – A sword with an inward curved blade
* Rhomphaia – Larger variant of the falx , much more similar to the war scythe REFERENCES