FRUIT
BY THE FOOT Fruit by the Foot
is a fruit snack made by General Mills ( GM ) in the brand line Betty Crocker .
It was introduced in 1991 in North America and is still in production .
Fruit by the Foot is very similar to GM 's Fruit Roll - Ups in its presentation of being rolled up within itself , but differs in taste , dimension and consumption methods .
The similarity in name and concept is such that many people sometimes mistakenly refer to Fruit by the Foot as " Fruit Roll - Ups " and vice versa .
The snack is approximately long , and has a loop at the end .
Current marketing slogans include " 3 Feet of Fun ! "
In the early 1990s , Fruit by the Foot came with stickers that kids put on their lunch boxes to show they had eaten Fruit by the Foot .
It is also very similar to Kellogg 's Fruit Winders sold in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
Sugar , in multiple forms , is the major ingredient of Fruit by the Foot , as it makes up 9 grams of each 21 gram serving .
Of the top four ingredients in each Fruit by the Foot , 3 of them are sweeteners ( corn syrup , maltodextrin , and ordinary sugar ) .
Artificial colors and flavors are used to synthesize the various flavors that Fruit by the Foot offers ; for example , the strawberry variety contains no actual strawberries .
Meanwhile , the British equivalent , Kellogg 's Fruit Winders , contains real strawberry purée and uses plant - based colorants .
Fruit by the Foot contains no protein , fiber , iron , calcium , or Vitamin A. Since the 1990s , the paper backing has been printed with games , jokes , or trivia facts – though not all flavors have it , such as ' Rippin Berry Berry ' , and ' Berry Tie - dye ' .
PROMOTIONS Section::::Promotions .
In early 1999 , Nintendo and General Mills worked together on a promotional television advertising campaign costing $ 5 million .
The advertisement by Saatchi began on January 25 and encouraged children to buy Fruit by the Foot snacks for tips to help them with their Nintendo 64 games .
Ninety different tips were available , with three variations of thirty tips each .
REFERENCES