NAMES AND TITLES OF GOD IN THE NEW TESTAMENT
The tetragrammaton ( YHWH ) or trigrammaton ( YHW ) do not occur in any extant Greek manuscripts of the New Testament .
Extant Greek New Testament manuscripts contain the Greek word Kyrios ( Lord ) in Old Testament quotes where the Hebrew manuscripts contain the tetragrammaton .
Some translations insert the tetragrammaton or another name of God into the New Testament where Kyrios appears in the available manuscripts .
MANUSCRIPTS Section::::Manuscripts .
None of the extant Greek manuscripts of the New Testament contain the tetragrammaton , The oldest extant fragments of New Testament manuscripts —
formula_1 , formula_1 , formula_1 and formula_1—do not include any verses that quote Old Testament verses that contained the tetragrammaton .
Fragments that do contain quotations of Old Testament verses containing the tetragrammaton are from the 3rd century CE onward ( formula_1 , formula_1 , formula_1 ) , almost two centuries after the originals .
The manuscripts of the Septuagint and other recensions that are pre - Christian or contemporary to the Apostolic Age present the tetragrammaton in Hebrew within the Greek text or use the Greek trigrammaton ΙΑΩ ( 4Q120 ) .
Even the Septuagint manuscript LXX dated to 3rd century CE , that is post - New Testament manuscript , contains a double yohd to represent the name of God .
Extant New Testament manuscripts are from the late Ante - Nicene Period rather than the Apostolic Age .
Scholar George Howard has suggested that the tetragrammaton appeared in the original New Testament autographs , and that " the removal of the Tetragrammaton from the New Testament and its replacement with the surrogates κυριος and θεος blurred the original distinction between the Lord God and the Lord Christ . "
In the Anchor Bible Dictionary , Howard states : " There is some evidence that the Tetragrammaton , the Divine Name , Yahweh , appeared in some or all of the OT quotations in the NT when the NT documents were first penned . "
Along with Howard , David Trobisch and Rolf Furuli both have suggested that the tetragrammaton may have been removed from the Greek manuscripts .
In the book Archaeology and the New Testament , John McRay wrote that the New Testament autographs " may have preserved the Jewish custom and retained the divine name in Aramaic script in quotations from the Old Testament . "
Robert Baker Girdlestone stated in 1871 that if the Septuagint had used " one Greek word for Jehovah and another for Adonai , such usage would doubtless have been retained in the discourses and arguments of the N.T.
Thus our Lord in quoting the 110th Psalm , ... might have said '
Jehovah said unto Adoni . '
"
Since Girdlestone 's time it has been shown that the Septuagint contained the tetragrammaton , but that it was removed in later editions .
For example , the 8HevXII gr manuscript dated to the 1st century CE contains the tetragrammaton in Hebrew or paleo - Hebrew script .
An original tetragram " had been maintained as far back as Origen " , who wrote : Wolfgang Feneberg comments in the Jesuit magazine Entschluss / Offen ( April 1985 ) : " He [ Jesus ] did not withhold his father 's name YHWH from us , but he entrusted us with it .
It is otherwise inexplicable why the first petition of the Lord 's Prayer should read : ' May your name be sanctified ! '
" Feneberg further notes that " in pre - Christian manuscripts for Greek - speaking Jews , God 's name was not paraphrased with kýrios [ Lord ] , but was written in the tetragram form in Hebrew or archaic Hebrew characters .
...
We find recollections of the name in the writings of the Church Fathers " .
Professor Christopher R. Matthews states : The Jewish custom of writing the tetragrammaton in Hebrew characters within the Greek text continued in the first centuries CE .
No Jewish manuscript of the Septuagint has been found with Κύριος representing the tetragrammaton , and it has been argued , but not widely accepted , that the use of Κύριος shows that later copies of the Septuagint were of Christian character , and even that the composition of the New Testament preceded the change to Κύριος in the Septuagint .
The consistent use of Κύριος to represent the tetragrammaton has been called " a distinguishing mark for any Christian LXX manuscript " , Alan Mugridge states regarding Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 1007 and Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 656 :
Mugridge concludes that early Gentile Christians could write the tetragrammaton in their homemade copies , but that later Christians " replaced the Tetragrammaton by Kyrios , when the divine name written in Hebrew letters was not understood any more . "
According to Edmon Gallagher , a faculty member of Heritage Christian University , some Christian scribes " would have produced a paleo - Hebrew Tetragrammaton " , concluding that " if the scribe copied poorly the paleo - Hebrew script ... as πιπι , which can be a corruption only of the Tetragrammaton in square script .
"
Jerome wrote that by 384CE , some ignorant readers of the LXX assumed the tetragrammaton to be a Greek word , πιπι ( pipi ) , suggesting its pronunciation had been forgotten , but affirming its existence at the end of the 4th century .
Professor Robert J. Wilkinson suggests that Jews in mixed communities would not tolerate articulations of the tetragrammaton , and that Gentiles would have trouble pronouncing it if it were not ΙΑΩ or Κύριος .
Some Jews may have continued to pronounce YHWH in one form or another , ( e.g. , ιαω in Greek ) until the late of Second Temple Period .
According to Pavlos Vasileiadis , a Doctor of Theology at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , " The indications denote that it was ' still being pronounced by some Hellenistic Jews ' and also by non - Jews as late as the third century C.E.
" Sidney Jellicoe concluded , " Kahle is right in holding that LXX [ Septuagint ] texts , written by Jews for Jews , retained the divine name in Hebrew Letters ( paleo - Hebrew or Aramaic ) or in the Greek - letters imitative form ΠΙΠΙ , and that its replacement by Κύριος was a Christian innovation " .
Jellicoe cites various scholars ( B. J. Roberts , Baudissin , Kahle and C. H. Roberts ) and various segments of the Septuagint , concluding that the absence of Adonai from the text suggests that the insertion of the term Κύριος was a later practice ; that the Septuagint Κύριος is used to substitute YHWH ; and that the tetragrammaton appeared in the original text , but Christian copyists removed it .
Tatian 's Diatessaron shows some variance in applying Κύριος to YHWH , but this may be because of dependence on the Peshitta .
Robert Shedinger wrote that in the Greek New Testament copies after originals it could have been changed יהוה by θεος , and later by Κύριος , and Diatessaron may provide additional confirmation of Howard 's hypothesis :
Kyrios appears over 700 times in the New Testament , and in a few instances some Greek manuscripts also use the term in place of Theos .
The consistency in rendering YHWH as Κύριος in all New Testament references would be difficult to explain if there were not already either an established tradition to read Κύριος where YHWH appears in a Greek manuscript , or an established body of texts with Κύριος already in the Greek .
Κύριος is not an exact synonym of the Hebrew Tetragrammaton . !
colspan=3Variance between Κύριος and θεος NT verse
Lord God Acts 8:22
Gr .
Vg , Syp Acts 8:24 א , A , B D , Vg ,
Sy Acts 8:25 א , B , C , D , P74 ,
A ,
Sy Acts 10:33 P45 , א , A , B , C P74 , D ,
Sy Acts 12:24 B P74 , א , A , D ,
Sy Acts 13:44 P74 , א , A
, B B , C ,
Sy Acts 14:48 P45 , P74 , א , A , C B , D ,
RABBINICAL SOURCES
Section::::Rabbinical sources .
A passage recorded in the Hebrew Tosefta , Shabbat 13:5 ( c. 300 CE ) , quoting Tarfon is sometimes cited to suggest that early Christian writings or copies contained the tetragrammaton .
This same source quotes Jose the Galilean ( who lived in the 1st and 2nd centuries CE ) : " one cuts out the references to the Divine Name which are in them
[ the Christian writings ] and stores them away , and the rest burns " .
The Hebrew word guilyonim comes from the Greek euaggelion " Gospel " .
Lawrence Schiffman views this as a discussion of whether to rescue section of the sifre minim ( Hebrew language texts of Jewish Christians ) containing the tetragrammata from a house fire .
Daniel Boyarin includes " even their books of Torah " in this quote .
PRESENCE IN OLD TESTAMENT QUOTES Section::::Presence in Old Testament quotes .
The New Testament contains statements attributed to individuals quoting the Old Testament .
George Howard concludes , because extant copies of the Septuagint from as late as the 3rd century CE contain the tetragrammaton or related forms ( e.g. 4Q120 ( 1st century BCE ) , P Oxy . 3522 ( 1st century CE ) , P Oxy 5101 ( 50 and 150 CE ) , P Oxy 1007 ( 3rd century CE ) , Q ( 6th century CE ) ) , that New Testament writers would also reasonably use the tetragrammaton .
Though Albert Pietersma , along with most scholars , does not accept Howard 's theory , Pietersma has stated about other revisions of the Septuagint : " It might possibly still be debated whether perhaps the Palestinian copies with which the NT authors were familiar read some form of the tetragram . "
From the third century CE onward , kyrios appears ( e.g. P.Oxy656 , P.Oxy1075 ) in Septuagint manuscripts .
Extant New Testament manuscripts from the same period use the Greek form kyrios in place of the Tetragrammaton , even when quoting the Old Testament .
For example , at Luke 4:17 Jesus reads the Isaiah scroll ( Isaiah 61:1 ) at the synagogue in Nazareth .
Some translators inserted the name of God in quotations where the Old Testament has YHWH . !
colspan=4Surrogates of YHWH in New Testament quotations of Old Testament verses New Testament verse Surrogate in NT verse Quote in Old Testament Name and titles of God in OT
Matthew 4:4 θεοῦ
Deuteronomy 8:3 יהוה
Matthew 4:7
Κύριον
τὸν θεόν
Deuteronomy 6:16 יהוה אלהיכם
Matthew 4:10
Κύριον τὸν θεόν
Deuteronomy 5:9
יהוה אלהיך
Matthew 5:33 τῷ κυρίῳ Deuteronomy 23:21 יהוה Matthew 21:9
Κυρίου Psalms 118:26 יהוה Matthew
22:37 Κύριον τὸν θεόν
Deuteronomy 6:5 יהוה
Matthew 22:44
Κύριος τῷ κυρίῳ Psalms 110:1 יהוה
לאדני Mark 12:29 Κύριος ὁ θεὸς , Κύριος Deuteronomy 6:4 יהוה : Nash Papyrus Luke 4:17
Κυρίου
Isaiah 61:1 יהוה Luke 10:27
Κύριον τὸν θεόν :
P45 Deuteronomy 6:5 יהוה : Nash Papyrus Luke 13:35
Κυρίου : P45 Psalms 118:26 יהוה John 6:45 θεοῦ :
P66 Isaiah 54:13 יהוה
John 12:13 Κυρίου : P66 Psalms 118:26 יהוה Acts 2:20,21
Κυρίου
Joel 3:31,32 , Zechariah 1:14 יהוה : LXX Acts 3:22 Κύριος ὁ θεὸς Deuteronomy 18:15 יהוה :
Papyrus Fouad 266 Acts 8:22 τοῦ θεοῦὁ :
Greek ; Dominus : Vg ; Alaha :
Sy Isaiah 55:7 יהוה James 5:11 Κυρίου , κύριος
Job 42:12 יהוה : P.Oxy .
L 3522 Revelation 4:11 κύριος καὶ ὁ θεὸς Psalms 29:1,2 , 96:8 יהוה :
Ambrosiano O 39 sup . , Aq Revelation
15:3 κύριε ὁ θεός
Psalms 97:1 יהוה :
Aq Revelation 19:5 Κύριος
ὁ θεὸς
Psalms 92:5 יהוה :
Aq NOMINA SACRA Section::::Nomina Sacra .
The early Christians in the 1st century CE believed Yahweh to be the only true God , the god of Israel , and considered Jesus to be the messiah ( Christ ) prophesied in the Jewish scriptures .
In pre - Nicene times " the Christian understanding of God carries the fundamental notion that He is the one and same in both the H[ebrew ] O[ld ] T[estament ] and the NT texts . "
George Howard states that κυριος and θεος were the initial nomina sacra when later Gentiles Christians did not copy the tetragrammaton once they " found no traditional reasons to preserve the tetragrammaton .
"
Larry Hurtado claims the innovation of nomina sacra favored the introduction of the doctrine of the Holy trinity in Christianity .
In Greek New Testament Manuscripts nomina sacra occurs around the third century CE onwards .
Vasileiadis states that " the subsequent use of the contracted forms of the original nomina sacra
κ[ύριο]ς
[
( ) ] and θ[εό]ς [ ( ) ]
within Christian manuscripts probably reflects the Jewish practice of replacing the Tetragrammaton by י[הו]ה .
" , transliterated in koine Greek as ιά .
HEBREW EXPRESSIONS HALLELUJAH Section::::Hebrew expressions .
Section::::Hallelujah .
Hallelujah ( Tiberian halləlûyāh , literally praise Jah or praise Yah ) , appears four times at .
It is represented in Greek as Ἁλληλουιά wherein ιά ( Hebrew יה ) is an abbreviated form of the tetragrammaton .
USAGE IN NEW TESTAMENT TRANSLATIONS Section::::Usage in New Testament translations .
Most English Bibles , including those which contain Yahweh ( such as the Jerusalem Bible ) or a related form in the Old Testament , do not use the same form in the New Testament because it does not appear in the available Greek New Testament manuscripts .
However , of over English translations of the Bible have been written , 23 use the forms Jehovah or Yahweh in the New Testament .
YHWH YAHWEH
*
The Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition ( 1981 ) renders the tetragrammaton as Yahweh in both the Old and New Testaments .
* The Holy Name Bible , ( 2012 ) , revised by A. B. Traina ,
The Scripture Research Association , Inc. , reprinted by Yahshua Promotions .
JEHOVAH
* The Family Expositor or , a Paraphrase and Version of the New Testament ; with Critical Notes , and a Practical Improvement of Each Section , by Philip Doddridge , 1808 .
* William Newcome , in what is sometimes known as " Archbishop Newcome 's new translation " ( 1809 ) , uses the name Jehovah a few times where the New Testament quotes from the Old Testament , such as Matthew 22:24 .
* A Literal Translation of the New Testament ...
From the Text of the Vatican Manuscript , by Herman Heinfetter ( 1863 )
*
The Emphatic Diaglott ( 1864 ) , by Benjamin Wilson .
Jehovah appears 13x in the Four Gospels and the Acts in the New Testament .
* Hiram Bingham II , ( 1890 ) , Te Baibara .
* Pablo Besson , ( 1919 ) , El Nuevo Testamento , Buenos Aires , Argentina .
* Edward Grimes , ( 1923 ) , The Apocalypse : A Revised Version in English of the Revelation with Notes , Historical and Explanatory .
* George N. LeFevre , ( 1928 ) ,
The Christian 's Bible — New Testament , ( Strasburg , PA ) .
* Wilfrid H. Isaacs , ( 1933 ) , The Epistle to the Hebrews with some interpretative suggestions .
* Benjamin Wisner Bacon , ( 1933 ) , The Gospel of the Hellenists , Carl Hermann Kraeling and H. Holt ed . ,
University of Michigan .
*
The New Testament Letters , by J.W.C. Wand , Bishop of London ( 1946 ) .
" Jehovah " appears just in three places - Rom 9:28 ; 12:19 and Heb 7:21 .
*
The rendering Jehovah appears 237 times in the New World Translation ( NWT ) , of the New Testament published first in 1950 by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and used by Jehovah 's Witnesses .
*
The Indoniseian Batak ( Toba ) version ( 1989 ) uses Jahowa 110 times .
* Rotuman Bible ( 1999 ) , which uses Jihova 51 times in 48 verses .
*
The Original Aramaic Bible in Plain English ( 2008 ) by David Bauscher , a self - published English translation of the New Testament , from the Aramaic of The Peshitta New Testament with a translation of the ancient Aramaic Peshitta version of Psalms & Proverbs , uses JEHOVAH approximately 239 times in the New Testament , where the Peshitta itself does not .
He justifies the insertion of the name Jehovah for the translation of the term MarYah , " which is The Aramaic for The Hebrew " Yahweh " , and always refers to The Deity " .
*
The Divine Name King James Bible , published in 2011 , uses Jehovah and Jah in 7,023 places where the capitalized LORD and GOD appear in the Authorized King James Version .
Jehovah appears in parentheses in the New Testament portion of this Bible where Old Testament quotes are cross - referenced .
ONLY IN NOTES SACRED NAME BIBLES Section::::Sacred Name Bibles .
Sacred Name Bibles are editions of the Bible that " consistently use Hebraic forms of God 's name ... in New Testament " .
*
In 1993 , the Institute for Scripture Research ( ISR ) published The Scriptures , the first English translation to incorporate the Hebrew letters of the tetragrammaton instead of a generic title ( e.g. , the ) or a conjectural transliteration ( e.g. , Yahweh or Jehovah ) .
The Besorah and ISR 's The Scriptures ' 98 also incorporate the tetragrammaton , using Paleo - Hebrew script rather than Hebrew square script .
SEE ALSO
* Assemblies of Yahweh * Names of God in Christianity
* Names of God in Judaism
* Papyrus Fouad 266
*
Papyrus Rylands 458
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The divine name in the New Testament Le nom divin dans le Nouveau Testament
* Greek text – Complete Greek text of the Septuagint hyperlinked to Strong 's concordance .
* Brenton 's – The standard English translation of the Septuagint ( hard copy has Greek in column ) * The New Testament and the Septuagint – Instances where the New Testament quotes the LXX against the Masoretic Hebrew *
The New Testament and the Hebrew OT – Instances where the New Testament agrees with the Masoretic Hebrew meaning
* Names in the Septuagint and Masoretic – A table of the older Greek names with the newer Masoretic renditions , in the Old Testament
*
The Septuagint Online – Comprehensive site with scholarly discussion and extensive links to texts and translations
* Article for the thesis by Matteo Pierro in a Catholic Magazine : " Rivista Biblica " , n. 2 , April – June 1997 , p.
183–186 .
Bologna , Italy
* Article against the thesis by Carmelo Savasta in a Catholic Magazine : " Rivista Biblica " , n. 1 , 1998 , p.
89–92 .
Bologna , Italy
* The Tetragrammaton and the Christian Greek Scriptures , a downloadable book .