ROUND STEAK
A round steak is a beef steak from the " round " , the rear leg of the cow .
The round is divided into cuts including the eye ( of ) round , bottom round , and top round , with or without the " round " bone ( femur ) , and may include the knuckle ( sirloin tip ) , depending on how the round is separated from the loin .
This is a lean cut and it is moderately tough .
Lack of fat and marbling makes round dry out when cooked with dry - heat cooking methods like roasting or grilling .
Round steak is commonly prepared with slow moist - heat methods including braising , to tenderize the meat and maintain moisture .
The cut is often sliced thin , then dried or smoked at low temperature to make jerky .
Rump cover , with its thick layer of accompanying fat , is considered one of the best ( and most flavorful ) beef cuts in many South American countries , particularly Brazil and Argentina .
This specific cut does not tend to be found elsewhere , however .
TOPSIDE AND SILVERSIDE Section::::Topside and Silverside .
British cuts topside and silverside together are roughly equivalent to the American Round cut .
New Zealand cuts also use these terms ( or sometimes " Outside Round " for silverside ) .
DISHES
* Bresaola : Air - dried salted beef made with round steak *
London broil : Bias - cut roasted steak , commonly made with round steak * Italian beef :
Thinly sliced round steak cooked in stock
* Rinderbraten : Round steak stuffed with pork fat and spices
* Steak and Guinness pie :
Round steak with Guinness stout , bacon , and onions , in pie crust
COMMON PREPARATIONS
* Ground round or beef mince : a type of ground beef made from round steak and trimmings from the primal round ; this is also the name of a U.S. restaurant chain , Ground Round * Accordion cut : cutting on alternating sides and stretching to make a thinner overall steak
* Butterflying :
cutting through the center , leaving a small hinge of meat , and unfolding to create a thinner steak
* Swiss steak : preparing by making a series of small cuts with a bladed roller or pounding flat , also called Swissing , cubing or tenderizing SEE ALSO
* List of steak dishes
* Popeseye steak
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*