QUICKEN LOANS Quicken Loans Inc. , is a mortgage lending company headquartered in the One Campus Martius building in the heart of the financial district of downtown Detroit , Michigan .
In January 2018 , the company became the largest overall retail lender in the U.S. ( it is also the largest online retail mortgage lender ) .
Unlike other large mortgage lenders that depend on deposits , Quicken Loans relies on wholesale funding to make its loans and uses online applications rather than a branch system .
Title Source and One Reverse Mortgage are also part of the Quicken Loans Family of Companies .
The company closed more than $ 400 billion of mortgage volume across all 50 states from 2013 through 2017 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Quicken Loans , originally Rock Financial , was founded in 1985 by Dan Gilbert , Gary Gilbert , and Lindsay Gross .
In July 1987 the name was changed to Rock Financial Corp. As RFC grew
so did the head count , hitting 50 employees in August 1991 .
In May 1998 , Gilbert took Rock Financial public , launching an IPO underwritten by Bear Stearns and Prudential Securities .
In December 1999 , Intuit Inc. ( makers of QuickBooks , TurboTax , Quicken , and an online lending platform QuickenMortgage ) purchased Rock Financial Corp. for $ 532M.
The company was renamed Quicken Loans .
In June 2002 , Dan Gilbert led a small group of private investors in purchasing the Quicken Loans subsidiary back from Intuit for $ 64M.
The company started to change course in the late 1990s , shifting from a traditional mortgage provider to an online - focused lender .
Traditionally , the home mortgage business in America has been fragmented due to varying regulations in each state and locality .
Gilbert challenged this orthodoxy , however , by offering loan applications online that were reviewed by experts versed in the regulations of each region but who were located in a central headquarters .
On November 12 , 2007 , Gilbert announced a development agreement with the city of Detroit to move the company headquarters downtown , consolidating suburban offices .
The construction sites reserved for development by the agreement included the location of the former Statler Hotel on Grand Circus Park and the former Hudson 's location .
Quicken Loans moved into its downtown headquarters in August 2010 .
The initial move brought 1,700 employees to the city .
Since 2009 , Quicken has leased office space in the Compuware building facing Campus Martius Park in Detroit .
The company also houses its employees in Downtown Detroit 's First National Building , The Qube , Chrysler House , One Woodward Avenue , and 1001 Woodward , all owned by Quicken Loans ' parent company , Rock Ventures .
In the spring of 2008 , Rock Holdings entered the reverse mortgage market with the acquisition of One Reverse Mortgage .
The company saw a small drop in employment levels following the 2008 financial crisis .
In August 2007 , the entire mortgage industry faced a crisis in obtaining new credit from banking institutions and hedge funds .
In response , Quicken Loans discontinued : *
Second mortgages * Home equity lines of credit ( HELOC )
* Alt - A products
* Deferred interest loans
In 2004 , Quicken Loans became a defendant in a class action lawsuit .
This was filed against the company on behalf of employees who had worked as loan consultants for any Quicken office within the past three years .
The claimants alleged that Quicken violated the Fair Labor Standards Act ( FLSA ) by failing to pay the plaintiffs overtime for working beyond a 40-hour work week .
Quicken Loans denied these claims , and said it is not aware of any such violations of the FLSA .
On March 17 , 2011 , a federal jury found in favor of Quicken Loans , ending the seven - year - old lawsuit .
The decision means that Quicken Loans is not obligated to pay overtime payments to the plaintiffs .
In 2014 , Quicken Loans grew to be the 2nd largest mortgage lender in the United States , and remains the nation 's largest online mortgage lender .
The company employs 24,000 people nationwide , with approximately 17,000 now working in the city of Detroit , making it Detroit 's largest employer , minority employer , and taxpayer .
In 2016 , Quicken Loans launched Rocket Mortgage , one of the first fully online mortgage lenders .
In January 2018 , Quicken Loans became the nation 's largest mortgage lender .
On October 15 , Quicken Loans announced that it was expanding into Canada by opening a tech center across the river in downtown Windsor , Ontario .
SEE ALSO
* Quicken Loans Arena - A multi - purpose arena in Downtown Cleveland , Ohio .
* Suburban Collection Showplace ( previously known as the Rock Financial Showplace ) -
A convention center in Novi , Michigan
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Quicken Loans