ELLIOT REID Elliot Reid , M.D. is a fictional character played by Sarah Chalke in the American comedy - drama Scrubs .
She appeared in every episode during the first eight seasons except two Season 8 episodes , " My Last Words " and " My Lawyer 's in Love . "
Chalke was a regular cast member for the first eight seasons and appeared in four episodes of Season 9 .
Elliot is a close friend and a frequent love interest to protagonist John " J.D. " Dorian ( Zach Braff ) for the first eight seasons , and in Season 9 becomes his wife .
She is also close to Carla Espinosa ( Judy Reyes ) and Christopher Turk ( Donald Faison ) , the series ' other chief characters .
FAMILY HISTORY Section::::Family history .
She is the daughter of Simon and Lily Reid ( Lane Davies and Markie Post ) , and is of German descent .
Her father was chief of medicine at St. Augustine 's , a private hospital in Greenwich , Connecticut .
She grew up privileged but love - starved ; she once attributed her many neuroses and cripplingly low self - esteem to the way she was treated by her parents .
Her mother is a cold , self - absorbed alcoholic , and her father tries to interfere with her career ; he eventually cuts her off financially after he tries to push her to specialize in gynecology and she refuses .
Elliot has several brothers who are also doctors , but are never portrayed on the show ; one of these unseen characters is her brother Barry , a closeted homosexual whom their parents sent to " hetero camp . "
She grew up in an apple orchard , where she learned to fight to drive away apple thieves .
She is a Republican and supports the Iraq War .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Elliot was valedictorian of her high school and attended Brown University , where she was in the sorority
Omega Beta Gamma ( a fictional sorority , first appearing in Season 2
; ΩΒΓ stands for the first three letters in OB - GYN ) with best friend Melody O'Harra ( Keri Russell ) .
She also played tambourine in a Christian rock band in college .
At Sacred Heart , Elliot begins as an intern and later becomes a resident after a grueling yearlong internship .
She serves as co - chief resident with J.D. during Season 4 .
At the end of that season , she briefly leaves to take an endocrinology fellowship , which ends five days later after her research partner finds a cure for osteogenesis imperfecta , the disease they were hired to research .
After a brief spell at a free clinic , she returns to Sacred Heart and becomes a senior attending physician .
At the end of the episode " My Coffee , " she accepts an offer to go into private practice , allowing her to receive double the pay , still work at Sacred Heart , and never have to deal with superiors Dr. Cox ( John C. McGinley ) or Dr. Kelso ( Ken Jenkins ) again .
In " My Full Moon , " she ponders her future career after struggling to deliver the bad news to a patient diagnosed with H.I.V. , and tells Turk that if she were lucky enough to get married and to have enough money to survive without working , she would " walk out of this place and never look back . "
PECULIARITIES Section::::Peculiarities .
When first introduced , Elliot was portrayed as socially awkward and hyper - competitive , but her personality was modified slightly by the second episode .
According to Chalke , her character was shown totally lacking " social skills .
" She is characterized as a chatterbox who puts her foot in her mouth at every conceivable opportunity ( in " My Mentor , " she asks an overweight woman , "
When 's the baby due ? "
and accidentally insults Turk 's Jehovah 's Witness mother by describing people of that faith as " crazed , annoying busybodies " ) .
According to J.D. and various patients , her bedside manner is cold and mechanical , although in later seasons she is shown to bond with several patients .
Her bedside manner ( or lack thereof ) is part of the reason that Dr. Cox decides to split the role of chief resident between her and the more sensitive J.D. ( saying the two of them together would make " one barely passable doctor / Labradoodle " ) .
Elliot is frequently shown telling " inspirational stories " to fellow staff and patients that invariably ended with someone committing suicide , to the extent that by " My Happy Place " it has become the expected result of any story she begins .
In the episode " My Fishbowl , " she admits that she tried to kill herself as a teenager by filling her pockets with rocks and walking into a lake , like her favorite author , Virginia Woolf ; however , the attempt failed when someone rowing a boat in the lake accidentally struck her on the head with an oar .
In Season 3 , Elliot undergoes a notable transformation ; she begins dressing and grooming herself in a more sexually provocative manner and adopts a somewhat more assertive and self - assured personality .
This was the result of a directive from NBC 's marketing department , which wanted the show to have a sexier female star for the network 's coveted young male demographic .
A short feature on the Season 3 DVD set titled " The New Elliot " explained the reasons for the makeover and the response it engendered from Chalke and the show 's writers .
Chalke , speaking about her character , has noted how much Elliot changed through the run of Scrubs .
At the start of the series , Elliot was a competitive and independent person until she realized that she needed the help and support of her co - workers .
Chalke said that Elliot 's transformation in the episode " My Own American Girl " did not really help her life , and that Elliot was still " on a never - ending journey to find respect [ in Season 4 ] , and now she 's a lot more confident and together . "
RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER CHARACTERS
J.D. Section::::Relationships with other characters .
Section::::J.D ..
J.D. and Elliot have a complex relationship ; they are close friends and often grapple with their romantic feelings for each other .
In an interview , Sarah Chalke said that Bill Lawrence , the creator of Scrubs , wanted to avoid a " will they or wo n't they get together " plot for the series , instead opting for a running gag where they hook up once a year and have " everything blow up in [ their ] faces and not work out . "
In the Season 1 episode " My Drug Buddy , " they start a relationship , but break up in the following episode upon realizing that they do n't work as a couple .
They repair their friendship , but it is later revealed that they still have feelings for each other , and they begin sleeping together again in " My Monster .
" They decide to be " sex buddies " without romantic involvement , but this ends after only a few days , with J.D. realizing that he has deep feelings for her .
In Season 3 , J.D. again realizes his feelings for her as she rekindles her relationship with an old boyfriend , Sean .
Later in the season , J.D. and Elliot sleep together again .
Although Elliot initially decides to stay with Sean , she later leaves him to be with J.D.
However , J.D. soon breaks up with Elliot after realizing that he does n't love her after all .
In Season 4 , following Elliot 's brief fling with J.D. 's brother , Dan ( Tom Cavanagh ) , they once again repair their friendship and then move in together in Season 5 , after J.D has nowhere to live .
J.D. and Elliot also have a very close friendship built on their shared experiences as residents at the hospital , similarities in their personalities , and their knowledge of each other 's quirks and issues .
In the episode " My Cold Shower , " J.D. realizes that he might still be in love with Elliot after she gets engaged ; in the Season 6 finale , " My Point of No Return , " they lean in for a kiss after a night of discussing their doubts about their respective relationships .
However , in " My Own Worst Enemy , " the Season 7 opener , Elliot realizes she is making a mistake and pulls away , asserting that the almost - kiss had nothing to do with her feelings for J.D. Later in Season 7 , there are some subtle hints that Elliot and J.D. might be getting closer , and possibly romantically involved .
For instance , the episode " My Waste of Time " ends with J.D. and Elliot sitting in a cafe , commenting on how everyone thought they were together , then playing with J.D. 's son , Sam , as if they were a family .
Also , in " My Bad Too , " Turk tells Carla ( in unsubtitled Spanish ) , " Those two will be getting back together in five weeks . "
In the Season 7 finale , " My Princess , " Elliot and J.D. agree that the almost - kiss , a point of tension between them , has nothing to do with their feelings and had merely been a response to stress .
In the Season 8 episode " My Happy Place , " Elliot and J.D. reevaluate their relationship , admitting their lingering feelings for each other .
However , it is only after Dr. Kelso tells them to do whatever makes them happy that they decide to give their relationship another chance .
J.D. and Elliot are shown to officially be a couple again in " My Cookie Pants . "
In the Season 8 episode "
My Cuz , " J.D. left Sacred Heart to move closer to his son .
Though Elliot remained at Sacred Heart , she moves in with J.D. , despite the long commute .
Before J.D. left the hospital for good , he had a prolonged fantasy ( implied to be a flash - forward ) that showed him and Elliot getting married and having at least one child together .
By the start of Season 9 , set a year after the Season 8 finale , they were married and expecting their first child .
CARLA Section::::Carla .
Elliot and Carla initially clash over their duties at the hospital and Elliot 's somewhat condescending attitude , but they gradually become close friends .
Carla becomes a source of personal and professional advice for Elliot ; for her part , Carla reveals before her wedding that she feels closer to Elliot than to her own sisters .
After Carla 's marriage , the two begin to drift apart , but when they realize it , they vow to work harder on maintaining their friendship .
Elliot lets Carla stay with her when her marriage to Turk hits a rough patch , while Carla supports Elliot through her various breakups and is overjoyed to see Elliot and J.D. become a couple again .
Cast and crew members have commented that the development of Carla and Elliot 's friendship was somewhat parallel to the development of that between Chalke and Judy Reyes , who played Carla .
TURK Section::::Turk .
Despite clashing initially , Elliot and Turk grow to be friends , a relationship begun in " My Mentor " when Turk tells Carla to give Elliot a break .
In " My Heavy Meddle , " he convinces Elliot , who had just broken up with J.D. , to mend their relationship for the sake of the group dynamic .
Throughout the series , Turk watches out for Elliot , J.D. , and Carla , and occasionally acts as a go - between .
The flash - forward scene at the end of " My Finale " shows all of them together as a happy family .
DR .
COX Section::::Dr .
Cox .
In Season 1 , Elliot is alternately terrified of and eager to please Dr. Perry Cox , Sacred Heart 's acerbic chief attending physician ( later residency director and chief of medicine ) .
Cox responds by constantly berating her , a trend that would continue throughout the series .
He occasionally shows signs of support , however ; in " My Blind Date , " he relies on her as a replacement " go - to guy " when J.D. is busy , and in " My Dream Job , " he defends her from Kelso 's verbal abuse by punching him .
From Season 3 on , their relationship is one of mutual contempt , based mostly on trading quips and insults .
Even so , Cox continues to give her personal and professional advice ( albeit in the form of mockery ) , and in " My Déjà Vu , My Déjà Vu , " they admit that , while they do n't like each other , they do respect each other .
MOLLY CLOCK
Section::::Molly Clock .
Molly Clock ( Heather Graham ) is Elliot 's close friend and mentor in Season 4 ; in " Her Story , " Elliot sees Molly as a role model even after Molly makes some questionable choices .
Molly moves to Milwaukee in " My Last Chance " and tells J.D. to ask Elliot 's permission for the two of them to sleep together ; Elliot uses the situation to get even with J.D. for breaking up with her .
JANITOR Section::::Janitor .
Elliot and the Janitor have a friendly if asymmetric relationship ; she views him as a nice hospital employee , while he harbors an intense schoolboy crush on her .
She finally realizes his feelings for her in " My Best Laid Plans , " when he confesses them outright and goes on to say that she is the only doctor who treats him like a person .
The Janitor 's nickname for Elliot is " Blonde Doctor . " ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Romantic relationships .
In Season 1 , she dates her former patient Sean Kelly ( Scott Foley ) .
In Season 2 , she dates Nurse Paul Flowers ( Rick Schroder ) .
In Season 3 , she meets Sean again and starts a new relationship with him , but when J.D. reveals his feelings for her , she leaves Sean .
In Season 4 , Elliot dates J.D. 's brother , Dan ( Tom Cavanagh ) , and then a man named Jake ( Josh Randall ) .
They break up when Elliot realizes that he does not really know her .
In Season 6 , Elliot gets engaged to fellow Sacred Heart doctor Keith Dudemeister ( Travis Schuldt ) , but breaks it off when she realizes that she does not truly love him .
KEITH DUDEMEISTER Section::::Keith Dudemeister .
Elliot starts a sex - only relationship with intern Keith Dudemeister in " My Buddy 's Booty , " much to J.D. 's chagrin .
Eventually , they begin a romantic relationship and , after navigating a rough patch , declare their love for each other .
Keith proposes to Elliot at the end of " My Turf War , " and she says yes in the following episode .
However , Elliot soon realizes that she does not truly love him , and she cancels the wedding .
He despises her for the rest of the season , but they finally bury the hatchet in the Season 8 episode " My Jerks , " when she apologizes for hurting him .
SEAN KELLY Section::::Sean Kelly .
Elliot meets Sean ( Scott Foley ) in the Season 1 episode " My Way or the Highway , " when he is a patient of hers .
Knowing that he has many of the same insecurities as her , Elliot is instantly attracted to him and eventually asks him out .
Their relationship ends in " My Sacrificial Clam , " however , when Elliot finds herself unable to juggle a relationship with the stresses of her internship .
Elliot meets Sean again at the beginning of Season 3 , when he is with another girl .
They begin dating again ( much to J.D. 's consternation ) .
Although their relationship is strong , Sean tries to end it in " My Lucky Night " when he has to move to New Zealand for six months , because he does not believe in long - distance relationships .
Elliot nevertheless convinces him that they can make it work .
However , in " His Story II , " Elliot comes to believe during Sean 's absence that J.D. loves her more and sleeps with him , only to realize the depth of Sean 's commitment when he returns from New Zealand .
She then goes back to Sean .
J.D. initially agrees to remain silent , but when Sean and Elliot begin planning to move in together , J.D. tells Elliot how he feels , prompting her to leave Sean for an ultimately doomed relationship with J.D. After breaking up with Elliot in " My Self - Examination , " J.D. finds a depressed Sean and tries to get him to take Elliot back in " My Best Friend 's Wedding . "
Sean arrives at Turk and Carla 's wedding to talk to Elliot about their relationship , but they do not get back together — to the disappointment of J.D. , who was trying to repair their relationship and , in turn , his own friendship with Elliot .
Sean appears again in the Season 8 episode "
My Cuz , " in a relationship with Kim Briggs ( Elizabeth Banks ) , the mother of J.D. 's child , Sam .
It is revealed that Sean and Kim had been introduced by Elliot before she and J.D. got back together , irritating both J.D. and Sean , who still harbor a mutual dislike .
REFERENCES