8 SECONDS 8 Seconds is a 1994 American biographical drama film directed by John G. Avildsen .
Its title refers to the length of time a bull rider is required to stay on for a ride to be scored .
It stars Luke Perry as American rodeo legend Lane Frost and focuses on his life and career as a bull riding champion .
It also features Stephen Baldwin as Tuff Hedeman , and Red Mitchell as Cody Lambert .
Notably , there is an early appearance by Renée Zellweger .
The film was completed and premiered shortly after what would have been Frost 's 30th birthday , in late 1993 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
While growing up in Oklahoma , young Lane Frost ( Cameron Finley ) learns the tricks of the bull riding trade at the hand of his father , Clyde ( James Rebhorn ) , an accomplished rodeo bronco rider himself .
As he enters his teenage and early adult years , Lane ( Luke Perry ) travels the western rodeo circuit with his best friends Tuff Hedeman ( Stephen Baldwin ) and Cody Lambert ( Red Mitchell ) .
He meets and falls in love with a young barrel racer , Kellie Kyle , and they eventually marry in 1984 .
As Lane 's legend and fame increase , so does the amount of pressure he puts on himself , to be what everyone wants him to be , and he wants to show that he is as good as they say he is .
His ascent to the world championship is marred by a cheating incident , questions about Kellie 's devotion , and a near broken neck .
The film also follows him through the true life series between himself and Red Rock , a bull that no cowboy had ever been able to stay on for 8 seconds .
It cuts the series down to three rides .
In 1989 , he is the second - to - last rider at the Cheyenne Frontier Days Rodeo .
While riding on the bull known as " Takin ' Care Of Business " , he dismounts after his 8-second ride but the bull turns back and hits him in the side with his horn , breaking some ribs and severing a main artery .
As a result of excessive internal bleeding , he dies on the arena floor before he can be transported to the hospital .
The final scene shows Hedeman later that same year at the National Finals Rodeo riding for the world championship .
After the 8 second bell sounds , he continues to ride and stays on an additional 8 seconds as a tribute to his fallen best friend .
CAST * Luke Perry as Lane Frost
* Stephen Baldwin as Tuff Hedeman * Red Mitchell as Cody Lambert * Cynthia Geary as Kellie Kyle Frost
* James Rebhorn as Clyde Frost * Carrie Snodgress as Elsie Frost * Linden Ashby as Martin Hudson * Renée Zellweger as Buckle Bunny
* George Michael as Himself
* Brooks & Dunn as Themselves
* Vince Gill as Himself
* Karla Bonoff as Herself PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming took place in Texas and Pendleton , Oregon .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film gained a mixed reception .
The Milwaukee Journal praised Perry 's acting but criticized the performance of Cynthia Geary , who played Kellie Frost .
It holds a 33 % rating from Rotten Tomatoes .
SOUNDTRACK REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS