HISTORY OF THE FIFA WORLD CUP
The FIFA World Cup was first held in 1930 , when FIFA , the world 's football governing body , decided to stage an international men 's football tournament under the era of FIFA president Jules Rimet who put this idea into place .
The inaugural edition , held in 1930 , was contested as a final tournament of only thirteen teams invited by the organization .
Since then , the World Cup has experienced successive expansions and format remodeling , with its current 32-team final tournament preceded by a two - year qualifying process , involving over 200 teams from around the world .
INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL
BEFORE 1930 Section::::International football before 1930 .
The first official international football match was played in 1872 in Glasgow between Scotland and England , although at this stage the sport was rarely played outside Great Britain .
By the twentieth century football had gained ground all around the world and national football associations were being founded .
The first official international match outside the British Isles was played between Uruguay and Argentina in Montevideo in July 1902 .
The Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) was founded in Paris on 22 May 1904 – comprising football associations from France , Belgium ( the preceding two teams having played their first national against each other earlier in the month ) , Denmark , the Netherlands , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland , with Germany pledging to join .
As football began to increase in popularity , it was contested as an IOC - recognised Olympic sport at the 1900 and 1904 Summer Olympics , as well as at the 1906 Intercalated Games , before becoming an official FIFA - supervised Olympic competition at the 1908 Summer Olympics .
Organised by England 's Football Association , the event was for amateur players only and was regarded suspiciously as a show rather than a competition .
The England national amateur football team won the event in both 1908 and 1912 .
There was an attempt made by FIFA to organize an international football tournament between nations outside of the Olympic framework in 1906 and this took place in Switzerland .
These were very early days for international football and the official history of FIFA describes the competition as having been a failure .
With the Olympic event continuing to be contested only between amateur teams , competitions involving professional teams also started to appear .
The Torneo Internazionale Stampa Sportiva , held in Turin in 1908 , was one of the first and the following year ; Sir Thomas Lipton organised the Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy , also held in Turin .
Both tournaments were contested between individual clubs ( not national teams ) , each one of which represented an entire nation .
For this reason , neither was really a direct forerunner of the World Cup , but notwithstanding that , the Thomas Lipton Trophy is sometimes described as The First World Cup , at the expense of its less well - known Italian predecessor .
In 1914 , FIFA agreed to recognise the Olympic tournament as a " world football championship for amateurs " , and took responsibility for organising the event .
This led the way for the world 's first intercontinental football competition , at the 1920 Summer Olympics , won by Belgium .
Uruguay won the tournaments in 1924 and 1928 .
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE WORLD CUP Section::::The beginnings of the World Cup .
In 1928 , FIFA made the decision to stage their own international tournament .
The 1932 Summer Olympics , held in Los Angeles , did not plan to include football as part of the programme due to the low popularity of the sport in the United States .
FIFA and the IOC also disagreed over the status of amateur players , and so football was dropped from the Games .
FIFA president Jules Rimet thus set about organizing the inaugural World Cup tournament .
With Uruguay now two - time official world champions and due to celebrate their centenary of independence in 1930 , FIFA named Uruguay as the host country .
The national associations of selected nations were invited to send a team , but the choice of Uruguay as a venue for the competition meant a long and costly trip across the Atlantic Ocean for European sides .
No European country pledged to send a team until two months before the start of the competition .
Rimet eventually persuaded teams from Belgium , France , Romania , Hungary and Yugoslavia to make the trip .
In total , 13 nations took part – seven from South America , four from Europe and two from North America .
The first two World Cup matches took place simultaneously , and were won by France and the United States , who beat Mexico 4–1 and Belgium 3–0 , respectively .
The first goal in World Cup history was scored by Lucien Laurent of France .
Four days later , the first World Cup hat - trick was achieved by Bert Patenaude of the U.S. in the Americans ' 3–0 win against Paraguay .
In the final , Uruguay defeated Argentina 4–2 in front of a crowd of 93,000 people in Montevideo to become the first nation to win a World Cup .
The 1934 World Cup was hosted by Italy and was the first World Cup to include a qualification stage .
Sixteen teams qualified for the tournament , a number which would be retained until the expansion of the finals tournament in 1982 .
Uruguay , the titleholders from 1930 , still upset about the poor European attendance at their World Cup in 1930 , boycotted the 1934 World Cup .
Bolivia and Paraguay were also absent , allowing Argentina and Brazil to progress to the finals in Italy without having to play any qualifying matches .
Egypt became the first African team to compete , but lost to Hungary in the first round .
Italy won the tournament , becoming the first European team to do so .
The 1938 World Cup competition was also held in Europe ( in France ) , much to the consternation of many South Americans , with Uruguay and Argentina boycotting .
For the first time , the title holders and the host country were given automatic qualification .
Following a play - off match against Latvia , Austria had officially qualified for the final round , but because of the Anschluss in April 1938 with Germany , the Austrian national team withdrew , with some Austrian players being added to the German squad ( the combined German squad would be eliminated in the first round for the first time in the World Cup 's history , with the second time happening eighty years later during the 2018 tournament ) .
Austria 's place was offered to England , but they declined .
This left the finals with 15 nations competing .
France hosted , but for the first time the hosts did not win the competition , as Italy retained their title , beating Hungary in the final .
Polish striker Ernest Willimowski became the first player to score four goals in a World Cup game during Poland 's 6–5 loss against Brazil ; his record was later equalled by other players , but was bettered only 56 years later in the 1994 World Cup .
CANCELLATIONS
DUE TO WORLD WAR II Section::::Cancellations due to World War II .
The FIFA World Cup was planned to take place in 1942 .
Germany officially applied to host the 1942 FIFA World Cup at the 23rd FIFA Congress on 13 August 1936 in Berlin .
In June 1939 , Brazil also applied to host the tournament .
The beginning of European hostilities in September 1939 prompted further plans for the 1942 World Cup to be cancelled , before a host country was selected .
The FIFA tournament did not take place .
During World War II , FIFA struggled to keep itself afloat , and it had no financial or personnel resources with which to plan a peacetime tournament for when hostilities ended .
When the war ended in 1945 , it was clear that FIFA would have no hope in a single year of planning and scheduling a 1946 World Cup .
In fact , FIFA 's first meeting was on July 1 , 1946 – around the time the 1946 World Cup would ordinarily have been played – and when it planned the next World Cup for 1949 no country would host it .
The major international tournament in 1946 was the 1946 South American Championship in which Argentina beat Brazil 2–0 on February 10 , 1946 .
POST - WAR YEARS
THE 1950S Section::::Post - war years .
Section::::The 1950s .
Competitions resumed with the 1950 World Cup in Brazil , which was the first to include British participants .
British teams withdrew from FIFA in 1920 , partly out of unwillingness to play against the countries they had been at war with , and partly as a protest against a foreign influence to football , but rejoined in 1946 following FIFA 's invitation .
England 's involvement , however , was not to be a success .
The English failed to make the final group round in a campaign that included a surprise 1–0 loss to the United States .
The tournament also saw the return of 1930 champions Uruguay , who had boycotted the previous two World Cups .
For political reasons , Eastern European countries ( such as Hungary , the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia ) did not enter .
Title - holder Italy did take part , despite the Superga air disaster of 1949 in which the entire Grande Torino team ( many who were national team players ) were killed .
The 1950 World Cup was the only tournament not to stage a final tie , replacing knockout rounds with two group phases .
The last match of the second group phase , however , is sometimes referred to as a " final " , as the group standings meant the winners would be the overall winners .
Uruguay were surprise victors over hosts Brazil with a final score of 2–1 ( the game would later be known as Maracanazo ) , and became champions for the second time .
This game also held the record for the highest attendance at any sporting match , at roughly 200,000 .
The 1954 World Cup , held in Switzerland , was the first to be televised .
The Soviet Union did not participate because of their dismal performance at the 1952 Summer Olympics .
Scotland made their first appearance in the tournament , but were unable to register a win , going out after the group stage .
This tournament set a number of all - time goal - scoring records , including highest average goals per game and highest - scoring team ( Hungary ) , and most goals in a single match ( Austria 's 7–5 quarter - final victory over Switzerland ) .
West Germany were the tournament winners , defeating Olympic champions Hungary 3–2 in the final , overturning a 2–0 deficit in the process , with Helmut Rahn scoring the winner .
The match is known as the Miracle of Bern in Germany .
Brazil won the 1958 World Cup , held in Sweden , and became the first team to win a World Cup outside their home continent ( only 4 teams have done this to date – Brazil in 1958 , 1970 , 1994 and 2002 , Argentina in 1986 , Spain in 2010 and Germany in 2014 ) .
The Soviet Union participated this time , most likely due to their win at Melbourne 1956 .
For the first ( and so far only ) time , all four British teams qualified for the final round .
Wales was able to take advantage of a situation in the Africa / Asia zone , where the number of withdrawals would give Israel qualification without having played a single qualifying match .
This prompted FIFA to rule that qualification without playing was not allowed ( despite allowing this to happen in earlier years of the Cup ) , and so Israel were ordered to play against one of the teams finishing second in the other groups .
A tie was created , and Wales defeated Israel 2–0 twice in 1958 .
It was the first ( and so far the only ) time that a country played a World Cup final round after having been eliminated in the regular qualifiers .
The tournament also saw the emergence of Pelé , who scored two goals in the final .
French striker
Just Fontaine became the top scorer of the tournament .
THE 1960S Section::::The 1960s .
Chile hosted the 1962 World Cup .
Two years before the tournament , an earthquake struck , the largest ever recorded at 9.5 magnitude , prompting officials to rebuild due to major damage to infrastructure .
When the competition began , two of the best players were in poor form as Pelé was injured in Brazil 's second group match against Czechoslovakia .
Also , the Soviet Union saw their goalkeeper Lev Yashin show poor form including a 2–1 loss to hosts Chile as the hosts captured third place .
The competition was also marred by overly defensive and often violent tactics .
This poisonous atmosphere culminated in what was known as the Battle of Santiago first round match between Italy and Chile in which Chile won 2–0 .
Prior to the match , two Italian journalists wrote unflattering articles about the host country .
In the match , players on both sides made deliberate attempts to harm opponents though only two players from Italy were sent off by English referee Ken Aston .
In the end , the Italian team needed police protection to leave the field in safety .
When the final whistle blew , Brazil beat Czechoslovakia for the second World Cup in a row by a final of 3–1 led by Garrincha and Amarildo , in Pelé 's absence , and retained the Jules Rimet trophy .
Colombia 's Marcos Coll made World Cup history when he scored a goal direct from a corner kick ( called an Olympic Goal in Latin America ) , the only one ever made in a World Cup , past legendary Soviet goalkeeper Lev Yashin .
The 1966 World Cup , hosted by England , was the first to embrace marketing , featuring a mascot and official logo for the first time .
The trophy was stolen in the run - up to the tournament but was found a week later by a dog named " Pickles " .
South Africa was banned for violating the anti - discrimination charter ( apartheid ) .
The ban remained in effect until 1992 when the South Africa Football Association was finally accepted by FIFA .
The qualifying rounds of the tournament saw a controversy when the African nations decided to withdraw in protest of only one qualifying place allocated by FIFA to the regions of Asia , Oceania and Africa .
The eventual qualifiers from the zone , North Korea , became the first Asian team to reach the quarter - finals , eliminating Italy in the process .
England won the tournament , although João Havelange ( former FIFA president from 1974 to 1998 ) claimed that the 1966 and 1974 World Cups were fixed so that England and Germany would win respectively .
Geoff Hurst became the first and to this day the only player to score a hat - trick in a World Cup Final and Eusébio , whose team Portugal were taking part in their first World Cup , was the tournament top - scorer , with nine goals to his name .
THE 1970S Section::::The 1970s .
The qualification stages of the 1970 World Cup were coincidental with the Football War between Honduras and El Salvador .
The finals were held in Mexico .
Israel had been with Europe , but due to political issues , it was becoming harder to place them adequately in the qualifying rounds .
They were grouped in Asia / Oceania .
Korea DPR then refused to meet them , even though this meant automatic disqualification .
The group stage clash between defending champions
England and Brazil lived up to its billing , and is still remembered for England goalkeeper Gordon Banks ' save from a Pelé header on the six - yard line , arguably the best save ever .
The tournament is also remembered for the semi - final match between Italy and West Germany , in which five goals were scored in extra time , and Franz Beckenbauer played with a broken arm , since Germany had used up all their allowed substitutions .
Italy were the eventual 4–3 winners , but were defeated 1–4 in the final by Brazil , who became the first nation to win three World Cups , and were awarded the Jules Rimet trophy permanently for their achievement .
A new trophy was created for the 1974 edition , held in West Germany .
After a draw in their first UEFA / CONMEBOL Intercontinental play - off match against Chile in the qualifiers , the Soviet Union refused to travel to the Chilean capital for the return fixture for political reasons , and in accordance with the regulations , Chile were awarded a victory .
East Germany , Haiti , Australia and Zaire made their first finals .
The tournament also saw a new format , where the two top teams from each of the earlier four groups were divided into two groups of four each again , the winner of either group playing each other in the final .
The West German hosts won the competition by beating the Netherlands 2–1 in the final , but it was also the revolutionary Total Football system of the Dutch that captured the footballing world 's imagination .
The very well - playing Poland finished third , after defeating Brazil 1–0 ( and after defeating Argentina 3–2 and eliminating Italy 2–1 in the initial group play ) , having barely lost in terrible rain in the semi - finals to West Germany 0–1 .
The 1978 World Cup was held in Argentina , causing controversy as a military coup had taken place in the country two years earlier .
Allegations that Dutch star Johan Cruyff refused to participate because of
political convictions were refuted by him 30 years later .
and none of the teams decided to stay away .
This was the hardest ever World Cup finals to qualify for .
With 95 teams vying for 14 places ( the holders and hosts qualified automatically ) , there were nearly seven countries competing for each place in Argentina .
Hungary won their European group but had to win a play - off against Bolivia to qualify , while England were eliminated despite winning five of their six qualifying matches .
Iran and Tunisia were first time participants .
Tunisia won their first match against Mexico 3–1 and became the first African team to ever win a world cup game .
There was some on - field controversy as well .
During the second round , Argentina had an advantage in their match against Peru since the kick off was several hours after Brazil 's match with Poland .
Brazil won their match 3–1 , so Argentina knew that they had to beat Peru by four goals to advance to the final .
Trailing 2–0 at half - time , Peru simply collapsed in the second half , and Argentina eventually won 6–0 .
Rumors suggested that Peru might have been bribed into allowing Argentina to win the match by such a large margin .
Argentina went on to win the final 3–1
, Mario Kempes scoring twice , with the Dutch being runners - up for the second time in a row .
LATE 20TH CENTURY
THE 1980S Section::::Late 20th century .
Section::::The 1980s .
Spain hosted an expanded 1982 World Cup which featured 24 teams , the first expansion since 1934 .
The teams were divided into six groups of four , with the top two teams in each group advancing to the second round , where they split into four groups of three .
The winners of each group advanced to the semi - finals .
Cameroon , Algeria , Honduras , New Zealand and Kuwait were the debutants .
The group match between Kuwait and France was stage of a farcical incident .
As the French were leading 3–1 , the Kuwaiti team stopped playing after hearing a whistle from the stands which they thought had come from referee , as French defender Maxime Bossis scored .
As the Kuwaiti team were protesting the goal , Sheikh Fahid Al - Ahmad Al - Sabah , president of the Kuwait Football Association , rushed onto the pitch and gave the referee a piece of his mind , who proceeded to disallow the goal .
Bossis scored another valid goal a few minutes later and France won 4–1 .
Also during the group stages , Hungary beat El Salvador 10–1 , which has been the only occasion to this day that a team scored ten goals in a World Cup match .
The group match between West Germany and Austria later resulted in a change of World Cup rules , after both teams visibly aimed to keep the qualification ensuring 1–0 scoreline over 80 minutes .
The semi - final between West Germany and France saw another controversy when German keeper Harald Schumacher 's challenge took out Patrick Battiston , with the score at 1–1 .
Schumacher escaped a red card , and Germany won in a penalty shoot - out , after coming back to level from having gone 1–3 down .
The final was won by Italy , making Italian captain Dino Zoff the oldest player to win the World Cup .
Italian striker Paolo Rossi , who was making his comeback after a match - fixing scandal and the ensuing ban , was the tournament top - scorer with six goals including a classic hat - trick against Brazil .
Because of Colombia 's withdrawal to host the tournament , Mexico became the first nation to hold two World Cups by hosting the 1986 World Cup .
The format changed again , with the second round being replaced by a pre - quarterfinal , knockout competition , for which 16 teams would qualify .
It was also decided that the final two matches in all groups would kick off simultaneously , to ensure complete fairness .
Canada , Denmark and Iraq made their first finals .
José Batista of Uruguay set a World Cup record being sent off after a mere 56 seconds into the game against Scotland .
The quarterfinal match between England and Argentina is remembered for two remarkable Diego Maradona goals , later regarded as player of the tournament , the first , the controversial handball goal , and the second , considered to be the Goal of the Century , in which he dribbled half the length of the field past five English players before scoring .
In the final , Argentina beat West Germany 3–2 , inspired by Diego Maradona , who set up Jorge Burruchaga for the winner .
THE 1990S Section::::The 1990s .
The 1990 World Cup was held in Italy .
Cameroon , participating in their second World Cup , made it to the quarter - finals after beating Argentina in the opening game .
No African country had ever reached the quarter - finals before .
Mexico was unable to compete in the 1990 World Cup preliminary competition as a result of a two - year ban for age fraud at a youth championship , an incident known as Los Cachirules .
the United States qualified for the first time since 1950 .
An unpleasant episode marred the South American qualifiers : during the match between Brazil and Chile , a firework landed close to the Chilean goalkeeper Roberto Rojas , who then feigned injury by cutting his own face with a razor blade he had hidden in his glove .
His team refused to continue the match ( as they were down a goal at the time ) .
The plot was discovered and resulted in a 12-year suspension for Rojas and to Chile being banned from the 1994 World Cup .
The final featured the same teams as in 1986 .
After finishing runners - up in the two previous tournaments , West Germany beat Argentina 1–0 in the final to record their third title .
The Republic of Ireland also made their first appearance in the tournament , reaching the quarter - finals without winning a single game ( four draws , with a penalty shoot - out win over Romania in the second round ) .
This is the furthest a team has ever advanced in the World Cup without winning a game .
The 1994 World Cup , held in the United States , saw the first World Cup final to be decided on penalties , with Brazil edging out Italy .
FR Yugoslavia was excluded due to UN sanctions in connection with the war in Bosnia - Herzegovina .
Colombia qualified unexpectedly defeating Argentina 5 - 0 .
Japan narrowly missed a ticket to the World Cup after drawing with Iraq in the final match of the qualification round , remembered by fans as the " Agony of Doha " .
As a result , South Korea qualified to the tournament .
Russia ( taking the place of the Soviet Union which had disintegrated over 1990 and 1991 ) played their first World Cup competition as a new country , with Greece , Nigeria and Saudi Arabia as the other first - timers .
Diego Maradona was banned mid - tournament after testing positive for recreational drugs : without him , Argentina were eliminated in the last 16 by Romania .
Colombian defender Andrés Escobar was murdered ten days after scoring an own - goal against the hosts in a first - round match that eliminated Colombia .
The total attendance for the tournament of nearly 3.6 million remains the biggest in World Cup history .
Oleg Salenko of Russia became the first player to score five goals in a single World Cup finals game in his country 's 6–1 group stage win over Cameroon .
In the same match , 42-year - old Roger Milla scored the only goal for Cameroon , becoming the oldest player ever to score in a World Cup match .
Hristo Stoichkov shared the Golden Boot as the joint top goal scorer in the tournament with Oleg Salenko ( six goals ) , as well as earning the Bronze Ball award .
He led Bulgaria to a shock 2 - 1 win over defending champions Germany in the quarter - finals , before losing 2–1 to Italy and losing the third place play - off to Sweden , 4–0 .
The 1998 World Cup was held in France , and had an expanded format featuring 32 teams .
Iran beat the Maldives in qualification by the widest margin in World Cup history – 17–0 .
In the finals , the second round match between France and Paraguay witnessed the first golden goal in World Cup history , as Laurent Blanc scored to give the hosts a 1–0 victory .
Hosts France won the tournament by beating Brazil 3–0 in the final , as the Brazilian Ronaldo had health issues and therefore he has n't impact on the match .
Debutants Croatia finished a commendable third .
21TH CENTURY THE 2000S Section::::21th century .
Section::::The 2000s .
The 2002 World Cup was the first to be held in Asia , and was hosted jointly by South Korea and Japan .
Togolese Souleymane Mamam became the youngest player ever to take to a World Cup preliminary game field at 13 years , 310 days in Lomé in May 2001 .
Australia defeated American Samoa 31–0 in a preliminary match – a new record for the margin of victory , and the highest - scoring match ever .
The tournament was a successful one for teams traditionally regarded as minnows , with South Korea , Senegal and the United States all reaching the last eight .
Brazil beat Germany 2–0 in the final for their fifth title .
The Turkish Hakan Sukur made history by scoring the earliest World Cup goal of all time against South Korea at only 11 seconds .
The 2006 World Cup was held in Germany .
It was the first World Cup for which the previous winner had to qualify ; the host nation(s ) continue to receive an automatic berth .
Four African teams also made their debut in the world cup finals : Togo , Ivory Coast , Angola and Ghana who impressively made it to last 16 by beating the Czech Republic , third ranked in the world , 2–1 , along with the United States 2–0 , before losing to the defending champions Brazil 0–3 .
First seed and holders Brazil and
second seeded England were initially English bookmakers ' favourites .
A strong performance by Germany brought them as far as the semi - finals .
However , the final match - up was between Italy and France , in which French captain Zinedine Zidane was sent off in the last ten minutes of extra time for a headbutt to the chest of Italian central defender Marco Materazzi .
Italy went on to win 5–3 in a penalty shootout , the score having been 1–1 after 90 minutes and extra time .
THE 2010S Section::::The 2010s .
The 2010 World Cup was held in South Africa .
It was the first cup hosted on African soil , and the cup was won by Spain .
The tournament was noted for its highly defensive opening matches , controversies surrounding goal - line technology , and the introduction of vuvuzelas .
Though considered as one of the tournament favorites , the Spaniards won the cup despite scoring only eight goals in seven games and losing their opening match to Switzerland .
David Villa led the squad in scoring with five goals .
In a final which saw a record number of yellow cards distributed and what some considered violent play from the Dutch side , the ten - man Netherlands squad were defeated 1–0 in the 116th minute of extra time by an Andrés Iniesta goal .
The 2014 World Cup was held in Brazil , marking the second time that Brazil hosted the competition .
The cup was won by Germany , who beat Argentina 1 - 0 in the final .
The Netherlands defeated Brazil ( who lost to the eventual winners , Germany , 7 - 1 in the semifinals ) 3–0 in the bronze medal game .
Because of the relatively high ambient temperatures in Brazil , particularly at the northern venues , cooling breaks for the players were first introduced during these games .
In this World Cup there was the debut of sensors to avoid phantom goals with the Goal - line technology , used to determine , in doubtful situations , whether the ball crossed the goal line or not .
The 2018 World Cup was held in Russia .
It was the first cup to be held in Eastern Europe .
The cup was won by France , who beat Croatia 4–2 in the final .
Belgium defeated England 2–0 in the bronze medal game .
It was also the first cup to use the video assistant referee ( VAR ) system .
Croatian player Luka Modric won the golden ball while the best young player award was won by the 18 year old French player Kylian Mbappé .
Harry Kane of England was the golden boot winner .
THE 2020S Section::::The 2020s .
The 2022 World Cup hosted by Qatar will be the first tournament to not be held in summer time in which it is usually held .
It will take place from November 21 to December 18 , 2022 .
EVOLUTION OF THE FORMAT Section::::Evolution of the format .
The number of teams and the format of each final tournament have varied considerably over the years .
In most tournaments , the tournament consists of a round - robin group stage followed by a single - elimination knockout stage . !
Year ! !
Host !
Entrants / Played ( Qualifying ) ! !
Teams ! !
Matches ! !
Round 1 ! !
Round 2 ! !
Final stages
No Qualification ( Invitational Only ) align = center 13 align = center
18 align = center 4 groups of 3 or 4 teams
colspan=2 align = center knockout of 4 teams ( round 1 group winners )
32 / 27 align = center 16 align
= center
17 colspan=3 align = center knockout
37 / 21 align = center 16 align
= center
18 colspan=3 align = center knockout
34 / 19
45 / 33
55 / 46 56 / 49 74 / 51 75 / 68
99 / 90
107 / 95 109 / 103 121 / 110 116 / 103 147 / 130 174 / 168 199 / 193 198 / 194 205 / 200
204 / 203
210 / 208
Until the 1990 FIFA World Cup , 2 points were conceded for a win and 1 point was conceded for a draw .
Since the 1994 FIFA World Cup , 3 points are conceded for a win and 1 point is conceded for a draw .
Each group of four teams plays a round - robin schedule .
As of the 1986 World Cup , all final group games must be held simultaneously , a rule instituted by FIFA to minimize collusion amongst teams requiring a certain result to advance .
FIFA instituted a policy to award three points for a win in the 1994 World Cup .
Although goals for was already a tiebreaker , FIFA hoped to create an additional incentive for teams to pursue victory .
The first team affected by the rule was Paraguay in 1998 , which would have won its group on goal differential over Nigeria under prior FIFA rules .
Paraguay advanced to the knockout phase as group runner - up and was defeated by host nation and eventual champion France in the round of 16 .
It is not possible under the new point system to be eliminated from the group stage with a second place or higher winning percentage , however it is possible to finish behind a team with the same winning percentage yet a lower goal difference .
This took place in the 2010 World Cup when New Zealand finished with three draws and Slovakia finished with one win , one draw , and one loss .
Slovakia advanced in Group F by finishing second with four points , eliminating New Zealand with three points .
Under the previous FIFA point allotment system , New Zealand would have advanced with a zero goal difference , while Slovakia would have been eliminated with a goal difference of −1 .
The criteria for advancement to knockout phase is as follows :
* Greatest number of points in group matches *
* Greatest total goal difference in the three group matches *
* Greatest number of goals scored in the three group matches
* *
If teams remained level after those criteria , a mini - group would be formed from those teams , who would be ranked on :
* * Most points earned in matches against other teams in the tie * * Greatest goal difference in matches against other teams in the tie *
* Greatest number of goals scored in matches against other teams in the tie
* *
If teams remained level after all these criteria , FIFA would hold a drawing of lots
*
* The drawing of lots for tied teams takes place one hour after the final game in the group at the stadium where the championship match is held .
The drawing of lots is similar to the World Cup draw in terms of style and format ; a ball is drawn from a pot , which contains balls with the names of each tied team .
* As of the 2014 World Cup , lots have only been drawn once in tournament history .
However , they were used to separate second and third place in a group ( Republic of Ireland and the Netherlands in 1990 )
where both were already assured of qualification .
Thus , a team has never been eliminated based upon drawn lots .
WORLD CUP – WINNING TEAMS , CAPTAINS , AND MANAGERS Section::::World Cup – winning teams , captains , and managers . !
Year !
Host !
Winning Team !
Captain !
Head coach Against 2018 SEE ALSO * History of FIFA
* FIFA World Cup hosts REFERENCES