MARVEL :
ULTIMATE ALLIANCE
Marvel :
Ultimate Alliance is an action role - playing video game developed for PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox and Xbox 360 by Raven Software and published by Activision .
The game was simultaneously ported to the PlayStation Portable and Wii by Vicarious Visions , and to Microsoft Windows by Beenox .
A significantly different Game Boy Advance version was also created , developed by Barking Lizards Technologies .
The game was initially released on October 24 , 2006 in North America for most platforms , with PlayStation 3 and Wii ports following shortly thereafter , as well as international releases .
The game was planned for release on Nintendo DS and GameCube , but these releases were cancelled .
Japan was only able to see a Wii and PS3 release .
It was released on July 26 , 2016 for PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Windows , and on July 28 , 2016 on Xbox One by Zoë Mode .
Marvel :
Ultimate Alliance is set within the fictional Marvel Universe and features many of the superheroes , supervillains , and supporting characters that appear in publications by Marvel Comics .
Ultimate Alliance is the third Marvel title to be developed by Raven Software , and features similar gameplay to their previous Marvel titles , X - Men Legends and .
A sequel , , was developed for multiple platforms by Vicarious Visions , n - Space and Savage Entertainment and released in 2009 .
A second sequel , , is being developed by Team Ninja as a Nintendo Switch exclusive in 2019 .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Players can select teams of four from a range of more than twenty - two playable characters ( although some characters are not initially available and need to be unlocked ) , allowing them to create their own superhero teams or recreate famous teams from the publications .
Bonuses are also available if forming certain groups ( e.g. the Avengers , Defenders , Fantastic Four , Marvel Knights , X - Men ) .
The game also has alternative endings , dictated by the number of optional missions the player completes .
Also included are trivia , artwork , and " simulator discs " , which unlock non - story related missions for characters .
Each character also has a variety of costumes that offer different advantages .
CONSOLES , PC AND PSP Section::::Consoles , PC and PSP .
The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions are virtually identical , with no major differences .
Both platforms include Colossus , Moon Knight , and five additional comic book missions .
Activision released eight additional downloadable characters on the Xbox 360 via the Xbox Live Marketplace on April 26 , 2007 in a set of packs : a Hero Pack , consisting of Cyclops , Nightcrawler , Hawkeye , and the Hulk , and a Villain Pack , which includes Magneto , Sabretooth , Venom , and a playable Doctor Doom .
Both packs are also available in a bundle pack for 800 MSP , which also adds 12 new achievements to the game .
The Gold Edition was released for the Xbox 360 in May 2007 which includes the standard game bundled with all downloadable content .
The Platinum Hits version was released for the Xbox 360 in September 2007 .
The set includes all the Gold Edition of the game and a bonus DVD .
As of December 2009 , the DLC was removed from the Xbox LIVE Marketplace by Activision , meaning the only way to play as the downloadable characters was to purchase the Gold Edition or the Platinum Hits version .
The Xbox 360 Games on Demand version now bundles the full game with all previously downloadable content .
The Wii version has a few features unique to its version including specific motion - sensitive controls for normal moves , motion - sensitive controlled special attacks ( the attacks are unique for each character , but not the motions ) , and access to any special move at any time .
This version contains no online play but has a local multiplayer mode in which up to four players may play at once .
It also features the characters Colossus and Moon Knight , as well as five additional comic book missions .
The PC version is customizable , and many characters ( including those exclusive to all other versions ) and their modifications can be obtained from community sites for play within the game .
The PC version 's graphics vary depending on the customization of a user 's settings .
The PC version also features " intuitive mouse controls " and works with a gamepad .
A number of custom characters ( including Jean Grey , Psylocke , Scarlet Witch , War Machine , Vision , Dazzler , and Punisher ) are available .
The re - release version of the game which came to Xbox One , PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Windows via Steam initially released without the DLC featured originally on Xbox 360 .
On August 30 , 2016 an updated was released on these three systems which contained the eight downloadable characters previously featured on the Xbox 360 .
The PSP version features simplified graphics , different characters , and extra features including the four exclusive playable Marvel characters Black Widow , Captain Marvel , Hawkeye , and Ronin .
Other things unique to this version are 6 exclusive comic book missions including one which contains Swordsman , an exclusive prequel mission , and three exclusive single - player gameplay modes .
Added features include online play , microphone support ( voice chat ) , and online - recordable player statistics .
The PlayStation 2 version of the game has the same features as the next - gen versions of the game , albeit without Colossus , Moon Knight and the five bonus simulator missions .
In August 2007 , a Greatest Hits version was released which included a bonus DVD containing a making - of featurette .
The Xbox version of the game has no changes from the standard PlayStation 2 edition .
However it is possible to play as Colossus and Moon Knight via a glitch which can be accessed through a series of steps .
GAME
BOY ADVANCE Section::::Game Boy Advance .
The Game Boy Advance version of Ultimate Alliance features significant differences from the other console versions .
Most notably , the basic gameplay takes the form of a side - scrolling fighting game with minor RPG elements , such as the ability to alter the player characters ' stats .
The graphics are simplified for this system and the selection of characters has also been reduced .
Some additional gameplay modes were added into this version of the game including a S.H.I.E.L.D. Simulator , Time Challenges , Scavenger Hunts , and a Survival mode .
Teams for this port consist of three characters and a striker , a non - playable fourth character who can be summoned to perform a powerful attack directed toward on - screen enemies .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The game begins with Dr. Doom and the Masters of Evil launching an attack on the S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarrier U.N.N. Alpha .
Nick Fury sends out a distress call to all available super heroes for assistance .
Captain America , Spider - Man , Thor and Wolverine respond to the call .
Along with the other heroes , they save the Helicarrier from the forces led by Scorpion , Bullseye , Winter Soldier , Radioactive Man , and Fin Fang Foom .
In the wake of the attack , Nick Fury is given permission to start a task force to confront the Masters of Evil and Iron Man allows them to use Stark Tower as their headquarters .
Fury asks the heroes to investigate an odd message received from Dum Dum Dugan on the Omega Base , a S.H.I.E.L.D. mobile research facility .
The team defeats supervillains MODOK , Crimson Dynamo , and Mysterio to prevent the Omega Base from crashing in to a dam and launching several gamma bombs .
With their mission successful , the heroes travel to Atlantis , where the inhabitants are being mind - controlled by Attuma , who has usurped Namor from his throne .
With the help of nano - technology that enables them to breathe and move freely underwater , the heroes are able to save Namor and defeat Attuma and Tiger Shark .
After defeating Attuma , the heroes encounter Mandarin , who unleashes the Kraken , which the team defeats by toppling pillars on it .
They then travel to the Valley of Spirits to confront Mandarin in his palace .
After his defeat , he reveals that he attempted to take command of the Masters of Evil and , upon failing , left the group .
He suggests that the Mandarin they saw in the catacombs was actually Loki , god of mischief .
Upon returning to base , the team learns that Nightcrawler and Jean Grey have been kidnapped .
Due to the involvement of mystical forces , Fury has the team relocated to the Sanctum Sanctorum .
Professor X tracks Nightcrawler to Castle Doom , but upon trying to transport the heroes there they are sent to Murderworld by a spell from Baron Mordo .
After defeating a mind - controlled Jean Grey , Rhino , and Shocker , the heroes battle a large mech , piloted by Arcade .
Victorious , the heroes learn that Dr. Doom has used Nightcrawler to access Mephisto 's Realm , and the team is sent in pursuit .
Upon arriving , minions of Mephisto kidnap Jean Grey and Nightcrawler .
Blackheart , Mephisto 's son , puts them in separate cages above the Infinity Vortex , stating one must be saved and the other sacrificed before the team can defeat Mephisto .
During their battle with Mephisto the sacrificed hero returns , resurrected by Mephisto , but now under his control .
As a final effort , the resurrected hero sacrifices their life to defeat Mephisto and allow the team to escape .
Meanwhile , in Asgard , a massive army of Super Soldiers attacks and imprisons the Asgardian gods .
The heroes travel to Valhalla to liberate it from its invading force and free Heimdall ( who is guarded by Rhino and Shocker ) , Tyr ( who is guarded by Scorpion and Lizard ) , and Balder ( who is guarded by Enchantress and Executioner ) .
Then they fight the Wrecking Crew to open Bifrost Bridge in order for reinforcements to arrive .
Looking for Odin in Niffleheim following a fight with Kurse and Ulik , they find his shattered Twilight Sword and learn from Ymir that Doctor Doom and Loki have taken Odin to Raven 's Spire .
After Loki is seemingly defeated at Raven 's Spire , the team frees the Destroyer Armor to use against Doctor Doom .
Loki , disguised as Fury , reveals himself and his plot to have the heroes free the armor for nefarious purposes .
As heroes defeat Loki and the armor , Doctor Doom appears and reveals that he has stolen Odin 's power .
He uses it to attempt to eliminate the heroes , but Uatu the Watcher saves them and transports them to the Inhumans ' base on the moon .
Uatu reveals the only way to defeat Doom is to acquire a piece of the M'Kraan Crystal and steal the Muonic Inducer from Galactus ( who is currently attacking the Skrull homeworld ) .
The team is sent to the Shi'ar Empire where they fight Deathbird and the Imperial Guard in order to restore Lilandra Neramani to the throne and gain a portion of the M'Kraan Crystal .
After retrieving the crystal , the heroes travel to the Skrull homeworld and with the help of the Silver Surfer , the heroes disable Galactus and steal the Muonic Inducer .
Meanwhile , Doctor Doom conquers Earth , corrupting and creating clones of many of the heroes .
In a final effort , the team travels to Latveria to confront Dr. Doom .
The heroes use the M'Kraan Crystal and Muonic Inducer to weaken Doom .
As the heroes weaken Doom , he is blasted by a bolt of lightning sent by a rejuvenated Odin , leaving nothing but his mask behind .
As the heroes meet on the repaired Helicarrier , Fury informs the heroes that the team must disband and asks if S.H.I.E.L.D. can count on them when another threat happens .
Captain America assures Nick that the world can count on them .
Meanwhile , Galactus vows revenge on the heroes who stole from him and plans to destroy Earth .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Marvel : Ultimate Alliance features over 140 characters , and in addition the heroes battle evil versions of both themselves and other heroes throughout the game .
Some heroes also appear as a villain under mind control , such as Jean Grey .
In game each character has a set of four alternate costumes however three of these costumes must be unlocked .
However , some of the characters costumes are also other superheroes in the Marvel Universe .
This includes Iron Man as War Machine , Thor as Beta Ray Bill , Spider - Woman as Spider - Girl and Julia Carpenter from the Secret Wars , Ghost Rider as Phantom Rider and Ms. Marvel as Sharon Ventura .
Also , there are various upgrades that can be attached to characters for boosts in power , speed , defense , etc .
Nintendo characters Link from The Legend of Zelda and Samus Aran from Metroid were to appear in the Wii version of the game , but were cancelled due to being presented to Nintendo in the PS2 version . !
colspan="6 " Playable Characters !
colspan="6 " Common * Black Panther * Blade * Captain America
* Daredevil * Deadpool * Doctor Strange * Elektra * Ghost Rider * Human Torch
* Iceman * Invisible Woman * Iron Man * Luke Cage *
Mister Fantastic * Ms. Marvel * Nick Fury
* Silver Surfer * Spider - Man * Spider - Woman * Storm
* Thing * Thor
*
Wolverine ! colspan="6 " System - Exclusive Characters
* Black Widow * Captain Marvel
* Colossus * Cyclops * Doctor Doom
* Hawkeye
* Hulk * Jean Grey *
Magneto
* Moon Knight
* Namor
* Nightcrawler * Ronin
* Sabretooth * Venom
* Vision !
colspan="6 " Non - Playable Characters !
colspan="6 " Bosses *
Arcade *
Attuma
* Baron Mordo * Blackheart * Bullseye * Byrrah * Crimson Dynamo * Destroyer
* Deathbird * Dragon Man *
Doctor Doom * Enchantress * Executioner *
Fin Fang Foom
* Galactus * Gladiator * Grey Gargoyle * Hussar
* Kraken * Krang * Kurse * Lizard
*
Loki
* Mandarin * Mephisto
* MODOK * Mysterio * Neutron * Radioactive Man
* Paibok
* Rhino * Scorpion * Shocker *
Skrulls * Starbolt
* Super Skrull * Swordsman * Tiger Shark * Titannus
* Ulik * Ultimo * Ultron * Winter Soldier * Warstar * Wrecking Crew
* Bulldozer * Piledriver * Thunderball * Wrecker * Ymir ! colspan="6 " Other characters
* Ancient One * Balder * Black Bolt * Black Widow
* Bruce Banner / Hulk * Clea * Colossus * Corsair * Crystal * Cyclops * Dum Dum Dugan * Edwin Jarvis
* Gorgon * Hank Pym *
Heimdall
* Hermod * Jean Grey *
Karnak * Lilandra Neramani * Lockjaw * Magneto * Medusa * Namor
* Namorita
*
Nightcrawler
*
Odin * Professor
X
* Psylocke * Senator Robert Kelly
* Sif
*
Tyr
*
Uatu
the Watcher
* Valkyrie * Vision * Volla * Weasel * Wong * Wyatt Wingfoot DEVELOPMENT AND MARKETING Section::::Development and marketing .
Most versions of Ultimate Alliance were developed using Vicarious Visions ' Alchemy engine , which was purchased from the now defunct Intrinsic Graphics in May 2003 .
Raven Software developed the primary version of the game on the PS2 , PS3 , Xbox and Xbox 360 .
Vicarious Visions simultaneously ported the game to the PSP and Wii , and Beenox ported the game to the PC .
During early development Ultimate Alliance used cel - shading technology , similar to Raven 's previous Marvel Comics games , X - Men Legends and , however , this was dropped at some point during development .
Barking Lizards Technologies used their Whiptail engine to develop the GBA version independently .
The game was originally known by Marvel Legends , and had an internal working title of Marvel Comics RPG .
At one point , both Link from The Legend of Zelda series and Samus Aran from the Metroid series were planned to be playable characters for the Wii version ; however , both characters were removed prior to release .
The music for the game was composed by Mark Griskey , Chance Thomas and Cris Velasco .
Over 50 minutes of music was composed by the trio , including gameplay and cutscene tracks .
Marvel :
Ultimate Alliance was first released on October 24 , 2006 in North America .
Regional releases followed throughout 2006 and 2007 .
The standard edition of Ultimate Alliance was also released as a companion with Forza Motorsport 2 in specially marked Xbox 360 consoles in 2007 .
The Gold Edition of the game was released on May 22 , 2007 exclusively for the Xbox 360 .
This version included the two DLC packs available at the time .
A remastered version was released for PlayStation 4 , Microsoft Windows , and Xbox One on July 26 , 2016 .
RECEPTION AND AWARDS Section::::Reception and awards .
Reviews for Raven and Vicarious Visions version of Marvel Ultimate Alliance received generally favorable reviews from critics .
The PS3 and 360 versions received 78 % and 82 % at GameRankings and 78 % and 82 % at Metacritic , respectively .
The PC version received an 83 % at GameRankings and 82 % at Metacritic .
GameRankings ' scores for the PS2 , PSP , Wii and Xbox versions were 81 % , 82 % , 74 % , and 83 % , while Metacritic scored those same consoles 81 % , 81 % , 73 % and 83 % respectively .
Several reviewers praised the character cast , with 1UP.com 's Scott Sharkey stating " Even if your favorite character is n't playable , there 's a good chance they 'll show up at some point through the course of the story as an NPC .
"
GameSpot 's Ryan Davis applauded the Xbox 360 's graphics , saying that it " features a lot of great lighting , particle , and bump - mapping effects absent from the other versions " .
He went on to comment " Even without those advanced graphical effects , the PC and Xbox versions still look pretty sharp .
"
Game Informer thought the game improved upon the " excellent X - Men Legends games from which it was born " , giving the game a 9.25/10 .
The Game Boy Advance version received the poorest scores , with only GameRankings registering a 42 % .
GameSpot thought poorly of the game , calling " uninteresting and sloppy " , and rating the game a 2.5/10 " terrible " .
IGN also disliked the game , giving it a 2.0/10 .
Reviewer Chris Adams stated " Everything is awful .
From sprites to backgrounds to effects , it shames the Marvel license . " .
Gamer 2.0 gave the game an 8.1/10 , however , citing a large number of bonus missions and unlockables as incentive to play .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
A sequel to Marvel :
Ultimate Alliance was announced by Activision on February 8 , 2008 .
It was released in North America on September 15 , 2009 , and follows closely the events of the Civil War storyline : an explosion in Stamford , Connecticut caused by a supervillain prompts a Superhuman Registration Act .
In the game , players are able to choose between the Pro - Registration side , headed by Iron Man , or the Anti - Registration side , headed by Captain America up to the point where the heroes end up uniting against a new common enemy called The Fold .
On December 6 , 2018 , at The Game Awards , was announced exclusively for the Nintendo Switch .
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS