BAVARIAN CREAM Bavarian cream , crème bavaroise or simply bavarois is a dessert consisting of milk thickened with eggs and gelatin or isinglass , into which whipped cream is folded .
The mixture sets up in a cold mold and is unmolded for serving .
Earlier versions , sometimes called fromage bavarois , did not include eggs .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Bavarian cream is a classic dessert that was included in the repertoire of chef Marie - Antoine Carême , who is sometimes credited with it .
It was named in the early 19th century for Bavaria or , perhaps more likely in the history of haute cuisine , for a particularly distinguished visiting Bavarian , such as a Wittelsbach .
True Bavarian creams first appeared in the U.S. in Boston Cooking School cookbooks , by D. A. Lincoln , 1884 , and by Fannie Merritt Farmer , 1896 .
The Fannie Farmer Cookbook offers a " Bavarian Cream " .
PREPARATION AND SERVING Section::::Preparation and serving .
Bavarian cream is lightened with whipped cream when on the edge of setting up and before it is molded ; a true bavarian cream is usually filled into a fluted mold , chilled until firm , then turned out onto a serving plate .
By coating a chilled mold first with a fruit gelatin , a glazed effect can be produced .
Imperfections in the unmolding are disguised with strategically placed fluted piping of " crème chantilly " .
In the United States , it is common to serve Bavarian Cream directly from the bowl it has been chilled in , similar to a French mousse .
In this informal presentation , Escoffier recommended the bavarian cream be made in a " timbale or deep silver dish which is then surrounded with crushed ice " .
It may be served with a fruit sauce or a raspberry or apricot purée or used to fill elaborate charlottes .
Though it does not pipe smoothly because of its gelatin , it could substitute for pastry cream as a filling for doughnuts .
American " Bavarian Cream doughnuts " are filled with a version of a crème pâtissière ( pastry cream ) , not true bavarois .
SEE ALSO
* List of custard desserts , mostly using eggs and not gelatine
* Panna cotta , made with gelatine but not eggs or whipped cream NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Food Timeline : French cremes