NON - DAIRY CREAMER Non - dairy creamers or coffee whiteners are liquid or granular substances intended to substitute for milk or cream as an additive to coffee , tea , hot chocolate or other beverages .
They do not contain lactose and therefore are commonly described as being non - dairy products , although many contain casein , a milk - derived protein .
Dry granular products do not need to be refrigerated and can be used and stored in locations which do not have a refrigerator .
Liquid non - dairy creamers should be tightly capped and refrigerated after opening .
Some non - dairy creamers contain sweeteners and flavours , such as vanilla , hazelnut or Irish cream .
As with other processed food products , low calorie and low fat versions are available for non - dairy creamers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Holton " Rex " Diamond , an employee of Rich Products , did experiments from 1943 to 1945 with using a " [ g]elationous form of soybean protein " to make a " soy cream " that would not form curds when mixed with coffee .
Diamond 's experiments are the first English - language reference to a non - dairy creamer for coffee .
Frank S. Mitchell , another Rich Products Corp. employee , and Diamond developed a non - dairy whip topping for their employer in 1946 .
Mitchell also developed a non - dairy coffee creamer , Perx , which was successful in the market .
In 1950 , Melvin Morse and Dick Borne of Presto Foods developed " Mocha Mix Coffee Creamer " , which was the first commercial non - dairy creamer and the first product with the term " Coffee Creamer " in the name .
Another early commercial powdered creamer was " Pream " , first marketed in 1952 and made from dehydrated cream and sugar .
It did not dissolve easily because of the protein in the milk .
Six years later , in 1958 , the Carnation Company developed a product that easily dissolved in hot liquid because it replaced most of the milk fat with vegetable oil , and reduced the milk protein .
The new product was marketed under the Carnation label with the brand name Coffee - Mate and released in 1961 , shortly after the commercial introduction of Rich Products ' CoffeeRich .
Borden followed suit by launching Cremora non - dairy creamer in 1963 .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
To replicate the mouthfeel of milk fats , nondairy creamers often contain hydrogenated vegetable - based fats , although nonfat nondairy creamers / whiteners also exist .
Other common ingredients include solidified corn syrup and other sweeteners or / and flavourings ( such as French vanilla , hazelnut and Irish cream ) ; as well as sodium caseinate , a milk protein derivative ( from casein ) that does not contain lactose .
The use of a milk derivative prompts some individuals and organisations – such as vegans and Jewish dietary law authorities – to classify the product as " dairy " rather than nondairy .
Those who rely on this classification will either not consume the product ( e.g. , vegans ) or will not use or consume it in conjunction with any meat products ( e.g. , observant Jews ) .
As with other processed food products , low calorie and low fat versions are available for non - dairy creamers .
People with milk allergy need to be aware that non - dairy creamer may contain sodium caseinate , a milk protein .
It will be in the ingredient list .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) has stated that products with sodium caseinate may contain low levels of lactose .
For a normal serving , the amounts are too small to trigger lactose intolerance .
ADVERTISING
Section::::Advertising .
A song with the words "
You 're the Pream in my coffee " was used to sell that product .
CoffeeRich was marketed with a successful series of national ads featuring George Burns : " its sales soared , particularly among Jews who kept kosher and were forbidden to put cream in their coffee while eating meat . " NON - FOOD USES Section::::Non - food uses .
As with many other powders , large amounts of powdered non - dairy creamer powder are susceptible to dust explosion when suspended in air .
Amateur filmmakers and pyrotechnicians have taken advantage of this property to produce several types of fireball effects .
Individuals using powdered non - dairy creamer in the ordinary amounts used in a cup of coffee do not face a risk of dust explosion .
Coffee creamer powder has also been used for creating fake snow in television and movies .
SEE ALSO
* Coffee break
* Half and half * List of dried foods * Whipped topping
* Whipped cream
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .
FDA - https://www.fda.gov/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm094550.htm