AMERICA 'S GOT TALENT
America 's Got Talent ( often abbreviated as AGT ) is a televised American talent show competition , broadcast on the NBC television network .
It is part of the global Got Talent franchise created by Simon Cowell , and is produced by Fremantle and SYCOtv , with distribution done by Fremantle .
Since its premiere in June 2006 , each season is run during the network 's summer schedule , with the show having featured various hosts - it is currently hosted by Tyra Banks , since 2017 .
It is the first global edition of the franchise , after plans for a British edition in 2005 were suspended , following a dispute between Paul O'Grady , the planned host , and the British broadcaster ITV ; production of this edition later resumed in 2007 .
The show attracts a variety of participants , from across the United States and abroad , to take part and who possess some form of talents , with acts ranging from singing , dancing , comedy , magic , stunts , variety , and other genres .
Each participant who auditions attempts to secure a place in the live episodes of a season by impressing a panel of judges - the current line - up consists of Cowell , Howie Mandel , Mel B , and Heidi Klum .
Those that make it into the live episodes compete against each other for both the judges ' and public 's vote in order to reach the live final , where the winner receives a large cash prize , paid over a period of time , and , since the third season , a chance to headline a show on the Las Vegas Strip .
Since its premiere , America 's Got Talent has helped to unearth new talent and kickstart / boost the careers of various performers who took part in the competition , while the show itself has been a rating success for NBC , drawing in on average around 10 million viewers per season .
In 2013 , a book was entitled Inside AGT : The Untold Stories of America 's Got Talent , was released , providing a description of the seasons , contestants , judges , and production techniques of the show , along with detailed interviews with contestants from all seasons , up to the date of the book 's of publication .
The show finished airing its thirteenth season , which ran from May 29 to September 19 , 2018 .
A winter - spin off edition is currently being planned , entitled , featuring acts from previous seasons , as well as acts from international Got Talent shows .
FORMAT AUDITIONS Section::::Format .
Section::::Auditions .
The general selection process of each season is begun by the production team with open auditions held in various cities across the United States .
Dubbed " Producers ' Auditions " , they are held months before the main stage of auditions are held .
Those that make it through the initial stage , become participants in the " Judges ' Auditions " , which are held in select cities across the country , and attended by the judges .
Each participant is held offstage and awaits their turn to perform before the judges , whereupon they are given 90 seconds to demonstrate their act , with a live audience present for all performances .
At the end of a performance , the judges give constructive criticism and feedback about what they saw , whereupon they each give a vote - a participant who receives a majority vote approving their performance , moves on to the next stage , otherwise they are eliminated from the programme at that stage .
Each judge is given a buzzer , and may use it during a performance if they are unimpressed , hate what is being performed , or feel the act is a waste of their time ; if a participant is buzzed by all judges , their performance is automatically over .
Many acts that move on may be cut by producers and may forfeit due to the limited slots available for the second performance .
Filming for each season always takes place when the Judges ' Auditions are taking place , with the show 's presenter standing in the wings of each venue 's stage to interview and give personal commentary on a participant 's performance .
Between the fifth and seventh season , acts who did not attend live auditions could instead submit a taped audition online via YouTube .
Acts from the online auditions were then selected to compete in front of the judges and a live audience during the " live shows " part of the season , prior to the semi - finals .
Before the inclusion of this round , the show had a separate audition episode in Seasons 3 and 4 ( 2008–2009 ) for contestants who posted videos on MySpace .
In the ninth season , the show added a new format to the auditions in the form of the " Golden Buzzer " , which began to make appearances within the Got Talent franchise , since it was first introduced on Germany 's Got Talent .
During auditions , each judge is allowed to use the Golden Buzzer to send an act automatically into the live shows , regardless of the opinion of the other judges ; when it was initially used , the buzzer simply saved an act from elimination .
The only rule to the buzzer was that a judge could use it only once per season ; the host was later allowed to use the Golden Buzzer for an act from the eleventh season .
JUDGE CUTS Section::::Judge Cuts .
Following auditions , successful entries take part in a second stage of the talent competition , in which they are separated out into a number of groups .
Over the course of several weeks , each group performs per week , at a fixed venue , in which that group 's participants each attempt to secure a place in the live show by performing a new variation of their act for the judges .
Of these acts , the judges chose around 10 from each group to perform in the live shows ; in some seasons , participants eliminated at this stage were given a chance to still appear in the live shows by being selected as a " wildcard " act .
The judges have access to their buzzers and if an act is buzzed by all of them , they are immediately eliminated from the competition .
Until the second season , acts did not have to perform a second time , instead moving on into the live shows , with the judges given a list of the acts who would appear in each live episode .
From the second season to the eighth , this stage was dubbed as the " Las Vegas " due to the fixed venue being situated upon the Las Vegas Strip , while in the ninth series , acts performed in New York , with the stage dubbed " Judgement Week " .
From the tenth season , the stage 's format was changed and renamed as " Judge Cuts " .
In each round , the judging panel were joined by a guest judge who helped with making decisions on which act could move on to the live shows .
Like the auditions , the guest judge could use a Golden Buzzer for an act , but once used , it could not be used again .
Unlike previous seasons , the Judge Cuts featured twenty acts per round , with seven acts advancing into the live shows , including the one chosen by the guest 's golden buzzer .
Unlike the previous format for the stage , the venue used varied , but included the CBS Studio Center and the NBC Universal Back Lot .
LIVE SHOWS Section::::Live shows .
During the live shows , the final selection of participants , which has ranged from between 20 to 60 acts and include those that were chosen as Wildcards by the judges or received the Golden Buzzer , are divided into groups and compete against each other for viewers ' and judges ' votes .
The general structure of the live episodes focuses first on four quarterfinals , and then two semi - finals , aimed at finding that season 's finalists .
Additional rounds are conducted when required ( such as a " Top 8 " or a " Top 10 " , depending on the season ) .
Live episodes are broadcast weekly , and featured performances by guest stars , including previous winners of America 's Got Talent .
During these stages , the judges still provide feedback on an act 's performance when it is over , and can use buzzers to prematurely end an performance before it is over ; in the first season , the judges could not end a performance before it was over .
Acts which do not secure a sufficient number of votes by the public and/or the judges , are eliminated from the competition .
Those that make it into the season 's final compete against each other to secure the most votes from the public , with the number of finalists varying between seasons .
The act which does is declared the winner for that season , in which they secure the programme 's cash prize of $ 1 million , and , since Season 3 ( 2008 ) , a chance to headline a show on the Las Vegas Strip .
Between the fifth and eighth season , the winner was also made the headline act of a national tour with runners up following the final show , stopping in 25 cities .
For season nine , however ( 2014 ) , there was no tour ; two shows were held in Las Vegas for the winner and some of the runner - up acts .
( See # America 's Got Talent Live , below . )
JUDGES AND PRESENTERS Section::::Judges and Presenters . !
rowspan="2 "
Season !
rowspan="2 "
Presenter !
colspan="4 " Judges !
1 !
2 !
3 !
4 !
scope="row
" 1 !
scope="row " 2 !
scope="row
" 3 ! scope="row
" 4 !
scope="row " 5 ! scope="row " 6 ! scope="row " 7 ! scope="row " 8 ! scope="row " 9 ! scope="row " 10 ! scope="row " 11 ! scope="row " 12 ! scope="row " 13 ! scope="row " 14
In its first season , the judging panel consisted originally of David Hasselhoff , Brandy Norwood , and Piers Morgan , with the program hosted by Regis Philbin .
Prior to the start of the second season , Norwood was forced to step down due to a legal matter she was caught up in , leading to her being replaced by Sharon Osbourne , while Philbin was replaced by Jerry Springer as the show 's host .
Further changes were made to the panel and show 's host , as a direct result of each respective member having a need to focus on other TV commitments - Springer was forced to leave after the third season , and was replaced by Nick Cannon for the fourth season ; Hasselhoff left the show after the fourth season , and so was replaced by Howie Mandel for the fifth season as a direct result ; Morgan left after the sixth season , leading to his replacement by Howard Stern for the seventh season .
In August 2012 , Osbourne left the program following a dispute with NBC .
While the network replaced her with former Spice Girls member Mel B in February 2013 , the production staff decided to expand the number of judges in the panel to four - such a format change had already been occurring in other international versions of the competition , such as on Britain 's Got Talent two years prior .
In March 2013 , supermodel Heidi Klum was announced as joining the panel for the eighth season , confirming reports that the show would include a fourth judge into its format .
In October 2015 , Stern was replaced by Simon Cowell for the eleventh season .
After his eighth year hosting America 's Got Talent , Cannon announced plans to retire from the show due to comments he made about the network ; despite being under contract to continue his hosting duties , NBC eventually replaced him with Tyra Banks for the twelfth season .
JUDGE CUTS GUEST JUDGE Section::::Judge Cuts Guest Judge . !
Season !
colspan="4 " Judge Cuts Guest Judge !
10 !
11 !
12 !
13
SEASON SYNOPSES 1 !
scope="row " 2 !
scope="row
" 3 ! scope="row
" 4 !
scope="row " 5 ! scope="row " 6 ! scope="row " 7 ! scope="row " 8 ! scope="row " 9 ! scope="row " 10 ! scope="row " 11 ! scope="row " 12 ! scope="row " 13 SEASON 1 ( 2006 )
Section::::Season 1 ( 2006 ) .
In May 2006 , NBC announced the new show .
The audition tour took place in June .
Auditions were held in the following locations : Los Angeles , New York , and Chicago .
Some early ads for the show implied that the winning act would also headline a show at a casino , possibly in Las Vegas ; however , this was replaced with a million dollars due to concerns of minors playing in Las Vegas , should one become a champion .
More than 12 million viewers watched the series premiere ( which is more than American Idol got during its premiere in 2002 ) .
The two - hour broadcast was the night 's most - watched program on U.S. television and the highest - rated among viewers aged 18 to 49 ( the prime - time audience that matters most to advertisers ) , Nielsen Media Research reported .
On the season finale , there was an unaired segment that was scheduled to appear after Aly & AJ .
The segment featured Tom Green dressing in a parrot costume and squawking with a live parrot to communicate telepathically .
Green then proceeded to fly up above the audience , shooting confetti streamers out of his costume onto the crowd below .
In season one , the show was hosted by Regis Philbin and judged by actor David Hasselhoff , singer Brandy Norwood , and journalist Piers Morgan .
The winner of the season was
11-year - old singer Bianca Ryan , and the runners - up were clogging group All That and musical group The Millers .
SEASON 2
( 2007 )
Section::::Season 2 ( 2007 ) .
After initially announcing in June 2006 that season two would premiere in January 2007 and would air at 8 pm on Sunday nights , with no separate results show , the network changed that , pushing the show back to the summer , where the first season had enjoyed great success .
This move kept the show out of direct competition with American Idol , which had a similar premise and was more popular .
In AGT 's place , another reality - based talent show , , began airing on Sunday nights in the same time slot on NBC beginning in January .
In March , NBC announced that Philbin would not return as host of the show , and that Jerry Springer would succeed him as host , with Sharon Osbourne ( formerly a judge on Cowell 's UK show The X Factor ) succeeding Brandy Norwood as a judge .
The season finale was shown Tuesday , August 21 , with the winner being Terry Fator , a singing impressionist ventriloquist .
The runner - up was singer Cas Haley .
SEASON 3
( 2008 )
Section::::Season 3 ( 2008 ) .
Season three premiered on June 17 , 2008 .
Auditions took place in Charlotte , Nashville , Orlando , New York , Dallas , Los Angeles , Atlanta , and Chicago from January to April .
A televised MySpace audition also took place .
Season three differed from the previous two in many ways .
Auditions were held in well - known theaters across the nation , and a new title card was introduced , featuring the American flag as background .
The X 's matched the ones on Britain 's Got Talent as did the judges ' table .
Like the previous season , the Las Vegas callbacks continued , but there were forty acts selected to compete in the live rounds , instead of twenty .
This season also contained several results episodes , but not on a regular basis .
The show took a hiatus for two - and - a - half weeks for the 2008 Summer Olympics , but returned with the live rounds on August 26 .
Neal E. Boyd , an opera singer , was named the winner on October 1 .
Eli Mattson , a singer and pianist , was runner - up .
SEASON 4 ( 2009 )
Section::::Season 4 ( 2009 ) .
Season four premiered on Tuesday , June 23 , 2009 .
It was the first to be broadcast in high definition .
Auditions for this season were held in more than nine major cities including New York , Los Angeles , Chicago , Washington , D.C. , Atlanta , Miami , Tacoma , Boston , and Houston .
Los Angeles auditions kicked off the January 29–31 tour at the Los Angeles Convention Center , followed by the February 7–8 Atlanta auditions .
New York and Miami auditions were held during March .
Tacoma auditions were held April 25 and 26 .
In addition to live auditions and the ability to send in a home audition tape , season four offered the opportunity for acts to upload their video direct to NBC.com / agt with their registration .
This year 's host was Nick Cannon .
Jerry Springer said that he could not return as host due to other commitments .
The audition process in season four was the same as the previous season , but the ' Las Vegas Callbacks ' was renamed ' Vegas Verdicts ' .
This was the first season since season one where results episodes lasted one hour on a regular basis .
The title card this year featured bands of the American flag and stars waving around the America 's Got Talent logo .
On September 16 , country music singer Kevin Skinner was named the season 's winner .
The grand prize was $ 1 million and a 10-week headline show at the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip .
The runner - up was Bárbara Padilla , an opera singer .
SEASON 5
( 2010 )
Section::::Season 5 ( 2010 ) .
For season five , the network had considered moving the show to the fall , after rival series
So You Think You Can Dance transferred from the summer to fall season in 2009 .
NBC ultimately decided to keep Talent a summer show .
Open auditions were held in the winter to early spring of 2010 in Chicago , Dallas , Los Angeles , New York , Orlando , and Portland ( Oregon ) .
Non - televised producers ' auditions were also held in Atlanta and Philadelphia .
For the first time , online auditions were also held via YouTube .
David Hasselhoff left to host a new television show and was replaced by comedian and game show host Howie Mandel .
This made Piers Morgan the only original judge left in the show .
The show premiered Tuesday , June 1 , 2010 , at 8 pm ET .
Afterward , Talent resumed the same time slot as the previous season .
On September 15 , singer Michael Grimm was named the winner .
He won a $ 1 million prize and a chance to perform at the Caesars Palace Casino and Resort on the Las Vegas Strip , as well as headline the 25-city America 's Got Talent Live Tour along with runner - up Jackie Evancho , Fighting Gravity , Prince Poppycock , and the other top ten finalists .
SEASON 6 ( 2011 )
Section::::Season 6 ( 2011 ) .
Season six premiered on Tuesday , May 31 , 2011 , with a two - hour special .
Piers Morgan and Sharon Osbourne continued as judges after taking jobs on Piers Morgan Tonight and The Talk , respectively .
On The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on July 27 , 2010 , Morgan officially stated that he had signed a three - year contract to stay on Talent .
The show held televised auditions in Los Angeles , New York , Minneapolis , Atlanta , Seattle , and Houston .
Non - televised producers ' auditions were also held in Denver and Chicago .
Previews of auditions were shown during NBC 's The Voice premiere on April 26 .
Online auditions via YouTube were also held for the second time in the show 's run , beginning on May 4 .
Finalists for this audition circuit competed live on August 9 .
On Wednesday , September 14 , Landau Eugene Murphy , Jr. , a Frank Sinatra - style singer , was named the winner .
Dance group Silhouettes was runner - up .
SEASON 7 ( 2012 )
Section::::Season 7 ( 2012 ) .
Season seven premiered on May 14 , 2012 .
The first round of auditions , which are judged by producers , were held in New York , Washington , D.C. , Tampa , Charlotte , Austin , Anaheim , St. Louis , and San Francisco from October 2011 to February 2012 .
The show began its live theater performances at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark on February 27 .
Piers Morgan did not return as a judge for season seven , due to his work hosting CNN 's Piers Morgan Tonight , and he was replaced by Howard Stern .
Since Stern hosts his SiriusXM radio show in New York City , the live rounds of the show were moved to nearby Newark , New Jersey .
In December 2011 , Simon Cowell , the show 's executive producer , announced that the show would be receiving a " top - to - bottom makeover " , confirming that there would be new graphics , lighting , theme music , show intro , logo , and a larger live audience at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark .
On July 2 , at the first live performance show of the season , their new location and stage were unveiled in a two - and - a - half - hour live special .
A new set was also unveiled with a revised judges ' desk and a refreshed design of the " X " .
On August 6 , Sharon Osbourne announced that she would leave America 's Got Talent after the current season , in response to allegations that her son Jack Osbourne was discriminated against by the producers of the upcoming NBC program Stars Earn Stripes .
On September 13 , Olate Dogs were announced the winner of the season , becoming the show 's first completely non - singing act to win the competition and also the first non - solo act to win .
Comedian Tom Cotter finished as the runner - up .
SEASON 8
( 2013 )
Section::::Season 8 ( 2013 ) .
Season eight of AGT premiered on Tuesday , June 4 , 2013 .
The new season was announced in a promotional video shown during a commercial break for season seven 's second live show .
Sharon Osbourne initially stated that she would not return for the season , but later said that she was staying with the show " for now .
"
Osbourne confirmed that she would be leaving the show after a feud with NBC on August 6 , 2012 .
On February 20 , 2013 , it was announced that one of the Spice Girls members , Mel B ( Melanie Brown ) , would be joining the show as the new fourth judge .
Entertainment Weekly also reported at the same time that NBC was looking at a possible fourth judge to be added .
On March 3 , it was announced that supermodel Heidi Klum would replace Sharon Osbourne as the third judge .
An Audition Cities poll for the season was announced on July 11 , 2012 .
The first batch of Audition Cities were announced as Los Angeles , Seattle , Portland ( Oregon ) , New Orleans , Birmingham , Memphis , Nashville , Savannah , Raleigh , Norfolk , San Antonio , New York , Columbus ( Ohio ) , and Chicago .
This season , the auditions traveled to more cities than ever before .
America 's Got Talent moved its live shows to Radio City Music Hall in New York for season eight .
Auditions in front of the judges and an audience began taping on March 4 .
The show traveled to New Orleans , New York , Chicago , Los Angeles , and San Antonio .
On September 18 , 2013 , martial arts dancer /
mime Kenichi Ebina was announced the winner of the season , the first dance act to win the competition .
Stand - up comedian Taylor Williamson was the runner - up .
SEASON 9 ( 2014 )
Section::::Season 9 ( 2014 ) .
Season nine premiered on Tuesday , May 27 , 2014 , at 8 pm ET .
The producers ' auditions began on October 26 , 2013 , in Miami .
Other audition sites included Atlanta , Baltimore , Denver , Houston , Indianapolis , Los Angeles , and New York .
Contestants could also submit a video of their audition online .
Auditions in front of the judges were held February 20–22 at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark , which also hosted the live shows during season seven .
Judges ' auditions were held in New York City at Madison Square Garden from April 3 to 6 and in Los Angeles at the Dolby Theatre from April 21 to 26 .
The live shows return to Radio City Music Hall on July 29 .
There was also a new twist in the show , where " Judgment Week " was held in New York City instead of Las Vegas .
Judgment Week was originally intended to be held in front of a live studio audience , but after three acts performed , the producers scrapped the live audience concept .
This season also came with the addition of a " Golden Buzzer , " which was unveiled on that same year 's Britain 's Got Talent .
Each judge can press the buzzer only once each season that can save an act , typically used when there is a tie .
For this season , contestants were invited to submit a video of their performance to The Today Show website throughout June , and the top three entrants performed their acts on The Today Show on July 23 , 2014 .
The performer with the most votes , Cornell Bhangra , filled the 48th spot in the quarterfinals .
On September 17 , magician Mat Franco was announced the winner of the season , the first magic act to win the competition .
Singer Emily West was the runner - up .
SEASON 10
( 2015 )
Section::::Season 10 ( 2015 ) .
Season ten premiered on May 26 , 2015 .
Producer auditions began on November 2 , 2014 , in Tampa .
Other audition sites included Nashville , Richmond ( Virginia ) , New York , Chicago , St. Louis , San Antonio , Albuquerque , San Francisco , Seattle , Boise , Las Vegas , and Los Angeles .
Online submissions were also accepted .
Howard Stern rumored on his radio show on October 1 , 2014 , that he might not return , but announced on December 8 that he would return for the upcoming season .
Nick Cannon returned for his seventh season as host .
On February 9 , 2015 , Howie Mandel said he would return for season ten and
Mel B announced the next day that she would be returning as well .
It was revealed on February 11 that Heidi Klum would also be returning .
It was announced on December 4 , 2014 , that Cris Judd would be named as a dance scout .
He previously worked on the show as a choreographer behind the scenes , and on the New Zealand version of Got Talent as a judge .
Auditions in front of the judges began on March 2 , 2015 , at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center .
They continued at the Manhattan Center in New York City and the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles .
A special " extreme " audition session was held outside at the Fairplex in Pomona , California , where danger acts performed outside for the judges , who were seated at an outdoor stage .
During NBC 's summer press tour , it was announced that America 's Got Talent would be making their " Golden Buzzer " more like Britain 's Got Talent where the contestant that gets the buzzer will be sent directly to the live shows .
An official trailer for the season was released , which showed that Dunkin Donuts was the show 's official sponsor for the season , with their cups prominently placed on the judges ' desk .
Dunkin replaced Snapple , which sponsored the show since season seven .
On June 24 , Howard Stern announced on The Howard Stern Show that season ten would be his last season as judge .
Stern said , " In all seriousness , I 've told you , I 'm just too f*cking busy … something 's got to give … NBC 's already asked me what my intentions are for next year , whether or not I 'd come back , I kind of have told them I think this is my last season .
Not I think , this is my last season " .
On September 16 , Paul Zerdin was announced the winner of the season , making him the second ventriloquist to win .
Comedian Drew Lynch was runner - up , and magician mentalist Oz Pearlman was in Third Place .
SEASON 11
( 2016 )
Section::::Season 11 ( 2016 ) .
America 's Got Talent was renewed for an eleventh season on September 1 , 2015 .
The season would have preliminary open call auditions in Detroit , New York , Phoenix , Salt Lake City , Las Vegas , San Jose , San Diego , Kansas City , Los Angeles , Atlanta , Orlando , and Dallas .
As in years past , hopeful contestants may also submit auditions online .
On October 22 , 2015 , it was announced that creator Simon Cowell would replace Howard Stern as a judge for season 11 .
Mel B , Heidi Klum and Howie Mandel all returned as judges , with Nick Cannon returning as host .
The live shows moved from New York back to Los Angeles , due to Stern 's departure , at the Dolby Theatre .
Auditions in front of the judges began on March 3 , 2016 at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium in Pasadena , California .
The season premiered on May 31 , 2016 .
On September 14 , 12-year - old singer - songwriter and ukulele player Grace VanderWaal was announced as the second female and second child to win America 's Got Talent ( Bianca Ryan , age 11 , was first ) .
Magician mentalists
The Clairvoyants were runners - up , and magician Jon Dorenbos placed third .
SEASON 12 ( 2017 )
Section::::Season 12 ( 2017 ) .
On August 2 , 2016 , it was announced that host Nick Cannon and all four judges would be returning for season 12 .
Later that year , on October 4 , Simon Cowell signed a contract to remain as a judge through to 2019 ( Season 14 ) .
On February 13 , 2017 , Cannon announced he would not return as host for the twelfth season , citing creative differences between him and executives at NBC .
The resignation came in the wake of news that the network considered firing Cannon after he made disparaging remarks about NBC in his Showtime comedy special Stand Up , Do n't Shoot .
NBC selected Tyra Banks as the new host for season 12 , which premiered on Tuesday , May 30 , 2017 .
On September 20 , Darci Lynne Farmer won the twelfth season , becoming the third ventriloquist , third child act and the third female act to win the competition ( second year in a row after VanderWaal 's win in 2016 ) .
Child singer Angelica Hale was announced as the runner - up , and Ukrainian dance act Light Balance finished in third place .
Deaf musician Mandy Harvey and dog act
Sara & Hero rounded out the top five .
SEASON 13
( 2018 )
Section::::Season 13 ( 2018 ) .
On February 21 , 2018 , it was announced that judges Simon Cowell , Mel B , Heidi Klum and Howie Mandel along with Tyra Banks would all be returning .
The season premiered on May 29 , 2018 .
No major changes were involved in this season , as it followed the same format for the last three seasons .
However , one minor change was implemented in which the Judge Cuts shortlist was reduced from a top 80 into a top 72 .
Therefore , 18 acts would perform each week , while only seven would still advance during each show .
Magician Shin Lim was named the winner on the season finale , September 19 , 2018 .
This marks the second magician to win .
Acrobatic group Zurcaroh and violinist
Brian King Joseph came in second and third place respectively .
Stand - up comedian Samuel J. Comroe and singer Michael Ketterer rounded out the top 5 .
POST - SHOW
AMERICA 'S GOT TALENT LIVE Section::::Post - show .
Section::::America 's Got Talent Live .
America 's Got Talent Live is a show on the Las Vegas Strip that features the winner of each season of America 's Got Talent as the main performance .
In 2009 , America 's Got Talent Live appeared on the Las Vegas Strip appearing Wednesday through Sunday at the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino in Las Vegas , in a limited ten - week run from October through January featuring winner Kevin Skinner , runner - up Barbara Padilla and fourth - place finisher The Texas Tenors .
It featured the final ten acts which made it to the season four ( 2009 ) finale .
Jerry Springer emceed , commuting weekly between Stamford , Connecticut , tapings of his self - named show and Las Vegas .
In 2010 , on the first live show of season five , the winner headlined America 's Got Talent Live from Caesars Palace Casino and Resort on the Las Vegas Strip , which was part of a 25-city tour that featured the season 's finalists .
Jerry Springer returned as both host of the tour and the headliner of the show .
In 2012 , the tour returned , featuring winners Olate Dogs , Spencer Horsman , Joe Castillo , Lightwire Theater , David Garibaldi and his CMYK 's , Jarrett and Raja , Tom Cotter , and other fan favorites .
In 2013 , after the success of the 2012 tour , another tour was scheduled , featuring season eight 's winner , Kenichi Ebina , and finalists Collins Key , Jimmy Rose , Taylor Williamson , Cami Bradley , The KriStef Brothers , and Tone the Chiefrocca .
Tone hosted the tour .
In 2014 , America 's Got Talent Live announced that performances in Las Vegas on September 26 and 27 would feature Taylor Williamson , the season eight ( 2013 ) runner - up , and the top finalists for season nine :
Mat Franco , Emily West , Quintavious Johnson , AcroArmy , Emil and Dariel , Miguel Dakota , and Sons of Serendip .
In 2015 , no tour was held .
Instead , three shows were given at the Planet Hollywood Resort in Las Vegas
featuring winner Paul Zerdin , runner - up Drew Lynch , and fan favorite Piff the Magic Dragon .
In 2016 , four shows were given at the Planet Hollywood Resort in Las Vegas .
They featured the top two finalists for season 11 , Grace VanderWaal and The Clairvoyants , as well as finalist Tape Face .
In 2017 , four shows were given at the Planet Hollywood Resort in Las Vegas .
They featured winner Darci Lynne , runner - up Angelica Hale , third - placed Light Balance , and finalist Preacher Lawson .
In 2018 , three shows were given at the Paris Las Vegas in Las Vegas .
They featured winner Shin Lim , 4th place Samuel J. Comroe , and three other finalists Courtney Hadwin , Vicki Barbolak , and Duo Transcend , as well as quarterfinalist Hans .
HOLIDAY SPECTACULAR Section::::Holiday Spectacular .
NBC broadcast the two - hour America 's Got Talent Holiday Spectacular on December 19 , 2016 , hosted by Cannon with performances by Grace VanderWaal , Jackie Evancho , Andra Day , Penn & Teller , Pentatonix , Terry Fator , Mat Franco , Piff the Magic Dragon , Olate Dogs , Professor Splash , Jon Dorenbos and others , and featuring the Season 11 judges , including Klum , who sang a duet with Season 11 finalist Sal Valentinetti .
The special drew 9.5 million viewers .
RECEPTION U.S. TELEVISION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::U.S. television ratings .
Since the show began , its ratings have been very high , ranging from 9 million viewers to as many as 16 million viewers , generally averaging around 12 million viewers .
The show has also ranked high in the 18–49 demographic , usually rating anywhere from as low as 1.6 to as high as 4.6 throughout its run .
Audition shows and performance shows rate higher on average than results shows .
Although the show 's ratings have been high , the network usually keeps the show 's run limited to before the official start of the next television season in the third week of September with some reductions or expansions depending on Olympic years , where finale ratings are usually lower due to returning programming on other networks .
The highest rated season in overall viewers to date is season four ( 2009 ) .
The most - watched episode has been the finale of season five ( 2010 ) , with 16.41 million viewers .
The series premiere and an episode featuring the first part of Las Vegas Week in season six ( 2011 )
have each tied for highest rating among adults 18–49 , both having a 4.6 rating . !
rowspan=2 Season !
colspan=2 Premiered !
colspan=2 Ended !
rowspan=2 Timeslot ( ET12345678910111213 AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Result TOP - SELLING ALBUMS BY FORMER CONTESTANTS Jackie Evancho 3,000,000 +
* Prelude to a Dream ( 2009 )
No .
121 * O Holy Night ( 2010 )
No . 2
( Platinum certification )
* Dream with Me ( 2011 )
No . 2
( Gold certification )
* Heavenly Christmas ( 2011 )
No . 11
* Songs from the Silver Screen ( 2012 )
No . 7 *
Awakening ( 2014 )
No . 17 *
Someday at Christmas ( 2016 )
No .
93 * Two Hearts ( 2017 )
No . 100 !
2
Lindsey Stirling 856,000 +
* Lindsey Stirling ( 2012 )
No . 23
* Shatter Me ( 2014 )
No . 2
* Brave Enough ( 2016 )
No . 5 !
3
The Texas Tenors 500,000 +
* The Texas Tenors ( album)Country Roots , Classical Sound : Remastered Special Edition ( 2011 )
No . 1 Classical Catalog Albums chart * O Night Divine ( 2013 )
No . 13 Classical Albums chart
* You Should Dream ( 2013 )
No . 111 ; No . 5 Classical Albums chart * First 5 Years Live ( 2014 )
No . 1 Classical Catalog Albums chart
* Rise ( 2017 )
No . 22 ;
No . 1 Classical Albums Chart ! 4 Grace VanderWaal 200,000 +
* Perfectly Imperfect ( 2016 )
No . 4 *
Just the Beginning ( 2017 )
No .
22 ! 5
Landau Eugene Murphy ,
Jr. 156,000
+
*
That 's Life ( 2011 )
No . 34
* Christmas Made for Two ( 2013 ) !
6 Bianca Ryan 150,000 +
* Bianca Ryan ( 2006 )
No . 57
* Christmas Everyday ( 2007 ) * The True Meaning of Christmas ( 2009 ) ! 7 Cas Haley 40,000 +
* Cas Haley ( 2008 )
No . 8 * Connection ( 2010 )
* La Si Dah ( 2013 ) !
8
Michael Grimm 22,000 +
* Michael Grimm Live ( 2007 )
* I Am
Michael Grimm ( 2009 ) * Leave Your Hat On ( 2010 )
No . 101 *
Michael Grimm ( 2011 )
No . 13 !
9 Neal E. Boyd 6,000 + *
My American Dream ( 2009 )
No .
195 CONTESTANTS WHO HAVE COMPETED ON OTHER REALITY SHOWS Section::::Contestants who have competed on other reality shows .
Many acts which have competed on America 's Got Talent but were ultimately eliminated before the final round have either previously competed on or went on to compete in a number of other reality shows , most notably American Idol and America 's Best Dance Crew .
The following America 's Got Talent ( AGT ) contestants also appeared on American Idol1 !
3 ! 4 !
4 ,
9 ! 6
!
9 !
10 !
11
The following America 's Got Talent ( AGT ) contestants also appeared on America 's Best Dance Crew2 !
3 !
3 , 4 ! 4 !
4 !
5 !
5 !
7 !
91 !
2 !
2 !
3 !
5 !
5 !
5 ! 6
! 7 ! 7 ! 7 ! 7 ! 7 ! 7 , 8 ! 7 !
8 !
8 !
8 !
8 !
8 !
8 !
9 !
10 !
10 !
10 !
10 !
10 !
11 !
11 !
13 !
13
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTS Section::::International broadcasts .
In Indonesia , the eleventh season has currently been broadcast by NET .
since October 22 , 2016 every Saturday and Sunday at 10 pm WIB .
But , since Monday , October 31 , in addition to the weekend slot , the show has also been broadcast every Monday to Friday at 5 pm WIB as the replacement of the currently concluded TV drama , the second season of , which was concluded on Friday , October 28 , 2016 .
In the United Kingdom , TruTV , along with simulcasts on the Local Television Limited network , show America 's Got Talent , with TruTV showing it from the tenth season .
The thirteenth season of the show will air on AXN Asia , together with the twelfth series of Britain 's Got Talent .
In the Philippines , the show was being broadcast on ABS - CBN from 2008 to 2010 .
When the network premiered Pilipinas Got Talent in 2010 , the show was now being aired on Studio 23 until January 2014 , the time Studio 23 rebranded to ABS - CBN Sports+Action ( now branding as ABS - CBN S+A ) .
In 2011 , the show aired on The Game Channel until its closure in 2015 .
Currently , it is being aired on AXN Philippines and on RTL CBS Entertainment ( now Blue Ant Entertainment ) .
DOMINICANA 'S GOT TALENT
Section::::Dominicana 's Got Talent .
On November 4 of 2018 , it was confirmed by the Dominican Republic 's national network Color Visión that a Dominican version of the reality show is in production and may be premiering its first season in the Latin American country on next year 's summer .
The upcoming show promises to raise the raitings of the channel , which may become in the new number one Broadcasting Network in the Dominican Republic .
The show is still searching for its respective judges and auditions will be starting by next spring .
This will be the first Latin American version of the reality show " Got Talent " and the tenth one over all .
SEE ALSO
* Got Talent *
The X Factor REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS