CIGARETTE PACK
A pack or packet of cigarettes is a rectangular container , mostly of paperboard , which contains cigarettes .
The pack is designed with a flavor - protective foil , paper or plastic , and sealed through a transparent airtight plastic film .
By pulling the " pull - tabs " , the pack is opened .
Hard packs can be closed again after opening , whereas soft packs can not .
Cigarette packs often contain warning messages depending on which country they are sold in .
In the European Union , most tobacco warnings are standardised ( although the United Kingdom now has plain tobacco packaging ) .
PACKAGE SIZE
PACK Section::::Package size .
Section::::Pack .
The size of a pack is often regulated .
Government agencies usually set a minimum pack size .
In Australia , the most common quantity per pack is 25 , but some brands have changed them to 26 or to 20 ( the minimum by law ) .
30 , 40 and even 50 packs are also sold .
In Canada , most packs sold have 25 cigarettes , but packs of 20 are also popular .
In many European countries , increases of cigarette tax can cause the quantity of cigarettes in the pack to change to achieve the same end price .
In Malaysia , the selling of packs containing fewer than 20 cigarettes is prohibited .
In the United States , the quantity of cigarettes in a pack must be at least 20 .
Certain brands , such as Export As , come in packs of 25 .
For many years , half - packs of 10 ( or even 14 ) cigarettes were commonly available .
In the United Kingdom brands are sold only in packets of 20 since
a May 2017 law prohibits the sale of 10-stick packs ( along with loose tobacco only being sold in 30 g or 50
g only).The legislation also outlawed branded packaging , introducing boxes which are a plain green color .
The packaging has the brand name in a basic typeface , with most of the packet dedicated to textual and photographic health warnings .
Vending machines sometimes dispense packets containing 16 or 18 cigarettes although the dimensions of the packaging are the same as the equivalent packet that contains 20 .
CARTON Section::::Carton .
A carton of cigarettes usually contains 10 packs , totaling 200 cigarettes .
Some cartons contain twenty packs , totaling 400 cigarettes .
HARD PACK AND SOFT PACK Section::::Hard pack and soft pack .
A hard pack is the usual style of paperboard packaging for store bought cigarettes , which consists of a relatively stable box .
This successfully prevents the crumpling of cigarettes when kept in a person 's pocket or handbag .
The flip - top hard pack cigarette case was introduced in 1955 by Philip Morris .
A soft pack is a box packaging made of thin paper , usually containing 20 cigarettes .
Soft packs may be considered inconvenient as they rupture easily and can not be resealed .
They offer the immediate convenience of not having to open the package each time the smoker wants a cigarette .
They require less physical ' pocket space ' when fewer cigarettes remain in the pack .
With American brands , cigarettes from a soft pack are usually a few millimeters longer than their hard - boxed counterparts .
COLLECTIBLE PACK Section::::Collectible pack .
To encourage cigarette pack collectors , some cigarette packs were made to present a particular interest for collectors .
There are cigarette packs labeled " collectible " .
Some brands introduce promotional packs to bypass advertising laws .
An example would be a limited time promotion where the pack is made from tin with the shape , purpose , and look of a cigarette case to entice potential buyers .
They are distinguished by unique décor or are very old or they were removed from manufacturing for some reasons and consequently became rare .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Most cigarette packs have no features at all and are just made up of a single container filled with cigarettes .
However , some cigarette packs have been proposed that also contain an empty container for disposing the cigarette butts into .
This could reduce cigarette butts of being discarded unto the street , where they contaminate the environment .
PLAIN TOBACCO PACKAGING
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Encyclopedia of Cigarettes