ENCLAVE AND EXCLAVE
An enclave is a territory , or a part of a territory , that is entirely surrounded by the territory of one other state .
Territorial waters have the same sovereign attributes as land , and enclaves may therefore exist within territorial waters .
An exclave is a portion of a state or territory geographically separated from the main part by surrounding alien territory ( of one or more states ) .
Many exclaves are also enclaves .
Enclave is sometimes used improperly to denote a territory that is only partly surrounded by another state .
Vatican City and San Marino , enclaved by Italy , and Lesotho , enclaved by South Africa , are the only completely enclaved states .
Unlike an enclave , an exclave can be surrounded by several states .
The Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan is an example of an exclave .
Semi - enclaves and semi - exclaves are areas that , except for possessing an unsurrounded sea border ( a coastline contiguous with international waters ) , would otherwise be enclaves or exclaves .
Enclaves and semi - enclaves can exist as independent states ( Monaco , Gambia and Brunei are semi - enclaves ) , while exclaves always constitute just a part of a sovereign state ( like the Kaliningrad Oblast ) .
A pene - enclave is a part of the territory of one country that can be conveniently approached — in particular , by wheeled traffic — only through the territory of another country .
Pene - enclaves are also called functional enclaves or practical enclaves .
Many pene - exclaves partially border their own territorial waters ( i.e. , they are not surrounded by other nations ' territorial waters ) , such as Point Roberts , Washington .
A pene - enclave can also exist entirely on land , such as when intervening mountains render a territory inaccessible from other parts of a country except through alien territory .
A commonly cited example is the Kleinwalsertal , a valley part of Vorarlberg , Austria , that is accessible only from Germany to the north .
ORIGIN AND USAGE Section::::Origin and usage .
The word enclave is French and first appeared in the mid-15th century as a derivative of the verb enclaver ( 1283 ) , from the colloquial Latin inclavare ( to close with a key ) .
Originally , it was a term of property law that denoted the situation of a land or parcel of land surrounded by land owned by a different owner , and that could not be reached for its exploitation in a practical and sufficient manner without crossing the surrounding land .
In law , this created a servitude of passage for the benefit of the owner of the surrounded land .
The first diplomatic document to contain the word enclave was the Treaty of Madrid , signed in 1526 .
Later , the term enclave began to be used also to refer to parcels of countries , counties , fiefs , communes , towns , parishes , etc .
that were surrounded by alien territory .
This French word eventually entered the English and other languages to denote the same concept , although local terms have continued to be used .
In India , the word " pocket " is often used as a synonym for enclave ( such as " the pockets of Puducherry district " ) .
In British administrative history , subnational enclaves were usually called detachments or detached parts , and national enclaves as detached districts or detached dominions .
In English ecclesiastic history , subnational enclaves were known as peculiars ( see also Royal Peculiar ) .
The word exclave , modeled on enclave , is a logically extended back - formation of enclave .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Enclaves exist for a variety of historical , political and geographical reasons .
For example , in the feudal system in Europe , the ownership of feudal domains was often transferred or partitioned , either through purchase and sale or through inheritance , and often such domains were or came to be surrounded by other domains .
In particular , this state of affairs persisted into the 19th century in the Holy Roman Empire , and these domains ( principalities , etc . ) exhibited many of the characteristics of sovereign states .
Prior to 1866 Prussia alone consisted of more than 270 discontiguous pieces of territory .
Residing in an enclave within another country has often involved difficulties in such areas as passage rights , importing goods , currency , provision of utilities and health services , and host nation cooperation .
Thus , over time , enclaves have tended to be eliminated .
For example , two - thirds of the then - existing national - level enclaves were extinguished on August 1 , 2015 , when the governments of India and Bangladesh implemented a Land Boundary Agreement that exchanged 162 first - order enclaves ( 111 Indian and 51 Bangladeshi ) .
This exchange thus effectively de - enclaved another two dozen second - order enclaves and one third - order enclave , eliminating 197 of the Indo - Bangladesh enclaves in all .
The residents in these enclaves had complained of being effectively stateless .
Only Bangladesh 's Dahagram – Angarpota enclave remained .
ENCLAVE VERSUS EXCLAVE Section::::Enclave versus exclave .
For illustration , in the figure ( above ) , A1 is a semi - enclave ( attached to C and also bounded by water that only touches C 's territorial water ) .
Although A2 is an exclave of A , it can not be classed as an enclave because it shares borders with B and C.
The territory A3 is both an exclave of A and an enclave from the viewpoint of B.
The singular territory D , although an enclave , is not an exclave .
TRUE ENCLAVES Section::::True enclaves .
An enclave is a part of the territory of a state that is enclosed within the territory of another state .
To distinguish the parts of a state entirely enclosed in a single other state , they are called true enclaves .
A true enclave can not be reached without passing through the territory of a single other state that surrounds it .
Vinokurov ( 2007 ) calls this the restrictive definition of " enclave " given by international law , which thus " comprises only so - called ' true enclaves ' " .
Two examples are Büsingen am Hochrhein , a true enclave of Germany , and Campione d'Italia , a true enclave of Italy , both of which are surrounded by Switzerland .
The definition of a territory comprises both land territory and territorial waters .
In the case of enclaves in territorial waters , they are called maritime ( those surrounded by territorial sea ) or lacustrine ( if in a lake ) enclaves .
Most of the true national - level enclaves now existing are in Asia and Europe .
While subnational enclaves are numerous the world over , there are only a few national - level true enclaves in Africa , Australia and the Americas ( each such enclave being surrounded by the territorial waters of another country ) .
An historical example is West Berlin before the reunification of Germany .
Since 1945 , all of Berlin was ruled de jure by the four Allied powers .
However , the East German government and the Soviet Union treated East Berlin as an integral part of East Germany , so West Berlin was a de facto enclave within East Germany .
Also , 12 small West Berlin enclaves , such as Steinstücken , were separated from the city , some by only a few meters .
ENCLAVED COUNTRIES Section::::Enclaved countries .
Three nations qualify , as completely surrounded by another country 's land and/or internal waters : * The Republic of San Marino , enclaved within Italy * Vatican City , enclaved within the city of Rome , Italy * The Kingdom of Lesotho , enclaved within South Africa Historically , four Bantustans ( or " Black homelands " ) of South Africa were granted nominal independence , unrecognized internationally , by the Apartheidist government from 1976 until their reabsorption in 1994 .
Others remained under government rule from 1948 to 1994 .
Being heavily partitioned , various parts of these Bantustans were true enclaves .
The United States ' constitutional principle of tribal sovereignty treats federally - recognized Indian reservations as quasi - independent enclaves .
TEMPORARY ENCLAVES Section::::Temporary enclaves .
To establish jurisdiction , the Scottish Court in the Netherlands , at Camp Zeist near Utrecht , was temporarily declared as sovereign territory of the United Kingdom under Scots law for the duration of the trial of those accused in the Lockerbie bombing , and was therefore an exclave of the United Kingdom and of Scotland , and an enclave within the Netherlands .
This was also so during the appeal against the conviction .
The court was first convened in 1999 , and the land returned to the Netherlands in 2002 .
TRUE EXCLAVES Section::::True exclaves .
True exclave is an extension of the concept of true enclave .
In order to access a true exclave from the mainland , a traveller must go through the territory of at least one other state .
Examples include : * Nakhchivan , which borders Turkey , Armenia and Iran , is an exclave of Azerbaijan .
*
In the United Arab Emirates , four emirates have five true exclaves : Dubai ( Hatta ) , Ajmān ( Masfout and Manama ) , Ras al - Khaimah ( the southerly of the emirate 's two non - contiguous sections ) , and Sharjah ( Nahwa , also both a true national - level enclave and a counter - enclave ) .
* Llívia is an enclave and exclave of Spain surrounded by France .
*
Campione d'Italia is an enclave and exclave of Italy surrounded by Switzerland .
*
Büsingen am Hochrhein is an enclave and exclave of Germany surrounded by Switzerland .
The shortest distance from Büsingen 's borders to the main portion of German territory is only about 700 metres ( about 2,300 ft ) .
* Likoma and Chizumulu Islands in Lake Malawi are lacustrine enclaves and exclaves of Malawi , surrounded by Mozambique territorial waters .
RELATED CONSTRUCTS AND TERMS SEMI - ENCLAVES / EXCLAVES
Section::::Related constructs and terms .
Section::::Semi - enclaves / exclaves .
Semi - enclaves and semi - exclaves are areas that , except for possessing an unsurrounded sea border , would otherwise be enclaves or exclaves .
Semi - enclaves can exist as independent states that border only one other state , such as Monaco , the Gambia and Brunei .
Vinokurov ( 2007 ) declares , " Technically , Portugal , Denmark , and Canada also border only one foreign state , but they are not enclosed in the geographical , political , or economic sense .
They have vast access to international waters .
At the same time , there are states that , although in possession of sea access , are still enclosed by the territories of a foreign state .
"
Therefore , a quantitative principle applies : the land boundary must be longer than the coastline .
Thus a state is classified as a sovereign semi - enclave if it borders on just one state , and its land boundary is longer than its sea coastline .
Vinokurov affirms that " no similar quantitative criterion is needed to define the scope of non - sovereign semi - enclaves / exclaves .
"
Examples include : * Alaska , one of the states in the United States of America , is the largest semi - exclave in the world , separated from the US by Canada .
* Oecusse , a district on the northwestern side of the island of Timor , is a semi - enclave of East Timor .
* Ceuta and Melilla are Spanish semi - enclaves on the Mediterranean coast of Morocco .
* Temburong is a Bruneian semi - enclave surrounded by Malaysia .
* Kaliningrad Oblast is a federal subject of Russia ( an oblast ) , a semi - exclave situated on the Baltic coast .
Sea access from mainland is possible from Saint Petersburg via Gulf of Finland without passing through other states ' territory .
* Cabinda ( also spelled Kabinda , formerly Portuguese Congo ) is a semi - exclave and a province of Angola on the Atlantic coast of southwestern Africa , separated by the only sea - access port of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
* French Guiana ( a French Overseas Department ) , in South America , is a semi - exclave that is bounded by Suriname , Brazil , and the Atlantic Ocean .
SUBNATIONAL ENCLAVES AND EXCLAVES Section::::Subnational enclaves and exclaves .
Sometimes , administrative divisions of a country , for historical or practical reasons , caused some areas to belong to one division while being attached to another .
* Dadra , enclaved within the state of Gujarat , is part of Dadra and Nagar Haveli in India .
* Pondicherry district , of the Union Territory of Puducherry , is made of 12 non - contiguous parts , many of them true enclaves entirely surrounded by the state of Tamil Nadu .
Before Pondicherry , along with the other territories of French India , was absorbed into India in 1954 , they were enclaved within the Union of India , and before that the British Raj .
Also a legacy of the French colonial period , the Mahe district is made of three non - contiguous parts enclaved within the state of Kerala .
*
From 1947 to 1971 , Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan as its East Pakistan exclave , separated from West Pakistan by 1,760 kilometers ( 1,100 miles ) of India .
It eventually gained independence in 1971 , during the Bangladesh Liberation War .
* Before 1974 , and especially before 1844 , there were many exclaves of counties in England and Wales .
*
The counties of Scotland before reorganisation in 1889 included dozens of exclaves .
This was especially notable in the case of Cromartyshire , which was split into at least nine parts spread across Ross - shire .
*
The French department of Pyrénées - Atlantiques , in the southwest of France , surrounds two enclaves of the neighbouring department of Hautes - Pyrénées .
*
The French department of Vaucluse has a rather large exclave to its southeast within the Drôme department – the canton of Valréas ( historically known as Enclave des Papes ) .
*
San Colombano al Lambro is an exclave of the province of Milan at the junction between the Pavia and Lodi provinces .
The exclave arose when the province of Lodi was carved out of the province of Milan , but a referendum in San Colombano indicated the locals ' wish to stay in Milan .
As a result , the commune is the only wine - producing area in the mostly urbanized province of Milan .
*
In the United States : * A portion of Ellis Island is an exclave of New York City within the boundaries of Jersey City , and therefore of New York State within the boundaries of New Jersey .
* The Kentucky Bend exists because of a meander of the Mississippi River .
* West Hollywood and Beverly Hills , California , adjoin one another , but are entirely surrounded by the city of Los Angeles .
* Jeddito , Arizona lies within a exclave of the Navajo Nation .
This exclave is surrounded by territory of the Hopi Reservation , which is itself surrounded by the Navajo Nation .
" PRACTICAL " ENCLAVES , EXCLAVES AND INACCESSIBLE DISTRICTS Section::::"Practical " enclaves , exclaves and inaccessible districts .
The term -exclave was defined in Robinson ( 1959 ) as " parts of the territory of one country that can be approached conveniently – in particular by wheeled traffic – only through the territory of another country . "
Thus , a pene - exclave , although having land borders , is not completely surrounded by the other 's land or territorial waters .
Catudal ( 1974 ) and Vinokurov ( 2007 ) further elaborate upon examples , including Point Roberts . "
Although physical connections by water with Point Roberts are entirely within the sovereignty of the United States , land access is only possible through Canada . "
Pene - enclaves are also called functional enclaves or practical enclaves .
They can exhibit continuity of state territory across territorial waters but , nevertheless , a discontinuity on land , such as in the case of Point Roberts .
Along rivers that change course , pene - enclaves can be observed as complexes comprising many small pene - enclaves .
A pene - enclave can also exist entirely on land , such as when intervening mountains render a territory , although geographically attached , inaccessible from other parts of a country except through alien territory .
A commonly cited example is the Kleinwalsertal , a valley part of Vorarlberg , Austria , that is only accessible from Germany to the north , being separated from the rest of Austria by high mountains traversed by no roads .
Another example is the Spanish village of Os de Civís , accessible from Andorra .
Hence , such areas are enclaves or exclaves for practical purposes , without meeting the strict definition .
Many pene - exclaves partially border the sea or another body of water , which comprises their own territorial waters
( i.e. , they are not surrounded by other nations ' territorial waters ) .
They border their own territorial waters in addition to a land border with another country , and hence they are not true exclaves .
Still , one can not travel to them on land without going through another country .
Attribution of a pene - enclave status to a territory can sometimes be disputed , depending on whether the territory is considered to be practically inaccessible from the mainland or not .
* Northern Ireland , an area of the United Kingdom , is bounded by the Republic of Ireland , the Irish Sea and the Atlantic Ocean .
* Equatorial Guinea 's continental portion , Rio Muni , is a semi - exclave surrounded by Gabon , Cameroon and the Atlantic Ocean .
*
The Northwest Angle in Minnesota is geographically separated from the rest of the state ( and United States ) by Lake of the Woods and is only accessible on land through Canada , via Manitoba .
* Point Roberts , Washington , is an unincorporated community in Whatcom County — located on the southernmost tip of the Tsawwassen Peninsula , south of Delta , British Columbia , Canada — that can be reached by land from the rest of the United States only by traveling through Canada .
* Vermont has two pene - enclaves with Canada .
Province Point , a few kilometres to the northeast of the town of East Alburgh , Vermont , is the southernmost tip of a small promontory approximately 2 acres ( 1 ha ) in size ( ) .
The promontory is cut through by the US - Canada border ; as such the area is a practical enclave of the United States contiguous with Canada .
Similarly , the southern point of Province Island ( ) , a small island mostly in the Canadian province of Quebec , crosses into the American state of Vermont .
It is situated in Lake Memphremagog , near Newport , Vermont .
* Walvis Bay , now part of Namibia , was a pene - exclave of the Cape Colony in German South - West Africa , created in 1878 .
It became part of the Cape Province of the Union of South Africa in 1910 , but from 1922 , it was administered as a de facto part of South - West Africa , a League of Nations Mandate .
In 1977 , it was separated from that territory and re - integrated into the Cape Province .
South Africa did not relinquish sovereignty over Walvis Bay until 1994 , nearly four years after Namibia 's independence .
SUBNATIONAL " PRACTICAL " ENCLAVES , EXCLAVES AND INACCESSIBLE DISTRICTS *
Although the Jervis Bay Territory , which occupies a coastal peninsula in Australia , is not part of the Australian Capital Territory , the laws of the ACT apply to it .
*
The Romanian village of Nămoloasa ( Galați county ) can be accessed only through Vrancea county ( where there is a bridge over the Siret river ) , because it is separated by the Siret River from the rest of Galați county .
*
The southern part of the Province of Venice , Veneto , can be reached directly from the rest of the province only by boat .
By land it can be reached only traveling through the Province of Padua because territorial continuity with the main part of the province exists only through some unconnected islands and islets .
*
It is not possible to drive from the northern half of County Leitrim in the Republic of Ireland to the southern half without leaving the county ; Lough Allen and the River Shannon present a water barrier requiring one to drive through County Cavan to the east or County Roscommon to the west .
* The community of East Kemptville , Nova Scotia , Canada , is part of the Municipality of Argyle , but it can only be reached by road from the rest of the municipality by travelling through the Municipality of Yarmouth or the Municipality of Shelburne .
The latter route also requires travelling through the Municipality of Barrington .
*
In the United States : * Several portions of land on the New Jersey side of the Delaware River belong to Delaware .
Within the Twelve - Mile Circle , Delaware 's border extends to the low - water mark across the river .
South of the Circle , the Delaware - New Jersey border follows the middle of the river and bay .
* The Eastern Shore of Virginia on the southern portion of the Delmarva Peninsula shares a border with Maryland but is only connected to the rest of Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge - Tunnel , which is part of U.S. Route 13 .
* The city of Carter Lake , Iowa is separated from the rest of the state of Iowa by the Missouri River , which changed course during a flood in 1877 , cutting the city off from the rest of the state .
It is now only accessible through Omaha , Nebraska .
*
The village of Kaskaskia , Illinois , the state 's first capital , is separated from the rest of Illinois by the Mississippi River due to a flood in 1881 , which shifted the river to flow east of the town , rather than west .
This resulted in the only access to the town being from Missouri .
* The Upper Peninsula of Michigan is separated from the Lower Peninsula by the Straits of Mackinac , so until construction of the Mackinac Bridge , the only land routes between them were through the states of Wisconsin , Illinois , and Indiana , or through the Canadian province of Ontario , *
The Marble Hill neighborhood of Manhattan is separated from the rest of the borough by the Harlem River .
ENCLAVES WITHIN ENCLAVES Section::::Enclaves within enclaves .
It is possible for an enclave of one country to be completely surrounded by a part of another country that is itself an enclave of the first country .
These enclaves are sometimes called counter - enclaves .
*
The Dutch municipality of Baarle - Nassau has seven exclaves in two exclaves of the Belgian municipality of Baarle - Hertog .
*
The former complex of enclaves at Cooch Behar district included 24 second - order enclaves and one small third - order enclave called Dahala Khagrabari # 51 : a piece of India within Bangladesh , within India , within Bangladesh .
The Indo - Bangladesh enclaves were exchanged on 31 July 2015 by the ratified Land Boundary Agreement , and Dahala Khagrabari was ceded to Bangladesh .
* Nahwa of the United Arab Emirates is surrounded by Madha , an exclave of Oman within the U.A.E. * The Portuguese town of Estremoz is made up of two civil parishes ( freguesias ) : the small Santo André and the big Santa Maria .
Santo André corresponds to the old town ( located inside the medieval walls ) , but excludes the citadel , which is an enclave inside the old town ; the citadel belongs to Santa Maria , which also includes the entire new town ( outside the walls ) and the vast rural area around it .
Thus , Santa Maria has an enclave ( Santo André , the old town ) with a second - order enclave inside it ( the citadel ) .
ETHNIC ENCLAVES
Section::::Ethnic enclaves .
An ethnic enclave is a community of an ethnic group inside an area in which another ethnic group predominates .
Ghettos , Little Italys , barrios and Chinatowns are examples .
These areas may have a separate language , culture and economic system .
*
Székely Land is a Hungarian ethnic enclave within Romania , with its people calling themselves Székely .
Originally , the name Székely Land denoted an autonomous region within Transylvania .
It existed as a legal entity from medieval times until the Austro - Hungarian Compromise of 1867 , when the Székely and Saxon seats were dissolved and replaced by the county system .
Along with Transylvania , it became a part of Romania in 1920 , according with the Treaty of Trianon signed on 4 June 1920 at the Grand Trianon Palace in Versailles , France .
In 1938–1940 , during World War II , post - Trianon Hungary temporarily expanded its territory and included some additional territories that were formerly part of the pre - war Kingdom of Hungary , under Third Reich auspices , the Second Vienna Award .
It was later reduced to boundaries approximating those of 1920 by the peace treaties signed after World War II at Paris , in 1947 .
The area was called Magyar Autonomous Region between September 8 , 1952 and February 16 , 1968 , a Hungarian autonomous region within Romania , and today there are territorial autonomy initiatives to reach a higher level of self - governance for this region within Romania .
*
There are several Serb enclaves in Kosovo where the institutions of Kosovo are not fully operational due to disputes .
EXTRATERRITORIALITY Section::::Extraterritoriality .
Diplomatic missions , such as embassies and consulates , as well as military bases , are usually exempted from the jurisdiction of the host country , i.e. , the laws of the host nation in which an embassy is located do not typically apply to the land of the embassy or base itself .
This exemption from the jurisdiction of the host country is defined as extraterritoriality .
Areas and buildings enjoying some forms of extraterritoriality are not true enclaves since , in all cases , the host country retains full sovereignty .
In addition to embassies , some other areas enjoy a limited form of extraterritoriality .
Examples of this include : * Pavillon de Breteuil in France , used by the General Conference on Weights and Measures .
* United Nations headquarters in the United States , used by the United Nations .
* United Nations Office at Geneva in Switzerland , used by the United Nations .
* INTERPOL headquarters in Lyon , France , used by INTERPOL .
* NATO ( political ) headquarters near Evere in Haren , a part of the City of Brussels , Belgium .
* Headquarters of Allied Command Operations ( NATO ) at the area designated as Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe ( SHAPE ) , north of Mons , Belgium .
* Palazzo Malta and the Villa del Priorato di Malta , the headquarters of Sovereign Military Order of Malta in Rome .
In addition to extraterritoriality , Italy recognizes the exercise by SMOM of all the prerogatives of sovereignty in its headquarters .
Therefore , Italian sovereignty and SMOM sovereignty uniquely coexist without overlapping .
* Extraterritorial properties of the Holy See in Rome and surroundings .
* By treaty of 2 November 1929 , Czechoslovakia obtained the lease for 99 years of two plots of land ( in the Moldauhafen and in the Saalehafen ) , both within the perimeter of the free port of Hamburg .
Another plot , in the Peutehafen , was purchased by the Czechoslovak government in 1929 ; this plot lies just outside the free - port perimeter .
* Saalehafen – approximately 2 ha of land on Hallesches Ufer , on the southeastern bank of the Saalehafen .
* Moldauhafen – approximately 0.5 ha of land on Dresdener Ufer , on the southeastern bank of the Moldauhafen .
* Peutehafen – the narrow peninsula between the Peutekanal and the Peutehafen dock , comprising 8.054 ha of land and 0.5 ha of water surface .
*
In Szczecin , Poland , a similar provision existed following the Treaty of Versailles for Czechoslovakia to have access to the harbor , which until the end of World War II was located in Germany .
From 1945 , when Szczecin became part of Poland , Czechoslovakia possessed no extraterritorial rights there .
It appears that the German concession ceased at the end of the war and that no successor paid attention to the pre - war rights that Czechoslovakia had under the Versailles Treaty .
Neither the Polish nor the occupying Russians appear to have assumed any of Germany 's pre - war liabilities .
Czechoslovakia gave up the rights to its territory in Szczecin under an agreement signed on 13 January 1956 .
* Saimaa Canal : the longitudinal half of the canal in Russia is leased by Finland until 2063 .
Russian law is in principle valid , but in reality Finland maintains the area .
LAND OWNED BY
A FOREIGN COUNTRY Section::::Land owned by a foreign country .
One or more parcels / holdings of land in most countries is owned by other countries .
Most instances are exempt from taxes .
In the special case of embassies / consulates these enjoy special privileges driven by international consensus particularly the mutual wish to ensure free diplomatic missions , such as being exempt from major hindrances and host - country arrests in ordinary times on the premises .
Most non - embassy lands in such ownership are also not enclaves as fall legally short of extraterritoriality , they are subject to alike court jurisdiction as before their grant / sale in most matters .
Nonetheless , for a person 's offence against the property itself , equally valid jurisdiction in criminal matters is more likely than elsewhere , assuming the perpetrator is found in the prosecuting authority 's homeland .
Devoid of permanent residents , formally defined new sovereignty is not warranted or asserted in the examples below .
Nonetheless , minor laws , especially on flag flying , are sometimes relaxed to accommodate the needs of the accommodated nation 's monument .
Embassies enjoy many different legal statuses approaching quasi - sovereignty , depending on the agreements reached and in practice upheld from time - to - time by host nations .
Subject to hosts adhering to basic due process of international law , including giving warnings , the enforced reduction of scope of a foreign embassy has always been a possibility , even to the point of expelling the foreign embassy entirely , usually on a breakdown of relations , in reaction to extreme actions such as espionage , or as another form of sanction .
The same seems to be possible in profit - driven moving or drilling under any of the sites below , providing safeguards as the structure or a new replacement site .
The same possible curtailments and alterations never apply to proper exclaves .
Examples of such land other than for diplomatic missions are : *
Napoleon 's original grave in Longwood , Saint Helena , owned by France .
* Victor Hugo 's house in Saint Peter Port ( Saint - Pierre - Port ) , Guernsey , owned by the city of Paris .
* The Brest memorial in Brest , France is owned by the US .
It commemorates World War I. *
The Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial in Normandy , France , which contains the graves of 9,386 American military dead , most of whom died during the landings and ensuing operations of World War II , owned by the United States of America .
* Pointe du Hoc , the 13-hectare site of a memorial and museum dedicated to the World War II Normandy landing at Omaha Beach , France transferred to the US on 11 January 1979 .
*
The to Russia 's final Generalissimo Alexander Suvorov near Göschenen in central Switzerland , was erected 99 years after his death by the Russian Empire .
* The Vimy Memorial in France , which commemorates the Battle of Vimy Ridge .
The French government permanently granted the about to Canada as a war memorial in 1922 in recognition of Canada 's military contributions in World War I in general and at Vimy Ridge in particular .
* Two cemeteries on the Outer Banks of North Carolina , United States : one on Ocracoke Island and one on Hatteras Island in the town of Buxton , are owned by the United Kingdom hosting the British seamen washed ashore after World War II U - Boat attacks of 10 April ( one from the San Delfino ) and 11 May 1942 ( five from HMT Bedfordshire ) .
Four graves are at Ocracoke and two at Buxton ; three of the bodies were never identified ; one of them could be that of a Canadian seaman .
The plot of land at Ocracoke " has been forever ceded to England " and is maintained by the U.S. Coast Guard .
The plot was leased to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission for as long as the land remained a cemetery .
The graves on Hatteras Island are maintained by the U.S. National Park Service .
*
The Captain Cook Monument at Kealakekua Bay and about of land around it in Hawaii , United States , the place where James Cook was killed in 1779 , is owned by the United Kingdom .
An historian on the occasion of the monument 's 50th anniversary recorded in 1928 that the white stone " obelisk monument [ was ] erected to the memory of Captain Cook , about 1876 , and on land deeded outright to the British Government by Princess Likelike , sister of King Kalakaua , about the same year , so that that square is absolute British Territory .
"
Hawaii was a sovereign nation at the time .
According to MacFarlane , " The land under the monument was deeded to the United Kingdom in 1877 and is considered as sovereign non - embassy land owned by the British Embassy in Washington DC . ...
the Hawaiian State Parks agency maintained that as sovereign British territory it was the responsibility of the UK to maintain the site . "
* Tiwinza in Peru : In the 1998 peace agreement following the 1995 Cenepa War , Peru ceded to Ecuador the property , but not the sovereignty , of one square kilometer within Tiwinza ( where 14 Ecuadorian soldiers were buried ) .
Ecuador had established a frontier military outpost in Tiwinza , an area that was specified in the agreement as belonging to Peru .
*
The land under the John F. Kennedy memorial at Runnymede , United Kingdom was transferred from the Crown Estates to the United States of America by the John F. Kennedy Memorial Act 1964 ( an Act of the UK Parliament ) ; however , it is in the care of the UK - based Kennedy Memorial Trust .
*
The Tomb of Suleyman Shah ( of Suleyman Shah , the grandfather of Osman I , the founder of the Ottoman Empire ) in Aleppo Governorate , Syria , is the property of Turkey .
Article 9 of the Treaty of Ankara signed between France and Turkey in 1921 , provides that the tomb " shall remain , with its appurtenances , the property of Turkey , who may appoint guardians for it and may hoist the Turkish flag there " .
UNUSUAL CROSS - BORDER TRANSPORT CHANNELS NATIONAL RAILWAY PASSING THROUGH ANOTHER STATE 'S
TERRITORY Section::::Unusual cross - border transport channels .
Section::::National railway passing through another state 's territory .
Changes in borders can make a railway that was previously located solely within a country traverse the new borders .
Since diverting a railway is expensive , this arrangement may last a long time .
This may mean that doors on passenger trains are locked and guarded to prevent illicit entry and exit while the train is temporarily in another country .
Borders can also be in the " wrong " place , forcing railways into difficult terrain .
Examples include : EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Current * Salzburg to Innsbruck ( Austria ) ( passes through Rosenheim , Germany ) .
A railway line within Austria exists as well , but trains take about 1.5 hours longer than across German territory .
* Trains on the Birsig Valley Line from Basel to Rodersdorf , Switzerland , which passes through Leymen , France .
It is operated by Baselland Transport and serviced by line no . 10 , which continues into the Basel tram network .
*
The Hochrheinbahn ( Upper Rhine Railway ) from Basel via Waldshut to Schaffhausen is part of the Deutsche Bahn network , and is mostly in Germany , but the two ends are in Switzerland and it is only connected with the rest of the German railway network via Switzerland .
At both Basel and Schaffhausen the railway has extraterritorial status : one can travel by train to and from the rest of Germany without going through Swiss customs .
See Basel Badischer Bahnhof .
* Trains from Neugersdorf , Saxony to Zittau pass Czech territory at Varnsdorf , while Czech trains from Varnsdorf to Chrastava pass through German territory at Zittau , and then a small part of Polish territory near the village of Porajów .
* Trains from Görlitz to Zittau , Germany , pass the border river Neisse several times ( see Oder – Neisse line ) ; the railway station for Ostritz , Germany , lies in Krzewina Zgorzelecka , Poland .
*
Belgrade –
Bar railway crosses into Bosnia and Herzegovina for , between stations Zlatibor and Priboj ( both in Serbia ) .
There is one station , Štrpci , but there are no border - crossing facilities , and trains do not call at the station .
* The Knin –
Bihać railway between Croatia and Bosnia is split by the Croatian – Bosnian border several times .
Similarly , the Savski Marof – Imeno railway was split by the Slovenian – Croatian border several times .
* Lučenec – Veľký Krtíš line in Slovakia passes through Hungary from Ipolytarnóc to Nógrádszakál .
*
The local trains on the Burgenlandbahn in Austria cross the area of Hungary at Sopron .
During the era of the Iron Curtain , the trains had their doors locked as they traversed Hungarian territory .
*
The line from Ventimiglia to Limone Piemonte , Italy , via Breil - sur - Roya , France .
*
The railway between France and Italy briefly leaves France to enter Monaco in a 150-metre tunnel before entering France once more .
*
For the Belgian Vennbahn ( now a cycleway ) narrow strips of Belgian territory were created running through Germany , creating five German exclaves .
*
The former Soviet republics have numerous examples :
* Semikhody – Chernihiv line of Ukraine passes through Belarus territory .
* Belarus / Lithuania : Adutiškis railway station straddles the Lithuania / Belarus border .
Trains pass through Lithuanian territory while traveling to and from Belarus , and platforms are in both Belarus and Lithuania .
The station is now mainly used for freight .
* Druzhba – Vorozhba line of Ukraine passes through Russian territory .
*
In 2009 , Russia and Kazakhstan agreed to transfer ownership of a cross - border section of line .
Historic
*
During the Cold War , underground lines in West Berlin ran under parts of East Berlin .
Ghost stations ( ) were stations on Berlin 's U - Bahn and S - Bahn metro networks that were closed during this period of Berlin 's division .
Proposals
* The shortest and straightest route for a proposed east – west high - speed railway in Austria through Linz , Salzburg and Innsbruck would pass under some mountains belonging to Germany .
AFRICA
*
Due to inability to agree in 1963 on a shorter route through easy terrain , the iron ore railway in Mauritania originally had to use a longer route through a tunnel ( built through 2 km of solid granite ) near Choum to avoid the territory of Spanish Sahara .
The tunnel is no longer in use and trains now use the shorter route through 5 km of Western Saharan territory controlled by the Polisario Front .
*
In 2012 , a railway route from Angola proper to the enclave of Cabinda has to cross not only the Congo River but also the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
*
In 2013 , the shortest railway route from coal mines at Tete to a port at Nacala passes through Malawi .
A route through all - Mozambique territory is circuitous .
*
In 1928 , Congo ( Belgium ) and Angola ( Portugal ) exchanged some land to facilitate the new route of the railway to Congo - Kinshasa .
MIDDLE EAST
* A very short length of the Syrian Homs –
Tripoli line crosses the border into Lebanon .
This happens because the railway was built before this border was defined .
THE AMERICAS * Bolivia is landlocked and has no access to the sea , but a rail route runs through Chile from La Paz to the port of Arica on the Pacific Ocean .
The rail route was built by Chile under the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1904 between Chile and Bolivia , with the Bolivian section transferred to Bolivia after 15 years .
Bolivia enjoyed duty - free use of the railway and the ports connected .
*
The International Railway of Maine was a railroad constructed by the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) between Lac - Mégantic , Quebec , and Mattawamkeag , Maine , closing a key gap in the railway 's transcontinental main line to the port of Saint John , New Brunswick .
The railway was however , at all times under American jurisdiction with the borders of the United States .
*
In order to avoid such a trans - border arrangement , the United States made the Gadsden Purchase of land from Mexico , on which it was planned to build a southern route for the transcontinental railroad .
Owing to the topography of the area , acquisition of the land was the only feasible way to construct such a railroad through the southern New Mexico Territory .
HIGHWAY OF ONE STATE PASSING THROUGH ANOTHER STATE 'S
TERRITORY
Section::::Highway of one state passing through another state 's territory .
This arrangement is less common as highways are more easily re - aligned .
Examples include : AFRICA * Congo Pedicle road : built to provide access for Zambia 's Luapula Province to the Copperbelt through of territory of the DR Congo , requiring a change in driving on the left to driving on the right .
*
In Guinea , where 20 km long tunnel(s ) through a hillspur at Naigaya ( elevation ) , Sicourou , Bokariadi and Feraya might be avoided by crossing the border into Sierra Leone at Yana ( elevation ) .
* Senegal is practically and inconveniently divided in two by the sovereign territory of Gambia .
The easiest way to travel from northern Senegal to the southern Casamance region is through Gambia via the Trans - Gambia Highway , with a connecting ferry being the only way to cross the Gambia River .
The fare for the ferry crossing is a source of contention between the two countries .
In 2015 , a road bridge is under construction .
ASIA
* The road from Dubai to the tourist spot of Hatta , an exclave of the emirate of Dubai , passes through a small stretch of Omani territory .
*
The highway between Bishkek and Issyk Kul , both in Kyrgyzstan , skirts the border with Kazakhstan , with the highway and the border crossing each other for short distances at various points .
EUROPE
* Various roads crossing the border back and forth between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland .
The N54 in County Monaghan , Ireland twice becomes the A3 in County Fermanagh , NI , before continuing as the N54 .
Similarly , the N53 in Monaghan passes through County Armagh , NI as the A37 , before resuming as the N53 at the border between Monaghan and County Louth , Ireland .
No national or county border signs are present .
* Between 1963 and 2002 the N274 road from Roermond to Heerlen , part of Dutch territory , passed through the German Selfkant , which had been annexed by the Netherlands after the Second World War but returned to Germany in 1963 .
* Close to Narvik , a road from Norway twice enters and leaves Swedish territory , following the southern shore of the Kjårdavatnet lake .
It does not connect with any other Swedish road in either location before it enters Norwegian land once more .
* Road 402 between Podsabotin and Solkan in Slovenia , built when Slovenia was a state of Yugoslavia , passes through part of Italy .
The road is confined by high concrete walls topped by fences ; as Slovenia and Italy are now both signatories to the Schengen agreement , the barriers are little more than historical curiosities .
*
The Saatse Boot Road in Estonia , between the villages of Lutepää and Sesniki , passes through Russian territory .
The stretch of road passing through Russia is flanked by barbed wire fences and guard towers .
Stopping and/or getting out of one 's vehicle on the stretch of road is forbidden ; the rule is enforced by Russian border guards .
*
The D8 coastal highway of Croatia passes through a small section of Herzegovina territory , at the Herzegovinian town of Neum , as it heads south from Split to Dubrovnik .
THE AMERICAS * East Richford Slide Road in the US state of Vermont crosses in to the Canadian province of Québec for a distance of approximately 100 meters ( 300 feet ) before returning to the United States .
SUBNATIONAL HIGHWAY PASSING
THROUGH OTHER INTERNAL TERRITORY
* India * The highway connecting Guwahati ( capital of Assam state ) to Silchar ( a city in Barak valley of Assam ) passes through Meghalaya state .
* One has to travel through part of West Bengal while travelling from Jamshedpur ( Tatanagar ) , Jharkhand to few other cities of Jharkahand like Ranchi or Dhanbad .
* Kota , a city in Rajasthan surrounded by territory of Madhya Pradesh , is connected to other parts of Rajasthan by roads passing through Madhya Pradesh .
* Gwalior ( Madhya Pradesh ) is connected to few other cities of Madhya Pradesh by highways passing through Uttar Pradesh , covering the city of Jhansi .
* United States : * Interstate 684 ,
connecting various points in New York State , passes through Connecticut near Kensico Reservoir and Westchester County Airport but is maintained entirely by New York State .
Motor vehicles can not enter from nor exit to Connecticut roads , even though a portion of the highway is owned by Connecticut .
* A portion of New York State Route 17 /
Interstate 86 passes through South Waverly , Pennsylvania but is maintained entirely by New York State .
This includes the roadway and traffic lights at the interchange with US Route 220 and a short portion of Pennsylvania Route 199 .
Nevertheless , Pennsylvania police enforce traffic laws on this short stretch , where there is one overpass built and owned by Pennsylvania .
* A portion of New Hampshire Route 153 runs along the border with and briefly passes through Parsonsfield , Maine as it sweeps around the eastern shore of Province Lake .
* Minnesota State Highway 23 passes through about of Wisconsin just west of Duluth , Minnesota .
Maintained by the Minnesota Department of Transportation , it intersects only a few dead - end local roads while in Wisconsin .
No state line signs are present .
* Hopkins Road north of Newark , Delaware , briefly enters Pennsylvania where the Twelve - Mile Circle meets the Mason – Dixon Line .
The road is maintained by Delaware , and it appears that at one time Arc Corner Road in Pennsylvania may have intersected here .
Further east , Beaver Dam Road enters Chadds Ford Township , Pennsylvania at the intersection of Beaver Valley Road and re - enters Delaware about 0.5 miles later .
The section of road in Pennsylvania is in rough shape , and it is unclear who is supposed to maintain this section .
*
Turkey :
* The main road for travel to Bartın via Zonguldak actually crosses Bartın first , traverses Zonguldak a short distance , then returns to Bartın .
BORDER TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE EUROPE
*
Several bridges cross the rivers Oder and Neisse between Germany and Poland .
To avoid needing to coordinate their efforts on a single bridge , the two riparian states assign each bridge to one or the other ; thus Poland is responsible for all maintenance on some of the bridges , including the German side , and vice versa .
* The Hallein Salt Mine crosses from Austria into Germany .
Under an 1829 treaty Austria can dig under the then - Kingdom of Bavaria .
In return some salt has to be given to Bavaria , and up to 99 of its citizens can be hired to work in the Austrian mine .
*
The twin town of TornioHaparanda or HaparandaTornio lies at the mouth of river Tornio , Tornio on the Finnish side and Haparanda on the Swedish side .
The two towns have a common public transportation , as well as cultural services , fire brigade , sports facilities etc .
*
The Basel Badischer Bahnhof is a railway station in the Swiss city of Basel .
Although situated on Swiss soil , because of the 1852 treaty between the Swiss Confederation and the state of Baden ( one of the predecessors of today 's Germany ) , the largest part of the station ( the platforms and the parts of the passenger tunnel that lead to the German / Swiss checkpoint ) is treated administratively as an inner - German railway station operated by the Deutsche Bahn .
The shops in the station hall , however , are Swiss , and the Swiss franc is used as the official currency there ( although the euro is universally accepted ) .
The Swiss post office , car rental office , restaurant and a cluster of shops are each separately located wholly within a surrounding station area that is administered by the German railway .
The customs controls are located in a tunnel between the platforms and the station hall ; international trains which continue to Basel SBB usually have on - board border controls .
*
The tram network in the French city of Strasbourg was extended into the neighbouring German city of Kehl in 2017 .
ASIA
*
The Hong Kong – Shenzhen Western Corridor on the Hong Kong –
mainland China border : the immigration control points for Hong Kong ( Shenzhen Bay Control Point ) and mainland China ( Shenzhen Bay Port ) are co - located in the same building on the Shenzhen side of the bridge in an effective pene - exclave .
The Hong Kong portion of the service building and the adjoining bridge are leased to Hong Kong , and are under Hong Kong 's jurisdiction for an initial period until 30 June 2047 .
* The Mainland Port Area in Kowloon
High Speed Railway Station in downtown Hong Kong is under the jurisdiction of the Mainland Chinese authorities and courts .
The 30 km long underground tunnel to the border is under Hong Kong jurisdiction , however , the train compartments of any train in operation ( that is carrying passengers to or from the Mainland ) are subject to Mainland Laws and jurisdiction .
This arrangement was created to allow for immigration clearance to occur in Hong Kong for all trains travelling to and from the Mainland of China .
*
As a legacy of the British colonial period , the Malaysian rail network had its southern terminus at Tanjong Pagar railway station in central Singapore .
The land on which the station and the rail tracks stood was leased to Keretapi Tanah Melayu , the Malaysian state railway operator .
Consequently , Malaysia had partial sovereignty over the railway land .
Passengers had to clear Malaysian customs and immigration checks at Tanjong Pagar before boarding the train to Malaysia , even after Singapore shifted its border control facility to the actual border in 1998 and objected to the continued presence of Malaysian officials at the station .
After a 20-year long dispute , the station was closed in 2011 and the railway land reverted to Singapore .
A remnant of the rail corridor is still in use ; KTM trains now terminate at Woodlands Train Checkpoint in northern Singapore near the border , which houses Malaysian and Singaporean border controls for rail passengers .
SEE ALSO
* Flagpole annexation
* Landlocked * Panhandle
* Precinct * Polynesian outlier Section::::See also .
Lists :
* List of enclaves and exclaves
* List of countries that border only one other country
* List of former foreign enclaves in China
* List of ethnic enclaves in North American cities NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rolf Palmberg 's Enclaves of the world
* Jan S. Krogh 's Geosite
* ' Tangled Territories ' 2005 review article on exclaves and enclaves in Europe published in hidden europe magazine * Barry Smith 's Baarle Site