MY FAIR LADY ( FILM )
My Fair Lady is a 1964 American musical film adapted from the Lerner and Loewe eponymous stage musical based on the 1913 stage play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw .
With a screenplay by Alan Jay Lerner and directed by George Cukor , the film depicts a poor Cockney flower seller named Eliza Doolittle who overhears an arrogant phonetics professor , Henry Higgins , as he casually wagers that he could teach her to speak " proper " English , thereby making her presentable in the high society of Edwardian London .
The film stars Audrey Hepburn as Eliza Doolittle and Rex Harrison as Henry Higgins , with Stanley Holloway , Gladys Cooper and Wilfrid Hyde - White in supporting roles .
A critical and commercial success , it won eight Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Actor , and Best Director .
In 1998 , the American Film Institute named it the 91st greatest American film of all time .
In 2018 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In London , Professor Henry Higgins ( Rex Harrison ) , a scholar of phonetics , believes that the accent and tone of one 's voice determines a person 's prospects in society ( "
Why Ca n't the English ? " ) .
At Covent Garden one evening , he meets Colonel Hugh Pickering ( Wilfrid Hyde - White ) , himself a phonetics expert who had come all the way from India to see him .
Higgins boasts he could teach anyone to speak
so well he could pass them off as a duke or duchess at an embassy ball , even the young woman with a strong Cockney accent named Eliza Doolittle ( Audrey Hepburn ) who tries to sell them flowers .
Eliza 's ambition is to work in a flower shop , but her accent makes that impossible ( " Would n't It Be Loverly " ) .
The following morning , Eliza shows up at Higgins ' home , seeking lessons .
Pickering is intrigued and offers to cover all the attendant expenses if Higgins succeeds .
Higgins agrees , and describes how women ruin lives ( " I 'm an Ordinary Man " ) .
Eliza 's father , Alfred P. Doolittle ( Stanley Holloway ) , a dustman , learns of his daughter 's new residence ( " With a Little Bit of Luck " ) .
He shows up at Higgins ' house three days later , ostensibly to protect his daughter 's virtue , but in reality simply to extract some money from Higgins , and is bought off with £ 5 .
Higgins is impressed by the man 's honesty , his natural gift for language , and especially his brazen lack of morals .
Higgins recommends Alfred to a wealthy American who is interested in morality .
Eliza endures Higgins ' demanding teaching methods and treatment of her personally ( " Just You Wait " ) .
She makes little progress , but just as she , Higgins , and Pickering are about to give up , Eliza finally " gets it " ( " The Rain in Spain " ) ; she instantly begins to speak with an impeccable upper class accent ( " I Could Have Danced All Night " ) .
As a trial run , Higgins takes her to Ascot Racecourse ( " Ascot Gavotte " ) , where she makes a good impression initially , only to shock everyone by a sudden lapse into vulgar Cockney while cheering on a horse .
Higgins partly conceals a grin behind his hand .
At Ascot , she meets Freddy Eynsford - Hill ( Jeremy Brett ) , a young , upper - class man who becomes infatuated with her ( " On the Street Where You Live " ) .
Higgins then takes Eliza to an embassy ball for the final test , where she dances with a foreign prince .
Zoltan Karpathy ( Theodore Bikel ) , a Hungarian phonetics expert trained by Higgins , converses briefly with Eliza , then certifies that she is not only Hungarian , but a princess .
However , Eliza 's hard work is barely acknowledged , with all the praise going to Higgins ( " You Did It " ) .
This and his callous treatment towards her afterwards , especially his indifference to her future , causes her to walk out on him , leaving him mystified by her ingratitude ( " Just You Wait ( Reprise ) " ) .
Outside , Freddy is still waiting ( " On the Street Where You Live ( Reprise ) " ) , and greets Eliza , who is irritated by him as all he does is talk ( " Show Me " ) .
Eliza tries to return to her old life , but finds that she no longer fits in .
She meets her father , who has been left a large fortune by the wealthy American to whom Higgins had recommended him , and is resigned to marrying Eliza 's stepmother .
Alfred feels that Higgins has ruined him , lamenting that he is now bound by " middle - class morality "
( " Get Me to the Church On Time " ) .
Eliza eventually ends up visiting Higgins ' mother ( Gladys Cooper ) , who is outraged at her son 's callous behaviour .
The next day , Higgins finds Eliza gone and searches for her ( " A Hymn to Him " ) , eventually finding her at his mother 's house .
Higgins attempts to talk Eliza into coming back to him .
He becomes angered when she announces that she is going to marry Freddy and become Karpathy 's assistant ( " Without You " ) .
He makes his way home , stubbornly predicting that she will come crawling back .
However , he comes to the unsettling realization that she has become an important part of his life ( " I 've Grown Accustomed to Her Face " ) .
As he listens to a recording of Eliza 's voice , she reappears in the doorway behind him , turning off the recording and saying in her old Cockney accent , " I washed my hands and face before I come , I did .
" Higgins looks surprised , then pleased , before asking where his slippers are .
CAST * Audrey Hepburn as Eliza Doolittle * Marni Nixon as Eliza 's singing voice ( uncredited ) * Rex Harrison as Professor Henry Higgins
* Stanley Holloway as Alfred P. Doolittle
* Wilfrid Hyde - White as
Colonel Hugh Pickering
* Gladys Cooper as Mrs. Higgins * Jeremy Brett as Freddy Eynsford - Hill
* Bill Shirley as Freddy 's singing voice ( uncredited ) * Theodore Bikel as Zoltan Karpathy * Mona Washbourne as Mrs. Pearce , Higgins ' housekeeper * Isobel Elsom as Mrs. Eynsford - Hill * John Holland as the Butler Uncredited Cast
* Henry Daniell as the British Ambassador ( in his last film role )
* Baroness Rothschild as the Queen of Transylvania
* Buddy Bryant as Prince Gregor of Transylvania * Charles Fredericks as the King in Eliza 's fantasy * Lillian Kemble - Cooper as female Ambassador ( in yellow dress ) at Ball * Queenie Leonard as Cockney bystander * Moyna MacGill as Lady Boxington
* Alan Napier as gentleman escorting Eliza to the Queen * Betty Blythe as Lady at Ball
* Marjorie Bennett as Cockney with pipe * Marni Nixon as Waiter from bar ( Get Me to the Church on Time )
MUSICAL NUMBERS * " Overture " – played by orchestra .
*
*
" Why Ca n't the English Learn to Speak ? " – performed by Rex Harrison , Wilfrid Hyde - White and Audrey Hepburn .
*
* " Would n't It Be Loverly ? " – performed by Audrey Hepburn ( dubbed by Marni Nixon ) and chorus .
* * " An Ordinary Man " – performed by Rex Harrison .
* *
" With a Little Bit of Luck " – performed by Stanley Holloway , John Alderson , John McLiam , and chorus .
*
*
"
Just You Wait " – sung by Audrey Hepburn ( partially dubbed by Marni Nixon ) and Charles Fredericks .
* * " Servants Chorus " – sung by Mona Washbourne and chorus .
* * " The Rain in Spain " – performed by Rex Harrison , Wilfrid Hyde - White , and Audrey Hepburn ( partially dubbed by Marni Nixon ) .
*
* " I Could Have Danced All Night " – performed by Audrey Hepburn ( mostly dubbed by Marni Nixon ) , Mona Washbourne and chorus .
* * " Ascot Gavotte " – sung by chorus .
* * " Ascot Gavotte ( Reprise ) " – sung by chorus .
* *
" On the Street Where You Live " – sung by Jeremy Brett ( dubbed by Bill Shirley ) .
* * " Intermission " – played by orchestra .
* * " Transylvanian March " – played by orchestra .
* * " Embassy Waltz " – played by orchestra .
*
*
" You Did It " – performed by Rex Harrison , Wilfrid Hyde - White , and chorus .
*
*
"
Just You Wait ( Reprise ) " – sung by Audrey Hepburn .
* *
" On the Street Where You Live " ( reprise ) – sung by Jeremy Brett ( dubbed by Bill Shirley ) .
* * " Show Me " – sung by Audrey Hepburn ( dubbed by Marni Nixon ) and Jeremy Brett ( dubbed by Bill Shirley ) .
* *
" Would n't It Be Loverly " ( reprise ) – sung by Audrey Hepburn ( dubbed by Marni Nixon ) and chorus .
* * " Get Me to the Church on Time " – performed by Stanley Holloway , John Alderson , John McLiam , and chorus .
* * " A Hymn to Him
( Why Ca n't A Woman Be More Like a Man ? )
" – performed by Rex Harrison and Wilfrid Hyde - White .
*
*
" Without You " – sung by Audrey Hepburn ( dubbed by Marni Nixon ) and Rex Harrison .
*
* " I 've Grown Accustomed to Her Face " – performed by Rex Harrison .
* * " Finale " – played by orchestra .
* PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The head of CBS , William S. Paley , put up the money for the original Broadway production in exchange for the rights to the cast album ( through Columbia Records ) .
When Warner bought the film rights in February 1962 for the then - unprecedented sum of $ 5 million , it was agreed that the rights to the film would revert to CBS seven years following release .
ORDER OF MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Order of musical numbers .
The order of the songs in the show was followed faithfully , except for " With a Little Bit of Luck " .
The song is listed as being the third musical number in the play ; in the film it is the fourth .
Onstage , the song is split into two parts sung in two different scenes .
Part of the song is sung by Doolittle and his cronies just after Eliza gives him part of her earnings , immediately before she makes the decision to go to Higgins 's house to ask for speech lessons .
The second half of the song is sung by Doolittle just after he discovers that Eliza is now living with Higgins .
In the film , the entire song is sung in one scene that takes place just after Higgins has sung "
I 'm an Ordinary Man " .
However , the song does have a dialogue scene ( Doolittle 's conversation with Eliza 's landlady ) between verses .
The instrumental " Busker Sequence " , which opens the play immediately after the Overture , is the only musical number from the play omitted in the film version .
However , there are several measures from this piece that can be heard as we see Eliza in the rain , making her way through the cars and carriages in Covent Garden .
All of the songs in the film were performed near complete ; however , there were some verse omissions , as there sometimes are in film versions of Broadway musicals .
For example , in the song " With a Little Bit of Luck " , the verse " He does not have a Tuppence in his pocket " , which was sung with a chorus , was omitted , due to space and its length .
The original verse in " Show Me " was used instead .
The stanzas of " You Did It " that came after Higgins says " she is a Princess " were originally written for the Broadway version , but Harrison hated the lyrics , and refused to perform the song unless and until those lyrics were omitted , which they were in most Broadway versions .
However , Cukor insisted that the omitted lyrics be restored for the film version or he would not direct at all , causing Harrison to oblige .
The omitted lyrics end with the words " Hungarian Rhapsody " followed by the servants shouting " Bravo " three times , to the strains of Liszt 's " Hungarian Rhapsody " before the servants sing " Congratulations , Professor Higgins " .
DUBBING
Section::::Dubbing .
Hepburn 's singing was judged inadequate , and she was dubbed by Marni Nixon , who sang all songs except " Just You Wait " , where Hepburn 's voice was left undubbed during the harsh - toned chorus of the song and Nixon sang the melodic bridge section .
Hepburn did sing the brief reprise of the song in tears .
Some of Hepburn 's original vocal performances for the film were released in the 1990s , affording audiences an opportunity to judge whether the dubbing was necessary .
Less well known is the dubbing of Jeremy Brett 's songs ( as Freddy ) by Bill Shirley .
Harrison declined to pre - record his musical numbers for the film , explaining that he had never talked his way through the songs the same way twice and thus could not convincingly lip - sync to a playback during filming ( as musical stars had , according to Jack L. Warner , been doing for years .
" We even dubbed Rin - Tin - Tin " ) .
George Groves decided to use a wireless microphone , the first such use during filming of a motion picture .
The sound department earned an Academy Award for its efforts .
INTERMISSION
Section::::Intermission .
One of the few differences in structure between the stage version and the film is the placement of the intermission .
In the stage play , the intermission comes after the embassy ball where Eliza dances with Karpathy .
In the film , the intermission comes before the ball , as Eliza , Higgins , and Pickering are seen departing for the embassy .
ART DIRECTION Section::::Art direction .
Gene Allen , Cecil Beaton , and George James Hopkins won an Academy Award for Best Production Design for art direction of the film .
Beaton 's inspiration for the library in Higgins ' home , where much of the action takes place , was a room at the Château de Groussay , Montfort - l'Amaury , in France , which had been decorated opulently by its owner Carlos de Beistegui .
Hats were created by Parisian milliner at Beaton 's request .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
All tracks played by the Warner Bros. Studio Orchestra conducted by André Previn .
Between brackets the singers .
* " Overture " * *
" Why Ca n't the English Learn to Speak ? "
( Rex Harrison , Audrey Hepburn , Wilfrid Hyde - White )
*
* " Would n't It Be Loverly ? "
( Marni Nixon ( for Hepburn ) )
*
* " I 'm an Ordinary Man " ( Harrison ) * *
" With a Little Bit of Luck " ( Stanley Holloway )
*
*
" Just You Wait " ( Hepburn , Nixon )
* * " The Rain in Spain " ( Harrison , Hepburn , Nixon , Hyde - White )
*
* " I Could Have Danced All Night "
( Nixon , Hepburn(one line ) )
* * " Ascot Gavotte " * *
" On the Street Where You Live " ( Bill Shirley ( for Jeremy Brett ) )
*
* " You Did It " ( Harrison , Hyde - White )
( without the choir " Congratulations " )
* * " Show Me " ( Nixon , Shirley ) * * " Get Me to the Church on Time " ( Holloway )
* * " A Hymn to Him
( Why Ca n't a Woman Be More Like a Man ? )
" ( Harrison , Hyde - White ) * * " Without You " ( Nixon , Harrison )
*
* " I 've Grown Accustomed to Her Face " ( Harrison )
* * " The Flower Market " * * " Servants ' Chorus " * * " Ascot Gavotte ( Reprise ) " * * " Intermission " * * " The Transylvanian March "
* * " The Embassy Waltz "
* * " You Did It "
( Harrison , Hyde - White )
( with the servant 's final choir " Congratulations " )
*
*
"
Just You Wait ( Reprise ) "
( Audrey Hepburn )
* *
" On the Street Where You Live ( Reprise ) " ( Shirley )
* * " The Flowermarket " ( containing the reprise of " Would n't It Be Loverly ? " )
( Nixon )
* * " End Titles " * * " Exit Music " * RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
With a production budget of $ 17 million , My Fair Lady was the most expensive film shot in the United States up to that time .
The film was re - released in 1971 and earned North American rentals of $ 2 million .
It was re - released again in 1994 after a thorough restoration .
My Fair Lady currently holds a 96 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 46 reviews , with an average rating of 8.1/10 .
The consensus states : " George Cukor 's elegant , colorful adaptation of the beloved stage play is elevated to new heights thanks to winning performances by Audrey Hepburn and Rex Harrison . "
Chicago Sun - Times critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four , and , in 2006 , he put it on his " Great Movies " list , praising Hepburn 's performance , and calling the film " the best and most unlikely of musicals . "
AWARDS AND HONORS ACADEMY AWARDS : 1964 Section::::Awards and honors .
Section::::Academy Awards : 1964 .
My Fair Lady won eight Oscars :
* Academy Award for Best Picture – Jack L. Warner
* Academy Award for Best Director – George Cukor * Academy Award for Best Actor –
Rex Harrison * Academy Award for Best Cinematography – Harry Stradling * Academy Award for Best Sound – George R. Groves , Warner Brothers Studio * Academy Award for Best Adaptation or Treatment Score – André Previn * Academy Award for Best Art Direction – Gene Allen , Cecil Beaton , and George James Hopkins
* Academy Award for Best Costume Design – Cecil Beaton * Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay – Alan Jay Lerner - Nominated * Academy Award for Best Film Editing
– William Ziegler - Nominated * Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor – Stanley Holloway - Nominated * Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress – Gladys Cooper - Nominated GOLDEN GLOBE
AWARDS Section::::Golden Globe Awards .
My Fair Lady won three Golden Globes : * Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture –
Musical or Comedy * Golden Globe Award for Best Director – Motion Picture –
George Cukor * Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy – Rex Harrison BAFTA AWARDS
*
My Fair Lady won the BAFTA Award for Best Film from any source RESTORATION Section::::Restoration .
The film was restored in 1994 by James C. Katz and Robert A. Harris , who had restored Spartacus three years earlier .
The restoration was commissioned and financed by CBS , to which the film rights reverted from Warner Bros. in 1971 .
CBS would later hire Harris to lend his expertise to a new 4 K restoration of the film for a 2015 Blu - ray release , working from 8 K scans of the original camera negative and other surviving 65 mm elements .
PLANNED REMAKE
Section::::Planned remake .
A new film of the musical was planned in 2008 with a screenplay by Emma Thompson but the project did not materialize .
Keira Knightley , Carey Mulligan , and Colin Firth were among those in consideration for the lead roles .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1964 NOTES *
The rights of the film were reverted to CBS in 1971 and in 2009 , currently distributed by Paramount Pictures .
* REFERENCES Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS