SS POLITICIAN + SS Politician SS Politician was an 8000-ton cargo ship owned by T & J Harrison of Liverpool .
It left Liverpool on 3 February 1941 , bound for Kingston , Jamaica and New Orleans with a cargo including 28,000 cases of malt whisky .
The ship sank off the north coast of Eriskay in the Outer Hebrides , off the west coast of Scotland , and much of the wreck 's cargo was salvaged by the island 's inhabitants .
The story of the wreck and looting was the basis for the book and film Whisky Galore ! .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The ship was called Politician only after 1935 , when she was purchased by T & J Harrison from Furness , Withy and Co. , who had called her London Merchant .
In the same transaction , the vessels Royal Prince , Imperial Prince and British Prince became Collegian , Craftsman and Statesman respectively .
All four turbine - engined sister ships were built in 1922 - 3 to have a length of and beam , gross and achieve .
Built for the Furness London - New York route , Harrisons employed them to South Africa in peacetime .
Harrisons had previously owned another Politician , built by Swan Hunter in 1899 , which was bought by Christian Salvesen in 1922 , renamed Coronda and used from 1940 - 5 as a store ship on the Tyne .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On 5 February 1941 , during gale force winds , she ran aground off the Island of Eriskay in the Outer Hebrides and later broke in two near the islet of Calvay .
The crew were all unharmed and were looked after by the locals for a while .
When the locals learned from the crew of the Politician what the ship was carrying , a series of illegal , and later well - organised salvage operations took place at night , before the customs and excise officials arrived .
The island 's supplies of whisky had dried up due to war - time rationing , so the islanders periodically helped themselves to some of the 28,000 cases ( 264,000 bottles ) of Scotch whisky before winter weather broke up the ship .
The men wore women 's dresses on their " fishing trips " , to keep their own clothes from being covered in incriminating oil from the ship 's holds .
Boats came from as far away as Lewis as news of the whisky spread across the Hebrides .
No islander regarded it as stealing ; for them the rules of salvage meant that once the bounty was in the sea , it was theirs to rescue .
This was not the view of the local customs officer .
Charles McColl was incensed at what he saw as outright thievery going on .
None of the whisky had paid a penny of duty , and he railed against this loss to the public purse .
McColl whipped up a furore and made the police act .
Villages were raided and crofts turned upside down .
Bottles were hidden , secreted , or simply drunk in order to hide the evidence .
TRIALS Section::::Trials .
McColl and the police caught plenty of locals red - handed , and they were sent to trial .
On 26 April at Lochmaddy Sheriff Court , a group of men from Barra pleaded guilty to theft and were charged between three and five pounds .
McColl was beside himself at the leniency of the sentence , but the police ( being largely locals themselves ) were tired of harassing the locals
who had not , in their minds , done such a bad thing .
But McColl continued on his crusade , and more men did appear in court , some of whom were sentenced to up to six weeks imprisonment in Inverness and Peterhead .
At sea , salvage attempts did not go well , and it was eventually decided to let Politician remain where she was .
McColl , who had already estimated that the islanders had purloined 24,000 bottles of whisky , ensured that there would be no more temptation .
He applied for , and was granted , permission to explode her hull .
The islanders watched this extraordinary action , their emotions summed up by Angus John Campbell , who commented , " Dynamiting whisky .
You would n't think there 'd be men in the world so crazy as that ! "
BANKNOTES Section::::Banknotes .
At the time , the Crown remained very unforthcoming about the incident , the cargo and the salvage .
The majority of its hold was taken up by the whisky , but there was also an assortment of other cargo ranging from baths , plumbing fittings , pianos , art silks , motor parts , bedding , furniture , food and banknotes for Jamaica .
Public Record Office files released in January 2001 show that Politician was also carrying nearly 290,000 ten - shilling notes ( 145,000 pounds ) , which would be worth the equivalent of several million pounds at current exchange rates .
( To give an idea of how much that was worth , a corporal on full pay in the British Army received 35 shillings a week ) .
The British government hoped that they would not get into circulation , but they started turning up at banks all around the world .
Some sources suggest that these supplies were being sent to the colonies in case there was need of evacuation in the war .
As soon as the weather allowed , Eriskay was besieged with customs officials , insurance agents and legitimate salvage companies .
It is reported that the custom officials were not well received and one agent was refused accommodation by most of the townsfolk .
In April 1941 Captain E Lauriston , who was in charge of the operation , claimed that the banknotes had turned up in Benbecula , north of the wreck .
The salvage company stated : It is reported that some of the children on the island have been playing with them and the locals , most of whom are known to be incriminated in the looting ,
are too wily to give anything away .
In a memorandum , the Crown Agents noted : The local police service is in no doubt on a very , very small scale but the nature of the place and its surroundings should tend to reduce the chances of serious loss through the notes being presented and paid .
Suspicions only began to rise when an empty cash case was found abandoned in the hold of the ship .
By June , the banknotes from Politician were turning up in branches as far away as Liverpool .
By mid July , a hundred or so had been tendered in Jamaica and almost two hundred in Britain .
By 1958 the Crown Agents reported that 211,267 notes had been recovered by the salvage company and the police and had been destroyed .
A further 2,329 had been presented in banks in England , Scotland , Ireland , Switzerland , Malta , Canada , the US , and Jamaica .
Only 1,509 were thought to have been presented in good faith .
That still leaves 76,404 banknotes which have never been accounted for .
Their fate remains a mystery .
The wreck of the Politician still lies off the coast of Eriskay , although it is below water line now as the winter gales destroyed the deck and cabins .
In 1988 the island got its own legitimate pub , named The Politician ( ) .
SS POLITICIAN IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::SS Politician in popular culture .
The story of the shipwreck inspired the Compton Mackenzie 's 1947 novel Whisky Galore which was made into an Ealing Comedy film in 1949 .
A " Poem of the S.S Politician " is attributed to Angus Mcintyre , Tobermory .
Oi Polloi wrote a song about this ship on their album
Ar Ceòl Ar Cànan Ar - A - Mach .
Two books have been written detailing the history :
* Scotch On The Rocks : The True Story Behind Whisky Galore , Arthur Swinson , 1963 & 2005
*
Polly : The True Story Behind Whisky Galore , Roger Hutchinson , Mainstream Publishing , 1990 + 1998 RECENT HISTORY Section::::Recent history .
In 1987 Donald MacPhee , a local South Uist man , found eight bottles of whisky in the wreck ; he sold them at Christies ' auction for £ 4,000 .
In October 1989 a salvage company , SS Politician plc , was founded by Churchill Baron Financial Services of Glasgow , with Jeremy Brough as company chairman .
About £ 400,000 was invested by more than 500 people , but moving hundreds of tons of sand and steel plates only uncovered 24 more bottles , thereby creating a notional rate of return of £ 16,667 / bottle .
Some of the whisky was blended and bottled by SS Politician plc .
In 2013 two of the original eight bottles of whisky salvaged in 1987 by Donald MacPhee , sold for £ 12,050 after an online auction .
Scotch Whisky Auctions , which sold the bottles , said they had gone to a buyer in the UK after worldwide interest .
REFERENCES