1921 TAMPA BAY HURRICANE
The Tampa Bay hurricane of 1921 ( also known as the 1921 Tarpon Springs hurricane ) is the most recent major hurricane to strike the Tampa Bay Area .
The eleventh tropical cyclone , sixth tropical storm , and fifth hurricane of the season , the storm developed from a trough in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 20 .
Initially a tropical storm , the system moved northwestward and intensified into a hurricane on October 22 and a major hurricane by October 23 .
Later that day , the cyclone peaked as a Category 4 on the modern day Saffir – Simpson scale with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) .
After entering the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane gradually curved northeastward and weakened to a Category 3 before making landfall near Tarpon Springs , Florida , late on October 25 , becoming the first major hurricane to hit the area since a hurricane in 1848 .
The storm quickly weakened to a Category 1 hurricane while crossing Central Florida , before reaching the Atlantic Ocean early on the following day .
Thereafter , system moved east - southeastward and remained fairly steady in intensity before weakening to a tropical storm late on October 29 .
The storm was then absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone early the next day , with the remnants of the hurricane soon becoming indistinguishable .
The storm brought strong winds to the Swan Islands , including hurricane - force winds on the main island .
Heavy rains fell in Cuba , particularly in Pinar del Río Province , but only minor damage occurred .
In Florida , storm surge and abnormally high tides caused damage along much of the state 's west coast from Pasco County southward .
Several neighborhoods and sections of Tampa were inundated , especially in Ballast Point , DeSoto Park , Edgewater Park , Hyde Park , Palmetto Beach , and other areas in the vicinity of Bayshore Boulevard .
Strong winds also damaged hundreds of trees , signs , buildings , and homes .
Four deaths occurred in Tampa , three from drownings and another after a man touched a live wire .
The storm left two additional fatalities in St. Petersburg .
A number of streets in Tarpon Springs were littered with masses of debris , with many structures and trees suffering extensive damage .
Strong winds occurred as far east as the Atlantic coast of the state , though wind damage east of the Tampa Bay area was generally limited to downed trees and power lines , resulting in power outages , particularly in Orlando .
Agriculture throughout the state experienced significant impact as well , including over $ 2 million ( equivalent to $ million in ) in damage and the loss of at least 800,000 boxes of citrus crops alone .
Overall , the hurricane left at least eight deaths and about $ 10 million ( equivalent to $ million in ) in damage .
METEOROLOGICAL HISTORY Section::::Meteorological history .
In mid - October , a significant drop in atmospheric pressures over the western Caribbean Sea coincided with the development of a trough on October 17 .
Observations suggested that a circulation formed on October 20 , with the Atlantic hurricane database listing a tropical storm beginning at 00:00 UTC , with the system was situated about 95 mi ( 155 km ) southeast of the Archipelago of San Andrés , Providencia and Santa Catalina .
The cyclone initially moved slowly northwestward due to a high pressure system over Bermuda .
Early on October 22 , the storm intensified into a Category 1 hurricane , based on sustained winds of on Great Swan Island .
The hurricane strengthened significantly over the northwestern Caribbean , becoming a Category 2 hurricane at 00:00 UTC on October 23 and a Category 3 hurricane six hours later .
Around 18:00 UTC , the cyclone reached Category 4 intensity and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of .
The latter was observed by the schooner Virginia , while the former was estimated using the southern wind - pressure relationship .
Early on October 24 , the hurricane moved northward across the Yucatán Channel and entered the Gulf of Mexico .
Thereafter , the system gradually curved to the northeast as the high pressure weakened and the storm became under the influence of a southwesterly air current .
At 12:00 UTC on October 25 , the cyclone weakened to a Category 3 hurricane .
About 10 hours later , the hurricane made landfall near Tarpon Springs , Florida , 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) .
The storm further weakened to a Category 1 hurricane over Central Florida early on October 26 , about six hours before emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near New Smyrna Beach .
Reaching the Atlantic with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , the hurricane briefly re - strengthened to reach winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) early on October 27 .
It then moved east - southeastward after the high pressure weakened further .
Late on October 29 , the system accelerated northeastward and weakened to a tropical storm , before being absorbed by a large extratropical cyclone about southeast of Bermuda at 00:00 UTC on October 30 .
About six hours later , the remnants of the hurricane became indistinguishable .
PREPARATIONS Section::::Preparations .
Forecasters at the United States Weather Bureau issued advisories for ships and oceangoing vessels , while posting hurricane warnings for areas in western Florida stretching from Key West to Apalachicola on October 24 and October 25 .
Additionally , storm warnings were issued eastward from mouth of the Mississippi River and along the east coast of Florida .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
In Cuba , heavy rainfall in Pinar
del Río Province caused rivers and creeks to rise .
However , only minimal damage was reported .
The hurricane passed to the west of the Florida Keys as a Category 4 hurricane .
Its large wind field caused tropical storm force winds to the islands , with the highest wind report being 48 mph ( 71 km / h ) in Key West .
Rainfall from the hurricane 's outer bands was intermittent , and storm tides of 5 ft ( 1.5 m ) were reported .
Further north , Captiva and Sanibel islands were completely inundated with water .
In Punta Rassa , the majority of homes were either extensively damaged or washed away .
Most highways leading out of Fort Myers were impassible due to high water .
Damage to railroad tracks resulted in a suspension of service for three days .
On Estero Island , a number of buildings were damaged , including the casinos , cottages , and Crescent Beach resort .
The storm also destroyed the mausoleum of Dr. Cyrus Teed , the founder of Koreshanity .
Damage in Lee County reached about $ 1.5 million .
Along the Myakka River near Boca Grande , the railroad bridge washed away , while the storm also destroyed two vehicular bridges over the Charlotte Harbor Bay .
The streets of Punta Gorda were inundated , where a tide of above normal was recorded .
One death occurred in the city due to drowning .
At Egmont Key , above normal tides forced 75 people to seek shelter in the lighthouse .
The entire island was inundated by water .
The hurricane brought a storm surge of 10–12 ft ( 3–3.5 m ) to Tampa Bay .
The highest rainfall total in Tampa was at 8.53 in ( 23.5 mm ) .
However , the observer noted that winds probably blew water out of the gauge .
The barometric pressure fell to , breaking a previous record set in 1910 .
The hurricane also brought sustained winds of 75 mph ( 119 km / h ) and a storm tide of 10.5 ft ( 3 m ) .
Damage from the wind was generally minor , while most of the impact wrought by the storm was due to abnormally high tides in Tampa and elsewhere in the area .
Much of the city was flooded , with the worst along Bayshore Boulevard , where some of the most expensive properties were located .
At Hyde Park , dwellings were inundated about halfway up the first story , prompting several people to be rescued by boat .
Electrical poles and wires were washed away near the intersection of Bayshore Boulevard and Howard Avenue .
The latter was also left impassible by car .
In the Palmetto Beach neighborhood , much of the section was inundated .
A group of about 40 volunteers rescued a number of women and children .
A total of 50 homes were destroyed by cedar logs used to construct cigar boxes at the Tampa Box Company on 22nd Street .
At Ballast Point , the pavilion and bathhouse were destroyed by the storm .
Nearby , the Tampa Yacht and Country Club suffered severe damage .
Many cars along the waterfront were severely damaged and nearly all flat railroad cars were submerged .
The Malloy Line dock was also left under several feet of water .
A number of waterfront warehouses were also damaged by floodwaters .
After the Tampa Electrical Company power house experienced water damage , the electricity was shutoff .
Additionally , the company 's cable station was flooded under several feet of water .
Winds downed hundreds of trees and sign across roadways and tore - up awnings .
At least 50 awnings were ripped from a bank building on Franklin Street alone .
Falling trees also damaged the post office and the YMCA .
Almost 500 dwellings in the neighborhood of Ybor City were demolished .
Five people were killed in the city , three from people coming into contact with a live wire and the other two from drowning .
Only minor damage occurred in Plant City .
Throughout Hillsborough County , many county roads were impassible due to downed telegraph poles and other debris , especially between Tampa and Plant City .
Tides 5–6 ft ( 1.5–2 m )
above normal and storm surge in St. Petersburg damaged or destroyed all four fishing piers .
Many ships and boats of all sizes capsized or were beached , including the trawler Hypnotist , which ejected the crew of seven into the water , all of whom were rescued .
The St. Petersburg Beach Hotel was destroyed , after employees swam through the lobby for safety .
At the office of the St. Petersburg Times , then located at Fifth Street and First Avenue South , the loss of electricity resulted in staff working overnight with lanterns .
With no power to operate the typesetting machine , the employees connected their linotype machine to a two - cylinder motorcycle to publish the " Motorcycle Extra " .
Two deaths occurred in St. Petersburg , one from a heart attack during preparations for the storm and the other from a man being crushed by a falling roof .
Initially , there were rumors and unconfirmed reports that Pass - a - Grille ( today a neighborhood of St. Pete Beach ) was wiped out and that up to 150 deaths occurred .
Though the town was hit particularly hard , there were no fatalities and damage
was less severe than indicated , reaching about $ 50,000 .
Storm surge was partially diverted to Boca Ciega Bay , but Pass - a - Grille generally suffered severe impact due to of water covering some areas .
The hotel was extensively damaged , while its dancing pavilion was destroyed .
A number of cottages were badly damaged .
The storm destroyed a casino in Gulfport .
The casino in Indian Rocks Beach collapsed after the sand foundation was washed away .
In Largo , nearly all of the buildings at the Pinellas County Fairgrounds were rendered unusable .
Buildings were severely damaged in Clearwater , including the ice and power plants , a theater , and a hotel .
Many residences were also damaged .
Electric and telephone wires were downed , leaving the city without power or telephone service .
Boats were tossed about in the bay .
The city of Oldsmar was devastated by storm surge , with portions of the town being inundated by of water .
Many homes were practically demolished .
Although no loss of human life occurred , many cattle drowned .
In Tarpon Springs , streets were littered with masses of debris .
Sections of the city along the Anclote River were flooded .
Primarily , impact consisted of structures being unroofed , windows shattering , and tree being uprooted .
Throughout the city , electrical and telephone lines were downed , but telephone was partially maintained and electricity was restored quickly .
Two hotels suffered extensive damage due to flooding .
Although the high school was also severely damaged , classrooms remained usable .
The cupola was torn away and the roof was partially damaged , including over the auditorium .
The Odd Fellows Hall was thrown off its foundation and virtually destroyed .
In the business district , most of the buildings leaked , resulting in damage to merchandise .
Crop damage in Pinellas County was extensive , totaling about $ 1 million , which included a loss of 50%-70 % of fruit lost and considerable damage to citrus trees .
The hurricane also brought extensive impact to portions of Pasco County .
In New Port Richey , a few churches suffered severe damage or were destroyed .
Nearly all walls collapsed and many windows were shattered at the school house .
Only one shop remained standing at a plaza with several industrial stores .
The vast majority of homes in the city received some degree of damage .
Local crops experienced extensive impact , with a local farm losing about 800 boxes worth of fruit .
Similar effects occurred in Port Richey .
All stores received water damage , while two homes were destroyed and several others were inflicted with varying degrees of impact .
In Dade City , Mt. Zion Baptist Church was demolished , which was never rebuilt .
Only the church cemetery remains .
Another church , which opened early in the year , was nearly demolished by falling trees .
A turpentine plant was damaged , including the loss of about one - third of the lumber stored in the building .
The Sunnybrook Tobacco Company suffered significant impact , with nine large barns destroyed and about of trees toppled .
A number of other companies sustained damage , including the Dade City Packing Company and the Dade City Ice , Light and Power Company .
Damage to the business reached $ 100,000 .
Several homes were damaged .
Electrical , telegraph , and telephone wires were downed throughout the city .
During the storm , electricity was maintained in the downtown section , while residential areas were left without power for two days .
In San Antonio and Trilby , a number of buildings were moved off their foundations .
The old city hall in Zephyrhills was moved about .
At a hotel , the building lost a portion of its roof and several windows were broken .
In addition , the hurricane virtually destroyed much of Passage Key , part of which was later rebuilt .
In Polk County , the storm left light property damage in Lakeland , reaching under $ 5,000 , which included the school building being deroofed .
Damage to crops was mostly limited to grapefruit and oranges , with losses estimated to have been less than 10 % .
In the rural communities outside Lakeland , several small building suffered damage .
This was considered the worst tropical cyclone in the area since 1897 .
Lake County experienced sustained winds of and of rain in some areas .
Much of the impact was confined to large trees being uprooted and ornamental vines suffering damage .
A number of trees fell on electrical wires , causing power outages and disruptions to telephone service .
Additionally , it is possible that a tornado touched down , based on some pine trees being " splintered from top to bottom and curled up like molasses candy .
" Damage to citrus crops was light , with losses conservatively estimated at less than 5 % .
Strong winds in Orange County left the entire city of Orlando without electricity , disrupting commerce .
Citrus crops suffered no more than 5 % in losses in the county .
In St. Augustine , wind downed wires , some of which caused small fires in the business district .
A steamship capsized between Jacksonville and Miami and there were reports of damage to several other small boats offshore .
Agricultural damage from the hurricane was high , reaching over $ 2 million , with more than $ 1 million incurred to crops and the remainder to fertilizer and other materials .
Citrus crops were especially hard hit , with 800,000 to 1,000,000 boxes of fruit lost .
Salt water , caused by coastal flooding , prevented cultivation of soil in some areas , though rainfall eventually washed away the salt .
In all , the hurricane left at least eight people dead and about $ 10 million in damage .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
After receiving reports of mass casualties and destruction at Pass - a - Grille , the American Red Cross stocked a United States Navy subchaser with pine caskets and relief supplies , but found no bodies and only a fraction of the reported damage .
Because of fears that the hurricane might hinder the Florida land boom of the 1920s , rebuilding and cleanup of the area commenced quickly and the land boom in the Tampa Bay region and in southern Florida continued .
Local officials , businessmen , realtors , and later the press soon attempted to cover up or downplay the damage , which threatened to distort Tampa 's advertised image as the " Year Round City " .
On October 28 , a writer for The Tampa Tribune stated , " Everyone is accepting the storm as an incident and all are going to work to rebuild the devastated areas , with the firm conviction that there will not be another storm of such severity during the life of anyone now living . "
One of the destroyed buildings at the Ballist Point Pavilion was soon rebuilt after the storm .
However , the building was destroyed again by fire in 1922 .
In 1925 , a new pavilion was built .
On Captiva Island , the Wayside Chapel suffered extensive damage , but was repaired and reopened as Captiva School and Chapel - by - the - Sea , which has been listed as a National Historic Place since 2013 .
Many farmers on the island sold their land for a significantly reduced price to Clarence B. Chadwick , who would transform more than of property into the South Seas Island Resort .
The hurricane was the first major hurricane to strike the Tampa Bay region since a hurricane in 1848 and the most recent to date .
Additionally , since this storm , only a hurricane in 1946 has made landfall in the area .
In the past few decades especially , local officials have been concerned about a major hurricane impacting the area due to population increases , older building codes , storm surge projections , and complacency among some residents .
The combined population of Citrus , Hernando , Hillsborough , Pasco , and Pinellas counties has increased from about 135,000 people in 1921 to approximately 2.7 million by 2011 .
In Pasco County , more than half of the homes were constructed prior to the enactment of stronger building codes in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew .
A Sea , Lake , and Overland Surge from Hurricanes ( SLOSH ) computer model from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) indicates that portions of Downtown Tampa would be flooded with over of water in the event of a Category 4 hurricane , while St. Petersburg would be surrounded by water .
CoreLogic , an international property information firm , estimated in 2016 that nearly 455,000 homes were at risk of being damaged by storm surge , with costs of property damage and repairs reaching approximately $ 80.6 billion ( 2016 USD ) .
Another property firm , Karen Clark & Co. , estimated in 2015 that storm surge could inflict as much as $ 175 billion ( 2015 USD ) in damage in a worst - case scenario .
SEE ALSO
* List of Florida hurricanes ( 1900–49 )
* Hurricane Charley * Hurricane Wilma NOTES REFERENCES Section::::References .
General
Specific
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Tampa Bay Hurricane of 1921 best track data * Hurricane Effects in Pasco County and Tarpon Springs