RACHEL DAWES Rachel Dawes is a fictional character who first appeared in Christopher Nolan 's 2005 feature film Batman Begins .
She was portrayed in that film by Katie Holmes , with Emma Lockhart as a younger version of the character in early scenes .
Holmes also voiced the character in the video game adaptation .
Maggie Gyllenhaal replaced Holmes in the 2008 sequel The Dark Knight after Holmes chose not to reprise the role .
Gyllenhaal also appeared as Dawes on the viral marketing website I Believe in Harvey Dent , giving Harvey Dent her endorsement in the District Attorney election .
In the Dark Knight Trilogy , Rachel is Bruce Wayne 's childhood sweetheart and one of the few people who truly knows him .
The conflict between Bruce 's love for her and his secret life as Batman is one of the main themes of the first two films in the trilogy , while her death in The Dark Knight in part motivates his actions in the third and final film , The Dark Knight Rises .
FICTIONAL BIOGRAPHY BATMAN BEGINS Section::::Fictional biography .
Section::::Batman Begins .
Rachel is Bruce Wayne 's closest childhood friend .
Rachel 's mother worked as a domestic servant at Wayne Manor , and the two would often play together on the grounds .
After Bruce 's parents are murdered by Joe Chill ( Richard Brake ) , Rachel 's mother seeks other employment and leaves Wayne Manor with Rachel .
Rachel enrolls in law school and gets an internship at the Gotham City District Attorney 's office during her first year .
After Chill is murdered for testifying against Mafia boss Carmine Falcone ( Tom Wilkinson ) , Bruce reveals to Rachel that he intended to murder Chill himself , and is angry that he was deprived of revenge .
Rachel is horrified and tells Bruce that his late parents would be ashamed of him .
She also takes Bruce down to the slums and shows him that Falcone 's criminal empire has worsened the poverty created by Gotham City 's economic depression , and states that every day more people just like Chill turn to crime out of desperation .
Soon afterward , Bruce leaves the United States and Rachel continues her studies in law school .
Years later , she becomes an Assistant District Attorney .
Rachel dedicates her life and career to eliminating crime in Gotham , in the process making enemies of Falcone and later Dr. Jonathan Crane ( Cillian Murphy ) , Arkham Asylum 's corrupt chief psychiatrist .
When Bruce returns to Gotham , Rachel is surprised that he did not contact her , and later feels disappointed in him , taking his playboy façade at face value .
Around the same time , a costumed vigilante calling himself Batman appears in Gotham , and saves Rachel from Falcone 's assassins .
Rachel is intrigued by the masked crime - fighter , unaware that he is her old friend Bruce .
After her boss is murdered by thugs working for Crane , Rachel takes over his job until a replacement can be found .
Shortly afterward , Falcone has a psychotic break in police custody , and Rachel believes he is faking it to avoid trial , unaware that Crane drugged him with his fear toxin .
When she goes to Arkham to evaluate the situation , Crane drugs her with fear toxin as well .
Batman rescues her again , administers an antidote and tells her that Crane is working with the League of Shadows , a terrorist organization led by Ra 's al Ghul ( Liam Neeson ) .
He gives her instructions for a plan to save the city from the League 's attack .
He then sedates her and has his butler , Alfred Pennyworth ( Michael Caine ) , take her home .
She wakes up in her bed and delivers samples of an anti - toxin to Gotham City Police Department sergeant James Gordon ( Gary Oldman ) .
The League starts a riot in the Narrows , one of Gotham City 's slums , and Rachel is trapped .
Crane , who has now assumed the criminal alter ego of " The Scarecrow " , attacks her again .
She defends herself and a boy caught in the riot by firing a taser at Crane 's face , driving him away .
Soon , the city is overrun by Arkham 's inmates , whom the League has released , and Rachel and the boy are surrounded by lunatics led by Falcone 's henchman , Victor Zsasz ( Tim Booth ) .
Batman saves them at the last minute and gives Rachel a hint as to his secret identity .
Towards the end of the film , Rachel visits the remains of Wayne Manor , finding Bruce and Alfred sorting through the wreckage .
She and Bruce share a kiss , but she tells him that they can not be together until Gotham no longer needs Batman .
At the end of the movie 's novelization , she is named interim District Attorney .
THE DARK KNIGHT Section::::The Dark Knight .
By the start of the second film , Rachel is in a relationship with newly selected District Attorney Harvey Dent ( Aaron Eckhart ) , creating a conflict between him , herself , and Bruce Wayne .
Dent soon asks Rachel to marry him , but she does not have a clear answer , being torn between her love for both men .
At one point , the Joker ( Heath Ledger ) attacks Rachel at Dent 's fundraiser , holding her at knifepoint .
Batman arrives and fights off the men , but the Joker grabs Rachel and throws her from the skyscraper window .
Batman jumps out the window after her , breaking their fall on a car below .
Rachel is next seen at the funeral of police commissioner Gillian Loeb ( Colin MacFarlane ) , who was murdered by the Joker .
At the funeral , the Joker attempts to assassinate Mayor Anthony Garcia ( Nestor Carbonell ) , and leaves behind evidence indicating that Rachel will be next .
Rachel takes shelter in Bruce 's penthouse at Dent 's insistence .
There she and Bruce briefly rekindle their romance .
He admits that he desires to turn himself in as Batman and hopes they could eventually be together , which Rachel says can not happen if he goes to prison .
Dent holds a press conference and claims to be Batman .
Rachel is disgusted that Bruce would let Dent take the fall for him , and gives Alfred a letter to be delivered to Bruce " when the time is right .
" She promptly leaves the penthouse .
After Batman and Gordon capture the Joker , Rachel and Dent are kidnapped by police officers on mob boss
Sal Maroni 's ( Eric Roberts ) payroll , who are working under the Joker 's orders .
Batman interrogates the Joker and learns that the lives of both Dent and Rachel are at stake .
The Joker tells Batman that he must choose which one of them to save and gives him both locations .
However , the Joker has switched the addresses , with the intention of orchestrating Dent 's downfall .
Batman speeds off , believing that he is traveling to Rachel 's destination .
Both Rachel and Dent are tied up in rooms surrounded with gasoline drums and remote - controlled explosives , with phones attached so they can talk to each other .
Rachel tells Dent that she wants to marry him .
Batman arrives at Dent 's location in time to save him , but Gordon arrives at the other too late , and Rachel is killed in the explosion .
The loss of Rachel , in addition to his own disfigurement , drives Dent insane and he becomes the murderous vigilante Two - Face , seeking revenge on those he holds responsible for Rachel 's death .
Upon her death , Alfred reads Rachel 's note ( which she deliberately left unsealed ) in which she reveals that she intends to marry Dent .
She explains that while Gotham may come to no longer need Batman , she now feels that the day when Bruce no longer does will never come .
She urges Bruce not to give up faith in other people , even if she has disappointed him .
When Bruce relates to Alfred that his only solace is the knowledge that she would have waited for him , Alfred decides to burn the note , sparing Bruce the pain of the truth .
THE DARK KNIGHT RISES Section::::The Dark Knight Rises .
Rachel does not appear in The Dark Knight Rises ( as she is already dead ) , but is mentioned several times .
Additionally , a picture of her appears in Wayne Manor , in Gyllenhaal 's likeness .
Bruce , having given up the mantle of Batman , is portrayed as still mourning Rachel eight years after her death , rarely leaving Wayne Manor and failing to move on and find a normal life that Rachel once promised him .
When Bane ( Tom Hardy ) attacks Gotham City , Bruce decides to become Batman once more to oppose him .
In an attempt to stop him , Alfred finally confesses to Bruce that Rachel chose Dent and that he burned the letter in order to spare Bruce the pain .
This revelation puts a severe strain on Bruce 's relationship with Alfred , who then leaves Wayne Manor when Bruce decides to continue as Batman .
Throughout the film , Bruce keeps a picture of Rachel .
By the end of the film , however , he is in a relationship with Selina Kyle ( Anne Hathaway ) , and has passed on his legacy to Detective John Blake ( Joseph Gordon Levitt ) so he can finally get on with his life .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Katie Holmes was to reprise as Rachel in The Dark Knight ; she turned it down and starred in Mad Money instead .
Before Maggie Gyllenhaal was cast , Emily Blunt , Isla Fisher , Sarah Michelle Gellar , and Rachel McAdams were considered to replace Holmes as Rachel .
Gyllenhaal has acknowledged that Rachel is a damsel in distress to an extent , but says Nolan sought ways to empower the character , so " Rachel 's really clear about what 's important to her and unwilling to compromise her morals , which made a nice change " from the many conflicted characters whom she has previously portrayed .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* McClintock , Pamela . "
Gyllenhaal joining Batman sequel " ( Archive ) .
Variety .
March 8 , 2007 .
* Ayala , Nancy . "
' Dark Knight ' Gets New Leading Lady "
( Archive ) .
ABC News .
July 18 , 2008 .
* Davis , Erik .
" It 's Official : Maggie Gyllenhaal Replaces Katie Holmes in ' The Dark Knight ' " ( Archive ) .
Moviefone .
March 8 , 2007 .