DOLAN V. UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE
Dolan v. United States Postal Service , 546 U.S. 481 ( 2006 ) , was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States , involving the extent to which the United States Postal Service has sovereign immunity from lawsuits brought by private individuals under the Federal Tort Claims Act .
The Court ruled that an exception to the FTCA that barred liability for the " negligent transmission of mail " did not apply to a claim for injuries caused when someone tripped over mail left by a USPS employee .
Instead , the exception only applied to damage caused to the mail itself or that resulted from its loss or delay .
BACKGROUND OF THE CASE Section::::Background of the case .
On August 25 , 2001 , Barbara Dolan fell over letters , packages and periodicals placed on her porch by an employee of the United States Postal Service , suffering serious injury .
Dolan initially filed an administrative claim with the Postal Service , which was denied on April 18 , 2002 .
On October 15 , 2002 , Dolan filed a complaint against the United States and the USPS in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania .
As " an independent establishment of the executive branch of the Government of the United States , " the United States Postal Service enjoys federal sovereign immunity absent a waiver .
Dolan accordingly brought her claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act , which waives the government 's sovereign immunity for certain claims arising from the negligence of federal employees committed in the course of their employment .
On March 19 , 2003 , the district court granted the government 's motion to dismiss , holding that Dolan 's claim was barred by the postal exception to the FTCA waiver of immunity , which applied to " any claim arising out of the loss , miscarriage , or negligent transmission of letters or postal matter .
" Dolan appealed , and the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed the dismissal .
THE COURT 'S DECISION Section::::The court 's decision .
The Supreme Court reversed the Third Circuit , ruling 7 - 1 that the postal exception under the FTCA did not include all negligence that occurred in the course of mail delivery .
Instead , context and precedent required the exception to be limited to negligence that caused mail to be lost or to arrive late , in damaged condition , or at the wrong address .
Dolan 's suit was accordingly not covered by the exception and could proceed .
The majority opinion was delivered by Justice Anthony Kennedy .
Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent , arguing that the majority ignored the plain language of the statute .
KENNEDY 'S
MAJORITY OPINION Section::::Kennedy 's majority opinion .
The Court first noted that , if considered in isolation , the phrase " negligent transmission " in the postal exception could include a wide range of negligent acts committed in the course of delivering mail , including creating hazards of the kind for which Dolan sued .
However , the complete statutory context and purpose behind a provision informs whether a word extends " to the outer limits of its definitional possibilities .
" The Court observed that the words " negligent transmission " follow the terms , " loss " and " miscarriage , so as to limit the reach of " transmission . "
Since both those terms refer to the failure to deliver mail in a timely manner to the right address , the Court considered it unlikely that " negligent transmission " could include injuries such as Dolan 's that happened to be caused by postal employees but involved neither the failure to transmit mail nor damage to its contents .
The Court found support for its interpretation in Kosak v. United States , , a case involving a claim against the United States Customs Service .
The Court in Kosak discussed the postal exception to the FTCA to contrast it from the more general Customs Service exception , noting that one of the principal purposes behind the FTCA was to waive the government 's immunity from liability for car accidents caused by postal employees .
The postal service exception was therefore drafted narrowly , such that it did not cover all negligence in the course of mail delivery , because postal trucks could be delivering ( and therefore " transmitting " ) mail when they collide with other vehicles .
The Court could find no basis in the text of the statute for distinguishing injuries such as Dolan 's that were " caused by the mail itself " from those caused by the negligent driving of postal vehicles .
" In both cases the postal employee acts negligently while transmitting mail . "
The Court also did not believe that the general rule applied that the government 's waiver of immunity should be strictly interpreted in its favor .
The Court considered this rule " unhelpful " in the FTCA context , because " unduly generous interpretations of the exceptions " would defeat the statute 's central and sweeping purpose of waiving the government 's immunity .
THOMAS 'S
DISSENT
Section::::Thomas 's dissent .
Justice Thomas argued that the Court had failed to give the text of the postal exception its ordinary meaning .
The definitions of " transmission"—"act , operation , or process , of transmitting"—and " transmit"—"to send or transfer from one person or place to another ; to forward by rail , post , wire , etc . , . . .
to cause . . .
to pass or be conveyed"—would include the conduct for which Dolan sued .
Thomas did not believe there was any reason to conclude that Congress was unaware of these ordinary definitions when it enacted the FTCA and the postal exception in 1946 , nor was there any contextual indication that a meaning other than the ordinary sense was intended .
Thomas considered that the discussion in Kosak at most established that the postal exception did not apply to auto accidents ; that decision accordingly said nothing about " slip and fall " claims .
Thomas furthermore believed that the Court in Kosak considered discrete acts determinative of the scope of Postal Service liability , rather than the consequences of those acts .
Kosak therefore could not support for the majority 's limitation , which was based on the consequence of the negligence — injury to the mail itself as opposed to injury caused by tripping over the mail .
Thomas further argued that even if the postal exception was ambiguous , any such ambiguity as to the scope of the Government 's waiver of immunity should be resolved in its favor .
Thomas believed the majority erred in failing to apply this rule just because it was construing an exception to waiver rather than waiver itself .
SEE ALSO
* List of United States Supreme Court cases , volume 546 * List of United States Supreme Court cases NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS