1979 NBA FINALS
The 1979 NBA World Championship Series was the championship series played at the conclusion of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) 's 1978–79 season .
The Western Conference champion Seattle SuperSonics played the Eastern Conference champion Washington Bullets , with the Bullets holding home - court advantage , due to a better regular season record .
The SuperSonics defeated the Bullets 4 games to 1 .
The series was a rematch of the 1978 NBA Finals , which the Washington Bullets had won 4–3 .
Dennis Johnson of the SuperSonics was named as the NBA Finals MVP , while Gus Williams of the SuperSonics was the top scorer , averaging 28.6 points per game .
This was Seattle 's second men 's professional sports championship , following the Seattle Metropolitans ' Stanley Cup victory in the 1917 Stanley Cup Finals .
Coincidentally , this series ( along with the 1978 NBA Finals ) was informally known as the George Washington series , because both teams were playing in places named after the first President of the United States ( the SuperSonics represented Seattle , the most populous city in the state of Washington , and the Bullets represented Washington , D.C. , albeit playing in nearby Landover , Maryland ) .
This is the most recent time that a Western Conference team based outside of Texas or California has won an NBA title , and the last of only two occasions alongside the 1976–77 Portland Trail Blazers when a team from the present - day Northwest Division has won the league title , which is by 26 years the longest league championship drought for any division of the four major North American sports leagues .
Since then , the following Western teams have gone on to win an NBA title : the Los Angeles Lakers ( ten times ) , the San Antonio Spurs ( five times ) , the Golden State Warriors ( three times ) , the Houston Rockets ( twice ) , and the Dallas Mavericks ( once ) .
The remaining eighteen titles since 1980 have been won by Eastern Conference teams .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
This was a rematch of the 1978 NBA Finals , which the Bullets won 4–3 .
Seattle made a key offseason trade sending Marvin Webster to the New York Knicks for Lonnie Shelton .
Other than that , both teams ' rosters stayed virtually intact .
Unlike the previous year , both teams finished 1 - 2 in the NBA , with the Bullets topping the league at 54 wins ; the Sonics with 52 wins .
In the playoffs , Seattle defeated the Los Angeles Lakers 4–1 and the Phoenix Suns 4–3 , while Washington had a much tougher road , eliminating the Atlanta Hawks in an unexpectedly tough seven - game series and coming back from a 3 - 1 deficit to eliminate the San Antonio Spurs in seven .
Both earned a first - round bye .
ROAD TO THE FINALS Seattle SuperSonics
( Western ConferenceWashington Bullets ( Eastern Conference champion ) align = right
1st seed in the West , 2nd best league record !
colspan=2Regular season 1st seed in the East , best league record align =
rightEarned first - round bye !
colspan=2First
Round Earned first - round bye align = rightDefeated the ( 5 ) Los Angeles Lakers , 4–1 !
colspan=2Conference
Semifinals Defeated the ( 5 ) Atlanta Hawks , 4–3 align =
rightDefeated the ( 3 ) Phoenix Suns , 4–3 !
colspan=2Conference
Finals Defeated the ( 2 ) San Antonio Spurs , 4–3 REGULAR SEASON SERIES Section::::Regular season series .
Both teams split the four - game series in the regular season : SERIES SUMMARY Section::::Series summary . !
Game ! !
Date ! !
Home team ! !
Result ! !
Road team GAME 1 Section::::Game 1 .
The Bullets controlled the game and led by 18 in the fourth , but Seattle mounted a furious comeback to tie it at 97 .
Larry Wright , who had 26 points off the bench , drove to the basket as time ran down and had his shot blocked by Dennis Johnson , but the referees called a foul on Johnson .
Wright went to the line with one second left and hit two of three foul shots ( NBA rules at the time awarded an extra free throw attempt when a team was in the penalty foul situation ) to win the game .
GAME 2 Section::::Game 2 .
Elvin Hayes had 11 points in the first quarter , but only nine the rest of the way as Seattle turned its defense up a notch , holding the Bullets to 30 points in the second half .
Outside of the two metropolitan areas of the competing teams , as well as Baltimore and Portland , the game was shown on tape delay beginning at 11:35 Eastern and Pacific/10:35 p.m. Central and Mountain .
This was the first of six championship series games shown by CBS on tape delay over a three - season span .
Four of the six games in the championship series two years later were shown on tape delay outside of the markets of the competing clubs .
GAME 3 Section::::Game 3 .
Seattle dominated this game , which was n't as close as the final margin indicated .
Gus Williams scored 31 points , Jack Sikma had 21 and 17 rebounds , and Dennis Johnson had a fine all - around game with 17 points , 9 rebounds , and two blocked shots .
GAME 4 Section::::Game 4 .
The Sonics won a close one in OT 114–112 , staving off a late Bullets comeback behind 36 points by Gus Williams and 32 by Dennis Johnson .
Williams and Johnson dominated the Bullets ' guards all series , as they were plagued by poor shooting .
Johnson also had four blocks in the game , the last on Kevin Grevey with 4 seconds left to ensure the Seattle victory .
GAME 5 Section::::Game 5 .
Back home , Elvin Hayes had a hot first half , scoring 20 , but injuries to starting guards Tom Henderson , Kevin Grevey and prolonged poor shooting by their replacements took their toll .
Hayes had only nine points in the second half as Seattle closed out the series .
PLAYER STATISTICS
Seattle SuperSonics Washington Bullets AFTERMATH
Section::::Aftermath .
Neither team made it back to the Finals the following season .
The Bullets ( 39–43 ) were eliminated in the first round by the Philadelphia 76ers , while the SuperSonics ( 56–26 ) lost to the Los Angeles Lakers in the Conference Finals .
Both the 76ers and Lakers faced off in the 1980 NBA Finals , a 4–2 Lakers win .
Dick Motta , the Bullets coach , departed to take over the expansion Dallas Mavericks in the 1980–81 NBA season , while the SuperSonics traded 1979 Finals MVP Dennis Johnson for Paul Westphal , which hastened their downfall .
Wes Unseld retired after the season , and Elvin Hayes concluded his final three NBA seasons with the team he started with , the Rockets .
Lenny Wilkens would not make the finals again for the remainder of his coaching career ; the closest he would advance was in the 1992 conference finals with the Cleveland Cavaliers .
As of the 2017–18 NBA season this remains the last Finals appearance , and indeed the last Conference Finals appearance , for the Bullets / Wizards franchise .
The SuperSonics would not return until 1996 .
That would be their last Finals appearance in Seattle , since they relocated to Oklahoma City in 2008 and were renamed as the Oklahoma City Thunder .
The Thunder played in the 2012 NBA Finals , where they lost to the Miami Heat in 5 games .
The city of Seattle did not win another men 's professional sports championship until the National Football League 's Seahawks defeated the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XLVIII on 2 February 2014 .
The next time Seattle played Washington for a championship was in the 2018 WNBA Finals , when the Seattle Storm swept the Washington Mystics in 3 games to win their third overall championship .
Coincidentally , as of the Seattle Mariners and Washington Nationals are the only two Major League Baseball franchises that have never played in a World Series .
TEAM ROSTERS
SEATTLE
SUPERSONICS WASHINGTON BULLETS SEE
ALSO
* 1979 NBA Playoffs
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* 1979 NBA Playoffs * NBA.com Season Review : 1978 - 79