UNITED STATES AIR FORCE IN THAILAND
The United States Air Force ( USAF ) deployed combat aircraft to Thailand from 1961 to 1975 during the Vietnam War .
Today , USAF units train annually with other Asian Air Forces in Thailand .
Royal Thai Air Force Bases are an important element in the Pentagon 's " forward positioning " strategy .
VIETNAM WAR Section::::Vietnam War .
During the Vietnam War , about 80 % of all USAF air strikes over North Vietnam originated from air bases in Thailand .
At its peak in 1969 more airmen were serving in Thailand than were serving in South Vietnam .
Under Thailand 's " gentleman 's agreement " with the U.S. , the bases were considered Royal Thai Air Force bases and were commanded by Thai officers .
Thai air police controlled access to the bases ; U.S. air police who helped them did carry weapons .
Command of the American units , however , remained with U.S. wing commanders and their Seventh Air Force / Thirteenth Air Force headquarters .
At Udorn , just 40 minutes by air from Hanoi supersonic , unarmed RF-101 and RF-4C photo - reconnaissance jets launched and flew missions over target areas immediately before and after a raid to photograph the damage so assessments of attacks could be made .
Udorn also hosted three squadrons of F-4C / D & E Phantoms which flew escort , sweep , and Air Combat Patrol missions to protect other U.S. strike aircraft .
From Korat , Takhli and Ubon came the Republic F-105 Thunderchiefs and F-4C and F-4D Phantoms that actually delivered the bombs and also General Dynamics F-111s with terrain - following radar from Takhli .
( During the deployment of the F-111s three crashed soon after arriving at Takhli and the F-111 fleet was grounded to investigate the problem ) .
From U - Tapao airfield on the Gulf of Siam , the largest airfield in Southeast Asia , came the Boeing B-52s and the four - engine Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker refuellers that took to the air and refueled the aircraft just before and after they hit North Vietnam .
From Takhli flew EB-66 electronic - warfare jets with special equipment that can detect the " fingerprints " of enemy radar in the sky and then send out a signal that fouls up the screen below .
Flying out of Takhli , F-105s armed with radar - guided Shrike missiles had the job of knocking out SAM sites .
Finally , from Nakhon Phanom came every pilot 's best friend : the air - rescue - and - recovery team .
Flying ungainly looking , green and brown HH43 and CH-3 helicopters , or " Jolly Green Giants , " R. & .
R. pilots had even gone into Hanoi 's outskirts to rescue downed fliers .
These are the major bases the USAF operated from in Thailand :
* Don Muang Royal Thai Air Force Base , 1961–1970
* Korat Royal Thai Air Force Base , 1962–1975 Major USAF Unit :
553rd Reconnaissance Wing , 1967 - 1971
* Nakhon Phanom Royal Thai Navy Base , 1962–1976 * Takhli Royal Thai Air Force Base , 1961–1971 ; 1972–1974 * U - Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield , 1965–1976
* Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base , 1965–1974 * Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base , 1964–1976
The circumstances surrounding the creation of these bases and the American deployment is a long and complex tale .
Its origins lie in the French withdrawal from Indochina as a result of the 1954 Geneva Agreement , nationalism and the Cold War .
LAO CIVIL WAR Section::::Lao Civil War .
Throughout the 1950s , Laos had been embroiled in civil war , and by the early 1960s , the conflict was threatening to spread to Thailand .
Major fighting broke out in December 1960 and spread far enough to cause casualties among Thai civilians living along the Mekong River .
The United States Embassy in Vientiane was burned to the ground and fighting raged in and around the city .
Western governments recognized different leaders , with military aid being provided to the communist Pathet Lao forces by the Soviet Union .
In December , the U.S. air attaché photographed a Soviet Il-14 cargo plane transporting supplies to communist forces near Van Vieng .
On 23 December , communist forces fired on an American VC-47 passenger transport .
The plane , which was carrying the air attaché , was struck by .50 caliber rounds but was able to land safely .
It was the first American aircraft in Southeast Asia to be fired upon .
Thailand was a constitutional monarchy and traditionally maintained a pro - western stance in foreign affairs .
The fighting in Laos was of great concern to the Thai government .
The government feared that should Laos would fall to the communists , the " Domino Theory " would place the entire region , including Thailand , in jeopardy .
Northeast Thailand housed a community of Vietnamese mixed with Chinese .
Some of the Vietnamese wanted to move to communist North Vietnam , but they were not necessarily communist sympathizers .
Indeed , attempts by North Vietnamese communists to organize the Vietnamese in Thailand were dealt with strongly by the Thai government .
The Royal Thai Government began flying reconnaissance missions over Laos on 19 December 1960 with some RT-33 photo jets .
United States Pacific Command ( CINCPAC ) ordered American technicians to assist the Royal Thai Air Force in processing and analyzing the film .
On 19 January 1961 , PACAF had identified 25 airfields , 49 communications routes , and 19 urban targets .
A few weeks later , HQ USAF authorized the release of these photographs to the governments of Laos and Thailand .
On 23 March 1961 Pathet Lao anti - aircraft artillery opened fire on an American C-47 as it flew over the eastern portion of the Plaines des Jarres , shooting the plane down .
It was one of the first USAF aircraft shot down over Indochina , and marked the beginning of combat action by the USAF from bases in Thailand .
ORIGINS OF U.S. MILITARY PRESENCE IN THAILAND Section::::Origins of U.S. military presence in Thailand .
The official American military presence in Thailand started in April 1961 when an advance party of the USAF 6010th
Tactical ( TAC ) Group arrived at Don Muang at the request of the Royal Thai government to establish an aircraft warning system .
On April 20 , 1961 a detachment of six F100 Super Sabres from the 510TFS/405TFW based at Clark AB , Philippines deployed to Don Muang Airport as part of Operation Bell Tone .
Immediately upon arrival , two of these planes were loaded with a full load ( 800 rnds ) of 20 mm ammunition and 4 x GAR-8s ( AIM-9Bs ) and placed on 5 minute alert .
Also in March 1962 , a small detachment of F-102 " Delta Daggers " from the 509th Fighter - Interceptor Squadron , based at Clark AB , Philippines were sent to Don Muang under " Operation Bell Tone " .
Their mission was to bolster the defense capabilities of the Royal Thai Air Force .
For the next several years , a minimum of four F-102 interceptors were kept on alert at Don Muang .
Then in November 1961 , four RF-101C reconnaissance aircraft of the 45th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron stationed at Misawa AB , Japan and their photo lab arrived at Don Muang .
The RF-101s were sent to assist Royal Thai AF RT-33 aircraft in performing aerial recon flights over Laos .
The RF-101s stayed until May 1962 , then returned for a second deployment during November and December 1962 .
These small detachments received logistical support from their home bases outside of Southeast Asia .
Circumstances in the region , however , were leading to drastic changes in the US position .
On 29 April 1961 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff instructed CINCPAC to move 5,000 troops and air elements to both Udon Air Base and Da Nang Air Base .
It was believed these forces were going to take action in Laos .
Also , in South Vietnam , the numbers of Communist insurgents continued to increase .
More American military advisers were being dispatched to the country , but their reports indicted a need for stronger measures to be taken .
In addition , one of U.S. President John F. Kennedy 's advisers indicated the need for deterring guerrilla action in northeast Thailand was more pressing than affairs in Vietnam , and Thailand should take precedence .
Vice - President Lyndon B. Johnson recommended that Thailand be given US$ 50 million in military aid .
Two milestones occurred early in 1962 .
The " Military Assistance Group in South Vietnam " was renamed U.S. Military Assistance Command , Vietnam ( MACV ) on 6 February .
The other being a joint communication from Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Koman on 6 March in which the United States " firm intention ... to aid Thailand , its ally and historic friend in resisting communist aggression and subversion " .
As a result , the " Military Assistance Command , Thailand ( MACT ) " was set up on 15 May 1962 at Don Muang .
On 23 July 1962 fourteen nations signed the Geneva Accords of 1962 which contained the following provisions : *
Laos was to become politically neutral and not enter into any military alliance .
*
Laos would not allow foreign military forces to use or occupy its territory .
*
Laos would not recognize any military alliance or coalition , such as SEATO .
*
Laos would not allow any foreign interference in its internal affairs .
*
All foreign troops , paramilitary forces and foreign military personnel would be removed from Laos in the " shortest possible time " .
The treaty was signed the Soviet Union , South Vietnam , China , North Vietnam and the United States , among others .
But North Vietnam continued moving heavy weapons into Laos to support the communist rebel Pathet Lao .
Of the 10,000 North Vietnamese troops in Laos at the time of the agreement , 6,000 remained in the country in violation of the accords .
In spite of the agreement , fighting continued in Laos , with North Vietnamese troops hidden in Pathet Lao - held areas .
Near the end of August a USAF RF-101 reconnaissance aircraft was fired on by radar - guided Anti - aircraft warfare ( AAA ) batteries while flying above the cloud cover .
Both sides violated the Geneva Accords .
GULF OF TONKIN INCIDENT Section::::Gulf of Tonkin Incident .
On 2 August 1964 , the Gulf of Tonkin Incident occurred .
An alleged attack by North Vietnamese torpedo boats on American destroyer , USS Maddox
DD-731 ] .
The misinterpreted incident took place in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam .
President Johnson used the flawed information about the incident to order additional forces to the area to support the government of South Vietnam.(https://m.usni.org / magazines / navalhistory/2008 - 02 / truth - about - tonkinAdditional )
USAF forces were dispatched to Thailand .
This marked the beginning of large scale United States military operations in Southeast Asia .
THE " SECRET WAR "
IN LAOS Section::::The " Secret War " in Laos .
Thailand was a member of SEATO .
While supposedly maintaining an air of neutrality , it was deeply concerned about the fighting in neighboring Indochina .
Over the centuries , Thai governments had managed to avoid foreign domination with a policy of accommodation with the predominant power in Asia at the time .
By 1965 , the increasing amount of American aircraft deployments to Thailand was jeopardizing policy .
The Royal Thai government 's desire to avoid publicity led to the formation of a policy to downplay the United States ' presence and not draw attention to its tactical air units in Thailand .
This is why so little information about the USAF in Thailand was made public during the Vietnam War .
Much of that information remains unavailable , being considered sensitive to the Thai government .
The Thai government prohibited photographing of American personnel and military aircraft , with the exception of official archive photography taken for documentation and official release .
American news agencies , such as United Press International and Associated Press , were prohibited from filing stories about American military activities .
Attacks on US bases and personnel were suppressed and any personnel wounded during military action in Thailand did not receive recognition of or awards for their wounds .
Military information officers were instructed that no mention was to be made of operations from Thai facilities , no names of bases were to be mentioned and no mention of operational activities were to be released .
The report " Snakes in the Eagles Nest " gives a partial account of combat operations in Thailand during the Vietnam War .
USAF combat sorties from Thailand flown into both North Vietnam and South Vietnam grew as the Vietnam War expanded in the 1960s .
In addition , combat missions were flown aiding friendly forces in Laos and , starting in 1970 , Cambodia were also flown .
The missions flown over Laos are today referred to as the Secret War .
Although the existence of the so - called " Secret War " was sometimes reported in the U.S. , details were largely unavailable due to official government denials that the war even existed .
The denials were seen as necessary considering that the US had signed agreements specifying the neutrality of Laos .
US involvement in Laos was considered necessary because North Vietnam had effectively conquered a large part of the country and was equally lying in public about its role in Laos .
Despite these denials , however , the Secret War was actually the largest U.S. covert operation prior to the Afghan - Soviet War , with areas of Laos controlled by North Vietnam subjected to three million tons of bombing , representing the heaviest U.S.-led bombing campaign since World War II .
USAF WITHDRAWAL FROM THAILAND
Section::::USAF withdrawal from Thailand .
The United States ended its involvement in Southeast Asia by treaty and disengagement rather than by military victory .
After the fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975 , relations between Washington and Bangkok turned sour .
In May 1975 , the Royal Thai Government asked the United States to remove all of its combat forces ( 27,000 troops , 300 aircraft ) by 1976 .
The USAF bases were closed and the last USAF personnel left Thailand in June 1976 .
The removal of U.S. military forces was accomplished by United States Marine Detachment BLT 1/9 out of Okinawa , Japan .
AFTER THE COLD WAR Section::::After the Cold War .
Starting in 1998 , the USAF returned to Korat RTAFB for " Cope Tiger " , an annual , multinational exercise conducted in two phases in the Asia - pacific region .
Cope Tiger involves air forces from the United States , Thailand , and Singapore , as well as U.S. Marines deployed from Japan .
The flying portion of the exercise promotes closer relations and enables air force units in the region to sharpen air combat skills and practice interoperability with U.S. forces .
Pilots fly both air - to - air and air - to - ground combat training missions .
American pilots fly A-10A / OA-10A , F-15C / D Eagles , F / A-18C Hornets , F-16C Fighting Falcons , E-3B Sentry Sentry Airborne Warning and Control Systems ( AWACS ) , and KC-135 Stratotankers .
Royal Thai Forces fly F-16 Fighting Falcons , F-5E Tigers , and ground attack L-39s
Singapore forces fly Northrop F-5s and F-16 Fighting Falcons .
Other Republic of
Singapore Air Force aircraft types used on Cope Tiger include AS-532 Cougar and CH-47 Chinook helicopters Grumman E-2 Hawkeye AEW aircraft , and Lockheed C-130 Hercules tanker aircraft .
More than 1,100 people participate , including approximately 500 U.S. service members and 600 service members from Thailand and Singapore .
WAR ON TERRORISM Section::::War on Terrorism .
Thailand is an important element in the Pentagon 's new strategy of " forward positioning , " establishing sites where United States forces can store equipment and from which they can come and go as needed .
Despite Thailand 's neutrality on the war in Iraq , the Thai government allowed U - Tapao RTNAF to be used by American warplanes flying into combat in Iraq , as it had earlier done during the war in Afghanistan .
In addition , U - Tapao may be where Al Qaeda operatives have been interrogated , according to some retired American intelligence officials .
SEE ALSO
* United States Pacific Air Forces * Seventh Air Force * Thirteenth Air Force NOTES
REFERENCES
* Endicott , Judy G. ( 1999 )
Active Air Force wings as of 1 October 1995 ; USAF active flying , space , and missile squadrons as of 1 October 1995 .
Maxwell AFB , Alabama : Office of Air Force History .
CD - ROM .
* Glasser , Jeffrey D. ( 1998 ) .
The Secret Vietnam War : The United States Air Force in Thailand , 1961–1975 .
McFarland & Company . .
* Ravenstein , Charles A. ( 1984 ) .
Air Force Combat Wings Lineage and Honors Histories 1947–1977 .
Maxwell AFB , Alabama : Office of Air Force History . .
*
Schlight , John ( 1988 ) , The Years of the Offensive , 1965–1968 , Office Of Air Force History , United States Air Force
*
Schlight , John ( 1996 ) , A War Too Long : The History of the USAF in Southeast Asia , 1961–1975 , Office Of Air Force History , United States Air Force ,
* Futrell , Robert F. with the assistance of Blumenson , Martin ( 1991 ) , The United States Air Force In Southeast Asia : The Advisory Years to 1965 , Office Of Air Force History , United States Air Force * Van Staaveren , Jacob ( 2002 ) , Gradual Failure : The Air War over North Vietnam , 1965–1966 , Office Of Air Force History , United States Air Force EXTERNAL LINKS