CATALINA CASINO
The Catalina Casino is located in Avalon on Santa Catalina Island , off the coast of Los Angeles in California .
It is the most visible landmark in Avalon Bay , and when approaching it from the mainland .
The large building contains a movie theatre , ballroom , and formerly an island art and history museum .
The Catalina Casino gets its name from the Italian language term casino , meaning a " gathering place " .
There is no gambling at the facility .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Catalina Casino was built on a site formerly known as Sugarloaf Point .
The site was graded for the planned construction of the Hotel St. Catherine .
However , it was eventually built in Descanso Canyon instead .
When chewing gum magnate William Wrigley Jr. bought the controlling stake in Catalina Island in 1919 , he used this cleared site to build a dance hall he named Sugarloaf Casino .
It served as a ballroom and Avalon 's first high school , until it became too small for Avalon 's growing population .
In 1928 , the Sugarloaf was razed to make room for a newer casino building .
Sugarloaf Rock was further blasted away to enhance the Casino 's ocean view .
On May 29 , 1929 , the new Catalina Casino was completed under the direction of Wrigley and David M. Renton , at a cost of 2 million dollars .
Its design , by Sumner Spaulding and Walter Weber , is in the Art Deco and Mediterranean Revival styles .
It was the first movie theatre to be designed specifically for films with sound ( " talkies " ) .
It received the Honor Award from the California Chapter of the American Institute of Architects , as " one of the outstanding architectural accomplishments " .
With a height equal to a 12-story building , it was built to serve as a theatre on the main floor and a ballroom and promenade on the upper level .
Movie studio tycoons such as Cecil B. DeMille , Louis B. Mayer , and Samuel Goldwyn frequently came by yacht to the Casino to preview their newest cinema productions .
It also serves as the island 's civil defense shelter , large enough to accommodate Catalina 's entire year - round population .
Within its walls is stored enough food and water for all Avalon 's residents for two weeks .
The steel structure of the predecessor Sugarloaf Casino can still be found in Avalon 's abandoned bird park .
The bird park was conceived by Mrs. Wrigley in the 1930s , and at the time it was one of the largest aviaries in the world .
In 1993 the movie theater was photographed by Hiroshi Sugimoto , for his art series " Theatres " .
In September 2008 , the Catalina Casino had the first live full production of a musical on its stage , when the Santa Catalina Island Company presented Grease ! .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Surrounded by sea on three sides , the circular structure of the Catalina Casino is the equivalent of 12 stories tall .
It has a movie theatre on the first level , and a ballroom on the top level .
The building interiors were decorated in the Art Deco style , including with sterling silver and gold leaf accents .
MOVIE THEATER
Section::::Movie theater .
The Avalon Theater is a movie theater on the first level , with a seating capacity of 1,154 .
It has a single massive screen , and still shows first run movies .
The theater has its original 4-manual , 16 rank pipe organ built by the Page Organ Company of Lima , Ohio .
The theatre is sound insulated so that patrons do not hear the band or up to 3,000 dancers in the ballroom above .
The circular domed ceiling has notable acoustics and has been studied by acoustical designers , due to its repute .
A speaker on the theatre stage can speak in a normal voice without a microphone , and be heard clearly by all in attendance .
The theater 's interior walls retain the original Art Deco murals by John Gabriel Beckman .
The theater 's facade had a painted mural of an Art Deco style underwater world scene , which was later replaced with replications of Beckman 's design created in Catalina Pottery style tiles .
The lobby has walnut wood paneling .
BALLROOM Section::::Ballroom .
The upper level houses the 20,000 square foot Catalina Casino Ballroom .
It is the world 's largest circular ballroom with a diameter dance floor , that can accommodate 3,000 dancers .
French doors encircle the room connecting the dance floor with the " Romance Promenade , " an open balcony that runs around the building .
To reach the ballroom on the top level the Casino building has two ramped walkways , both in enclosed towers that extend out from the circular building .
Wrigley took the idea to use ramps instead of stairs from Wrigley Field , his Chicago Cubs stadium .
The ramps allowed the large numbers of people using the ballroom to quickly move to and from their destinations .
They each have a small lobby areas just below the dance floor level .
CATALINA ISLAND
MUSEUM Section::::Catalina Island Museum .
In 1953 Philip K. Wrigley established the Catalina Island Museum on the first level , to preserve the history of the island from the Pre - Columbian indigenous Island Tongva ( Gabrielino ) peoples through the pre - war 20th century development by his father .
The museum featured a large and comprehensive collection of original Catalina Pottery ceramics , produced by Catalina Clay Products between 1927 and 1937 .
On June 18 , 2016 the museum relocated to a new building , located approximately one half mile from its original location in the Catalina Casino .
The Ada Blanche Wrigley Schreiner Building is located at 217 Metropole Avenue .
The museum continues documenting Catalina Island history , adding from World War II to the present day and a research institute .
It is the repository for all archeological digs on the island , and has one of the largest collections of Island Tongva artifacts in the world .
There are now over 10,000 photographs and negatives documenting island life from the early 1880s until the present day in the museum 's photography collection .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Santa Catalina Island Company : official Catalina Casino website * Catalina Island Museum — formerly located in the Catalina Casino .
* Cinematreasures.org :
Avalon Theatre — article by movie theatre preservation organization .