BRIAN 'S WINTER
Brian 's Winter also known as Hatchet : Winter is a 1996 young adult novel by Gary Paulsen .
It is the third novel in the Hatchet series , but second in terms of chronology as an alternate ending sequel to Hatchet .
It was also released as Hatchet :
Winter by Pan Macmillan on February 9 , 1996 .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
At the end of Hatchet , thirteen - year - old Brian Robeson , who has been trapped in the Canadian wilderness after a plane accident , decides to dive for a " survival pack " from the submerged aircraft .
He almost drowns trying to tear the plane open .
He recovers , among other things , an emergency transmitter .
Within hours , a pilot receives the beacon and rescues him .
The book begins with a foreword that Brian , who learned wilderness survival through trial and error , probably would not have survived the upcoming harsh winter on his own .
Paulsen says that many readers wrote to him , complaining about the deus ex machina ending .
In response , Paulsen wrote Brian 's Winter , which explores what would have happened if Brian had not activated the transmitter .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The story deals with Brian , still stranded at the L - shaped lake during the fall and winter , constructing a winter shelter , building snow shoes , being confronted by a bear , befriending and naming a skunk and learning how to make a bow more powerful .
Eventually , Brian meets a family of Cree trappers , the Smallhorns , who help him return home .
CONTINUITY WITH SERIES Section::::Continuity with series .
Brian 's Winter is followed chronologically by the two sequels , Brian 's Return and Brian 's Hunt as they recognize the book as a series canon .
The River does not and includes no mention that the events of Brian 's Winter ever took place as Brian tells Derek Holtzer that he only spent fifty - four days in the wilderness .
This is because The River was published in 1991 , five years before the release of Brian 's Winter .
REFERENCES