PRE - SHARED KEY
In cryptography , a pre - shared key ( PSK ) is a shared secret which was previously shared between the two parties using some secure channel before it needs to be used .
KEY Section::::Key .
To build a key from shared secret , the key derivation function is typically used .
Such systems almost always use symmetric key cryptographic algorithms .
The term PSK is used in Wi - Fi encryption such as Wired Equivalent Privacy ( WEP ) , Wi - Fi Protected Access ( WPA ) , where the method is called WPA - PSK or WPA2-PSK , and also in the Extensible Authentication Protocol ( EAP ) , where it is known as EAP - PSK .
In all these cases , both the wireless access points ( AP ) and all clients share the same key .
The characteristics of this secret or key are determined by the system which uses it ; some system designs require that such keys be in a particular format .
It can be a password , a passphrase , or a hexadecimal string .
The secret is used by all systems involved in the cryptographic processes used to secure the traffic between the systems .
Crypto systems rely on one or more keys for confidentiality .
One particular attack is always possible against keys , the brute force key space search attack .
A sufficiently long , randomly chosen , key can resist any practical brute force attack , though not in principle if an attacker has sufficient computational power ( see password strength and password cracking for more discussion ) .
Unavoidably , however , pre - shared keys are held by both parties to the communication , and so can be compromised at one end , without the knowledge of anyone at the other .
There are several tools available to help one choose strong passwords , though doing so over any network connection is inherently unsafe as one can not in general know who , if anyone , may be eavesdropping on the interaction .
Choosing keys used by cryptographic algorithms is somewhat different in that any pattern whatsoever should be avoided , as any such pattern may provide an attacker with a lower effort attack than brute force search .
This implies random key choice to force attackers to spend as much effort as possible ; this is very difficult in principle and in practice as well .
As a general rule , any software except a cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator ( CSPRNG ) should be avoided .
REFERENCES