OWEN HART
Owen James Hart ( May 7 , 1965 – May 23 , 1999 ) was a Canadian – American professional and amateur wrestler who worked for several promotions including Stampede Wrestling , New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) , World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) , and the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , where he wrestled under both his own name , and ring name The Blue Blazer .
A member of the Hart wrestling family , he was born in Calgary , Alberta , the youngest of 12 children of Stampede Wrestling promoters Stu and Helen Hart .
Among other accolades , Owen was a one - time USWA Unified World Heavyweight Champion , a two - time WWF Intercontinental Champion , a one - time WWF European Champion , and a four - time WWF World Tag Team Champion , as well as the 1994 WWF King of the Ring .
He headlined multiple pay - per - view events for the WWF , and was widely regarded as one of the company 's best in - ring performers .
Hart died on May 23 , 1999 due to injuries suffered following an equipment malfunction and subsequent fall from the rafters of Kemper Arena in Kansas City , Missouri , United States , during his ring entrance at the WWF 's Over the Edge pay - per - view event .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Owen was born on May 7 , 1965 in Calgary , Alberta into the Hart wrestling family and was the youngest child of Stu and Helen Hart .
Hart grew up in a household with 11 siblings , Smith , Bruce , Keith , Wayne , Dean , Ellie , Georgia , Bret , Alison , Ross , and Diana .
He was of Greek descent through his maternal grandmother and Irish through his maternal grandfather .
His father was mainly of Scots - Irish descent , but also had Scottish and English ancestry .
Because his mother , Helen , was born in New York , Hart was a dual citizen of Canada and the United States .
PROFESSIONAL WRESTLING CAREER TRAINING AND INDEPENDENT CIRCUIT ( 1983–1988 )
Section::::Professional wrestling career .
Section::::Training and independent circuit ( 1983–1988 ) .
Hart first gained wrestling experience in the amateur wrestling division at high school , through which he met his wife , Martha .
Wrestling was not Hart 's first choice for a career ; as Martha explained in her book Broken Harts , Owen tried numerous times to find a profitable living outside of wrestling .
Owen is quoted as saying , in the WWEs Home Video " Owen Hart of Gold " that " during his time in the University , he wrestled incognito ( under a mask ) as the original British Bulldog .
Then , after he graduated from the University , he wrestled as " Bronco " Owen Hart at Royal Albert Hall in London , England .
As those attempts were unsuccessful , Hart was trained in his father 's Hart Dungeon and worked for his father 's federation , Stampede Wrestling and in England for Max Crabtree 's Joint Promotions in matches that got broadcast on ITV 's World of Sport .
He remained with Stampede for the next couple of years while honing his skills .
During 1986 , Hart teamed with Ben Bassarab and won the Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship .
The success of the team and Hart 's in ring skills earned him Pro Wrestling Illustrateds Rookie of the Year Award in 1987 .
After he and Bassarab lost the tag team title , he feuded with Johnny Smith and Dynamite Kid .
In 1987 , Hart branched out to Japan where he wrestled for New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) on several tours .
In NJPW , he wrestled Keiichi Yamada , and later under the Jushin Liger gimmick .
On May 27 , 1988 , Hart defeated Hiroshi Hase for the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship , becoming the first non - Japanese wrestler to win the title .
His reign would end nearly a month later , as he lost the title to Shiro Koshinaka on June 24 , 1988 .
WORLD WRESTLING FEDERATION ( 1988–1989 ) Section::::World Wrestling Federation ( 1988–1989 ) .
Hart 's success in Japan and Stampede 's working relationship with the World Wrestling Federation led to Hart signing with the company in the summer of 1988 .
Instead of promoting Owen as Bret Hart 's younger brother , the WWF decided to create a masked " superhero " type gimmick for him which played to his high - flying style .
He broke into the WWF as The Blue Blazer ( initially The Blue Angel ) , with his early appearances seeing him defeat the likes of Terry Gibbs , Steve Lombardi and Barry Horowitz .
The Blue Blazer made his pay - per - view debut at Survivor Series ' 88 , teaming with The Ultimate Warrior , Brutus Beefcake , Jim Brunzell and Sam Houston against The Honky Tonk Man , Greg Valentine , Outlaw Ron Bass , Bad News Brown and Dangerous Danny Davis .
The Blazer was eliminated by Valentine , but his team went on to win the match .
He continued to wrestle in the midcard , defeating enhancement talent but often falling short against other name talent ; he lost to Ted DiBiase on the March 11 , 1989 edition of Saturday Night 's Main Event and was defeated by Mr. Perfect at WrestleMania V. RETURN TO INDEPENDENT CIRCUIT ( 1989–1991 )
Section::::Return to independent circuit ( 1989–1991 ) .
Shortly after WrestleMania , Hart left the WWF to tour the world both with and without the Blue Blazer gimmick .
He also returned to Stampede , until it shut down in December 1989 .
In 1991 , Hart lost the Blue Blazer mask in a mascara contra mascara match against Mexican wrestler El Canek , thus bidding farewell to the Blue Blazer gimmick .
WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING ( 1991 )
Section::::World Championship Wrestling ( 1991 ) .
Hart debuted in World Championship Wrestling 's self - titled TV show on March 16 , 1991 , the first of five TV matches he competed in , all of which were against preliminary talent such as Mark Kyle .
One of the bouts saw him team with Ricky Morton .
RETURN TO WWF THE NEW FOUNDATION AND HIGH ENERGY
( 1991–1992 ) Section::::Return to WWF .
Section::::The New Foundation and High Energy ( 1991–1992 ) .
Hart had been engaged in contract discussions with WCW but the deal was never struck , as Owen was not willing to move himself and his family to the company 's headquarters in Atlanta .
Instead , he signed with the WWF for a second time .
In the WWF the popular Hart Foundation , composed of his brother Bret and real - life brother - in - law Jim Neidhart , had split up ; Bret set out on a singles career while Neidhart was used sparingly .
When Neidhart returned from a storyline injury , he joined Owen to form a team known as The New Foundation .
Owen and Neidhart first feuded with the Beverly Brothers .
They then had their only pay - per - view match at the Royal Rumble in January 1992 where they beat The Orient Express .
Neidhart left the WWF shortly afterward , and Hart set out on a very short run as a singles wrestler , including a match at WrestleMania VIII against Skinner .
Shortly after WrestleMania , Hart was teamed up with Koko B. Ware to form the duo known as High Energy .
They had only one pay - per - view match as a team , at the Survivor Series where they lost to The Headshrinkers .
The team was quietly dropped at the start of 1993 with Hart starting a singles career .
FEUD WITH BRET ( 1993–1995 ) Section::::Feud with Bret ( 1993–1995 ) .
In the middle of 1993 , when Bret Hart 's feud with Jerry Lawler ignited , Owen stood by his brother 's side and fought against Lawler in the United States Wrestling Association where most of the WWF talent were considered the heels .
Owen won the USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship from Papa Shango .
Owen 's participation in the WWF vs. USWA feud was cut short when he suffered a knee injury in the summer of 1993 and was forced to take some time away from the ring .
Hart returned to the WWF ring in the fall of 1993 , at a time when Bret 's feud with Lawler was temporarily sidetracked .
Bret , along with Owen and their brothers Bruce and Keith , were scheduled to face Lawler and his team at Survivor Series .
However , Lawler was unable to make it to the show , and as a result could not appear on WWF television .
Lawler was replaced with Shawn Michaels .
During the match Owen and Bret inadvertently crashed into each other , causing Owen to be eliminated from the team .
Owen showed up after the match and had a heated confrontation with Bret , while Keith , Bruce and Stu tried to calm things down .
This confrontation resulted in Owen leaving the ring to boos while his brothers and father watched in dismay and mother Helen cried at ringside .
The following night Owen adopted the pink and black tights , sunglasses and Sharpshooter finisher to send a message to his brother .
Owen , angry with being in Bret 's shadow , challenged his brother which Bret declined .
Instead the brothers seemed to reunite by the holidays .
Bret tried to make amends with Owen , teaming with him on a regular basis .
Bret even secured the two a shot at the WWF Tag Team Championship .
They faced the Quebecers for the title at the Royal Rumble in January 1994 .
Initially everything was fine between the brothers , but when Bret hurt his knee ( kayfabe ) and was unable to tag Owen in for a long period of time , the younger Hart got frustrated .
When the referee stopped the match due to Bret 's damaged knee , Owen snapped ; he kicked his brother in the knee and then walked off , berating Bret on the Titantron shortly after as Bret was being helped backstage .
This started his run as a heel .
After the act , an infuriated Owen accused his brother of being selfish and holding him down .
Owen admitted that it felt good to take out his brother .
The two brothers faced off for the first time at WrestleMania X , where Owen cleanly pinned his older brother .
Later in the evening , Bret won the WWF World Heavyweight Championship while Owen stood by and watched in jealousy as Bret celebrated in the ring .
Owen won the King of the Ring tournament turning back Razor Ramon in the finals with an elbow drop to the back and with an assist from Jim Neidhart .
After the victory , Owen took the nickname " The King of Harts . "
Owen and Bret feuded throughout the summer of 1994 , clashing many times both in singles and later in tag team matches ( with Bret joined by the returning British Bulldog ) .
Two prominent matches took place in this feud : first , their steel cage match in the co - main event of SummerSlam for Bret 's WWF World Heavyweight Championship , which Bret won .
This match later received a five - star rating from Dave Meltzer .
The second was a lumberjack match on August 17 that Owen initially won and was announced as WWF World Heavyweight Champion ; Bret won the match after it was ordered to continue due to interference .
At the Survivor Series , Owen struck the most damaging blow against his brother as he conned his own mother Helen to throw in the towel for Bret .
The ploy cost Bret the world title to Bob Backlund .
Owen also prevented Bret from regaining the title at the Royal Rumble in 1995 when he interfered in the match between Bret and new champion Diesel .
In the weeks after the Rumble , Bret and Owen clashed again with Bret soundly defeating his brother , thus putting an end to their feud for the time being .
Owen rebounded from the loss to Bret by winning the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Smoking Gunns at WrestleMania XI .
Owen , who was joined by a " Mystery Partner " , had challenged the Gunns to a title match ; the partner turned out to be former world champion Yokozuna .
After the victory Owen took Jim Cornette and Mr. Fuji as his managers , who already managed Yokozuna .
The team defended the title for five months until they lost them to Shawn Michaels and Diesel at In Your House 3 .
They would briefly hold the title a second time when the belts were handed back to them before the Smoking Gunns regained the title .
Owen and Yokozuna would continue to team off and on until the end of the year .
TEAMING WITH THE BRITISH BULLDOG ( 1996–1997 ) Section::::Teaming with The British Bulldog ( 1996–1997 ) .
In 1995 , Owen 's brother - in - law Davey Boy Smith turned heel and joined the Camp Cornette stable .
During the summer of 1996 the two brothers in law started to team up more and more , sometimes alongside Vader who was also a member of Camp Cornette .
Owen was also a color commentator for the 1996 King of the Ring ( exhibiting clear partisan support for Vader and Smith ) and during this time wore a cast on his right forearm for several months , feigning a nagging injury to subsequently use his cast as a weapon during his matches .
In September 1996 , Bulldog and Hart earned a pay - per - view shot at the tag team titles at .
Owen and Bulldog left with the gold after defeating the Smoking Gunns .
They also left with a new manager as Clarence Mason had conned Jim Cornette into signing over the contracts of the new champions .
Signs of dissension , however , slowly started to show .
One occasion where this was evident was at the Royal Rumble when Hart accidentally eliminated Bulldog .
After the Rumble , they had miscommunication in matches against Doug Furnas and Phil LaFon and Bulldog fired Mason after losing a match to Crush who was also managed by Mason , something which did not sit well with Hart .
Another bone of contention between the two was the newly created WWF European Championship ; both men had fought their way to the finals to crown the first champion with Bulldog coming out as the victor .
After retaining the tag team title against the Headbangers by disqualification on the edition of March 24 , 1997 of Monday Night Raw , the tension between the two bubbled over .
An incensed Hart demanded a shot at Bulldog 's European title the next week .
The match was booked for March 31 ; on the night , the two went at it with such intensity that many thought the tag team champions had finally gone their separate ways .
Then in a shocking moment , the recently turned heel Bret Hart appeared at ringside and stopped the match .
Bret appealed to both Owen and Bulldog , talking about the importance of family .
They agreed to put their differences aside and join with Bret to form the new Hart Foundation , an anti - American stable that also included Hart in - law Jim Neidhart and Hart family friend Brian Pillman .
THE HART FOUNDATION REUNION ( 1997 ) Section::::The Hart Foundation reunion ( 1997 ) .
After forming the Hart Foundation , Owen quickly gained singles gold of his own as he pinned Rocky Maivia to win his first WWF Intercontinental Championship .
This meant that the Hart Foundation held every WWF title except the World title , cementing their dominance over the federation .
It was not all success for Owen , though , as he and the British Bulldog lost their tag team title to Stone Cold Steve Austin and Shawn Michaels on May 26 , 1997 .
He began feuding with Austin shortly thereafter .
Owen and Bulldog got a second chance at regaining the tag team titles after Michaels vacated his half of the championship due to an injury .
On the edition of July 14 , 1997 of Raw the two entered a tournament and won to face Austin and a partner of his choice that evening for the vacant titles .
That partner turned out to be Dude Love , who declared himself to be Austin 's partner and helped him defeat Hart and Bulldog for the tag team championship .
At SummerSlam in August , Hart was to defend his Intercontinental Championship against Austin in a " Kiss My Ass " match , where Hart put the title up against Austin having to kiss his buttocks if he lost .
During the match , Hart botched a piledriver and dropped Austin on the top of his head , injuring his neck .
Austin won the title from Hart that evening , but due to the injury was forced to vacate the title .
Although the entire situation was an accident , the WWF decided to make it part of the storyline as Owen began wearing a T - shirt patterned after Austin 's that read " Owen 3:16 /
I Just Broke Your Neck " .
Hart was then entered into a tournament to crown a new champion .
Hart fought his way to the finals of the tournament to crown the next Intercontinental Champion and was set to face Faarooq at .
Owen beat Faarooq with Austin 's help .
Afterward , Austin explained that he wanted to beat Hart for the title when he returned and would not allow Faarooq or anyone else to beat him .
After Hart retained the title twice by disqualification between Bad Blood and Survivor Series in Montreal , Austin got his wish and defeated Hart for the Intercontinental Championship again .
Later that night , the Montreal Screwjob took place .
Bret left the Federation after the event and both the British Bulldog and Jim Neidhart were granted quick releases from their contracts to jump to WCW .
This left Owen as the only Hart family member remaining in the WWF , due to his contractual obligations .
Unlike Smith and Neidhart , Vince McMahon did not grant Owen a release from his contract and Owen remained with the company .
He was skeptical about returning to WCW anyway , as he was not confident that the organization would use him correctly .
Bret has said that the biggest reason Owen did not make the move was because WCW president Eric Bischoff was unwilling to match his WWF contract .
THE BLACK HART AND NATION OF DOMINATION ( 1997–1998 ) Section::::The Black Hart and Nation of Domination ( 1997–1998 ) .
Hart was not seen or mentioned on WWF programming until he made a surprise appearance after Shawn Michaels retained his title following a disqualification loss to Ken Shamrock at where he attacked Shawn Michaels .
Now a fan favorite , but with a new edgy , antisocial attitude , Hart became known as " The Lone Hart " and also
" The Black Hart " .
Owen had a feud with DX and challenged Shawn Michaels for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship on the December 29 ,
1997 episode of Raw Is War
: Hart had Michaels locked in the Sharpshooter when Triple H interfered in order to save Michaels ' title , giving Hart the victory by disqualification .
He later won the European title from Triple H , although not directly .
Goldust dressed up as Triple H in an attempt to swerve Hart , but Commissioner Slaughter considered him to be a legitimate replacement .
Hart later suffered a kayfabe ankle injury during a match against Barry Windham involving Triple H. When Hart joined the commentary at ringside , Triple H managed to draw Owen into an impromptu title match and regained the title .
Chyna interfered while the referee was n't looking and while Triple H was distracting the referee , she struck Hart behind the left knee with a baseball bat , picked him up and threw him back into the ring where Triple H put Hart in a reverse ankle lock to his injured right ankle to win the European Championship under referees discretion in controversial fashion .
Four weeks after WrestleMania , during a tag team match with Ken Shamrock against Mark Henry and Rocky Maivia ( later known as The Rock ) , Hart turned on Shamrock , " snapping " his ankle and " biting his ear " in the process .
After the attack on Shamrock , Hart became the co - leader , with The Rock , of the Nation of Domination , claiming that " Enough is enough and it 's time for a change " .
The Nation 's first big feud after Hart joined was against DX .
It was during this feud that D - Generation X parodied the Nation of Domination .
The imitation was complete with an actor dressing up as Hart and uttering the phrase
" I am not a nugget " ; this was in response to Shawn Michaels referring to Owen as a nugget of feces in a toilet bowl that , no matter how many times Michaels flushed , he was unable to get rid of .
" Nugget " became a derisive term that followed Hart for the rest of his career .
Hart 's participation in the DX feud was sidetracked when Shamrock returned from injuries dead set on getting revenge on Hart .
The two split a pair of specialty matches on pay - per - view , but nothing was ever conclusively settled between them .
TEAMING WITH JEFF JARRETT AND RETURN
AS THE BLUE BLAZER ( 1998–1999 ) Section::::Teaming with Jeff Jarrett and return as The Blue Blazer ( 1998–1999 ) .
Hart remained with the Nation throughout the year until the stable slowly dissolved .
After SummerSlam , he teamed with Jeff Jarrett .
Hart and Jarrett had Jarrett 's manager Debra in their corner .
During this time a storyline was proposed that Hart was supposed to have an on - screen affair with Debra , something which Owen turned down .
After a match in which Hart " accidentally injured " Dan Severn , Hart seemingly quit the WWF .
Playing off the legitimate injury Hart had inflicted on Austin the year before , the angle blurred the lines between reality and " storyline " .
Yet as soon as Hart " quit " , the Blue Blazer appeared in the WWF claiming to in no way be Hart despite it being very obvious who was under the mask .
Unlike the first run of the character , the Blazer was now an overbearing , self - righteous heel who treated the edgy Attitude Era WWF with disdain .
Hart and Jarrett ended up making the storyline comical .
To prove that Hart was not the Blazer , he showed up beside the Blue Blazer , who was a masked Jarrett .
In a later attempt to prove that neither Hart or Jarrett was the Blazer , they both appeared next to a man in the Blue Blazer mask ; however , it was obvious that a black man was under the mask ( Hart 's former tag team partner Koko B. Ware ) .
On January 25 , 1999 , in the midst of the Blue Blazer angle Hart and Jarrett defeated Ken Shamrock and The Big Boss Man for the tag team title .
The pair successfully defended the belts against Test and D'Lo Brown at WrestleMania XV .
They lost the titles to the team of Kane and X - Pac on the ( pre - taped ) episode of Raw that aired on April 5 , 1999 .
However , Hart and Jarrett continued to team together until Hart 's death in May during the Over the Edge pay - per - view event .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
He met Martha Joan Patterson in 1982 .
They married on July 1 , 1989 and had two children .
Oje Edward Hart was born on March 5 , 1992 and
Athena Christie Hart was born on September 23 , 1995 .
On May 28 , 2011 , Owen was inducted into the Legends Pro Wrestling " Hall of Fame " by Jack Blaze in Wheeling , West Virginia at their " LPW Hart & Soul Tour " event .
The award was accepted by his brother - in - law Jim Neidhart , who was also inducted that night .
Despite Owen spending the majority of his WWF career portraying a cocky , obnoxious heel , he was very well - liked by his fellow wrestlers backstage , and was known for being easy to work with .
Hart was very frugal with his money ; he had planned to save enough to retire and live comfortably with his family .
When touring on the road with the WWF , he normally would stay in his hotel room while other wrestlers went out and partied on the evenings .
Hart was notorious for pulling elaborate " ribs " ( pranks ) on fellow wrestlers .
During a shoot interview , Tony Norris , who wrestled in the WWF during the mid-90 's as Ahmed Johnson , and faced Hart in the ring on many occasions , stated that he had received a phone call saying he was to be a guest on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno .
After spending a large amount of money on new clothes for the occasion , he was told a limousine was to pick him up and deliver him to the studio .
After waiting a seemingly long time , he says that Hart appeared and asked him why he was n't at the show yet .
Norris , suspicious as to how Hart could have known about his guest appearance , as he had not told anyone , said that Hart was then on the ground laughing ; he then realized that Hart was behind the ruse and there was no guest spot on The Tonight Show .
Despite this , Norris spoke very highly of Hart and said that he had loved working with him .
During the segments of wrestlers sharing stories about Hart during the RAW IS OWEN broadcast following his death , Shane McMahon mentions Hart and himself taking his brother Bret 's wrestling boots and hiding them in a shower .
Shane mentioned he was fearful of what Bret would do when he found out .
In his autobiography , his brother Bret spoke of a time when he , their father Stu , and Bret 's oldest daughter Jade were in a hotel room during the WrestleMania IV weekend when Stu received a phone call apparently from former bodybuilder and wrestler Reg Park , who said that he was calling from the hotel 's lobby .
Having been acquaintances before , Stu was originally cordial until Park supposedly began accusing him of cowardice and challenging him to a confrontation .
Bret mentions Stu becoming extremely irritated to the point of anger and was ready to meet Park face to face until he slammed the phone down , mentioning that it was Owen all along .
DEATH
OVER THE EDGE 1999 Section::::Death .
Section::::Over the Edge 1999 .
On May 23 , 1999 , Hart fell to his death in Kansas City , Missouri during the Over the Edge pay - per - view event .
Hart was in the process of being lowered via harness and grapple line into the ring from the rafters of Kemper Arena for a booked Intercontinental Championship match against The Godfather .
In keeping with the Blazer 's new " buffoonish superhero " character , he was to begin a dramatic entrance , being lowered to just above ring level , at which time he would act " entangled " , then release himself from the safety harness and fall flat on his face for comedic effect
— this necessitated the use of a quick release mechanism .
It was an elaboration on a Blue Blazer stunt done previously on the Sunday Night Heat before Survivor Series in 1998 .
While being lowered into the ring , Hart fell 78 feet ( 24 m ) , landing chest - first on the top rope ( approximately a foot from the nearest turnbuckle ) , throwing him into the ring .
Hart had performed the stunt only a few times before .
Hart 's widow Martha has suggested that , by moving around to get comfortable with both the harness and his cape on , Hart unintentionally triggered an early release .
Television viewers did not see the incident .
During the fall , a pre - taped vignette was being shown on the pay - per - view broadcast as well as on the monitors in the darkened arena .
Afterward , while Hart was being worked on by medical personnel inside the ring , the live event 's broadcast showed only the audience .
Meanwhile , WWF television announcer Jim Ross repeatedly told those watching live on pay - per - view that what had just transpired was not a wrestling angle or storyline and that Hart was hurt badly , emphasizing the seriousness of the situation .
Hart was transported to Truman Medical Center in Kansas City .
While several attempts to revive him were made , he never made it back to his feet and would die from his injuries .
The cause of death was later revealed to be internal bleeding from blunt force trauma .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The WWF management controversially chose to continue the event .
Later , Jim Ross announced the death of Hart to the home viewers during the pay - per - view , but not to the crowd in the arena .
While the show did go on , it has never been released commercially by WWF Home Video .
In 2014 , fifteen years after his death , the WWE Network aired the event for the first time .
A small photo tribute is shown before the start informing fans that Hart died during the original broadcast .
All footage of Hart was edited out of the event .
The statement reads : " In Memory of Owen Hart May 7 , 1965 – May 23 , 1999 who accidentally passed away during this broadcast . "
In the weeks that followed Hart 's death , much attention was focused on the harness Hart used that night , especially on the " quick release " trigger and safety latches .
When someone is lowered from the rafters in a harness , there are backup latches that must be latched for safety purposes .
Four weeks after the event , the Hart family sued the WWF over how dangerous and poorly planned the stunt was , and that the harness system was defective .
After over a year and a half into the case , a settlement was reached on November 2 , 2000 , which saw the WWF give the Hart family US$ 18 million .
The manufacturer of the harness system was also a defendant against the Hart family , but they were dismissed from the case after the settlement was reached .
Martha used millions of the settlement to establish the Owen Hart Foundation .
Martha wrote a book about Hart 's life in 2002 called Broken Harts : The Life and Death of Owen Hart .
In his DVD set , Bret said that he wishes he had been with the WWF the night Owen 's accident happened , as he would have discouraged Owen from performing the stunt .
Triple H has stated in several interviews that " The Game " nickname that he would adopt months after Owen 's death was originally intended for Owen and that he adopted it in honor of Owen .
RAW IS
OWEN Section::::Raw Is Owen .
A special episode of Raw Is War that aired on May 24 , 1999 , the night after Hart 's death , was dubbed Raw Is Owen .
It was broadcast live from the Kiel Center in St. Louis .
It included shoot interviews from his fellow wrestlers .
According to Raw Exposed ( a special that aired upon Raw returning to USA Network on October 3 , 2005 ) , all storylines and rivalries were put aside , and WWF management gave all wrestlers on the roster the option of working or not .
Nevertheless , ten matches were booked with no angles .
The show began with all the wrestlers , managers , referees and agents of the WWF ( except WWF Champion The Undertaker and Kane ) standing on the entrance ramp .
Howard Finkel called for a ten - bell salute .
A tribute video narrated by Vince McMahon then played on the Titantron .
Throughout the broadcast , personal thoughts on Hart in the form of shoot interviews with various WWF wrestlers were played .
Hart 's former Nation of Domination comrades were emotional , most notably Mark Henry , who wept as he read a poem that he wrote in memory of Hart .
Before the first commercial break , such thoughts were aired from Mick Foley and Bradshaw .
Foley noted that Hart was his son 's favorite wrestler and had proudly gotten a haircut like Owen 's , although he also said his son did not quite understand that " nugget " was not a term of endearment .
Bradshaw talked about how Hart spent less money on the road than most wrestlers because he wanted to retire early and spend time with his family .
Owen 's friend and Nation of Domination partner
The Rock also made a short speech before engaging in a short match against Val Venis .
Test then spoke about a rib Owen pulled on him .
The broadcast ended with Stone Cold Steve Austin coming out for a special salute to Hart by climbing the turnbuckle and performing his famous " beer - bash " routine , ending with him giving a toast to Owen ( whose picture was displayed on the TitanTron throughout the entire show ) and leaving one beer in the ring ( for Owen ) .
The only notable absence from this show was The Undertaker as he decided to visit his real - life friend , Bret Hart .
The tribute show scored a 7.2 Nielsen rating , making it the highest - rated special episode in Raw history and the third highest - rated episode of Raw show overall .
Shawn Michaels , in his Heartbreak and Triumph autobiography , notes that " Owen is the only guy you could have a two - hour show for , and no - one would say a bad word about him .
"
The next day , WWF taped the episode of Raw for May 31 , 1999 .
During that show , Jeff Jarrett defeated The Godfather to win the WWF Intercontinental Championship , the title Hart was booked to win for a third time at Over the Edge .
Celebrating his victory , Jarrett screamed Hart 's name .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Hart was widely regarded as one of the best in - ring performers in the WWF ; Fox Sports dubbed him a " genius " .
He would go on to be considered one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time by many industry colleagues .
In 2001 , Hart 's sister Diana released her first book named Under the Mat which dealt with their family .
The book was written partially in response to Owen 's death and became very controversial .
Owen 's widow Martha Hart pursued legal action over the work and claimed that Diana made inaccurate and irresponsible statements about her and her family .
She stated that the book was " filled with distortions , misstatements and unjustified slurs that attempt to destroy the reputation of my family and me , and undermine the memory of Owen . "
In June 2010 , Martha filed a lawsuit against the WWE over WWE 's use of Owen 's name and likeness as well as personal photos of Hart 's family in the Hart & Soul WWE DVD , as well as the failure to make royalty payments .
The matter was scheduled to go to trial in June 2013 before the settlement was reached in April 2013 for an undisclosed amount .
In December 2015 , WWE released Owen : Hart of Gold on DVD and Blu - ray , which covers his career .
WWE wrestler Kevin Owens named his son after Hart and incorporated the name into his own ring name as tribute to both of them .
CHAMPIONSHIPS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
* George Tragos / Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame * Class of 2018 ( Posthumous Inductee )
* Legends Pro Wrestling * LPW Hall of Fame ( Class of 2011 )
* Prairie Wrestling Alliance * Prairie Wrestling Alliance Hall of Fame ( Class of 2010 )
* New Japan Pro Wrestling * IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time )
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated * Editor 's Award ( 1999 )
* Feud of the Year ( 1994 )
* Rookie of the Year ( 1987 )
* Ranked No . 10 of the top 500 wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1994
* Ranked No . 66 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003
* Ranked No . 84 of the top 100 tag teams of the " PWI Years " in 2003 – with Davey Boy Smith * Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
* Class of 2019 * Pro Wrestling
This Week
* Wrestler of the Week ( July 5–11 , 1987 ) * Canadian Wrestling Hall of Fame
* Individually * With the Hart family * Stampede Wrestling
* Stampede British Commonwealth Mid - Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time )
* Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Ben Bassarab * Stampede North American Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) * Stampede Wrestling Hall of Fame
* United States Wrestling Association
* USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time )
* World Wrestling Federation * WWF European Championship ( 1 time ) * WWF Intercontinental Championship ( 2 times ) * WWF Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with Yokozuna ( 2 ) , The British Bulldog ( 1 ) and Jeff Jarrett ( 1 ) * King of the Ring ( 1994 )
* Slammy Award ( 3 times )
* Biggest Rat ( 1994 )
* Squared Circle Shocker ( 1996 )
* Best Bow Tie ( 1997 )
* WWF Intercontinental Championship Tournament ( 1997 )
* WWF Tag Team Championship Tournament ( 1997 ) – with the British Bulldog
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter *
Best Flying Wrestler ( 1987 , 1988 )
* Feud of the Year ( 1997 ) LUCHAS DE APUESTAS RECORD El Canek ( mask ) Owen HartBlue Blazer ( mask ) Naucalpan , Mexico State
SEE ALSO
* Deaths in sports * List of premature professional wrestling deaths
* Hart wrestling family NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* Owen Hart 's Funeral * Bret Hart column mentioning he and Owen holding dual citizenship