NAME OF PITTSBURGH
The name of the city of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , has a complicated history .
Pittsburgh is one of the few U.S. cities or towns to be spelled with an h at the end of a burg suffix .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Pittsburgh was named in honor of William Pitt , 1st Earl of Chatham , often referred to as William Pitt the Elder to distinguish him from his son William Pitt the Younger .
The suffix burgh is the Scots language and Scottish English cognate of the English language borough , which has other cognates in words and place names in several Indo - European languages .
Historically , this morpheme was used in place names to describe a location as being defensible , such as a hill , a fort , or a fortified settlement .
EARLY HISTORY AND SPELLINGS
Section::::Early history and spellings .
Pittsburgh ( originally Fort Duquesne ) was captured by British forces during the French and Indian War ( Seven Years War ) .
The earliest known reference to the new name of the settlement is in a letter sent from General John Forbes to William Pitt the Elder , dated 27 November 1758 , notifying Pitt that his name had been given to the place .
In that letter , the spelling is given as " Pittsbourgh . "
As a Scotsman , General Forbes probably pronounced the name , similar to the pronunciation of " Edinburgh " as a Scotsman would say it : .
The first recorded reference using the current spelling is found on a survey map made for the Penn family in 1769 .
In the city charter , granted on March 18 , 1816 , the Pittsburgh spelling is used on the original document , but due to an apparent printing error , the final ' h ' is omitted on official copies of the document printed at the time .
Even before the federal government endorsed the Pittsburg spelling in 1891 , that orthographic variant was well - attested .
Its use by The Pittsburg Dispatch newspaper , for example , dates back at least to 1847 .
SPELLING CONTROVERSY
Section::::Spelling controversy .
The city 's name is commonly misspelled as Pittsburg because innumerable cities and towns in America make use of the German -burg suffix , while very few make use of the Scottish -burgh suffix .
This problem is compounded by the fact that from 1891 to 1911 , the spelling of the city 's name was federally recognized as Pittsburg .
FEDERAL ABANDONMENT AND READOPTION OF THE ' H ' Section::::Federal abandonment and readoption of the ' h ' .
In 1890 , the United States Board on Geographic Names was created to establish uniform place name usage throughout the various departments and agencies of the federal government .
To guide its standardization efforts , the Board adopted thirteen general principles , one of which was that place names ending in -burgh should drop the final .
The Board compiled a report of place name " decisions " in 1891 in which the city 's name was rendered Pittsburg .
In support of its decision favoring the Pittsburg spelling , the Board referenced the printed copies of the 1816 city charter which featured that same spelling .
Based on those copies of the city charter , the Board claimed that the official name of the city had always been Pittsburg .
However , the members of the board seem to have been unaware that the original copy of the 1816 charter specified the name of the city to be Pittsburgh , and that only the printed copies of the charter featured the erroneous spelling Pittsburg .
The full decision and rationale from the Board follows : Pittsburg .
Pennsylvania .
The city was chartered in 1816 , its name being spelled without the h , and its official form is still Pittsburg .
The h appears to have been added by the Post - Office Department , and through that action local usage appears to have become divided .
While the majority of local newspapers print it without the h , certain others use the final h. The Board 's decisions had limited but effective power ; they were compulsory upon all federal government agencies , including the Post Office .
The decisions were not , however , binding outside the federal government .
Official city and state documents continued to use the old spelling , as did the Pittsburgh Gazette , the Pittsburgh Stock Exchange and the University of Pittsburgh .
Responding to mounting pressure and , in the end , political pressure from senator George T. Oliver , the Board adopted the Pittsburgh spelling on July 19 , 1911 , reversing its previous decision on the matter .
The letter sent to senator Oliver to announce this decision , dated July 20 , stated : Hon .
George T. Oliver , United States Senate :
Sir : At a special meeting of the United States Geographic Board held on July 19 , 1911 , the previous decision with regard to the spelling of Pittsburgh without a final H was reconsidered and the form given below was adopted : Pittsburgh , a city in Pennsylvania ( not Pittsburg ) .
Very respectfully , C. S. SLOAN , Secretary .
Notwithstanding the Board 's reversal , the ' h'-less spelling variant remained in use for years .
Some local daily newspapers carried it in their titles until the early 1920s , when The Pittsburg Dispatch and The Pittsburg Leader ceased publication and The Pittsburg Press became The Pittsburgh Press .
The confusion and controversy surrounding the alternative spellings means that both the Pittsburgh and the Pittsburg spelling were commonly encountered around the turn of the 20th century , and continued uses of Pittsburg still occur to this day .
Many cities across the United States named after the city of Pittsburgh , such as Pittsburg , Kansas , Pittsburg , California , and West Pittsburg , Pennsylvania , continue to use the Pittsburg spelling in their names .
Other independent municipalities , such as the borough of East Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , reflect the modern spelling .
BASEBALL CARD
Section::::Baseball card .
Perhaps the most familiar reference to the Pittsburg spelling is on the renowned 1909 T-206 baseball card of Pittsburgh Pirates legend Honus Wagner .
Its scarcity , even at the time , combined with Wagner 's reputation as one of the greatest players in baseball history , made it the most valuable sports card of all time , with one pristine specimen yielding $ 2.8 million at auction .
It has been characterized as the " Holy Grail " of baseball cards .
The city name displayed across Wagner 's jersey on the card was an artistic addition that did not actually appear on the Pirates ' uniforms of the time .
The portrait of Wagner makes it appear as if there could be an H on the end , cut off by the border of the picture , but the caption beneath it is " WAGNER , PITTSBURG " , confirming that the omission of the H was intentional .
THE ' -H ' IN PITTSBURGH CULTURE Section::::The ' -h ' in Pittsburgh culture .
The presence of the -h at the end of the word Pittsburgh is occasionally recognized in Pittsburgh culture .
It is often rendered as PGH .
For example , Pittsburgh International Airport 's abbreviation is PIT , while Union Station 's abbreviation is PGH ; the area 's Fox affiliate takes their calls , WPGH - TV from this .
( This is ironic considering that Union Station , which opened in 1903 , bears a relief on its rotunda that spells the city 's name without the -h . )
A recent playful take on the final -h of Pittsburgh appears in the name of the Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority 's brand of bottled water : PGHO , which is a portmanteau of the abbreviation PGH and the chemical name for water , HO ..
In homage to the city 's history , the " Pittsburg Plunge " at Kennywood park retains the alternate spelling without the " h " .
SEE ALSO * Alburgh ( town ) , Vermont , a town whose name was changed from Alburgh to Alburg in the 19th century , apparently by influence of the same 1891 decision that applied to the spelling of Pittsburgh .
The original Alburgh spelling was restored in 2006 , more than a century later .
* Newburgh , New York , another early U.S. city with a trailing " h " .
NOTES REFERENCES