SALTED DUCK EGG
A salted duck egg is a Chinese preserved food product made by soaking duck eggs in brine , or packing each egg in damp , salted charcoal .
In Asian supermarkets , these eggs are sometimes sold covered in a thick layer of salted charcoal paste .
The eggs may also be sold with the salted paste removed , wrapped in plastic , and vacuum packed .
From the salt curing process , the salted duck eggs have a briny aroma , a gelatin - like egg white and a firm - textured , round yolk that is bright orange - red in color .
Salted duck eggs are normally boiled or steamed before being peeled and eaten as a condiment to congee or cooked with other foods as a flavoring .
The egg white has a sharp , salty taste .
The orange red yolk is rich , fatty , and less salty .
The yolk is prized and is used in Chinese mooncakes to symbolize the moon .
Salted eggs can also be made from chicken eggs , though the taste and texture will be somewhat different , and the egg yolk will be less rich .
Salted eggs sold in the Philippines undergo a similar curing process , with some variation in ingredients used .
They are dyed red to distinguish them from fresh duck eggs .
PRODUCTION PATEROS
METHOD
Section::::Production .
Section::::Pateros method .
A popular method for processing salted eggs in the Philippines is the Pateros method .
The salted egg is prepared " Pateros style " by mixing clay ( from ant hills or termite mounds ) , table salt and water in the ratio of 1:1:2 until the admixture becomes smooth and forms a thick texture similar to cake batter .
The fresh eggs are individually dipped in the admixture , and packed in 150-egg batches in newspaper - lined 10x12x18 inch wooden boxes ( often residual boxes of dried fish packing ) .
The whole batch is then lightly wrapped in newspapers to slow down the dehydration process .
The eggs are then stored indoors at room temperature over the next 12 to 14 days to cure , the salt equilibrating in the batch by osmosis .
Curing can last up to 18 days , but that results in very long - lasting red eggs that can have a 40-day shelf life , which is largely unnecessary , as the eggs are stocked and replenished biweekly .
After the two - week curing period , the eggs are hand - cleaned with water and a brush and prepared to be boiled in low heat for 30 minutes .
Time is measured from the first moment the water boils and the eggs are immersed .
A 50-egg batch is then wrapped in fish nets for ease of removal from the cookware , which must be large enough to accommodate the batch with a two - inch covering of water .
Chicken eggs may be processed the same way , although up to 10 % of the batch can break during the process .
SEE ALSO
* Balut * Century egg * Chinese red eggs * List of egg dishes * Smoked egg
* Tea egg
REFERENCES
* Sandra Leong , 2008 .
Salted egg hunt , Mar 23 , 2008 , The Sunday Times