SAINT RALPH Saint Ralph is a 2004 Canadian comedy - drama film written and directed by Michael McGowan .
Its central character is a teenage boy who trains for the 1954 Boston Marathon in the hope a victory will be the miracle his mother needs to awaken from a coma .
The film premiered at the 2004 Toronto International Film Festival and was given a theatrical release in 2005 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ralph Walker is a teenager attending a Catholic private school .
His father was killed in World War II and his mother is hospitalized with an unidentified illness .
Ralph is naturally prone to mischief and often finds himself an outcast among his classmates .
He tries to emulate the conduct of grown ups , and is caught smoking cigarettes and masturbating by headmaster Father Fitzpatrick .
Already labeled a troublemaker , Ralph is forced to join the school 's cross country team to relieve him of his excess energy .
When Ralph 's mother falls into a coma , he is told it will take a miracle for her to survive .
When running coach Father Hibbert , a former world class marathoner who was forced to quit running when he injured his knee , claims it would be a miracle if a member of his team won the Boston Marathon , Ralph decides to train for it in the hope his victory would fulfill the miracle needed to save his mother 's life .
At first , Ralph can not even keep up with his teammates in practice .
He reads books to learn about running , uses the new techniques , and gradually improves .
Father Hibbert decides to train him despite disapproval from Father Fitzpatrick .
Ralph begins to win the respect of his classmates , and eventually wins the attention of the local media when he wins a prestigious regional race .
When Father Fitzpatrick learns Ralph intends to run the Boston Marathon , he threatens to expel him if he participates , as well as remove Father Hibbert from the priesthood should he try to interfere .
Both Ralph and his mentor must then decide how deeply they believe in miracles , and what is possible when a person risks everything without promise of success .
Both he and Father Hibbert defy Father Fitzpatrick and decide to go to Boston .
Ralph ends up winning second place after a close race with the previous year 's winner and gives the medal to his mother who wakes up from her coma .
CAST
* Adam Butcher as Ralph Walker
* Campbell Scott as George Hibbert * Gordon Pinsent as Father Fitzpatrick
*
Jennifer Tilly as Nurse Alice * Shauna MacDonald as Emma Walker *
Tamara Hope as Claire Collins * Michael Kanev as Chester Jones PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film was shot on location in Cambridge , Hamilton , and Toronto .
The song " Hallelujah " by Leonard Cohen is performed by Gord Downie .
After premiering at the Toronto International Film Festival , the film was shown at the Portland International Film Festival , the Festival du Film d'Aventures de Valenciennes and the Paris Film Festival before opening in Canada on April 8 , 2005 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
In his review in The New York Times , Stephen Holden said , " This crude , inspirational tear - jerker is as sweet as a bowl of instant oatmeal smothered in molasses . "
Sean Axmaker of the Seattle Post - Intelligencer thought the " conventionally heartwarming underdog drama does n't miss a cliche . "
He continued , " The climactic race footage is well directed ... and the understated period detail adds to the charm , but the route is painfully familiar and the obstacles are as contrived as the clunky performances .
The exception is Scott , whose sensitive turn as a priest inspired by Ralph 's conviction and commitment gives the film a touch of grace at the cost of revealing McGowan 's drab direction of every other actor .
Yet there is something inherently rousing in the finale , no matter how hackneyed , as if his conviction ultimately holds its own against the cliches . "
In the Austin Chronicle , Marrit Ingman rated the film two stars and called it " very conventional in its characterizations and narrative . "
He added , " The movie does have two things going for it ( besides Tilly in a nurse 's uniform ) .
One is its brisk , sunny aplomb .
It zips right along in cheerful montages and abbreviated scenes , divided by intertitles announcing the feasts of saints .
The second is Butcher , who seems to be something like the masculine Amanda Bynes of Canada : goofy and authentically youthful but remarkably assured onscreen ...
The film is n't going to catapult Butcher to international stardom , but he holds his own in it and helps to sell its curious logic . "
AWARD AND NOMINATIONS
* Genie Award for Best Motion Picture ( nominee )
* Genie Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role ( Adam Butcher , nominee )
* Genie Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role ( Campbell Scott and Gordon Pinsent , nominees ) * Genie Award for Best Achievement in Costume Design ( Anne Dixon , nominee )
* Canadian Screenwriting Award for Best Feature Film ( Michael McGowan , winner ) * Canadian Society of Cinematographers Award for Best Cinematography in a Theatrical Feature ( Rene Ohashi , nominee ) * Directors Guild of Canada Award for Outstanding Achievement in Direction of a Feature Film ( Michael McGowan , winner )
* Directors Guild of Canada Award for Outstanding Team Achievement in a Family Feature Film ( winner ) * Directors Guild of Canada Award for Outstanding Achievement in Production Design for a Feature Film ( Matthew Davies , nominee )
* London Canadian Film Festival Audience Award ( winner )
* Paris Film Festival Grand Prix Award ( winner ) * Young Artist Award for Best International Family Feature Film ( winner ) * Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Feature Film by a Leading Young Actor
( Adam Butcher , nominee )
* Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Feature Film by a Supporting Young Actor
( Michael Kanev , nominee ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS