QUAKERS IN NORTH AMERICA Quakers in North America constitute approximately 21 % of Quakers worldwide ( 2012 ) , according to the online Quaker Information Center .
Quakers ( or Friends ) are members of a Christian religious movement that started in England in the 17th century , and has spread throughout the United States , Canada , Mexico , and Central America .
Some Quakers originally came to North America to spread their beliefs to the British colonists there , while others came to escape the persecution they experienced in Europe .
The first known Quakers in North America arrived in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1656 via Barbados , and were soon joined by other Quaker preachers who converted many colonists to Quakerism .
Many Quakers settled in Rhode Island , due to its policy of religious freedom , as well as the British colony of Pennsylvania which was formed by William Penn in 1681 as a haven for persecuted Quakers .
THE ARRIVAL OF THE QUAKERS Section::::The arrival of the Quakers .
Mary Fisher and Ann Austin are the first known Quakers to set foot in the New World .
They traveled from England to Barbados in 1655 and then went on to the Massachusetts Bay Colony to spread the beliefs of the Friends among the colonists .
In Puritan - run Massachusetts the two women were persecuted , imprisoned , and their books were burned .
Only one man , Nicholas Upsall , was kind to them during their imprisonment .
Nicholas became a Friend himself and began spreading Friends ' beliefs in Massachusetts .
Due to the intolerance of the Puritans , the Quakers eventually left the Massachusetts bay colonies and migrated to the more tolerant colonies in Rhode Island .
THE FIRST MONTHLY MEETING Section::::The first Monthly Meeting .
Nicholas Upsall was banished from Boston and took refuge in the town of Sandwich , Massachusetts .
It was there that he helped to establish the first Monthly Meeting of Friends in the United States , which began meeting in 1657 at the home of William and Priscilla Allen .
Besides the Allens and Upsall , those in attendance included Richard Kerley and Elizabeth Newland .
QUAKERS IN NEW JERSEY AND PENNSYLVANIA Section::::Quakers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania .
The first Friends who settled along the Delaware River were John Fenwick , Edward Wade , John Wade , and Richard Noble .
They formed a settlement at Salem , New Jersey , in 1675 .
In 1681 , King Charles II granted William Penn , a Quaker , a charter for the area that was to become Pennsylvania .
Penn guaranteed the settlers of his colony freedom of religion .
He advertised the policy across Europe so that Quakers and other religious dissidents would know that they could live there safely .
On November 10 , 1681 , Robert Wade established the first Monthly Meeting in the colony at his home , which eventually became the Chester Monthly Meeting .
BRANCHES OF QUAKERISM IN NORTH AMERICA Section::::Branches of Quakerism in North America .
Quakers in North America are diverse in their beliefs and practices .
Friends there have split into various groups because of disagreements throughout the years .
Liberal Friends emphasize the Inner Light as a source of inspiration and guidance .
They practice unprogrammed ( i.e. , spontaneous , Spirit - led ) worship , and have no ordained clergy .
Among them are both Christians and universalists .
Many liberal Friends groups are part of the Friends General Conference .
Some of them are part of both the Friends General Conference and the Friends United Meeting ; others are independent or not affiliated with any larger group .
They are very involved in service projects but not in evangelism .
They are widespread throughout Canada and the United States but are concentrated in Pennsylvania , New York , and New Jersey .
Pastoral Friends emphasize the Bible as a source of inspiration and guidance .
They practice programmed ( i.e. , planned ) worship led by ordained clergy .
Most pastoral Friends groups are part of the Friends United Meeting .
They conduct both service projects and evangelism , and are found primarily in Indiana , North Carolina , Iowa , and Ohio .
Conservative Friends are a small group that emphasize both the Inner Light and the Bible as sources of inspiration and guidance .
They practice unprogrammed worship .
Many of them adhere to the traditional standards of " plainness " in speech and dress ( see Testimony of Simplicity ) .
Their meetings are not part of any larger groups .
They are found primarily in Iowa , Ohio , and North Carolina .
Evangelical Friends strongly emphasize the Bible as a source of inspiration and guidance , considering it the ultimate authority for faith and practice .
They practice planned worship led by ordained clergy .
Their congregations are often called churches instead of meetings , and they are usually part of Evangelical Friends International .
They are very active in evangelism and missionary outreach as well as service projects .
They are found throughout the United States and Latin America but are concentrated in Guatemala , Panama , Ohio , California , Oregon , and Kansas .
The Religious Society of Free Quakers , originally called " The Religious Society of Friends , by some styled the Free Quakers " , was established on February 20 , 1781 in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
More commonly known as Free Quakers , the Society was founded by members of the Religious Society of Friends , or Quakers , who had been expelled for failure to adhere to the Peace Testimony during the American Revolutionary War .
Many of its early members were prominent Quakers involved in the American Revolution before the society was established .
Notable Free Quakers at the early meetings include Lydia Darragh and Betsy Ross .
Following the end of the American Revolutionary War , the number of Free Quakers began to dwindle as some members died and others were either accepted back into the Society of Friends or by other religious institutions .
There is a small group of Free Quakers in Indiana who continue the tradition of the Five Principles ( Inner Light , peace , simplicity , justice , stewardship ) and the Five Freedoms ( from creeds , from clergy , from public worship , from organized membership , from evangelization ) .
Today , the descendants of the original Free Quakers hold an annual meeting of the Religious Society of Free Quakers at the Free Quaker Meetinghouse in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
SEE ALSO
* Quakers in Latin America
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Statistics from Quaker Information Center * Distribution Map from Friends World Committee for Consultation