SOLE SURVIVOR POLICY
The Sole Survivor Policy or DoD Directive 1315.15 " Special Separation Policies for Survivorship " describes a set of regulations in the Military of the United States that are designed to protect members of a family from the draft or from combat duty if they have already lost family members in military service .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The issue that gave rise to the regulations first caught public attention after the five Sullivan brothers were all killed when the USS Juneau ( CL-52 ) was sunk during World War II .
The policy was enacted as law in 1948 .
No nominally peacetime restriction was in place until 1964 during the Vietnam War ; in 1971 , Congress amended the law to include not only the sole surviving son or daughter , but also any son or daughter who had a combat - related death in the family .
Since then , each branch of the military has made its own policies with regard to separating immediate family members .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Before the Sole Survivor Policy was officially implemented in 1948 , several occasions occurred when sole survivors were excused from active service .
In World War II , the Borgstrom brothers , Elmer , Clyde , and twins Rolon and Rulon , were killed within a few months of each other in 1944 .
Their parents then successfully petitioned for their son Boyd , who was also on active duty , to be released from service .
Their sixth son , Elton , who had not yet reached conscription age , was exempted from military service .
The three Butehorn brothers of Bethpage , New York , Charles , Joseph , and Henry , were all deployed during World War II .
After Charles was killed in action in France in 1944 and Joseph was killed in action in the Pacific in 1945 , Henry , who was serving with the Army Air Forces in Italy , was ordered home by the War Department .
The " Veterans of Foreign Wars " post in Bethpage is named after their sacrifice .
In the case of the Niland brothers , U.S. intelligence believed that all but one of four siblings were killed in action .
The eldest brother , Technical Sergeant Edward Niland , of the U.S. Army Air Forces , was later found to have been held in a prisoner of war camp in Burma .
The academy - award winning film Saving Private Ryan , directed by Steven Spielberg , was loosely based on the Niland brothers ' story .
Both the Borgstrom and Butehorn incidents occurred before the Sole Survivor Policy was put into effect in 1948 .
They , along with the deaths of all of the Sullivan brothers in 1942 , helped lead to it .
Jason and Nathan Hubbard joined the army after their brother Jared had died in Iraq in 2004 .
In 2007 , Nathan died in a helicopter crash .
Military officials ordered Jason home shortly after .
Jeremy , Ben , and Beau Wise served in active combat roles in the Afghan War .
Jeremy , a former Navy SEAL , was at a CIA base as a military contractor and was killed in 2009 when a suicide bomber attacked the base .
Later in 2011 , Ben , an Army Special Forces combat medic , was seriously wounded in Afghanistan and died of his injuries at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center .
Beau was deployed in Afghanistan with the Marines at that time and was immediately relieved of combat duties and returned to the United States .
REGULATIONS Section::::Regulations .
This policy protects " only sons / daughters " , " the last son / daughter to carry the family name " , and " sole surviving sons / daughters " only during peacetime .
In times of war or national emergency as declared by the US Congress , this provision does not apply to any of the above .
Also , this provision is voluntary , meaning that the member wishing to be sent home has to request for the policy to be applied and get his application approved .
Furthermore , it does not apply strictly to the sole surviving son but also to all surviving sons .
Members of the Armed Forces who are not eligible for Department of Defense Directive 1315.15 , " Special Separation Policies for Survivorship " , include those who currently have court - martial charges pending against them or those who have been convicted by court - martial .
The policy was changed to allow both enlisted and officers to apply for this discharge .
If members of the Armed Forces re - enlist or voluntarily extend their active duty beyond the requirement after having been notified of a death in the family , those members automatically becomes ineligible .
SEE ALSO
* ( 1969 )
– deaths of three Sage brothers on USS Evans
* Bixby letter *
Only child REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Sole Surviving Son or Daughter " by Rod Powers
* U.S. Navy policy regarding family members serving together at sea * DoD Special Separation Policies for Survivorship Directive
* Snopes article regarding this topic
* US ' sole survivor ' to leave Iraq
* House OKs benefits for military ' sole survivors '
* Military ' sole survivors ' bill goes to president