CRYSTAL BEACH , TEXAS Crystal Beach is an Unincorporated community in the Bolivar Peninsula census - designated place , in Galveston County , Texas , United States .
Also known as Patton , Crystal Beach stretches 7 miles ( 10 km ) along Texas State Highway 87 in the middle of Bolivar Peninsula .
It is located along 27 miles of beach on the Bolivar Peninsula .
It is a popular destination thanks to its permitting of camping and fires , as well as its fishing opportunities .
Some fish in the surf , while others take advantage of Rollover Fish Pass or the rocks of the North Jetty .
The pass is named for the practice of ship captains from the days of Spanish rule through prohibition , who , to avoid the Galveston customs station , rolled barrels of import or export merchandise over that part of the peninsula .
Crystal Beach is served by the Bolivar Chamber of Commerce , which is the official source for business , tourism and government information for the Bolivar Peninsula .
Crystal Beach and the entire Bolivar Peninsula suffered catastrophic damage from Hurricane Ike on September 12–13 , 2008 .
The majority of the area was damaged by a storm surge of over 20 feet , added to the morning high tide , plus higher waves on top .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The sole initial recorded activity was in the Patton community .
The Patton Beach post office operated from 1898 to 1900 .
The Crystal Beach site was settled in the early 20th century .
Patton served as a railroad station .
When the railroad ended in the early 1940s , the name of the community became " Crystal Beach .
"
The community incorporated in 1971 .
Four subsequent attempts to disincorporate the municipality occurred in the mid-1980s .
The municipality ended in 1987 .
Afterward , supporters of incorporation and supporters of disincorporation lost and gained control .
During 1990 the community , which remained unincorporated , had a full - time population recorded as 787 .
Other estimates stated that the community had as many as 1,600 full - time residents .
Around that time Crystal Beach was the largest Bolivar Peninsula community .
Officials estimated that 80 % of the property owners of Crystal Beach residents were people who vacationed during holidays , summers , and weekends .
In 1990 Crystal Beach had one bank , one hotel , one supermarket , and the headquarters of most of the Bolivar Peninsula real estate agencies .
The community sustained severe damage after Hurricane Ike struck in September 2008 ; the hurricane obliterated many vacation houses .
HURRICANE IKE Section::::Hurricane Ike .
Crystal Beach and the entire Bolivar Peninsula suffered catastrophic damage from Hurricane Ike on the night of September 12–13 , 2008 .
The majority of the area was damaged by a storm surge of over 20 ft , during the high tide of 4:14 a.m. , adding 1.5 - 2.3 ft more height to the storm tide , plus higher waves on top .
Most of the houses were vacation homes , and it had appeared that most of them sustained significant damage .
Nearly every house south of Ridgeway was completely destroyed .
Carl Griffith , an owner of an exotic game ranch and a former Jefferson County sheriff and judge , said that he saw many newly manufactured cars in the debris .
Griffith believed that this indicated that many people were killed in the storm ; Griffith explained that people would not likely leave newer cars alone and flee without them .
For several days after the hurricane , a rumor swirled stating that a tiger roamed the streets after Ike hit , as the storm opened an exotic animal compound .
Police found the tiger inside the compound .
After Hurricane Ike the United States Postal Service temporarily relocated Crystal Beach post office box services to Winnie , Texas .
GOVERNMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE Section::::Government and infrastructure .
The United States Postal Service operates the Crystal Beach Station Post Office at 2000 Texas State Highway 87 .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Crystal Beach residents are zoned to Galveston Independent School District schools .
Residents attend Crenshaw Elementary and Middle School for grades Kindergarten through 8 .
The current Crenshaw campus opened in 2005 , on land donated by a third party .
The building , designed by Bay Architects , is located at Texas State Highway 87 and Helen Drive .
The current Crenshaw school was built off of the ground and as a hurricane shelter .
It includes a cafeteria that includes a stage and a gymnasium .
Carter Thompson of the Galveston County Daily News wrote " A slight nautical theme shows up in a lobby that resembles a wheelhouse . "
Prior to the opening of the current campus , two separate campuses housed portions of the Crenshaw school .
Residents attend Ball High School in Galveston .
Crystal Beach is within the Galveston College service area .
PARKS AND RECREATION Section::::Parks and recreation .
The Galveston County Department of Parks and Senior Services operates the Joe Faggert Community Center at 1760 State Highway 87 .
The county also has Gregory Park along State Highway 87 and Noble Carl Park at 1760 State Highway 87 .
SEE ALSO
* Gilchrist , Texas – nearby settlement on the peninsula .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Crystal Beach web site
* Bolivar Chamber of Commerce * Crenshaw Elementary and Middle School