BOROUGHS OF NEW YORK CITY New York City encompasses five county - level administrative divisions called boroughs : Manhattan , Brooklyn , Queens , The Bronx , and Staten Island .
All boroughs are part of New York City , and each of the boroughs is coextensive with a respective county , the primary administrative subdivision within New York State .
Queens and The Bronx are concurrent with the counties of the same name , while Manhattan , Brooklyn , and Staten Island correspond to New York , Kings , and Richmond Counties respectively .
Boroughs have existed since the consolidation of the city in 1898 , when the city and each borough assumed their current boundaries .
However , the boroughs have not always been coextensive with their respective counties .
Before 1914 , the borough of The Bronx had been earlier in the southern part of Westchester County which had then been annexed to New York County in two stages in 1874 and 1895—finally , in 1914 the county was created to match the borough .
Before 1899 , the County of Queens included an eastern part , which was split - off during the consolidation to become Nassau County .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
The term borough was adopted to describe a form of governmental administration for each of the five fundamental constituent parts of the newly consolidated city in 1898 .
Under the 1898 City Charter adopted by the New York State Legislature , a " borough " is a municipal corporation that is created when a county is merged with populated areas within it .
The limited powers of the borough governments are inferior to the authority of the Government of New York City , contrasting significantly with other borough administrations of government used in Connecticut , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania , where a borough is an independent level of government , as well as borough forms used in other states and in Greater London .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
New York City is often referred to collectively as the five boroughs ; the term is used to refer to New York City as a whole unambiguously , avoiding confusion with any particular borough or with the Greater New York metropolitan area .
The term is also used by politicians to counter a frequent focus on Manhattan and thereby to place all five boroughs on equal footing .
In the same vein , the term outer boroughs refers to all of the boroughs excluding Manhattan , even though the geographic center of the city is along the Brooklyn – Queens border .
All five boroughs were created in 1898 during consolidation , when the city 's current boundaries were established .
CHANGES AFTER 1898 Section::::Changes after 1898 .
The Bronx originally included parts of New York County outside of Manhattan that had previously been ceded by neighboring Westchester County in two stages ; in 1874 and then following a referendum in 1894 .
Ultimately in 1914 , the present - day separate Bronx County became the last county to be created in the State of New York .
The borough of Queens consists of what formerly was only the western part of a then - larger Queens County .
In 1899 , the three eastern towns of Queens County that had not joined the city the year before — the towns of Hempstead , North Hempstead , and Oyster Bay — formally seceded from Queens County to form the new Nassau County .
The borough of Staten Island , concurrent with Richmond County , was officially the borough of Richmond until the name was changed in 1975 to reflect its common appellation , while leaving the name of the county unchanged .
DESCRIPTION OF THE BOROUGHS Section::::Description of the boroughs .
There are throughout the five boroughs of New York City , many with a definable history and character to call their own .
* Manhattan ( New York County ) is the geographically smallest and most densely populated borough ; is the symbol of New York City , as home to most of the city 's skyscrapers and prominent landmarks , including Times Square and Central Park ; and may be locally known simply as The City .
Manhattan 's ( New York County 's ) population density of 72,033 people per square mile ( 27,812 / km ) in 2015 makes it the highest of any county in the United States and higher than the density of any individual U.S. city .
Manhattan is the cultural , administrative , and financial center of New York City and contains the headquarters of many major multinational corporations , the United Nations Headquarters , Wall Street , and a number of important universities .
Manhattan is often described as the cultural , financial , media , and entertainment capital of the world .
Most of the borough is situated on Manhattan Island , at the mouth of the Hudson River .
Several small islands are also part of the borough of Manhattan , including Randall 's Island , Wards Island , and Roosevelt Island in the East River , and Governors Island to the south in New York Harbor ; Liberty Island , on which the Statue of Liberty stands , is a Manhattan exclave .
Manhattan Island is loosely divided into Lower , Midtown , and Uptown regions .
Uptown Manhattan is divided by Central Park into the Upper East Side and the Upper West Side , and above the park is Harlem .
The borough also includes a small neighborhood on the United States mainland , called Marble Hill .
Marble Hill was originally part of Manhattan Island , but is now contiguous with the Bronx after having been severed from Manhattan Island by the construction of the Harlem River Ship Canal south of the neighborhood , and having been connected to the mainland by the subsequent filling in of the Harlem River 's original path to the neighborhood 's north .
New York City 's remaining four boroughs are collectively referred to as the outer boroughs .
* Brooklyn ( Kings County ) , on the western tip of Long Island , is the city 's most populous borough .
Brooklyn is known for its cultural , social , and ethnic diversity , an independent art scene , distinct neighborhoods , and a distinctive architectural heritage .
Downtown Brooklyn is the largest central core neighborhood in the outer boroughs .
The borough has a long beachfront shoreline including Coney Island , established in the 1870s as one of the earliest amusement grounds in the country .
Marine Park and Prospect Park are the two largest parks in Brooklyn .
Since 2010 , Brooklyn has evolved into a thriving hub of entrepreneurship and high technology startup firms , and of postmodern art and design .
* Queens ( Queens County ) , on Long Island north and east of Brooklyn , is geographically the largest borough , the most ethnically diverse county in the United States , as well as the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world .
Historically a collection of small towns and villages founded by the Dutch , the borough has since developed both commercial and residential prominence .
Downtown Flushing has become one of the busiest central core neighborhoods in the outer boroughs .
Queens is the site of Citi Field , the baseball stadium of the New York Mets , and hosts the annual U.S. Open tennis tournament at Flushing Meadows - Corona Park .
Additionally , two of the three busiest airports serving the New York metropolitan area , John F. Kennedy International Airport and LaGuardia Airport , are located in Queens .
( The third is Newark Liberty International Airport in Newark , New Jersey . )
*
The Bronx ( Bronx County ) is New York City 's northernmost borough and the only New York City borough that is part of the United States mainland .
It is the location of Yankee Stadium , the baseball stadium of the New York Yankees , and home to the largest cooperatively owned housing complex in the United States , Co - op City .
It is also home to the Bronx Zoo , the world 's largest metropolitan zoo , which covers and houses over 6,000 animals .
Directly to the zoo 's north is the New York Botanical Garden , a botanical garden and National Historic Landmark .
Pelham Bay Park is the largest park in New York City , at .
* Staten Island ( Richmond County ) is the most suburban in character of the five boroughs .
Staten Island is connected to Brooklyn by the Verrazzano - Narrows Bridge and to Manhattan by way of the Staten Island Ferry , a free commuter ferry and popular tourist attraction which provides unobstructed views of the Statue of Liberty , Ellis Island , and Lower Manhattan .
In central Staten Island , the Staten Island Greenbelt spans approximately , including of walking trails and one of the last undisturbed forests in the city .
Designated in 1984 to protect the island 's natural lands , the Greenbelt comprises seven city parks .
GOVERNANCE
Section::::Governance .
Since 1914 , each of New York City 's five boroughs has been coextensive with a county of New York State – unlike most U.S. cities , which lie within a single county or extend partially into another county , constitute a county in themselves , or are completely separate and independent of any county .
Each borough is represented by a borough president .
Brooklyn , Queens , and Staten Island each have a Borough Hall with limited administrative functions .
The Manhattan Borough President 's office is situated in the Manhattan Municipal Building .
The Bronx Borough President 's office used to be in its own Bronx Borough Hall but has been in the Bronx County Courthouse for decades .
Since the abolition of the Board of Estimate in 1990 ( due to a 1989 ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court ) , the borough presidents have minimal executive powers , and there is no legislative function within a borough .
Executive functions in New York City are the responsibility of the Mayor of New York City , while legislative functions reside with the New York City Council .
The borough presidents primarily act as spokesmen , advocates , and ceremonial leaders for their boroughs , have budgets from which they can allocate relatively modest sums of money to community organizations and projects , and appoint the members of the 59 largely advisory community boards in the city 's various neighborhoods .
The Brooklyn and Queens borough presidents also appoint trustees to the local public library systems in those boroughs .
Being coextensive with an individual county , each borough also elects a district attorney , as does every other county of New York State .
While the district attorneys of Manhattan , Brooklyn , and Staten Island are popularly referred to as such by the media ( e.g. , " Manhattan D.A. Cyrus Vance , Jr. " , or " Brooklyn D.A. Kenneth P. Thompson " ) , they are technically and legally the district attorneys of New York County , Kings County and Richmond County , respectively .
There is no such distinction made for the district attorneys of the other two counties , Queens and the Bronx , since these boroughs share the respective counties ' names .
Because the five district attorneys are , technically speaking , state officials ( since the counties are considered to be arms of the state government ) , rather than officials of the city government , they are not subject to the term limitations that govern other New York City officials such as the mayor , the New York City Public Advocate , members of the city council , or the borough presidents .
Some civil court judges also are elected on a borough - wide basis , although they generally are eligible to serve throughout the city .
SIXTH BOROUGH Section::::Sixth borough .
The term sixth borough is used to describe any of a number of places that have been metaphorically called a part of New York City because of their geographic location , demographics ( they include large numbers of former New Yorkers ) , special affiliation , or cosmopolitan character .
They have included adjacent cities and counties in the New York metropolitan area as well as in other states , U.S. territories , and foreign countries .
In 2011 , New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg referred to the city 's waterfront and waterways as a composite sixth borough during presentations of planned rehabilitation projects along the city 's shoreline , including Governor 's Island in the Upper New York Bay .
The Hudson Waterfront in the U.S. state of New Jersey lies opposite Manhattan on the Hudson River , and during the Dutch colonial era , was under the jurisdiction of New Amsterdam and known as Bergen .
Jersey City and Hoboken in Hudson County , New Jersey , are sometimes referred to as the sixth borough , given their proximity and connections by rapid transit PATH trains .
Fort Lee , New Jersey , in Bergen County , opposite Upper Manhattan and connected by the George Washington Bridge , has also been called the sixth borough .
Miami and nearby areas in Florida , Philadelphia and China are locales entirely outside the city 's metropolitan area which have been called New York City 's sixth borough .
SEE ALSO
* Flags of New York City * List of counties in New York REFERENCES