APPLE CORPS V APPLE COMPUTER
Between 1978 and 2006 there were a number of legal disputes between Apple Corps ( owned by The Beatles ) and the computer manufacturer Apple Computers ( now Apple Inc. ) over competing trademark rights .
The High Court of Justice in England handed down a judgment on 8 May 2006 in favour of Apple Computer , but the companies did not announce a final settlement until 5 February 2007 .
HISTORY OF TRADEMARK DISPUTES 1978–1981 Section::::History of trademark disputes .
Section::::1978–1981 .
In 1978 , Apple Corps , the Beatles - founded holding company and owner of their record label , Apple Records , filed a lawsuit against Apple Computer for trademark infringement .
The suit was settled in 1981 with an undisclosed amount being paid to Apple Corps .
This amount was later revealed to be $ 80,000 .
As a condition of the settlement , Apple Computer agreed not to enter the music business , and Apple Corps agreed not to enter the computer business .
1986–1989 Section::::1986–1989 .
In 1986 , Apple Computer added MIDI and audio - recording capabilities to its computers , which included putting the advanced Ensoniq 5503 DOC sound chip from famous synthesizer maker Ensoniq into the Apple IIGS computer .
In 1989 , this led Apple Corps to sue again , claiming violation of the 1981 settlement agreement .
The outcome of this litigation effectively spelled the end of any further development of the highly profitable Apple II line , all forays at the time by Apple Computer into the multimedia field in parallel with the Amiga , and any future advanced built - in musical hardware in the Macintosh line .
1991 Section::::1991 .
In 1991 , another settlement involving payment of around $ 26.5 million to Apple Corps was reached .
This time , an Apple employee named Jim Reekes had included a sampled system sound called Chimes to the Macintosh operating system ( the sound was later renamed to sosumi , to be read phonetically as " so sue me " ) .
Outlined in the settlement was each company 's respective trademark rights to the term " Apple " .
Apple Corps held the right to use Apple on any " creative works whose principal content is music " , while Apple Computer held the right to use Apple on " goods or services ... used to reproduce , run , play or otherwise deliver such content " , but not on content distributed on physical media .
In other words , Apple Computer agreed that it would not package , sell or distribute physical music materials .
2003–2006
Section::::2003–2006 .
In September 2003 , Apple Corps sued Apple Computer again , this time for breach of contract , in using the Apple logo in the creation and operation of Apple Computer 's iTunes Music Store , which Apple Corps contended was a violation of the previous agreement .
Some observers believed the wording of the previous settlement favoured Apple Computer in this case .
Other observers speculated that if Apple Corps was successful , Apple Computer would be forced to offer a much larger settlement , perhaps resulting in Apple Corps becoming a major shareholder in Apple Computer , or perhaps in Apple Computer splitting the iPod and related business into a separate entity .
The trial opened on 29 March 2006 in England , before a single judge of the High Court .
In opening arguments , a lawyer for Apple Corps stated that in 2003 , shortly before the launch of Apple Computer 's on - line music store , Apple Corps rejected a $ 1 million offer from Apple Computer to use the Apple name on the iTunes store .
On 8 May 2006 the court ruled in favour of Apple Computer , with Justice Edward Mann holding that " no breach of the trademark agreement [ had ] been demonstrated " .
The Judge focused on section 4.3 of that agreement :
The Judge held Apple Computer 's use was covered under this clause .
In response , Neil Aspinall , manager of Apple Corps , indicated that the company did not accept the decision : " With great respect to the trial judge , we consider he has reached the wrong conclusion " , and announced that it would " be filing an appeal and putting the case again to the Court of Appeal " .
The judgment orders Apple Corps to pay Apple Computer 's legal costs at an estimated UK£2 million , but pending the appeal the judge declined Apple Computer 's request for an interim payment of £ 1.5 million .
The verdict coincidentally led to the Guy Goma incident on BBC News 24 , in which a job applicant mistakenly appeared on air after he was confused with computing expert Guy Kewney .
2007
Section::::2007 .
There was a hint that relations between the companies were improving at the January 2007 Macworld conference , when Apple CEO Steve Jobs featured Beatles content heavily in his keynote presentation and demonstration of the iPhone .
During that year 's All Things Digital conference , Jobs quoted the Beatles song " Two of Us " in reference to his relationship with co - panelist Microsoft chairman Bill Gates .
Speculation abounded regarding the much anticipated arrival of the Beatles ' music to the iTunes Store .
On 5 February 2007 , Apple Inc. and Apple Corps announced a settlement of their trademark dispute under which Apple Inc. will own all of the trademarks related to " Apple " and will license certain of those trademarks back to Apple Corps for their continued use .
The settlement ends the ongoing trademark lawsuit between the companies , with each party bearing its own legal costs , and Apple Inc. will continue using its name and logos on iTunes .
The settlement includes terms that are confidential , although newspaper accounts at the time stated that Apple Computer was buying out Apple Corps ' trademark rights for a total of $ 500 million .
Commenting on the settlement , Steve Jobs , Apple 's CEO said , " We love the Beatles , and it has been painful being at odds with them over these trademarks .
It feels great to resolve this in a positive manner , and in a way that should remove the potential of further disagreements in the future . "
Commenting on the settlement on behalf of the shareholders of Apple Corps , Neil Aspinall , manager of Apple Corps said , " It is great to put this dispute behind us and move on .
The years ahead are going to be very exciting times for us .
We wish
Apple Inc. every success and look forward to many years of peaceful co - operation with them . "
An announcement in April 2007 that Apple Corps had settled another long - running dispute with EMI ( and that Neil Aspinall had retired and been replaced by Jeff Jones )
further fueled media speculation that The Beatles ' catalogue would appear on iTunes .
In early September 2007 , an Apple press release for the new iPod touch , related iPod updates , and iPhone price cut was entitled " The Beat Goes On " , the title of the Beatles ' last press release before splitting up .
Although Beatles content was still unavailable from the iTunes store , each Beatle 's solo work could be accessed and downloaded on this service .
Paul McCartney was quoted in Rolling Stone as saying that their catalogue would be released through digital music stores such as iTunes in the first quarter of 2008 , but this did not happen until 2010 .
SEE ALSO
* Apple Inc. litigation * A moron in a hurry , a legal test referenced by Apple 's lawyers * Confusing similarity , a test in trademark law REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY