ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF THE QURAN
The Quran has been translated into English many times .
The first few translations were made in the 17th and 19th centuries , but the majority were produced in the 20th .
EARLY TRANSLATIONS
*
The Alcoran , Translated out of Arabic into French .
By the Andrew du Ryer , Lord of Malezair , and Resident for the French King , at ALEXANDRIA .
And Newly Englished , for the satisfaction of all that desire to look into the Turkish Vanities London , Printed Anno Dom . 1649
The earliest known translation of the Qur'an into the English Language was The Alcoran of Mahomet in 1649 by Alexander Ross , chaplain to King Charles I. This , however , was a translation of the French translation L'Alcoran de Mahomet by the Sieur du Ryer , Lord of Malezair .
L'Alcoran de Mahomet ..
* Koran , commonly called the Alcoran of Mohammed , tr .
into English immediately from the original Arabic ; with explanatory notes , taken from the most approved commentators .
To which is prefixed a preliminary discourse by George Sale London ; Printed by C. Ackers ... 1734 .
The first scholarly translation of the Qur'an based primarily on the Latin translation of Louis Maracci ( 1698 ) .
George Sale 's two - volume translation was to remain the most widely available English translation over the next 200 years , and is still in print today , with release of a recent 2009 edition .
It was Third U.S. President Thomas Jefferson 's hardcover copy , kept by the United States Library of Congress , of George Sale 's translation that was used by House Representative Keith Ellison in his oath of office ceremony , upon first being elected in 2006 to the 110th United States Congress on 3 January 2007 , generating a first - ever controversy over the choice of scripture for such a ceremony .
Section::::Early translations .
The next major English translation of note was by John Rodwell , Rector of St. Ethelburga , London , released in 1861 , entitled The Koran .
It was soon followed in 1880 with a two - volume edition by E.H. Palmer , a Cambridge scholar , who was entrusted with the preparation of the new translation for Max Muller 's Sacred Books of the East series .
20TH CENTURY TRANSLATIONS
* The Qur'an ( 1910 ) by Mirza Abul Fazl , Arabic Text and English Translation Arranged Chronologically with an Abstract ( Allahabad ) .
Mirza Abul Fazl ( 1865–1956 ) , was a native of Allahabad , India .
He was the first Muslim to present a translation of the Qur'an in English along with the original Arabic text .
*
The English Translation of the Holy Qur'an with Commentary ( 1917 ) by Maulana Muhammad Ali ( d. 1951 ) was " the first English translation by a Muslim to be generally available and to be made accessible to the West ... "
A revised edition was published in 1951 , Ali having spent the last 5 years of his life working towards it .
It was redesigned with a retypeset and expanded index in 2002 .
*
The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an ( 1930 ) by Muhammad Marmaduke Pickthall .
An English convert to Islam penned this translation at the behest of the Emir of Hyderabad while on a sojourn in India .
Pickthall 's widely printed translation was regarded as " an important milestone in the long course of Koranic interpretation " by later esteemed Qur'an translator A.J. Arberry , who also noted a few problems with Pickthall 's verse numbering , which deviated in places from what had by then become the standard Arabic edition by Gustav Fluegel .
* ( 1934 ) by Abdullah Yusuf Ali .
This translation is widely used in many English - speaking countries and was the most popular translation before the Interpretation of the Meanings of the Noble Qur'an was published in 1999 .
* The Qur'an :
Translated , with a Critical Re - arrangement of the Surahs ( 1937–39 ) by Richard Bell .
Published by Edinburgh University Press .
A. J. Arberry , in the preface to his own translation of the Qur'an , notes : " Dr Bell was a most erudite scholar of Arabic , and had devoted many years to his ' critical re - arrangement of the Surahs [ chapters ] ' ...
He quite literally took the Koran to pieces and put it together again , his meticulous reconstruction extending as far as individual verses and even parts of verses .
As he set up his translation in a kind of tabular form to indicate his views of how the discourse originally ran , it is virtually unreadable ; certainly one needs to have some detailed knowledge of the text in order to benefit by the arduous exercise of studying his hard - laboured pages . "
*
The Koran Interpreted ( 1955 ) by Arthur Arberry .
The first English translation by an academic scholar of Arabic , Islam and Sufism .
For many years the scholarly standard for English translations , this rendering of the Qur'an makes a special attempt to reproduce something of the rhythms and cadence of the Arabic original .
*
The Koran ( 1956 ) by N. J. Dawood is published by Penguin .
Dawood , a native Arabic speaker from Iraq 's now defunct Jewish community , is said to have preferred comprehensibility to literalism in translation , making his version comparatively easy to read .
The first edition of the Dawood translation rearranged the chapters ( suras ) into more or less chronological order , but later editions restored the traditional sequence .
* Tafseru - l - Qur'aan ( 1957 ) by the Indian scholar Abdul Majid Daryabadi is a translation with commentary .
Daryabadi criticizes the scriptures of other religions , such as the Christian Bible , claiming they have not been transmitted faithfully .
*
The English Commentary of the Holy Quran ( 1963 )
A 5 volume English translation and interpretation published under the auspices of the Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community .
* The Running Commentary of the Holy Qur - an with Under - Bracket Comments ( 1964 ) .
Dr. Khadim Rahmani Nuri of Shillong , India .
* The Quran ( 1970 )
A free - flowing English translation by Muhammad Zafrulla Khan ( Curzon Press Ltd : London ) * The Message of the Qur'an : Presented in Perspective ( 1974 ) by Dr. Hashim Amir Ali .
The suras are presented in chronological order .
* The Message of the Qur'an ( 1980 ) by Muhammad Asad .
Written by a Jewish convert to Islam .
* The Holy Qur'an :
The Arabic Text and English Translation ( 1981 ) , by Muhammad Sarwar , a Shi'a Muslim cleric .
* Al - Qur'an :
A Contemporary Translation ( 1984 ) by Ahmed Ali .
Published by Akrash Publishing , 1984 ; Oxford University Press , Delhi , 1987 ; Final Revised Edition , Princeton University Press , New Jersey , 1988 - 2015 ; & Rupa Publications , Delhi , 2012 .
* The Qur'an :
The First American Version ( 1985 ) ; by Dr. Thomas Ballantyne Irving / T.B. Irving ( Al Hajj
Ta'lim
Ali Abu Nasr )
, Dr Irving is a Canadian Muslim who is an author , professor , translator ( Arabic , Spanish ) and activist .
His English - only edition uses a North American vernacular .
Published by Amana Books , Brattleboro , Vermont .
* The Holy Qur'an ( 1988 ) by Syed V. Mir Ahmed Ali .
A translation used by English - speaking Shi'ite Muslims .
* The Holy Qur'an : Arabic Text and English Translation ( 1990 )
As explained by Allamah Nooruddin , and translated from Arabic into modern English by Amatul Rahman Omar , the first woman in Islamic history to translate the Qur'an into English , with her husband Abdul Mannan Omar .
Currently it is in its third edition and ninth printing ( ) .
*
The Clarion Call of the Eternal Quran ( 1991 ) , An English translation from Islamic political perspective by Muhammad Khalilur Rahman ( Dhaka , Bangladesh ) .
He is son of Late Ishaq Bardwani , the first Khalifa of Ashraf Ali Thanwi .
* Quran : The Final Testament ( 1992 ; revision of work first published in 1981 ) is the work of the controversial teacher and computer scientist Rashad Khalifa .
Khalifa claimed that he had used mathematics and computers to find hidden meanings in the Qur'an .
* The Noble Qur'an ( 1992 ) ; by Dr. T. B. ( Thomas Ballantyne )
Irving
( Al Hajj Ta'lim Ali Abu Nasr ) .
Arabic text with English translation and commentary by Dr. Irving .
Published by Amana Books , Brattleboro , Vermont .
*
The Glorious Qur'an ( 1993 ) , a joint translation by the Egyptian - born UK resident Dr. Ahmad Zidan and the British Muslim convert Mrs. Dina Zidan .
* A Simple Translation of The Holy Quran ( 1993 ) , by Dr. Mir Aneesuddin .
This translation uses Simple English , also called Basic English .
It is published by the Islamic Academy of Sciences , Hyderabad , India .
* The Glorious Qur'an ( 1999 through 2013 ) , by Dr. Syed Vickar Ahamed , is a simple translation meant for young adults seeking divine and eternal guidance to live a healthy , honest , complete and pious life .
Published by the New York - based publisher Tahirke Tarsile Qur'an .
Translation is approved by Al - Azhar , Islamic Research Academy , Cairo , Egypt ( 1998 , and again in 2004 ) and by Pusat Islam , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia ( 1999 , See KDN.Q.03/913/1.2/0/65/1999 ) .
First published in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia in 1999 in full color by TR Group of Companies ( ) .
Since then , there are eight editions and numerous printings in the US by Al - Furqaan Foundation , Lombard , Illinois ( 978 - 9773009 - 2 - 1 ) and by Tahirke Tarsile Qur'an , Elmhurst , New York ( ) .
It is available throughout the world .
* The Holy Qur'an ( 1997 ) by Saheeh International is a translation by three American women converts .
It is published by the Dar Abul Qasim Publishing House , Saudi Arabia .
* Al - Qur'an : Guidance for Mankind ( 1997 ) by M. Farooq - e - Azam Malik .
*
Towards Understanding the Ever - glorious Qur'an ( 1997 ) was translated by Dr Muhammad Mahmoud Ghali , faculty of languages and translation , Al - Azhar University , and published by Cairo : Publishing House for Universities .
* Interpretation of the Meanings of the Noble Qur'an ( 1999 ) by Darussalam ( first published 1977 ) is translated by Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan and the Moroccan Salafi scholar Muhammad
Taqi - ud - Din al - Hilali .
This translation is among the most widely read translations in the world , primarily because it is the officially promoted translation of the Saudi Government .
* The Qur'an ( 1999 ) by Mohammedali Habib Shakir is an English translation directed towards Shia Muslims .
It is published in New York by Tahirke Tarsile Qur'an .
* The Noble Qur'an :
A New Rendering of Its Meaning in English ( 1999 ) by Abdalhaqq Bewley and Aisha Bewley .
The husband - and - wife team behind this translation are disciples of Abdalqadir as - Sufi .
They have also translated the Muwatta of Imam Malik , Tafsir al - Qurtubi , and the Ash - Shifa of Qadi Iyad .
*
The Quran : A Poetic Translation ( 1999 ) , a recent work by the Iranian - born lecturer , translator and linguist Fazlollah Nikayin , attempts a poetic rendering of the Qur'an .
21ST CENTURY TRANSLATIONS
* An Interpretation of the Qur'an ( 2000 ) translated by Majid Fakhry , a Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the American University of Beirut who was born in Lebanon and now resides in the United States .
* Translation and Commentary on The Holy Quran ( 2000 ) , a 1,256 page work by the Indian - Bengali translator Dr. Zohurul Hoque .
* The Majestic Qur'an :
An English Rendition of Its Meanings ( 2000 ) was translated by a committee that included the Cambridge professor Timothy Winter , the American Muslim writer Uthman Hutchinson , and Mostafa al - Badawi .
It is published by Starlatch Press .
* The Qur'an in Persian and English ( Bilingual Edition , 2001 ) features an English translation by the Iranian poet and author Tahere Saffarzadeh .
* The Qur'an ( 2002 ) , by the UK - based Afghan - born writer M. J. Gohari , is an Oxford Logos Society imprint .
* " Quran - The Living Truth " ( 2003 ) by Shaikh Basheer Ahmed Muhuyiddin )
* The Tajwidi Qur'an ( 2003 ) is a translation by an American Muslim convert , Nooruddeen Durkee .
It presents the Arabic text using a romanized transliteration system that allows English - speaking readers to pronounce the Arabic .
The English translation is an amalgamation of other translations .
* The Qur'an with an English Paraphrase ( 2003 ) , a translation by Indian - born Sayyid Ali Quli Qara'i , is an imprint of the Iranian Centre for Translation of the Holy Qur'an .
* The Qur'an :
A New Translation ( 2004 ) by a well - known California - based translator of numerous Buddhist works , Dr. Thomas Cleary .
Based on an earlier , partial translation , which was highly praised by the famous American Muslim scholar Hamza Yusuf .
* The Qur'an ( 2004 ) , by M.A.S. Abdel - Haleem , is published by Oxford World Classics .
*
The Quran : A Reformist Translation ( 2007 ) , is a recent translation by the team of Edip Yuksel , Layth Saleh al - Shaiban , and Martha Schulte - Nafeh .
They claim to offer a non - sexist understanding of the text .
*
The Sublime Qur'an ( 2007 ) is by Laleh Bakhtiar , and it was claimed to be the first translation of the Qur'an by an American woman ( individually , Sahih international ( 1997 ) was translated by three American women ) .
* The Qur'an ( 2007 ) , a recent translation by the retired Oxford University lecturer and Arabist Alan Jones .
* The Qur'an with Annotated Interpretation in Modern English ( 2007 ) by Ali Ünal .
The translator is a member of the Gülen Movement , a Turkish Islamic group .
* Quran Made Easy ( 2007 ) is a translation by Mufti Afzal Hoosen Elias .
*
The Meanings of the Noble Qur'an with Explanatory Notes ( 2007 ) , 2 volumes , revised with Indo - Pak Arabic Script ( 2016 ) , is a translation by Pakistani leading scholar Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani .
( A single - volume edition is also available . )
* The Gracious Qur'an :
A Modern Phrased Interpretation in English ( 2008 ) by Dr. Ahmad Zaki Hammad , of Egypt 's Al - Azhar University .
*
The Message - A Translation of the Glorious Qur'an ( 2008 ) was translated by the Monotheistic Group , which claims to be a group of progressive Muslims .
* The Qur'an :
A New Translation ( 2008 ) by Tarif Khalidi , a professor of Islamic Studies at the American University of Beirut .
The translation is published by Penguin Classics .
*
The Generous Qur'an ( 2009 ) is a translation by Usama Dakdok , an Arabic - speaking Christian .
*
The Quran : Translation and Commentary with Parallel Arabic Text ( 2009 ) by Maulana Wahiduddin Khan .
Published in India .
* Irfan ul Quran ( 2009 ) is a translation by the Pakistani scholar Muhammad Tahir - ul - Qadri .
It was released together with an Urdu translation of the same name by Minhaj - ul - Quran Publications .
* The Holy Qur'an : Guidance for Life ( 2010 ) is a translation by the American Muslim writer Yahiya Emerick , who has also published the Complete Idiot 's Guide to Understanding Islam .
* The Easy Qur'an .
( 2010 ) by Imtiaz Ahmad .
Published by Tawheed Center of Farmington Hills .
* The Qur'an ( 2011 ) , translated into American English by the Bangalore resident Nazeer Ahmed .
* The Glorious Qur'an ( 2011 ) is a translation by the Pakistani scholar Muhammad Tahir - ul - Qadri .
It was published in the UK by Minhaj - ul - Quran Publications .
* The Qur'an as It Explains Itself ( 5th edition , Mar 2012 ) is a translation by Dr. Shabbir Ahmed that attempts to explain Qur'anic verses by cross - references within the Qur'an .
* The Wise Qur'an :
A Modern English Translation ( 2012 ) is a translation by the Chicago - based writer and lecturer Dr. Assad Nimer Busool .
* Quran in English : Clear and Easy to Read ( 2012 ) .
Translated by Talal Itani .
Published by ClearQuran .
* What is in the Quran ?
Message of the Quran in Simple English ( 2013 ) .
Translated by Professor Abdur Raheem Kidwai , Aligarh Muslim University .
Published by Viva Books , New Delhi , India . .
* Holy Qur'an : Text & Translation .
( 2014 )
An ongoing , partially published translation , translated by Yasin T. al - Jibouri , an Iraqi - American writer , editor and translator who also previously worked on editing various translations of Qur'an .
*
The Clear Quran : A Thematic English Translation ( 2015 ) by Dr. Mustafa Khattab ( Al - Azhar University ) .
Published by SirajPublications.com
* The Study Quran : A New Translation and Commentary ( 2015 ) .
Seyyed Hossein Nasr , University Professor of Islamic Studies at George Washington University , editor - in - chief ; Caner K. Dagli , Maria Massi Dakake , Joseph E. B. Lumbard , general editors ; Mohammed Rustom , assistant editor .
Featuring verse - by - verse commentaries and essays by both Shiite and Sunni scholars .
Published by HarperOne , * The Division by Division English Interpreation of the Holy Qur'an In The Order of Revelation ( 2015 ) by Hakkı Yılmaz .
Published by Hakkı Yılmaz .
* The Qur'an Interpretation .
2 vols .
by Mohammed - Ali Hassan Al - Hilly ( 1968 , Iraq ) , translated by E. A. Nassir ( 2016 , Beirut ) .
* The Magnificent Qur'an :
A 21st Century English Translation ( 2016 ) is a conceptual translation by Ali Salami , Professor of Translation Studies and English Literature at the University of Tehran .
Published by Leilah Publication , Arizona .
*
The Quran : God 's Message to Mankind .
New Millennium Exposition - an exegesis for the 21st .
Century with Quindex .
English .
( 2016 ) by Paigham Mustafa .
Annotated throughout with Quranic concepts section .
Publisher ( UK )
Xeitre - Signat .
* The Qur'an : Treasure of the Faith of Islam .
Sacred Arabic Text and Parallel Transliteration .
English Translation and Paraphrasing by Dr. Badr Hashemi .
Six volumes ( 2016 ) .
Published by the Holy Qur'an Research Foundation ( Trust ) in Islamabad , PK .
* Noor Al Bayan .
English .
( 2018 ) by Dr. Sayed Jumaa Salam .
Publisher ( CA )
Salam Educational Center
* The Majestic Quran : A plain English Translation by Dr Musharraf Hussain al Azhari , 2018 Published by Invitation Publishing . .
TRANSLATIONS FROM URDU INTO ENGLISH
* The Meaning of the Qur'an ( Lahore , 1967 ) , by Muhammad Akbar is the first English translation of Maulana Abul Ala Maududi 's original Urdu translation of the Qur'an .
Towards Understanding the Qur'an ( 2006 ) is a later English translation by Dr. Zafar Ishaq Ansari .
* Kanzul Iman ,
Ahmad Raza Khan Barelvi 's ( 1856 - 1921 C , E,1272 - 1340 H )
Urdu translation , originally published in 1910 , has been translated into English several times .
The first translation into English was by University of Kuwait - based Professor Hanif Akhtar Fatmi .
A second translation was completed by Professor Shah Fareed al Haq .
Aqib Farid Qadri recently published a third translation .
Maulana Muhammad Husain Mukaddam in 2012 has committed a fourth translation .
Further , Mukaddam 's translation is also available as a two volume tafsir entitled " Noor al Irfan " with commentary taken from Mufti Ahmad Yar Khan Naeemi , 1st edition from 2003 .
* Exposition of the Holy Quran ( 1996 ) by Ghulam Ahmed Pervez is an English rendering of the 1961 Urdu translation , Mafhum - al - Quran .
Available in both print & pdf by Tolu - E - Islam .
* " Jamal Ul Qur'an " ( The Beauteous Qur'an ) by Zia - ul - Ummat Justice Pir Muhammad Karam Shah Al - Azhari , translated into English by Professor Anis Ahmad Sheikh , 3rd edition in 2004 .
Published by Zia - ul - Qur'an Publications in Lahore - Karachi , Pakistan .
TRANSLATIONS
BY AUTHENTIC SUNNI MUSLIM SCHOLARS Section::::Translations by Authentic Sunni Muslim Scholars .
The following English translations are done by the authentic and Bid'ah - free Sunni Muslim scholars for those Bid'ah - free Sunni Muslims who follow the Hanafi , Maliki , Shafi'i , and Hanbali jurisprudence and the Ash'ari and Maturidi creed of Sunni Islam :
* Tafseeru - l - Qur'aan ( 1957 ) by the Indian scholar
Abdul Majid Daryabadi is a translation with commentary in 4 volumes .
The author was a disciple of Mawlana Muhammad Ashraf Ali Thanwi .
*
* The Noble Qur'aan ( Tafseer - e-'Uthmaanee ) ( 1991 ) by Mawlana Ashfaq Ahmad , translated from the Urdu translation and commentary of Mahmud al - Hasan Deobandi and Shabbir Ahmad Usmani .
It is published in 3 volumes .
* * Ma'ariful - Qur'an ( 1969 - 2003 ) by Mufti Muhammad Shafi Deobandi .
It was edited , revised , and supervised with an introduction by Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani , who also translated parts of it along with his teachers Hasan Askari and Muhammad Shameem and his brother Wali Raazi ' Uthmani .
The 6th volume was translated by Muhammad Ishrat Husain and the last volume was translated by Mawlana Ahmad Khaleel ' Azeez .
A book called " ' Uloomu - l - Qur'aan ( An Approach to the Qur'aanic Sciences ) " was written by Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani as a lengthy introduction to the translation and commentary of the Qur'aan .
It was translated by Muhammad Sawleeh Siddeeqi and revised and edited by Rafeeq ' Abdur - Rahmaan .
*
* Illuminating Discourses on the Noble Qur'aan ( Anwaaru - l - Bayaan ) by Mufti Muhammad Ashiq Ilahi Madani .
It is a translation and commentary of the Qur'aan in 5 volumes .
The translation was edited by Mufti Afzal Husain Ilyaas and revised by Mawlana Arshad Fakhri based on the Ma'ariful - Qur'an .
( 2003 )
* * Tafsir Ibn Kathir : Exegesis of the Grand Holy Qur'an ( 4 volumes ) by Abu - l - Fidaa ' '
Imaadu - d - Deen Ismaa'eel Ibn ' Umar Ibn Kathir Al - Quraishi Ash - Shafi'i Al - Ash'ari Al - Busrawee Ad - Dimashqi .
The unabridged translation was done by Dr. Muhammad Mahdee Ash - Shareef and published by Daaru - l - Kutub Al-'Ilmiyyah , Beirut , Lebanon in 2006 .
*
*
Qur'aan Made Easy ( 2007 ) is a translation by Mufti Afzal Husain Ilyaas , Mawlana Isma'eel Ibrahim , and Yoosuf Khatrada incorporating the in - line commentary from Tafseer - e-'Uthmaanee by ' Allamah Shabbir Ahmad Usmani .
*
* The Meanings of the Noble Qur'an with Explanatory Notes ( 2007 ) , 2 volumes , revised with Indo - Pak Arabic Script ( 2016 ) , is a translation by Indian - born Pakistani leading scholar Shaykh al - Islām Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani .
( A single - volume edition is also available . )
* SEE ALSO * Quran oath controversy of the 110th United States Congress REFERENCES Section::::References .
14 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Compare
English Qur'an Translations Side - by - Side * Holy Quran Translation in Easy English and 70 other languages .
* 40 different English translations Al - Quran project online
* Quran Database Archive More than 77 translations available in variety of SQL , CSV , Excel , Text and HTML for developers and web site owners
*
Islam Awakened Compares English Qur'an translations verse - by - verse ARCHIVE.ORG *
The full text of Ross 's Translation in pdf
* The full text of Amatul Rahman Omar & Abdul Mannan Omar 's Translation in pdf
* The full text of Sale 's Translation in pdf
* The full text of Rodwell 's Translation in pdf
* The full text of A.J. Arberry 's Interpretation * The full text of A.J. Arberry 's Interpretation ( with verses numbered ) .
TRANSLATIONS
BY SUNNI MUSLIM SCHOLARS
AT ARCHIVE.ORG
* The full text of Mufti Muhammad Shafi Deobandi and Mufti Muhammad
Taqi Usmani 's translation and commentary in pdf *
The full text of Mufti Muhammad Ashiq Ilahi Bulandshahrī Muhājir Madanī 's translation and commentary in pdf *
The full text of Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani 's translation in pdf
*
The full text of Mufti Afzal Husain Ilyaas 's translation in pdf
* 5 out of the 7 English translations by the authentic and Bid'ah - free Sunni Muslim scholars for those Bid'ah - free Sunni Muslims who follow the Hanafi , Maliki , Shafi'i , and Hanbali jurisprudence and the Ash'ari and Maturidi creed of Sunni Islam in multiple formats WIKISOURCE