MR .
BROOKS Mr. Brooks is a 2007 American psychological thriller film directed by Bruce A. Evans starring Kevin Costner , Demi Moore , Dane Cook , and William Hurt .
It was released on June 1 , 2007 .
The film follows the eponymous character , a celebrated Portland businessman and serial killer ( Costner ) who is forced to take on a protégé ( Cook ) after being blackmailed , and has to contend with his bloodthirsty alter ego ( Hurt ) who convinces him to indulge his " habit " .
His life grows even more complicated when a driven police officer ( Moore ) reopens the investigation into his murders .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Earl Brooks ( Kevin Costner ) is a wealthy , successful businessman recently honored by the Portland , Oregon , Chamber of Commerce as " Man of the Year " .
However , Brooks lives a secret life as a serial killer , known as the " Thumbprint Killer " .
Brooks has abstained from murder for the past two years by attending twelve - step meetings for addicts , to try and cope with his " killing addiction " .
He feels the compulsion to kill rising again , however , as his i d , Marshall ( William Hurt ) , becomes more insistent .
Brooks / Marshall gives in to his addiction and kills a young couple while they are having sex in their house and , as part of his psychopathology , leaves each of the victims ' bloody thumbprints on a lampshade .
Brooks / Marshall follows his meticulous modus operandi , including fastidious preparation , cleaning up the crime scene , even locking the doors before departing , and burning the clothes he was wearing during the killings .
Brooks / Marshall then realizes that the couple 's curtains were open , facing an apartment building .
Brooks ' daughter Jane ( Danielle Panabaker ) unexpectedly arrives home , having dropped out of college in Palo Alto , California .
She visits Brooks at work and mentions that she would like to get a job with his company .
The same day , a man calling himself " Mister Smith " ( Dane Cook ) turns up at Brooks ' work and blackmails him with photographs of Brooks at the most recent murder .
Smith demands that Brooks take him along on a murder , to which Brooks reluctantly agrees .
Brooks ' wife , Emma ( Marg Helgenberger ) , reveals that Jane dropped out of college because she is pregnant .
The Brooks are then visited by detectives from Palo Alto who want to interview Jane about a murder committed in her former dorm building .
Brooks / Marshall realize that Jane committed the murder and consider letting her go to jail to " save her " from becoming like them .
Eventually , however , Brooks uses an alternate identity , flies to Palo Alto , and commits a similar murder to make it appear as if a serial killer is loose , thereby exonerating Jane .
Brooks researches the background of the police officer chasing the Thumbprint Killer , Detective Tracy Atwood ( Demi Moore ) , and discovers she 's in the middle of an agonizing divorce from Jesse Vialo ( Jason Lewis ) .
Brooks decides that Vialo and his lawyer , Sheila ( Reiko Aylesworth ) , will be Smith 's first " victims " .
At the scene of the Vialo murder , Smith wets his pants in a fit of panic , leaving his DNA for the police to discover later .
While driving away from the scene , Smith pulls a gun on Brooks / Marshall , which Brooks / Marshall had predicted would happen .
Brooks / Marshall explains to Smith that he knows he ca n't stop killing , and so plans to commit suicide to spare his family the shame of his being caught .
Brooks / Marshall takes Smith to a cemetery he owns , and explains that they will find an open grave .
Smith will shoot Brooks / Marshall and then cover him with just enough dirt to mask the body .
The next day , a casket will be lowered into the grave and covered , and Brooks / Marshall body will never be discovered .
Smith attempts to shoot Brooks / Marshall , but Brooks reveals that , at some point prior , he had broken into Smith 's apartment and bent the firing pin on Smith 's pistol , rendering it inoperable on the off - chance that Brooks / Marshall would change his mind .
Brooks / Marshall brush with death makes him realize he wants to live to see his grandchild , and he turns on his would - be murderer , slitting Smith 's throat with a shovel and hiding his body in the open grave .
With Smith 's urine providing the only DNA evidence of the Thumbprint Killer at a murder scene , Brooks / Marshall will remain undetected .
Smith is named as the Thumbprint Killer and Brooks / Marshall returns to his normal life .
Knowing he is in the clear , Brooks calls Detective Atwood , whom he has come to admire , to ask her why she is a police officer .
She replies that her wealthy father had wanted a boy , and she wanted to succeed in spite of him .
Atwood is unable to trace the call before Brooks hangs up , but she is puzzled as she realises Smith was not the voice on the line and that they may have fingered the wrong guy .
That night , Brooks has a nightmare in which Jane murders him , suggesting that he fears Jane will become like him .
CAST
* Kevin Costner as Earl Brooks - Serial killer
* Demi Moore as Detective Tracy Atwood * Dane Cook as Mr. Smith / Graves Baffert - Blackmailer
* William Hurt as Marshall - Mr. Brooks ' psychological alter ego * Marg Helgenberger as Emma Brooks - Wife * Ruben Santiago - Hudson as Detective Hawkins * Danielle Panabaker as Jane Brooks - Daughter
* Aisha Hinds as Nancy Hart - Vialo 's lawyer * Lindsay Crouse as Captain Lister - Boss * Jason Lewis as Jesse Vialo - Detective 's husband
* Reiko Aylesworth as Sheila - Husband 's lawyer
*
Matt Schulze as Thornton Meeks - Criminal * Yasmine Delawari as Sunday
* Traci Dinwiddie as Sarah Leaves * Michael Cole as Atwood 's lawyer * Laura Bailey as Flight Attendant RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Mr. Brooks opened in 2.453 theaters and grossed $ 10,017,067 , with an average of $ 4,083 per theater and ranking # 4 at the North American box office .
The film ultimately grossed $ 28,549,298 domestically and $ 19,572,602 internationally for a total of $ 48,121,900 worldwide , above its $ 20 million budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Mr. Brooks received mixed reviews from film critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , a Review aggregator , the film has a score of 55 % based on 153 reviews with an average rating of 5.7 out of 10 .
The critical consensus states " The setup is intriguing , but Mr. Brooks overstuffs itself with twists and subplots , becoming more preposterous as it goes along . "
Costner and Hurt were both praised for their performances .
The film also has a score of 45 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 34 critics indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
On the director 's commentary , Bruce Evans said that the film was to be the first of a trilogy , but as with any franchise it depended on the film 's profits .
Despite its commercial success , there are no plans to make further films .
Speaking in April 2009 , Panabaker said , " Everybody wanted to make a trilogy .
I saw Kevin [ Costner ]
last summer
and we still would love to .
The idea of my character and Kevin 's character , it 'd be so much fun .
I think you got to see how manipulative they both are with each other .
I would have loved to have done three . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on October 23 , 2007 , on both high - definition Blu - ray Disc and standard - definition DVD .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film score for Mr. Brooks was composed by Ramin Djawadi .
The soundtrack album was released on May 22 , 2007 .
The film 's soundtrack features Ramin Djawadi 's score and the song " Vicious Traditions " by The Veils .
Ramin Djawadi was nominated for the World Soundtrack Award in category Discovery of the Year in 2007 .
English metalcore band Asking Alexandria wrote a song based on the film entitled " Hey There Mr. Brooks " for their 2009 debut album Stand Up And Scream .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS