SUPERMAN AND LOIS LANE Superman and Lois Lane are among the best known fictional couples .
They were the very first superhero comic book romance .
Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster , both characters ( including Superman 's alter ego , Clark Kent ) first appeared in DC Comics ' Action Comics # 1 ( June 1938 ) .
They have remained in a complicated relationship ever since .
The couple has been portrayed in multiple Superman adaptations in different media .
The characters ' relationship was based for a long time in a love triangle in which Clark was interested in Lois who was smitten with the superhero Superman .
Clark , unable to reveal to Lois that his mild - mannered demeanor was a ruse , was unable to compete for Lois ' affection .
The irony being he was his own rival in that Clark and Superman are , in fact , the same person .
This love triangle and the dual identity were originally conceived in 1934 .
Following John Byrne 's 1986 reboot , The Man of Steel , Clark 's character became not only the more dominant personality of the Clark Kent / Superman character but also more outgoing , aggressive , and assertive .
This allowed a more natural romance to develop between Lois and Clark .
In the 1990s , Clark proposes marriage to Lois and reveals his identity as Superman to her .
They began a long engagement , which was complicated by the death of Superman , a breakup , and several other problems .
The couple finally married in ( Dec. 1996 ) .
Clark and Lois ' biological child in DC Comics canon was born in Convergence :
Superman # 2 ( July 2015 ) , a son named Jonathan Samuel Kent , who eventually becomes Superboy .
Lois appears in virtually every Superman comics and media adaptations .
She is the character most commonly associated with Superman and continues to be an essential part of the Superman mythos .
Across decades of comics and other media adaptations , in some stories , Lois knows or suspects that Clark is Superman , sometimes this is explored for humor or plot development .
CREATION Section::::Creation .
The characters , Superman / Clark Kent and Lois Lane , were created by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster .
Superman was conceived as being like the ideal Hollywood romantic hero of the time , portrayed in films by actors such as Douglas Fairbanks , Clark Gable , and Rudolph Valentino .
Siegel and Shuster were both fans of silent film actor Douglas Fairbanks , his movies The Mark of Zorro ( 1920 ) , Robin Hood ( 1922 ) , and The Black Pirate ( 1926 ) became a huge influence on their writing and art on the Superman character .
The idea of making Superman a visitor from another planet was inspired by author Edgar Rice Burroughs ' John Carter of Mars stories .
Clark Kent 's character grew out of Siegel and Shuster 's own personal lives .
His name is the combined names of actors Clark Gable and Kent Taylor .
Clark Kent 's demeanor was based on Harold Lloyd .
Lois Lane was inspired by actress Glenda Farrell 's portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of films .
Siegel took her name from actress Lola Lane .
Shuster based Lois Lane 's physical appearance on a model name Joanne Carter .
Carter later married co - creator Jerry Siegel in 1948 .
On the conception of Superman 's dual identity , Jerry Siegel said in the 1983 Nemo magazine interview : " That occurred to me in late 1934 , when I decided that I 'd like to do Superman as a newspaper strip .
I approached Joe about it , and he was enthusiastic about the possibility .
I was up late one night , and more and more ideas kept coming to me , and I kept writing out several weeks of syndicate scripts for the proposed newspaper strip .
When morning came , I had written several weeks of material , and I dashed over to Joe 's place and showed it to him .
[ This was the story that appeared in Action Comics # 1 , June , 1938 , the first published appearance of Superman . ]
You see , Clark Kent grew not only out of my private life but also out of Joe 's .
As a high school student , I thought that some day I might become a reporter , and I had crushes on several attractive girls who either did n't know I existed or did n't care I existed .
As a matter of fact , some of them looked like they hoped I did n't exist .
It occurred to me : What if I was real terrific ?
What if I had something special going for me , like jumping over buildings or throwing cars around or something like that ?
Then maybe they would notice me .
That night when all the thoughts were coming to me , the concept came to me that Superman could have a dual identity and that in one of his identities he could be meek and mild , as I was , and wear glasses , the way I do .
The heroine , who I figured would be a girl reporter , would think he was some sort of a worm , yet she would be crazy about this Superman character who could do all sorts of fabulous things .
In fact , she was real wild about him , and a big inside joke was that the fellow she was crazy about was also the fellow whom she loathed .
By coincidence , Joe was a carbon copy [ of me ] . "
Jerry Siegel objected to any proposal that Lois discovers Clark Kent is Superman because he felt that , as implausible as Clark 's disguise is , the love triangle was too important to the book 's appeal .
Siegel stated : " If Lois should ACTUALLY learn Clark 's secret , the strip would lose about 75 % of its appeal — the human interest angle .
I know that a formula can possibly prove monotonous through repetition
but I fear that if this element is removed from the story formula that makes up SUPERMAN , that this strip will lose a great part of its effectiveness . "
COMICS 1938–1986 Section::::Comics .
Section::::1938–1986 .
Superman / Clark Kent and Lois Lane first appeared in Action Comics # 1 ( June 1938 ) , other than the fact that Superman had been rocketed to Earth as an infant , his complex backstory had yet to develop .
The very first story includes a sequence in which Clark behaved in a cowardly fashion , leaving Lois to defend herself against an aggressive man , from whom Superman later saves her .
From then on , Clark was established as a shy man attracted to Lois , while she was interested in his heroic alter ego , Superman .
This remained the status quo in the comics for decades , though Lois did warm up to Clark for the most part ; yet their relationship could n't really advance with Lois left out of Clark 's secret and the Clark Kent persona is a disguise .
As early as the 1940s , Lois began to suspect that Clark Kent was Superman , the first such story appears in Superman # 17 ( July – August 1942 ) in a story titled " Man or Superman " by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster .
Across decades of comics , Lois would suspect Clark is Superman and tries to prove it , but Superman always thwarts her .
This theme became particularly pronounced in the 1950s and 1960s comics .
The first official DC Comics story where Superman marries Lois Lane ( not dreams , hoaxes or imaginary tales , but in DC canon ) was in Action Comics # 484 ( June 1978 ) .
In this 40th anniversary of Superman issue , a wizard wanted to rid the world of Superman but had no idea that Superman had a secret identity .
Clark , with no memory of being Superman and therefore no need to pretend to be a coward , finally became a man with a backbone .
The new take charge Clark Kent , who was fearless and bold , became very attractive to Lois Lane — proving that it was more about attitude and personality than superpowers that attracted her to Superman .
Lois and the new Clark began dating , fell in love and eventually he proposed and the couple got married .
On their honeymoon , when Lois saw Clark caught in a crossfire that should have killed him , but left no mark on him , she began to suspect he was really Superman .
Lois tried to cut a lock of his hair and the scissors broke .
As much as she loved Clark with no memory of being Superman , Lois knew that the world needed Superman and found the wizard who had cast the spell and had him reverse it .
Clark remembered he was Superman but also his marriage to Lois .
He took Lois to the Fortress of Solitude and married her again in a Kryptonian ceremony as Superman .
From that point on , Lois and Clark / Superman of the alternate universe known as Earth - Two remained married in DC Comics .
This version of the character stars in The Superman Family comic book in the series Mr. and Mrs. Superman , which feature the adventures of the Earth - Two Superman and his wife , Lois Lane Kent .
The couple later appeared in the 2005 Infinite Crisis limited series and the New 52 Earth 2 comic books .
In the main DC universe , things stay the same , Lois was still not allowed to discover Superman 's dual identity .
She loved Superman , but he said he belonged to the world and could n't commit to anyone .
In 1985 , the DC universe went through a revamp with the Crisis on Infinite Earths limited series .
The purpose of the year - long event was to get rid of some character histories , conflicting continuity , and overlapping worlds .
In the 1986 two - part story Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow ?
by Alan Moore and Curt Swan , that told the final tale of Superman ( which was being rebooted following the events of Crisis on Infinite Earths , before his modern introduction in the John Byrne series ) .
The story is a frame story set ten years after Superman was last seen , where Lois Lane recounts the end of Superman 's career to a reporter .
The story includes numerous attacks against Superman by his enemies , the public revelation of his secret identity as Clark Kent , and a number of deaths of his friends .
At the end of the story , it is revealed that Lois ' husband , the car mechanic Jordan Elliot is Superman .
He is without powers and living as an ordinary man with Lois and their son Jonathan .
The final image is of Jordan delivering a classic Superman wink to the reader , as he and Lois continue to " live happily ever after .
" The story was designed to honor the long history of the Superman character and serves as a complete conclusion to his mythology .
1986–2011 Section::::1986–2011 .
Following Crisis on Infinite Earths , DC Comics released six - issue limited series
The Man of Steel by John Byrne .
The series told the story of Superman 's modern origin .
Superman was now never Superboy in his youth , and Clark Kent became the real person and Superman the disguise .
There was finally a setting in which Lois could logically fall in love with Clark Kent because he was the real person this time ; although it would take years for Lois to have romantic feeling for Clark after he scooped her on the exclusive Superman story .
In Superman # 44 ( June 1990 ) , the couple buries the hatchet and begin dating and fall in love .
In Superman # 50 ( Dec. 1990 ) , Clark proposes to Lois and she accepts .
Clark did not tell Lois his secret as the superhero Superman until weeks later in Action Comics # 662 ( Feb. 1991 ) .
After contemplating the revelation and its implications , Lois decides it all comes down to love .
She loves Clark and wants to spend the rest of her life with him .
Due to the upcoming television series , a chain of events were put into motion to prevent Clark and Lois in the comics from getting married until the TV couple was ready to walk down the aisle .
Superman was killed off by Doomsday in Superman # 75 ( Jan. 1993 ) .
After a year of mourning , searching and resurrecting in The Death and Return of Superman storyline , Superman returned to the land of the living and the arms of Lois Lane .
However , because Clark and Lois on the television series met as strangers when the show debuted in September 1993 .
DC Comics launched a series of stories designed to keep them apart in the comics , including a broken engagement arc .
When Clark and Lois on the television series finally married in October 1996 , so did their comic book counterpart in the special ( Dec. 1996 ) .
In 2006 , the couple adopts a boy , the biological son of Kryptonian villains General Zod and Ursa and named him Chris Kent in the story arc Last Son .
Although Clark is quick to embrace parenthood , Lois is more reluctant , until she sees how vulnerable and sweet Chris is , and the three of them become a happy family .
When Zod invades Earth , during the battle , Chris along with his birth parents are sucked into the Phantom Zone , leaving Clark and Lois without their son and heartbroken .
Chris later returned as a teenager under the guise of Nightwing .
In the 2009 , a six - part miniseries by Geoff Johns and Gary Frank that detailed Superman 's new origin story ( replacing Mark Waid 's 2003 limited series ) in the post - Infinite Crisis DC Universe .
In the series , Lois becomes Clark 's mentor when he begins his employment at the Daily Planet .
The paper has been in financial trouble since Lex Luthor controls nearly every media outlet in Metropolis and the Daily Planet is the only major newspaper that directly attacks him .
In Superman 's first public appearance , he saves Lois when she falls off the LexCorp building .
Understanding the flying hero 's benevolence , Lois writes a positive article on him , which boosts the Daily Planet 's sales 700 % .
Eventually , Luthor becomes involved with General Sam Lane , Lois ' father , so that they can defeat Superman , believing him to be an alien threat .
Superman defeats Metallo , a U.S. soldier converted into a cyborg , and public opinion turns in Superman 's favor .
In the aftermath , Clark and Lois become friendly rivals , while Superman and Lois begin to develop mutual romantic feelings .
2011–PRESENT
Section::::2011–present .
In 2011 , DC Comics rebooted its continuity with the New 52 initiative .
In the relaunch , Lois views Clark as a friend and respects him as a journalist , but regards him as a loner who has difficulty letting people get close to him and displays no existing knowledge of his dual identity .
Superman Unchained , a nine - issue series by Scott Snyder and Jim Lee explores Clark 's connection with Lois in the New 52 .
The miniseries Convergence released in April 2015 , features a Post - Crisis version of a married Superman and Lois Lane .
The couple is expecting the impending birth of their child , as Superman is called to protect the city after it is taken out of time by a powerful alternate version of Brainiac .
Convergence shows the birth of their son , Jonathan Samuel Kent ( Clark and Lois ' biological child in DC Comics canon ) .
Following Convergence , DC announced a spin - off comic book series Superman : Lois and Clark .
The eight - issue series debuting in October 2015 by Dan Jurgens and Lee Weeks is set several years after the Convergence event .
The series focuses on Clark and Lois ' relationship and their son , Jonathan , living in the New 52 universe .
Clark and Lois operating undercover-
Superman discreetly helping out in a black variant of his suit and Lois writing exposes under the name ' Author X. '
In June 2016 , DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic book titles with DC Rebirth .
In Rebirth , DC Comics re - established Lois and Clark 's relationship and marriage in DC continuity , along with their son Jonathan , who eventually becomes Superboy .
The story arc Superman Reborn smooths over the discrepancies between the two versions of Superman and Lois Lane .
According to Mr. Mxyzptlk , the creation of the New 52 caused Superman and Lois to be separated into two people : the New 52 characters that served as the protagonists of the Superman books in 2011 - 2015 and the Post - Crisis characters that took part in the Convergence event and sired Jon .
Mxyzptlk even provides a meta - reference to their relationship and says he could n't keep Superman and Lois apart when DC Comics could n't ; obviously referencing the negative reactions from fans when DC dissolved their relationship at the beginning of the New 52 .
Thanks to Jon , the New 52 and Post - Crisis counterparts of Superman and Lois merge into complete versions of themselves , rearranging their shared histories and accommodating them into the restored DC Universe .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
The long - running radio serial
The Adventures of Superman starring the DC Comics character Superman originally aired from 1940 to 1951 .
For the bulk of the show 's run , Superman / Clark Kent was voiced by Bud Collyer and Lois Lane was voiced by Joan Alexander .
FILMS 1940S AND 1950S
SUPERMAN FILMS
Section::::Films .
Section::::1940s and 1950s Superman films .
The first live - action appearance of Superman on film is the 1948 Columbia Pictures film serial Superman .
The fifteen part black - and - white film stars Kirk Alyn as Superman / Clark Kent and Noel Neill as Lois Lane .
Both actors returned in Columbia 's second live - action Superman film , Atom Man vs. Superman ( 1950 ) .
In the 1951 independent film , Superman and the Mole Men , Superman / Clark Kent was played by George Reeves and Phyllis Coates as Lois Lane .
CHRISTOPHER REEVE
SUPERMAN FILMS
Section::::Christopher Reeve Superman films .
The film Superman was released by Warner Bros. in 1978 and based on the popular DC Comics character .
Superman / Clark Kent was portrayed by Christopher Reeve and Margot Kidder portrays Lois Lane .
It was directed by Richard Donner with music by John Williams .
The film led to three theatrical sequels , Superman II ( 1980 ) , Superman III ( 1983 ) and ( 1987 ) .
Kidder 's role in Superman III was greatly reduced due to her conflict with the producers of the film .
She returns as the female lead and Superman 's love in the fourth film .
In 2006 , was released on DVD , featuring director Richard Donner 's original vision for Superman II .
One of the most important aspects in the first and second films was the romantic relationship between the two main characters ; Clark was hopelessly in love with Lois and even gave up his powers in order to be with her .
The scene in the first movie , where Superman takes Lois in his arms and flying over the night sky of Metropolis have become classics , and has inspired several parodies and influenced many film scores over the years .
The relationship between Superman / Clark Kent and Lois Lane develops and grows over the first two films .
In Superman , Lois meets Clark when he begins working at the Daily Planet newspaper .
She is introduced to his Superman persona when he rescues her from a helicopter accident .
Lois quickly becomes smitten with Superman and accepts his offer to be interviewed for the newspaper .
During the interview , she learns about Superman 's homeworld , his abilities , and is taken into the sky for a flight over Metropolis .
In the climax of the first film , Lois is killed in an earthquake caused by Lex Luthor .
Superman is so distraught by her death that he flies around the globe at incredible speed , traveling backward in time and preventing the earthquake from occurring , saving Lois ' life .
In Superman II , Lois becomes suspicious of Clark and eventually discovers he is Superman .
Clark tells Lois more about himself , flying her to the Fortress of Solitude and revealing that he loves her .
Wanting to spend his life with Lois , Clark uses a Kryptonian device to alter his DNA , making him human .
Soon after , Clark and Lois learn that three Kryptonian have arrived on Earth and is threatening humanity .
Clark decides to restore his powers and defeats the Kryptonians .
Later , Clark finds Lois upset about knowing his secret and not being able to be open about her true feelings .
Clark kisses Lois , using his abilities to wipe her mind of her knowledge of the past few days .
SUPERMAN RETURNS Section::::Superman Returns .
The 2006 film Superman Returns serves as a homage sequel to Superman and Superman II .
Brandon Routh played the role of Superman / Clark Kent and Kate Bosworth as Lois Lane .
In the film , Superman has disappeared for many years .
On his return to Earth , not only did he find the world he left behind has changed in ways he did n't expect , but the woman he loves , Lois Lane , is a mother and is engaged to Richard White ( Perry White 's nephew ) .
Lois and Richard 's son , Jason White , is later revealed to be Superman 's son after the child begins to show superpowers .
DC EXTENDED UNIVERSE MAN OF STEEL Section::::DC Extended Universe . Section::::Man of Steel .
In 2013 Warner Bros. released a reboot of Superman film , portraying the character 's origin story .
Man of Steel , the first film in the DC Extended Universe , stars Henry Cavill in the title role as Superman / Clark Kent and Amy Adams as Lois Lane .
The film is directed by Zack Snyder and produced by Christopher Nolan .
In Man of Steel , unlike in previous adaptations , Lois was made aware of Clark 's identity as Superman very early on in the film .
The traditional love triangle between Clark Kent , Lois Lane , and Superman was removed .
This was part of an effort to reinvent Superman in the modern world .
Warner Bros. initially questioned the decision , but screenwriter David S. Goyer insisted that Lois should know Clark 's secret as Superman ; because they are trying to depict Superman in a more realistic , more relatable way .
Goyer said sidestepped the alter
ego problem is not an issue with Lois .
Moving forward Lois will be Clark 's secret keeper and they will be involved in a real relationship .
Goyer also revealed a deleted scene that was filmed but was cut from the film , where after Lois is captured by the FBI , they interrogate her and she refuses to reveal Superman 's identity .
Director Zack Snyder said Lois needed to be a match for Superman , a girl who intrigues him .
Snyder describes Superman is " falling in love " with the reporter and affirm the bond between Clark and Lois is a vital part of the film .
Producer Deborah Snyder said while Lois and Superman immediately click , their upbringings are on opposite ends of a cultural gulf that make their romance like the pairing of a country mouse with a city mouse .
" The fact that he picks Lois makes him better .
Because Lois is not the obvious choice .
She 's difficult , she 's sophisticated , she 's from the city , she 's all the things that he 's not .
They make a really interesting couple , but a complicated couple , " Deborah explained .
Deborah also stated that although Superman saves Lois physically , she saves him emotionally .
Amy Adams saw a lot to like about Lois ' straightforward approachability , a quality that would appeal to a Kansas farm boy .
" I think there was a great juxtaposition between this sort of Man of Steel and woman of Earth , " Adams said .
Henry Cavill says it 's essential for Lois to know Clark 's secret and that she saves him just as much as he saves her .
" I think the interaction between Lois and Superman is that she is obviously Superwoman , in a societal sense .
And then she 's finally found this one guy who can literally sweep her off her feet , " Cavill said .
Cavill also noted : " What is between Clark and Lois is a very personal thing .
He opens her eyes to a world she did n't know existed and she opens his eyes to the idea of what he sees as a more normal existence . "
In the film , Lois first meets Clark Kent in the Arctic , while writing a story about a scientific discovery of an unidentified object found in the Arctic ice .
There , Lois follows Clark to the buried Kryptonian scout ship and became aware of his abilities , when Clark saved and heals her after she was attacked by a Kryptonian drone .
Over the next several weeks Lois begins to search for Clark 's identity , by tracking down his activities in the past few years .
Lois eventually arrives in his hometown Smallville and speaks with his mother Martha Kent .
Clark and Lois meet again in the Smallville cemetery .
And after revealing to Lois about his father 's death , Lois decides to keep Clark 's identity a secret .
When General Zod arrives on Earth and demands the humans to surrender Kal - El ( Clark ) , Lois is arrested by the FBI , on the belief , she knows the identity of Kal - El .
Clark agrees to hand himself into the government in exchange for Lois ' freedom .
Later both Clark and Lois are taken to General Zod 's ship and are interrogated by Zod 's forces .
Clark manages to defeat Zod 's forces with the help of both Lois and Jor - El .
At the battle of Metropolis Clark kissed Lois before Zod arrives and attacked him .
Clark ultimately ended the fight by killing Zod , when Lois arrived she consoles him .
Some time afterward , Clark decides to join the Daily Planet and is introduced to Lois as a new stringer , and Lois plays along with his new secret identity .
BATMAN V SUPERMAN : DAWN OF JUSTICE
Section::::Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice .
Amy Adams and Henry Cavill reprise their role in ( 2016 ) .
Clark and Lois are now actively dating and living together .
Lois ' connection to Superman has prompted some to use her against the Kryptonian hero , with Lex Luthor initiating his plan against Superman by arranging for Lois to be abducted by insurgents and threatened so that Superman 's intervention would create a potential international incident .
At the end of the film , after Superman 's death , Martha gives Lois an engagement ring which Clark originally planned to give her .
JUSTICE LEAGUE Section::::Justice League .
Henry Cavill and Amy Adams reprise their roles in Justice League ( 2017 ) .
On what role does Lois Lane fulfill for Superman , Cavill stated that : " I think Lois was , and is , a true anchor for Superman , and she always has been . "
Lois is still grieving over Clark 's death and is writing puff pieces for the Daily Planet .
Batman and his allies decide to use the Mother Box to resurrect Superman to help them fight off Steppenwolf and his Parademon army ( but also to restore hope to mankind ) .
Superman is successfully resurrected , however , his memories have not returned and attacks the league .
Lois becomes Batman 's secret contingency plan and helps calm Superman down .
Clark leaves with Lois to his family home in Smallville where he tries to recover his memories .
Clark and Lois reaffirm their love for each other before Superman join the battle against Steppenwolf .
TELEVISION SERIES
ADVENTURES OF SUPERMAN Section::::Television series .
Section::::Adventures of Superman .
Adventures of Superman was an American television series in the 1950s .
The show is the first live - action television series to feature the comic book character Superman and began filming in California in 1951 .
Sponsored by cereal manufacturer Kellogg 's , the series ran from September 1952 to April 1958 .
The series stars George Reeves as Clark Kent / Superman , and Phyllis Coates as Lois Lane in the first season .
Noel Neill played Lois Lane from seasons two to season six opposite George Reeves .
The series follows Superman as he battles crooks , gangsters , and other villains in the city of Metropolis while masquerading as the Daily Planet reporter Clark Kent .
Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen , Clark 's colleagues at the office , often find themselves in dangerous situations which can only be resolved with Superman 's timely intervention .
LOIS & CLARK : THE NEW ADVENTURES OF SUPERMAN Section::::Lois & Clark :
The New Adventures of Superman . was a live - action television series in the 1990s and is based on the comic book character Superman .
The series takes us from the moment Clark Kent / Superman arrivals in Metropolis , and applying for a job at the Daily Planet , to his first meeting with Lois Lane , through to their romantic relationship and eventual marriage , and beyond .
The series ran from 1993 to 1997 and stars Dean Cain as Superman / Clark Kent and Teri Hatcher as Lois Lane .
The show loosely followed John Byrne 's six - issue comic book series , The Man of Steel , which significantly rewrote Superman 's origin , with Clark Kent as the true personality and Superman a disguise .
The main characteristic of this series is that it gave special focus on the relationship between Clark and Lois .
In the series , Jonathan and Martha Kent witness the crash - landing of a small spaceship in Shuster 's Field near Smallville , Kansas in 1966 .
When they investigate the craft , they discover the baby Kal - El and decide to raise him as their own , naming him Clark Jerome Kent .
27 years later , Clark moves to Metropolis and gets a job at the Daily Planet .
There , he is partnered with Lois Lane , who at first considers him little more than a pest .
Eventually , the two fall in love and marry , after a turbulent courtship : including Lois being kidnapped by Lex Luthor and replaced with a frog eating clone , Lois suffering from amnesia , and Clark being called away to serve as a leader on New Krypton .
Clark and Lois finally get married in the episode
" Swear to God ,
This Time We 're Not Kidding .
" Their marriage on the television series was timed to coincide with the release of the comic book special , which depicts the couple 's wedding in DC Comics .
SMALLVILLE Section::::Smallville .
The television series Smallville aired on The WB / CW from 2001–2011 .
The series began with a teenage Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) learning to balance the demands of his powers with his desire to lead a normal life .
It shows Clark 's reluctance to accept his Kryptonian heritage , his responsibility for his abilities , his longing desire to be normal and his constant fear of people discovering his secret .
In the series , Clark 's affection began with Lana Lang , his childhood crush in the comics .
Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) was introduced in the fourth season as Chloe Sullivan 's cousin .
Clark and Lois first developed a friendship and in later seasons a romantic interaction ; with Clark gradually starts to fall in love with Lois and realize that she is the one for him , and eventually revealing his alien origin to her .
Clark and Lois ' relationship on Smallville was in TV Guide 's " Best TV Couples of All Time " list .
The writers of the show were constrained to limit the usage of Clark and Lois ' romantically relationship , and in the Lois Lane character in general .
At Wizard World Philadelphia Erica Durance revealed that : " DC Comics has really clamped down on Lois .
You ca n't do a dream sequence ( with her and Clark ) or any of that sneaky stuff . "
Starting from season 6 ( after the release of Superman Returns ) the restrictions on Lois and Clark 's romance were less restricted .
Throughout the series , the show foreshadowed Clark and Lois ' future romances , which was woven throughout their interactions from the moment Lois was introduced to the series .
Including Lois revealing that a fortune teller once told her that she was destined to fall for a guy who flies a lot and likes to wear tights , or saying she prefers geeks in glasses .
And numerous other hints and comments made by Clark or Lois , and other characters on the show .
In season 4 , at the end of the episode " Lucy , " after Clark and Lois admit for the first time that they have become friends , two stars collide , referring to Clark and Lois as coming together .
In season 5 , series producer Darren Swimmer describes the relationship between Clark and Lois in the fifth season as " a bit of a melting of the ice .
" The two characters continue to " butt heads , " but the audience can see where there is a growing attraction and that either would be there for the other in a time of need .
Erica Durance feels that in season five it is not yet clear if either character realizes the attraction , but the joking between the two characters represents a foreshadowing of a greater relationship .
Durance sees season five as being too soon for the characters to be " in - love " because they are still getting to know each other .
In season 6 , the relationship between Clark and Lois is still undefined for the audience .
Erica Durance described the relationship between Clark and Lois in season six as something neither character wanted to put an official label on .
The pair has learned to deal with each other 's " quirks , " but there are still moments that both feel uncomfortable with .
Durance believes that Clark and Lois are satisfied with identifying with a " brother - sister friendship " label , rather than trying to discover how they both truly feel about each other .
Writer Brian Peterson describes Lois ' relationship with Oliver Queen in season six as a precursor to her future relationship with Clark .
Peterson sees the dynamic between Lois and Oliver — with Lois willingness to accept Oliver 's secret identity as Green Arrow — mirroring the relationship Lois will have with Clark .
In the episode " Hydro , " Clark and Lois share their first kiss .
However , Lois was unaware that she was kissing Clark , as he was disguising himself as Green Arrow ( Oliver , Lois ' boyfriend at the time ) .
In the episode " Crimson , " Clark is infected by Red Kryptonite ( which in the series removes his inhibitions ) .
Clark 's action , behavior and his conversation with his mother , shows that he was attracted to Lois at some level .
In season 7 , Clark and Lois made a huge progression in their relationship .
In the episode " Siren " Lois ( after breaking up with Oliver Queen ) in a very emotionally vulnerable state told Clark that she knows what it 's like to love someone who has a destiny greater than her own .
In the episode " Apocalypse " ( which heavily underlines the Superman mythos )
Jor - El sent Clark to an alternate reality where Clark never came to Earth .
And Lois meeting Clark Kent for the first time at the Daily Planet , and the two character have an instant attraction to each other .
And Clark exposing his powers to save Lois ' life and working with her to stop President Lex Luthor 's plans for world domination .
In season 8 , Clark and Lois took another crucial step towards their relationship , with Clark start to work at the Daily Planet working alongside Lois .
The writers for the series stated that in season eight , Lois finds out about her true feelings towards Clark .
Erica Durance describes season eight as a lesson in duality , with Clark realizing that he has to be two different people if he wants to have a life and save the day .
Durance believes that the same applies to Lois .
Durance explains , " [ Lois has ] got her confidence as a journalist and on the inside , she 's going
oh my god
I 'm truly in love with [ Clark ] , more in love than I 've ever been with anyone .
"
In the episode " Instinct , " Maxima , an alien princess who came to Earth to seek a suitable mate , chose Clark .
When Lois broke Maxima 's spell over Clark , Maxima confronts Lois ; saying that Clark 's attraction to Lois and the bond between them was the only way that Clark was able to resist her spell .
In the episode " Committed , " Lois was put under a lie detector test by a serial killer and admitted that she was in love with Clark .
In the episode " Bride , " the two shared many moments of attraction towards each other and almost sharing a kiss , but was interrupted by the return of Lana .
At the end of the season , Lois was sent to the future .
Clark believing Lois was killed in Doomsday 's attack on the city ( this and the death of Jimmy Olsen ) leads him to leave behind his human identity and fully embrace only his Kryptonian side .
In season 9 , Lois returns to the present in the episode " Savior " but has lost her memory of when and where she has been .
Lois ' reappearance breaks Clark 's self - imposed exile , prompting him to return to the Daily Planet .
Soon , the two were seen flirting much more .
In the first nine episodes , Lois is seen having dreams and visions of the future , which includes her and Clark making love .
In the episode " Crossfire , " Clark finally shows his true feeling for Lois and kissed her , which Lois reciprocated in the episode " Idol . "
In the episode " Pandora , " the truth of what Lois saw in her visions is revealed .
At the end of the episode , Clark and Lois decide to become an official couple .
Throughout the rest of season nine , the two took slow steps in their relationship because both want this relationship to be the one they " got right .
" In the season finale episode " Salvation , " as The Blur , Clark kissed Lois and she discovers his secret as the superhero vigilante , The Blur .
It is made clear in the season
ten premiere episode " Lazarus " Clark does n't realize that Lois knows his secret .
In season 10 , several new milestones occurred in their relationship : from " I love you " exchanged , Clark , revealing his secret as the Blur to Lois , to them consummating their love .
In the episode " Ambush , " it is implied that Clark asked Sam Lane ( Lois ' father ) for her hand in marriage .
Clark reveals the engagement ring in the episode " Abandoned " and proposed to Lois in the episode " Icarus , " which Lois happily accepts .
Over the course of the season , the two grow closer than ever , learning to rely on each other and help each other through challenges both normal and super .
Their wedding ceremony occurred in the series finale , only to be interrupted by the coming of Darkseid and his planet Apokolips .
Clark defeated the evil entity and saved the world , and finally becomes Superman .
A flash forward to the future depicts Clark and Lois working as reporters seven years later at the Daily Planet , and still trying to find the right time to get married .
ANIMATIONS
FLEISCHER
SUPERMAN CARTOONS Section::::Animations .
Section::::Fleischer Superman cartoons .
The first animated appearance of Superman was in a series of animated short films released in Technicolor by Paramount Pictures .
They are collectively known as " The Fleischer Superman cartoons . "
A total of seventeen films were made .
Superman / Clark Kent was voiced by Bud Collyer and Joan Alexander voiced Lois Lane .
Fleischer Studios originally produced the first nine cartoons from 1941 to 1942 , before being taken over by Famous Studios who produced eight more cartoons from 1942 to 1943 .
The first cartoon in the series , Superman , was nominated for an Academy Award in 1942 and was voted # 33 of the 50 Greatest Cartoons of all time .
SUPERMAN : THE ANIMATED SERIES Section::::Superman : The Animated Series .
originally aired on Kids ' WB from September 1996 to February 2000 .
Superman / Clark Kent was voiced by Tim Daly and Dana Delany as Lois Lane .
When developing the series , the producers made the decision to establish Lois as a character much more grounded in her Golden Age roots , that of a sharp , aggressive , and career - minded reporter who was n't afraid to dig deep into the Metropolis dirt to gain a story , with Clark Kent as the voice of caution and reason in his alter - ego , and as the well - meaning , boy scout in his role as Superman .
In the series , already accustomed to a world filled with madmen , Superman 's heroics in Metropolis do not impress Lois initially , and her professional rivalry with his alter - ego Clark Kent is n't any better .
Lois is severely territorial over her stories and constantly teases Clark by calling him " Smallville " ( a line adapted in the comics and the Smallville television series . )
Following a trip to an alternate universe in " Brave New Metropolis , " Lois is surprised and dismayed to find Superman has sold out to Lex Luthor after her alternate self - was killed , finally beginning to realize she meant much more to Superman .
After this version of Superman saved the world from Lex Luthor 's dominion , Lois kissed him before returning to her own reality , becoming much closer to Superman afterward , aware of how delicate his feelings are .
Lois also became more affectionate to Clark as the series progressed , confiding in him as a friend , though their rivalry at times became more heated on a personal basis because of this .
In the three - part story " World 's Finest , " Bruce Wayne CEO of Wayne Enterprises arrived in Metropolis and starts a relationship with Lois .
Lois actually considers moving to Gotham City , much to Clark 's dismay .
But Lois eventually learned that Bruce Wayne was the Gotham City vigilante Batman , and ended the relationship .
In " The Late Mr. Kent , " Clark is forced to fake his death in order to sniff out an assassin who has targeted his alter - ego .
Unaware of his survival , Lois takes the loss of her partner hard and becomes consumed with uncovering the truth behind his murder , enlisting Superman 's help .
Whilst investigating Clark 's apartment , Lois breaks down , admitting to Superman that she respected and " really liked " Clark , but never told him .
Lois and Superman continued to have a friendly , yet distanced relationship , neither really taking the first step until the events of the series finale " Legacy " , where Superman is briefly turned against the world by Darkseid .
After overcoming the threat of Apokolips yet again , Superman admits to Lois that it will take him a long time to restore humanity 's faith in him ; but Lois assures him he 's already got one less human to worry about and kisses him .
In the animated series Justice League Unlimited ( where Superman was voiced by George Newbern ) , the two continue to date while Lois maintains a more amiable relationship with Clark .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* The poem "
I 'm a Superman , thanks to Lois Lane " by Rudy Francisco ( featured in Keone Madrid 's dance video Lois Lane )
includes the line " Superman ...
The Man of steel , Big Blue , the last son of Krypton , he is faster than a speeding bullet , stronger than a locomotive , he has Lasers for eyes , X - ray vision and can fly without even flapping his arms , but his most notable power ... was Lois Lane ,
the love of an amazing woman is a phone booth , that can turn a man from a spineless news reporter into a symbol of justice , into the reason why it 's safe to walk outside while the sun is sleeping . "
*
In the movie Mermaids ( 1990 )
Kate Flax asked her sister Charlotte if her boyfriend ever kissed her like Superman kisses Lois Lane .
*
The song " Invincible " by Emma Bunton from the single , Take My Breath Away , includes the line " Like Superman and Lois Lane , we are just as strong , we are just the same . "
* " Lois Lane " a song by pop artist Noelle Bean includes the line "
I 'm so happy , and now we 're flying , like Superman and Lois Lane . "
* " Love the Way You Lie " by Eminem and Rihanna featured on his album Recovery includes the line " Cuz
when it 's going good , it 's going great
, I 'm Superman with the wind in his back , she 's Lois Lane .
"
* " Love Fight " a song by Dannii Minogue featured on the album
The Hits & Beyond has the line " Heavy breathing always makes me feel like I 'm Lois with the Man of Steel . "
* " Superman " by Robin Thicke has the line "
I 'm a Superman thanks to Lois Lane .
"
* " Superman " a song by the band Stereophonics has the line " Superman on an airplane , sitting next to Lois Lane . "
* " Deeply Dippy " by Right
Said Fred featured on the album Up includes a line "
I 'm your Superman , I 'll explain you 're my Lois Lane . "
* " 100 Ways " by former ' N Sync member JC Chasez featured on the album Schizophrenic in a line referencing sexual roleplay " I 'll be your Superman , and you play Lois Lane . "
*
In the Seinfeld episode " The Face Painter , " George discovers that a woman he is dating is deaf in one ear and therefore might not have heard him tell her he loves her .
" Do n't you see what this means ? " he says .
" It 's like the whole thing never happened .
It 's like when Superman reversed the rotation of the Earth to save Lois Lane ! "
*
In the Seinfeld episode " The Race , " Jerry dates a woman named Lois and enjoys frequently using her first name and slyly making Superman - related references in her presence .
* The poem " To Lois " by Shane Koyczan is a love letter from Superman to Lois Lane , written from Clark 's perspective as he expresses his love , fear , and hope .
* " Lois Lane " by British indie rock band Farrah from the album Moustache includes the line
" If you 'll be my Lois Lane , I 'll be your Superman , if you 'd only call my name , I 'd be your Superman . "
* The song " Superhero " by 5 Seconds of Summer includes the line "
She met him on the staircase , like Kent and Lois Lane .
"
*
In Sabrina , the Teenage Witch episode " Super Hero , " Sabrina 's boyfriend Harvey became the superhero " Mighty Teen . "
After rescuing Sabrina , Harvey tells Sabrina " you 're my world . "
Sabrina replies " now
I know why Superman ruined Lois for other men . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Clark and Lois at Smallville Wikia
* Redboots History of Lois and Clark * Superman and Lois Lane