PETER COTTONTAIL Peter Cottontail is a name temporarily assumed by a fictional rabbit named Peter Rabbit in the works of Thornton Burgess , an author from Springfield , Massachusetts .
In 1910 , when Burgess began his Old Mother West Wind series , the cast of animals included Peter Rabbit .
Four years later , in The Adventures of Peter Cottontail , Peter Rabbit , unhappy at his plain - sounding name , briefly changed his name to Peter Cottontail because he felt it made him sound more important .
He began putting on airs to live up to his important - sounding name , but after much teasing from his friends , soon returned to his original name , because , as he put it , " There 's nothing like the old name after all . "
In the 26-chapter book , he takes on the new name partway through chapter 2 , and returns to his " real " name , Peter Rabbit , at the end of chapter 3 .
Burgess continued to write about Peter Rabbit until his retirement in 1960 , in over 15,000 daily syndicated newspaper stories , many of them featuring Peter Rabbit , and some of them later published as books , but " Peter Cottontail " is never mentioned again .
When Thornton Burgess began making up bedtime stories with named animals for his 4-year - old son , the boy was already familiar with Beatrix Potter 's Peter Rabbit character , and would not allow his father to give his stories ' rabbit character any other name .
Later when the boy stayed with grandparents for a month while widower Burgess ( his wife had died in childbirth ) worked , he wrote stories down and mailed them to be read to the boy .
Later still , the magazine where Burgess worked published a few of those stories .
Then a representative of publisher
Little , Brown came by asking the magazine editor about children 's stories , and the editor pointed him to Burgess .
Little , Brown then published some of Burgess ' stories as the book Old Mother West Wind .
The name of Burgess ' rabbit character was never changed along the way .
The laws governing usage of published character names were less strict back then than they are today .
Burgess was not the only author to reuse the name Peter Rabbit , though with the huge popularity of Old Mother West Wind , he became the most known .
A fuller treatment on this topic can be found in Nature 's Ambassador :
The Legacy of Thornton W. Burgess by Christie Palmer Lowrance .
Harrison Cady , who illustrated Burgess ' books , wrote and drew the syndicated Peter Rabbit comic strip from 1920 to 1948 .
The 1971 Easter television special Here Comes Peter Cottontail was based on a 1957 novel by Priscilla and Otto Friedrich entitled The Easter Bunny That Overslept .
In 1950 , Gene Autry recorded the holiday song , " Here Comes Peter Cottontail " which became popular on the Country and Pop charts and informally gave the Easter Bunny a name .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Thornton Burgess ' Peter Cottontail , abridged Dover edition ( 1996 ) , illustrated by Pat Stewart