SPENCER REID
Spencer Reid is a fictional character from the CBS crime drama Criminal Minds , portrayed by Matthew Gray Gubler .
Reid is a genius with an IQ of 187 and can read 20,000 words per minute with an eidetic memory ( meaning that he can remember an exceedingly large amount of information with extraordinary detail ) .
He is the youngest member of the FBI 's Behavioral Analysis Unit ( BAU ) , has three BAs and three PhDs
( in Mathematics , Chemistry , and Engineering ) , and specializes in statistics and geographic profiling .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Reid was born on October 28th , 1981 and is a genius and autodidact who graduated from a Las Vegas public high school at age 12 .
He has an IQ of 187 , an eidetic memory , and can read 20,000 words per minute
( an average American adult reads prose text at 200–300 words per minute ) .
He holds B.A.s in Psychology , Sociology , and Philosophy , a Ph.D. in Chemistry and Engineering as well as a Ph.D. in Mathematics from MIT .
Reid is 23 in the pilot episode , having joined the unit when he was 22 .
His fellow team members almost always introduce him as Dr. Reid .
Hotch reveals in the first season that Gideon insists on introducing him as Dr. Reid because Gideon fears that , because of his age , Reid will not be taken seriously as an FBI agent .
This was a genuine concern , both for in - universe and for audience acceptance , since in real life the minimum age to become
an FBI Special Agent is 23 , with at least three more years to obtain Supervisory Special Agent status , and appointments to the BAU do not usually occur until after at least eight to ten years in the FBI .
While filming the pilot , the show 's FBI consultant informed Matthew Gray Gubler that there was nothing realistic about his character .
Before Gubler was cast in the role , the character was envisioned as more like Data from Star Trek .
However , the producers liked Gubler 's softer interpretation , despite telling the actor he was wrong for the part .
After several callbacks , he was hired .
During October 2012 , series creator Jeff Davis tweeted that Reid was originally envisioned to be bisexual , but the network shut the idea down by the fourth episode when Reid develops a crush on his colleague , Jennifer " JJ " Jareau .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
As a common characteristic of people with Asperger 's syndrome , Reid is socially awkward .
Reid has a hard time dealing with his emotions .
He often fixates on things ( prompting Morgan and other team members to have to tell him to be quiet ) , and misses social cues at times ( for example , unknowingly changing the subject of a conversation ) .
The Unknown Subject ( " UnSub " ) in " Broken Mirror " notes this , and Gubler stated in an interview in the show 's second season "
[ Reid ] 's an eccentric genius , with hints of schizophrenia and minor autism , Asperger 's syndrome .
Reid is 24 years old with three Ph . D.s and one can not usually achieve that without some form of autism . "
Writer Sharon Lee Watson stated in a Twitter chat that Reid 's Asperger traits make the character more lovable .
Gubler has commented on the differences between Reid and similarly odd character Penelope Garcia : "
She represents everything he 's not
, she 's very tech oriented
and I would like to imagine he is more like 1920s smart , books and reading etc " .
Kirsten Vangsness agreed , adding that Garcia is more extroverted and available emotionally , whereas Reid struggles with his emotions .
Reid is a technophobe , using neither email nor the new iPads .
Gubler tweeted that Reid is also germaphobic .
In general , Reid dislikes shaking hands , and shows adverse reactions when touched by strangers .
It is speculated the character may also have slight obsessive compulsive disorder , particularly from a scene in " Out of the Light " where Derek Morgan slightly moves an item in the home of an UnSub afflicted with OCD , and Reid immediately places it back to its previous spot .
Reid is a good map - reader , and therefore does the geographic profiling and map - related activities for the team .
He also has a talent with words , and is the team 's go - to linguistic profiler , as well as their unofficial discourse analyst .
He is rarely seen behind the wheel – one time when Morgan hands him the keys , JJ and Emily exchange horrified expressions – but in " Lo - Fi " he is seen getting into the driver 's side of a vehicle and even driving that same vehicle in one scene , as well as driving to Gideon 's cabin in " In Name and Blood , " and in " Nelson 's Sparrow . "
However , he is usually seen as a backseat passenger during car scenes , and he commutes to work using the Metro , and presumably the VRE .
STORYLINES BACKSTORY Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Backstory .
Spencer Walter Reid was born in Las Vegas to William Reid ( Taylor Nichols ) , a lawyer , and Diana Reid ( Jane Lynch ) , a former professor of 15th century literature .
Diana also has paranoid schizophrenia , and went off her medication during her pregnancy .
Reid and his mother have a very close relationship despite her condition .
At age four , Spencer was approached by a man , Gary Michaels , while playing chess at a local park .
Although Spencer was unharmed , Diana insisted the family move because she believed her son was in danger .
Shortly thereafter , Spencer 's six - year - old neighbor , Riley Jenkins , was sexually abused and murdered .
Diana told Lou Jenkins , Riley 's father , about the park incident .
Diana then followed Jenkins and witnessed him beat Michaels to death with a baseball bat , getting blood on her clothes in the process .
In order to protect his wife , William burned Diana 's clothes , which Spencer inadvertently witnessed .
Jenkins avoided arrest because Michaels " disappeared " , and as he had a criminal history as a sexual predator , the police did n't look very hard into the case .
Years later , Reid starts having nightmares about the incident , initially leading him to believe his own father was Riley 's killer .
Rossi and Morgan help him investigate .
After undergoing hypnosis to recover his memories , Reid mistakenly believes he saw his father burning Riley 's clothes , not Diana 's .
He pursues his father as a suspect , even after it becomes clear that Michaels is the more likely perpetrator .
Michaels ' body is found , and DNA confirms his killer was Lou Jenkins , who is arrested .
While Reid is interviewing Jenkins , demanding to know how his father was involved , his parents interrupt and confess to their son the whole story .
At ten years old , Reid 's father abandoned the family .
The Michaels incident had already started the rift , and as Diana 's mental state continued to deteriorate due to her paranoid schizophrenia , William left , refusing to take Spencer with him .
He moved ten miles away , and never contacted his son .
Reid finds out his father 's address from Lou Jenkins seventeen years later , as well as the fact that his father never changed jobs .
William later states that the reason he never returned was because he was too ashamed , and felt too much time had passed for him to re - enter Reid 's life , although he did keep electronic tabs on his son .
When his father was leaving , young Spencer tried to convince him to stay by using a statistic that children of parents who remain together receive more education .
This angered William : " We 're not statistics . "
Reid states that one way he gets back at his father is to collect more educational degrees .
Due to his young age and genius IQ , Reid was a victim of severe bullying in high school .
In " Elephant 's Memory " , he recounts one instance where he was stripped naked and tied to a goalpost in front of other students , remaining there for hours .
In " L.D.S.K. " , Hotchner is forced to kick Reid in order to allow him access to a gun in order to shoot a suspect .
When Hotch says he is sorry if he hurt him , Reid points out that he was a child prodigy in a Las Vegas school and tells Hotch , " you kick like a nine - year - old girl " .
Reid 's social standing as a child increased when he started winning games as the coach of his high school 's basketball team , using statistics to break down the opposing teams ' shooting strategies .
At age twelve , Reid graduated from high school .
He attended Caltech , where he rode his bike to classes .
He finished his undergraduate degree at sixteen , and received his first doctorate ( in Mathematics ) the following year .
It has also been stated that he attended MIT , but episode writer Breen Frazier admitted the MIT line was a mistake , although it has not yet been corrected onscreen .
Yale University was Reid 's " safety school " .
Between the ages of 17 and 21 , he completed two more doctorates ( Chemistry and Engineering ) , and two more Bachelor 's degrees ( psychology and sociology ) .
When Reid was eighteen , he realized his mother 's condition had deteriorated to the point where she could no longer take care of herself and had her committed involuntarily to a psychiatric institution , Bennington Sanitarium .
Diana still resides in the same institution , and Reid says that he sends her letters every day , in part because of the guilt he feels for not visiting her .
He worries about the fact that his mother 's illness can be passed on genetically ; telling Morgan : " I know what it 's like to be afraid of your own mind " .
Currently , Reid resides in an apartment in the District of Columbia , possibly near the Van Ness - UDC Metro stop .
BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS UNIT Section::::Behavioral Analysis Unit .
Reid joined the FBI at either the age 21 or 22 , depending upon what age he entered the FBI Academy .
While there was " no psychological exam or test the FBI could put in front of him he could not ace inside of an hour " , he did struggle with the more physical aspects of training , and ultimately received waivers for those requirements .
Even after a year in the field , Reid still struggles to pass his gun qualifications .
He is often left behind during takedowns , has never given chase , and jokes that it 's Morgan 's job to kick down the doors .
This does not bother the team , because while he has shown an ability to physically disarm unsubs , his true talent is psychologically disarming them , as well as his abilities to solve the cases behind the scenes .
Profiling is the only profession Reid considered , and he was groomed specifically for the BAU .
Upon graduation from the Academy , he was placed in the BAU at age 22 , and given the title Supervisory Special Agent .
His first case in the field was the Blue Ridge Strangler .
Gideon is Reid 's closest confidante on the team during the first two seasons , and often serves as a mentor to Reid .
Gideon 's departure affects Reid deeply .
He tries playing all possible chess moves in order to understand .
Reid is close to JJ , Morgan , and Emily Prentiss .
JJ asks him to be godfather to her new born son Henry , and is the only one on the team who calls him " Spence .
" It is implied in " Plain Sight " that Reid may have a slight crush on JJ , and Gideon even prods him to ask out JJ after giving him Washington Redskins football tickets for his birthday , but nothing comes from it , and they continue with their brother - sister relationship .
However , Reid is very protective of her , and often blames himself if she is injured ; even if there was nothing he could have done to prevent it .
In " Closing Time " , after she arrests an unsub , but gets hurt in the process , Spencer is seen counting her injuries as she sits in the ambulance and tells the paramedic that she should be going to get a CAT scan .
Reid also shares a brotherly friendship with Derek Morgan .
In season seven , he is comfortable enough to start a joke war with him , something that he probably would never do with anyone else , and he occasionally confides his secrets to Morgan .
It is suggested in the episode " Epilogue " that Reid told Derek details about what Tobias Hankel did to him when he makes a remark about seeing the afterlife before Tobias saved him .
Morgan looks surprised and says " You never told me that . "
In the episode " Elephant 's Memory " , when approached by a fully armed Owen Savage , the unsub whom Reid identifies with , Reid gives Prentiss his gun and trusts her enough to back him up and not shoot at Owen as he tries talking Owen down .
Although not shown , it is implied Reid and Prentiss spend time together outside of work heavily , along with riding the train home together when they return from cases .
Prentiss is the only one who has beat Reid at poker , even correcting his statistic about her particular poker move .
Reid and Prentiss are held hostage by a cult led by Benjamin Cyrus ( portrayed by Luke Perry ) .
Though he is not injured , Reid struggles with guilt over " allowing " Prentiss 's beating at the hands of Cyrus in " Minimal Loss " .
Reid later becomes close to Alex Blake , whose forensic linguistics class he guest lectures in .
Blake serves as a maternal figure within the BAU .
Reid contracts anthrax during an outbreak in Maryland , and is later shot in the leg protecting a doctor whose life is being threatened .
During " Corazon " , Reid begins to suffer from severe headaches and hallucinations .
He goes to see a doctor in order to find out the source of his headaches , but the doctor says there is no physical cause for his headaches , and they may be psychosomatic .
Reid refuses to believe this , afraid that he may be suffering from the same illness as his mother .
It is not mentioned again until " Coda " , when he is seen once again wearing sunglasses and is carrying a book on migraines .
In the same episode , Reid bonds with a young autistic boy , Sammy Sparks .
A cut line from the episode has Rossi stating that Sammy and Reid are two of the most fascinating minds he 's ever encountered .
In the episode " Valhalla " , Reid tells Prentiss about his headaches .
By then , Reid has gone to several doctors , but no one has been able to diagnose what is wrong with him .
He tells Prentiss that he has not told any of the team members because he is afraid that they will " make him feel like a baby . "
In " Lauren " , it is Reid and Garcia who react most strongly to the news of Emily 's death .
Reid 's reaction is to run out of the room , and he ends up sobbing into JJ 's shoulder telling her that he " never got a chance to say goodbye .
"
In season seven , when Emily returns and Reid discovers Hotch and JJ faked her death , he is upset , especially with JJ .
He tells her he feels betrayed because he came to her house " for 10 weeks in a row , crying over losing a friend " and " not once did you have the decency to tell me the truth .
" She does n't say anything .
He asks J.J. " what if " he had started using Dilaudid again after Emily " died . "
In " True Genius " , Reid doubts his reasons for being in the BAU and wonders if he should be doing more with his ' genius ' .
This is caused by the unsub sending him taunting messages and challenging Reid to find him .
In this episode , he also reveals that the team missed his 30th birthday .
At the end of the episode , the team throw him a mini birthday party .
DRUG ADDICTION Section::::Drug addiction .
After being kidnapped by a serial killer with multiple personalities , Tobias Hankel ( James Van Der Beek ) , Reid is tortured and drugged over the course of two days in " Revelations " .
This leads him to develop an addiction to the narcotic painkiller Dilaudid .
While the BAU team members have their suspicions about Spencer 's addiction , none of them confront him about it .
An old friend of Reid 's in New Orleans is also aware that Reid suffers from ' problems ' in " Jones " .
Reid gets clean and attends a support group meeting for addicts in law enforcement in " Elephant 's Memory " , at which he admits struggling with cravings as well as with traumatic memories , including a young adult suspect 's shooting death in his presence .
When he contracts anthrax in " Amplification " , he strictly refused to take any narcotic painkillers in an attempt to remain clean .
Memories of his torture under Hankel later allow him to empathize with other victims .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Throughout the show , Reid shows a lack of interest when interacting with women .
The only three exceptions are Lila Archer , a young actress he is assigned to protect ; Austin ( Courtney Ford ) , a bartender he " woos " with magic tricks while showing her a sketch of a potential suspect ; and Maeve , a geneticist he first meets through correspondence , then later weekly phone calls .
In " Memoriam " , a prostitute hits on Reid in a Las Vegas casino , but he is oblivious to her intentions .
In " Somebody 's Watching " , with the team on a case to protect a TV starlet , Reid saves Lila Archer ( Amber Heard ) from being harmed by a serial killer .
Reid and Lila kindle a short - lived romance , beginning when Lila pulls Reid , fully clothed , into her pool for a kiss .
At the end of the episode , they go their separate ways , and Lila is not seen in further episodes .
In another episode , Reid and Morgan are in a nightclub trying to find a serial murderer who picks up women in nightclubs .
Reid is having trouble talking to the women in these clubs , especially since he is spouting facts about club - related deaths , but Morgan helps him out .
Reid starts a conversation with the female bartender , and proceeds to do a magic trick in which he appears to jab a pen through the eye of a police sketch , but pulls it through , leaving the paper unscathed .
She expresses interest in him , and he gives her his business card in case
she hears something about the killer .
Later , she sees the killer with another potential victim and intentionally spills her drink on the lady , pulling her away .
The killer seems to disappear , and while the bartender goes outside to phone Reid , he grabs her .
The team responds quickly and saves her before she is harmed .
At the end of the episode , she and Reid are talking over the phone , and he opens a package at his desk that contains the card that he gave her — with a lipstick kiss on the back .
In " God Complex " , Reid begins calling a mystery woman on a pay phone and they talk about his progress with his headaches and sleep deprivation .
It is revealed that she is in danger and does n't want someone to know about her and Reid .
While on a case in New Mexico , Alex Blake drops Reid off at a phone booth , unaware that he is going to call the mystery woman .
Blake later returns and questions his motives .
The two agents have a heated discussion , and he tells her the mystery woman is a geneticist he contacted about his headaches during season six , whom he believes can help on the case .
Thanks to her , they are able to find the unsub and save his latest victim .
At the end of the episode , Reid thanks her for her help and tells her that he and the BAU can help her in her situation .
However , she refuses because she does n't want him to hurt Reid .
She ends the phone call by telling him that she loves him .
Left shocked and speechless , he starts walking to his left but then turns around and walks to his right .
Sometime after " The Lesson " , Reid continues calling his mystery woman , and it is revealed that her name is Maeve ( portrayed by Beth Riesgraf ) .
She tells Reid that her stalker might be gone and because of this , she wants to meet him .
During a case in Arizona , Blake confronts him about " phone booth girl " .
Reid tells Blake that he 's nervous to meet her because he already believes she 's the most beautiful girl in the world , and he is afraid that she wo n't like him because of his looks .
Blake encourages him to meet her .
After Reid gets back from the case , they plan to meet at a fancy restaurant until Reid sees a man gazing over at him .
Thinking him to be Maeve 's stalker , Reid calls her to cancel while she is right outside .
Spencer realizes that the man is not the stalker , and Maeve has already left .
The hostess gives him a bag that she left for him .
It turns out to be the very same book he was going to give to her by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle .
Inside , she has written a quote by Thomas Merton ; " Love is our true destiny .
We do not find the meaning of life by ourselves alone .
We find it with another . "
In " Zugzwang " , Reid discovers that Maeve has been kidnapped by her stalker .
In the investigation , he meets Maeve 's former fiance , the man he believed to be her stalker .
Reid becomes more and more distressed by the situation and discovers that her kidnapper is not her ex - fiance , but the man 's girlfriend .
Reid searches excessively to find her , and even offers to take her place .
He discovers that the stalker wants attention from him and to be seen as an equal .
He gets a clue from the stalker leading him to her location , where he tricks the unsub into believing that he is in love with her .
Reid finally meets Maeve face - to - face during the situation and is able to briefly subdue the stalker , only to have her hold Maeve at gunpoint .
He once again offers to take Maeve 's place , but the unsub kills herself and Maeve in one shot .
Reid spends two weeks alone in his apartment after Maeve 's death .
The team constantly tries to help him , but he refuses to answer the door .
While Reid remains at home , the team travel to another case .
They call him for help a few times before he joins the team in person .
Once the case is complete , Reid asks Morgan , Penelope , and JJ to help clean up his apartment .
He picks up The Narrative of John Smith ( given to him by Maeve ) with the Thomas Merton quote and places it on the bookshelf .
In the months following , Reid throws himself into his work when he is not able to sleep because of a recurring dream where Maeve asks him to dance with her , but forces himself to wake up before he answers .
By the end of " Alchemy " , Reid is able to complete the dream by accepting Maeve 's request to dance with her .
In " The Inspiration " , Reid admits that , had Maeve not died , he might have had kids .
In the season nine finale , it is revealed that he still carries a copy of The Narrative of John Smith in his bag .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Dr. Spencer Reid on IMDb