CYSTIC FIBROSIS FOUNDATION
The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation ( CFF ) is a 501(c)(3 ) non - profit organization in the United States established to provide the means to cure and control cystic fibrosis ( CF ) .
The Foundation provides information about cystic fibrosis and finances CF research that aims to improve the quality of life for people with the disease .
The Foundation also engages in legislative lobbying for cystic fibrosis .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Foundation was established in 1955 by a group of volunteers in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
In addition to providing grants for research into cystic fibrosis and supporting clinical trials , the foundation promotes and accredits 115 specialized centers for treatment of individuals with cystic fibrosis .
The Foundation has over 80 chapters and offices across the United States .
Before it began using the current name , the organization was known as the " National Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation " .
In 1989 , scientists working for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation discovered the gene that causes cystic fibrosis , considered the key to developing a cure for cystic fibrosis .
From 1982 until 1999 , sports journalist Frank Deford served as chairman of the Foundation .
The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has been a pioneer of cystic fibrosis treatment , having played a major role in the development and use of five FDA - approved therapies , including ivacaftor ( Kalydeco ) .
In 2014 , the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation sold the rights to the royalties of the drugs for $ 3.3 billion , twenty times the Foundation 's 2013 budget .
PRESENT DAY
Section::::Present day .
Currently the Foundation operates out of Bethesda , Maryland .
Preston Campbell , M.D. is the active president and CEO of the organization .
EVENTS Section::::Events .
The Foundation hosts several philanthropic events both locally around the chapters and nationwide .
One of the biggest signature events is the Great Strides walk , established in 1989.It is a sponsored walk akin to Race for the Cure , where participants walk to raise money to support research for cystic fibrosis .
There are Great Strides walks in over 560 locations throughout the country .
Great Strides has succeeded in raising over $ 180,000,000 for cystic fibrosis research .
Some other signature events include the CF Cycle for Life , CF Climb , Xtreme Hike , and Team CF .
The list of national events includes Ultimate Golf Experience , American Airlines Celebrity Ski , and Volunteer Leadership Conference .
Individual chapters may host their own events which may include , but are not limited to , fishing events , dinner dance events , golf tournaments , and finest events .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Marks
50 Years in the Fight Against Cystic Fibrosis