DAMAGE WAIVER Damage waiver or , as it is often referred to , collision damage waiver ( CDW ) or loss damage waiver ( LDW ) , is optional damage insurance coverage that is available to you when you rent a car .
Car rental companies treat the CDW as a waiver of their right to make the renter pay for damages to the car .
In many countries , it is a legal requirement to have CDW insurance included in the basic car rental rate .
It covers the rented car .
Some rental companies also offer liability insurance and coverage of towing charges .
Terms and prices vary .
Alternatives to the CDW include other car insurance policies , some coverage from credit card issuers ( Visa , MasterCard , etc . ) and some travel insurance .
RISKS ADDRESSED
LIABILITY Section::::Risks addressed .
Section::::Liability .
If the car damages property or injures someone , the customer or other insurance must pay for the damages ( i.e. , is " held liable " ) .
US car rental companies sometimes include minimum liability insurance required by law in the basic rental charge .
Hertz includes it in all states except California , but will subrogate any damages against the driver ( meaning the car is insured to the state minimum but the driver will pay for all damages paid by Hertz ) .
Avis includes it in all states except California and Texas , at least for renters who lack their own coverage .
Other companies do not publicize where they include liability insurance in the basic rental charge .
Some car rental companies offer more liability insurance for a fee .
Within Canada , all auto rentals are required by law to include a minimum of $ 200,000 in third - party liability insurance , regardless of whether the renter has their own auto insurance or not .
Most rental agencies thus do not provide a third - party liability insurance option , and simply factor in the premium as part of fixed cost of rental .
COLLISION , THEFT , OTHER DAMAGE Section::::Collision , theft , other damage .
When a customer does not pay the car rental company to waive damage , and a rented car is stolen , or damaged by accident , vandalism , weather ( hail ) , etc . , the customer or other insurance must pay to the rental company the full cost of repair , plus administrative charges and , in some states , loss of use .
From some companies , in some states and countries , there are charges for towing , storage , impound , administrative fees and diminution of value of the car ( Avis , Budget , National , Thrifty ) .
Some companies even say they alone will decide the diminution ( Dollar , Hertz " ) .
The rental company 's damage waiver normally covers accidental damage and towing a damaged vehicle , as long as the renter complies with the rental contract ( such as authorized drivers , locations , no racing ) and with the damage waiver ( such as police report ) .
Waivers may also cover theft , vandalism , loss of use , and liability .
The renter often has a choice among different coverages for different fees .
Damage waivers are not necessarily complete .
They may have deductibles ( also called excess ) and limits on the amount covered .
Liability coverage always has limits .
The descriptions above come from rental company websites , under headings like Policies , FAQ , Coverage , or More .
Damage Waivers can be bought from the car rental company in most countries , or through a car hire excess insurer in the UK , or through travel insurers .
Coverage from the car rental company may be required if the renter lacks proof of coverage elsewhere .
INSURANCE OR NOT ?
Section::::Insurance or not ?
CDW meets the basic definition of insurance , since it transfers some risk from the car renter to the rental company .
However rental companies do not call it insurance , since it is a waiver between the renter and the company .
Rental companies are not licensed or regulated as insurers .
There are also no claims made .
Rental companies treat CDW as a waiver of their right to make the renter pay for damage to the vehicle .
CREDIT CARD COVERAGE OF DAMAGE WAIVER CARDS ISSUED IN THE US Section::::Credit card coverage of damage waiver .
Section::::Cards issued in the US .
Some credit card issuers ( Visa , MasterCard , etc . , ) offer insurance for theft or damage to rented cars .
A few of the cards ( noted in the table below ) offer " primary " insurance , so the driver does not need to file a claim with his or her personal insurance .
More cards offer " secondary insurance .
"
This means that if the renter has personal or business vehicle insurance with appropriate coverage , then that insurance will pay first .
Then the credit card issuer will pay the primary insurance 's deductible and will address any large claims above the primary insurance limit .
If the renter has no other vehicle insurance for the specific claim ( no insurance at all , or not in the relevant country , or no collision insurance , etc . ) , the credit card company ( if it offers coverage ) will pay the whole amount , up to its limits .
All four credit card companies listed below cover collision damage with some of their cards .
Visa and some MasterCards and American Express cards also cover theft , while other MasterCards and American Express cards include theft , vandalism , hitting a deer or chipping a window ( sources at bottom of table ) .
Other issues important to some renters are that Visa and MasterCard only cover rental contracts of 15 days or less ( not even the first 15 days of longer rentals ) .
Some American Express and MasterCards are not useful on dirt or gravel roads , since they exclude " damage sustained on any surface , other than a bound surface such as concrete or tarmac " .
MasterCard and Visa in the United States say they cover " Physical damage and/or theft " , but an introductory paragraph for some MasterCards and all Visa cards limits this to " collision or theft , " so vandalism and hail are excluded .
It may be ambiguous whether deer impacts and glass chips are covered as " collisions .
" MasterCards from Bank of America and MBNA generally have a simpler opening paragraph , which leaves coverage in place for any physical damage .
Even among these brands , some cards lack coverage entirely , especially debit cards and cards with low credit limits .
The AmEx Platinum Cash Rebate cardMasterCardVisaDiscoverAmerican Express 2 .
benefit information center 3 .
MasterCard Trinidad and Tobago 4 .
Citi cards
https://www.discover.com/credit-cards/member-benefits/ 4.secure.cmax.americanexpress.com/ ... SEE ALSO
* Vehicle insurance REFERENCES