EARLOBE
The human earlobe ( lobulus auriculae ) is composed of tough areolar and adipose connective tissues , lacking the firmness and elasticity of the rest of the auricle ( the external structure of the ear ) .
In some cases the lower lobe is connected to the side of the face .
Since the earlobe does not contain cartilage it has a large blood supply and may help to warm the ears and maintain balance .
However , earlobes are not generally considered to have any major biological function .
The earlobe contains many nerve endings , and for some people is an erogenous zone .
The zoologist Desmond Morris in his book
The Naked Ape ( 1967 ) conjectured that the lobes developed as an additional erogenous zone to facilitate the extended sexuality necessary in the evolution of human monogamous pair bonding .
ORGANOGENESIS Section::::Organogenesis .
It might seem to be that the earlobe , as a body part built of epithelium and connective tissue , is derived from dermatome .
However this is not the case , in the surrounding tissue there are no somites – thus also there is no dermatome .
In this area , the dermis is derived from cells of mesenchymal cells , whereas the mesenchyme is derived from the sclerotome and splanchnopleura located in the nearby regions of the torso .
The earlobe as a body part arises and develops in the vicinity of auricular follicle , as a result of cascade induction :
* The first - level inductor is the central segment of Archenteron 's roof , which induces the production of the Medulla oblongata ( part of the Hindbrain ) .
*
* The second - level inductor is the Medulla oblongata , which induces the production of a pair of auricular follicles derived from the mesoderm .
*
* The third - level inductor is the auricular follicle , which induces the production of the auditory bulla .
* GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
Earlobes average about 2 centimeters long , and elongate slightly with age .
Although the " free " vs. " attached " appearance of earlobes is often presented as an example of a simple " one gene – two alleles " Mendelian trait in humans , earlobes do not all fall neatly into either category ; there is a continuous range from one extreme to the other , suggesting the influence of several genes .
+
Recessive gene frequency in the selected worldwide populations !
Population !
N !
Recessive gene frequency(for attached ear lobes ) !
Source AfricaAfroamericanBavariaBosnia and HerzegovinaBrazilCameroonHong KongLaponiaMicronesiaSardiniaSomaliaTibetBaltimoreBrooklynBuffaloPennsylvania CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Earlobes are normally smooth , but occasionally exhibit creases .
Creased earlobes are sometimes associated with genetic disorders in children , including Beckwith - Wiedemann syndrome .
In some early studies , earlobe creases were thought to be associated with an increased risk of heart attack and coronary heart disease ; however , more recent studies have concluded that since earlobes become more creased with age , and older people are more likely to experience heart disease than younger people , age may account for the findings linking heart attack to earlobe creases .
The earlobe crease is also called Frank 's Sign .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE EARLOBE PIERCING AND STRETCHING Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Earlobe piercing and stretching .
Piercing the earlobes is a commonplace activity in many cultures in many historical eras ; no other location on the body is as commonly pierced .
Consequently , injury to the earlobe due to the weight of heavy earrings is also common .
Some cultures practice earlobe stretching , using piercing ornaments to stretch and enlarge the earlobes to accommodate plugs .
NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF WEARING EARRINGS Section::::Negative effects of wearing earrings .
Some research has found that the most frequent complications connected with wearing earrings are : * inflammation , * keloids , * loss of tissue by tearing , and * mechanical division of earlobes .
There was noticeable relationship between the piercing of young girls ' earlobes and following development of allergy .
In the view of Professor Ewa Czarnobilska , the manager of the research team , the primary reason for the allergies connected to earrings is the presence of nickel , which is a common component of the alloys used in jewelry production .
The symptom seen is generally eczema , and is often misdiagnosed as a food allergy , for instance to milk .
The specific mechanism in allergies caused by earrings is the contact of nickel ions with the lymphatic system .
The study noted that children who simply stopped wearing earrings did not see the disappearance of the allergic symptoms .
The immune system remembers the presence of the nickel ions in the person 's blood and lymph , so the child can still react to : * metal parts of wardrobe , * dental braces , * dental prosthesis , * orthotics ,
* meals cooked in pots with addition of nickel ,
* margarine ( nickel is a catalyst in hydrogenation of unsaturated fats ) , * coins ,
* chocolate , * nuts , * leguminous vegetables , * wine , and * beer .
Research by allergists has found that in a sample of 428 pupils of ages 7–8 and 16–17 years old : * 30 % of the research population showed an allergy to nickel , and * the allergy occurred in girls who had started wearing earrings in early childhood .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING