MIKE DELFINO
Michael " Mike " Delfino is a fictional character on the ABC television series Desperate Housewives .
The character was played by actor James Denton from the show 's inception , until the eighth and final season of the show .
HISTORY SEASON 1 Section::::History .
Section::::Season 1 .
Mike Delfino lives at 4356 Wisteria Lane , renting the Simms 's house , and poses as the friendly neighborhood plumber .
He was quietly searching for his missing ex - girlfriend ( Deirdre Taylor ) .
Her father , Noah , wanted to know what had happened to her before he died .
Deirdre 's remains are inside Zach 's toy chest , and are buried under the family pool .
After Mary Alice kills herself , Paul Young excavates the toy chest out of the pool , wraps it , and tapes it up , and drives away with it to throw it in a body of water .
The toy chest later comes up and is only mentioned once more when it appears on a local News channel .
Paul is shown in his living room , while Zach sleeps on the couch , and the story comes on the News , making Paul quickly turn off the tv , and storm out of the room .
Zach is seen opening his eyes , and realizes something is not right .
Paul Young murdered Martha Huber after she admitted blackmailing his late wife .
He tried framing Mike for the murder .
Susan Meyer discovers that Mike had been in prison for manslaughter , and drug dealing .
Devastated , she ends their relationship , disappointed that he did n't tell her the truth .
However , she visited Kendra and Noah , looking for more answers .
Kendra explains that Mike and Deirdre were drug addicts .
Mike was defending Deirdre from an undercover policeman , and he tried stopping the policeman who had caught them together .
Mike and the policeman got into a fight , and they went over a balcony .
Mike survived , but the cop did n't .
Mike discovers that Paul Young was involved in Deirdre 's murder .
He took Paul hostage and planned to shoot him until Paul told him that he , and his late wife , Mary Alice , lived in Salt Lake City years ago .
Mary Alice Young worked at a rehab center and met Deirdre .
One night , wanting drugs , Deirdre tried to sell them her watch , claiming the baby needed food , but Mary Alice knew Deirdre would buy drugs , so she refused .
Deirdre then offered them her baby son , Dana .
Mary Alice agreed since she could n't conceive , and they moved to Fairview with the baby , now renamed Zach .
Four years later , Deirdre found them and demanded her baby back , but they refused .
Deirdre went to take Zach , but Mary Alice stabbed her in the process .
They cut up her body , and put it inside Zach 's toy chest , and buried it underneath the pool they were about to have installed .
Mike let Paul go , realizing Zach was his son .
Meanwhile , Zach was holding Susan hostage because he had just found out Mike kidnapped Paul and intended to kill him .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
When Mike got home , he and Susan fought off Zach and he fled because Zach was keeping Susan so Mike would come home and Zach intended to kill him .
Susan was stunned to discover that Zach is Mike 's son .
Susan was wary of Zach because his behaviour towards Julie was worrying , particularly when she asked him not to see Julie as much .
She encouraged Zach to go to Utah , looking for Paul and gave him money .
When Mike found out , he ended their relationship .
Mike tried getting to know him , on his return from Utah , and Zach was initially interested .
Paul , however , told Zach that he was getting tired of his obsession with two people who had n't loved him enough to keep him .
After that , Zach made it clear that he felt Paul was his father .
After Edie Britt set Susan 's house on fire , Mike got Susan a wire to record Edie 's confession .
Susan moved into a caravan .
Later , they made up and he planned to propose in the season finale but was run over by Orson Hodge .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Mike survived the accident but spent 6 months in the Fairview hospital .
When he woke up , he was diagnosed with retrograde amnesia , causing him to forget the last 2 years .
Edie Britt took advantage , telling him that Susan had treated him like dirt to make Mike fall in love with her .
They had a brief relationship which she ended when he was arrested for Monique Polier 's murder .
Susan pursued her new boyfriend , Ian , to hire the best lawyer to get Mike out of jail .
In prison , Paul tried befriending Mike so Zach would help him find Felicia Tilman ( Mrs. Hughes ' sister ) , who had accused Paul murdering her sister .
Later , he visited a hypnotherapist to try to make sense of some memories .
He realized Orson Hodge(who married Bree Van De Kamp ) was responsible .
He and Mike had a fight on the hospital roof and Orson fell off .
Mike was cleared when the police found Alma and Monique 's teeth and suicide note
Alma wrote when she pretended to die .
Mike was saddened when Ian and Susan got engaged but discovered that Ian proposed , knowing that Mike had intended to propose the night of his accident .
Mike challenged Ian at a poker game and they did a deal :
if Mike won , he could tell Susan but if Ian won , he could n't .
Ian won and Mike kept his distance
but Ian had to thank Mike when he rescued him from drowning .
Following an argument with Ian , Mike consoled Susan and they kissed , renewing Mike 's hope that they would reconcile .
Despite his deal with Ian , he told Susan what happened at the poker game .
Susan was furious , refusing to see either of them but eventually decided to marry Ian .
With broken Heart , Mike left her a message , saying goodbye and left Wisteria Lane , unaware that Ian had ended things with Susan .
Mike went camping
so Susan went after him but offended by her guide 's suggestion that she invited in too much drama , Susan went to find Mike alone .
Back at the campground , she was reported lost , and Mike recognized Susan from the description .
Susan left Mike a message , promising if they reconciled , they would be a normal couple .
Mike found Susan and they went home .
Exactly a year to the day after Mike 's accident , they went out to dinner and on returning to Wisteria Lane , the trailer Susan decorated a year before , was waiting on her driveway .
They lived the experience they were meant to have that night and Mike proposed .
They married in the woods in the middle of the night .
Susan surprised him with a small wedding because she did n't want to put pressure on him for a big , expensive wedding .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
In Season Four , Mike and Susan discovered that she was pregnant ( result of WB ) .
Mike told Susan that he had never been happier but problems arose when Julie asked for permission to go to a party .
Susan agreed but Mike said no as he 'd seen some crazy parties at the house in question .
Susan agreed with Mike but later told Julie she could go but asked her not to tell Mike , wanting him to feel part of the decision - making process , and Julie went .
Later that night , after Mike said he had driven past the house and seen topless girls , drunken people and music blaring , Susan claimed she needed something from the store and went to get Julie .
However , at the party , she was mistaken for a stripper but brought Julie and Dylan home and a friend of Julie 's phoned to check she 'd got home all right , alerting Mike .
He told Susan that he respected her decisions about how to raise Julie but expected her to consult him on how they raised their child .
The doctor suggested Susan and Mike go for genetic counselling and Mike admitted his father , Nick , was alive and in prison for first degree murder .
They visited and Susan was shocked by how cold Nick was and needing to know that Nick felt remorse for his actions , visited him alone the next day .
Nick told Susan that he regretted what his actions did to Mike as he became very unpopular , claiming that one never truly overcame that , and told Susan to watch Mike carefully .
While at Bree 's house , Mike dropped a painkiller .
Bree found it and wondering what it was , researched it .
On discovering that it was highly addictive , she told Susan who only believed it when she found pills hidden in Mike 's flashlight .
She confronted him and he threw the pills down the sink , telling her that he was n't addicted but later retrieved them .
Mike 's drug dealer hassled him for money
so he blackmailed Adam and Orson into prescribing him more .
Mike 's drug dealer came to the house and Susan , unaware he was a drug dealer , tried fixing him up with Julie until Mike told her that he was a drug dealer and she threw him out .
He confessed that he had bought drugs illegally from the dealer so he could keep working , worried about the cost of raising a child .
Susan thought that he had stopped taking them but found pills in the car .
She confronted Mike and he accidentally pushed her down the stairs .
They went to the hospital — worried about the baby — but punched a hospital worker
so Mike was handcuffed to a seat .
Luckily she and the baby were fine and Susan 's ankle was only sprained .
She was prescribed painkillers and when Mike asked for one , she told him if he did n't go to rehab , she would leave him and refuse him access to the baby .
Mike agreed and went for thirty days .
Mike did n't go to the first Lamaze class , as he received his 30-day chip ( 30 days without drugs ) but was there for the second .
Mike told Susan that Bree Hodge 's husband , Orson , had run him over , Susan furiously told Orson to stay away from her family and told Bree what happened .
Orson and Bree grew apart because of this , and Susan apologized for it .
After Mike 's mother visited , Mike scolded his mother for her attitude towards Susan — asking personal questions and unable to believe that Susan could n't cook .
She apologized just before Susan gave birth to their baby boy .
Mike wanted to name him Maynard after his grandfather ( who was a father figure for him ) but Susan preferred Connor .
Mike convinced her to name their son Maynard James Delfino ( he 's known as M.J. ) .
5-YEAR LEAP Section::::5-year leap .
As the plot fast forwards 5 years in the future , Susan is seen coming home to a man who is not Mike .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
The fifth season premiered on U.S. television on Sunday September 28 , 2008 with the episode " You 're Gon na Love Tomorrow " .
As previously stated , season five takes place five years after the events of season four .
In the new timeline , it is revealed that Susan is having a secret relationship with her painter / decorator Jackson Braddock .
When Jackson asked why they could n't go public , she replies , " Maybe I do n't deserve to be happy , " which led to flashbacks revealing why Susan and Mike divorced : they were involved in a crash with another car .
They survived but the occupants of the other car — Lila Dash and her daughter , Paige — died .
Susan and Mike were n't responsible ( the other car pulled out in front of them ) , but Susan blamed herself and Mike and the trauma took its toll on their marriage .
When Mike arrives to collect their son ( " M.J. " ) for the weekend , Susan tells Mike that she is seeing someone .
While Susan is now with Jackson , Mike started dating Katherine Mayfair , Susan 's older friend .
Mike and Katherine bonded over after bad dates and realize they are attracted to each other .
When Susan finds out that they are dating and that Bree knew , it is clear that she still has feelings for Mike , whom she refers to as her .
This bad feeling spills over into Mike and Susan 's son , M.J. , when he attacks Katherine ( he threw chewed chewing gum on Katherine 's head ) .
It emerges that this is a result of what Susan told M.J. when she and Mike first split up ; that they would get back together eventually .
Worried about her and Mike 's relationship , Katherine tells him that her daughter wants her to move to Maryland , but is n't sure if she should go .
Mike was non - committal but realized , thanks to Dave Williams ( AKA David Dash ) , that he was falling in love with Katherine and left her a basket of roses with a note saying " Do n't go " .
When Katherine found them , she was thrilled — unaware that Dave had an agenda of his own , thinking Mike was responsible for the deaths of his wife and daughter .
Dave planned his revenge — he , Mike and Katherine would go camping and he would shoot Katherine dead .
Fortunately , Dave 's wife , Edie , sent him a text , telling him to come home .
Edie confronts him — during the confrontation , Edie is about to call Mike when Dave nearly strangles her .
Edie rushed out and was killed after being electrocuted when she crashed her car into an electricity pole after swerving to avoid Orson .
Dave later learns that he nearly killed the wrong person .
Susan confessed she was driving the night that Lila and Paige died and realized he should have been targeting her .
Dave decides to kill Susan and Mike 's six - year - old son , M.J. Delfino , in revenge .
Mike later struggled with his feelings for Susan and Katherine , and proposes to Katherine , who gladly accepts .
In the finale , Dave gives Mike a videotape which he says is rehearsal footage of their band ; it is actually Dave 's confession which Mike was n't supposed to see until after M.J. is dead .
Needing a videotape to use at the wedding , Katherine puts it in her camera .
Katherine and Mike are waiting to fly to Vegas and Katherine takes her wallet to buy cappuccinos and knocked the camera so Mike heard Dave 's voice from her purse .
Watching it , he sees Dave confess to killing M.J ..
Mike runs to save him , and asks a passenger to inform Katherine that he left due to an emergency .
Unfortunately , it is misinterpreted .
Mike phones Susan and told her that Dave is the man whose wife and daughter that died in the accident .
He speaks to Dave , offering himself in Susan and M.J. 's place .
Dave agrees and tells Mike to meet them at the site of the accident .
Unknown to Mike , Dave plans to have Mike crash into his car and kill M.J. , just as Susan did when she killed Lila and Paige .
Susan manages to escape and tried to warn Mike , but he crashed into Dave 's car anyway .
Susan was relieved to find M.J. alive as Dave had told him to get out of the car .
Susan , Mike , and M.J. share a hug , and Mike kisses Susan .
At the end of the finale , Mike is seen marrying someone whose face is not shown .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
It is revealed that Mike broke up with Katherine and asked Susan to marry him , again .
She accepts and they plan their wedding .
Her daughter , Julie , then returns to Wisteria Lane .
Though Susan is happy and in love with Mike , Katherine is devastated and jealous .
Their friendship is deeply scarred by this .
At the ceremony , Katherine approaches Susan and explains how she feels and asks for her to make a public apology during the ceremony
or she will make a huge scene .
Susan then locks Katherine in a closet , she breaks out and a scene ensues after Mike and Susan are we d .
Susan then apologizes publicly .
However , Katherine tells her it does n't matter because as of this moment , they are at war and she begins to plot revenge .
When Katherine tells M.J. how Susan stole Mike away and takes the child from school , Mike verbally blasts her , saying he never loved Katherine and was thinking of Susan the whole time they were together .
When a hurt Katherine says it 'd be less painful for Mike to stab her with a knife , he retorts that he does n't care enough about Katherine to kill her .
After he leaves , Katherine calls 911 to say she 's losing blood and then stabs herself .
Katherine tells the police that Mike stabbed her and he 's arrested .
Trying to help him , Susan calls on Katherine 's daughter Dylan , who 's believed Katherine 's tales that she 's married to Mike .
After talking to Mike in jail , Dylan realizes her mother has been lying and confronts her , causing Katherine to have a full breakdown that presumably exonerates Mike .
Mike is currently having financial problems , but while he refuses any help coming from Susan , he takes a loan from Carlos .
Susan eventually learns of their financial ruin and , after going over their finances
she and Mike realize they need to cut back .
This includes them moving to an apartment across town and , renting out their home .
Though Mike knows it will help them get back on their feet , Susan becomes very angry with him as she is forced to leave the house where she raised her children .
Though they make up and leave Wisteria Lane , they quickly find a renter for their house .
The renter is an old resident of Wisteria Lane , Paul Young .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
When Susan tells Mike about her lingerie job on the Internet and Paul Young 's plan to buy their house , Mike decides to take an oil rig job in Alaska in order to earn more money .
He has also been communicating with Felicia Tilman .
When Susan develops kidney problems Mike surprises her at the hospital .
They both fear the prospect of Susan succumbing to her disease and so they decide to have an early anniversary which turns into a sham .
After everything backfires Mike admits he 's not ready to lose Susan and tells her that she 'll find a kidney donor .
After Paul recovers from the gunshot wound he asks for Mike 's help in finding Zach .
Mike rejects but later changes his mind when he realizes that Zach is on drugs .
Both Mike and Paul visit Zach and ask him to go to rehab .
When Susan gets a kidney , courtesy of Beth , they both can not wait for their sex drought to end with Susan dreaming of having sex but can not recall her male counterpart .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
Making the fatal mistake of crossing Donny , an unruly and vengeful loan shark who harasses Renee , Mike is killed in a drive - by shooting by Donny himself in front of his home on Wisteria Lane , just seconds after expressing his love toward Susan .
He pushes Susan down to the ground in order to save her while he is shot in the chest .
He is then remembered by the housewives at his funeral .
The fate of Mike 's killer is never shown afterwards , but Bree is later told that an arrest had been made .
When Susan was cleaning out Mike 's closet , she finds papers indicating that Mike was writing checks to a woman .
Susan visits the address she finds in Mike 's things and discovers that Mike had a sister , Laura , whom he only learned about eight years before .
Mike 's mother did not want to be " inconvenienced " by their special needs child .
In the final moments of the series , as Susan leaves Wisteria Lane , Mike is among the spirits watching her go .
REFERENCES