SHOWER GEL Shower gel ( also shower cream or body wash ) is a specialized liquid product used for cleaning the body during showers .
Not to be confused with liquid soaps , shower gels , in fact , do not contain saponified oil .
Instead , it uses synthetic detergents derived from either petroleum or plant sources .
Body washes and shower gels holds a lower pH value than the traditional soap , which is also known to feel less drying to the skin .
In certain cases , sodium stearate is added to the chemical combination to create a solid version of the shower gel .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Shower gel is a derivative invention of the liquid soap , which first appeared in the 1800s .
In 1865 , William Shepphard patented the formula behind the liquid soap , but the product gained eventual popularity with the rise of Palmolive soap in 1898 , by B.J. Johnson .
Modern chemistry later enabled the creation of the shower gel , which specialized in cleaning the entire body during baths and showers .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Shower gels are known to consist of the same basic ingredients as soap - water , betaines , and sodium laureth sulfate , or SLS .
But the main difference between the two products lie in its surfactants - compounds known to lower the surface tension between substances , which helps in the emulsification and the washing away of oily dirt .
The surfactants of shower gels do not come from saponification , that is by reacting a type of oil or fat with lye .
Instead , it uses synthetic detergents for surfactants derived from either plant - based sources or petroleum .
This gives the product a lower pH value than soap and might also feel less drying to the skin .
Some people have likened the effect to feeling less squeaky clean , however .
Surfactants can make up as much as 50 percent of the shower gel content , with the remaining proportion being made up of a combination of water and ingredients to thicken , preserve , emulsify , add fragrance , and color .
Multiple surfactants are often used to achieve desired product qualities .
A primary surfactant can provide good foaming ability and cleaning effectiveness , while a secondary surfactant can add qualities of mildness to prevent irritation or over - drying of the skin .
To prevent shower gel ingredients from separating , emulsifiers such as diethanolamine are added .
Conditioning agents may also be added to moisturize the skin during and after product use .
They are also available in different colours and scents .
Ingredients , like scent in the form of essential oils or fragrance oils and colorant in the form of water soluble dyes are common in shower gels .
Microbeads were commonly used in shower gels until recently .
Microbeads are tiny spheres of plastic that were added to a variety of cosmetic products for their exfoliating qualities .
They are too small to filter out of water systems and end up in waterways and oceans , potentially passing toxins to animal life and humans .
Following the legislative actions of other countries , the United States passed the Microbead - Free Waters Act in 2015 , which bans microbeads in the U.S. incrementally starting in 2017 , with full implementation set for 2019 .
Shower gels for men may contain the ingredient menthol , which gives a cooling and stimulating sensation on the skin , and some men 's shower gels are also designed specifically for use on hair and body .
Shower gels contain milder surfactant bases than shampoos , and some also contain gentle conditioning agents in the formula .
This means that shower gels can also double as an effective and perfectly acceptable substitute to shampoo , even if they are not labelled as a hair and body wash .
Washing hair with shower gel should give approximately the same result as using a moisturising shampoo .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Like shampoo and bubble bath products , many are marketed directly towards children .
These often feature scents intended to appeal to children , such as fruit scents , or cookies or cotton candy scents .
Many bottles feature popular characters from children 's television or movies .
As with men 's body wash , they often are specifically designed to be used also as a shampoo and conditioner .
They also often contain gentle ingredients designed for young skin .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING