OFFICE OF PROFIT
An office of profit is a term used in a number of national constitutions to refer to executive appointments .
A number of countries forbid members of the legislature from accepting an office of profit under the executive as a means to secure the independence of the legislature and preserve the separation of powers .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The English Act of Settlement 1701 and Act of Union 1707 are an early example of this principle .
The Act of Settlement provided that no person who has an office or place of profit under the King , or receives a pension from the Crown , shall be capable of serving as a member of the House of Commons ; AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Section 44(iv ) of the Constitution of Australia provides that anyone who holds an " office of profit under the Crown " is disqualified from sitting in or being elected to Federal Parliament .
This provision has been subject to interpretation by the High Court of Australia , sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns .
In 2018 , the Court of Disputed Returns introduced a two - limbed test to determine whether an office was " under the Crown " :
* An office is " under the Crown " if appointment is made " at the will of the executive government of the Commonwealth or of a State " , even if the government does not control the office - holder 's tenure or remuneration *
If appointment is not made " at the will " of the government , an office is still " under the Crown " if the government exercises " effective control over holding or profiting from the office " INDIA LAW Section::::India .
Section::::Law .
The term is used an in Article 102 ( 1)(a ) of the Indian Constitution which bars a member of the Indian Parliament from holding an office that would give its occupant the opportunity to gain a financial advantage or benefit .
It refers to a post under central / state government which yields salaries , perks and other benefits .
The actual amount of profit gained during the violation has no bearing on its classification .
India had the Parliament ( Prevention of Disqualification ) Act , 1950 , 1951 , and 1953 exempting certain posts from being recorded as offices of profit .
All these Acts were replaced by the Parliament ( Prevention of Disqualification ) Act , 1959 .
By virtue of section 3 of the said Act , certain offices did not disqualify their holders from being members of Parliament .
The law was again amended in 2006 .
The representatives can not hold an office of profit under section 9 of the Representation of People Act and Article 191 ( 1)(a ) of the Constitution also .
INSTANCES
Section::::Instances .
In 2006 , Indian National Congress President and a Member of Parliament Sonia Gandhi resigned several posts under pressure from the political opposition who asserted that the posts were ' offices of profit ' and thus unlawful .
Jaya Bachchan was disqualified from the Rajya Sabha , while she was also chairperson of the Uttar Pradesh Film Development Federation .
Two Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly members , Bajrang Bahadur Singh and Uma Shankar Singh , were disqualified in January 2015 due to holding government contracts .
January 19 , 2018 : President Ram Nath Kovind accepted the Election Commission 's recommendation to disqualify 20 MLAs of Delhi 's ruling Aam Aadmi Party for holding offices of profit .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , the principle has been eroded .
As a parliamentary system , the executive sits in the legislature , and from the nineteenth - century ministries were invariably led by Members of Parliament or Peers .
Until 1919 , Members of Parliament who were appointed to ministerial office lost their right to sit in the House of Commons and had to seek re - election in a ministerial by - election .
The rule survives in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 which specifies a number of state positions that make an individual ineligible to serve as a Member of Parliament .
The last vestige of the rule can be seen through the process of resignation from the House of Commons .
By tradition , resignation from the House of Commons is impossible .
An MP who wishes to resign has first to accept an office of profit under the Crown , thus vacating their seat .
Members who wish to retire ask to be appointed to the office of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the three Chiltern Hundreds of Stoke , Desborough and Burnham , or Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead .
While these ancient posts have no responsibilities attached to them , they fulfill the requirements of the law and disqualify Members from sitting in parliament , enabling their retirement .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The U.S. Constitution prohibits a Member of Congress from being appointed to an executive office under two circumstances : if the executive office was created during that Member 's term in Congress , or if the compensation for that executive office was increased during that Member 's term in Congress .
The U.S. Constitution also prohibits an executive officer from being a Member of Congress .
Specifically , Article I , Section 6 , Clause 2 provides :
The U.S. Constitution does not define the term " office of profit " .
In fact , that term is not even used in the above - mentioned provision .
However , the term " office of profit " is referred to in three other provisions .
First , only a person holding an office of honor , an office of trust , or an office of profit , is subject to impeachment and removal from office .
Specifically , Article I , section 3 , clause 7 provides : Second , a person holding an office of trust , or an office of profit , is prohibited from receiving presents , emoluments , offices , or titles from foreign powers .
Specifically , Article I , section 9 , clause 8 provides : Third , a person holding an office of trust , or an office of profit , is prohibited from serving as a presidential elector .
Specifically , Article II , section 1 , clause 2 provides : BIBLIOGRAPHY *
This treatment by a Secretary General of the Lok Sabha covers the concept in the Indian and British contexts .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Office of profit and disqualification , The Hindu , April 2006
* Just what is an office of profit ? , Rediff , March 2006 * — a section about the concept