CORPORATE COMMUNICATION Corporate communication is a set of activities involved in managing and orchestrating all internal and external communications aimed at creating favourable point of view among stakeholders on which the company depends .
It is the messages issued by a corporate organization , body , or institute to its audiences , such as employees , media , channel partners and the general public .
Organizations aim to communicate the same message to all its stakeholders , to transmit coherence , credibility and ethics .
Corporate communication helps organizations explain their mission , combine its many visions and values into a cohesive message to stakeholders .
The concept of corporate communication could be seen as an integrative communication structure linking stakeholders to the organisation .
METHODS AND TACTICS Section::::Methods and tactics .
Three principal clusters of task - planning and communication form the backbone of business and the activity of business organizations .
These include management communication , marketing communication , and organizational communication .
*
Management communication takes place between management and its internal and external audiences .
To support management communication , organizations rely heavily on specialists in marketing communication and organizational communication .
*
Marketing communication gets the bulk of the budgets in most organizations , and consists of product advertising , direct mail , personal selling , and sponsorship activities .
* Organizational communication consists of specialists in public relations , public affairs , investor relations , environmental communications , corporate advertising , and employee communication .
The responsibilities of corporate communication are : * to promote the profile of the " company behind the brand " ( corporate branding ) * to minimize discrepancies between the company 's desired identity and brand features * to delegate tasks in communication * to formulate and execute effective procedures to make decisions on communication matters * to mobilize internal and external support for corporate objectives
* to coordinate with international business firms A Conference Board Study of hundreds of the US 's largest firms showed that close to 80 percent have corporate communication functions that include media relations , speech writing , employee communication , corporate advertising , and community relations .
The public is often represented by self - appointed activist non - governmental organizations ( NGOs ) which identify themselves with a particular issue .
Most companies have specialized groups of professionals for communicating with different audiences , such as internal communication , marketing communication , investor relations , government relations and public relations .
COMPONENTS CORPORATE BRANDING Section::::Components .
Section::::Corporate branding .
A corporate brand is the perception of a company that unites a group of products or services for the public under a single name , a shared visual identity , and a common set of symbols .
The process of corporate branding consists creating favourable associations and positive reputation with both internal and external stakeholders .
The purpose of a corporate branding initiative is to generate a positive halo over the products and businesses of the company , imparting more favourable impressions of those products and businesses .
In more general terms , research suggests that corporate branding is an appropriate strategy for companies to implement when :
* there is significant " information asymmetry " between a company and its clients ; customers are much less informed about a company 's products than the company itself
is
* customers perceive a high degree of risk in purchasing the products or services of the company * features of the company behind the brand would be relevant to the product or service
a customer is considering purchasing CORPORATE AND ORGANIZATIONAL IDENTITY Section::::Corporate and organizational identity .
There are two approaches for identity : * Corporate identity is the reality and uniqueness of an organization , which is integrally related to its external and internal image and reputation through corporate communication
* Organizational identity comprises those characteristics of an organization that its members believe are central , distinctive and enduring .
That is , organizational identity consists of those attributes that members feel are fundamental to ( central ) and uniquely descriptive of ( distinctive ) the organization and that persist within the organization over time ( enduring ) " .
Four types of identity can be distinguished :
* Perceived identity : The collection of attributes that are seen as typical for the continuity , centrality and uniqueness of the organization in the eyes of its members .
* Projected identity :
The self - presentations of the organization 's attributes manifested in the implicit and explicit signals which the organization broadcasts to internal and external target audiences through communication and symbols .
* Desired identity ( also called " ideal " identity ) : The idealized picture that top managers hold of what the organization could evolve into under their leadership .
* Applied identity :
The signals that an organization broadcasts both consciously and unconsciously through behaviors and initiatives at all levels within the organization .
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Section::::Corporate responsibility .
Corporate responsibility ( often referred to as corporate social responsibility ) , corporate citizenship , sustainability , and even conscious capitalism are some of the terms bandied about the news media and corporate marketing efforts as companies jockey to win the trust and loyalty of constituents .
Corporate responsibility ( CR ) constitutes an organization 's respect for society 's interests , demonstrated by taking ownership of the effects its activities have on key constituencies including customers , employees , shareholders , communities , and the environment , in all parts of their operations .
In short , CR prompts a corporation to look beyond its traditional bottom line , to the social implications of its business .
CORPORATE REPUTATION Section::::Corporate reputation .
Reputations are overall assessments of organizations by their stakeholders .
They are aggregate perceptions by stakeholders of an organization 's ability to fulfill their expectations , whether these stakeholders are interested in buying the company 's products , working for the company , or investing in the company 's shares .
In 2000 , the US - based Council of PR Firms identified seven programs developed by either media organizations or market research firms , used by companies to assess or benchmark their corporate reputations .
Of these , only four are conducted regularly and have broad visibility :
*
" America 's Most Admired Companies " by Fortune Magazine
* The " Brand Asset Valuator " by Young & Rubicam * " RepTrak " by Reputation Institute * " Best Global Brands " by Interbrand CRISIS COMMUNICATIONS Section::::Crisis communications .
Crisis communication is sometimes considered a sub - specialty of the public relations profession that is designed to protect and defend an individual , company , or organization facing a public challenge to its reputation .
These challenges may come in the form of an investigation from a government agency , a criminal allegation , a media inquiry , a shareholders lawsuit , a violation of environmental regulations , or any of a number of other scenarios involving the legal , ethical , or financial standing of the entity .
The crisis for organizations can be defined as follows : INTERNAL / EMPLOYEE COMMUNICATIONS Section::::Internal / employee communications .
As the extent of communication grows , many companies create an employee relations ( ER ) function with dedicated staff to manage the numerous media through which senior managers can communicate among themselves and with the rest of the organization .
Internal communication in the 21st century is more than the memos , publications , and broadcasts that comprise it ; it 's about building a corporate culture on values that drive organizational excellence .
ER specialists are generally expected to fulfill one or more of the following four roles :
* Efficiency :
Internal communication is used primarily to disseminate information about corporate activities .
*
Shared meaning : Internal communication is used to build a shared understanding among employees about corporate goals .
*
Connectivity : Internal communication is used mainly to clarify the connectedness of the company 's people and activities .
* Satisfaction : Internal communication is used to improve job satisfaction throughout the company .
INVESTOR RELATIONS Section::::Investor relations .
The investor relations ( IR ) function is used by companies which publicly trade shares on a stock exchange .
In such companies , the purpose of the IR specialist is to interface with current and potential financial stakeholders - namely retail investors , institutional investors , and financial analysts .
The role of investor relations is to fulfill three principal functions :
* comply with regulations
* Create a favorable relationship with key financial audiences
* contribute to building and maintaining
the company 's image and reputation PUBLIC RELATIONS :
ISSUES MANAGEMENT AND MEDIA RELATIONS
Section::::Public relations : issues management and media relations .
The role of the public relations specialist , in many ways , is to communicate with the general public in ways that serve the interests of the company .
PR therefore consists of numerous specialty areas that convey information about the company to the public , including sponsorships , events , issues management and media relations .
When executing these types of activities , the PR Specialist must incorporate broader corporate messages to convey the company 's strategic positioning .
This ensures the PR activities ultimately convey messages that distinguish the company vis - à - vis its competitors and the overall marketplace , while also communicating the company 's value to target audiences .
ISSUES MANAGEMENT Section::::Issues management .
A key role of the PR specialist is to make the company better known for traits and attributes that build the company 's perceived distinctiveness and competitiveness with the public .
In recent years , PR specialists have become increasingly involved in helping companies manage strategic issues – public concerns about their activities that are frequently magnified by special interest groups and NGOs .
The role of the PR specialist therefore also consists of issues management , namely the " set of organizational procedures , routines , personnel , and issues " .
A strategic issue is one that compels a company to deal with it because there is " a conflict between two or more identifiable groups over procedural or substantive matters relating to the distribution of positions or resources " .
MEDIA RELATIONS Section::::Media relations .
To build better relationships with the media , organizations must cultivate positive relations with influential members of the media .
This task might be handled by employees within the company 's media relations department or handled by a public relations firm .
COMPANY / SPOKESPERSON PROFILING
Section::::Company / spokesperson profiling .
These " public faces " are considered authorities in their respective sector / field and ensure the company / organization is in the limelight .
* Managing content of corporate websites and/or other external touch points
* Managing corporate publications – for the external world
* Managing print media REFERENCES