COOPERATIVE BANKING Cooperative banking is retail and commercial banking organized on a cooperative basis .
Cooperative banking institutions take deposits and lend money in most parts of the world .
Cooperative banking , as discussed here , includes retail banking carried out by credit unions , mutual savings banks , building societies and cooperatives , as well as commercial banking services provided by mutual organizations ( such as cooperative federations ) to cooperative businesses .
A 2013 report by ILO concluded that cooperative banks outperformed their competitors during the financial crisis of 2007 - 2008 .
The cooperative banking sector had 20 % market share of the European banking sector , but accounted for only 7 per cent of all the write - downs and losses between the third quarter of 2007 and first quarter of 2011 .
Cooperative banks were also over - represented in lending to small and medium - sized businesses in all of the 10 countries included in the report .
Credit unions in the US had five times lower failure rate than other banks during the crisis and more than doubled lending to small businesses between 2008 - 2016 , from $ 30 billion to $ 60 billion , while lending to small businesses overall during the same period declined by around $ 100 billion .
Public trust in credit unions stands at 60 % , compared to 30 % for big banks and small businesses are eighty percent less likely to be dissatisfied with a credit union than with a big bank .
INSTITUTIONS COOPERATIVE BANKS Section::::Institutions .
Section::::Cooperative banks .
Cooperative banks are owned by their customers and follow the cooperative principle of one person , one vote .
Co - operative banks are often regulated under both banking and cooperative legislation .
They provide services such as savings and loans to non - members as well as to members , and some participate in the wholesale markets for bonds , money and even equities .
Many cooperative banks are traded on public stock markets , with the result that they are partly owned by non - members .
Member control is diluted by these outside stakes , so they may be regarded as semi - cooperative .
Cooperative banking systems are also usually more integrated than credit union systems .
Local branches of co - operative banks select their own boards of directors and manage their own operations , but most strategic decisions require approval from a central office .
Credit unions usually retain strategic decision - making at a local level , though they share back - office functions , such as access to the global payments system , by federating .
Some cooperative banks are criticized for diluting their cooperative principles .
Principles 2 - 4 of the " Statement on the Co - operative Identity " can be interpreted to require that members must control both the governance systems and capital of their cooperatives .
A cooperative bank that raises capital on public stock markets creates a second class of shareholders who compete with the members for control .
In some circumstances , the members may lose control .
This effectively means that the bank ceases to be a cooperative .
Accepting deposits from non - members may also lead to a dilution of member control .
CREDIT UNIONS Section::::Credit unions .
Credit unions have the purpose of promoting thrift , providing credit at reasonable rates , and providing other financial services to its members .
Its members are usually required to share a common bond , such as locality , employer , religion or profession , and credit unions are usually funded entirely by member deposits , and avoid outside borrowing .
They are typically ( though not exclusively )
the smaller form of cooperative banking institution .
In some countries they are restricted to providing only unsecured personal loans , whereas in others , they can provide business loans to farmers , and mortgages .
LAND DEVELOPMENT BANKS Section::::Land development banks .
The special ( bank)s providing Long Term Loans are called Land Development Banks , in the short , LDB .
The history of LDB is quite old .
The first LDB was started at Jhang in Punjab in 1920 .
This bank is also based on Co - operative .
The main objective of the LDBs are to promote the development of land , agriculture and increase the agricultural production .
The LDBs provide long - term finance to members directly through their branches .
BUILDING SOCIETIES Section::::Building societies .
Building societies exist in Britain , Ireland and several Commonwealth countries .
They are similar to credit unions in organisation , though few enforce a common bond .
However , rather than promoting thrift and offering unsecured and business loans , their purpose is to provide home mortgages for members .
Borrowers and depositors are society members , setting policy and appointing directors on a one - member , one - vote basis .
Building societies often provide other retail banking services , such as current accounts , credit cards and personal loans .
In the United Kingdom , regulations permit up to half of their lending to be funded by debt to non - members , allowing societies to access wholesale bond and money markets to fund mortgages .
The world 's largest building society is Britain 's Nationwide Building Society .
OTHERS Section::::Others .
Mutual savings banks and mutual savings and loan associations were very common in the 19th and 20th centuries , but declined in number and market share in the late 20th century , becoming globally less significant than cooperative banks , building societies and credit unions .
Trustee savings banks are similar to other savings banks , but they are not cooperatives , as they are controlled by trustees , rather than their depositors .
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS Section::::International associations .
The most important international associations of co - operative banks are the Brussels - based European Association of Co - operative Banks which has 28 European and non - European members , and the Paris - based International Cooperative Banking Association ( ICBA ) , which has member institutions from around the world too .
BY
REGION
CANADA Section::::By region .
Section::::Canada .
In Canada , cooperative banking is provided by credit unions ( UNI in French ) .
As of September 30 , 2012 , there were 357 credit unions and caisses populaires affiliated with Credit Union Central of Canada .
They operated 1,761 branches across the country with 5.3 million members and $ 149.7 billion in assets .
QUEBEC Section::::Quebec .
The UNI movement started by Alphonse Desjardins in Quebec , Canada , pioneered credit unions .
Desjardins opened the first credit union in North America in 1900 , from his home in Lévis , Quebec , marking the beginning of the Mouvement Desjardins .
He was interested in bringing financial protection to working people .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
British building societies developed into general - purpose savings and banking institutions with ' one member , one vote ' ownership and can be seen as a form of financial cooperative ( although many de - mutualised into conventionally owned banks in the 1980s and 1990s ) .
Until 2017 the Co - operative Group included The Co - operative Bank .
It still retains an insurance provider , The Co - operative Insurance , noted for promoting ethical investment .
CONTINENTAL EUROPE Section::::Continental Europe .
Important continental cooperative banking systems include the Crédit Agricole , Crédit Mutuel , Banque Populaire and Caisse d'épargne in France , Rabobank in the Netherlands , BVR / DZ Bank in Germany , Banco Popolare , UBI Banca in Italy , Migros and Coop Bank in Switzerland , and the Raiffeisen system in several countries in central and eastern Europe .
The cooperative banks that are members of the European Association of Co - operative Banks have 130 million customers , 4 trillion euros in assets , and 17 % of Europe 's deposits .
The International Confederation of Cooperative Banks ( CIBP ) is the oldest association of cooperative banks at international level .
In Scandinavia , there is a clear distinction between mutual savings banks ( Sparbank ) and true credit unions ( Andelsbank ) .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Credit unions in the United States had 96.3 million members in 2013 and assets of $ 1.06 trillion .
The sector had five times lower failure rate than other banks during the financial crisis of 2007 - 2008 and more than doubled lending to small businesses between 2008 - 2016 , from $ 30 billion to $ 60 billion , while lending to small businesses overall during the same period declined by around $ 100 billion .
Public trust in credit unions stands at 60 % , compared to 30 % for big banks and small businesses are five times less likely to be dissatisfied with a credit union than with a big bank .
INDIA Section::::India .
Cooperative banks serve an important role in the Indian economy , especially in rural areas .
In urban areas , they mainly serve to small industry and self - employed workers .
They are registered under the Cooperative Societies Act , 1912 .
They are regulated by the Reserve Bank of India under the Banking Regulation Act , 1949 and Banking Laws
( Application to Cooperative Societies ) Act , 1965 .
Anyonya Sahakari Mandali , established in 1889 in the province of Baroda , is the earliest known cooperative credit union in India .
The Cooperative Credit System in India consists of Short Term and Long Term credit institutions .
The short - term credit structure which takes care of the short term ( 1 to 5 years )
credit needs of the farmers is a three tier structure in most of the States viz . , Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies ( PACCS ) at the village level , District Central Cooperative Banks at the District level and State Cooperative Bank at the State level and two tier in some States voz . , State Cooperative Banks and PACCS .
The long term credit sturcture caters to the long term credit needs of the farmers(upto 20 years ) is a two tier structure with Primary Agriculture and Rural Development Banks ( PARDBs ) at the village level and State Agriculture and Rural Development Banks .
The State Cooperative Banks and Central Cooperative Banks are licensed by Reserve Bank of India under Banking Regulation Act .
While the StCBs and DCCBs function like a normal Bank they focus mainly on agricultural credit .
While Reserve Bank of India is the Regulating Authority , National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development ( NABARD ) provides refinance support and takes care of inspection of StCBs and DCCBs .
The first Cooperative Credit Society in India was started in 1904 at Thiroor in Tiruvallur District in Tamil Nadu Primary Cooperative Banks which are otherwise known as Urban Cooperative Banks are registered as Cooperative Societies under the Cooperative Societies Acts of the concerned States or the Multi - State Cooperative Societies Act function in urban areas and
their business is similar to that of Commercial Banks .
They are licensed by RBI to do banking business .
Reserve Bank of India is both the controlling and inspecting authority for the Primary Cooperative Banks .
ISRAEL Section::::Israel .
Ofek ( Hebrew : אופק ) is a cooperative initiative founded in mid-2012 that intended to establish the first cooperative bank in Israel .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
Since the 19th century , Italy has had hundreds of " banche popolari " ( popular banks ) and " banche di credito cooperativo " ( cooperative credit banks ) which are different kinds of cooperative societies ( governed by an assembly where every shareholder / member has 1 vote ) .
As of 2016 , the biggest was Banca Popolare di Milano ( founded in 1865 ) .
Starting in 2016 , due to a new law , several cooperative banks will be forced to merge and/or be converted to società per azioni .
MICROCREDIT AND MICROFINANCE Section::::Microcredit and microfinance .
The more recent phenomena of microcredit and microfinance are often based on a cooperative model .
These focus on small business lending .
In 2006 , Muhammad Yunus , founder of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh , won the Nobel Peace Prize for his ideas regarding development and his pursuit of the microcredit concept .
In this concept the institution provide micro loan to requires .
LIST OF COOPERATIVE BANKING INSTITUTIONS Section::::List of cooperative banking institutions .
+ Cooperative banking institutions !
Name ! !
Country ! !
Members(2010 ) Assets(2010 US$ millions ) ! !
Type ! !
Alternative name ! !
Notes Coop Bank Pertama ( formerly known as Bank Persatuan ) Malaysia 300,000+RM3.4 Billion Islamic cooperative bank Koperasi Co - opbank Pertama Malaysia Berhad
The first national cooperative bank in Malaysia established in 1950 Bank Rakyat Malaysia 907,918 Islamic cooperative bank Bank Kerjasama Rakyat Malaysia Berhad
Second national cooperative bank in Malaysia founded in 1954
Crédit Agricole
S.A. France Bank ( Public S.A. ) Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricol local banks of ther group majority owned by individuals ; local banks jointly - owned Crédit Agricole S.A.
indirectly , via regional bank of the group Islami Co - operative Bank Ltd. ( Instead of Sandwip Central Co - Operative Bank Ltd. ) Head office : Zakir Hossain Road , Khulshi , Chittagong-4209 , Bangladesh .
Crelan Belgium 288,000
Bank formerly Landbouwkrediet ( agricultural ) Independent from Crédit Agricole since 2015 DZ Bank Germany 17,700,000 Bank Deutsche ZentralgenossenschaftbankGerman Central Cooperative Bank Owned by three quarters of all Volksbank and Raiffeisenbank ( cooperative banks ) in Germany and Austria Caisse d'EpargneFrance Bank
literally " savings bank " Credit union federation
RabobankNetherlands 1,500,000 + Bank Credit union federation Nationwide Building SocietyUK15,500,000 Building society World 's largest building society Bangladesh Samabaya Bank LTD .
Bangladesh Bank The largest Co - Operative Bank in Bangladesh with 478 Registered Member Society .
Groupe Banque Populaire France 3,400,000 Bank Desjardins Group Canada 5,795,277 Credit union federation Leading bank in Quebec Raiffeisen Bank
International Austria Bank ( Public aktiengesellschaft ) RI owned by regional Raiffeisen Bank of Austrian states Nonghyup South Korea Banking division of agricultural cooperativeNational Agricultural Cooperative Federation ( NACF )
Approx US$ 230 billion in loans
ICCREA Banca Italy Bank ( società per azioni )
Istituto Centrale delle Casse Rurali ed Artigiane owned by credit unions of Italy Cassa Centrale Banca – Credito Cooperativo
del Nord Est Italy Bank
( società per azioni ) CCB owned by credit union of Northern Italy Raiffeisen Landesbank Südtirol Italy Bank ( società per azioni ) Cassa Centrale Raiffeisen dell'Alto Adige owned by credit union of South Tyrol region , Italy Raiffeisen ( Switzerland ) Switzerland Credit union federation Banco Cooperativo Español and Caja Rural
Spain OP Financial GroupFinland 1,750,000 31 % share of Finnish credit market , and 32 % share of savings and deposit market POP Pankki Finland Credit union federation Bank AustraliaAustralia 125,000 + $ 3b bank Australia 's first customer owned bank Co - operative
Bank UK
Not applicable Bank Subsidiary of consumer cooperative Navy Federal Credit UnionUS
3,004,35233012 Credit union Shared Interest UK Cooperative lending society Finance for fair trade
GLS Bank Germany
The Cooperative Bank New Zealand 120,000
+ Bank Customer owned bank Banco Credicoop Argentina SEE ALSO
* Building society
* Credit union * Mutual savings bank * Rotating savings and credit association * Savings and loan association
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * International Co - operative Banking Association , a sectoral organization of the International Co - operative Alliance *
The European Association of Cooperative Banks * NCB * Co - operative Banks in India
* CIBP
*
The Kelly Review * Cooperative Banking in Canada
* Co - operative
Central Bank Ltd Cyprus