ELMER 'S PRODUCTS
Elmer 's Products is an American - based company that has a line of adhesive , craft , home repair , and office supply products .
It is best known as the manufacturer of Elmer 's Glue - All , a popular PVA - based synthetic glue , in addition to other brands including Krazy Glue , ProBond adhesives , and X - Acto cutting tools .
Introduced by Borden , it was spun off independently in 1999 .
The company was acquired in 2003 by Berwind Corporation , a privately held investment firm .
On October 5 , 2015 , Newell Rubbermaid announced a $ 600 million deal to acquire Elmer 's Products .
The logo for the brand was based upon " Elmer the Bull " , mate of Borden Inc. 's advertising mascot Elsie the Cow , during the 20th century .
Elmer 's image continues to be featured in the company logo .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On May 11 , 1857 , with three employees and one product , Gail Borden founded the company that became Borden ,
Inc. In 1929 , Borden purchased the Casein Company of America , the leading manufacturer of glues made from casein , a byproduct of milk .
Borden introduced its first glue product , known as Casecorez Glue , in 1932 .
Five years later , the company began producing resin adhesives for use in woodworking , such as Cascamite .
EARLY YEARS
Section::::Early years .
Immediately after World War II , the company expanded into synthetic resin glues and , in 1947 , the first multipurpose consumer white glue , known as Elmer 's Glue - All , was introduced .
The glue was packaged in a glass bottle with a popsicle stick type wooden applicator attached with a rubber band .
Consumer feedback confirmed a need for an easier to use delivery method , which prompted the company to develop easy to squeeze bottles featuring a twistable orange cap , introduced in 1962 .
This innovation remains in use and is a trademark of Elmer 's Products .
LATER YEARS
Section::::Later years .
Over the next few decades , Elmer 's focused on expansion of adhesive products for school and home , in addition to developing a variety of hardware sealants , compounds , and caulks .
In 1968 , Elmer 's introduced Elmer 's School Glue , the first white glue that washed out of clothes .
In the 1970s , Elmer 's also began marketing Krazy Glue , a well - known instant adhesive .
In response to teacher requests for an easier - to - use , no - mess bonding method , Elmer 's introduced its line of glue sticks in 1983 , easing application and reducing mess .
In 1989 , Borden , Inc. , and Toagosei America entered into a joint venture partnership to manufacture , sell and distribute cyanoacrylate and anaerobic adhesives under the Krazy Glue and Aron Alpha trademarks .
In 1991 , Elmer 's expanded into the kid 's Arts and Crafts category with GluColors , colorful products designed especially for children .
In 1994 , Borden was purchased by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts , and Elmer 's was launched as a separate operating company .
The company focused on creating category - leading adhesive and related products for school , crafts , hardware , and home repair use .
In 2000 , Elmer 's acquired Ross Products , an expansion that helped accelerate product development beyond adhesives and into the world of creative arts and crafts .
Two years later , Elmer 's was purchased by another private equity firm and merged with Hunt Corporation , known for development of adult arts and crafts , and office products , including the X - Acto and Boston brands .
In addition , Painters paint markers and other arts and crafts brands were added to the family .
LET 'S BOND PROGRAM Section::::Let 's Bond program .
In 2013 , Elmer 's partnered with researcher Richard Rende , Ph.D. , to explore the benefits arts and crafts can offer children in the early years of growth and development .
His research revealed that creative interaction between parents and young children engaging in activities like arts and crafts not only provides immediate and lasting cognitive benefits , but also creates a unique bonding experience .
ELMER
THE BULL Section::::Elmer the Bull .
Although Elmer the Bull did not become the marketing symbol for Borden 's adhesive line until 1951 , he had been a familiar household name since the 1940s .
Elmer was designed in 1940 by David William Reid .
Reid was part of the advertising team that developed Elsie the Cow , the well - known bovine marketing symbol for the dairy division .
Elmer was a huge hit with the public and was frequently seen alongside Elsie and their children in most promotional and advertising campaigns .
In 1951 , Elmer the Bull was officially chosen to be the marketing symbol for all adhesives in the Borden line , and his portrait has been appearing on Elmer 's packaging ever since .
Elmer 's does not use animals or animal parts to make glue .
Its glue adhesive products are made from synthetic materials and are not derived from processing horses , cows , or any other animals , or milk .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
The company manufactures a wide range of glues , wood fillers , display boards , and paint markers .
OTHER BRANDS
Section::::Other brands .
Krazy Glue , a super - strong , fast - drying instant adhesive , was introduced to the North American market in 1973 .
It is based on ethyl cyanoacrylate and has properties similar to other cyanoacrylate adhesives ( commonly sold as " Crazy Glue " or " Super Glue " ) .
X - Acto is the brand name for a variety of cutting tools and office products .
Cutting tools include hobby and utility knives , saws , carving tools , and many small - scale precision knives used for crafts and other applications .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* www.elmers.com—Elmer 's site at elmers.com
* www.berwind.com—Berwind site at berwind.com
* Material Safety Data Sheet for Elmer 's Glue - All at elmers.com