POSEIDON ( FICTIONAL SHIP )
The SS Poseidon is a fictional transatlantic ocean liner that first appeared in the 1969 novel The Poseidon Adventure by Paul Gallico and later in four films based on the novel .
The ship is named after the god of the seas in Greek mythology .
DESCRIPTIONS
THE BOOK Section::::Descriptions .
Section::::The Book .
In the 1969 novel , the ship is traveling across the Atlantic on her first month - long cruise with African and South American ports of call , after her recent sale & conversion from the 35-year old British ocean liner RMS Atlantis into the American cruise ship SS Poseidon .
On December 26 , the SS Poseidon capsizes when a landslide in the Mid - Atlantic Ridge produces a massive 99-foot tsunami .
The description of the ship is slim , Gallico described her as a quadruple - screw ocean liner of 81,000 tons , as long as four city blocks , and as high as an apartment building with three massive funnels .
He also described her fatal flaw as riding high in the water , improperly ballasted and technically unseaworthy , this , he wrote , made SS Poseidon vulnerable to capsizing in heavy seas .
THE 1972 FILM VERSION Section::::The 1972 film version .
In the 1972 film , The Poseidon Adventure , the ship is in the Mediterranean on her final voyage , which will take her to the breaker 's yards in Greece , when an undersea earthquake produces a rogue wave that capsizes the ship just after midnight on New Year 's Eve .
The film uses the RMS Queen Mary as a stand - in for Poseidon , using actual onboard locations as well as model shots .
The captain ( Leslie Nielsen ) complains about Poseidon being top - heavy and hence vulnerable to capsizing by large waves , and he makes clear his intent to take on ballast , but the representative of the owners refuses to allow this and indeed , orders him to proceed at full speed , threatening to fire him and replace him with another officer .
Of the hundreds aboard , no more than a handful survive .
BEYOND
THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE Section::::Beyond the Poseidon Adventure .
In the 1979 film , Beyond the Poseidon Adventure , which is a direct continuation of the story from the first film , the Poseidon is an abandoned overturned wreck that has not yet sunk .
She is boarded by a small group of salvagers and a group of thieves in disguise ( who are looking for gold and a lost plutonium shipment ) .
Eventually trapped in the ship , they encounter a group of passengers and crew who are still aboard .
In the end , the Poseidon 's boilers and plutonium cargo explode , destroyed most of the hull and sinking the ship permanently and , worse , irradiating her wreckage to unsafe levels .
THE 2005 TV FILM Section::::The 2005 TV film .
In the 2005 TV film , The Poseidon Adventure , Poseidon is a modern motor driven cruise ship using propeller pods , which is sailing from Cape Town , South Africa on a cruise through the Indian Ocean to Sydney , Australia .
The events that lead to the capsize of the ship vary greatly from the original book , as it is a partly foiled terrorist plot to sink the ship using explosives below the water line which leads to Poseidon rolling over and sinking bow first .
POSEIDON Section::::Poseidon .
In the 2006 film , Poseidon , the ship is not a cruise ship , but a British ocean liner registered in Southampton , which is sailing from an unnamed port in the United Kingdom ( presumably London as one of the characters mentions it briefly ) to New York City .
While the first film used Queen Mary as a stand - in for Poseidon , the ship in the 2006 film has an original exterior design not based on any real - life vessel , although the interior was inspired by the modern ocean liner RMS Queen Mary 2 .
The lower part of the hull is loosely based on the Queen Mary 2 , but the superstructure is not .
This Poseidon is also struck by a huge rogue wave just after midnight on New Year 's Eve and capsizes , but unlike the original the cause of the wave is never explained .
COMMONALITY Section::::Commonality .
In the bulk of each story , a group of survivors try to make their way to the overturned top of the capsized liner , hoping to get to safety .
SEE ALSO * SOS ( 1993 video game ) REFERENCES