DRIVING RANGE
A driving range is an area where golfers can practice their golf swing .
It can also be a recreational activity itself for amateur golfers or when enough time for a full game is not available .
Many golf courses have a driving range attached and they are also found as stand - alone facilities , especially in urban areas .
They are typically run by businesses or sometimes by universities .
Distances are usually marked by target greens at regular distances .
Driving ranges may have natural grass , similar to a golf course , or players may have to use synthetic mats that resemble real turf .
Golfers pay for various sizes of buckets of balls , usually designated as small ( 30–50 balls ) , medium ( 50 - 80 balls ) , and large ( 80 - 150 balls ) , and hit at their leisure .
Some ranges feature electronic tee devices , which load balls automatically , and record ball use on a smart card .
Often there are golf professionals available to give lessons and instruction .
Balls are retrieved by a specialty cart with a brush and roller attachment that automatically picks up balls and a cage that protects the driver from incoming balls .
In urban and suburban areas , large nets protect surrounding people and structures from errant balls .
Driving ranges are particularly popular in Japan where golf courses are overcrowded and often very expensive .
Many commercial driving ranges are seen in conjunction with other sports - related practice areas such as batting cages or miniature golf , for entertainment .
Some driving ranges also offer areas for practice chip shots , bunker shots , and putting .
Driving ranges may use golf balls that differ significantly from those used on the golf course .
Range balls , as they are known , are often cheap and specially designed with a harder cover to make them more durable .
As such they also may not necessarily conform to the rules of golf .
In order to distinguish them from other type of ball , they may have a distinct coloring or colored band and be stamped with the word " range " .
SEE ALSO
* Golf instruction *
Indoor golf REFERENCES