DOMINICK 'S
Dominick 's was a Chicago - area grocery store chain and subsidiary of Safeway Inc .. Dominick 's distribution center was located in Northlake , Illinois , while its management offices were located in Oak Brook , Illinois .
HISTORY FOUNDING Section::::History .
Section::::Founding . Dominick DiMatteo , born in Sicily , founded the chain in 1918 .
The second Dominick 's opened in 1934 .
In 1950 , the DiMatteos opened their first supermarket , a store .
EXPANSION Section::::Expansion .
By 1968 , the chain had reached 19 stores .
The family elected to sell their store to the Cleveland company Fisher Foods .
The DiMatteos continued to operate the chain under the financial backing of Fisher Foods .
Under Fisher , Dominick 's acquired 24 stores plus a 462,000-square - foot distribution center in Northlake from Kroger in two separate transactions in 1970 .
The new acquisitions from Kroger increased the number of stores to 45 .
The Northlake distribution center , which was originally built by Kroger in 1961 , was used by Dominick 's until the chain was closed in 2014 .
By the 1980s , the family had become unhappy with the agreement and bought back the chain in 1981 for $ 100 million .
The DiMatteos continued to expand and had acquired 4 stores from Kohl 's and 16 stores from Eagle in 1982 and 1985 respectively .
In 1986 , Dominick 's experiment with a discount grocery store concept called Jerry 's Deep Discount Centers with just 3 units , but the experiment was terminated after a few months of operation .
STORE DESIGN DURING DOMINICK 'S HEYDAY
Section::::Store design during Dominick 's heyday .
In the 1980s and early 1990s , under the direction of Bob Mariano , Dominick 's experimented with new large " food and drug " combo stores .
Dominick 's was one of the first to experiment with all ceiling sales areas , exposed structural elements such as piping and HVAC ducts , large - scale state - of - the - art telephone systems and POS systems , video departments , one - hour photo , bulk foods , and many other " new " 1980s concepts .
This design carried over to the Omni Superstore Division of Dominick 's .
Early 1985 - 1988 , Dominick 's food and drug combo stores contained a full glass front wall that overlooked the parking lot with a customer service desk in the middle of the glass wall .
Between 1988 - 1993 , Dominick 's stores contained a 2-story area ( similar to its sister format Omni Superstore ) at the front of the store .
The first floor contained the customer service desk area , entry / exit vestibules , the security room , the video department , and a bank .
The 2nd level contained a break room , employee restrooms , office area , and windows that overlooked the sales floor .
After 1993 and the introduction of the Dominick 's Fresh Stores , the design was switched back to a single - level store throughout .
In the 1990s , Dominick 's took the " food and drug " combo to the next level with the introduction of the Dominick 's Fresh Store in 1993 .
The Dominick 's " Fresh Store " introduced prepared foods , in - store restaurants / cafés , Starbucks cafés , soft lighting , upscale subtle graphics , uniform products signage , and a general European Market feel to the Dominick 's stores .
During the late 1990s , the Fresh Stores were the main expansion model for Dominick 's and was rolled out to all new stores including former Omni Superstores , up until the purchase by Safeway .
Safeway bought Dominick 's in 1998 and put an abrupt halt to the Fresh Stores , instead rolling out their own prototype with the Fresh Store logo on the outside of the store .
Safeway still put " The Fresh Store " cursive logo on the outside of the stores , and in many stores , the Fresh Store concepts such as cafés , fresh prepared foods and European store layout format were discontinued in favor of Safeway 's national store model .
Safeway implemented its own store layouts as stores were remodeled , and their own house brands such as Safeway Select .
In 2005 the Safeway Lifestyle Store concept was brought to the Dominick 's brand and in turn , many stores were remodeled with many of the same elements that Bob Mariano ( the CEO of Dominick 's during the Safeway takeover ) had instituted prior to Safeway 's acquisition but were in turn removed in 1998 by Safeway .
Items such as hot prepared foods , salad bars , localized merchandise , and enhanced customer service , once removed by Safeway , were put back into service to try and win back the Chicago consumer .
Mariano , currently the CEO of Roundy 's Mariano 's ( as of 2016 ) , expanded under the Mariano 's banner and put pressure onto the Dominick 's stores , which eventually closed in late 2013 .
IN - STORE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS Section::::In - store communication systems .
Dominick 's and its sister operation , Omni Superstore , was a pioneer in experimenting with unique ways for in store communication method between employees and methods for announcing messages to customers .
Most retail stores in the early to mid 1980s still employed the use of analog 1A2 telephone systems with separate analog paging handsets or even microphones .
Starting in 1986 , Dominick 's employed the use of ROLM Redwood digital telephone systems that were interconnected between stores via Tie Lines .
Stores could be dialed using short codes and without long distance charges .
Also used , was the overhead paging feature , built into the ROLM Redwood systems .
An employee at the service desk would announce " Produce you have a call on 630 " and then the employee in produce would simply go to any phone in the entire store and dial 630 to retrieve a call .
Around 1986 this was highly advanced as most grocery stores still relied on analog
1A2 phone systems with a separate intercom handset that only had one or two voice paths .
In addition to the overhead paging and parking capabilities of the phone system , employees could directly dial to each telephone in the store via an intercom extension such as 604 or 627 , etc .
For example , general merchandise would be extension 627 .
The store manager could dial 627 to directly dial general merchandise without having to overhead page across the entire store .
While paging was frequent , Dominick 's operations also experimented with walkie talkie radios .
The radios were n't meant to replace the overhead paging , but to cut down on a few announcements , but overall , overhead paging was the most common way for Dominick 's employees to communicate .
Dominick 's employed a unique in store background music / paging system as well .
While the typical lay in ceilings stores used standard ceiling mounted loud speakers , the exposed structure stores used unique high powered Atlas Soundolier paging horns directed downward from the roof trusses in the 1980s stores .
Most of the 1990s stores used white Soundsphere spherical speakers attached to the bottom of the roof deck .
There was some experimentation with column mounted boxed speakers at customer level as well .
Later stores from 1991 and on were outfitted with Nortel Meridian 1 Option 11 PBX systems in place of the ROLM Redwood product , which was discontinued by IBM ROLM in 1990 .
With the Option 11 systems , an even higher advanced feature package was outfitted into the Dominick 's and Omni Superstore stores .
Park and Paging using extension codes such as 627 and 601 were still common but the voice quality of the M2616 and M2008 Meridian 1 telephone sets was unsurpassed in quality and paging audio was tied into Soundsphere speakers and extremely clear .
The ROLM , Meridian 1 and even some 1A2 telephone systems were replaced in 2006 - 2007 by Safeway 's Nortel BCM200 telephone systems , some of which are still in use at the Dominick 's stores purchased by Roundy 's and converted to Mariano 's .
In addition to reusing the Nortel BCM200 system from Safeway , Roundy 's Mariano 's tied in wireless SIP handsets for department managers and store directors to carry around on the sales floor .
Dominick 's innovative park and page feature has a legacy that most large retail stores use today , including Walgreens , Home Depot , Nordstrom , Jewel - Osco , Albertsons , Meijer , and Whole Foods .
1990S : TAKEOVERS Section::::1990s : Takeovers .
In 1993 , Dominick DiMatteo , Jr. died from lung cancer .
According to the local press , his daughters and son did not have the same passion for the supermarket business .
There was corporate infighting that also contributed to the family selling the chain .
It took three years before the company was sold to a Los Angeles - based grocery investment firm headed by Yucaipa Companies .
In 1998 , the chain 's then 116 stores were acquired by
Safeway Inc. Safeway soon began to sell its own private - label brands at Dominick 's locations , replacing Dominick 's former private - label brands .
According to a grocery business consultant , " Dominick 's focused on purchasing produce and meat on quality first , price second .
Safeway did just the opposite .
" Dominick 's lost market share and profits following the Safeway takeover .
Safeway tried to imitate the model that had been successful in California , but Chicago 's strong ethnic background did not mesh well with the California shopping experience .
Between 2002 and 2007 , Dominick 's market share in the Chicago region declined from 24.4 percent to 14.5 percent ( Jewel - Osco 's 40.5 percent was the market 's leader ) .
Safeway unsuccessfully attempted to sell the Dominick 's chain in 2003 .
Safeway then reported Dominick 's financial information as a discontinued operation , but later , Safeway announced that it was retaining the chain .
After closing more than 20 stores since its acquisition , Safeway announced in February 2007 that it would close another 14 stores in the Chicago area and convert 20 existing stores to the lifestyle format .
After these store closings , Dominick 's operated in 83 locations until they were closed on December 28 , 2013 .
OMNI SUPERSTORE Section::::Omni Superstore .
In 1987 , the chain opened Omni Superstore locations , which were " warehouse - style " supermarkets to stave off Cub Foods supermarkets .
Besides traditional food items , these stores featured non - food items , movie rental stores , and bulk items .
The stores ' design was stark in comparison to Dominick 's and featured cost - cutting techniques .
These stores began to lose money due to lack of loss prevention and throwaway inventorying .
Around 1996 then - owner Yucaipa decided to convert them to the Dominick 's " Fresh Store " concept .
Omni Superstores were converted to Dominick 's Stores in 1997 .
After Dominick 's was acquired by Safeway , some locations were closed .
The Clybourn Avenue Dominick 's in Chicago was the only remaining Omni Superstore building which was occupied by Dominick 's until the store was closed on December 28 , 2013 .
BRANDS Section::::Brands .
After being acquired by Safeway , Dominick 's private - label brands varied between those branded for Safeway ( such as " Safeway Select " and " O Organics " ) and ones branded for Dominick 's .
LIFESTYLE BRANDING
Section::::Lifestyle branding .
On April 18 , 2005 , Safeway , Dominick 's parent company , began a $ 100 million brand re - positioning campaign labeled " Ingredients for Life " .
Although the campaign was used in the Chicago area , the " Ingredients for Life " slogan was still positioned with the store 's logo as in Safeway 's other divisions ( i.e. at the end of commercials and on billboards Dominick 's logo was flashed combined with the slogan ) .
Under this campaign many Dominick 's were remodeled to the new format .
Lifestyle stores featured more upscale trends than on Dominick 's last re - branding , " Fresh Stores " , such as an olive bar , carving station , Starbucks , and a salad bar .
Architectural changes included hardwood flooring and new direct lighting schemes that tend to be less abrasive .
The first Dominick 's to be branded a Lifestyle store was in Northfield which opened after closing 12 poorly - performing stores .
Safeway later spent an additional $ 150 million in upgrades to the Lifestyle brand .
BANKING Section::::Banking .
After seeing the success that their Omni division had with their in - store banking partnership with St. Paul Federal Bank since 1988 , Dominick 's formed an agreement with First Chicago Corp. in 1993 .
Until final closure in 2013 , many Dominick 's featured in - store bank locations and ATMs of First Chicago 's successor , Chase . SALES OF EXPIRED FOOD Section::::Sales of expired food .
On February 17 , 2011 CBS Chicago News aired a report picked up on from Chicago blogger Jill Cataldo about a widespread issue with the sale of expired products in Dominick 's stores .
Legions of Dominick 's customers had apparently been contacting Dominick 's about these issues for some time to no avail .
In two separate shopping trips to two different Dominick 's stores , Ms. Cataldo , along with two of her readers , documented over 700 expired items on the store shelves , some more than 2 years past their expiration dates .
On that same day The Chicago Tribune featured an article on the Dominick 's expired - food issue .
In that article , Safeway , as parent company of Dominick 's , released the following statement to the media : " Dominick 's customers rightly expect they will find only high - quality , fresh products at all of our stores .
Our organization is committed to meeting those expectations .
While expiration dates on food products are largely based on quality , not food safety , that does not diminish the fact that we are displeased with the out - of - date products found at our stores .
This is not indicative of how we do business .
A high - level and highest - priority team has been assembled to immediately address these issues . "
Reports of shoppers witnessing Dominick 's employees in the aisles of their stores filling carts with expired products began popping up in the comments sections of these articles .
On February 18 , 2011 various Chicago market media outlets also ran reports on this problem including NBC Chicago , WGN Morning News and WBBM AM Radio .
Scores of customers had taken to the Dominick 's Facebook page demanding answers about the volume of expired products on their shelves , but Dominick 's remained silent on the issue prior to Ms. Cataldo 's blog posts and the subsequent media coverage .
STORE CLOSINGS
Section::::Store closings .
Over time , Dominick 's closed stores due to lack of sales and overall poor performance .
In 2011 , three locations were closed in Orland Park , Oak Lawn , and Carpentersville .
In 2012 , stores were closed in Hoffman Estates , Vernon Hills , Lake Bluff and Bloomingdale .
Most employees were either transferred to different stores or offered a severance package .
It was announced that most Dominick 's stores would be closed in the Chicago area by December 28 , 2013 .
The announcement has spurred its competitors into seeking out employees and store locations that they could expand into once Dominick 's exits the market .
On December 2 , 2013 , Milwaukee - based Roundy 's , which operates under the Mariano 's Fresh Market brand in the Chicago market and is chaired by former Dominick 's CEO Bob Mariano , announced the purchase of eleven stores in the chain , though employees would have to re - apply to work for Roundy 's .
Most former Dominick 's locations purchased by Roundy 's were demolished and a new building rebuilt on site .
In December 2013 , Dominick 's employee Steve Yamamoto was suspended one day prior to his store closure date for having published a satirical , science - fiction themed video on the closure .
One location remained open in Bannockburn , Illinois until January 25 , 2014 , and another in Westchester , Illinois , until January 28 .
Whole Foods purchased 7 of the closed locations in 2014 .
Most of Dominick 's brands were later incorporated into Jewel ( supermarket ) in 2014 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* ( Archive )