M*A*S*H GOES TO MAINE M*A*S*H
Goes to Maine is a novel written by Richard Hooker and originally published in 1972 .
A sequel to 1968 's book , it features several of that novel 's characters back in rural Maine after the Korean War armistice .
An attempt to adapt M*A*S*H Goes to Maine as a feature film sequel to the 1970 movie was unsuccessful .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Captain Benjamin Franklin " Hawkeye " Pierce returns from duty in the Korean War ( 1950 - 1953 ) to live in Crabapple Cove , Maine near the town of Spruce Harbor , Maine .
Having left the Army , Hawkeye is established to be working for the Veterans Administration .
In May 1954 he is laid off .
At this point Hawkeye , who does not have much money in the bank , is 31 years old , and has three children :
Billy , Stephen and Karen .
The day he is discharged , old Army buddy and co - conspirator in hijinks
" Trapper John " McIntyre comes to visit and sets Hawkeye 's future in motion .
Trapper John , a lieutenant in the " Cardia Nostra " medical " family " ( as Hawkeye refers to it ) of " Don " Maxie Neville in New York City , arranges for further thoracic training for Hawkeye , first in the East Orange V.A. Hospital in New Jersey , then at St. Lombard 's Hospital in Manhattan from July 1954 .
After two years Hawkeye breezes through the Thoracic Boards .
At the end of his training in June 1956 , two Spruce Harbor locals , Jocko Allcock ( the man who was responsible for Hawkeye being fired by the V.A. ) and " Wooden Leg " Wilcox ( the local fish marketing magnate ) come to visit Hawkeye to set him up in practice — by betting favorably on the outcome of his operations .
The first operation with Trapper John 's assistance ( upon Pasquale Merlino ) is a success , and thanks to his superior training
Hawkeye becomes the local surgeon .
As time goes by , Hawkeye is given more patients by the local general practitioner of note , " Doggy " Moore M.D. ; goes into private practice with ex - Spitfire fighter pilot Tony Holcombe and plots the eventually reuniting of " The Swamp " Gang .
By 1959 , Hawkeye has lured Trapper John , Duke Forrest , and " Spearchucker " Jones into his net , and thanks to the proceeds of the " Allcock - Wilcox " syndicate , a new " Finestkind Fishmarket and Clinic " is set up along with the newly constructed Spruce Harbor General Hospital .
Duke returns to Georgia from Korea , and takes a course in urology .
Hawkeye then invites him up to Spruce Harbor , Maine to join him and a new friend , Tony Holcombe in private practice .
Duke immediately turns up in Maine with his bloodhound , Little Eva , and joins Hawkeye in persuading Spearchucker to become the local neurosurgeon .
Duke and his family move into Crabapple Cove next to Hawkeye and Mary Pierce .
Trapper John is lured to the area by the possibility of becoming the Don of Spruce Harbor in the Cardia Nostra and becomes romantically involved with Hawkeye 's secretary , Lucinda Lively , whom he eventually marries .
Along the way , the reader meets more of the local characters , including " Wrong Way " Napolitano , who sometimes uses the transatlantic jet planes he flies for a major airline to spot fish for his fisherman relatives in the Gulf of Maine ; " Moose " Lord , a longtime friend of " Big Benjy " Pierce who contracts a rare and extremely nasty form of cancer that Hawkeye has to treat ; " Goofus " MacDuff , the Medical Director of Spruce Harbor General , whose ability to summarize a case and reach the completely wrong conclusion and diagnosis is the stuff of legend to the Swampmen ; " Doggy " Moore , the previously mentioned general practitioner whose adopted son Chip
( short for Chipmunk ) Moore was a high school and college buddy of Hawkeye 's ;
" Half A Man " Timberlake , who is not overly bright but is sexually insatiable , and Wooden Leg 's loyal henchman ; the three local hookers , ' Bang - Bang " Betty , " Mattress " Mary , and " Made " Marion ; and Hawkeye 's Uncle Lewis " Lew the Jew " Pierce , who is a fanatic golfer and lives on an old fishing pier in The Solid Rust Cadillac .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
Pierce 's home , " Port Waldo " , is ( real - life )
Waldoboro , Maine , and the FinestKind Clinic is just up U.S. Route 1 in Rockland .
" Crabapple Cove " is actually Broad Cove , in Bremen just down the Medomak River from Waldoboro Village .
Author Richard Hooker ( Hornberger ) owned an old farmhouse on Heath Point .
The reader will note Wreck Island , Thief Island , and other Muscongus Bay landmarks in the book .
It is possible that the Pierce family is modeled after the ( real - life )
Spear family , who had a number of different branches in the area , in the 1950s .