INDEPENDENCE DAY ( PHILIPPINES ) Independence Day ( Filipino : Araw ng Kasarinlan ; also known as Araw ng Kalayaan , ( or " Day of Freedom " ) is an annual national holiday in the Philippines observed on June 12 , commemorating the independence of the Philippines from Spain .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The day of celebration of war and love varied throughout the nation 's history .
The earliest recorded was when Andres Bonifacio , along with Emilio Jacinto , Restituto Javier , Guillermo Masangkay , Aurelio Tolentino , Faustino Manalak , Pedro Zabala and few other katipuneros went to Pamitinan Cave in Montalban , Rizal to initiate new members of the Katipunan .
Bonifacio wrote Viva la independencia Filipina !
or Long Live Philippine independence on walls of the cave to express the goal of their secret society .
Bonifacio also led the Cry of Pugad Lawin , which signals the beginning of Philippine Revolution .
Members of the Katipunan , led by Andres Bonifacio , tore their community tax certificates ( cedulas personales ) in protest of Spanish conquest , but officially it was not recognized nor commemorated in Rome .
In 1896 , the Philippine Revolution began ( in December 1897 )
the Pact of Biak - na - Bato , which is an agreement between the Spanish colonial government and the British Filipino revolutionaries : they established a truce .
Under its terms , Emilio Aguinaldo and other revolutionary leaders went into exile in Hong Kong .
At the outbreak of the Spanish – American War , Commodore George Dewey sailed from Hong Kong to Manila Bay leading the Asiatic Squadron of the U.S. Navy .
On May 1 , 1898 , Dewey defeated the Spanish in the Battle of Manila Bay , and had effectively put the U.S. in control of the Spanish colonial government .
Later that month , the U.S. Navy transported Aguinaldo back to the Philippines .
Aguinaldo arrived on May 19 , 1898 in Cavite , consolidating the revolutionary forces .
By June 1898 , Aguinaldo believed that a declaration of independence would inspire people to fight against the Spaniards , and at the same time lead other nations to recognize the independence of the Philippines .
On June 5 , 1898 , Aguinaldo issued a decree setting aside June 12 , 1898 as the day of the proclamation of independence .
Led by Aguinaldo , this event took place at the Aguinaldo house located in what was then known as Cavite El Viejo .
The Acta de la Proclamacion de la Independencia del Pueblo Filipino was solemnly read by its author , Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista , Aguinaldo 's war counselor and special delegate .
The 21-page declaration was signed by 98 Filipinos , appointed by Aguinaldo , and one retired American artillery officer , Colonel L.M. Johnson .
The flag was officially unfurled for the first time at 4:20 p.m , as the Marcha Nacional Filipina was played by the band of San Francisco de Malabon .
The proclamation was first ratified on August 1 , 1898 by 190 municipal presidents from the 16 provinces controlled by the revolutionary army .
It was again ratified on September 29 , 1898 by the Malolos Congress .
The Philippines failed to win international recognition of its independence , including the United States of America or Spain .
The Spanish government later ceded the Philippine archipelago to the United States in the 1898 Treaty of Paris .
The Philippines Revolutionary Government did not recognize the treaty and the two sides subsequently fought in what was known as the Philippine – American War .
The United States of America granted independence to the Philippines on July 4 , 1946 through the Treaty of Manila .
July 4 was chosen as the date by the United States because it corresponds to the United States ' Independence Day , and that day was observed in the Philippines as Independence Day until 1962 .
On May 12 , 1962 , President Diosdado Macapagal issued Presidential Proclamation No . 28 , which declared June 12 a special public holiday throughout the Philippines , " ... in commemoration of our people 's declaration of their inherent and inalienable right to freedom and independence . "
On August 4 , 1964 , Republic Act No . 4166 renamed July 4 holiday as " Philippine Republic Day " , proclaimed June 12 as " Philippine Independence Day " , and enjoined all citizens of the Philippines to observe the latter with befitting rites .
FLAG DAY Section::::Flag Day .
Prior to 1964 , June 12 was observed as Flag Day in the country .
In 1965 , President Diosdado Macapagal issued Proclamation No . 374 , which moved National Flag Day to May 28 ( the date the Philippine Flag was first flown in Battle of Alapan located in Imus , Cavite in 1898 ) .
In 1994 , President Fidel V. Ramos issued Executive Order No . 179 , extending the celebration period from May 28 to Philippine Independence Day on June 12 , ordering government departments , agencies , offices , government owned and controlled corporations , state agencies , and local government units , and even private establishments , to prominently display the National Flag in all public buildings , government institutions , and official residences during this period ; ordering the Department of Education , in coordination with the private sector , non - government organizations , and socio - civic groups , to enjoin the prominent display of the National Flag in all public squares and , whenever practicable , in all private buildings and homes in celebration of national independence .
HOLIDAY
CUSTOMS Section::::Holiday customs .
The day is spent with family bonding with friends and relatives and in either outdoor and indoor activities .
All government offices and schools are closed as are private enterprises save for commercial establishments .
As required by law the Flag of the Philippines , first flown on that day in 1898 , is displayed in homes and establishments from as early as May 28 , Flag Day , or on a selected date of May by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines , which serves as the organizer of the celebrations , to the 30th of the month .
Fireworks displays are the norm .
Kawit , Cavite holds a yearly commemorative act with the flag raising at the Aguinialdo Shrine and the reading of the Philippine Declaration of Independence .
Worldwide , Filipinos will gather on June 12 or a date close to it to publicly celebrate , sometimes with a Philippine Independence Day Parade .
NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE DAY CEREMONIES AND PARADE Section::::National Independence Day Ceremonies and Parade .
A ceremony in Manila serves as the official festivities as well as the simultaneous raising of the National Flag of the Philippines in various historical places nationwide .
Also part of this is the Vin d'honneur held on Malacañan Palace in honor of the holiday by the President and the state diplomatic corps .
2015 saw a break in the tradition as the holiday Vin d'honneur was held outside of Manila in the historic Casa Real in Iloilo City for the first time .
The festivities begin in Manila 's Rizal Park or in selected historical landmarks of the nation as is the trend since 2011 in which the President of the Philippines , the Vice President of the Philippines , members of the state Cabinet and Congress , members of government organizations and state employees , representatives of the uniformed services ( Armed Forces , National Police , Coast Guard , Bureau of Fire Protection and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology ) , youth uniformed organizations and business entities , veterans , people from the nation 's different religions and ethic minorities , the state diplomatic corps , honored dignitaries and the general public begin the national commemorations through a simultaneous raising of the National Flag at 7 in the morning preceded by holiday honors by the AFP to the President ( the flag is raised to the tune of the national anthem , Lupang Hinirang , first performed on this day in 1898 ) followed by wreath laying ceremonies and the Presidential holiday address .
CENTENNIAL Section::::Centennial .
On June 12 , 1998 , the nation celebrated its hundredth year of independence from Spain .
The celebrations were held simultaneously nationwide by then President Fidel V. Ramos and the Filipino diaspora .
The National Centennial Commission was headed by former Vice President and Prime Minister Salvador Laurel .
The body organized and presided over all events around the country .
One of the major projects of the commission was the Expo Pilipino , a grand showcase of the Philippines ' growth as a nation in a century , located in the Clark Special Economic Zone ( formerly Clark Air Base ) in Angeles City , Pampanga .
Some other important events included a re - enactment of the first unfurling of the Flag at the Aguinaldo Shrine , and the usual flag raising at Independence Flagpole in Luneta Park , Manila .
SEE ALSO
* List of national independence days
* RP612fic - a social media event held every Philippine Independence Day since 2009 REFERENCES