THE INCREDIBLE HULK ( FILM )
The Incredible Hulk is a 2008 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character the Hulk , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Universal Pictures .
It is the second film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) .
The film was directed by Louis Leterrier , with a screenplay by Zak Penn .
It stars Edward Norton as Bruce Banner , alongside Liv Tyler , Tim Roth , Tim Blake Nelson , Ty Burrell , and William Hurt .
In The Incredible Hulk , Bruce Banner becomes the Hulk as an unwitting pawn in a military scheme to reinvigorate the " Super - Soldier " program through gamma radiation .
On the run , he attempts to cure himself of the Hulk before he is captured by General Thaddeus Ross , but his worst fears are realized when power - hungry soldier Emil Blonsky becomes a similar , but more bestial creature .
After the mixed reception to the 2003 film Hulk , Marvel Studios reacquired the rights to the character .
Leterrier , who had expressed interest in directing Iron Man , was brought onboard and Penn began work on a loose sequel that would be much closer to the comics and the 1978 television series of the same name .
In April 2007 , Norton was hired to portray Banner and to rewrite Penn 's screenplay in order to distance itself from the 2003 film and establish its own identity as a reboot , although he would go uncredited for his writing .
Filming mostly took place in Toronto , Ontario , from July to November 2007 .
Over 700 visual effects shots were created in post - production using a combination of motion capture and computer - generated imagery to complete the film .
The Incredible Hulk premiered on June 8 , 2008 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , California and was released in the United States on June 13 , 2008 .
It received praise for its improved visuals , action sequences , and the portrayal of the title character , and grossed over $ 263 million worldwide .
Norton was set to reprise the role of Banner in The Avengers and any other MCU installment featuring the character , but he was ultimately replaced by Mark Ruffalo , who has signed on to portray the character in potential future projects .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
At Culver University in Virginia , General Thunderbolt Ross meets with Dr. Bruce Banner , the colleague and boyfriend of his daughter Betty , regarding an experiment that Ross claims is meant to make humans immune to gamma radiation .
The experiment — part of a World War II - era " super soldier " program that Ross hopes to recreate — fails , and the exposure to gamma radiation causes Banner to transform into the Hulk for brief periods of time , whenever his heart rate rises above 200 beats per minute .
The Hulk destroys the lab , injuring or killing the people inside .
Banner becomes a fugitive from the U.S. military and Ross in particular , who wants to weaponize the Hulk .
Five years later , Banner works at a bottling factory in Rocinha , Rio de Janeiro in Brazil , while searching for a cure for his condition .
On the internet , he collaborates with a colleague he knows only as " Mr. Blue " , and to whom he is " Mr. Green " .
He is learning Yoga techniques to help keep control , and has not transformed in five months .
After Banner cuts his finger , a drop of his blood falls into a bottle , and is eventually ingested by an elderly consumer in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , giving him gamma sickness .
Using the bottle to track down Banner , Ross sends a special forces team , led by Russian - born British Royal Marine Emil Blonsky , to capture him .
Banner transforms into the Hulk and defeats Blonsky 's team .
After Ross explains how Banner became the Hulk , Blonsky agrees to be injected with a small amount of a similar serum , which gives him enhanced speed , strength , agility , and healing , but also begins to deform his skeleton and impair his judgment .
Banner returns to Culver University and reunites with Betty , who is dating psychiatrist Leonard Samson .
Banner is attacked a second time by Ross and Blonsky 's forces , tipped off by the suspicious Samson , causing him to again transform into the Hulk .
The ensuing battle outside the university proves futile for Ross ' forces and they retreat ,
though Blonsky , whose sanity is faltering , attacks and mocks the Hulk .
The Hulk seemingly kills Blonsky and flees with Betty .
After the Hulk reverts to Banner , he and Betty go on the run , and Banner contacts Mr. Blue , who urges them to meet him in New York City .
Mr. Blue is actually cellular biologist Dr. Samuel Sterns , who tells Banner he has developed a possible antidote to Banner 's condition .
After a successful test , he warns Banner that the antidote may only reverse each individual transformation .
Sterns reveals he has synthesized Banner 's blood samples , which Banner sent from Brazil , into a large supply , with the intention of applying its " limitless potential " to medicine .
Fearful of the Hulk 's power falling into the military 's hands , Banner wishes to destroy the blood supply .
Blonsky has survived the battle at Culver University and completely healed .
He joins Ross ' forces for a third attempt to take Banner into custody .
They succeed and Banner , along with Betty , are taken away in a helicopter .
Blonsky stays behind and orders Sterns to inject him with Banner 's blood , as he covets the Hulk 's power .
Sterns warns that the combination of the super - soldier formula and Banner 's blood may cause him to become an " abomination " , but Blonsky insists .
The experiment mutates Blonsky into a creature with size and strength surpassing that of the Hulk , but drives him insane .
He attacks Sterns , who gets some of Banner 's blood in a cut on his forehead , causing him to begin mutating as well .
Blonsky rampages through Harlem .
Realizing that the Hulk is the only one who can stop Blonsky , Banner convinces Ross to release him .
He jumps from Ross ' helicopter and transforms after hitting the ground .
After a long and brutal battle through Harlem , the Hulk defeats Blonsky .
After having a peaceful moment with Betty , the Hulk flees New York .
A month later , Banner is in Bella Coola , British Columbia .
Instead of trying to suppress his transformation , he successfully transforms in a controlled manner .
Tony Stark approaches Ross at a local bar and informs him a team is being put together .
CAST
* Edward Norton as Bruce Banner
/ Hulk :
* Liv Tyler as Betty Ross :
* Tim Roth as Emil Blonsky / Abomination :
* Tim Blake Nelson as Samuel Sterns : The cellular biologist who develops a possible antidote to Banner 's condition .
Towards the end of the film , Sterns is exposed to some substance that begins his transformation into Leader .
* Ty Burrell as Leonard Samson :
* William Hurt as Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross : Section::::Cast .
Robert Downey Jr. has an uncredited cameo as Tony Stark at the end of the film .
Downey appeared as a favor to Marvel Studios , which he acknowledged as a smart move on Marvel 's part , because when he was promoting his film he would also have to mention their other production .
Hulk co - creator Stan Lee cameos as a man who becomes ill when drinking the soda poisoned by Banner 's blood .
Michael K. Williams appears as a Harlem bystander , a role that was written for him by Norton , who is a fan of The Wire .
Paul Soles , who voiced Banner in the 1966 The Marvel Super Heroes cartoon , appears as Stanley , a kindly pizza restaurant owner who helps Banner .
Additionally , the late Bill Bixby appears , in a scene on his TV comedy - drama
The Courtship of Eddie 's Father on a television Banner is watching at the beginning of the film .
Rickson Gracie has a small role as Bruce Banner 's martial arts instructor ; despite Gracie 's Brazilian Jiu - Jitsu background , he is credited as an Aikido instructor .
Peter Mensah plays a small role as General Joe Gellar , one of General Ross ' military friends / associates .
Christina Cabot portrays Major Kathleen Sparr , General Ross ' personal aid .
Martin Starr plays a college student , credited as " Computer Nerd " and identified as Amadeus Cho in the novelization for the film .
Hulk supporting characters , Jim Wilson and , make cameo appearances as Culver University students played by P.J. Kerr and Nicholas Rose , respectively .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
At the time of the release of Ang Lee 's Hulk , screenwriter James Schamus was planning a sequel , featuring the Grey Hulk .
He was also considering the Leader and the Abomination as villains .
Marvel wanted the Abomination because he would be an actual threat to the Hulk , unlike General Ross .
During the filming of Hulk , producer Avi Arad had a target May 2005 theatrical release date .
On January 18 , 2006 Arad confirmed Marvel Studios would be providing the money for The Incredible Hulks production budget , with Universal distributing , because Universal did not meet the deadline for filming a sequel .
Marvel felt it would be better to deviate from Ang Lee 's style to continue the franchise , arguing his film was like a parallel universe one - shot comic book , and their next film needed to be , in Kevin Feige 's words , " really starting the Marvel Hulk franchise " .
Producer Gale Anne Hurd also felt the film had to meet what " everyone expects to see from having read the comics and seen the TV series " .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
Louis Leterrier , who enjoyed the TV series as a child and liked the first film , had expressed interest in directing the Iron Man film adaptation .
Jon Favreau had taken that project , so Marvel offered him the Hulk .
Leterrier was reluctant as he was unsure if he could replicate Lee 's style , but Marvel explained that was not their intent .
Leterrier 's primary inspiration was Jeph Loeb and Tim Sale 's Hulk :
Gray ( a retelling of the character 's first appearance ) .
He replicated every comic book panel that he pinned - up during pre - production , from the many comics he browsed , in the final film .
Leterrier said that he planned to show Bruce Banner 's struggle with the monster within him , while Feige added the film would explore " that element of wish fulfillment , of overcoming an injustice or a bully and tapping into a strength that you did n't quite realize you had in yourself " .
Arad also said the film would be " a lot more of a love story between Bruce Banner and Betty Ross " .
Zak Penn , who wrote a draft of the first film in 1996 , said the film would follow up Hulk , but stressed it would be more tonally similar to the TV show and Bruce Jones ' run on the comic .
He compared his script to Aliens , which was a very different film from Alien , but still in the same continuity .
He included two scenes from his 1996 script : Banner jumping from a helicopter to trigger a transformation , and realizing he is unable to have sex with Betty .
After the studio rejected a treatment by another screenwriter in 2006 , Penn wrote three drafts before departing in early 2007 to promote his film The Grand .
Norton , that April , began discussions to play Banner , and arranged a deal that included him as both an actor and a writer , with a screenplay draft he was contractually obligated to turn in within a month .
He did so , and continued to polish his draft as late as halfway through principal photography .
In November 2006 , a June 13 , 2008 release date was set .
Leterrier acknowledged the only remaining similarity between the two films was Bruce hiding in South America , and that the film was a unique reboot , as generally audiences would have expected another forty - minute origin story .
There were previous discussions to set the first act in Thailand .
Leterrier felt audiences were left restless waiting for the character to arrive in Ang Lee 's film .
Feige commented , " we did n't want to tell the origin story again , because we thought people were so familiar with it , which is why we did n't tell that ...
One reason we made Incredible Hulk was to get Hulk into the [ Marvel Cinematic Universe ] canon . "
Shortly after the release of The Incredible Hulk , Gale Anne Hurd commented on the uncertainty of its relationship with Ang Lee 's Hulk film .
" We could n't quite figure out how to term this ...
It 's kind of a reboot
and it 's kind of sequel . "
Hurd said that " requel " , a portmanteau of " reboot " and " sequel " , was a " perfect " description for the film .
Norton explained his decision to ignore Lee 's origin story : " I do n't even like the phrase ' origin story ' , and I do n't think in great literature and great films that explaining the roots of the story does n't mean it comes in the beginning . "
" Audiences know this story , " he added , "
[ so ] deal with it artfully .
" He wanted to " have revelations even in the third act about what set this whole thing in motion " .
The new origin story references Ultimate Marvel 's take on the Hulk , which also had him created in an attempt to make super soldiers .
Norton removed Rick Jones and toned down S.H.I.E.L.D. 's presence .
He also added the scene where Banner attempts to extract a cure from a flower and his e - mailing with Samuel Sterns , which references Bruce Jones ' story .
Norton rewrote scenes every day .
Ultimately , the Writers Guild of America decided to credit the script solely to Penn , who argued Norton had not dramatically changed his script .
Journalist Anne Thompson explained " The Guild tends to favor plot , structure and pre - existing characters over dialogue . "
Penn said in 2008 , " I was n't happy with [ Norton ] coming to Comic - Con
saying that he wrote the script . "
Before either Penn or Norton joined the project , an anonymous screenwriter wrote a draft and lobbied for credit .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Leterrier had to direct four units with a broken foot .
Filming began on July 9 , 2007 .
Shooting primarily took place in Toronto , because mayor David Miller is a Hulk fan and promised to be very helpful to the crew when closing Yonge Street for four nights in September to shoot Hulk and Blonsky 's climactic fight .
Despite messing up the street with explosives and overturned burning vehicles , the crew would clean it up within twenty minutes so business could continue as normal each day .
The first action sequence shot was the Culver University battle , which was filmed at the University of Toronto and Morningside Park .
The filmmakers built a glass wall over a walkway at the University for when the soldiers trap Banner inside to smoke him out .
There was also shooting in the Financial District .
A factory in Hamilton , Ontario , which was due for demolition , was the interior of the Brazilian factory .
The site 's underground floors were used for Ross ' military command center .
The crew also shot part of the Hulk and Blonsky 's fight on a backlot in Hamilton .
Other Canadian locations included CFB Trenton and a glacier in Bella Coola , British Columbia .
Afterwards , there was a week - long shoot in New York City and two weeks in Rio de Janeiro .
While there , the crew shot at Rocinha , Lapa , Tijuca Forest and Santa Teresa .
Filming concluded in November after eighty - eight days of filming .
The Incredible Hulk joined Toronto 's Green - Screen initiative , to help cut carbon emissions and waste created during filming .
Producer Gale Anne Hurd acknowledged the Hulk , being green , was a popular environmental analogy , and Norton himself was an environmentalist .
Hybrid and fuel efficient vehicles were used , with low sulfur diesel as their energy source .
The construction department used a sustainably harvested , locally sourced yellow pine instead of lauan for the sets , and also used zero - or low - VOC paint .
The wood was generally recycled or given to environmental organizations , and paint cans were handed to waste management .
In addition , they used cloth bags , biodegradable food containers , china and silverware food utensils , a stainless steel mug for each production crew member , a contractor who removed bins , recycled paper , biodegradable soap and cleaners in the trailers and production offices , and the sound department used rechargeable batteries .
The Incredible Hulk became the first blockbuster film to receive the Environmental Media Association 's Green Seal , which is displayed during the end credits .
POST - PRODUCTION EDITING Section::::Post - production .
Section::::Editing .
Seventy minutes of footage , mostly dealing with the origin , were not included in the final cut .
Much of this back - story was unscripted and the filmmakers were never sure of including it into the final cut , and had considered releasing some of these clips on the internet .
Editor Kyle Cooper , creator of the Marvel logo ( with the flipping pages ) and the montage detailing Iron Man 's biography in that film , edited together much of this footage into the opening credits .
Leterrier explained a negative test screening , where flashbacks were placed across the film that the audience found too similar to Hulk , had resulted in compressing these to the film 's start .
This replaced the original opening , where Banner comes to the Arctic to commit suicide .
When the scene ends , in an instant the frozen body of Captain America is partially seen in the ice .
Leterrier said he did not want this scene to be lost amid the opening montage .
Norton and Leterrier disputed with the producers over the final running time : they wanted it to be near 135 minutes , while the producers wanted the film to be under two hours .
This was made public , and rumors spread that Norton " made it clear he wo n't cooperate with publicity plans if he 's not happy with the final product " .
Norton dismissed this : " Our healthy process [ of collaboration ] , which is and should be a private matter , was misrepresented publicly as a ' dispute ' , seized on by people looking for a good story , and has been distorted to such a degree that it risks distracting from the film itself , which Marvel , Universal and I refuse to let happen .
It has always been my firm conviction that films should speak for themselves and that knowing too much about how they are made diminishes the magic of watching them . "
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Leterrier cited Andy Serkis ' motion capture portrayals of Gollum and King Kong in The Lord of the Rings and King Kong , respectively , as the standard he was aiming for .
Norton and Roth filmed 2500 takes of different movements the monsters would make ( such as the Hulk 's " thunder claps " ) .
Phosphorescent face paint applied to the actors ' faces and strobe lighting would help record the most subtle mannerisms into the computer .
Others including Cyril Raffaelli provided motion capture for stunts and fights , after the main actors had done video referencing .
Leterrier hired Rhythm and Hues to provide the CGI , rather than Industrial Light & Magic who created the visual effects for Ang Lee 's Hulk .
Visual effect company , Image Engine , spent over a year working on a shot where Banner 's gamma - irradiated blood falls through three factory floors into a bottle .
Overall 700 effects shots were created .
Motion capture aided in placing and timing of movements , but overall key frame animation by Rhythm and Hues provided the necessary " finesse [ and ] superhero quality " .
Many of the animators and Leterrier himself provided video reference for the climactic fight .
Dale Keown 's comic book artwork of the Hulk was an inspiration for his design .
Leterrier felt the first Hulk had " too much fat [ and ]
the proportions were a little off " .
He explained , " The Hulk is beyond perfect
so there is zero grams of fat , all chiseled , and his muscle and strength defines this creature
so he 's like a tank .
"
Visual effects supervisor Kurt Williams envisioned the Hulk 's physique as a linebacker rather than a bodybuilder .
A height of nine feet was chosen for the character as they did not want him to be too inhuman .
To make him more expressive , computer programs controlling the inflation of his muscles and saturation of skin color were created .
Williams cited flushing as an example of humans ' skin color being influenced by their emotions .
The animators felt green blood would make his skin become darker rather than lighter , and his skin tones , depending on lighting , either resemble an olive or even gray slate .
His animation model was completed without the effects company 's full knowledge of what he would be required to do : he was rigged to do whatever they imagined , in case the model was to be used for The Avengers film .
The Hulk 's medium - length hair was modeled on Mike Deodato 's art .
He originally had a crew cut , but Leterrier decided flopping hair imbued him with more character .
Leterrier cited An American Werewolf in London as the inspiration for Banner 's transformation , wanting to show how painful it was for him to change .
As a nod to the live action TV series , Banner 's eyes change color first when he transforms .
Leterrier changed the Abomination 's design from the comics because he felt the audience would question why he resembled a fish or a reptile , instead of " an über - human " like the Hulk .
Rather , his hideousness is derived from being injected multiple times into his skin , muscles and bones , creating a creature with a protruding spine and sharp bones that he can use to stab .
His green skin is pale , and reflects light , so it appears orange because of surrounding fire during the climactic battle .
The motion capture performers , including Roth , tried to make the character behave less gracefully than the Hulk .
They modeled his posture and the way he turns his head on a shark .
The character also shares Roth 's tattoos .
A height of eleven feet was chosen for the character .
Leterrier tried to work in the character 's pointed ears , but realized the Hulk would bite them off ( using the example of Mike Tyson when he fought Evander Holyfield ) , and felt ignoring that would make the Hulk come across as stupid .
Leterrier had planned to use prosthetic makeup and animatronics to complement the computer - generated imagery that was solely used in the previous film .
The make - up artists who worked on were set to portray Blonsky 's gradual transformation , which Zak Penn said would portray Blonsky " not [ being ] used to having these properties .
Like he 's much heavier , and we talked about how when he walks down the sidewalk , his weight destroys the sidewalk and he 's tripping .
[ It 's all about ] the humanization of these kinds of superhero characters , showing the effects physics may actually have on [ them ] .
"
Tom Woodruff , Jr. of Amalgamated Dynamics ( who created all the costumes for the Alien films since Alien 3 ) was in negotiations , and created two busts of the Hulk and prosthetic hands to act as stand - ins for the character .
A full animatronic was never created as it was decided it would complicate production to set up shots for a puppet and then a computer graphic .
An animatronic was used for Sterns ' mutating head , however .
Destruction was mostly done practically .
A model of a bottling machine was smashed through a wall for when the Hulk escapes the factory .
The filmmakers used steam and dry ice for the gas used to smoke out the Hulk , and they destroyed a real Humvee by dropping a weight on it when shooting the Culver University battle .
Pipes blew fire for when the Hulk strikes down the computer - generated helicopter .
When Banner falls from the helicopter to trigger the Hulk into fighting the Abomination , Norton was attached to a surface held by a bar which turned 90 degrees while the camera was pulled to the ceiling to simulate falling .
Leterrier jokingly remarked that making Norton fall that distance would obviously render him unable to act .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The score for the film was composed by Craig Armstrong , who was the arranger for Massive Attack , a band Leterrier was fond of and had collaborated with on the 2005 film Unleashed .
Armstrong was his first choice , which surprised Marvel , not knowing if he had scored an action film ( he did compose 2001 's Kiss of the Dragon ) .
At Leterrier 's suggestion , the soundtrack was released on a two - disc album , which Armstrong thought was a joke until he compiled the album and Marvel asked him why they were given only one disc .
The film 's score borrows Joe Harnell 's theme " The Lonely Man " from the 1978 Incredible Hulk television series .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Effort was made to promote the story as having a romance and a physical antagonist , and the title was used for promotional puns ( such as 7-Eleven 's " Incredible Gulp " slurpees , and " Incredible Dad " themed Father 's Day gifts at Kmart ) .
Burger King also promoted the film , and General Nutrition Centers used the title character as a role model for strength training .
Hasbro created the toy line , which they released on May 3 , 2008 , while Sega released a video game on June 5 , 2008 .
The film was promoted in an episode of American Gladiators on June 9 , 2008 , which was hosted by Hulk Hogan and featured Lou Ferrigno .
Following the editing dispute between Norton and Leterrier , Universal 's Adam Fogleson and Norton planned a promotional tour which would avoid constant media interviews and therefore uncomfortable questions .
Norton attended the premiere , took part in a Jimmy Kimmel Live !
sketch and would also promote the film in Japan .
However , during the film 's release he chose to do charity work in Africa .
RELEASE
THEATRICAL Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical .
The Incredible Hulk premiered on June 8 , 2008 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , California and was released in theaters on June 13 in the United States , where it opened in 3,505 theaters .
The Incredible Hulk was formatted and screened in IMAX for the first time on August 30 , 2018 , as part of Marvel Studios ' 10 year anniversary IMAX festival .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Incredible Hulk was released by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment on Blu - ray and DVD on October 21 , 2008 .
It includes behind - the - scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and an alternate opening .
The film was number one in sales when released on DVD and Blu - ray on October 21 , 2008 , in the United States ( having been available in the United Kingdom since October 13 ) .
There are widescreen and fullscreen single - disc editions ; a three - disc special edition ; and a two - disc Blu - ray package .
The first disc contains an audio commentary by Leterrier and Roth , while the second comes with special features and deleted scenes , and the third with a digital copy of the film .
The Blu - ray edition combines the content of the first two DVDs onto a single disc , while the second disc contains the digital copy .
The film was also collected in a 10-disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe :
Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase
One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
It was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on April 2 , 2013 .
Universal released the film on Ultra HD Blu - ray on April 10 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Incredible Hulk earned $ 134.8 million in the United States and Canada , as well as $ 128.6 million from other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 263.4 million .
The film , even though it barely passed its predecessor , and only equalled it if the smaller budget of the first film is taken into account , was still considered successful .
Entertainment analyst David Davis told The Hollywood Reporter , " The first Hulk had such high expectations after the NBC Universal merger and was supposed to be critical favorite Ang Lee 's breakout commercial blockbuster .
Then with the new Hulk film , Marvel was able to underplay the importance of the success after the great success of Iron Man this summer .
So the new one overdelivered , relative to its underpromise . "
The Incredible Hulk earned $ 55.4 million in its opening weekend , becoming the top film at the box office .
Behind , it was the second - highest gross for a film released over the Father 's Day weekend .
This surpassed industry expectations of a $ 45 million opening , following the disappointing response to the 2003 film .
Universal believed word of mouth would contribute to the film breaking even eventually .
The Incredible Hulk also opened in 38 other countries , adding $ 31 million to the total opening .
The film outgrossed the 2003 film in South Korea , while its openings in Mexico and Russia created records for Universal .
The film grossed 24 million yuan ( roughly $ 3.4 million ) in its Chinese opening on August 26 , outgrossing the previous film 's overall gross of 10 million yuan .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 67 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.2/10 based on 227 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " The Incredible Hulk may not be quite the smashing success that fans of Marvel 's raging behemoth might hope for , but it offers more than enough big green action to make up for its occasionally puny narrative .
"
Metacritic gave the film an average score of 61 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
A CinemaScore poll indicated the majority of viewers were male and graded the film an A- , and 82 % of them had seen the 2003 film .
Todd McCarthy of Variety said , " what seemed , in theory , the least - necessary revival of a big screen superhero emerges as perfectly solid summer action fare in The Incredible Hulk . "
He emphasized " it 's all par - for - the - course cinematic demolition and destruction , staged efficiently and with a hint of enthusiasm , " and " penned with sporadic wit [ ... ]
Visuals lean toward the dark and murky , but editing by three — actually six — hands is fleet , and Craig Armstrong 's ever - present score is simultaneously bombastic and helpfully supportive of the action .
Effects are in line with pic 's generally pro but not inspired achievements . "
Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald applauded that the film " does a lot of things [ Ang ]
Lee 's Hulk did n't : It 's lighter and faster - paced , it 's funnier and it embraces ( instead of ignoring )
the 1970s TV series that furthered the character 's popularity " .
Mark Rahner of The Seattle Times wrote that , " The relaunch of Marvel 's green goliath is an improvement over director Ang Lee 's ponderous 2003 Hulk in nearly every way – except that the actual Hulk still looks scarcely better than something from a video game , and he still barely talks " .
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post said , " What lingers in my memory ... is the lengthy , essentially animated climactic battle between the Hulk and the Abomination on the streets and rooftops of Harlem , and an earlier showdown between the title creature and the U.S. Army , which is deploying high - tech weapons including sound - wave cannons .
These are expertly staged by director Louis Leterrier , who disposes of the backstory under the opening credits and wraps up the whole thing in twenty - four minutes less than [ Ang ] Lee took " .
Roger Ebert was not a fan of the film stating , "
The Incredible Hulk is no doubt an ideal version of the Hulk saga for those who found Ang Lee 's Hulk too talky , or dare I say , too thoughtful .
But not for me .
It sidesteps the intriguing aspects of Hulkdom and spends way too much time in , dare I say , noisy and mindless action sequences . "
Conversely , Christy Lemire of the Associated Press found that " the inevitable comparisons to Iron Man , Marvel Studios ' first blockbuster this summer , serve as a glaring reminder of what this Hulk lacks : wit and heart .
Despite the presence of Edward Norton , an actor capable of going just as deep as Robert Downey Jr. , we do n't feel a strong sense of Bruce Banner 's inner conflict " .
A.O. Scott of The New York Times opined , " ' The Adequate Hulk ' would have been a more suitable title .
There are some big , thumping fights and a few bright shards of pop - cultural wit , but for the most part this movie seems content to aim for the generic mean " .
David Ansen of Newsweek wrote , " Leterrier has style , he 's good with action
and he 's eager to give the audience its money 's worth of bone - crunching battles .
Still , once the movie leaves the atmospheric Brazilian settings , nothing in this " Hulk " sinks in deeply : its familiar genre pleasures are all on the surface . ...
The movie 's scene stealer is Tim Blake Nelson , making a comically welcome third act appearance as the unethical but madly enthusiastic scientist Samuel Sterns " .
The film was nominated for best superhero film at the 2008 National Movie Awards and for Best Science Fiction Film at the Saturn Awards , but lost to The Dark Knight and Iron Man , respectively .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
On a potential sequel , Norton said , " The whole thing was to envision it in multiple parts .
We left a lot out on purpose .
[ The Incredible Hulk is ] definitely intended as chapter one . "
Leterrier made the film 's final shot of Banner ambiguous ; the thought being if there is a sequel , it would mean Banner finally masters control over his anger ; if there is not a sequel , the shot indicates instead that he becomes a menace in The Avengers .
Leterrier had also intended for a scene in the credits showing Blonsky , human once more , imprisoned and chained in a box .
The character of Samuel Sterns , played by Tim Blake Nelson , was introduced to set him up as a villain in a possible future film , where he would become the Leader .
Aaron Sims , the lead designer on The Incredible Hulk , also took time to work on concepts for the Leader .
Nelson is " signed on " to reprise the role .
Ty Burrell wants to portray the superpowered Doc Samson faithfully to the comics .
Leterrier and Roth were originally contracted to return .
Leterrier also stated Norton was not signed on , but in October 2008 , Hurd stated that Norton was contracted to reprise the role .
The film had outgrossed its predecessor and Universal indicated interest in a sequel , though Leterrier believed a sequel would not be made because of the film 's box office return .
Feige said the film met Marvel 's expectations and that Hulk would return , but after the crossover .
Hurd was not concerned that a sequel may not be produced until at least 2012 , citing the positive reception to the film and having produced the Terminator series , the second and third film of which had a 12-year gap .
Tim Roth confirmed that Marvel had signed him for three more films .
Leterrier , after having previously said he did not want to direct a sequel , said in late 2009 he had changed his mind and was now amenable .
Mark Ruffalo began his role as Banner / Hulk in The Avengers , after Feige said he chose not to bring back Norton .
In October 2014 , Norton claimed he chose never to play Hulk again because he " wanted more diversity " with his career , and did not want to be associated with only one character .
In April 2012 , despite Ruffalo being on board to play the Hulk in the sequel , Feige confirmed to Collider that Marvel had no plans at that time to film another Hulk film .
In a Q&A session , Feige and Ruffalo confirmed that discussions were underway to produce another Hulk film due to the positive audience response to Ruffalo 's performance in The Avengers .
In September 2012 , Feige , while exploring all possible story options for a sequel film , including a film based on the " Planet Hulk " and " World War Hulk " storylines , stated , " everything [ in terms of stories from the comics ] is on the table .
Do I think Hulk can carry a movie and be as entertaining as he was in Avengers ?
I do believe that .
I do believe he absolutely could .
We certainly are not even going to attempt that until Avengers 2 .
So there 's a lot of time to think about it . "
In June 2014 , Ruffalo said he believed the studio might be considering doing a new standalone Hulk film , saying , " I think they are , for the first time , entertaining the idea of it .
When we did The Avengers it was basically ' No ! ' , and now there is some consideration for it .
But there 's still nothing definitive , not even a skeletal version of what it would be . "
In July , Feige stated that the studio was not considering a " Planet Hulk " film at that time , due to wanting to feature Ruffalo 's Banner in the film .
However , he did not rule out a story that saw the Hulk and Banner end up in space and explained why a solo Hulk film did not occur in Phase Two of the MCU by saying , " After the first Avengers , Iron Man had his own movie , Thor had his own movie , Captain America had his own movie , and Widow and Fury were in .
So it was really about , frankly , saving somebody so that the only place you could get Hulk between Avengers movies is the next Avengers movie , so [ director Joss Whedon ] could continue to play with that in [ Avengers : Age of Ultron ] .
Where we go after that , we 'll see . "
In October 2014 , again on a solo film , Feige said , " We 'll see .
We 'd love to do it , we 'd love to find the place to put it , but right now , Hulk will be appearing , with his friends , in their [ Phase Three ] films . "
In April 2015 , Ruffalo said Universal holding the distribution rights to Hulk films may be an obstacle to releasing a future Hulk standalone film and reiterated this in October 2015 , and July 2017 .
Marvel regained the film production rights for the character since February 2006 , but Universal retained the distribution rights for The Incredible Hulk as well as the right of first refusal to distribute future Hulk films .
According to The Hollywood Reporter , a potential reason why Marvel has not reacquired the film distribution rights to the Hulk as they did with Paramount Pictures for the Iron Man , Thor , and Captain America films is that Universal holds the theme park rights to several Marvel characters that Marvel 's parent company , Disney , wants for its own theme parks .
In December 2015 , Ruffalo stated that the strained relationship between Marvel and Universal may be another obstacle to releasing a future standalone Hulk film .
The following month , he indicated that the lack of a standalone Hulk film allowed the character to play a more prominent role in , , and , stating , " We 've worked a really interesting arc into Thor [ : Ragnarok ] ,
Avengers [ : Infinity War ] , and [ Avengers : Endgame ] for Banner that I think will – when it 's all added up – will feel like a Hulk movie , a standalone movie . "
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS