MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF HUMAN MEDICINE
The Michigan State University College of Human Medicine ( MSUCHM ) is an academic division of Michigan State University ( MSU ) , and grants the Doctor of
Medicine ( MD ) degree .
CHM was founded in 1964 as the first community - integrated medical school , and has a program that emphasizes patient - centered care and a biopsychosocial approach to caring for patients .
Required courses at the college reinforce the importance of ethics and professionalism in medicine .
In 2013 , U.S. News & World Report ranked the college 51st for primary care .
The college was also ranked for family medicine and rural medicine .
More than 4,000 M.D.s have graduated from the College .
Pre - clinical campuses are located on MSU 's main campus in East Lansing , Michigan and in downtown Grand Rapids , Michigan , while the clinical rotations are at seven community campuses located throughout Michigan .
HISTORY Section::::History .
From 1959–61 , several reports demonstrated the need for a third medical school in Michigan focused on serving the state 's population through direct involvement in community health care .
In 1961 , the Michigan State Board of Trustees decided to begin a two - year medical program at Michigan State University .
Several grants aided the development of the program .
Michigan State University appointed Andrew D. Hunt , MD as the first dean of the College of Human Medicine in 1964 .
The College of Human Medicine began training pre - clinical medical students in the fall of 1966 ( 26 students ) and the fall of 1967 ( 23 students ) .
After their preclinical training , these students needed to transfer to other medical schools to finish the final two years of their medical school education .
In 1967 , the College of Human Medicine was approved for a four - year degree program .
The first MDs graduated in 1972 .
In 2006 , Marsha D. Rappley , M.D. , became the first graduate of the College of Human Medicine to become dean of the medical school .
In August 2007 , enrollment increased from 106 first - year students to 156 students .
In October 2007 , MSU Board of Trustees voted to approve a $ 90 million project to build a new educational facility in downtown Grand Rapids .
The construction was supported entirely with private funds , including $ 55 million from Spectrum Health and $ 5 million from Richard DeVos .
MSU alumnus and philanthropist Peter F. Secchia is the namesake for the facility , following his $ 10 million donation to the university .
In September 2010 , the college 's headquarters moved from Fee Hall in East Lansing to the newly built Secchia Center in Grand Rapids .
The college 's administration maintain offices at both the East Lansing and Grand Rapids campuses .
In June 2015 , MSU announced plans to build an $ 88 million research complex , Grand Rapids Research Center , near the Secchia Center in downtown Grand Rapids .
The center opened in September 2017 .
In later 2015 , Marsha Rappley stepped down as Dean of the College , and Senior Associate Dean for Academic Affairs Aron Sousa , M.D. , became interim dean .
On October 1 , 2016 , the College of Human Medicine welcomed its new dean , Norman Beauchamp , Jr. , MD , the second graduate of the college to serve as dean .
CLINICAL TRAINING Section::::Clinical training .
Clinical practice ( undergraduate medical education during the third and fourth years of medical school ) , graduate medical education , and research takes place across seven campuses located throughout Michigan Flint , Grand Rapids , Lansing , Midland , Marquette , Southeast Michigan and Traverse City .
The college previously had a Saginaw campus , but that was transitioned to the Central Michigan University College of Medicine in 2011 .
The campus in Kalamazoo , was transitioned to Western Michigan University in 2014 .
Students are assigned to one of the campuses for their third and fourth years , rather than a specific hospital .
The campus administration then places students at hospitals within the campus .
After submitting a request , clinical students are also able to take a clerkship at a campus other than their assigned campus .
Students may fulfill clerkship electives outside of the MSU system only in their fourth year .
GRAND RAPIDS Section::::Grand Rapids .
The Grand Rapids campus serves as both a pre - clinical and clinical campus .
*
Spectrum Butterworth Hospital *
Saint Mary 's Health Care *
Spectrum Blodgett Hospital FLINT Section::::Flint .
The Flint campus utilizes three area hospitals .
* Genesys Regional Medical Center * Hurley Medical Center
* McLaren Regional Medical Center
LANSING
Section::::Lansing .
Adjacent to the pre - clinical campus in East Lansing , the Lansing campus provides clerkship training at area hospitals .
Pre - clinical students also have educational experiences at Sparrow Hospital .
* McLaren – Greater Lansing Hospital
* Sparrow Hospital MARQUETTE Section::::Marquette .
The Upper Peninsula campus , based in Marquette , provides an environment for training physicians in rural medicine .
The campus is operated in collaboration with the Upper Peninsula Health Education Corporation .
* Marquette General Hospital
MIDLAND REGIONAL CAMPUS Section::::Midland Regional Campus .
The Midland Regional Campus is based in Midland , but students at this campus also have clerkships in hospitals in Saginaw , Alma , Clare , and Gladwin .
This campus was formerly known as the Saginaw campus , but the headquarters moved to Midland as of July 2011 .
*
MidMichigan Medical Center - Midland
* MidMichigan Medical Center - Gladwin * MidMichigan Medical Center - Clare * Gratiot Medical Center * Covenant Medical Center
* St. Mary 's of Michigan Medical Center TRAVERSE CITY
* Munson Medical Center SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN
* Ascension Providence Southfield
* Ascension Providence Novi
GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION
RESIDENCIES
Section::::Graduate medical education .
Section::::Residencies .
The College of Human Medicine sponsors or is affiliated with 59 graduate medical education programs and 872 residents , including the following programs .
In the Lansing area , MSU collaborates with area hospitals through Graduate Medical Education ,
Inc. In the Grand Rapids area , MSU programs are affiliated with the Grand Rapids Medical Education Partners .
MSU / Flint Area Medical Education partners with MSU CHM in the Flint area . ! scope="col "
Specialty ! scope="col " Location ! scope="col " Sponsor(s ) !
scope="col " class="unsortable " Reference id="Emergency
Medicine"Emergency Medicine Lansing MSU CHM , MSU COM , Sparrow Hospital Emergency Medicine Grand Rapids MSU CHM , GRMEP id="Family
Medicine"Family
Medicine Lansing Sparrow Hospital , MSU CHM Family Medicine Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM Family Medicine Marquette Marquette General Hospital , MSU CHM , Lake Erie COM Family Medicine Midland MidMichigan Medical Center - Midland , MSU CHM Family Medicine Traverse City Munson Medical Center , MSU CHM ,
MSU COM
id="General
Surgery"General
Surgery Lansing ,
Flint MSU CHM General Surgery Grand Rapids GRMEP ,
MSU CHM
id="Internal Medicine"Internal Medicine Lansing MSU CHM , Sparrow Hospital Internal Medicine Grand Rapids
GRMEP , MSU CHM id="Obstetrics and Gynecology"Obstetrics and Gynecology Lansing Sparrow Hospital , MSU CHM , MSU COM Obstetrics and Gynecology
Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM
id="Orthopaedic
Surgery"Orthopaedic Surgery Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM
id="Pediatrics"Pediatrics
Lansing MSU CHM , Sparrow Hospital
Pediatrics Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM id="Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation"Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Lansing MSU CHM , MSU COM , GMEI , Sparrow Hospital id="Plastic
Surgery"Plastic Surgery Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM
id="Psychiatry"Psychiatry Lansing MSU CHM , MSU COM id="Diagnostic
Radiology"Diagnostic
Radiology Flint MSU CHM , MSU FAME
Diagnostic Radiology Grand Rapids MSU CHM , GRMEP id="Vascular
Surgery"Vascular Surgery Grand Rapids GRMEP , MSU CHM FELLOWSHIPS Section::::Fellowships .
Affiliated fellowship programs include :
* Cardiology * Child and adolescent psychiatry * Endocrinology * Geriatrics * Hematology / oncology
* Infectious disease
* Interventional cardiology * Neonatology
* Surgical Critical Care NOTABLE ALUMNI * Mona Hanna - Attisha - pediatrician , public health advocate and Flint Water Crisis whistleblower
* John A. McDougall - nutrition expert * Nicholas Perricone - dermatologist
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * MSU College of Human Medicine residency placements