CHURCH AVENUE ( BMT BRIGHTON LINE ) Church Avenue is an express station on the BMT Brighton Line of the New York City Subway , located at Church Avenue near East 18th Street in the Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn .
The station is served by Q at all times and by the B on weekdays only .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The original station at this location was a two - track side platform station that ran south from Church Avenue , whereas the current station runs to the north .
At a point about 150 feet south of Church Avenue , a clear difference in the form of the concrete retaining wall is visible on both sides of the right - of - way .
This marks the point where the original Brighton Beach Line transitioned from an open - cut line depressed below ground level to a surface railroad for the remainder of the run to Coney Island .
The line south of this point was converted from a two - track surface line to a four - track grade - separated line in 1907 , and the portion north of this point was rebuilt from a two - track open cut to a four - track open cut in 1919 .
After August 1 , 1920 , through service was shifted from the current BMT Franklin Avenue Line to a new subway alignment under Flatbush Avenue , which permitted direct access to Manhattan via the Manhattan Bridge and the Montague Street Tunnel .
During the 1964–1965 fiscal year , the platforms at Church Avenue , along with those at six other stations on the Brighton Line , were lengthened to 615 feet to accommodate a ten - car train of 60-foot IND cars , or a nine - car train of 67-foot BMT cars .
In 1981 , the MTA listed the station among the 69 most deteriorated stations in the subway system .
STATION LAYOUT Bedford Park Boulevard rush hours , 145th Street weekdays Southbound express → toward Brighton BeachConey Island – Stillwell Avenue → Church Avenue is an open - cut express station with short tunnels at each end to carry the line between cross streets .
The station has four tracks and two island platforms .
Each platform has two staircases , leading to a station - house at each end .
EXITS Section::::Exits .
There are two exits and entrances to the station , both through station houses .
The full - time end of the station is at Church Avenue , to the south .
The original station - house was demolished and replaced with the current structure .
Plain white tiles dot the interior and exterior of this entrance .
There are restrooms inside fare control to the right side .
The part - time entrance is at the north end of the station by Caton Avenue and St. Pauls Place , and the station - house there retains the original c.1918 exterior .
This end of the station originally had a part - time booth during the morning rush ; a high - exit turnstile was open at all other times .
After the 1980s renovation , the station was converted to booth operations from 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM every day .
All of the platform columns were covered with steel supports during the renovation .
At the midpoint , the southbound platform has an abandoned exit to East 18th Street between Church and Caton Avenues .
The exterior of the station - house was made with brick and stucco , and was added in the early 1960s .
The boarded - up staircase still stands . !
Exit location !
width=50px Number of exits !
Platform served SEE
ALSO
* Church Avenue ( IRT Nostrand Avenue Line ) * Church Avenue ( IND Culver Line ) * Church Avenue Line ( surface ) *
IND Church Avenue Line
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Station Reporter — B Train * Station Reporter —
Q Train *
The Subway Nut —
Church Avenue Pictures
* Church Avenue entrance from Google Maps Street View * Caton Avenue entrance from Google Maps Street View
* Platform from Google Maps Street View