DADDY 'S LITTLE GIRLS
Tyler Perry 's Daddy 's Little Girls is a 2007 American romantic comedy - drama film written and directed by Tyler Perry and produced by Perry and Reuben Cannon .
It stars Gabrielle Union and Idris Elba .
The film was released on February 14 , 2007 by Lions Gate Entertainment .
This is one of only three films directed by Perry that he does not appear in ( the other two being For Colored Girls and ) as well as the first of Perry 's films to not be based on any of the filmmaker 's stage plays .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Monty James is a mechanic who has three daughters : China , Lauryn and Sierra , who dreams of owning his own shop .
His children have been cared for by their maternal grandmother , Kat , for years , but she dies of lung cancer .
Before her death , Kat asks Monty to take custody of his daughters , since their mother and his ex - wife , Jennifer , is a drug addict who does not care about the girls and lives with her boyfriend , Joe , the main drug dealer in the neighborhood .
Monty is reluctant to do so , but agrees .
During Kat 's funeral , Jennifer disrupts the service , demands her daughters live with her and sues for custody .
Monty accepts help from Maya , an employment agency worker , who recommends he works as a driver for Julia Rossmore , an attorney in Atlanta .
Julia 's friends , Brenda and Cynthia , set Julia up on a blind date with Byron .
She also ends up on a blind date with a guy who she thinks is perfect for her until his wife and kids expose him as an unfaithful married man .
When Monty and Julia meet , she insists on having everything done on schedule .
Sierra accidentally starts a fire in his home .
Social Services were notified and the children were sent to live with their mother and Joe .
Julia goes to the hospital to demand Monty to take her home , but sees Social Services sending his children to live with Jennifer .
Monty returns to his day job as a mechanic and finds the owner Willie has been injured in a robbery .
Willie offers to sell the shop to Monty for a $ 10,000 deposit .
Meanwhile , his daughters , now living with their mother , face constant abuse and neglect from Joe and Jennifer .
Joe even gets Sierra in trouble at school after forcing her to sell drugs in the area , under the threat that he would hurt Monty if she refused .
After Sierra gets caught , Monty decides to fight to get the custody of his daughters back .
He goes to Julia for help , which she does during the court case .
Julia finishes Monty 's case preparation and discovering it is her 32nd birthday , takes her to his favorite jazz club , where they dance .
As they are traveling home , Julia kisses Monty and asks him to spend the night .
Monty is willing but Julia is too drunk and vomits in the bathroom .
Julia changes her mind and tells Monty to go home .
Over the next few weeks , Julia begins to feel confused .
She goes to Monty 's apartment to meet his daughters during his visitation right .
When they 're at the aquarium , Julia sees one of her friends there and gets reminded that she has to be conscious of decisions which impact her career .
Monty overhears Julia 's friend and is hurt .
At the child custody hearing , Julia argues that it would be in the children 's best interest for Monty to be awarded custody .
Jennifer 's lawyer says that Monty is irresponsible due to an earlier conviction of statutory rape .
Julia feels betrayed because she did n't hear this information from Monty earlier ; she leaves , telling Monty that he no longer needs her .
At 3:00 am , Monty 's daughters arrive at his house and inform him that Joe has been beating them , proving it by revealing that China 's back is bruised , while Jennifer just watched and did nothing about it .
While his daughters are asleep , Monty drives away and crashes into Jennifer and Joe 's car , after which he physically assaults Joe and a crowd gathers .
Joe 's thugs arrive and begin to attack Monty .
But the crowd , having had enough , defends Monty against them .
Julia sees a report on the incident , in which Monty is identified as having been " falsely convicted " of rape .
Jennifer and Joe are facing drug charges in court , because cocaine and marijuana was found in Joe 's car and house , while Monty is to be charged with assault .
Julia represents Monty , apologizing for not hearing his side of the story .
The witnesses testify against Joe but refuse to testify against Monty , so Jennifer and Joe , along with all of Joe 's thugs , are jailed without bail while the case against Monty is dropped .
Monty tells Julia that he loves her .
Monty 's daughters greet him and Julia at the auto shop that now bears his name .
Monty and Julia kiss , and the neighbors celebrate Monty 's success .
CAST * Gabrielle Union as Julia Rossmore , Monty 's lawyer and love interest , who struggles to find a decent boyfriend
* Idris Elba as Monty James , the main protagonist , a loving , hard - working mechanic with three daughters who dreams of owning his own garage * Louis Gossett , Jr. as Willie , Monty 's elderly boss and best friend who sells Monty his garage * Tasha Smith as Jennifer Jackson , Monty 's selfish , drug - addicted ex - wife who is bent on getting custody of their three daughters * Tracee Ellis Ross as Cynthia , Julia 's colleague and friend who sets Julia up on blind dates
* Malinda Williams as Maya , Monty 's neighbor and Julia 's personal assistant * Terri J. Vaughn as Brenda , Julia 's lawyer friend who despises Monty * Gary Sturgis as Joe , the main antagonist , Jennifer 's gangster boyfriend and drug dealer who has the town in fear * Cassi Davis as Rita , Jennifer 's aunt and sister of Jennifer 's mom , Kat
* Sierra Aylina McClain as Sierra James , Monty 's oldest daughter * Lauryn Alisa McClain as Lauryn James , Monty 's middle daughter *
China Anne McClain as China James , Monty 's youngest daughter * Juanita Jennings as Kat Jackson , Jennifer 's mom who died in the beginning of the film * LaVan Davis as Lester * Brian J. White as Christopher ( uncredited ) * Craig Robinson as Byron , a low - classed , loud - mouthed , middle - aged rapper ( cameo ) .
* Bishop Eddie Long as himself RECEPTION BOX OFFICE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film opened at # 5 on Valentine 's Day 2007 behind Ghost Rider , Bridge to Terabithia , Norbits second weekend , and Music and Lyrics , and has grossed $ 31,609,243 worldwide , making it Tyler Perry 's lowest - grossing film .
CRITICAL REACTION
Section::::Critical reaction .
The film received generally negative reviews from critics , earning a 26 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
The site 's critical consensus reads : " Daddy 's Little Girls boasts fine performances and a poignant message , but is ultimately let down by amateurish filmmaking " .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Atlantic Records released Music inspired by the film :
Tyler Perry 's Daddy 's Little Girls , in stores and online on January 16 , 2007 .
Among the highlights of the album is " Family First , " the first - ever recording by the Houston Family --
Whitney Houston , Dionne Warwick , and Cissy Houston .
The song " Ca n't Let You Go " by Anthony Hamilton is not on the soundtrack .
Also , the song " Beautiful " by Meshell Ndegeocello is featured in the movie .
* Anthony Hamilton featuring Jaheim & Musiq Soulchild -
" Struggle No More
( The Main Event ) "
* * R. Kelly - " Do n't Let Go " * * Tamika Scott of " Xscape " - " Greatest Gift " * * Adrian Hood - " Brown Eyed Blues " * * Whitney Houston , Cissy Houston , Dionne Warwick and The Family - " Family First " * * Yolanda Adams - " Step Aside "
* * Brian McKnight - " I Believe " * * Beyoncé Knowles - " Daddy " * * Anthony Hamilton - " Struggle
No More " * * Governor - " Blood , Sweat & Tears " * * Charles " Gator " Moore -
" A Change Is Gon na Come " * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS