NEAR SIDE OF THE MOON
The near side of the Moon is the lunar hemisphere that is permanently turned towards Earth , whereas the opposite side is the far side .
Only one side of the Moon is visible from Earth because the Moon rotates on its axis at the same rate that the Moon orbits the Earth – a situation known as synchronous rotation , or tidal locking .
The Moon is directly illuminated by the Sun , and the cyclically varying viewing conditions cause the lunar phases .
Sometimes the dark portion of the Moon is faintly visible due to earthshine , which is indirect sunlight reflected from the surface of Earth and onto the Moon .
Since the Moon 's orbit is both somewhat elliptical and inclined to its equatorial plane , libration allows up to 59 % of the Moon 's surface to be viewed from Earth ( though only half at any moment from any point ) .
NAMES Section::::Names .
The near side of the Moon is characterized by large dark areas that were believed to be seas by the astronomers who first mapped them , in the 17th century ( notably , Giovanni Battista Riccioli and Francesco Maria Grimaldi ) .
Although it was found out later that the Moon has no seas , the term " mare " ( plural : maria ) is still used .
The lighter toned regions are referred to as " terrae " , or more commonly , the " highlands " .
ORIENTATION
Section::::Orientation .
The image of the Moon here is drawn as is normally shown on maps , that is with north on top and west to the left .
Astronomers usually turn the map over to have south on top , as to correspond with the view in most telescopes which also show the image upside down .
West and east on the Moon are where you would expect them , when standing on the Moon .
But when we , on Earth , see the Moon in the sky , then the east – west direction is just reversed .
When specifying coordinates on the Moon it should therefore always be mentioned whether geographic ( or rather selenographic ) coordinates are used or astronomical coordinates .
The actual orientation
you see the Moon in the sky or on the horizon depends on your geographic latitude on Earth .
In the following description a few typical cases will be considered .
*
On the north pole , if the Moon is visible , it stands low above the horizon with its north pole up .
*
In mid northern latitudes ( North America , Europe , Asia ) the Moon rises in the east with its northeastern limb up ( Mare Crisium ) , it reaches its highest point in the south with its north on top , and sets in the west with its northwestern limb ( Mare Imbrium ) on top .
*
On the equator , when the Moon rises in the east , its N — S axis appears horizontal and Mare Foecunditatis is on top .
When it sets in the west , about 12.5 hours later , the axis is still horizontal , and Oceanus Procellarum is the last area to dip below the horizon .
In between these events , the Moon reached its highest point in the zenith and then its selenographic directions are lined up with those on Earth .
*
In mid southern latitudes ( South America , South Pacific , Australia , South Africa ) the Moon rises in the east with its southeastern limb up ( Mare Nectaris ) , it reaches its highest point in the north with its south on top , and sets in the west with its southwestern limb ( Mare Humorum ) on top .
*
On the south pole the Moon behaves as on the north pole , but there it appears with its south pole up .
DIFFERENCES Section::::Differences .
The two hemispheres have distinctly different appearances , with the near side covered in multiple , large maria
( Latin for ' seas , ' since the earliest astronomers incorrectly thought that these plains were seas of lunar water ) .
The far side has a battered , densely cratered appearance with few maria .
Only 1 % of the surface of the far side is covered by maria , compared to 31.2 % on the near side .
According to research analyzed by NASA 's Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory ( GRAIL ) mission , the reason for the difference is because the moon 's crust is thinner on the near side compared to the far side .
The dark splotches that make up the large lunar maria are lava - filled impact basins that were created by asteroid impacts about four billion years ago .
Though both sides of the moon were bombarded by similarly large impactors , the near side hemisphere crust and upper mantle was hotter than that of the far side , resulting in the larger impact craters .
These larger impact craters make up the Man in the Moon references from popular mythology .
SEE ALSO * Far side of the Moon * Geology of the Moon
* Giant impact hypothesis *
Lunar south pole
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * Lunar and Planetary Institute : Exploring the Moon * Lunar and Planetary Institute : Lunar Atlases * Ralph Aeschliman Planetary Cartography and Graphics :
Lunar Maps
* NASA 's Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory ( GRAIL )
Mission