JURY DUTY Jury duty or jury service is service as a juror in a legal proceeding .
JUROR
SELECTION PROCESS Section::::Juror selection process .
The prosecutor and defense can dismiss potential jurors for various reasons , which can vary from one state to another , and they can have a specific number of arbitrary dismissals , or unconditional peremptory challenge , which does not require specific reasons .
The judge can also dismiss potential jurors .
Some courts had been sympathetic to jurors ' privacy concerns and refer to jurors by number , and conduct voir dire in camera ( i.e. , in private ) .
In the United States , there have also been Fifth Amendment challenges and medical privacy ( e.g. , HIPAA ) objections to this .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Australia uses an adversarial system , and potential jurors are randomly selected from an electoral roll .
Jurors receive a small payment for each day of attendance .
Employers are also required to pay their employees " make - up pay " , that is , the usual pay the employee would have earned from working , less the jury duty payment received from the state .
Under the National Employment Standards , make - up pay is required only for the first ten days of jury service - however the laws of Victoria , Queensland and Western Australia extend the make - up pay requirement for the entire duration of the jury service .
NEW SOUTH WALES
Section::::New South Wales .
The jury system in New South Wales is administered by the Jury Services Branch of the Office of the Sheriff of New South Wales , an office in the New South Wales Department of Attorney General and Justice , and operates in accordance with the Jury Act 1977 and Jury Amendment Act 2010 .
These laws detail persons who are disqualified , ineligible , or may be excused from jury service are detailed .
In addition , the Jury Exemption Act 1965 and section 7 , " Excuse for cause " , of LRC Report 117 ( 2007 ) details other persons who can or may not serve as jurors or otherwise claim exemption .
Individuals who are blind and/or deaf may be excluded from jury service .
During the juror selection process , both parties can object to up to three potential jurors without providing reasons .
The Office of the Sheriff of NSW disseminates resources for jurors .
Jurors may be compensated for their service .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
According to 2016 figures from the Ministry of Justice , there is about a 35 % chance of people in England and Wales being summoned for jury service over the course of their lifetime .
In Scotland the percentage is much higher due to having a lower population as well having juries made up of 15 people as opposed to 12 people in England and Wales .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Judicial proceeding means any action or suit , including any condemnation , preliminary , informational , or other proceeding of a judicial nature , but does not include an administrative proceeding ( a summons or subpoena , to serve as a witness , by an administrative law judge ) .
Administrative proceedings do not have juries ; they are not informational or preliminary in nature and the judge makes the ultimate decisions .
When a person is called for jury duty in the United States , that service is mandatory and the person summoned for jury duty must attend .
Failing to report for jury duty is illegal and usually results in an individual simply being placed back into the selection pool in addition to potential criminal prosecution .
Repeatedly ignoring a jury summons without explanation will result in strict penalties , which may include being fined or a bench warrant issued for contempt of court .
Employers are not allowed to fire an employee for being called to jury duty , but they are typically not required to pay salaries during this time .
When attended , potential jurors may be asked to serve as a juror in a trial , or they may be dismissed .
In the United States , government employees are in a paid status of leave ( in accordance with ) for the duration spent serving as a juror ( also known as court duty or court leave by some organizations ) .
Many quasi - governmental organizations have adopted this provision into their contract manuals .
Accordingly , government employees are in a paid status as long as they have received a summons in connection with a judicial proceeding , by a court or authority responsible for the conduct of that proceeding to serve as a juror ( or witness ) in the District of Columbia or a state , territory , or possession of the United States , Puerto Rico , or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands .
The Supreme Court of the United States has held , in Butler v. Perry , 240 U.S. 328 ( 1916 ) , that the Thirteenth Amendment does not prohibit " enforcement of those duties which individuals owe to the state , such as services in the army , militia , on the jury , etc . " .
REACTIONS Section::::Reactions .
Although jury duty is regarded as vital to the administration of justice and , as such , is considered a condition of U.S. citizenship , jury duty has been criticized by some libertarian groups as a form of involuntary servitude akin to conscription .
Jurors are essentially conscripts rather than volunteers and are reimbursed as little as five dollars per day , well below the federal minimum wage rate ; unwillingness to sit on trials expected to last months can occasionally result in dismissal from jury service , but such instances are rare if the juror is willing to be impartial to both parties .
In both the United States and Canada jurors having conscientious objection to service are generally excused from service .
This chiefly includes groups like the Amish , Old Order Mennonites , and Conservative Mennonites .
JURY SCAM IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Jury scam in the United States .
In recent years , citizens of the United States have been targets of a " jury scam " , wherein they are called by persons posing as officers from a court , claiming that the person did not show up for jury duty and that charges will be pressed .
Targets are then told that the matter can be resolved if personal information is given .
Federal courts mostly use the USPS , however , and calls do not require personal information .
REFERENCES