SUM OF ANGLES OF A TRIANGLE
In several geometries , a triangle has three vertices and three sides , where three angles of a triangle are formed at each vertex by a pair of adjacent sides .
In a Euclidean space , the sum of measures of these three angles of any triangle is invariably equal to the straight angle , also expressed as 180 ° , radians , two right angles , or a half - turn .
It was unknown for a long time whether other geometries exist , where this sum is different .
The influence of this problem on mathematics was particularly strong during the 19th century .
Ultimately , the answer was proven to be positive : in other spaces ( geometries )
this sum can be greater or lesser , but it then must depend on the triangle .
Its difference from 180 ° is a case of angular defect and serves as an important distinction for geometric systems .
CASES EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY Section::::Cases .
Section::::Euclidean geometry .
In Euclidean geometry , the triangle postulate states that the sum of the angles of a triangle is two right angles .
This postulate is equivalent to the parallel postulate .
In the presence of the other axioms of Euclidean geometry , the following statements are equivalent :
* Triangle postulate :
The sum of the angles of a triangle is two right angles .
* Playfair 's axiom :
Given a straight line and a point not on the line , exactly one straight line may be drawn through the point parallel to the given line .
*
Proclus ' axiom : If a line intersects one of two parallel lines , it must intersect the other also .
* Equidistance postulate : Parallel lines are everywhere equidistant ( i.e. the distance from each point on one line to the other line is always the same . )
* Triangle area property : The area of a triangle can be as large as we please .
* Three points property :
Three points either lie on a line or lie on a circle .
* Pythagoras ' theorem : In a right - angled triangle , the square of the hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides .
HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
Section::::Hyperbolic geometry .
The sum of the angles of a hyperbolic triangle is less than 180 ° .
The relation between angular defect and the triangle 's area was first proven by Johann Heinrich Lambert .
One can easily see how hyperbolic geometry breaks Playfair 's axiom , Proclus ' axiom ( the parallelism , defined as non - intersection , is intransitive in an hyperbolic plane ) , the equidistance postulate ( the points on one side of , and equidistant from , a given line do not form a line ) , and Pythagoras ' theorem .
A circle can not have arbitrarily small curvature , so the three points property also fails .
The sum of the angles can be arbitrarily small ( but positive ) .
For an ideal triangle , a generalization of hyperbolic triangles , this sum is equal to zero .
SPHERICAL GEOMETRY Section::::Spherical geometry .
For a spherical triangle , the sum of the angles is greater than 180 ° and can be up to 540 ° .
Specifically , the sum of the angles is where f is the fraction of the sphere 's area which is enclosed by the triangle .
Note that spherical geometry does not satisfy several of Euclid 's axioms ( including the parallel postulate . )
EXTERIOR ANGLES Section::::Exterior angles .
Angles between adjacent sides of a triangle are referred to as interior angles in Euclidean and other geometries .
Exterior angles can be also defined , and the Euclidean triangle postulate can be formulated as the exterior angle theorem .
One can also consider the sum of all three exterior angles , that equals to 360 ° in the Euclidean case ( as for any convex polygon ) , is less than 360 ° in the spherical case , and is greater than 360 ° in the hyperbolic case .
IN DIFFERENTIAL GEOMETRY Section::::In differential geometry .
In the differential geometry of surfaces , the question of a triangle 's angular defect is understood as a special case of the Gauss - Bonnet theorem where the curvature of a closed curve is not a function , but a measure with the support in exactly three points – vertices of a triangle .
REFERENCES SEE ALSO
* Euclid 's Elements
* Foundations of geometry * Hilbert 's axioms * Saccheri quadrilateral ( considered earlier than Saccheri by Omar Khayyám )
* Lambert quadrilateral