THE STEPFATHER ( 2009 FILM )
The Stepfather is a 2009 American horror thriller film and a remake of the 1987 horror film of the same title .
The film was directed by Nelson McCormick and stars Penn Badgley , Dylan Walsh and Sela Ward .
The original was directed by Joseph Ruben and shot from a script by Donald Westlake .
The films are loosely based on the crimes of mass murderer John List .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film opens as Grady Edwards ( Dylan Walsh ) transforms himself in a bathroom .
He shaves off his beard , dyes his hair , and removes his brown contact lenses .
He goes downstairs with his luggage and fixes himself peanut butter toast and coffee .
As he leaves the house , the camera reveals the bodies of his wife and her three children .
Susan Harding ( Sela Ward ) is shopping in a grocery store with her youngest children where she meets Grady , who introduces himself as David Harris , a man who lost his wife and daughter in a car crash .
He charms her , and six months later , they are engaged to be married .
Susan 's eldest son , Michael ( Penn Badgley ) returns home from military school and is wary of the situation .
David invites him down to the basement , where he has installed locked cabinets , and tries to befriend Michael over tequila shots .
Michael 's suspicions start when David uses the wrong name when mentioning his deceased daughter .
After Susan says that an elderly neighbor warned her that America 's Most Wanted ran a profile on a serial killer that looked like David , David barges into the woman 's house and throws her down her basement stairs , then suffocating her .
Susan 's ex - husband Jay confronts David angrily about laying hands on his younger son , Sean , after David grabbed the boy roughly for failing to turn down the volume on his video game .
He warns Susan that she knows nothing about David .
Doubts about David mount further when he quits his job working as a real estate agent for Susan 's sister , Jackie ( Paige Turco ) , to avoid displaying a photo ID and other forms of identification .
Later , Jay confronts David about an apparent lie regarding his college history .
David clubs him with a vase and suffocates him with a plastic bag .
He sends Michael a text with Jay 's phone saying that David checked out okay .
When the neighbor woman 's body is discovered two weeks later , David tells the family .
Michael is alarmed because he overheard David being told by the mailman , who gave less detail than David .
While Michael 's girlfriend , Kelly ( Amber Heard ) , tries to get him to focus on college applications , he grows more obsessed with the contradictions in David 's stories .
Michael is obsessed with David 's stories and Kelly leaves .
The situation comes to a head when David intercepts an email from Jackie about hiring an investigator .
He then goes to Jackie 's house and drowns her in her pool .
Determined to discover what was in the locked cabinets , Michael breaks into the basement as Kelly keeps a lookout .
In the basement , Michael eventually discovers his dad 's body in a freezer .
David knocks out Kelly and traps Michael in the basement .
The commotion awakens Susan , and he berates her parenting skills and says that he thought she could be " Mrs. Grady Edwards " .
On Susan 's stunned reaction , David grimaces and asks , " Who am I here ? " , Susan tries to snap him out of it , saying his name , causing him to say " David !
I 'm David Harris ! "
Susan , realizing the situation after noticing the unconscious Kelly , flees to the bathroom , locking herself in .
David kicks the door in , shattering the mirror behind it .
Susan picks up a shard of the glass mirror , holding it behind her .
David grabs her , they struggle , and she manages to stab him in the neck with the shard .
He falls to the floor , apparently dead .
Michael escapes from the basement and finds Kelly .
They find Susan in the hallway across from the bathroom , thinking David is dead .
Then David approaches from behind and blocks the stairs , chasing all of them into the attic , where he and Michael fight .
Both fall onto the roof and then off the edge of the roof to the ground , where they lie unconscious .
When Michael wakes up , he finds out he had been in a coma for just over a month .
He learns that David is still alive and fled the scene before the police arrived .
The end scene shows David , who has again changed his appearance and his name to Chris Ames .
He is working at a hardware store when he meets a woman ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) who was shopping with her two sons .
CAST * Penn Badgley as Michael Harding
* Dylan Walsh as Grady Edwards / David Harris /
Chris Ames
* Sela Ward as Susan Kerns Harding
* Amber Heard as Kelly Porter * Sherry Stringfield as Leah
( Jackie 's significant other )
* Paige Turco as Jackie Kerns ( Susan 's sister ) * Jon Tenney as Jay M. Harding * Nancy Linehan Charles as Mrs. Cutters * Marcuis Harris as Detective Shay * Braeden Lemasters as Sean Harding * Skyler Samuels as Beth Harding * Jessalyn Gilsig as Julie King PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was distributed by Screen Gems .
Filming was completed on April 15 , 2008 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Terry O'Quinn who portrayed the stepfather in the first two installments of the series , was approached by director Nelson McCormick to appear in the remake in a cameo role , but according to producer Mark Morgan , O'Quinn turned down the offer .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
It was released in cinemas on October 16 , 2009 .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment has released the film to DVD and Blu - Ray on a special Unrated Directors Cut containing a few more special features and depicting each death in the film in a more graphic tone .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The Stepfather received negative reviews .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a rating of 11 % , based on 61 reviews , with a rating average of 3.4/10 .
The site 's general consensus reads , " This tepid remake of the 1987 cult classic lacks the tension and satirical undercurrents of the original .
"
On Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score , the film has a score of 33 out of 100 , based on 11 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times wrote of the film being " a piece , a handsome , thoughtfully crafted production that generates a mounting terror securely anchored by assured performances , consistent psychological persuasiveness and believable dialogue . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Stepfather grossed $ 29.1 million in North America and $ 2.1 million in other territories , for a worldwide gross of $ 31.2 million , against its budget of $ 20 million .
The film opened # 5 at the box office , grossing $ 11.6 million in 2,734 theaters , with an average of $ 4,236 per theater .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS