.50
CALIBER BMG REGULATION ACT OF 2004
The .50 Caliber BMG Regulation Act of 2004 is a law in the state of California that effectively banned all .50 BMG - caliber rifles from being sold in the state .
The law took effect on January 1 , 2005 . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The legislature of California declared that " proliferation and use " of .50 BMG rifles posed a terrorist threat , as well as a threat to the " health , safety , and security of all residents " of California .
The act required existing .50 BMG rifles to be registered with the state and prohibited the sale of any rifle after the ban went into effect .
To quote the state web site , the act " regulates the .50 BMG rifles in essentially the same manner as assault weapons .
" The law specifically allowed a registration period of one year , now passed , to register any such firearms , after which unregistered weapons would become illegal firearms .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
" A .50 BMG rifle is defined as a centerfire rifle that can fire a .50 BMG cartridge and is not already an assault weapon ... or a machinegun " " .50 BMG cartridge " is defined as a cartridge that is designed and intended to be fired from a centerfire rifle and that meets all of the following criteria : ( 1 )
It has an overall length of from the base to the tip of the bullet .
( 2 )
The bullet diameter for the cartridge is from .510 to , and including , .
( 3 )
The case base diameter for the cartridge is from to , and including , .804 inch .
EXCEPTIONS Section::::Exceptions .
The law does not apply to the law enforcement officers with permission from their employing agencies .
Exceptions are granted to rifles classified as antiques or Curio and Relics as defined by the BATFE .
Out - of - state owners may bring .50 BMG rifles into the state for shooting competitions .
Limited exceptions are granted for exhibitions , displays , and education projects sponsored by law enforcement or government agencies .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
As a result of the ban , the Barrett Firearms Company announced it would no longer sell to or service any of its rifles in the possession of any California government agency .
A 1999 Justice Department Office of Special Investigations briefing on .50 caliber rifle crime identified several instances of the .50 BMG being involved in criminal activities .
Most of the instances of criminal activity cited in the Office of Special Investigations briefing involved the illegal possession of a .50 BMG rifle .
The briefing did not identify any instance of a .50 BMG rifle being used in the commission of a murder .
ALTERNATIVE CARTRIDGES Section::::Alternative cartridges .
The .510 DTC Europ has since been introduced to take advantage of the highly specific language used in the act .
The round provides almost identical ballistics and performance , but can not be used in weapons chambered for .50 BMG .
Barrett has since produced the .416 Barrett , a necked - down .50 BMG case using a .416 caliber bullet , which is not subject to the .50 BMG Act because of the smaller caliber .
It has the benefit of having a flatter trajectory than the .50 BMG .
SEE ALSO
* 12 mm caliber REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Text of Law
* California Department of Justice Firearms Division