EYE OF AGAMOTTO
The Eye of Agamotto ( ) is a fictional mystical item appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics and in their Marvel Cinematic Universe films , with its first appearance in Doctor Strange .
The item appears in publications in particular those featuring Doctor Strange .
The Eye of Agamotto is the name commonly given to the amulet Strange wears on his chest , though the Eye actually resides within the amulet and is released from time to time .
Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Steve Ditko , it first appeared in " The Origin of Dr. Strange " , an eight - page story in Strange Tales # 115 ( December 1963 ) .
In designing the Eye , Ditko drew inspiration from the real world charm The All Seeing Eye of the Buddha , known among Buddhists as The Amulet of Snail Martyrs , a Nepali symbol meant to protect its wearer against evil .
In film , the Eye contains the Time Stone , one of the fictional universe 's Infinity stones , diverging from the comics ' continuity where the Time Gem is owned by an ancient being named Ord Zyonz .
FICTIONAL HISTORY
Section::::Fictional history .
Agamotto , a powerful mystic being and one of Doctor Strange 's three Vishanti , is said to have used the Eye during his time as Sorcerer Supreme of the Earth dimension .
The Eye 's origins are currently unknown , but there are theories of how it came into existence .
Some believe that it was discovered by Agamotto among the seas and stars , where it had drifted for ages .
Others claim that it was created by Agamotto himself , which makes sense when the Eye 's powers are compared to those of " the All - Seeing . "
It is said that the Eye of Agamotto draws on Agamotto 's own mystical ability to span distances and dispel disguises and illusions .
Agamotto is also presumably aware of every time the Eye is used and may even record those events for later viewing .
Rintrah , a disciple of Doctor Strange , is able to call on many of the effects of the eye by using the ' Amulet Of Agamotto ' .
In the New Avengers Annual # 2 ( 2008 ) , though Strange has at first retained both the Eye and the Cloak , the Hood , on Dormammu 's commands , has targeted Strange to eliminate him and seize the Eye of Agamotto .
Strange , having evoked Zom 's power tells him that he is not ready to use it because of his tainted soul and demonic connection .
Strange shows it to the New Avengers , describing the Eye as " one of the most powerful mystic conduits on this physical plane .
" Strange and the New Avengers now battle against the forces of the Dark Dimension as Strange searches the planet for new potential candidates .
The Eye is presented to the new Sorcerer Supreme , Brother Voodoo , in New Avengers # 53 , who bears it as he fights against Dormammu .
Strange had lost the eye because of his own corrupted connection to Zom .
Later , Doctor Doom arrives to challenge Brother Voodoo 's ' claim ' to the Eye .
Doom claims the object must belong to him , for the protection of others , but abandons the Eye after using it to see his future , informing Brother Voodoo that he will gain nothing from it .
When Doctor Strange and Daimon Hellstrom are possessed by an unspecified demonic entity , they attempt to claim the Eye from Doctor Voodoo , causing it to teleport to Avengers Mansion .
Luke Cage touches the object and mutates in a monstrous version of himself , the entity that has possessed him subsequently ' jumping ' into Iron Fist , who then teleports away with the Eye , triggering a rift in the sky that Strange states means the end of everything .
As the Avengers battle the demons back on Earth , Iron Fist finds himself in a white void where he encounters the Ancient One , who claims that he is responsible for the current invasion due to his anger at Strange 's recent ' failures ' .
When Iron Fist returns to Earth — now dressed in a new costume—- , he claims that the Ancient One has told him that Strange stole the Eye from the Ancient One rather than being given it by his master , challenging Strange to admit the truth .
Noting that such a claim contradicts everything the Ancient One taught him about the Eye , Strange realises that the entity they are facing is not his master , with a casual comment by Spider - Man prompting the sorcerers to realise that the enemy they face is Agamotto himself , trying to reclaim his Eye after the apparent ' death ' of the Vishanti .
Although the group attempt to defeat Agamotto by empowering Wolverine to serve as their ' avatar ' , Doctor Voodoo is finally forced to sacrifice himself to contain their foe , apparently destroying himself and the Eye at the same time .
OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
The Eye and Strange 's Cloak of Levitation are seen in the 1992 Hulk graphic novel Future Imperfect .
Set a hundred years in the future , after a nuclear war , the cloak , tattered , and the Eye are among the many artifacts in the memorial room in the home of the Hulk associate Rick Jones .
The same cloak and Eye are then stolen as part of a plot by Thanatos , a version of Rick Jones , who wished to become the ultimate version of himself .
Thanks to other versions , including the elderly , Thanatos is stopped .
The Eye is used by the 2099 version of the Sorcerer Supreme , a young woman who hangs it on her jacket .
It is used to keep her demonic half in check .
She teams up with the 2099 version of Spider - Man .
POWERS Section::::Powers .
The Eye is a weapon of wisdom that can radiate a powerful mystical light that allows Strange to see through all disguises and illusions , see past events , and track both ethereal and corporeal beings by their psychic or magical emissions .
The light given off by the Eye also weakens a variety of evil mystical beings , such as demons , devils , undead beings , dark extradimensional entities , and even sufficiently corrupt human practitioners of the Dark Arts .
Strange can use it to probe the minds of others , project a powerful mystical shield , and create portals to other dimensions .
It has also been used to place beings into suspended animation , and it serves as the clasp for his Cloak of Levitation ; during the early years of the Defenders Strange used the light of the Eye to levitate objects as heavy as the Hulk and Professor Xavier plus his wheelchair together , or the Thing , with minimal effort while simultaneously magically controlling the cloak to fly himself , carrying a total of at least seven Megagrams ( fifteen thousand pounds ) .
The Eye of Agamotto can be used to transport a group of dozens of beings of all kinds and power levels into another point within a universe , as Strange did to combat the threat of Thanos .
IN OTHER MEDIA
MARVEL
CINEMATIC UNIVERSE Section::::In other media .
Section::::Marvel Cinematic Universe .
The Eye of Agamotto appears multiple times in the Marvel Cinematic Universe and is wielded by Stephen Strange ( Benedict Cumberbatch ) .
* The Eye of Agamotto appeared in Doctor Strange ( 2016 ) .
The Eye has the ability to manipulate probabilities and time , as it contains the Time Stone , which is one of the Infinity Stones .
* The Eye reappears in Strange 's possession during ( 2017 ) when Thor seeks the whereabouts of his father .
* The Eye once again appears in ( 2018 ) , in which it is targeted by Thanos , who is collecting the Infinity Stones .
Strange uses the Eye to travel to the future to see if the Avengers can defeat Thanos and sees only one path to victory out of millions .
After fighting against Thanos on Titan , Thanos manages to snatch and crush the eye , revealing it as a fake as the Time Stone is not present in it .
Strange ultimately surrenders the Time Stone to Thanos in exchange for sparing Tony Stark 's life .
ANIMATION
* The Eye of Agamotto appears in the direct - to - video film , .
It is a legendary mystical artifact that belongs to the Sorcerer Supreme .
It previously belonged to the Ancient One until it was passed down to Doctor Strange .
Dormammu stole the Eye as he made his way to the Sanctum Sanctorum .
Strange , remembering his training with Mordo , absorbs the pure magic that the demon is blasting him with .
Since Dormammu himself is made of pure magic , he soon vanishes into nothing after pouring his power into Strange using the Eye of Agamotto .
* The Eye is displayed by Dr. Strange in the animated TV series
The Super Hero Squad Show .
In one episode , interaction with the show 's unique plot element called Infinity Fractals resulted in the corruption of the Eye .
This causes Dr. Strange to act in an erratic , deranged manner .
* The Eye is used by Doctor Strange in the 1990s cartoon series Spider - Man in the season 3 opener " Doctor Strange . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Eye of Agamotto at marvel.com
* The Eye of Agamotto at fjackets.com