SIALOLITHIASIS Sialolithiasis ( also termed salivary calculi , or salivary stones ) , is a condition where a calcified mass or sialolith forms within a salivary gland , usually in the duct of the submandibular gland ( also termed " Wharton 's duct " ) .
Less commonly the parotid gland or rarely the sublingual gland or a minor salivary gland may develop salivary stones .
The usual symptoms are pain and swelling of the affected salivary gland , both of which get worse when salivary flow is stimulated , e.g. with the sight , thought , smell or taste of food , or with hunger or chewing .
This is often termed " mealtime syndrome " .
Inflammation or infection of the gland may develop as a result .
Sialolithiasis may also develop because of the presence of existing chronic infection of the glands , dehydration ( e.g. use of phenothiazines ) , Sjögren 's syndrome and/or increased local levels of calcium , but in many instances the cause is idiopathic ( unknown ) .
The condition is usually managed by removing the stone , and several different techniques are available .
Rarely , removal of the submandibular gland may become necessary in cases of recurrent stone formation .
Sialolithiasis is common , accounting for about 50 % of all disease occurring in the major salivary glands and causing symptoms in about 0.45 % of the general population .
Persons aged 30–60 and males are more likely to develop sialolithiasis .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The term is derived from the Greek words sialon ( saliva ) and lithos ( stone ) , and the Latin -iasis meaning " process " or " morbid condition " .
A calculus ( plural calculi ) is a hard , stone - like concretion that forms within an organ or duct inside the body .
They are usually made from mineral salts , and other types of calculi include tonsiloliths ( tonsil stones ) and renal calculi ( kidney stones ) .
Sialolithiasis refers to the formation of calculi within a salivary gland .
If a calculus forms in the duct that drains the saliva from a salivary gland into the mouth , then saliva will be trapped in the gland .
This may cause painful swelling and inflammation of the gland .
Inflammation of a salivary gland is termed sialadenitis .
Inflammation associated with blockage of the duct is sometimes termed " obstructive sialadenitis " .
Because saliva is stimulated to flow more with the thought , sight or smell of food , or with chewing , pain and swelling will often get suddenly worse just before and during a meal ( " peri - prandial " ) , and then slowly decrease after eating , this is termed meal time syndrome .
However , calculi are not the only reasons that a salivary gland may become blocked and give rise to the meal time syndrome .
Obstructive salivary gland disease , or obstructive sialadenitis , may also occur due to fibromucinous plugs , duct stenosis , foreign bodies , anatomic variations , or malformations of the duct system leading to a mechanical obstruction associated with stasis of saliva in the duct .
Salivary stones may be divided according to which gland they form in .
About 85 % of stones occur in the submandibular gland , and between 5 - 10 % occur in the parotid gland .
In about 0 - 5 % of cases , the sublingual gland or a minor salivary gland is affected .
When minor glands are rarely involved , caliculi are more likely in the minor glands of the buccal mucosa and the maxillary labial mucosa .
Submandibular stones are further classified as anterior or posterior in relation to an imaginary transverse line drawn between the mandibular first molar teeth .
Stones may be radiopaque , i.e. they will show up on conventional radiographs , or radiolucent , where they not be visible on radiographs ( although some of their effects on the gland may still be visible ) .
They may also symptomatic or asymptomatic , according to whether they cause any problems or not .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Signs and symptoms are variable and depend largely upon whether the obstruction of the duct is complete or partial , and how much resultant pressure is created within the gland .
The development of infection in the gland also influences the signs and symptoms .
* Pain , which is intermittent , and may suddenly get worse before mealtimes , and then slowly get better ( partial obstruction ) .
* Swelling of the gland , also usually intermittent , often suddenly appearing or increasing before mealtimes , and then slowly going down ( partial obstruction ) .
* Tenderness of the involved gland .
* Palpable hard lump , if the stone is located near the end of the duct .
If the stone is near the submandibular duct orifice , the lump may be felt under the tongue .
* Lack of saliva coming from the duct ( total obstruction ) .
* Erythema ( redness ) of the floor of the mouth ( infection ) .
* Pus discharging from the duct ( infection ) .
* Cervical lymphadenitis ( infection ) .
* Bad Breath .
Rarely , when stones form in the minor salivary glands , there is usually only slight local swelling in the form of a small nodule and tenderness .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
There are thought to be a series of stages that lead to the formation of a calculus ( lithogenesis ) .
Initially , factors such as abnormalities in calcium metabolism , dehydration , reduced salivary flow rate , altered acidity ( pH ) of saliva caused by oropharyngeal infections , and altered solubility of crystalloids , leading to precipitation of mineral salts , are involved .
Other sources state that no systemic abnormality of calcium or phosphate metabolism is responsible .
The next stage involves the formation of a nidus which is successively layered with organic and inorganic material , eventually forming a calcified mass .
In about 15 - 20 % of cases the sialolith will not be sufficiently calcified to appear radiopaque on a radiograph , and therefore be difficult to detect .
Other sources suggest a retrograde theory of lithogenesis , where food debris , bacteria or foreign bodies from the mouth enter the ducts of a salivary gland and are trapped by abnormalities in the sphincter mechanism of the duct opening ( the papilla ) , which are reported in 90 % of cases .
Fragments of bacteria from salivary calculi were reported to be Streptococci species which are part of the normal oral microbiota and are present in dental plaque .
Stone formation occurs most commonly in the submandibular gland for several reasons .
The concentration of calcium in saliva produced by the submandibular gland is twice that of the saliva produced by the parotid gland .
The submandibular gland saliva is also relatively alkaline and mucous .
The submandibular duct ( Wharton 's duct ) is long , meaning that saliva secretions must travel further before being discharged into the mouth .
The duct possesses two bends , the first at the posterior border of the mylohyoid muscle and the second near the duct orifice .
The flow of saliva from the submandibular gland is often against gravity due to variations in the location of the duct orifice .
The orifice itself is smaller than that of the parotid .
These factors all promote slowing and stasis of saliva in the submandibular duct , making the formation of an obstruction with subsequent calcification more likely .
Salivary calculi sometimes are associated with other salivary diseases , e.g. sialoliths occur in two thirds of cases of chronic sialadenitis , although obstructive sialadenitis is often a consequence of sialolithiasis .
Gout may also cause salivary stones , although in this case they are composed of uric acid crystals rather than the normal composition of salivary stones .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Diagnosis is usually made by characteristic history and physical examination .
Diagnosis can be confirmed by x - ray ( 80 % of salivary gland calculi are visible on x - ray ) , by sialogram , or by ultrasound .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Some current treatment options are : * Non - invasive : * For small stones , hydration , moist heat therapy , NSAIDs ( nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs ) occasionally , and having the patient take any food or beverage that is bitter and/or sour .
Sucking on citrus fruits , such as a lemon or orange , may increase salivation and promote spontaneous expulsion of the stone.(Examples of size : 2–10 mm )
* Some stones may be massaged out by a specialist .
* Shock wave therapy (
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy ) .
*
Minimally invasive :
* Sialendoscopy * Surgical : * An ENT or oral / maxillofacial surgeon may cannulate the duct to remove the stone ( sialectomy ) .
* A surgeon may make a small incision near the stone to remove it .
*
In some cases when stones continually reoccur the offending salivary duct is removed .
* Supporting treatment : * To prevent infection while the stone is lodged in the duct , antibiotics are sometimes used .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
The prevalence of salivary stones in the general population is about 1.2 % according to post mortem studies , but the prevalence of salivary stones which cause symptoms is about 0.45 % in the general population .
Sialolithiasis accounts for about 50 % of all disease occurring in major salivary glands , and for about 66 % of all obstructive salivary gland diseases .
Salivary gland stones are twice as common in males as in females .
The most common age range in which they occur is between 30 and 60 , and they are uncommon in children .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS