COMPANY SECRETARY
A company secretary is a senior position in a private sector company or public sector organisation .
In large American and Canadian publicly - listed corporations , a company secretary is typically named a corporate secretary or secretary .
The company secretary is responsible for the efficient administration of a company , particularly with regard to ensuring compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements and for ensuring that decisions of the board of directors are implemented .
Despite the name , the role is not clerical or secretarial .
The company secretary ensures that an organisation complies with relevant legislation and regulation , and keeps board members informed of their legal responsibilities .
Company Secretaries are the company 's named representative on legal documents , and it is their responsibility to ensure that the company and its directors operate within the law .
It is also their responsibility to register and communicate with shareholders , to ensure that dividends are paid and to maintain company records , such as lists of directors and shareholders , and annual accounts .
In many countries , private companies have traditionally been required by law to appoint one person as a company secretary , and this person will also usually be a senior board member .
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Section::::Roles and responsibilities .
Company secretaries in all sectors have high level responsibilities including governance structures and mechanisms , corporate conduct within an organisation 's regulatory environment , board , shareholder and trustee meetings , compliance with legal , regulatory and listing requirements , the training and induction of non - executives and trustees , contact with regulatory and external bodies , reports and circulars to shareholders / trustees , management of employee benefits such as pensions and employee share schemes , insurance administration and organisation , the negotiation of contracts , risk management , property administration and organisation and the interpretation of financial accounts .
Company secretaries are the primary source of advice on the conduct of business and this can span everything from legal advice on conflicts of interest , through accounting advice on financial reports , to the development of strategy and corporate planning .
Among public companies in North America , providing advice on corporate governance issues is an increasingly important role for corporate secretary .
Many shareholders , particularly institutional investors , view sound corporate governance as essential to board and company performance .
They are quite vocal in encouraging boards to perform frequent corporate governance reviews and to issue written statements of corporate governance principles .
The corporate secretary is usually the executive to assist directors in these efforts , providing information on the practices of other companies , and helping the board to tailor corporate governance principles and practices to fit the board 's needs and expectations of investors .
In some companies , the role of the corporate secretary as corporate governance adviser has been formalised , with a title such as Chief Governance Officer added to their existing title .
In view of the important roles the company secretary plays in business , PLCs and large companies require the company secretary to be suitably trained , experienced and professionally qualified for these responsibilities .
In the UK , the company secretary may be qualified by virtue of examination and membership of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators ( ICSA ) , which is the main qualification specifically for company secretaries .
ICSA is the body dedicated to the advancement and recognition of professional administration based on a combination of degree - level studies , carefully vetted experience and sponsorship by two people of professional status .
Only a person thus qualified is entitled to be designated a ' Chartered Secretary ' or ' Chartered Company Secretary ' .
The Faculty of Secretaries and Administrators founded in 1930 is the second body of corporate secretaries in the United Kingdom and now has a strong emphasis on equality work and governance and its members are designated ' corporate secretaries ' or ' certified public secretaries ' .
It is expected that company secretaries of publicly quoted companies will be professionally qualified through ICSA , one of the chartered professional bodies in the accountancy profession , or have appropriate training and experience through another body .
In India , the Institute of Company Secretaries of India ( ICSI ) regulates the profession of company secretaries .
ICSI is a statutory professional body which has more than 50,000 associate members .
Chartered Secretaries are employed as chairs , chief executives and non - executive directors , as well as executives and company secretaries .
Some chartered secretaries are also known in their own companies as corporate secretarial executives / managers or corporate secretarial directors .
Chartered Secretaries are the sixth highest paid employees in the UK according to the Office for National Statistics Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings ( March 2010 ) .
Many corporate secretaries of North American public companies are lawyers and some serve as their corporation 's general counsel .
While this can be helpful in the execution of their duties it can also create ambiguity as to what is legal advice , protected by privilege , and what is business advice .
http://www.icsi.edu
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Since 8 April 2008 there has been no legal requirement for a private company in the UK to have a company secretary unless the company 's articles of association state otherwise .
If a private company does n't have a company secretary then the company secretarial duties and responsibilities fall upon the directors of the company .
With the increase in the number of social enterprises and community interest companies there is often a demand for a company secretary in the voluntary and community sectors as well as ordinary private trading companies .
A public company in the UK must still have a formally appointed company secretary .
The exact responsibilities of the company secretary depend on the size and nature of the company and there is no statutory definition of what these are , but it generally includes some or all of the following : * advising the board of directors on their legal and corporate responsibilities and matters of corporate governance ; INDIA Section::::India .
In India , every listed company and other class of companies ( i.e. non - listed public companies with share capital of 50 million ( 5 Crore ) & private Companies with share capital of 50 million [ 5 crore ] ) are required to have a Qualified Company Secretary be appointed as Key Managerial Personnel to perform the Functions of Company Secretary under section 203 of the Companies Act , 2013 read with Rule 8 of Companies ( Appointment and Remuneration of Key Managerial Personnel ) Rules , 2014.But
later it is clarified by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs company secretary would be appointed as earlier i.e. a company having a paid up capital of 5 crore or more should appoint a whole time basis in its notification .
BANGLADESH CHINA Section::::China .
In China , every listed company is required to have a board secretary .
According to article 124 of 2005 Company Law , every listed company is required to have a secretary to the board of directors .
The responsibilities of board secretary include preparing meetings of shareholders and boards of directors , maintaining company records and shareholders information , dealing with information disclosure etc .
Relevant listing rules in China further clarify that the secretary of the Board is a managerial position .
Such listing rules discuss duties of board secretary in details .
According to " Special Provisions of the State Council Concerning the Flotation and Listing Abroad of Stocks by Limited Stock Companies " , " Guidance for the Articles of Listed Company " , " Stock Listing Rules of the Shanghai Stock Exchange " and " Stock Listing Rules of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange " , the secretary of the Board is classified as the senior management team .
From those listing rules , the board secretary , or the secretary of the board of directors , in China is comparable as the company secretary in many other countries .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa , all public and state - owned company must appoint a company secretary .
The roles and responsibilities of the company secretary are defined in the Companies Act , No 71 of 2008 .
For publicly listed companies , these roles were clarified and expanded by the King IV report .
In addition , non - profit companies that have voluntarily adopted the " Enhanced Accountability and Transparency " provisions of the Companies Act must appoint a company secretary whose role is comparable to that of a public company .
SRI LANKA Section::::Sri Lanka .
In Sri Lanka , the Companies Act , No . 07 of 2007 requires that each registered company has a company secretary .
A company secretary is required to be registered with the Department of Registrar of Companies , to function as a company secretary .
Eligibility to function as a secretary are ; * Sri Lankan citizen
* An Attorney at law , a Chartered Accountant or any person demanded have followed a program of study by the Subject Minister .
* Applicants with over 20 years experience in the company secretaries field may be appointed after an interview with the Registrar of Companies .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Canadian Society of Corporate Secretaries ( Canada )
* Corporate Secretaries International Association * The Society of Corporate Secretaries & Governance Professionals ( North America ) * Chartered Secretaries Canada
* The Hong Kong Institute of Chartered Secretaries * The Institute of Company Secretaries Of India * The Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators ,
UK
* The Faculty of Secretaries and Administrators , UK * Institute of Corporate secretaries of Pakistan * Governance Institute of Australia