MELISANDRE Melisandre of Asshai is a fictional character in the A Song of Ice and Fire series of fantasy novels by American author George R. R. Martin , and its television adaptation Game of Thrones .
She is a priestess of the god R'hllor from the continent Essos and a close advisor to King Stannis Baratheon in his campaign to take the Iron Throne .
She is often nicknamed The Red Woman due to the color of her hair and clothes .
Introduced in 1998 's A Clash of Kings , Melisandre has come to Westeros to propagate her faith in the Red God .
She subsequently appeared in Martin 's A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) and A Dance with Dragons ( 2011 ) .
Melisandre is not a point - of - view character in the first four novels , her actions are witnessed and interpreted through the eyes of other characters such as Davos Seaworth and Jon Snow .
In the fifth novel A Dance with Dragons , she has a single point - of - view chapter .
George R. R. Martin stated she will return as a viewpoint character in future novels .
Melisandre is portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in the HBO television adaptation .
CHARACTER DESCRIPTION
Section::::Character description .
Also known as " The Red Woman " , Melisandre is a shadowbinder and a priestess of R'hllor in service to Stannis Baratheon .
Originally a slave from Asshai called Melony , she is chosen by the Red Temple and recruited as a red priestess , and as a result has prophetic powers that give her partial knowledge of future events .
She is also referred to as a shadowbinder , being able to cast glamours and perform certain feats of dark magic .
Melisandre is introduced in A Clash of Kings and serves as the third - person narrator for one chapter of A Dance with Dragons .
She is described as a beautiful voluptuous foreign woman with red eyes and red hair , always dressing in red robes and wearing a red gold choker set with a large ruby , and rarely sleeps or eats .
She possesses magical abilities that can cast glamour and manipulate fire and shadow , has prophetic visions by looking into fire , and takes an aggressively militant stance against the other religions of Westeros .
STORYLINES IN THE BOOKS EARLY HISTORY AND A GAME OF THRONES Section::::Storylines .
Section::::In
the books .
Section::::Early history and A Game of Thrones .
Melisandre was born an unknown number of years before the start of the series , possibly with the name " Melony " .
As a child slave , she was sold to the Red Temple and trained for the priesthood .
Believing Stannis Baratheon to be the reincarnation of Azor Ahai , a mythic messiah prophesied by her faith , she travels to his island stronghold , Dragonstone , during the events of A Game of Thrones .
Tywin Lannister indirectly mentioned her as " a shadowbinder from Asshai " during a private conversation with Tyrion Lannister after the Battle in the Whispering Wood .
A CLASH OF KINGS Section::::A Clash of Kings .
Melisandre converts Stannis 's wife Selyse to her religion , along with several other members of Stannis ' court .
Stannis ' maester Cressen , fearing Melisandre 's power and her influence over him , tries to assassinate Melisandre with poison in a murder - suicide , and although Melisandre drinks most of the poison her powers allow her to survive .
When Stannis ' brother Renly also declares himself king , Melisandre has a vision of Renly defeating Stannis ' host at King 's Landing .
She convinces Stannis to impregnate her , giving birth to a shadow demon that kills Renly .
She also births another demon that kills Storm 's End 's castellan , Ser Cortnay Penrose , when he refuses to yield Storm 's End .
Ser Bryce Caron convinces Stannis to leave Melisandre at Dragonstone during the Battle of the Blackwater , which ends in Stannis ' defeat .
During the battle , Ser Garlan Tyrell dons Renly 's armor and leads the Tyrell - Lannister vanguard , thus fulfilling Melisandre 's earlier prophecy .
A STORM OF SWORDS
Section::::A Storm of Swords .
Stannis ' advisor Davos Seaworth blames Melisandre for Stannis ' defeat and plans to assassinate her before Melisandre sees the plot in her flames and has him arrested .
She attempts to persuade Stannis to sacrifice his bastard nephew Edric Storm to awaken stone dragons beneath Dragonstone .
Stannis refuses , but allows her to leech him and burns the leeches to curse Stannis ' rivals : Balon Greyjoy , Robb Stark , and Joffrey Baratheon .
All three die in various circumstances soon after , but Davos smuggles Edric to Lys , fearing he will be sacrificed .
Melisandre then accompanies Stannis and Davos to the Wall to defeat Mance Rayder 's wildling host .
A FEAST FOR CROWS AND A DANCE WITH DRAGONS
Section::::A Feast for Crows and A Dance With Dragons .
Jon Snow swaps Mance Rayder 's baby son with Gilly 's baby , and sends the baby with Gilly , Samwell Tarly and Maester Aemon to Oldtown , to prevent Melisandre from burning the baby to perform fire magic .
When Stannis orders Mance Rayder to be burned alive for deserting the Night 's Watch , she uses her magic to secretly switch Mance 's identity with Rattleshirt 's , another wildling raider , resulting in Rattleshirt being burned instead .
She later reveals this to Jon Snow , and sends Mance to Winterfell with six spearwives to rescue " Arya Stark " ( actually Sansa Stark 's handmaiden Jeyne Poole ) from Ramsay Bolton .
Melisandre remains at the Wall while Stannis marches on Winterfell .
Noting that her powers are stronger at the Wall , she asks R'hllor for a vision of Azor Ahai , but only sees " Snow " .
She also warns Jon of having seen " daggers in the dark " .
Jon ignores her warnings , and is later stabbed by mutineers led by Bowen Marsh .
IN THE SHOW Section::::In
the show .
Melisandre is played by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in the television adaption of the book series .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
In a ceremony on Dragonstone , Melisandre burns the statues of the Faith of the Seven , drawing the ire of Stannis ' maester Cressen .
Cressen attempts to poison her in a murder - suicide attempt ; despite drinking the poison , Melisandre is unharmed .
She convinces Stannis to impregnate her , giving birth to a shadow demon that kills Stannis ' brother Renly , a rival claimant to the throne .
However , Stannis ' advisor Davos Seaworth counsels Stannis to leave Melisandre on Dragonstone when he attacks King 's Landing ; when the attack fails , Melisandre claims that Stannis ' defeat was a result of not bringing her to the battle .
Stannis attempts to strangle Melisandre in a fit of rage , before she makes him understand his role in Renly 's death , and assures him that his betrayals will be worth it in the end .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Melisandre begins burning members of Stannis ' court alive at Dragonstone .
Davos , blaming Melisandre for Stannis ' defeat , tries to assassinate her but fails and is imprisoned .
She travels to the Riverlands to meet up with the Brotherhood without Banners , who have taken on Robert Baratheon 's bastard Gendry as a blacksmith .
During her meeting , Melisandre is astonished when the Red Priest Thoros of Myr reveals he has resurrected the Brotherhood 's leader Ser Beric Dondarrion six times .
Melisandre purchases Gendry from the Brotherhood , much to the fury of Gendry 's friend Arya Stark .
Melisandre uses Gendry 's blood in a ritual to kill Stannis ' rivals .
However , before Gendry can be sacrificed , Davos helps him escape .
Davos staves off his own execution by showing Stannis a letter from the Night 's Watch , claiming that the White Walkers have returned .
After burning the letter in the flames , Melisandre corroborates Davos ' story , and declares that Stannis will have need of Davos in future .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
Melisandre accompanies Stannis , Davos and their army to the Wall .
Before the Baratheon forces sail north , she convinces Selyse Baratheon to bring Stannis ' daughter Shireen to the Wall with them , claiming that the Lord of Light has use for her .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
Melisandre presides over Mance Rayder 's burning .
She attempts to seduce Jon Snow , but he rejects her advances .
She later joins Stannis and Davos on their mission to take Winterfell from the Boltons .
When a large snowstorm delays their march , Melisandre suggests that Stannis sacrifice Shireen .
Stannis initially refuses , but after a raiding party led by Ramsay Bolton burns their supplies , he gives in and allows her to burn Shireen at the stake .
The blizzard lifts , but half of Stannis ' army deserts and Selyse commits suicide out of guilt for Shireen 's death .
Melisandre flees to Castle Black , where her distraught demeanour leads Davos and Jon to realise that Stannis and Shireen are dead .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Still reeling from Stannis ' defeat , Melisandre is further shocked when Jon is assassinated by his officers , as she had had a vision of him fighting at Winterfell .
In shock and suffering a crisis of faith , she returns to her chambers , removing her necklace and hence revealing her true form of an extremely old woman .
Following the imprisonment of the mutineers by the wildlings , Davos persuades her to attempt a resurrection of Jon , which , to her shock , is ultimately successful .
Melisandre comes to believe that the " prince that was promised " was not Stannis , but Jon , and dedicates herself to his service .
Realizing that her constant meddling had done more harm than good , Melisandre works no magic without Jon 's permission , nor does she try to convert anyone – including Snow – to worship the Lord of Light .
Melisandre joins Jon in his march on Winterfell to confront Ramsay Bolton .
Although Jon forbids her from resurrecting him again if he falls .
Melisandre says she will at least try , as the Lord of Light might still need him .
In the aftermath of House Stark 's recapture of Winterfell ( which validates her vision ) , Melisandre is confronted by Davos , who has discovered that she burned Shireen at the stake .
Jon Snow exiles her from the North , threatening to have her executed if she ever returns .
Melisandre protests that she is now dedicated to the cause of defeating the White Walkers , but ultimately agrees to leave and rides south .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
Melisandre arrives on Dragonstone , which is now occupied by Daenerys Targaryen .
Melisandre claims that both she and Jon ( who has been crowned King in the North since her exile ) are the " prince that was promised " , and suggests that Daenerys summon Jon to Dragonstone to hear of his experiences fighting the White Walkers .
When Jon and Davos arrive on Dragonstone to meet Daenerys , Melisandre avoids them and decides to return to Volantis .
Although Daenerys ' advisor Varys warns that Melisandre will not be safe if she ever returns to Westeros , she declares that she will eventually make one final journey to Westeros to die .
TV ADAPTATION Section::::TV adaptation .
Melisandre is portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in the television adaption of the series of books .
RECOGNITION AND AWARDS Section::::Recognition and awards .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " ! scope="row " 2014 !
scope="row " 2016 ! scope="row " 2017 REFERENCES