BIG FISH :
A NOVEL OF MYTHIC PROPORTIONS Big Fish : A Novel of Mythic Proportions is a 1998 novel by Daniel Wallace .
It was adapted into a film , Big Fish , in 2003 by Tim Burton .
A musical adaptation starring Norbert Leo Butz premiered in Chicago in April 2013 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
A young man ( William Bloom ) , at the deathbed of his father ( Edward Bloom ) , tries to reconcile his memories of his dad with the person he really is .
Whereas he always saw his father as an irresponsible liar , he comes to understand his dad 's exaggerations and their roots in reality .
The book is written in a chronological ( although they may not appear so at first ) series of tall tales .
Despite the novel 's first - person narration , there is no present tense part of the book .
The various stories are Will 's retelling of tales that Edward has told about his life .
The ' My Father 's Death Take ' chapters are William planning out his final conversation with his father in his head and how it will go , so that when the actual conversation takes place , he will be able to get to bottom of the truth and of truly understanding his father .
The book draws elements from the epic poem the Odyssey , James Joyce 's Ulysses , and American tall tales .
The story of Edward Bloom also includes a few events based on the Twelve Labors of Hercules .
CHARACTERS
* Edward Bloom -the protagonist .
Edward is the center of all the tales told ; through these stories , pieces of his character are revealed through his actions , as well as the people he encounters , and the places he passes through .
* William Bloom - son of Edward .
William appears in the " Death Takes " , as he tries to extract the truth from his father ( only to be further frustrated with his lack of seriousness ) .
*
Jenny Hill - owns the last part of Specter .
She was in love with Edward .
Edward told her he would come back for her , but ended up falling in love with and marrying Sandra .
*
Dr. Bennett - was a family doctor and an old friend .
He is a very old man who ca n't even stand for a long time .
He has been into doctoring even before William was born and at that time was being asked to retire .
He is emotional and tries everything to see to the survival of Edward .
* Sandra Kay Templeton - Edward 's wife whom he meets while at Auburn .
Don Price asks Sandra to marry him before Edward has a chance to make his move , but Sandra says that she wants to think about it , which gives Edward the chance to win her over himself .
* Don Price - a college student at Auburn .
Edward has a run in with Don over the magical glass eye of the old woman who owns the boarding house that Edward is staying in .
Don is the leader of a group of boys who steals the eye , and Edward tricks Don into entrusting him with the eye overnight which he promptly gives back to the woman .
Don then sees his future in the woman 's eye when Edward returns to meet Don and the boys the next day with the old lady in tow .
Don and Edward later have another run in over their mutual love for Sandra Templeton that results in a fistfight between the two .
Edward wins both the fight and Sandra 's heart .
REFERENCES