DEMON DROP
Demon Drop is a drop tower amusement ride at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom .
Designed by Intamin , it is a Freefall model that was originally located at Cedar Point when it first opened to the public in 1983 .
It was relocated to Dorney Park following the 2009 season and reopened in 2010 .
It is one of the oldest of its kind still in operation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Demon Drop debuted at Cedar Point in 1983 .
It was very popular as it was located at the very front of the park .
In 2005 , rumors started of the ride being relocated or dismantled when the ride was put up for sale .
On October 21 , 2009 , Cedar Point officials announced that Demon Drop would be moved to its sister park , Knott 's Berry Farm , for the 2010 season .
In November , fans of Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom spotted pieces similar to Demon Drop at its park in Pennsylvania .
On December 2 , 2009 , it was announced that Demon Drop would not be relocated to Knott 's Berry Farm .
Instead , it would be relocated to Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom .
It officially opened at Dorney Park on July 8 , 2010 .
RIDE DESCRIPTION Section::::Ride Description .
The ride can accommodate up to four riders , and consists of three main sections ; the loading and unloading station , the lift tower , and the drop and run - out track .
Riders are loaded into a gondola type car near ground level at the station and secured with over the shoulder harnesses .
The gondola is then moved backwards horizontally to the rear base of the lift tower and then climbs vertically to the top of the tower in 7.2 seconds .
Once there , it slides forward and hangs over the drop track for a few seconds .
Without warning , the car is released and riders drop 60 feet in less than two seconds before experiencing the deceleration g - forces as the car enters a pull - out curve which transitions the vertical fall into a horizontal brake run .
As the gondola rolls through the brake run to slow down , the riders are facing the sky .
Once it stops at the end of the run , a mechanism swings the top of the car down , and the gondola moves in reverse at a downward 45 degree angle to another track where it returns to an upright position .
It then returns to the station in reverse traveling below the brake run track .
SEE ALSO
* Power Tower , a S&S Worldwide drop tower ride at Cedar Point
* Dominator , a S&S Worldwide drop ride at Dorney Park REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official page
* Demon Drop Photo Gallery