SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY ( SOCIOLOGY )
In sociology , social psychology , also known as sociological social psychology or microsociology , is an area of sociology that focuses on social actions and on interrelations of personality , values , and mind with social structure and culture .
Some of the major topics in this field are social status , structural power , sociocultural change , social inequality and prejudice , leadership and intra - group behavior , social exchange , group conflict , impression formation and management , conversation structures , socialization , social constructionism , social norms and deviance , identity and roles , and emotional labor .
The primary methods of data collection are sample surveys , field observations , vignette studies , field experiments , and controlled experiments .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Sociological social psychology was born in 1902 with the landmark study by sociologist Charles Horton Cooley , Human Nature and the Social Order , which presented Cooley 's concept of the looking glass self .
The first textbook in social psychology by a sociologist appeared in 1908—Social Psychology by Edward Alsworth Ross .
The area 's main journal was founded as Sociometry by Jacob L. Moreno in 1937 .
The journal 's name changed to Social Psychology in 1978 , and to Social Psychology Quarterly in 1979 .
In the 1920s W. I. Thomas contributed the notion of the definition of the situation , with the proposition that became a basic tenet of sociology and sociological social psychology : " If men define situations as real , they are real in their consequences . "
One of the major currents of theory in this area sprang from work by philosopher and sociologist George Herbert Mead at the University of Chicago from 1894 forward .
Mead generally is credited as the founder of symbolic interactionism .
Mead 's colleague and disciple at Chicago , sociologist Herbert Blumer , coined the name of the framework in 1937 .
Sociologist Talcott Parsons , at Harvard University from 1927 forward , developed a cybernetic theory of action which was adapted to small group research by Parsons ' student and colleague , Robert Freed Bales , resulting in a body of observational studies of social interaction in groups using Bales ' behavior coding scheme , Interaction Process Analysis .
During his 41-year tenure at Harvard , Bales mentored a distinguished group of sociological social psychologists concerned with group processes and other topics in sociological social psychology .
MAJOR FRAMEWORKS
SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM Section::::Major frameworks .
Section::::Symbolic interactionism .
Contemporary symbolic interactionism originated out of ideas of George Herbert Mead and Max Weber .
In this framework meanings are constructed during social interaction , and constructed meanings influence the process of social interaction .
Many symbolic interactionists see the self as a core meaning constructed through social relations , and influencing social relations .
The structural school of symbolic interactionism uses shared social knowledge from a macro - level culture , natural language , social institution , or organization to explain relatively enduring patterns of social interaction and psychology at the micro - level , typically investigating these matters with quantitative methods .
Identity theory , affect control theory , and the Iowa School are major programs of research in this tradition .
Identity Theory and Affect Control Theory both focus on how actions control mental states , thereby manifesting the underlying cybernetic nature of the approach , evident in Mead 's writings Affect Control Theory provides a mathematical model of role theory and of labeling theory .
Process symbolic interactionism stems from the Chicago School and considers the meanings underlying social interactions to be situated , creative , fluid , and often contested .
Researchers in this tradition frequently use qualitative and ethnographic methods .
A journal , Symbolic Interaction , was founded in 1977 by the Society for the Study of Symbolic Interaction as a central outlet for the empirical research and conceptual studies produced by scholars in this area .
Postmodern symbolic interactionists understand the notions of self and identity to be increasingly fragmented and illusory , and consider attempts at theorizing to be meta - narratives with no more authority than other conversations .
The approach is presented in detail by The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research .
SOCIAL EXCHANGE Section::::Social exchange .
Social exchange theory emphasizes the idea that social action is the result of personal choices made in order to maximize benefits and minimize costs .
A key component of this theory is the postulation of the " comparison level of alternatives " , which is the actor 's sense of the best possible alternative ( i.e. the choice with the highest net benefits or lowest net costs ) .
Theories of social exchange share many essential features with classical economic theories like rational choice theory .
However , social exchange theories differ from economic theories by making predictions about the relationships between persons , and not just the evaluation of goods .
For example , social exchange theories have been used to predict human behaviour in romantic relationships by taking into account each actor 's subjective sense of costs ( i.e. , volatility , economic dependence ) , benefits ( i.e. , attraction , chemistry , attachment ) , and comparison level of alternatives ( i.e. , if any viable alternative mates are available ) .
THEORY OF STATUS CHARACTERISTICS AND EXPECTATION STATES
Section::::Theory of Status Characteristics and Expectation States .
Expectation states theory and its popular " sub - theory " , status characteristics theory , proposes that individuals use available social information to form expectations for themselves and others .
Group members use stereotypes about competence to attempt to determine who will be comparatively more skilled in any given task , indicating to whom the group should listen and accord status .
Group members use known ability on the task at hand , membership in social categories ( race , gender , age , education , etc . ) , and observed dominance behaviors ( glares , rate of speech , interruptions , etc . ) to determine everyone 's relative ability and assign rank accordingly .
While exhibiting dominant behavior or being of a certain race , for instance , has no direct connection to actual ability , implicit cultural beliefs about who is relatively more or less socially valued drive group members to " act as if " they believe some people have more useful contributions than others .
As such , the theory has been used to explain the rise , persistence , and enactment of status hierarchies .
SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND PERSONALITY Section::::Social structure and personality .
This research perspective deals with relationships between large - scale social systems and individual behaviors and mental states including feelings , attitudes and values , and mental faculties .
Some researchers focus on issues of health and how social networks bring useful social support to the ill .
Another line of research deals with how education , occupation , and other components of social class impact values .
Some studies assess emotional variations , especially in happiness versus alienation and anger , among individuals in different structural positions .
SOCIAL INFLUENCE Section::::Social influence .
Social influence is a factor in every individual 's life .
Social influence takes place when one 's thoughts , actions and feelings are affected by other people .
It is a way of interaction that affects individual behavior and can occur within groups and between groups .
It is a fundamental process that affects ways of socialization , conformity , leadership and social change .
DRAMATURGY Section::::Dramaturgy .
Another aspect of microsociology aims to focus on individual behavior in social settings .
One specific researcher in the field , Erving Goffman , claims that humans tend to believe that they are actors on a stage .
He explains his theories in his book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life .
He argues that as a result , individuals will further proceed with their actions based on the response of that individual 's ' audience ' or in other words , the people to whom he is speaking .
Much like a play , Goffman believes that rules of conversing and communication exist : to display confidence , display sincerity , and avoid infractions which are otherwise known as embarrassing situations .
Breaches of such rules are what make social situations awkward .
GROUP PROCESSES Section::::Group processes .
From the sociological perspective , group processes scholars study how power , status , justice , and legitimacy impact the structure and interactions that take place within groups .
Group processes scholars study how group size affects the type and quality of interactions that take place between group members , an area of study initiated by the work of the German social theorist , Georg Simmel .
Dyads consist of two people and triads consist of three people , and the fundamental difference is that one person who leaves a dyad dissolves that group whereas the same is not true of a triad .
The difference between these two types of groups also indicates the fundamental nature of group size , which is that every additional member of a group increases the group 's stability but also decreases the possible amount of intimacy or interactions between any two members .
Groups are also distinguished in terms of how and why the members know each other , and this stems from whether they are members of primary groups consisting of close friends and family held together by expressive ties ; secondary groups consisting of coworkers , colleagues , classmates , etc . held together by instrumental ties ; or reference groups consisting of people who do not necessarily know or interact with each other but who use each other for standards of comparison for appropriate behaviors .
Group processes researchers also study interactions between groups , such as in the case of Muzafer Sherif 's Robbers Cave Experiment .
SEE ALSO
* Behavioral economics
* Important publications in social psychology * List of social psychologists
* Political psychology * Social psychology ( discipline within psychology )
*
Socialization * Sociobiology *
Sociology *
Socionics
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Social Psychology Network * Society for Personality and Social Psychology * Society of Experimental Social Psychology * Journal of Personality and Social Psychology * Current Research in Social Psychology
* Social Psychology - brief introduction * Social Psychology basics * Social Psychology forum
* Scapegoating Processes in Groups
* Introduction to Social Psychology * PsychWiki