BINGO ( SCRABBLE )
Bingo is a slang term used in Scrabble for a play using all seven of the player 's tiles .
A player who does this receives 50 points in addition to what the word would normally score .
Mattel , the game 's manufacturer in the United Kingdom , uses the term bonus to describe such a word .
In French , it is called a scrabble .
Bingos are an important part of achieving high scores in Scrabble .
While many beginners rarely play even one during a game , experts frequently score three or more .
Much advanced strategy revolves around maximizing one 's chance of playing of a bingo : blank tiles are kept , poor letter combinations such as BVW , LLNNN , or IIIUU are broken up , and flexible letter combinations such as AEINST ( a six - letter " stem " that anagrams with 24 letters — all but Q and Y — to form nearly 70 bingos ) are aimed for until a bingo is formed .
This strategy is often at direct odds with that of placing high - value letters on premium squares .
A common misconception is that the 50-point bonus received for using all seven tiles is multiplied if a double word score ( DWS ) or triple word score ( TWS ) is used .
This is not the case : for example , TRAINER(S ) played at 1A ( with the T on the TWS ) without forming additional words scores formula_1 points .
BINGO EXAMPLES Section::::Bingo examples .
These facts are according to the SOWPODS lexicon as amended in 2006 .
*
The highest scoring 7-letter bingo is " MUZJIKS " .
The tiles total 29 points , and it scores 128 on the first move .
*
The highest scoring 8-letter bingo in Collins is " QUIZZIFY " ( using a blank for one of the Zs ) .
Placed on two triple - word squares with the Z on a double letter square , it scores 419 .
*
The highest scoring 8-letter bingo in TWL and the highest scoring 8-letter bingo without a blank is " QUINZHEE " , which amounts to 401 points when played across two triple - word squares .
* The lowest possible score for a bingo is 56 .
This is achieved by making an 8-letter word with six one - point tiles and two blanks , or by making a 7-letter word with one blank and a two - letter word with both blanks .
The word must not be doubled or tripled , and no one - point tile may be doubled or tripled .
A 55-point bingo is theoretically possible in tournament play , by making a two - blank play on an empty board that misses the center star .
*
The highest scoring 15-letter bingo is theoretically " OXYPHENBUTAZONE " ( an anti - inflammatory drug most often used to treat arthritis ) .
With 8 letters already placed between three triples , the word can score 1785 .
There are no reports of a triple - triple - triple ever being played in a competitive game , as it requires very unlikely circumstances .
* Based on the tile frequency , the most likely bingos in SOWPODS are OTARINE#/NOTAIRE
# , followed by ETAERIO # (
the # denotes words not in the TWL lexicon ) .
Using the TWL lexicon , the most probable bingos are ANEROID , AILERON / ALIENOR , ATONIES , ELATION / TOENAIL , and ERASION .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The ABSP tournament records page