QUEENS PLAZA ( IND QUEENS BOULEVARD LINE )
Queens Plaza is an express station on the IND Queens Boulevard Line of the New York City Subway .
Located under the eastern edge of Queens Plaza at the large Queens Plaza interchange , it is served by the E train at all times , by the R train at all times except late nights , and by the M train on weekdays except late nights .
While situated relatively close to the elevated Queensboro Plaza station on the BMT Astoria Line and IRT Flushing Line , there is no free transfer between the two stations .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Queens Boulevard Line was one of the first lines built by the city - owned Independent Subway System ( IND ) , and stretches between the IND Eighth Avenue Line in Manhattan and 179th Street and Hillside Avenue in Jamaica , Queens .
The Queens Boulevard Line was in part financed by a Public Works Administration ( PWA ) loan and grant of $ 25,000,000 .
One of the proposed stations would have been located at Steinway Street .
The first section of the line , west from Roosevelt Avenue to 50th Street , opened on August 19 , 1933 .
E trains ran local to Hudson Terminal ( today 's World Trade Center ) in Manhattan , while the GG ( predecessor to current G service ) ran as a shuttle service between Queens Plaza and Nassau Avenue on the IND Crosstown Line .
It was the first stop in Queens after crossing the East River for six years until the 1939 opening of 23rd Street – Ely Avenue .
Until the opening of the 60th Street Tunnel Connection in 1955 after the unification of the subway , only express trains in Queens ran to Manhattan ; local trains were routed onto the IND Crosstown Line .
This service pattern is no longer in use due to the opening of the 63rd Street track connector in 2001 , and Crosstown Line trains now terminate one stop earlier at Court Square .
In 1978 , the New York City Department of City Planning proposed making Queens Plaza into a large subway station complex .
Queens Plaza would have been converted to a transfer station with the 63rd Street Line , which at that time was described as a " tunnel to nowhere " that did not connect with any other lines in Queens .
The complex would also have had a retail center above it , as well as a transfer to the elevated Queensboro Plaza station .
This was ultimately not constructed , and the 63rd Street connector was built instead , between the Queens Plaza and 36th Street stations .
STATION LAYOUT World Trade Center late nights ) ← toward 95th Street Jamaica Center →→ toward Forest Hills–71st Avenueisland platforms and four tracks to facilitate cross - platform interchanges between local and express trains .
Its tile band is of the darkest shade of the violet family ( Black Grape ) , three tiles high and black - bordered – so dark , in fact , that even under bright light it appears black from a distance .
West of the station , the M train ( E train during late nights ) crosses to the express track from the local track .
R trains stay on the local tracks , which split to the BMT Broadway Line via the 60th Street Tunnel to Manhattan and IND Crosstown Line to Brooklyn .
The connection to the Crosstown Line is not currently used in revenue service , while the 60th Street Tunnel Connection is used by the R.
The express tracks continue on the IND Queens Boulevard Line , serving Court Square–23rd Street at Long Island City before traveling through the 53rd Street Tunnel to Manhattan .
East of the station , the M train ( E train during late nights ) crosses from the express track to the local track , after which the tunnel widens to include a lay - up track that forms from the two express tracks and then merges with the northbound express track .
This track is used to relay the New York Transit Museum 's holiday trains in November and December .
The tunnel then widens again to allow the IND 63rd Street Line ramps to rise and lead trains to merge with either the local or express tracks .
EXITS Section::::Exits .
The full - time booth is near the center of the mezzanine .
There are three staircases to the street on all corners of Queens Boulevard and Jackson Avenue except the northern one .
There is an outside passageway to two more staircases near the southern and western corners of Jackson Avenue and Orchard Street at the south end near a former booth .
The old - style change booth was in place until it was removed in 1998 .
Two of the outside entrances were redone to match the facade of the DOT indoor parking lot structure when it was constructed in 1975 .
Before the renovation , the station had a full length mezzanine ( inside and outside of fare control ) with three booths .
Since then , this area has balconies that allow views of local trains and platforms down below .
There are three staircases to each platform from that end .
Two staircases in between both fare control areas were removed during the renovation process .
The part - time booth has two stairs to the northwest and southeast corners of Northern Boulevard at 41st Avenue , and one to each platform .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Station Reporter —
E Train * Station Reporter — R Train * Station Reporter —
M Train *
The Subway Nut — Queens Plaza Pictures
* MTA 's Arts For Transit — Queens Plaza ( IND Queens Boulevard Line )
* Queens Plaza entrance from Google Maps Street View
* 41st Avenue entrance from Google Maps Street View
* Entrance south of Queens Plaza from Google Maps Street View
* Platforms from Google Maps Street View