BROADWAY JUNCTION ( NEW YORK CITY SUBWAY )
Broadway Junction is a New York City Subway station complex shared by the elevated BMT Canarsie Line and BMT Jamaica Line , and the underground IND Fulton Street Line .
It was also served by trains of the Fulton Street Elevated until that line closed in 1956 .
It is located roughly at the intersection of Broadway , Fulton Street and Van Sinderen Avenue at the border of Bedford - Stuyvesant and East New York , Brooklyn .
The complex is served by the A , J , and L trains at all times ; the C train at all times except late nights ; and the Z train during rush hours in the peak direction only .
The station is adjacent to the East New York Yard and a complex junction between the tracks leading to the yard , the Canarsie Line and the Jamaica Line .
The structure of the elevated station still contains the ironwork for the trackways used by the old Fulton Elevated .
The station has a single exit and entrance through a fare control building located at the eastern end of the Fulton Street Line station .
There is evidence of closed exits from the Jamaica Line platforms .
The station opened as Manhattan Junction as part of the BMT Lexington Avenue Line in 1885 .
In 1900 , an elevated connection was made with the Fulton Street Elevated , resulting in a change in service patterns .
Lexington Avenue and Fulton Street trains were through - routing , going around the East New York Loop , with service to Cypress Hills requiring a transfer .
The station started to be used by service to Canarsie in 1906 .
In 1919 , the Manhattan Junction station was replaced by the current station which was then known as Eastern Parkway .
The modern - day Canarsie Line platforms , known as Broadway Junction , opened in 1928 when that line was connected to the 14th Street – Eastern District Line .
The Independent Subway System 's Fulton Street Line was extended to Broadway – East New York in 1946 , and the three stations were combined as one station complex on July 1 , 1948 .
The names of the stations in the complex were conformed to Broadway Junction in 2003 .
Although Broadway Junction ranked 166th in the system for passenger entries in 2016 , with 3,085,401 total entries , it is Brooklyn 's third - busiest station in terms of passenger activity .
It sees 100,000 passengers per day , the vast majority of whom use it to make transfers .
In 2017 , the New York City Economic Development Corporation started studying options to rezone the surrounding area as a transit hub .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Broadway Junction is a New York City Subway station complex shared by the elevated BMT Canarsie and BMT Jamaica Lines , and the underground IND Fulton Street Line .
Throughout the history of the area , this has been a key junction point between various different rail lines .
What is now Broadway Junction sits atop the historical Jamaica Pass , the junction of the modern Broadway , Fulton Street , and Jamaica Avenue .
The Pass is where these roads passed through the valleys of the area , which are part of the terminal moraine created by the Wisconsin glaciation .
The first rail service in the area was the Atlantic Branch of the Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) at East New York station .
The line opened as the Brooklyn and Jamaica Railroad in 1836 , under lease to the LIRR , but did not include a station at East New York until early 1843 .
The Brooklyn and Rockaway Beach Railroad ( the predecessor to the BMT Canarsie Line ) began service in the area in 1865 .
The name Manhattan Junction or Manhattan Beach Junction was applied to the station on what is now the Jamaica Line when it opened in 1885 ; the area had been known as Manhattan Beach Crossing since before then , due to the crossing of the LIRR 's Manhattan Beach Division .
A station on the Fulton Street Elevated railroad at Sackman Street opened on July 4 , 1889 , when the line was extended to Atlantic Avenue .
A two - track , one - half - block elevated connection was built on the east side of Vesta Avenue ( now Van Sinderen Avenue ) between the Fulton Street and Broadway Lines .
This connection , equipped with a third rail to supply electric power , was opened on August 9 , 1900 , and new service patterns were implemented : during times other than rush hours , Lexington Avenue and Fulton Street trains were through - routed , and travel beyond Manhattan Junction required a transfer .
This " East New York Loop " was unpopular , and was soon stopped ; the next service to use the tracks was the BMT Canarsie Line to Broadway Ferry ( later the 15 train ) , joined to the Fulton Street Line at Pitkin and Snediker Avenues in 1906 .
The name was changed from Manhattan Junction to Broadway Junction in 1913 .
The Dual Contracts were signed on March 19 , 1913 between the City and the Interborough Rapid Transit Company and the Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company ( BRT ) .
As part of the agreement , the BRT , which owned the elevated lines in Brooklyn , agreed to construct bidirectional express tracks on the Fulton and Broadway Elevateds .
The Broadway express track was placed into service on December 23 , 1916 .
The current Broadway Elevated station at Eastern Parkway opened on August 5 , 1919 , replacing the old Manhattan Junction station .
The full BMT 14th
Street - Canarsie Line was completed on July 14 , 1928 with the opening of the segment connecting Broadway Junction with Montrose Avenue .
By 1936 , the Independent Subway System 's Fulton Street Line had been extended to Rockaway Avenue .
At that time , Broadway Junction was an all - Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit ( BMT ) transfer point .
Further eastward extension of the line was delayed by World War II ; the Broadway – East New York station opened on December 30 , 1946 .
A direct escalator passageway was constructed between the IND and BMT stations in East New York to allow passengers free transfers .
The passageway opened on July 1 , 1948 .
The Fulton Street Elevated was now redundant , and BMT service on the line closed entirely on April 26 , 1956 , with the eastern portion to Lefferts Boulevard connected to the IND .
The entire complex was renovated from 1999 to 2001 .
As part of the project , an abandoned mezzanine and adjacent staircases were removed , a new station booth was built and the public address system was improved .
In 2001 , as part of the work a piece of artwork made by Al Loving titled Brooklyn , New Morning was installed in the station .
This piece of art consists of 75 unique glass panels arranged in a series throughout the complex and a mosaic mural wall that is seven - by - ten feet .
This installation was part of MTA Arts & Design 's program to install artwork in stations that undergo rehabilitations .
Other necessary improvements were also completed as part of the project .
For a long time , the stations within the complex went by three different names : the original Eastern Parkway on the BMT Jamaica Line , Broadway Junction on the BMT Canarsie Line , and Broadway –
East New York
( IND Fulton Street Line ) .
Conformity between the station names was established in 2003 .
As part of a project initiated in 2017 in which 200 blocks of land in East New York were rezoned for housing and improvements to area parks and schools were planned , the New York City Economic Development Corporation initiated a study to foster economic growth around Broadway Junction as a transit hub with residential and commercial uses .
In 2018 , the MTA announced several further improvements to the Broadway Junction station : new elevators for the Fulton Street Line platforms , as well as staircases for the Canarsie Line platforms and Jamaica Line platforms .
STATION LAYOUT Section::::Station layout .
The station complex is composed of three stations : the two elevated stations on the BMT Jamaica and Canarsie Lines , as well as the underground station on the IND Fulton Street Line .
The IND station is accessible from the station 's ground - level station house , at the east end of the station complex , using staircases down to platform level .
The BMT lines are reachable from that same station house via escalators from street level to the upper mezzanine , which is located over the elevated BMT Jamaica Line platforms and at the BMT Canarsie Line 's platform level .
The two escalators , which were replaced in 2000 , are long and steep .
A footbridge leads from the upper mezzanine to the BMT Canarsie Line 's northbound platform .
Despite having being renovated in the late 1990s , the Broadway Junction complex does not conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 , and there are no elevators in the station because the different parts of the complex are too far from each other .
Because Broadway Junction is a major transfer station , the community identified this lack of access as a major issue .
Calls for elevators were renewed in 2017 , after the announcement of the L train shutdown in 2019–2020 , which would temporarily suspend Canarsie Line service to Manhattan .
In January 2018 , the MTA announced that the IND Fulton Street Line platforms would receive elevators , and that elevators were also being studied for the BMT Jamaica Line platforms .
However , the BMT Canarsie Line platforms are not expected to receive these improvements .
EXIT Section::::Exit .
The fare control area is in the station house , with a token booth and turnstile banks .
The structure was built along with the IND station .
The station house leads to Van Sinderen Avenue between Fulton Street to the south , and Truxton Street and Broadway to the north .
This is the only entrance to the entire complex .
There is also a police precinct located in the station house , NYPD Transit Police District 33 , at the south end of the building .
The station was previously part of Transit Police District 23 .
The station house is adjacent to Callahan - Kelly Playground , and is recessed a short distance west from Van Sinderen Avenue .
A ventilation structure for the IND line sits at the west end of the park at Sackman Street .
There have been planning studies to build a new entrance in this area .
BMT CANARSIE LINE PLATFORMS
Section::::BMT Canarsie Line platforms .
Broadway Junction on the BMT Canarsie Line has two tracks , one island platform , and one side platform .
Manhattan - bound trains use the island platform for northbound service while Canarsie - bound trains use the side platform for southbound service , similar to the configuration of the Bowling Green station on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line .
However , unlike Bowling Green , the southbound trains can use the island platform if necessary .
This station opened on July 14 , 1928 as the final section of the 14th Street – Eastern DIstrict Line , now part of the Canarsie Line , opened between Montrose Avenue and Broadway Junction .
This new line allowed trains from Canarsie to run via the 14th Street Line in Manhattan in addition to the Nassau Street Line .
The station is one of the highest elevated platforms in the city , sitting above the already - elevated BMT Jamaica Line .
As high as this station platform is , it plunges abruptly into a tunnel at the north end .
This end of the station slopes sharply downward , and the platform end is about away from the tunnel 's portal .
A diamond crossover was installed here between 1998 and 2001 .
The south end of the northbound platform divides into two , with a central gap between the two legs .
Two normally - unused tracks connect the Canarsie and Jamaica lines .
The southbound track can be seen emerging beneath the two legs of the northbound platform ; the northbound flyover with its severe curve can be seen just east of the station , beginning near the signal tower .
During 1999 , this station underwent a series of renovations , including new canopies , a new crossover ( known as ' The Barn ' because of its rustic red siding and white trim ) , and the removal of a hazardous crossunder .
The old - style platform lights were removed and replaced with light fixtures that curve upward and split into two lights , widely seen elsewhere in the system .
In March 2018 , in preparation for the L train shutdown , the MTA announced that it would be installing two extra staircases to the BMT Canarsie Line platforms ; at the time , there was only one passageway to each platform .
BMT JAMAICA LINE PLATFORMS Section::::BMT Jamaica Line platforms .
Broadway Junction is an express station on the BMT Jamaica Line that has three tracks and two island platforms .
The middle express track is not used by regular service .
At each end of the station there are track connections to the East New York Yard .
Trains that run to or from that yard can terminate or begin at this station .
The station was originally called Eastern Parkway , named for its original exit on the extreme west end of the platforms .
This entrance is now closed , though the street stairs and station house are still present .
A second fare control area , a mezzanine , at Conway Street in the middle of the platforms was also closed , and was removed in the 2000s as part of the station 's renovation .
The ironwork for the old Fulton Elevated trackways can be seen under this portion of the complex from the platforms .
Two staircases from each platform lead to the upper mezzanine of the complex .
The mezzanine is above the platforms and connects to the Canarsie Line and to the exit at street level via two long escalators .
At street level , there is a transfer to the underground IND Fulton Street Line and the fare control area .
As part of the 2015–2019 Metropolitan Transportation Authority 's Capital Program , station capacity enhancements will be made at the station .
The project will assess the feasibility of building two additional staircases from each platform to the mezzanine to reduce platform congestion .
Design work started in February 2017 , and was finished in August 2017 .
The project was being bid on , work began in July 2018 , and the new staircases were finished around October 2018 .
IND FULTON STREET LINE PLATFORMS
Section::::IND Fulton Street Line platforms .
Broadway Junction on the IND Fulton Street Line , formerly called Broadway – East New York , is a standard express station with four tracks and two island platforms .
The land for the station was acquired by the city in 1938 , and in order to construct the station and other utilities , the land had to be cleared of buildings .
Some of the land was given to the New York City Parks Department in 1945 for the construction of Callahan - Kelly Playground , which was named after two local soldiers who died during World War I.
The station was nearly complete when the United States ' entrance into World War II in 1941 halted construction due to material shortages .
Work resumed following the war to install the necessary signals , tracks and complete the escalators to the BMT platforms .
The contract for the escalator was awarded on November 7 , 1945 to the Otis Elevator Company .
The station opened on December 30 , 1946 , while the escalator was completed on July 1 , 1948 after supply delays .
In the early 1950s , the platforms were extended to to accommodate 11-car trains .
The station 's tile band is unique in that it incorporates two types of tile – gloss and matte – in contrasting shades of cobalt blue ( gloss border ) and blueberry ( matte center ) .
When the station was renamed in 2003 , the " EAST NY " tiles on the wall were removed and replaced by tiles reading " JUNCTION " , in the matching IND copperplate font .
There is an active control tower just past the head end of the Queens - bound platform .
East of the station , the tunnel widens on both sides to accommodate an additional trackway diverging from the local tracks .
These bellmouths , one of which has an emergency exit , were built for a proposed extension along the BMT Jamaica Line , or for a proposed Jamaica Avenue Subway .
They were not a provision for the IND Second System , as were similar structures on other IND lines , but rather date from an earlier plan for the IND Fulton Street Line , which would have connected the IND tracks west of the station to two lines to the east of the station : the BMT Jamaica Line tracks , and the BMT Fulton Street Line tracks to Lefferts Boulevard , which were eventually connected to the IND Fulton Street Line anyway , albeit past Grant Avenue .
BMT FULTON
STREET LINE PLATFORMS Section::::BMT Fulton Street Line platforms .
Manhattan Junction was the original name for the Fulton Street Elevated platforms .
It was located above Fulton and Sackman Streets , and was the second station to be built in the area of Broadway Junction .
The station was built by the Kings County Elevated Railway on July 4 , 1889 .
Manhattan Junction station had an island platform and two tracks , with a spur leading to the East New York Yard , as well as a side platform on the north side of the station that turned north along the East New York Loop , and ended on the south side of the BMT Jamaica Line platforms .
The line was originally double tracked ; a third track was added in the mid-1910s as part of the Dual Contracts expansion of the line between Nostrand Avenue and Hinsdale Street .
In 1938 , the Independent Subway System began constructing their own Fulton Street Subway and added an underground subway station named Broadway - East New York station .
Stations west of this point were being made obsolete as many were being replaced by the subway stations .
The subway station opened in December 1946 , and the elevated station above it closed on April 26 , 1956 , along with all other stations east of Rockaway Avenue .
The ironwork for the old Fulton Elevated trackways can still be found over Fulton Street between Van Sinderen Avenue and Williams Place , and can be seen under this portion of the complex from the Canarsie Line platforms .
The severed connection between the station and the East New York Yard can also be seen below the Canarsie Line and above the north side of Fulton Street .
RIDERSHIP Section::::Ridership .
In 2016 , the station had 3,085,401 boardings , making it the 166th most used station in the 422-station system .
This amounted to an average of 9,189 passengers per weekday .
In 2017 , The New York Times wrote that 100,000 daily passengers used the station per day , meaning that the vast majority of passengers used the station to make transfers to other routes .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .
The Subway Nut : * Broadway Junction – East New York
( A , C ) Pictures * Broadway Junction – Eastern Parkway ( J ,
L , Z ) Pictures Miscellaneous links :
* MTA 's Arts For Transit — Broadway Junction
* Station Reporter — Broadway Junction Complex Google Maps Street View :
* Van Sinderen Avenue entrance from Google Maps Street View ( the only entrance into the entire complex )
* Closed entrance to the Jamaica Line station on Eastern Parkway from Google Maps Street View
* Canarsie Line platforms from Google Maps Street View * Jamaica Line platforms from Google Maps Street View * IND platforms from Google Maps Street View