KWIK TRIP
Kwik Trip /
Kwik Star is a chain of convenience stores founded in 1965 with locations throughout Wisconsin and Minnesota under the name Kwik Trip , and in northeast Iowa under the name Kwik Star ( to avoid confusion with QuikTrip ) .
The company also operates stores under the name Hearty Platter , Tobacco Outlet
Plus , and Kwik Trip / Kwik Star Express .
Kwik Trip , Inc. is a privately held company headquartered in La Crosse , Wisconsin .
Unlike many other convenience store chains , the company is vertically integrated across most of its product lines .
It carries bag / pitcher milk and orange juice in pouches under the Nature 's Touch brand via its in - house dairy .
These pouches are notable for the Milk Moola banner on the top of the pouches ( however the products are also offered in traditional jugs and bottles ) .
Milk Moola is a Kwik Trip program that provides funding for schools , offering five cents per clipped pouch top .
The program uses the catchphrase " Moola for Your Schoola " .
Kwik Trip also has an internal bakery operation which provides sliced and wrapped bread , doughnut and muffin products to its stores , along with a store brand snack line under the " Urge " branding .
The company also maintains branding partnerships with several Upper Midwest professional sports teams , including Minnesota 's Twins and Vikings , along with the Green Bay Packers and Milwaukee Brewers .
All locations have a small grocery store selling basic fruits , bread , canned food , frozen food , and ice cream , along with traditional convenience store food such as bottled drinks and hot dogs .
Notably , the chain has sold bananas , baking potatoes , and yellow onions for 38 cents per pound as a loss leader .
They also all have heated and ready - to - eat food , and will cook food to order off a small menu .
Many of the stores operate as full service truck stops , with dual - pump fuel islands .
Many of the truck stop locations also have overnight parking , showers , and full - service Denny 's restaurants .
KWIK TRIP / KWIK STAR
STORE OPERATIONS Section::::Kwik Trip / Kwik Star store operations .
Kwik Trip /
Kwik Star stores employ a mixture of full - time and part - time employees .
In addition to a store leader , each store employs an assistant store leader and about 3 - 5 guest service leaders .
These employees are responsible for overseeing store operations while the store leader is out of the store .
Additionally , each store has a food service leader and assistant food service leader responsible for overseeing the individual store 's hot food program , ensuring that appropriate amounts of food are made and sold and the program continues to grow according to company expectations .
District leaders supervise multiple stores in a given region , and zone leaders supervise multiple districts .
WORKPLACE HONORS
Section::::Workplace honors .
In 2011 , Kwik Trip was named by the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel as the number one large workplace ( over 500 employees ) for workers in Southeastern Wisconsin .
Kwik Trip beat out Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation ( MGIC ) for the first spot .
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Company Homepage * About Kwik Trip
* Milk Moola program * American Marketing Association Collegiate Case Competition featuring Kwik Trip