BLOOD TYPE ( NON - HUMAN ) Animal erythrocytes have cell surface antigens that undergo polymorphism and give rise to blood types .
Antigens from the human ABO blood group system are also found in apes and Old World monkeys , and the system traces back to the origin of hominoids .
Other animal blood sometimes agglutinates ( to varying levels of intensity ) with human blood group reagents , but the structure of the blood group antigens in animals is not always identical to those typically found in humans .
The classification of most animal blood groups therefore uses different blood typing systems to those used for classification of human blood .
SIMIAN BLOOD GROUPS Section::::Simian blood groups .
Two categories of blood groups , human - type and simian - type , have been found in apes and monkeys , and can be tested by methods established for grouping human blood .
RHESUS BLOOD GROUP Section::::Rhesus blood group .
The rhesus system is named after the rhesus monkey , following experiments by Karl Landsteiner and Alexander S. Wiener , which showed that rabbits , when immunised with rhesus monkey red cells , produce an antibody that also agglutinates the red blood cells of many humans .
CHIMPANZEE BLOOD GROUP SYSTEMS Section::::Chimpanzee blood group systems .
Data on blood groups of chimpanzees , baboons , and macaques .
Two complex chimpanzee blood group systems , V - A - B - D and R - C - E - F systems , proved to be counterparts of the human MNS and Rh - Hr blood group systems , respectively .
Two blood group systems have been defined in Old World monkeys : the Drh system of macaques and the Bp system of baboons , both linked by at least one species shared by either of the blood group systems .
CANINE BLOOD GROUPS Section::::Canine blood groups .
Over 13 canine blood groups have been described .
Eight DEA ( dog erythrocyte antigen ) types are recognized as international standards .
Of these DEA types , DEA 4 and DEA 6 appear on the red blood cells of ~98 % of dogs .
Dogs with only DEA 4 or DEA 6 can thus serve as blood donors for the majority of the canine population .
Any of these DEA types may stimulate an immune response in a recipient of a blood transfusion , but reactions to DEA 1.1 + are the most severe .
Dogs that are DEA 1.1 positive ( 33 to 45 % of the population ) are universal recipients - that is , they can receive blood of any type without expectation of a life - threatening hemolytic transfusion reaction .
Dogs that are DEA 1.1 negative are universal donors .
Blood from DEA 1.1 positive dogs should never be transfused into DEA 1.1 negative dogs .
If it is the dog 's first transfusion the red cells transfused will have a shortened life due to the formation of alloantibodies to the cells themselves and the animal will forever be sensitized to DEA 1.1 positive blood .
If it is a second such transfusion , life - threatening conditions will follow within hours .
In addition , these alloantibodies will be present in a female dog 's milk ( colostrum ) and adversely affect the health of DEA 1.1 negative puppies .
Other than DEA blood types , Dal is another blood type commonly known in dogs .
FELINE BLOOD GROUPS
Section::::Feline blood groups .
The commonly recognized system of feline blood designates cats as A , B , or AB .
The vast majority of cats in the United States are Type A , but the percentage of Type B cats increases in other countries , such as Australia .
In a study conducted in England , 87.1 % of non - pedigree cats were type A , while only 54.6 % of pedigree cats were type A. Type A and B cats have naturally occurring alloantibodies to the opposite blood type , although the reaction of Type B cats to Type A blood is more severe than vice versa .
Based on this , all cats should have a simple blood typing test done to determine their blood type prior to a transfusion or breeding to avoid the haemolytic disease ( or neonatal isoerythrolysis ) .
It is also important to check donor cats for FeLV / FIV status .
EQUINE BLOOD GROUPS Section::::Equine blood groups .
There are eight major recognized blood groups in horses .
Seven of them , A , C , D , K , P , Q , and U , are internationally recognized , with an eighth , T , which is primarily used in research .
Each blood group has at least two allelic factors ( for example , the A blood group has a , b , c , d , e , f , and g ) , which can be combined in all combinations ( Aa , Afg , Abedg , etc . ) , to make many different alleles .
This means that horses can have around 400,000 allelic combinations , allowing blood testing to be used as an accurate method of identifying a horse or determining parentage .
Unlike humans , horses do not naturally produce antibodies against red blood cell antigens that they do not possess ; this only occurs if they are somehow exposed to a different blood type , such as through blood transfusion of transplacental hemorrhage during parturition .
Breeding a mare to a stallion with a different blood type , usually Aa or Qa blood , risks neonatal isoerythrolysis if the foal inherits the blood type of the stallion .
This can also occur if a mare is bred to a jack , due to donkey factor .
This immune - mediated disease is life - threatening and often requires transfusion .
Ideally , cross - matching should be performed prior to transfusion , or a universal donor may be used .
The ideal universal whole blood donor is a non - thoroughbred gelding that is Aa , Ca , and Qa negative .
If this is not available , a gelding , preferably of the same breed as the patient , may be used as a donor , and cross - matching may be crudely accessed by mixing donor serum with patient blood .
If the mixture agglutinates , the donor blood contains antibodies against the blood of the patient , and should not be used .
BOVINE BLOOD GROUPS
Section::::Bovine blood groups .
The polymorphic systems in cattle include the A , B , C , F , J , L , M , S , and Z polymorphisms .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Boyd , WC .
Fundamentals of Immunology Third Edition 1956 , Interscience .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* H / h blood groups in non - humans at BGMUT Blood Group Antigen Gene Mutation Database at NCBI , NIH * MNS blood groups in non - humans at BGMUT Blood Group Antigen Gene Mutation Database at NCBI , NIH
* Rh blood groups in non - humans at BGMUT Blood Group Antigen Gene Mutation Database at NCBI , NIH