SANTA CLAUS 'S REINDEER
In traditional festive legend , Santa Claus 's reindeer pull a sleigh through the night sky to help Santa Claus deliver gifts to children on Christmas Eve .
The commonly cited names of the eight reindeer are Dasher , Dancer , Prancer , Vixen , Comet , Cupid , Donner and Blitzen .
They are based on those used in the 1823 poem " A Visit from St. Nicholas " ( commonly called " The Night Before Christmas " ) by Clement Clarke Moore , arguably the basis of the reindeers ' popularity .
The enduring popularity of the Christmas song " Rudolph the Red - Nosed Reindeer " has led to Rudolph often joining the list , bringing the number of Santa Claus 's reindeer up to nine .
LIST Section::::List .
In traditional lore , Santa Claus 's sleigh is led by eight reindeer : Dasher , Dancer , Prancer , Vixen , Comet , Cupid , Dunder ( variously spelled Donder and Donner ) and Blixem ( variously spelled Blixen and Blitzen ) , with Rudolph being a 20th - century inclusion .
The names Dunder and Blixem derive from Dutch words for thunder and lightning , respectively .
ORIGINS SINGLE REINDEER Section::::Origins .
Section::::Single reindeer .
The first reference to Santa 's sleigh being pulled by a reindeer appears in Old Santeclaus with Much Delight , an illustrated children 's poem published in New York in 1821 .
The names of the author and the illustrator are not known .
The poem , with eight colored lithographic illustrations , was published by William B. Gilley as a small paperback book entitled The Children 's Friend : A New - Year 's Present , to the Little Ones from Five to Twelve .
EIGHT REINDEER Section::::Eight reindeer .
The 1823 poem by Clement C. Moore " A Visit from St. Nicholas " ( also known as " ' Twas the Night Before Christmas " ) is largely credited for the contemporary Christmas lore that includes eight named reindeer .
The relevant segment of the poem reads :
When , what to my wondering eyes should appear , but a miniature sleigh , and eight tiny rein - deer , with a little old driver , so lively and quick ,
I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick .
More rapid than eagles his coursers they came ,
And he whistled , and shouted , and call'd them by name :
" Now , Dasher !
Now , Dancer !
Now , Prancer , and Vixen !
" On , Comet !
On , Cupid !
On , Dunder and Blixem !
" To the top of the porch !
to the top of the wall !
" Now dash away !
dash away !
dash away all ! "
As dry leaves that before the wild hurricane fly , When they meet with an obstacle , mount to the sky ; So up to the house - top the coursers they flew ,
In An American Anthology , 17871900 , Edmund Clarence Stedman reprints the 1844 Clement C. Moore version of the poem , including the German spelling of " Donder and Blitzen , " rather than the original 1823 version using the Dutch spelling , " Dunder and Blixem " .
Both phrases translate as " Thunder and Lightning " in English , though German for " thunder " is now spelled Donner , and the Dutch words would now be spelled Donder and Bliksem .
RUDOLPH
THE RED - NOSED REINDEER
Section::::Rudolph the Red - Nosed Reindeer .
Rudolph 's story was originally written in verse by Robert L. May for the Montgomery Ward chain of department stores in 1939 , and published as a book to be given to children in the store at Christmas time .
According to this story , Rudolph 's glowing red nose made him a social outcast among the other reindeer .
Santa Claus 's worldwide flight one year was imperiled by severe fog .
Visiting Rudolph 's house to deliver his presents , Santa observed Rudolph 's glowing red nose in the darkened bedroom and decided to use him as a makeshift lamp to guide his sleigh .
Rudolph accepted Santa 's request to lead the sleigh for the rest of the night , and he returned home a hero for having helped Santa Claus .
IN FILM
*
The feature film ( 1998 ) , introduces Mitzi as Rudolph 's mother and Blitzen 's wife ( as opposed to the Rankin / Bass version , wherein Donner is Rudolph 's father and his mother is unnamed ) .
It also features two other reindeer : Rudolph 's love interest Zoey and his cousin and rival Arrow , the latter of whom is Cupid 's son .
*
The animated movie
Annabelle 's Wish tells the story of Annabelle , a young calf who dreams to fly after meeting Santa and his reindeer .
Many years later in her old age she is granted her wish and is transformed into a reindeer herself as she leads Santa 's team .
*
Chet is a young reindeer - in - training who is introduced in the 2002 feature film The Santa Clause 2 ( 2002 ) .
*
In the film Blizzard ( 2003 ) , the title character is Blitzen 's daughter .
The film also includes Delphi , Blitzen 's mate and Blizzard 's mother .
*
In the 2011 film Arthur Christmas , Arthur and his grandfather Grandsanta use a team of reindeer who are the great - great - grandchildren of the original eight to pull Grandsanta 's old sleigh .
*
The 1989 film Prancer concerns a young girl who finds an injured reindeer who she realizes is Prancer .
She nurses him back to health and returns him to Santa .
IN LITERATURE
* L. Frank Baum 's story The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus ( 1902 ) includes a list of ten reindeer , none of which match the names of the versions found in " A Visit from St. Nicholas " .
Flossie and Glossie are Santa 's principal reindeer in Baum 's story .
Claus gathers eight more reindeer , named in rhyming pairs : Racer and Pacer , Fearless and Peerless , Ready and Steady , Feckless and Speckless .
IN MUSIC
* " Run Rudolph Run " ( 1958 ) , recorded by Chuck Berry a popular Christmas - rock song about Rudolph * " Shadrack The Black Reindeer " , was recorded by Loretta Lynn for a 1974 Christmas single .
*
Joe Diffie 's album Mr. Christmas ( 1995 ) features the song " Leroy the Redneck Reindeer " .
*
Australian trio Tripod wrote the song " Fabian " for their album Fegh Maha ( 2004 ) about an arrogant and self - serving reindeer .
The song begins with a list of the reindeer : " You know Dasher and Dancer and Prancer and Vixen , Comet and Cupid and ... Chopper and Nixon . "
* KC & The Sunshine Band wrote the song
Let 's Go Dancing With Santa as part of their album A Sunshine Christmas , which featured Santa and his reindeer .
IN TELEVISION
*
The stop - motion animated TV special Rudolph the Red - Nosed Reindeer ( 1964 ) features Fireball , son of Blitzen , as one of several reindeer trying out for the sleigh team .
Another reindeer is said to be the son of Dasher and struggles at flying , along with two other reindeer fawns of the same age .
A young fawn named Clarice is also featured and eventually becomes Rudolph 's love interest .
Donner is portrayed as Rudolph 's father , while his mother is left unnamed .
* A stop - motion animated sequel , Rudolph and Frosty 's Christmas in July ( 1979 ) , features an additional antagonist reindeer named Scratcher , who was originally planned to lead Santa 's team before Rudolph was chosen .
*
In the animated television special Dr. Seuss ' How the Grinch Stole Christmas !
( 1966 ) , the Grinch disguises his dog Max as a reindeer .
* Lightning , from the Sesame Street Christmas special , Elmo Saves Christmas ( 1996 ) , is a reindeer - in - training .
*
In the TV special Robbie the Reindeer ( 1999 ) , the eponymous Robbie is ostensibly assumed to be the son of Rudolph .
His special feature is his nose , which has supernatural powers that allow him to jump and fly farther and faster than most reindeer .
*
The South Park Christmas special " Red Sleigh Down " ( 2002 ) , Santa 's sleigh is shot down over Iraq , killing the eight famous reindeer .
The protagonists go to rescue him with Santa 's backup team : Steven , Fluffy , Horace , Chantel , Skippy , Rainbow , Patches and Montel .
*
In the TV special ( 2006 ) , Rusty is said to be Rudolph 's younger brother .
Unlike the other reindeer , Rusty is flightless , so instead he assists Santa and the other reindeer from air traffic control .
* The TV series , My Friends Tigger & Pooh , introduced a special ( 2007 ) that included Vixen 's husband Frost and daughter Holly .
* The television special , The Flight Before Christmas ( 2008 ) , features Niko , a wild reindeer whose mother Oona claims he was fathered by one of Santa 's team .
After a falling out with his herd , he runs away to try to meet his father , learning to fly in the process .
His father turns out to be Prancer .
A sequel titled was released and featured Niko gaining a stepbrother named Jonni , after Oona marries a reindeer named Lenni .
*
Thrasher is a top - secret , oversized reindeer introduced in the Disney TV special Prep & Landing ( 2009 ) .
He leads the titular " prep and landing " team of elves in a sleigh ahead of Santa Claus ' main sleigh and is Dasher 's second cousin .
SEE ALSO * Folklore * Christmas Mountains * Six White Boomers
REFERENCES FURTHER READING