BREAKING WAVE
In fluid dynamics , a breaking wave is a wave whose amplitude reaches a critical level at which some process can suddenly start to occur that causes large amounts of wave energy to be transformed into turbulent kinetic energy .
At this point , simple physical models that describe wave dynamics often become invalid , particularly those that assume linear behaviour .
The most generally familiar sort of breaking wave is the breaking of water surface waves on a coastline .
Wave breaking generally occurs where the amplitude reaches the point that the crest of the wave actually overturns — though the types of breaking water surface waves are discussed in more detail below .
Certain other effects in fluid dynamics have also been termed " breaking waves , " partly by analogy with water surface waves .
In meteorology , atmospheric gravity waves are said to break when the wave produces regions where the potential temperature decreases with height , leading to energy dissipation through convective instability ; likewise Rossby waves are said to break when the potential vorticity gradient is overturned .
Wave breaking also occurs in plasmas , when the particle velocities exceed the wave 's phase speed .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Breaking of water surface waves may occur anywhere that the amplitude is sufficient , including in mid - ocean .
However , it is particularly common on beaches because wave heights are amplified in the region of shallower water ( because the group velocity is lower there ) .
See also waves and shallow water .
There are four basic types of breaking water waves .
They are spilling , plunging , collapsing , and surging .
SPILLING BREAKERS
Section::::Spilling breakers .
When the ocean floor has a gradual slope , the wave will steepen until the crest becomes unstable , resulting in turbulent whitewater spilling down the face of the wave .
This continues as the wave approaches the shore , and the wave 's energy is slowly dissipated in the whitewater .
Because of this , spilling waves break for a longer time than other waves , and create a relatively gentle wave .
Onshore wind conditions make spillers more likely .
PLUNGING BREAKERS
Section::::Plunging breakers .
A plunging wave occurs when the ocean floor is steep or has sudden depth changes , such as from a reef or sandbar .
The crest of the wave becomes much steeper than a spilling wave , becomes vertical , then curls over and drops onto the trough of the wave , releasing most of its energy at once in a relatively violent impact .
A plunging wave breaks with more energy than a significantly larger spilling wave .
The wave can trap and compress the air under the lip , which creates the " crashing " sound associated with waves .
With large waves , this crash can be felt by beachgoers on land .
Offshore wind conditions can make plungers more likely .
If a plunging wave is not parallel to the beach ( or the ocean floor ) , the section of the wave which reaches shallow water will break first , and the breaking section ( or curl ) will move laterally across the face of the wave as the wave continues .
This is the " tube " that is so highly sought after by surfers ( also called a " barrel " , a " pit " , and " the greenroom " , among other terms ) .
The surfer tries to stay near or under the crashing lip , often trying to stay as " deep " in the tube as possible while still being able to shoot forward and exit the barrel before it closes .
A plunging wave that is parallel to the beach can break along its whole length at once , rendering it unrideable and dangerous .
Surfers refer to these waves as " closed out " .
COLLAPSING
Section::::Collapsing .
Collapsing waves are a cross between plunging and surging , in which the crest never fully breaks , yet the bottom face of the wave gets steeper and collapses , resulting in foam .
SURGING
Section::::Surging .
Surging breakers originate from long period , low steepness waves and/or steep beach profiles .
The outcome is the rapid movement of the base of the wave up the swash slope and the disappearance of the wave crest .
The front face and crest of the wave remain relatively smooth with little foam or bubbles , resulting in a very narrow surf zone , or no breaking waves at all .
The short , sharp burst of wave energy means that the swash / backwash cycle completes before the arrival of the next wave , leading to a low value of Kemp 's phase difference ( < 0.5 ) .
Surging waves are typical of reflective beach states .
On steeper beaches , the energy of the wave can be reflected by the bottom back into the ocean , causing standing waves .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
During breaking , a deformation ( usually a bulge ) forms at the wave crest , either leading side of which is known as the " toe .
"
Parasitic capillary waves are formed , with short wavelengths .
Those above the " toe " tend to have much longer wavelengths .
This theory is anything but perfect , however , as it is linear .
There have been a couple non - linear theories of motion ( regarding waves ) .
One put forth uses a perturbation method to expand the description all the way to the third order , and better solutions have been found since then .
As for wave deformation , methods much like the boundary integral method and the Boussinesq model have been created .
It has been found that high - frequency detail present in a breaking wave
plays a part in crest deformation and destabilization .
The same theory expands on this , stating that the valleys of the capillary waves create a source for vorticity .
It is said that surface tension ( and viscosity ) are significant for waves up to about in wavelength .
These models are flawed , however , as they ca n't take into account what happens to the water after the wave breaks .
Post - break eddy forms and the turbulence created via the breaking is mostly unresearched .
Understandably , it might be difficult to glean predictable results from the ocean .
After the tip of the wave overturns and the jet collapses , it creates a very coherent and defined horizontal vortex .
The plunging breakers create secondary eddies down the face of the wave .
Small horizontal random eddies that form on the sides of the wave suggest that , perhaps , prior to breaking , the water 's velocity is more or less two dimensional .
This becomes three dimensional upon breaking .
The main vortex along the front of the wave diffuses rapidly into the interior of the wave after breaking , as the eddies on the surface become more viscous .
Advection and molecular diffusion play a part in stretching the vortex and redistributing the vorticity , as well as the formation turbulence cascades .
The energy of the large vortices are , by this method , transferred to much smaller isotropic vortices .
Experiments have been conducted to deduce the evolution of turbulence after break , both in deep water and on a beach .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Oceans and margins , Earth Science Australia