DON'T TAKE THE GIRL
" Do n't Take The Girl " is a song written by Craig Martin and Larry W. Johnson , and recorded by American country music artist Tim McGraw .
It was released in March 1994 as the second single from his album Not a Moment Too Soon .
The song was McGraw 's fifth single overall , and his first number - one single on the Hot Country Songs chart .
It reached number one on the Canadian country charts as well and it was also a successful pop song , reaching number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
CONTENT Section::::Content .
The song tells the story of two young lovers dealing with difficult scenarios at three different stages in their lives .
In each situation , the man does all he can to make sure that different people " do n't take the girl . "
In the first verse , the young man ( Johnny ) is eight years old , about to go on a fishing trip with his father .
A young , unnamed girl , apparently Johnny 's age , is also present , with a fishing pole in her hand .
Johnny does n't want the girl to come fishing with them .
So he begs his father to " take any boy in the world / Daddy please , do n't take the girl " .
The song 's second verse finds Johnny and the girl ten years later , now as teenagers — the two have since fallen in love and are now dating .
As Johnny and his girlfriend are on a date at the " picture show " ( i.e. , the movie theater ) , they encounter a lone robber with a gun .
The robber grabs the girl and tells Johnny to give in to his demands .
Johnny surrenders his money , wallet , credit cards , a watch that his grandfather gave him , and even his car keys so that the girl would be safe ( in the music video , the crook 's only seen running away with the wallet ) .
Verse three takes place five years after the second verse .
At this point , Johnny and the girl are now ( presumably ) married and expecting their first child , and the girl is eventually rushed to the hospital to have her baby delivered .
The baby ( a boy ) is safely delivered , but the doctor informs Johnny that his wife is " fading fast " ( presumably dying of childbirth complications ) .
Johnny then collapses to his knees and prays to God that his wife survives , even asking that his own life be taken instead of his wife 's as long as she 's okay .
The music video shows that Johnny 's wife does indeed survive .
The song ends with a repeat of the song 's opening line : "
Johnny 's daddy was taking him fishin ' when he was eight years old " .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Deborah Evans Price , of Billboard magazine reviewed the song favorably , saying that the song has the listeners " crying in their beer in the dancehalls down in Texas .
"
Price goes on to say that once radio gets a hold of it , the song will take off .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
This was McGraw 's second music video .
It was directed by Sherman Halsey .
It shows 5 actors , playing Johnny , his dad , the girl , the robber & the doctor .
Intercut with McGraw , performing in front of dark blue lights .
CHARTS AND CERTIFICATIONS Section::::Charts and certifications .
" Do n't Take the Girl " debuted at number 17 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks for the week of April 2 , 1994 .
PEAK POSITIONS
Section::::Peak positions .
!
align="left"Chart ( 1994 ) !
align="center"Peakposition
END OF YEAR CHARTS Section::::End of year charts . !
align="left"End of year chart ( 1994 ) !
align="center"Position
US Billboard Hot
100
align="center"87 CERTIFICATIONS PARODIES * Country music parodist Cledus T. Judd recorded a parody of the song , called " Please Take the Girl " , on his 1995 debut album Cledus T. Judd ( No Relation ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS