SOLO CUP COMPANY Solo Cup Company is an American manufacturer of disposable consumer products including beverage cups , disposable plates and bowls .
Solo Cup Company is located in Lake Forest , Illinois , and in 2006 had sales of $ 2.4 billion .
On May 4 , 2012 , Solo Cup Company was acquired by Dart Container .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Leo Hulseman , a former employee of the Dixie Co. in the 1930s , created the " Solo Cup " , a paper cone he made at his home and sold to bottled - water companies .
He founded the Solo Cup Company in 1936 , and developed other products , like wax - coated cups and the plastic Cozy Cup .
The wax - coated cups were added to its lineup in the 1950s , as fountain sodas gained popularity .
In the 1970s , Hulseman 's son , Robert Leo Hulseman , came up with the now - ubiquitous red Solo cup .
The red Solo cups are made of thick , molded polystyrene .
They are known for being able to withstand drops , easily stackable , and disposable while price accessible .
Their characteristic red color may conceal the drinking contents .
On March 1 , 2004 , Solo acquired Sweetheart Cup Company for $ 917.2 million , in part with public debt .
Sweetheart was founded by Joseph Shapiro and his four brothers , emigrants from Russia .
It became the largest consumer packaging company in the world and was sold several times before being acquired by Solo Cup .
Following the acquisition , Solo Cup 's finances suffered , and Standard & Poor 's lowered their credit rating from B to CCC+ .
In late 2006 , Solo Cup was reported to be $ 1.1 billion in debt .
In 2005 , the Museum of Modern Art in New York City added a Solo Cup Traveler 's Lid to its permanent collection .
The lid was featured because it symbolized innovation and progress in basic product design .
Solo Cup Company closed its longstanding facility in Highland Park , Illinois , in December 2009 and relocated to Lake Forest , Illinois .
On May 4 , 2012 , Solo Cup Company was acquired by Dart Container .
MANAGEMENT
FOUNDER Section::::Management . Section::::Founder .
Leo Hulseman ( 1898–1989 ) was an active polo player .
His wife , Dorothy Donahoe Hulseman ( 1900–1988 ) , better known by her stage name Dora Hall , was a singer whose records were given away free of charge through Solo promotions .
Leo Hulseman was also the founder and owner of
Premore Inc. Premore was a television production company on the Culver Studios lot for many years in the 1970s and 1980s , and later moved to North Hollywood .
Premore produced children 's TV shows including Tony the Pony ( like the later Barney & Friends ) and The Clifford Avenue Kids ( like Our Gang ) .
Other programs produced at the Premore facilities included Greystone 's The Real West and Candid Camera .
Premore 's television studio stage , remote truck , and post production were used for Dora Hall 's shows and rented for television specials and sports .
Dora Hall was most noted for and seen on the Dora Hall TV Show ( 1979 ) , and she played Rose On Broadway with Frank Sinatra Jr. , Donald O'Connor and Scatman Crothers .
She also had a TV special called " Once Upon a Tour " .
Her songs are found on Premore and Cozy Records Labels .
Premore Inc. was closed in 1993 , four years after the death of Leo Hulseman .
SUBSEQUENT MANAGEMENT Section::::Subsequent management .
Robert Leo Hulseman , son of the founder Leo Hulseman and the creator of the iconic red solo cup , served as President .
Hulseman died December 21 , 2016 .
Current CEO Robert M. Korzenski took over from Robert Hulseman in August 2006 .
Korzenski had worked for Sweetheart Cups for over 10 years .
CUSTOMERS Section::::Customers .
Solo Cup customers include Starbucks , Dairy Queen , Così , Walmart , Whole Foods Market , Einstein Bros. Bagels , Publix , and Tim Hortons , as well as many universities .
The red plastic cups are notably used in American college and university games such as beer pong and flip cup .
This usage is referenced in Toby Keith 's 2011 country music song " Red Solo Cup " .
The red party cup outsells the blue variety by a wide margin .
In part because of its cultural significance , many other manufacturers now produce similar looking red cups .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Company 's history timeline
* CNN Money profile
* Dora 's World : The Unofficial Dora Hall Website ] * Culver City Studio