1:64 SCALE 1:64 scale is a traditional scale for models and miniatures , in which one unit ( such as an inch or a centimeter ) on the model represents 64 units on the actual object .
It is also known as " three - sixteenths scale " , since 3/16-inch represents a foot .
A human is approximately tall in 1:64 scale .
The scale originated by halving the very common , which was known as " standard size " in some hobbies .
This scale became successful because of its relative size in comparison to other toys , the fact that it is a derivative of 1/16 scale , and because they are easily held by small hands .
The 1/64 scale models will generally have less detail than a 1/16 scale models .
Moreover , " 1/64 coincides with the S scale of model railroading , part of the consideration of why 1/64 became an established size . "
Currently , 1:64 scale is most commonly used for automobile and other vehicle models , but it is also a popular scale for model railroads and toy trains , and has been used for ship models , also .
In addition , 28 mm military and fantasy figures are a popular size for tabletop gaming , and they are sometimes scaled out to 1:64 , although opinion on the actual scale of 28 mm range from 1:48 to 1:64 .
DIE - CAST VEHICLES Section::::Die - cast vehicles .
Many die cast automobiles and commercial vehicle models for collectors have been made to a strict scale of 1:64 .
However , for much of the die - cast toy market , 1:64 is only a nominal scale .
Though collectors and manufacturers loosely describe popular lines of die - casts as 1:64 , toy vehicles are usually made to " box scale .
"
This means that the size of the model is determined by the size of the standard packaging ( formerly a cardstock box , now usually a clear blister - card ) .
Models of a 1959 Cadillac and an Austin Mini - Cooper designed to fill up the same packaging space will have very different actual scales , but for the passenger automobiles in many die cast lines , 1:64 is a reasonable approximation .
Brands of die - cast toys in and around this scale include Hot Wheels and Matchbox , Ertl , GreenLight , Code 3 , Johnny Lightning , and Jada Toys .
Outside the USA brands like Maisto , Siku , Norev Mini Jet , Corgi , Tomica , Autoart , Edocar , Kyosho , Majorette , Schuco , Welly , and many others , are available in this scale .
SLOT
CARS
Section::::Slot Cars .
Small - scale slot cars are often sized to fit a standard motorized chassis , and therefore vary somewhat in scale .
The mechanisms have increased in size over the years to generate more power .
The so - called " HO " sized slot cars which were introduced in the 1960s at about , now average around 1:64 scale .
Pictured is an early example of an approximately 1:64 slot car built by Aurora around 1972 , as part of its AFX line .
This first - generation AMC Matador coupe NASCAR race car replica is designed to fit on an enlarged chassis for nominal HO track .
The 1:64 slot car lines include Micro Scalextric from the maker of the pioneering slot cars .
Tomy - Aurora and Life - Like also produce cars that average close to 1:64 .
Mattel 's diecast Hot Wheels Racing series and the Winner 's Circle also have made diecast scenes of 1/64-scale pit crews and race officials that look right with the appropriate NASCAR slot car models .
WARGAMING Section::::Wargaming .
Metal figures for tabletop wargaming and role - playing gaming are usually not described by scale ratio , but by the approximate height of a human figure , in millimeters .
Manufacturers gradually enlarged the standard 25 mm figures of the 1970s , at first describing them as " large 25s , " or " heroic 25s .
" By the 1990s , they were simply called 28 mm .
figures , and have largely replaced 25s as the standard size for role - playing and many military games .
Accessories scaled to match 28 mm gaming figures are generally built to 1:64 scale .
More accurate to 1/64 scale car models would actually be the 20 mm figures , or approximately 1/72 .
28 mm models come a lot closer to 1/48 nowadays MODEL AND TOY TRAINS Section::::Model and Toy Trains .
From the late 1940s to the mid-1960s , 1:64 was a popular scale in the U.S. model railroad market , where it was called S scale or S gauge , however it still remains a popular scale , with a dedicated following .
A.C. Gilbert , a major toy manufacturer , challenged the predominant O scale ( ) manufacturers such as Lionel with a fully developed line of 1:64 scale and semi - scale equipment marketed under the American Flyer brand .
Because they were 25 % smaller than traditional O scale models , they ran on two - rail track that was more realistic than the traditional 3-rail O gauge track .
These features would become standard characteristics of model trains in later years , when the even - smaller HO scale ( ) took over the model train market from both the O and S scale trains .
S - scale survives currently with a small number of manufacturers producing scale equipment for hobbyists and a large number of collectors who seek out the 1950s - era American Flyer equipment to run trains on nostalgic layouts .
Since the 1930s , O scale ( 1:48 ) train manufacturers , including Gilbert , Lionel and Marx , have produced bargain or introductory lines of undersized toy trains to run on O - gauge track with very tight curves , known as 0 - 27 track .
Though sold as O gauge , the bodies of these undersized cars and engines were often scaled to 1:64 proportions .
The origins of Gilbert 's S - gauge equipment can be traced to its American Flyer O-27 line of 1938 and after .
SHIPS AND BOATS Section::::Ships and Boats .
Kit manufacturers have used 1:64 as a scale for boats and small ships .
SEE ALSO
* List of scale model sizes
* Scale model * ;
O scale ; HO scale * Model car * Die cast toy
* Rail transport modelling * Rail transport modelling scales
* Rail transport modelling scale standards
* S gauge * Wargaming * Role playing game
* Miniature figure ( gaming ) * Common slot car scales * Ship model REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS