2011
NCAA DIVISION
I MEN 'S BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT
The 2011 NCAA Division
I Men 's Basketball Tournament was a single - elimination tournament involving 68 teams to determine the national champion of the 2010–11 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season .
The 73rd edition of the NCAA Tournament began on March 15 , 2011 , and concluded with the championship game on April 4 at Reliant Stadium in Houston , Texas .
This tournament marked the introduction of the " First Four " round and an expansion of the field of participants from 65 teams to 68 .
The " South " and " Midwest " regional games were replaced by the monikers " Southeast " and " Southwest " for this tournament , due to the geographical location of New Orleans and San Antonio , respectively .
The Final Four featured no top seeds for the first time since 2006 , with the highest remaining seed being West Region winner , # 3 Connecticut .
For the first time since 2000 , a # 8 seed advanced to the Final Four as Butler , the national runner - up from the year before , won the Southeast Region .
For only the third time ever , a # 11 seed advanced to the Final Four as Virginia Commonwealth , one of the " First Four " teams , won the Southwest Region .
Those three teams were joined by East Region champion Kentucky , a # 4 seed .
Connecticut won its third national championship in the championship game by defeating Butler 53 - 41 .
Upsets ruled the 2011 tournament .
The East Region saw its # 11 seed , Marquette , advance to the Sweet Sixteen where they were downed by North Carolina .
The Southwest Region saw four of its double digit seeds win , as VCU was joined by # 12 seed and citymate Richmond , # 10 seed Florida State , and # 13 seed Morehead State as first round winners .
Florida State , VCU , and Richmond all advanced to the Sweet Sixteen from that region , and VCU defeated top - seeded Kansas in the final .
Butler and # 11 seed Gonzaga advanced from the Southeast Region , with Gonzaga losing in the Round of 32 to BYU .
For the third time in as many appearances , Vanderbilt suffered a defeat to a double digit seed .
This time , they were defeated by Richmond as a # 5 seed .
The Big East had a record
eleven make the tournament ( the conference then had 16 total teams ) .
Due to having more than eight teams qualify , it was possible for intra - Big East matchups to occur in the third round .
Two of these matchups did occur as Marquette defeated Syracuse in the East while Connecticut defeated Cincinnati in the West .
The other Big East teams to qualify were Pittsburgh , who earned the # 1 seed in the Southeast Region and were knocked out in the third round by Butler , St. John 's , who were the Southeast 's # 6 seed and were eliminated in their first game by Gonzaga , Louisville , which earned the # 4 seed in the Southwest and fell to Morehead State in their first game , Georgetown , who lost to VCU in the first round as a # 6 in the Southwest , Notre Dame , the # 2 seed in the Southwest who were eliminated by Florida State , Villanova , who were eliminated in an # 8 vs # 9 matchup against George Mason in the East Region , and West Virginia , the East 's # 5 seed who lost in the third round to Kentucky .
Northern Colorado , winners of the Big Sky Conference , made its first NCAA Division I tournament .
QUALIFIED TEAMS
TOURNAMENT PROCEDURE AND LOCATIONS Section::::Tournament procedure and locations .
For the first time , a total of 68 teams entered the tournament .
Thirty of the thirty - one automatic bids were given to the programs that won their conference tournaments , while the remaining automatic bid went to the Ivy League champion Princeton , as the conference does not hold a tournament .
The remaining 37 teams were granted " at - large " bids , which are extended by the NCAA Selection Committee .
All 68 teams were announced on " Selection Sunday " March 13 , 2011 .
The Selection Committee ranked the entire field from 1 to 68 .
The last four at - large teams selected and the four lowest ranked automatic qualifiers played in a " First Four " .
The four winners of those games advanced to the main draw of the tournament to play a higher seed .
The four lowest ranked teams of the 68 played against each other in a pair of First Four games , with winners advancing to play No . 1 seeds , and the last four at - large teams played in the other two First Four games , with the winners moving on to face the seed they would otherwise be matched up against , as determined by their seed number .
The following sites were selected to host each round of the 2011 tournament :
First Four
* March 15 and 16 * University of Dayton Arena , Dayton , Ohio Second and third rounds
* March 17 and 19 *
Verizon Center , Washington , D.C.
( Host : Georgetown University )
* McKale Center , Tucson , Arizona ( Host : University of Arizona ) * Pepsi Center , Denver , Colorado ( Host :
Mountain West Conference )
* Tampa Bay Times Forum , Tampa , Florida
( Host : University of South Florida )
* March 18 and 20 * Quicken Loans Arena , Cleveland , Ohio ( Host : Cleveland State University )
* Time Warner Cable Arena , Charlotte , North Carolina
( Host : University of North Carolina at Charlotte )
* United Center , Chicago , Illinois ( Host : Big Ten Conference )
* BOK Center , Tulsa , Oklahoma ( Host : University of Tulsa )
Regional sites * March 24 and 26
* West Regional : Honda Center , Anaheim , California
( Host : Big West Conference )
* Southeast Regional : New Orleans Arena , New Orleans , Louisiana ( Host : Tulane University )
* March 25 and 27 *
Southwest Regional :
Alamodome , San Antonio , Texas
( Host : University of Texas at San Antonio )
* East Regional : Prudential Center , Newark , New Jersey ( Host : Seton Hall University )
Each regional winner advanced to the Final Four , held April 2 and 4 in Houston at Reliant Stadium , co - hosted by Rice University and the University of Houston .
Reliant Stadium was the 37th new venue to host the Final Four , marking the fortieth anniversary of the previous Final Four in the city , at the neighboring Astrodome .
The tournament saw three new arenas and one new host city .
For the first , and as of 2018 only , time , the city of Newark proper hosted tournament games , at the Prudential Center , which was the successor venue to the Meadowlands Arena in nearby East Rutherford .
The city of Cleveland hosted games for the first time at Quicken Loans Arena , the downtown home of the Cleveland Cavaliers ; the two previous appearances for the city were on the campus of Cleveland State University at the Wolstein Center .
The city of Tulsa returned to the tournament for the first time since 1985 , hosting at the BOK Center , which had opened in 2008 .
Previous games in the city had been held at the Mabee Center on the campus of Oral Roberts University .
As of 2018 , this is the last tournament to feature what is now Amalie Arena , McKale Center , the Prudential Center and the Smoothie King Center ( New Orleans Arena ) ; of these , only Amalie Arena is currently scheduled to host another tournament , in 2020 .
Games have since returned to the Mercedes - Benz Superdome in New Orleans .
BRACKET Section::::Bracket .
* – Denotes overtime period
Unless otherwise noted , all times listed are Eastern Daylight Time ( ) FIRST FOUR – DAYTON , OHIO Section::::First Four –
Dayton , Ohio .
All games on truTV .
First Four winners enter the second round as their respective seed and in their respective region .
EAST REGIONAL – NEWARK , NEW JERSEY REGIONAL FINAL SUMMARY WEST REGIONAL –
ANAHEIM , CALIFORNIA
REGIONAL FINAL SUMMARY SOUTHWEST REGIONAL – SAN ANTONIO , TEXAS REGIONAL FINAL SUMMARY SOUTHEAST REGIONAL – NEW ORLEANS ,
LOUISIANA
REGIONAL FINAL SUMMARY FINAL FOUR – RELIANT STADIUM , HOUSTON , TEXAS GAME SUMMARIES Section::::Game summaries .
Consisting of # 3-seeded Connecticut , No . 4
Kentucky , No . 8 Butler , and No . 11 Virginia Commonwealth ( VCU ) , the Final Four was considered a result of one of the weakest tournament fields in history .
Regarding the four finalists , there was widespread belief that none of them were among the best teams in the nation .
It was the first time in the tournament 's history that a No . 1 or a No . 2 seed had failed to reach the final four .
11th seeded VCU tied a record as the lowest seed to reach the final four .
By virtue of their " first four " appearance , VCU became the first team to reach the final four by winning five tournament games .
The first semifinal featured Butler and VCU , with Butler winning 70–62 , despite VCU forward Jamie Skeen leading the scoring with 27 points .
The second semifinal match was between Kentucky and Connecticut .
Connecticut had already defeated Kentucky earlier that season 84–67 at the Maui Invitational .
This time , Connecticut won in a close game 56–55 , led by Kemba Walker with 18 points .
Connecticut were noted for their defensive effort , which held Kentucky to 34 % shooting and also held Kentucky scoreless for over 5 minutes during a spell in the second half .
NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP Section::::National Championship .
The National Championship game was between Butler , a mid - major university team that was a surprise finalist in the 2010 tournament , and Connecticut , a basketball powerhouse which had previously won the tournament twice under coach Jim Calhoun but had an average regular season finishing 9th in the Big East Conference before winning The Big East Tournament with five wins in five consecutive days ( never before accomplished in NCAA history ) .
The championship game was won by Connecticut 53–41 .
It was a very defensive contest , with Butler having the fewest points in a championship game since 1949 .
Butler led at halftime 22–19 , but suffered in the second half from poor shooting , making only 6 of 37 shots in the second half .
Butler 's 18.8 percent shooting for the entire game was the lowest ever in the NCAA final .
Connecticut contributed to Butler 's poor shooting by blocking 10 shots ( a championship game record ) .
Butler was led in scoring by junior guard Shelvin Mack with 13 points , while UConn freshman Jeremy Lamb scored 12 points in the 2nd half .
The win by Connecticut completed a season - ending 11-game win streak that began with the Big East Tournament .
The game was widely viewed as a poor quality final .
In reference to the game 's first half of play , CBS analyst Greg Anthony said , " This is the worst half of basketball
I 've ever seen in a national championship game . "
RECORD
BY CONFERENCE Big East align="left
" Horizon align="left
" CAA align="left
" SEC align="left " ACC align="left " Pac-10 align="left "
Big 12 align="left
" Mountain West align="left " Big Ten align="left " Atlantic 10 align="left
" OVC align="left " WCC align="left " C - USA * The R32 , S16 , E8 , F4 , CG , and NC columns indicate how many teams from each conference were in the round of 32 ( third round ) , Sweet 16 , Elite Eight , Final Four , championship game , and national champion , respectively .
*
The SWAC and Sun Belt Conference each had one representative , eliminated in the first round .
*
The America East Conference , Atlantic Sun Conference , Big Sky Conference , Big West Conference , Ivy League , MAAC , MAC , MEAC , MVC , NEC , Patriot League , Southern Conference , Summit League , and WAC each had one representative , eliminated in the second round with a record of 0–1 .
*
The Big South and Southland each had one representative , eliminated in the second round with a record of 1 - 1 .
*
The Big East Conference had a record 11 teams in the tournament , which made intra - Big East matchups possible prior to the Elite Eight .
There were two such matchups in the 3rd round , Syracuse vs. Marquette and Connecticut vs. Cincinnati .
The two Big East teams to make the Sweet Sixteen beat conference opponents to advance to that round .
MEDIA TELEVISION Section::::Media .
Section::::Television .
On April 22 , 2010 , it was announced that the NCAA had reached a new 14-year , US$ 10.8 billion deal with CBS Sports and Time Warner - owned Turner Sports ( by way of TBS , TNT and truTV ) for the rights to broadcast the NCAA Tournament from 2011 until 2024 , marking the first time every game in the tournament would be telecast on a national basis .
CBS and Turner pooled their resources for the tournament , with members of the NBA on TNT crew joining CBS 's established March Madness broadcasters .
Coverage will originate from the CBS Broadcast Center in New York City and Turner 's Atlanta studios .
The tournament television ratings report shows the tournament had an average of 10.2 million viewers per game , an increase from the 2005 tournament when it drew an average of 10.6 million ( 6.4 Nielsen rating ) .
The championship game recorded an 11.7 rating and drew 20.1 million viewers .
TruTV , which up to that point had never aired any live sports programming , saw a surge in carriage deals for its high definition feed with several major providers including AT&T U - verse , Verizon FiOS , Comcast , Charter Communications , Cablevision , Cox Cable and RCN .
STUDIO HOSTS * Greg Gumbel ( New York City and Houston ) – First Four , Second round ,
Third round , Regionals , Final Four and National Championship Game
* Ernie Johnson Jr. ( New York City and Atlanta ) – First Four , Second round , Third round and Regional Semi - Finals
* Matt Winer ( Atlanta ) – First Four , Second round and Third round STUDIO
ANALYSTS
* Greg Anthony ( New York City and Houston ) – First Four , Second round , Third round , Regionals , Final Four and National Championship Game
* Charles Barkley ( New York City and Houston ) – First Four , Second round ,
Third round , Regionals , Final Four and National Championship Game
* Tom Crean ( Atlanta ) –
First Four and Second round
* Seth Davis ( Atlanta and Houston ) – First Four , Second round , Third round , Regional Semi - Finals , Final Four and National Championship Game
* Tom Izzo ( Atlanta ) – Regional Semi - Finals * Phil Martelli ( Atlanta ) –
Third round * Rick Pitino ( New York City ) –
Third round
* Kenny Smith ( New York City and Houston ) – First Four , Second round ,
Third round , Regionals , Final Four and National Championship Game
* Steve Smith ( Atlanta ) –
First Four , Second round , Third round and Regional Semi - Finals
* Jay Wright ( New York City ) – Regional Finals ANNOUNCING TEAMS
* Jim Nantz / Clark Kellogg / Steve Kerr / Tracy Wolfson – First Four at Dayton , Ohio ;
Second and Third round at Charlotte , North Carolina ; East Regional at Newark , New Jersey ; Final Four at Houston , TexasKerr will join Nantz and Kellogg during the First Four , Final Four , and National Championship games * Marv Albert / Steve Kerr / Craig Sager –
Second and Third round at Tulsa , Oklahoma ; Southwest Regional at San Antonio , Texas * Verne Lundquist / Bill Raftery / Lesley Visser –
Second and Third round at Denver , Colorado ; West Regional at Anaheim , California * Gus Johnson / Len Elmore / Reggie Miller / Marty Snider – First Four at Dayton , Ohio ;
Second and Third round at Cleveland , Ohio ; Southeast Regional at New Orleans , LouisianaMiller will join Johnson and Elmore during the Regional games * Kevin Harlan / Reggie Miller / Dan Bonner / Sam Ryan – Second and Third round at Tucson , Arizona * Ian Eagle / Jim Spanarkel / David Aldridge – Second and Third round at Tampa , Florida * Tim Brando / Mike Gminski / Lewis Johnson – Second and Third round at Washington , D.C *
Spero Dedes / Bob Wenzel / Jaime Maggio – Second and Third round at Chicago , Illinois ROUND - BY - ROUND GAME SCHEDULE score bug .
In addition , a banner at the top of the screen displayed the scores of other games along with what network they are being broadcast on .
Replays feature all four network logos being shown , and for fair use highlight credits by local television stations and other networks such as ESPN , the Turner network name or CBS Sports , followed by " NCAA " is given as the source .
CBS also kept coverage of the Division II final , which is part of the larger contract for this tournament .
Turner Sports aired full - length studio shows before and after each session of play .
The pregame show was called Infiniti NCAA Tip - Off and all shows were on TruTV .
The postgame show , called Inside March Madness presented by Buick , alternated between TruTV and TBS .
TruTV had also added coverage of the Reese 's College All - Star Game .
NUMBER OF GAMES PER NETWORK
* CBS : 26
* TBS : 16
* TruTV : 13 * TNT : 12 RADIO Section::::Radio .
Westwood One had live broadcasts of all 67 games .
They will be available both on terrestrial and satellite radio outlets , on NCAA.com , and on CBSSports.com .
The radio contract was extended in January 2011 for multiple tournaments .
FIRST FOUR * Dave Ryan and Alaa Abdelnaby – at Dayton
, Ohio SECOND AND THIRD ROUND
* Scott Graham and Kevin Grevey – Second and Third round at Washington , D.C. * Dave Sims and Bill Frieder – Second and Third round at Tucson , Arizona * Ted Robinson and Tom Brennan –
Second and Third round at Denver , Colorado * Gary Cohen and Kyle Macy – Second and Third round at Tampa , Florida * Kevin Kugler and Pete Gillen –
Second and Third round at Cleveland , Ohio * Kevin Calabro and Will Perdue –
Second and Third round at Charlotte , North Carolina * Wayne Larrivee and John Thompson – Second and Third round at Chicago , Illinois * Brad Sham and Reid Gettys –
Second and Third round at Tulsa , Oklahoma REGIONALS * Ian Eagle and John Thompson –
East Regional at Newark , New Jersey * Kevin Kugler and Pete Gillen – Southeast Regional at New Orleans , Louisiana * Kevin Harlan and Kevin Grevey –
Southwest Regional at San Antonio , Texas * Wayne Larrivee and Bill Frieder – West Regional at Anaheim ,
California
FINAL FOUR * Kevin Kugler , John Thompson and Bill Raftery – at Houston , Texas INTERNET / OTHER VIDEO Section::::Internet / other video .
All games are expected to be streamed at NCAA.com or CBSSports.com , as in the past ; with the new rights deal , NCAA.com and the game streaming is now managed by Turner Interactive .
The iPhone app which allowed streaming of games on the iPhone in previous years , and had cost about ten dollars , has received two upgrades
: it is compatible with iPad , and it is now free of charge .
However , with the CBS - Turner agreement allowing all games in the tournament to be available on a national basis ( see above ) , Mega March Madness , a DirecTV - only service , has been discontinued .
INTERNATIONAL
* : TSN acquired Canadian rights for the tournament , rights which were previously held by The Score .
This is apparently the result of a larger international rights deal between the NCAA and ESPN International ( which owns a minority interest in TSN ) .
TSN had its own studio programming hosted by Dan Shulman and James Cybulski , and game coverage came from CBS and Turner .
Unlike the Score , which had whiparound coverage , TSN and TSN2 showed entire games .
Sometimes , both channels aired games , but on Friday of the first weekend , no games were shown due to previous programming commitments on both channels .
TSN.ca also streamed first - round games to those with Canadian IP addresses .
Basketball TV planned to broadcast the NCAA Tournament using the American feed .
* Worldwide : The NCAA.com video and audio streams were available with no blackout restrictions anywhere in the world .
SEE ALSO * 2011 NCAA Division II Men 's Basketball Tournament * 2011
NCAA Division III Men 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NCAA Division
I Women 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NCAA Division II Women 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NCAA Division III Women 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 National Invitation Tournament * 2011
Women 's National Invitation Tournament * 2011 NAIA Division I Men 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NAIA Division II Men 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NAIA Division
I Women 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 NAIA Division II Women 's Basketball Tournament * 2011 College Basketball Invitational * 2011 CollegeInsider.com Postseason Tournament REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS