COMMERCIAL SPEECH
In law , commercial speech is speech or writing on behalf of a business with the intent of earning a profit .
It is economic in nature and usually attempts to persuade consumers to purchase the business 's product or service .
The Supreme Court of the United States defines commercial speech as speech that " proposes a commercial transaction " .
IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::In the United States .
In the United States , commercial speech is " entitled to substantial First Amendment protection , albeit less than political , ideological , or artistic speech " .
In the 1980 case Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission , the U.S. Supreme Court developed a four - part test to determine whether commercial speech regulation violates the First Amendment : *
Whether the commercial speech concerns a lawful activity and is not misleading
* * Whether the government interest asserted to justify the regulation is " substantial " * * Whether the regulation " directly advances " that government interest
*
* Whether the regulation is no more extensive than necessary to serve that interest * HISTORY Section::::History .
Until the 1976 Supreme Court case Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council , commercial speech in the United States was viewed as an " unprotected " category of speech beyond the pale of First Amendment protection .
Indeed , the idea of commercial speech was first introduced by the Supreme Court when it upheld Valentine v. Chrestensen in 1942 , which ruled that commercial speech in public is not constitutionally protected .
In upholding the regulation , the Supreme Court said , " We are ... clear that the Constitution imposes ...
no restraint on government as respects purely commercial advertising " .
This ruling , however , would be overturned with Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council ( 1976 ) and Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission ( 1980 ) .
The Court has recognized that commercial speech does not fall outside the purview of the First Amendment and has afforded commercial speech a measure of First Amendment protection " commensurate " with its position in relation to other constitutionally guaranteed expression .
The Court has set forth a framework under Central Hudson for analyzing commercial speech under intermediate scrutiny :
Whereas Central Hudson limits what commercial speech can be said , another facet is related compelled commercial speech in the form of government - mandated disclaimers or other information required to be included in some forms of commercial speech .
This concept was established as constitutional in Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio , , which established the Zauderer standard to judge which such government - mandated speech does not violate First Amendment rights of the commercial speaker .
Zauderer found that the government can mandate commercial speech to include " purely factual and uncontroversial information " when it is reasonably related to the government 's interest and " to dissipate the possibility of consumer confusion or deception " .
The Zauderer standard has since been expanded within Circuit Court case law to extend beyond protecting consumer deception as to include factual information for consumer awareness , such as food packaging information , as long as the information serves a reasonable government interest .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Members of the Supreme Court have expressed doubts about the Court 's differential treatment of commercial speech in relation to other types of speech .
Justice Clarence Thomas replied , in 44 Liquormart , Inc. v. Rhode Island ( 1996 ) , that " I do not see a philosophical or historical basis for asserting that ' commercial ' speech is of ' lower value ' than ' noncommercial ' speech . "
Justice Thomas would apply strict scrutiny to regulations of commercial speech .
Justice Antonin Scalia expressed " discomfort with the Central Hudson test , which seem[ed to him ] to have nothing more than policy intuition to support it " .
U.S. Court of Appeals judge Alex Kozinski criticized the 1942 Valentine v. Chrestensen ruling , stating that " the Supreme Court plucked the commercial speech doctrine out of thin air " .
IN THE EUROPEAN UNION Section::::In the European Union .
The European Court of Human Rights has held that commercial speech is protected under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) on several occasions since the 1980s , but lacks a counterpart to the commercial speech doctrine that exists under U.S. law .
In Germany , the courts adopted a strict approach to advertising and commercial speech due to its emphasis on ensuring competition .
For example , in Barthold v. Germany ( 1985 ) , the European Court of Human Rights held that enjoining a veterinary surgeon for advocating for 24-hour animal clinics ( which did not exist at the time in Hamburg , Germany ) violated his free expression rights .
After the vet was quoted in a newspaper article , he was sued for violating the veterinary association 's rules of professional conduct , which barred vets from advertising , and he was injuncted from making similar statements in the future .
In the 1990 Markt Intern Verlag GmbH and Klaus Beermann v. Germany case — described Europe 's " leading case concerning speech in commercial context"—the European Court of Human Rights concluded that there had been no violation of Article 10 when Germany 's Federal Court of Justice prohibited a publishing company from repeating statements that had been published in a specialist information bulletin criticizing the practices of another company .
It noted that the prohibition did not exceed the " margin of appreciation which national authorities were allowed in laying down , in accordance with Article 10 , § 2 , formalities , conditions , restrictions or penalties on the exercise of freedom of expression " .
SEE ALSO
* First Amendment to the United States Constitution
* Freedom of speech * Professional speech * Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission
* Anonymous Online Speakers v. United States District Court for the District of Nevada
* Valentine v. Chrestensen REFERENCES