HARRY POTTER INFLUENCES AND ANALOGUES
Writer J. K. Rowling cites several writers as influences in her creation of her bestselling Harry Potter series .
Writers , journalists and critics have noted that the books also have a number of analogues ; a wide range of literature , both classical and modern , which Rowling has not openly cited as influences .
This article is divided into three sections .
The first section lists those authors and books which Rowling has suggested as possible influences on Harry Potter .
The second section deals with those books which Rowling has cited as favourites without mentioning possible influences .
The third section deals with those analogues which Rowling has not cited either as influences or as favourites but which others have claimed bear comparison with Harry Potter .
ACKNOWLEDGED INFLUENCES
Section::::Acknowledged influences .
Rowling has never openly credited any single author with inspiration , saying , " I have n't got the faintest idea where my ideas come from , or how my imagination works .
I 'm just grateful that it does , because it gives me more entertainment than it gives anyone else . "
However , she has mentioned a number of favourite authors as probable influences in her creation of Harry Potter .
The works are listed roughly in order of publication .
BRITISH FOLKLORE AND MYTHOLOGY Section::::British folklore and mythology .
Rowling has said , " I 've taken horrible liberties with folklore and mythology , but I 'm quite unashamed about that , because British folklore and British mythology is a totally bastard mythology .
You know , we 've been invaded by people , we 've appropriated their gods , we 've taken their mythical creatures , and we 've soldered them all together to make , what I would say , is one of the richest folklores in the world , because it 's so varied .
So I feel no compunction about borrowing from that freely , but adding a few things of my own . "
THE ILIAD Section::::The Iliad .
When an interviewer said that saving Cedric 's body resembled the actions of Hector , Achilles , and Patroclus in the Iliad , Rowling said , " That 's where it came from .
That really , really , really moved me when I read that when I was 19 .
The idea of the desecration of a body , a very ancient idea ...
I was thinking of that when Harry saved Cedric 's body . "
THE BIBLE Section::::The Bible .
A number of commentators have drawn attention to the Biblical themes and references in J. K. Rowling 's final Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows .
In an August 2007 issue of Newsweek , Lisa Miller commented that Harry dies and then comes back to life to save humankind , like Christ .
She points out the title of the chapter in which this occurs—"King 's Cross"—a possible allusion to Christ 's cross .
Also , she outlines the scene in which Harry is temporarily dead , pointing out that it places Harry in a very heaven - like setting where he talks to a father figure " whose supernatural powers are accompanied by a profound message of love . "
Jeffrey Weiss adds , in the Dallas Morning News , that the biblical quotation " And the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death " ( 1 Corinthians 15:26 ) , featured on the tombstones of Harry 's parents , refers to Christ 's resurrection .
The quotation on Dumbledore 's family tomb , " Where your treasure is , your heart will be also " , is from Matthew 6:21 , and refers to knowing which things in life are of true value .
" They 're very British books " , Rowling revealed to an Open Book conference in October 2007 , " So on a very practical note Harry was going to find biblical quotations on tombstones , [ but ] I think those two particular quotations he finds on the tombstones at Godric 's Hollow , they ( … ) almost epitomize the whole series . "
AESCHYLUS AND WILLIAM PENN Section::::Aeschylus and William Penn .
Deathly Hallows begins with a pair of epigraphs , one from Quaker leader William Penn 's More Fruits of Solitude and one from Aeschylus ' The Libation Bearers .
" I really enjoyed choosing those two quotations because one is pagan , of course , and one is from a Christian tradition " , Rowling said .
" I 'd known it was going to be those two passages since ' Chamber ' was published .
I always knew [ that ] if I could use them at the beginning of book seven then I 'd cued up the ending perfectly .
If they were relevant , then I went where I needed to go .
They just say it all to me , they really do . "
THE PARDONER 'S TALE Section::::The
Pardoner 's Tale .
In a July 2007 webchat hosted by her publisher Bloomsbury , Rowling stated that The Pardoner 's Tale of Geoffrey Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales was an inspiration for a folktale retold by Xenophilius Lovegood in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows .
In the tale , three brothers outwit Death by magicing a bridge to cross a dangerous river .
Death , angry at being cheated , offers to give them three gifts , the Deathly Hallows , as a reward for evading him .
The first two die as a result of the gifts granted to them , but the third uses his gift wisely and dies in his bed an old man .
In The Pardoner 's Tale , three rogues are told that if they look under a tree , they can find a means to defeat Death .
Instead they find gold , and , overcome with greed , eventually kill each other to possess it .
MACBETH Section::::Macbeth .
Rowling has cited William Shakespeare 's Macbeth as an influence .
In an interview with The Leaky Cauldron and MuggleNet , when asked , " What if [ Voldemort ] never heard the prophecy ? " , she said , " It 's the Macbeth idea .
I absolutely adore Macbeth .
It is possibly my favourite Shakespeare play .
And that 's the question is n't it ?
If Macbeth had n't met the witches , would he have killed Duncan ?
Would any of it have happened ?
Is it fated or did he make it happen ?
I believe he made it happen .
" On her website , she referred to Macbeth again in discussing the prophecy : " the prophecy ( like the one the witches make to Macbeth , if anyone has read the play of the same name ) becomes the catalyst for a situation that would never have occurred if it had not been made . "
EMMA Section::::Emma .
Rowling cites Jane Austen as her favourite author and a major influence .
Rowling has said : " My attitude to Jane Austen is accurately summed up by that wonderful line from Cold Comfort Farm : ' One of the disadvantages of almost universal education was that all kinds of people gained a familiarity with one 's favourite books .
It gave one a curious feeling ; like seeing a drunken stranger wrapped in one 's dressing gown . '
"
The Harry Potter series is known for its twist endings , and Rowling has stated that , " I have never set up a surprise ending in a Harry Potter book without knowing I can never , and will never , do it anywhere near as well as Austen did in Emma . "
THE STORY OF THE TREASURE SEEKERS Section::::The Story of the Treasure Seekers .
Rowling frequently mentions E. Nesbit in interview , citing her " very real " child characters .
In 2000 , she said , " I think I identify with E Nesbit more than any other writer " , and described Nesbit 's The Story of the Treasure Seekers as , " Exhibit A for prohibition of all children 's literature by anyone who can not remember exactly how it felt to be a child . "
THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS Section::::The Wind in the Willows .
In a 2007 reading for students in New Orleans , Rowling said that the first book to inspire her was Kenneth Grahame 's children 's fantasy The Wind in the Willows , read to her when she had the measles at age 4 .
DOROTHY L. SAYERS Section::::Dorothy L. Sayers .
Rowling has also cited the work of Christian essayist and mystery writer Dorothy L. Sayers as an influence on her work , saying " There 's a theory – this applies to detective novels , and then Harry , which is not really a detective novel , but it feels like one sometimes – that you should not have romantic intrigue in a detective book .
Dorothy L. Sayers , who is queen of the genre said – and then broke her own rule , but said – that there is no place for romance in a detective story except that it can be useful to camouflage other people 's motives .
That 's true ; it is a very useful trick .
I 've used that on Percy
and I 've used that to a degree on Tonks in this book , as a red herring .
But having said that , I disagree inasmuch as mine are very character - driven books , and it 's so important , therefore , that we see these characters fall in love , which is a necessary part of life . "
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA Section::::The Chronicles of Narnia .
Rowling has said she was a fan of the works of C. S. Lewis as a child , and cites the influence of his The Chronicles of Narnia on her work : " I found myself thinking about the wardrobe route to Narnia when Harry is told he has to hurl himself at a barrier in King 's Cross station – it dissolves and he 's on platform Nine and Three - Quarters , and there 's the train for Hogwarts . "
She is , however , at pains to stress the differences between Narnia and her world : " Narnia is literally a different world " , she says , " whereas in the Harry books you go into a world within a world that you can see if you happen to belong .
A lot of the humour comes from collisions between the magic and the everyday world .
Generally there is n't much humour in the Narnia books , although I adored them when I was a child .
I got so caught up
I did n't think CS Lewis was especially preachy .
Reading them now I find that his subliminal message is n't very subliminal . "
New York Times writer Charles McGrath notes the similarity between Dudley Dursley , the obnoxious son of Harry 's neglectful guardians , and Eustace Scrubb , the spoiled brat who torments the main characters until converted by Aslan .
THE LITTLE WHITE HORSE Section::::The Little White Horse .
In an interview in The Scotsman in 2002 , Rowling described Elizabeth Goudge 's The Little White Horse as having , " perhaps more than any other book . . .
a direct influence on the Harry Potter books .
The author always included details of what her characters were eating and I remember liking that .
You may have noticed that I always list the food being eaten at Hogwarts . "
Rowling said in O that " Goudge was the only [ author ] whose influence I was conscious of .
She always described exactly what the children were eating , and I really liked knowing what they had in their sandwiches . "
THE SWORD IN THE STONE Section::::The Sword in the Stone .
Rowling also cites the work of T. H. White , a grammar school teacher , and the author of the well - known children 's classic saga , The Once and Future King , which tells the story of King Arthur of Britain , from childhood to grave .
Perhaps the best - known book from this saga is The Sword in the Stone ( the first book ) which was made into an animated movie by Walt Disney .
Arthur ( called Wart ) is a small scruffy - haired orphan , who meets the wizard Merlin ( who has an owl , Archimedes , and acts , much like Dumbledore , in the manner of an " absent - minded professor " ) who takes him to a castle to educate him .
As writer Phyllis Morris notes , " The parallels between Dumbledore and Merlin do not end with the protection of the hero in danger ...
In addition to both characters sporting long , flowing beards ( and blue eyes , according to T.H. White ) , Merlin was King Arthur 's mentor and guide , as Dumbledore has been Harry 's guide and mentor .
"
Rowling describes Wart as " Harry 's spiritual ancestor . "
MANXMOUSE Section::::Manxmouse .
Rowling is also a fan of Paul Gallico , " especially Manxmouse .
That 's a great book .
Gallico manages the fine line between magic and reality so skilfully , to the point where the most fantastic events feel plausible . "
JESSICA MITFORD Section::::Jessica Mitford .
In the Scotsman interview , Rowling described civil rights activist Jessica Mitford as " my most influential writer " , saying , " I love the way she never outgrew some of her adolescent traits , remaining true to her politics – she was a self - taught socialist – throughout her life .
"
In a review of Decca — The letters of Jessica Mitford , she went further saying , " Jessica Mitford has been my heroine since I was 14 years old , when I overheard my formidable great - aunt discussing how Mitford had run away at the age of 19 to fight with the Reds in the Spanish Civil War " , and claims what inspired her about Mitford was that she was " incurably and instinctively rebellious , brave , adventurous , funny and irreverent , she liked nothing better than a good fight , preferably against a pompous and hypocritical target . " OTHER FAVOURITES Section::::Other favourites .
In 1999 , while Rowling was on a tour of the United States , a bookseller handed her a copy of I
Capture the Castle by Dodie Smith , saying she would love it .
The book became one of her all time favourites .
Rowling says that , " it is the voice of the narrator , in this case 17-year- old Cassandra Mortmain , which makes a masterpiece out of an old plot . " Also in 1999 , Rowling said in interview that she was a great fan of Grimble by Clement Freud , saying : " Grimble is one of funniest books I 've ever read , and Grimble himself , who is a small boy , is a fabulous character .
I 'd love to see a Grimble film .
As far as I know , these last two fine pieces of literature are out of print , so if any publishers ever read this , could you please dust them off and put them back in print so other people can read them ? "
On a number of occasions , Rowling has cited her admiration for French novelist Colette .
Rowling said that the death of Charles Darnay in Charles Dickens 's A Tale of Two Cities , and the novel 's final line , " It is a far , far better thing that I do than I have ever done ; it is a far , far better rest that I go to than I have ever known " , had a profound impact on her .
In a 2000 interview with BBC Radio 4 , Rowling revealed a deep love of Vladimir Nabokov 's controversial book Lolita , saying , " There just is n't enough time to discuss how a plot that could have been the most worthless pornography becomes , in Nabokov 's hands , a great and tragic love story , and I could exhaust my reservoir of superlatives trying to describe the quality of the writing . "
In an interview with , Rowling described Irish author Roddy Doyle as her favourite living writer , saying , " I love all his books .
I often talk about him and Jane Austen in the same breath .
I think people are slightly mystified by that because superficially they 're such different writers .
But they both have a very unsentimental approach to human nature .
They can be profoundly moving without ever becoming mawkish . "
Many of Rowling 's named favorites decorate the links section of her personal webpage .
The section is designed to look like a bookcase , and includes
I Capture the Castle , The Little White Horse and Manxmouse , Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice , Sense and Sensibility and Emma , a book of fairy tales by E. Nesbit , The Commitments and The Van by Roddy Doyle , two books by Dorothy L. Sayers and a book by Katherine Mansfield .
In January 2006 , Rowling was asked by the Royal Society of Literature to nominate her top ten books every child should read .
Included in her list were Wuthering Heights by Emily Brontë , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl , Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe , David Copperfield by Charles Dickens , Hamlet by William Shakespeare , To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee , Animal Farm by George Orwell , The Tale of Two Bad Mice by Beatrix Potter , The Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger and Catch-22 by Joseph Heller .
ANALOGUES
Section::::Analogues .
There are a number of fictional works to which Harry Potter has been repeatedly compared in the media .
Some of these Rowling has herself mentioned , others have been mentioned by Internet sites , journalists , critics or other authors .
The works are listed roughly in order of creation .
THE PILGRIM 'S PROGRESS Section::::The
Pilgrim 's Progress .
John Granger sees Chamber of Secrets as similar to a morality play like John Bunyan 's The Pilgrim 's Progress .
He describes the climax , where Harry descends to the Chamber of Secrets to rescue Ginny Weasley as " the clearest Christian allegory of salvation history since Lewis 's The Lion , the Witch , and the Wardrobe . …
Using only traditional symbols , from the ' Ancient of Days ' figure as God the Father to the satanic serpent and Christ - like phoenix ( ' the Resurrection Bird ' ) , the drama takes us from the fall to eternal life without a hitch . "
WUTHERING HEIGHTS
Section::::Wuthering Heights .
In 2006 , Rowling recommended Emily Brontë 's Gothic post - Romantic Wuthering Heights as number one of the top ten books every child should read .
In her essay , " To Sir With Love " in the book Mapping the World of Harry Potter , Joyce Millman suggests that Severus Snape , Harry Potter 's morally ambiguous potions master , is drawn from a tradition of Byronic heroes such as Wuthering Heights Heathcliff and that chapter two of Harry Potter and the Half - Blood Prince is reminiscent of the opening of Wuthering Heights when Heathcliff is coldly introduced and asks his servant Joseph to bring up wine for him and Lockwood .
Snape commands the almost identical line to his servant Wormtail , with Snape described similarly to how Emily Brontë described Heathcliff .
TOM BROWN 'S
SCHOOLDAYS Section::::Tom Brown 's Schooldays .
The Harry Potter series draws upon a long literary tradition of stories set in boarding schools .
This school story genre originated in the Victorian era with Tom Brown 's Schooldays , by Thomas Hughes .
Tom Brown 's Schooldays laid down a basic structure which has been widely imitated , for example in Anthony Buckeridge 's 1950s Jennings books .
Both Tom Brown 's Schooldays and Harry Potter involve an average eleven - year - old , better at sport than academic study , who is sent to boarding school .
Upon arrival , the boy gains a best friend ( in Tom 's case , East , in Harry 's case , Ron Weasley ) who helps him adjust to the new environment .
They are set upon by an arrogant bully – in Tom Brown 's case , Harry Flashman , in Harry 's case Draco Malfoy .
Stephen Fry , who both narrates the British audio adaptations of the Harry Potter novels and has starred in a screen adaptation of Tom Brown , has commented many times about the similarities between the two books . "
Harry Potter – a boy who arrives in this strange school to board for the first time and makes good , solid friends and also enemies who use bullying and unfair tactics " , notes Fry , " then is ambiguous about whether or not he is going to be good or bad .
His pluck and his endeavour , loyalty , good nature and bravery are the things that carry him through – and that is the story of Tom Brown 's Schooldays " .
THE LORD OF THE RINGS
Section::::The Lord of the Rings .
Fans of author J. R. R. Tolkien have drawn attention to the similarities between his novel The Lord of the Rings and the Harry Potter series ; specifically Tolkien 's Wormtongue and Rowling 's Wormtail , Tolkien 's Shelob and Rowling 's Aragog , Tolkien 's Gandalf and Rowling 's Dumbledore , Tolkien 's Nazgûl and Rowling 's Dementors , Old Man Willow and the Whomping Willow and the similarities between both authors ' antagonists , Tolkien 's Dark Lord Sauron and Rowling 's Lord Voldemort ( both of whom are sometimes within their respective continuities unnamed due to intense fear surrounding their names ; both often referred to as ' The Dark Lord ' ; and both of whom are , during the time when the main action takes place , seeking to recover their lost power after having been considered dead or at least no longer a threat ) .
Several reviews of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows noted that the locket used as a horcrux by Voldemort bore comparison to Tolkien 's One Ring , as it negatively affects the personality of the wearer .
Rowling maintains that she had not read The Hobbit until after she completed the first Harry Potter novel ( though she had read The Lord of the Rings as a teenager ) and that any similarities between her books and Tolkien 's are " Fairly superficial .
Tolkien created a whole new mythology , which I would never claim to have done .
On the other hand , I think I have better jokes .
"
Tolkienian scholar Tom Shippey has maintained that " no modern writer of epic fantasy has managed to escape the mark of Tolkien , no matter how hard many of them have tried " .
ROALD DAHL 'S STORIES
Section::::Roald Dahl 's stories .
Many have drawn attention to the similarities between Rowling 's works and those of Roald Dahl , particularly in the depiction of the Dursley family , which echoes the nightmarish guardians seen in many of Dahl 's books , such as the Wormwoods from Matilda , Aunt Sponge and Aunt Spiker from James and the Giant Peach , and Grandma from George 's Marvellous Medicine .
Rowling acknowledges that there are similarities , but believes that at a deeper level , her works are different from those of Dahl ; in her words , more " moral " .
X - MEN Section::::X - Men .
The Marvel Comics superhero team the X - Men , created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby in 1963 , are similar to Harry Potter in their examination of prejudice and intolerance .
Comic book historian Michael Mallory examined the original premise of the comic , in which teenage mutants study under Professor X to learn how to control their abilities , safe from fearful Homo sapiens , and also battle less benign mutants like Magneto .
He argued , " Think about [ the comic ] clad in traditional British university robes and pointy hats , castles and trains , and the image that springs to mind is Hogwarts School for Witchcraft and Wizard[ry ] , with Dumbledore , Voldemort and the class struggle between wizards and muggles . "
He acknowledged that while the X - Men was for the longest time " a phenomenon that was largely contained in the realm of comic book readers as opposed to the wider public [ such as Rowling ] " , he argued " nothing exists in a vacuum , least of all popular culture .
Just as the creators of X - Men consciously or unconsciously tapped into the creative ether of their time for inspiration , so has the X - Men phenomenon had an effect on the books and films that has since followed . "
THE CHRONICLES OF PRYDAIN Section::::The Chronicles of Prydain .
Lloyd Alexander 's five - volume Prydain Chronicles , begun in 1964 with The Book of Three and concluding in 1968 with " The High King " , features a young protagonist , an assistant pig keeper named Taran , who wishes to be a great hero in a world drawn from Welsh mythology .
Entertainment Weekly cited Lloyd Alexander as a possible influence on Rowling when it named her its 2007 Entertainer of the Year .
When Alexander died in 2007 , his obituary in New York Magazine drew many comparisons between Harry Potter and Prydain and said that " The High King is everything we desperately hope Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows will be . "
THE DARK IS RISING
Section::::The Dark Is Rising .
Susan Cooper 's Dark Is Rising sequence ( which commenced with Over Sea , Under Stone in 1965 and now more commonly bound in a single volume ) have been compared to the Harry Potter series .
The second novel , also called The Dark Is Rising , features a young boy named Will Stanton who discovers on his eleventh birthday that he is in fact imbued with magical power ; in Will 's case , that he is the last of the Old Ones , beings empowered by the Light to battle the Dark .
The books open in much the same way , with Will finding that people are telling him strange things and that animals run from him .
John Hodge , who wrote the screenplay for the film adaptation , entitled The Seeker , made substantial changes to the novel 's plot and tone to differentiate it from Harry Potter .
A WIZARD OF EARTHSEA
Section::::A Wizard of Earthsea .
The basic premise of Ursula K. Le Guin 's A Wizard of Earthsea ( Parnassus , 1968 ) , in which a boy with unusual aptitude for magic is recognised , and sent to a special school for wizards , resembles that of Harry Potter .
Ged also receives a scar in his struggle with the shadow which hurts whenever the shadow is near him like Harry Potter 's scar when Voldemort is near him .
Le Guin has claimed that she does n't feel Rowling " ripped her off " , but that she felt that Rowling 's books were overpraised for supposed originality , and that Rowling " could have been more gracious about her predecessors .
My incredulity was at the critics who found the first book wonderfully original .
She has many virtues , but originality is n't one of them .
That hurt . "
THE WORST WITCH Section::::The Worst Witch .
Many critics have noted that Jill Murphy 's The Worst Witch series ( first published in 1974 by Allison & Busby ) , is set in a school for girls , " Miss Cackle 's Academy for Witches " , reminiscent of Hogwarts .
The story concerns an awkward pupil at a boarding - school for witches , who faces a scheming rival student .
Her professors include a kindly and elderly headmistress and a bullying , raven - haired potions teacher .
Murphy has commented on her frustration at constant comparisons between her work and Harry Potter : "
It 's irritating … everyone asks the same question
and I even get children writing to ask me whether I mind about the Hogwarts school of witchcraft and pointing out similarities .
Even worse are reviewers who come across my books , or see the TV series , and , without taking the trouble to find out that it 's now over quarter of a century since I wrote my first book , make pointed remarks about ' clever timing ' – or say things like ' the Worst Witch stories are not a million miles from J K Rowling 's books ' .
The implications are really quite insulting ! "
STAR WARS Section::::Star Wars .
The Harry Potter series shares many similarities with George Lucas 's Star Wars with respect to main characters , especially heroes and villains , as well as story plotlines .
Scholar Deborah Cartmell states that Harry Potter story is based as much on Star Wars as it is on any other text .
The life of Harry Potter , the main hero of the series , parallels that of Luke Skywalker , who is the main hero of the Original Star Wars trilogy with both characters living dull and ordinary lives until a later age when they are recruited by an older mentor .
Harry Potter trains to become a wizard at his late childhood and mentored by Albus Dumbledore in facing his destiny and enemy Lord Voldemort ; whereas Luke Skywalker trains to become a Jedi at his early adulthood and is mentored by Obi - Wan Kenobi in facing his destiny and enemy Darth Vader ( also known as Lord Vader ) .
Both characters were also brought at infancy to their foster families directly by their future mentors .
The main villains of both the franchises also share many similarities .
Tom Riddle was once also a student of the hero 's mentor , Dumbledore at Hogwarts , also studying to be a wizard before he turned evil and transformed into Voldemort .
Likewise , Anakin Skywalker was also a student of the hero 's mentor , Obi - Wan Kenobi with the Jedi Order training to be a Jedi Knight before he turned to the dark side and transformed into Darth Vader .
The mentors of the main heroes also share many parallels .
Both also mentored the main villain of their stories before they turned bad and betrayed their respective mentor .
Both mentors were also eventually killed when fighting their former students .
Albus Dumbledore was betrayed by Tom Riddle before being eventually killed off by him as Lord Voldemort ( through Draco Malfoy and Snape ) .
Obi - Wan was betrayed by Anakin Skywalker before eventually being killed off by him as Darth Vader .
Both also voluntarily allowed themselves to be killed and advised the hero from beyond the grave .
Both stories have a " Dark Side " the followers of which are the villains of the story as well as their own followers / apprentices .
Both stories also have a prophesied " Chosen One " who will destroy evil .
In the Harry Potter series , it is Harry Potter who is the chosen one who would defeat the Dark Lord Voldemort .
In Star Wars , it is presumed and appears to be Luke Skywalker , but actually revealed to be Anakin Skywalker as proclaimed in the Jedi prophecy who would destroy the Sith and bring balance to the Force .
He does this after being redeemed by his son , Luke Skywalker .
More recent theories contrast this and argue that Luke is indeed the chosen one who will bring balance to The Force .
CHARMED LIFE Section::::Charmed Life .
In Diana Wynne Jones ' Charmed Life ( 1977 ) , two orphaned children receive magical education while living in a castle .
The setting is a world resembling early 1900s
Britain , where magic is commonplace .
Diana Wynne Jones has stated in answer to a question on her webpage : " I think Ms Rowling did get quite a few of her ideas from my books – though I have never met her , so I have never been able to ask her .
My books were written many years before the Harry Potter books ( Charmed Life was first published in 1977 ) , so any similarities probably come from what she herself read as a child .
Once a book is published , out in the world , it is sort of common property , for people to take ideas from and use , and I think this is what happened to my books . " DISCWORLD Section::::Discworld .
Before the arrival of J. K. Rowling , Britain 's bestselling author was comic fantasy writer Terry Pratchett .
His Discworld books , beginning with The Colour of Magic in 1983 , satirise and parody common fantasy literature conventions .
Pratchett was repeatedly asked if he " got " his idea for his magic college , the Unseen University , from Harry Potter Hogwarts , or if the young wizard Ponder Stibbons , who has dark hair and glasses , was inspired by Harry Potter .
Both in fact predate Rowling 's work by several years ; Pratchett jokingly claimed that he did steal them , though " I of course used a time machine .
"
The BBC and other British news agencies emphasised a supposed rivalry between Pratchett and Rowling , but Pratchett said on record that , while he did not put Rowling on a pedestal , he did not consider her a bad writer , nor did he envy her success .
Claims of rivalry were due to a letter he wrote to The Sunday Times , about an article published declaring that fantasy " looks backward to an idealised , romanticised , pseudofeudal world , where knights and ladies morris - dance to Greensleeves " .
Actually , he was protesting the ineptitude of journalists in that genre , many of whom did not research their work and , in this case , contradicted themselves in the same article .
ENDER 'S GAME Section::::Ender 's Game .
Science fiction author Orson Scott Card , in a fierce editorial in response to Rowling 's copyright lawsuit against the Harry Potter Lexicon , claimed that her assertion that she had had her " words stolen " was rendered moot by the fact that he could draw numerous comparisons between her books and his own 1985 novel Ender 's Game ; in his words , YOUNG SHERLOCK HOLMES Section::::Young Sherlock Holmes .
Chris Columbus , who directed the first two Harry Potter film adaptations , has cited the 1985 film Young Sherlock Holmes , which he wrote , as an influence in his direction for those films .
" That was sort of a predecessor to this movie , in a sense " , he told the BBC in 2001 , " It was about two young boys and a girl in a British boarding school who had to fight a supernatural force . "
Scenes from Young Sherlock Holmes were subsequently used to cast the first Harry Potter film .
On 3 January 2010 , Irish journalist Declan Lynch ( writing in The Sunday Independent ) stated that " there 's more than a hint of young Sherlock evident in Harry " .
TROLL Section::::Troll .
The 1986 Charles Band - produced low - budget horror / fantasy film Troll , directed by John Carl Buechler and starring Noah Hathaway , Julia Louis - Dreyfus and Sonny Bono , features a character named
" Harry Potter Jr. " In an interview with M. J. Simpson , Band claimed : " I 've heard that J. K. Rowling has acknowledged that maybe she saw this low - budget movie and perhaps it inspired her . "
However , a spokesman for Rowling , responding to the rumors of a planned remake of the film , has denied that Rowling ever saw it before writing her book .
Rowling has said on record multiple times that the name " Harry Potter " was derived in part from a childhood friend , Ian Potter , and in part from her favourite male name , Harry .
On 13 April 2008 , The Mail on Sunday wrote a news article claiming that Warner Bros. had begun a legal action against Buechler ; however , the story was denied and lawyers for Rowling demanded the article be removed .
On 14 April 2008 , John Buechler 's partner in the Troll remake , Peter Davy , said about Harry Potter , " In John 's opinion , he created the first Harry Potter .
J.K. Rowling says the idea just came to her .
John does n't think so .
There are a lot of similarities between the theme of her books and the original Troll .
John was shocked when she came out with Harry Potter . "
GROOSHAM GRANGE Section::::Groosham Grange .
Groosham Grange ( first published in 1988 ) , a novel by best - selling British author Anthony Horowitz has been cited for its similarities with Harry Potter ; the plot revolves around David Eliot , a young teenager mistreated by his parents who receive an unexpected call from an isolated boarding school , Groosham Grange , which reveals itself as a school for wizards and witches .
Both books feature a teacher who is a ghost , a werewolf character named after the French word for " wolf " ( Lupin / Leloup ) , and passage to the school via railway train .
Horowitz , however , while acknowledging the similarities , just thanked Rowling for her contribution to the development of the young adult fiction in the UK .
THE BOOKS OF MAGIC Section::::The Books of Magic .
Fans of the comic book series
The Books of Magic , by Neil Gaiman ( first published in 1990 by DC Comics ) have cited similarities to the Harry Potter story .
These include a dark - haired English boy with glasses , named Timothy Hunter , who discovers his potential as the most powerful wizard of the age upon being approached by magic - wielding individuals , the first of whom makes him a gift of a pet owl .
Similarities led the British tabloid paper the Daily Mirror to claim Gaiman had made accusations of plagiarism against Rowling , which he went on the record denying , saying the similarities were either coincidence , or drawn from the same fantasy archetypes .
" I thought we were both just stealing from T.H. White " , he said in an interview , " very straightforward . "
Dylan Horrocks , writer of the Books of Magic spin - off , has said they should be considered as similar works in the same genre and that both have parallels with earlier schoolboy wizards , like the 2000 AD character Luke Kirby .
SPELLCASTING SERIES Section::::Spellcasting series .
The text adventure game ( 1990 ) is the first installment of the Spellcasting series created by Steve Meretzky during his time at Legend Entertainment .
All the three games in the series tell the story of young Ernie Eaglebeak , a bespectacled student at the prestigious Sorcerer University , as he progresses through his studies , learning the arcanes of magic , taking part in student life , occasionally saving the world as he knows it .
Each separate game takes place during consecutive school years as well , much like the Harry Potter books .
WIZARD 'S HALL Section::::Wizard 's Hall .
In 1991 , the author Jane Yolen released a book called Wizard 's Hall , to which the Harry Potter series bears a resemblance .
The main protagonist , Henry ( also called Thornmallow ) , is a young boy who joins a magical school for young wizards .
At the school " he must fulfill an ancient prophecy and help overthrow a powerful , evil wizard . "
However , Yolen has stated that " I 'm pretty sure she never read my book , " attributing similarities to commonly - used fantasy tropes .
In an interview with the magazine Newsweek , Yolen said , " I always tell people that if Ms. Rowling would like to cut me a very large check , I would cash it . "
Yolen stopped reading Harry Potter after the third book , and has expressed dislike for the writing style of Harry Potter , calling it " fantasy fast food " .
THE SECRET OF PLATFORM 13 Section::::The Secret of Platform 13 .
Eva Ibbotson 's The Secret of Platform 13 ( first published in 1994 ) features a gateway to a magical world located in King 's Cross station in London .
The protagonist belongs to the magical world but is raised in the normal world by a rich family who neglect him and treat him as a servant , while their fat and unpleasant biological son is pampered and spoiled .
Amanda Craig is a journalist who has written about the similarities : " Ibbotson would seem to have at least as good a case for claiming plagiarism as the American author currently suing J. K. Rowling [ i.e. Nancy Stouffer ] , but unlike her , Ibbotson says she would ' like to shake her by the hand .
I think we all borrow from each other as writers . ' "
SEE ALSO
* Legal disputes over the Harry Potter series
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Pat Pincent , " The Education of a Wizard : Harry Potter and His Predecessors " in The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter : Perspectives in a Literary Phenomenon .
Edited with an Introduction by Lana A. Whited .
Columbia : University of Missouri Press , 2002 .
* * Amanda Craig , " Harry Potter and the art of lifting ideas " , The Sunday Times , 17 July 2005 .
*
* Heath Paul , Helmer says he invented Harry Potter " , The Hollywood News , 14 April 2008 .
*