TEXAS STATE GUARD
The Texas State Guard ( TXSG ) is the State Defense Force of Texas , and is one of three branches of the Texas Military Forces .
Along with the other two branches , the TXSG falls under the command of the Governor of Texas and is administered by the Texas Adjutant General , an appointee of the Governor .
The other two branches of the Texas Military Forces are the Texas Army National Guard and the Texas Air National Guard .
The mission of the Texas State Guard ( TXSG ) is to provide mission - ready military forces to assist state and local authorities in times of state emergencies , to conduct homeland security and mission support activities under the umbrella of Defense Support to Civil Authorities , and to augment the Texas Army National Guard and Texas Air National Guard as required .
Headquartered at Camp Mabry in Austin , Texas , the TXSG functions as an organized state militia under the authority of Title 32 of the U.S. Code and Chapter 431 of the Texas Government Code .
The Governor of Texas has sole control over the Texas State Guard , because it is not subject to federal activation .
CURRENT STRUCTURE
Section::::Current structure .
The Texas State Guard is a state defense force that assists and augments Texas military and civil authorities in times of state emergencies , and in on - going support of National Guard units and local communities .
They are not part of the federal armed forces command structure , but rather operate purely as a state organized and controlled force .
The Texas State Guard consists of six Civil Affairs Regiments , two Air Wings , a Medical Brigade , and a Maritime Regiment .
Members ' entry rank depends on prior federal military service and/or civilian education .
Individuals with no prior military service or ROTC training must attend the Basic Orientation Training ( BOT ) course .
Texas State Guard personnel actively support the state in the event of catastrophic events , and ongoing state military missions .
Members receive duty pay [ currently $ 121 daily , regardless of rank ] when activated by the Governor and placed on paid state active duty , and starting in 2008 , for a limited number of mandatory training days .
The organizational structure follows the federal military component structure , with comparable positions , ranks , protocols , and authorities .
Members wear the Texas military uniform according to branch of service ( in accordance with branch regulations ) in regards to state military forces when conducting activities while on duty .
TXSG personnel are also eligible for the same State issued military awards and decorations as members of the Texas Army & Air National Guard .
For example , deployed members of the Texas State Guard received the Governor 's Unit Citation for Hurricane Katrina and Rita relief in 2005 .
The governor is the commander in chief of the Texas State Guard .
Article 4 , Section 7 of the Texas Constitution states that " He shall be Commander - in - Chief of the military forces of the State , except when they are called into actual service of the United States .
He shall have power to call forth the militia to execute the laws of the State , to suppress insurrections , and to repel invasions . "
Commanding General Major General Jake Betty received his Bachelors degree from Texas A&M University and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the Infantry in 1973 .
Upon entering active duty he was assigned to the 1st 501st Infantry Battalion , 101st Airborne Division , Fort Campbell , KY .
In 1979 the then Colonel Betty transferred to the U.S. Army Reserves and held various leadership positions including a nine - month deployment from 1997 to 1998 in support of Operation Joint Guard in Bosnia .
In February 2003 , while serving as the Commander of the 3419th Military Intelligence Detachment , NAS - JRB Fort Worth , TX , he was mobilized to the Defense Intelligence Agency as Chief , Iraq Survey Group , Fusion Center – CONUS , in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom .
He retired from the U.S. Army Reserve in 2003 after serving a total of 30 years .
Since 2006 Colonel Betty has been a member of the Texas State Guard holding a number of leadership positions including Commander of the 8th Regiment headquartered in Houston , and the Texas State Guard Headquarters J1 .
He has served on several State Active Duty Missions to include Hurricanes Dean , Gustav , Dolly , Edouard , and Ike .
In March 2013 General Betty was selected to serve as Commanding General , Army Component Command .
On 1 September 2014 he was selected as Commanding General Texas State Guard .
DEPUTY COMMANDING GENERAL Major General Bodisch .
Graduate of the U. S. Army Basic Military Police Officer and Advanced Military Police Officer course , and the Joint Task Force Commander Training Course ( JTF - N / NORTHCOM ) .
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Criminal Justice from the University of Houston and a Master of Science degree in Quality Systems Management from the National Graduate School , in Falmouth , Massachusetts .
SENIOR ENLISTED ADVISOR Sergeant Major Becknel .
Served as an Aviation Ordnanceman in the United States Marine Corps from January 1987 to July 1996 .
During his 9.5 years SgtMaj Becknel served in the 1st , 3rd and 4th Marine Aircraft Wings .
While on active duty he completed the Marine Corps NCO Academy Career Nonresident Program , and the Staff NCO Academy Advanced Nonresident Program .
In May 2008 , SgtMaj Becknel entered into the Texas State Guard , Texas Maritime Regiment , 1st Battalion and was the Senior Enlisted Advisor for 1st Battalion from July 2010 until October 2014 .
SgtMaj Becknel has a Bachelor of Science in Business Management and a Masters in Business Administration both obtained from the University of Phoenix .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Texas State Guard has its roots in Stephen F. Austin 's colonial militia .
On February 18 , 1823 , Emperor of Mexico , Agustín de Iturbide , authorized Austin who was the leader of the first non - Spanish efforts of Texas settlement " to organize the colonists into a body of the national militia , to preserve tranquility .
" Austin was appointed to the rank of lieutenant colonel and allowed the colonists to elect all subordinate militia officers .
Soon after , Austin 's militia was authorized to make war on Indian tribes who were hostile and molested the settlement .
In 1827 , in a move contrary to modern perceptions of Anglo - Texan colonists in Mexico , Austin 's militia mobilized in support of the Mexican government to put down the Fredonian Rebellion , a group of Americans who tried to declare a part of Texas as an independent republic separate from Mexico .
In 1835 , all of the local militias in Texas were annexed by Sam Houston to provide a unified military command for the provisional government of the Republic of Texas .
After becoming an independent republic in 1836 , these forces were aligned with the Army of the Republic of Texas .
In 1845 , with the annexation of Texas by the United States , this structure was supplanted by the United States Army , but local militia companies were maintained for ready response .
After secession from the United States in 1861 , existing militia companies rallied and new militia regiments were formed which were made available to the various armies of the Confederacy .
It was officially reorganized as the " State Guard " in 1871 during Reconstruction to unify the independent militia companies and regiments throughout the state and continued in operation until 1903 , when it was replaced by the nationalized Texas Army National Guard .
It was revived in 1941 , after thousands of Texan troops were deployed overseas in World War II , to provide state military forces and support for wartime civil defense .
When the National Guard was mobilized for service in the First World War , the federal legislature recognized the need for state troops to replace the National Guard .
A law was passed authorizing the formation of home defense forces for the duration of the war .
While Texas passed the necessary enabling statutes , it did not form such an organization .
As World War II made mobilization of the National Guard again likely , steps were taken to provide for state troops as replacements for the National Guard .
The Texas Legislature passed the Defense Act , HB 45 , and the Governor signed the bill on 10 February 1941 .
This time , a force was organized , with the task falling to Brigadier General J. Watt Page , the Adjutant General of Texas .
Within a year , the Texas Defense Guard numbered 17,497 officers and enlisted men .
This number was in sharp contrast to the 11,633 members of the Texas National Guard mustered into federal service some months before .
The Texas Defense Guard was organized into fifty independent battalions , each composed of a varying number of companies and a headquarters .
The federal legislation authorizing them expired on 25 July 1947 .
This was not taken lightly in some states and most notably in Texas .
In that same year , the State Legislature authorized the Texas State Guard Reserve Corps .
It was activated in January , 1948 .
The Reserve Corps continued in existence until ten years after the Congress had once again authorized state guards in 1955 .
Under statutes enacted by the 59th Legislature , the Texas State Guard Reserve Corps was abolished and Texas State Guard was again authorized and organized on 30 August 1965 .
First made up of independent battalions , it was later organized along regimental lines , and at one time also included brigade - sized elements .
It was at first organized as Infantry and " Internal Security " units .
After the early 1970s , it was organized as Military Police with companies assigned to battalions for control and the battalions , in turn , assigned to groups .
For several years , there were six Military Police Groups with boundaries generally following those of Texas Department of Public Safety command districts .
In 1979 , the 7th Military Police Group was formed to provide for command and control over remaining separate battalions in East Texas .
A reorganization in 1980 resulted in formation of the 8th and 9th Military Police Groups in San Antonio and Dallas .
The original six groups were headquartered in Fort Worth , Houston , the Rio Grande Valley , Midland , Lubbock , and Austin .
In 1993 , Texas State Guard was reorganized into regiments and the old group designations disappeared .
Regimental headquarters were established in San Antonio ( 1st , ) Austin ( 2nd , )
Fort Worth ( 4th , )
Houston ( 8th , ) Dallas ( 19th , ) and Lubbock ( 39th . )
In ceremonies held in Killeen in July 1993 , during the Texas State Guard Association convention , the newly organized regiments were presented with their new colors by the incumbent general officers and three retired general officers of the Texas State Guard .
For the first time since World War II , the regiments were authorized distinctive unit insignia for wear by assigned personnel .
In March , 1995 , a seventh regiment , the 9th , was organized in El Paso from elements of the 39th .
This added regiment did not survive though and personnel were returned to the 39th in 1999 .
UNIFORM Section::::Uniform .
The Texas military uniform worn by most of the Texas State Guard is similar to US Army 's Army Combat Uniform military uniforms , though with different markings ; the Maritime Regiment 's uniform is similar to the Marine 's MARPAT Digital Desert uniform .
Air units wear the U.S. Air Force 's Airman Battle Uniform .
Personnel in the Medical Brigade wear the Army ACU style uniform , except for those personnel with prior federal military service who may , at their discretion , wear the uniform of the branch of the federal military under which they served .
UNITS AND FORMATIONS COMMAND GROUP Section::::Units and formations .
Section::::Command Group .
Texas State Guard Headquarters , Camp Mabry , Austin , TX ENGINEER GROUP Section::::Engineer Group .
HQ Engineer Group , Camp Mabry , Austin , TX
* Expeditionary Engineer Response Taskforce ( EERT ) - Alpha , San Antonio , TX * EERT - Delta , Dallas , TX * EERT - Helo , Houston , TX ARMY COMPONENT Section::::Army Component .
HQ Army Component , Camp Mabry , Austin , TX
* 1st Regiment ( Alamo Guards )
San Antonio , Corpus Christi , Weslaco , Zapata .
* 2nd Regiment ( Travis Rifles )
Waco , Gatesville , San Marcos , Austin .
* 4th Regiment ( Panther City Fencibles )
Fort Worth , Decatur , Mineral Wells , Weatherford
* 8th Regiment ( Terry 's Texas Rangers ) Houston , Bryan , Huntsville , Beaumont , Port Arthur .
* 19th Regiment ( Parson 's Brigade ) Dallas , Wylie , Kilgore , New Boston , Greenville
* 39th Composite Regiment ( Roughnecks ) Midland , Lubbock , Amarillo , El Paso .
AIR COMPONENT Section::::Air Component .
Formed in 1996 , the Air Component Command supports the Texas Air National Guard and provides Defense Support to Civil Authorities , ( DSCA ) .
HQ Air Component Command , Camp Mabry , Austin , TX HQ 4th Air Wing , Dallas , TX HQ 5th Air Wing , Camp Mabry , Austin ,
TX MEDICAL BRIGADE Section::::Medical Brigade .
HQ Texas State Guard Medical Brigade [ nickname " Texas Medical Rangers " ] * Austin Medical Company * Conroe Medical Detachment * Corpus Christi Medical Company
* Dallas - Fort Worth Medical Response Group * Galveston Medical Response Group * Hill Country Medical Company * Houston Medical Response Group * Rio Grande Valley Medical Group * San Antonio - Alamo Medical Response Group * Temple Medical Response Group * Tyler Medical Response Group * Wichita Falls Medical Company MARITIME REGIMENT Section::::Maritime Regiment .
Established in 2006 , the Maritime Regiment serves the U.S. state of Texas by providing maritime , littoral , and riverine operational support for homeland defense or in response to man - made or natural disasters , e.g. hurricanes or flooding .
It serves as the naval militia of Texas .
Additionally , the Maritime Regiment provides operational support for the Texas Parks & Wildlife Game Wardens and the United States Coast Guard ( stationed in Texas ) .
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , Regimental Headquarters , Austin , TX
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , 1st Battalion , East Texas
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , 2nd Battalion , El Paso , San Angelo , San Antonio , Austin .
Rio Grand Valley
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , 3rd Battalion , Dallas , Ft Worth
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , Combined Engineering Command , Statewide
* Maritime Regiment ( TMAR ) , Regimental Band , Austin , TX DUTIES * Military Emergency Management Specialists * Emergency Shelter Management ( Operations and Security ) * Emergency Medical Services ( Doctors , Nurses , Mental Health and Paramedics )
* Assists local civil authorities
* Volunteer coordination
* Legal support ( attorneys and paralegals ) * Information management and communications * Chaplain services
* Ground Search and Rescue *
Maritime Operations
* Support to the United States Coast Guard
* Dive Search and Recovery Services
* Operational support to Texas Army and Air National Guards
* Annual free medical care mission along the Texas border with Mexico ( " Operation Lone Star " )
*
Border monitoring LEGAL PROTECTION Section::::Legal protection .
Employers in the state of Texas are required under Texas law to provide a leave of absence to any employees who are members of the Texas State Guard ( or any other state 's military forces ) whenever these employees are activated to take part in training , drill , or to take part in an emergency mission .
Employers must reinstate these employees to their former employment positions following their deployments , without loss of time , efficiency rating , vacation time , or any benefit of employment during or because of the absence .
RECENT OPERATIONS
* Hurricane Harvey in 2017
* Operation Final Rest ( Ongoing ) * Operation Lone Star ( annual mission ) * Operation Strong Safety ( Ongoing ) * Operation Border Star I - VII ( Ongoing ) * Observe Operation Jade Helm 15 in 2015 ( see Jade Helm 15 conspiracy theories )
* Texas Memorial Day Flood ( Blanco River ) in 2015 * Bastrop Forest Fire in 2014
* Hurricane Alex in 2010 * Hurricane Ike in 2008 * Hurricane Gustav in 2008 * Tropical Storm Edouard in 2008
* Hurricane Dolly in 2008 * Marble Falls Flood in 2007
* Hurricane Humberto in 2007 * Hurricane Dean in 2007
* Eagle Pass Tornado in 2007
* Operation Wrangler in 2007 * Hurricane Rita in 2005 * Hurricane Katrina in 2005
* Columbia Space Shuttle - ground search for remains in 2003
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
U.S. Armed Forces awards may be worn on the Texas State Guard uniform .
Texas Military Forces awards available to Texas State Guard members :
* Texas Medal of Valor
*
Texas Purple Heart Medal * Texas Superior Service Medal * Texas Lone Star Distinguished Service Medal * Texas Outstanding Service Medal * Texas Medal of Merit ( also awarded with " V " for valor )
* Texas Adjutant General 's Individual Award * Texas Humanitarian Service Ribbon
* Texas Homeland Defense Service Medal * Texas Faithful Service Medal Texas State Guard ( TXSG )
Awards : * Texas State Guard Meritorious Service Ribbon * Texas State Guard Commanding General 's Individual Award Ribbon * Texas State Guard Recruiting Ribbon
* Texas State Guard Officer Professional Development Ribbon
* Texas State Guard NCO Professional Development Ribbon * Texas State Guard Enlisted Personnel Basic Training Ribbon * Texas State Guard Physical Fitness Ribbon * Texas State Guard 3 Year Service Medal
Texas State Guard Unit Awards : * Texas Governor 's Unit Citation * Texas State Guard Meritorious Unit Award * Texas State Guard Organizational Excellence Award COMMANDING GENERALS
* Maj .
Gen. J. Watt Page 1941 - 1943
* Maj .
Gen. Arthur B. Knickerbocker 1943 - 1947
* Maj .
Gen. Claude V. Birkhead 1947 - 1950
* Maj .
Gen. Raymond Phelps 1950 - 1953
* Maj .
Gen. Lloyd M. Bentsen Sr . 1953 - 1963
* Maj .
Gen. John L. Thompson , Jr. 1963 - 1966 *
Maj .
Gen. Harley B. West 1966 - 1969 * Maj .
Gen. Max H. Specht 1969 - 1974
* Maj .
Gen. William Green 1974 - 1984
* Maj .
Gen. Roland Bruce Harris 1984 - 1987
* Maj .
Gen. James W. Robinson 1988 - 1990
* Maj .
Gen. Marlin E. Mote 1990 - 1994
* Maj .
Gen. John H. Bailey , II 1994 - 1997
* Maj .
Gen. Bertus L. Sisco 1997 - 2000
* Maj .
Gen. Richard A. Box 2000 - 2006
* Maj .
Gen. Christopher J. Powers 2006 - 2009
* Maj .
Gen. Raymond C. Peters 2009 - 2012
* Maj .
Gen. Manuel A. Rodriguez VII 2012 - 2014
* Maj .
Gen. Gerald R.
" Jake " Betty 2014 - 2017
* Maj .
Gen. Robert J. " Duke " Bodisch 2017–present IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The Texas State Guard was referenced in a Doonesbury comic strip in June 2015 .
SEE ALSO
* Texas Wing Civil Air Patrol REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Texas State Guard