FOOTLOOSE ( SONG )
" Footloose " is a song co - written and recorded by American singer - songwriter Kenny Loggins .
It was released in January 1984 as the first of two singles by Loggins from the 1984 film of the same name ( the other one being "
I 'm Free ( Heaven Helps the Man ) " ) .
The song spent three weeks at number one , March 31—April 14 , 1984 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and was the first of two number - one hits from the film .
Billboard ranked it at the No . 4 song for 1984 .
The song was very well received , and is one of the most recognizable songs recorded by Loggins .
When the American Film Institute released its AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs , " Footloose " reached the 96th position .
The song was covered by country music artist Blake Shelton for the 2011 remake of the 1984 film .
It was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 1985 ceremony , losing to Stevie Wonder 's
" I Just Called to Say I Love You " from The Woman in Red .
The single version is slightly shorter in length compared to the album version .
It begins with a soloed guitar track instead of a drum intro , and features more prominent backing vocals in the mix , particularly towards the end of the song .
In 2018 , it was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or artistically significant . "
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video was directed by Brian Grant .
It uses the single version and features several scenes from the film , in particular the warehouse where Kevin Bacon 's character performs an unorchestrated dance routine ( which was actually performed to a different song in the film itself ) .
PERSONNEL
* Kenny Loggins - vocals
* Neil & Steve Larsen - keyboards
* Nathan East - bass
* Tris Imboden - drums * Buzz Feiten - guitar * Paulinho da Costa - percussion * Michael Boddicker - synthesizer bass & percussion * Marilyn Dorman , Richey Washington & Steve Wood - background vocalists CHARTS AND CERTIFICATIONS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts and certifications .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1984 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( KMR )
align="center"1 Austria ( Ö3 Austria Top 40 )
align="center"8 Belgium ( VRT Top 30 Flanders )
align="center"26 Canada ( RPM )
align="center"1 Germany ( Media Control Charts )
align="center"4 Ireland ( IRMA ) align="center"4 Italy ( Musica e dischi ) align="center"17 Switzerland ( Schweizer Hitparade )
align="center"4 !
Chart ( 2018 ) !
Peakposition
YEAR - END CHARTS CERTIFICATIONS BLAKE SHELTON
VERSION Section::::Blake Shelton version .
Blake Shelton covered the song for the 2011 version of the film .
Shelton 's version also appears on the film 's soundtrack .
It charted at number 63 on the US Billboard Hot Country Songs chart in November 2011 .
A music video for Shelton 's version of the song , directed by Shaun Silva , premiered in October 2011 .
PERSONNEL
* Blake Shelton – vocals CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance . !
Chart ( 2011 ) !
Peakposition CERTIFICATIONS OTHER COVER VERSIONS
*
The song has also been parodied by " Weird Al " Yankovic ( " Hooked on Polkas " ) .
*
The song was covered in the cast of Disney Channel television series Soy Luna .
SEE ALSO
* List of Billboard Hot 100 number - one singles of 1984
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Kenny Loggins discusses " Footloose " - RetroRewind interview