CURING SALT Curing salts are used in food preservation to prevent or slow spoilage by bacteria or fungus .
Generally they are used for pickling meats as part of the process to make sausage or cured meat .
Curing salts are generally a mixture of table salt and sodium nitrite , which serves to inhibit the growth of bacteria , specifically Clostridium botulinum in an effort to prevent botulism , and helps preserve the color of cured meat .
Many also contain red dye that makes them pink to prevent them from being confused with common table salt .
Thus curing salt is sometimes referred to as " pink salt " .
Curing salts are not to be confused with Himalayan pink salt , which is pure salt with trace elements that give it a pink color .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are many types of curing salts often specific to a country or region .
PRAGUE POWDER
# 1 Section::::Prague Powder # 1 .
One of the most common curing salts .
It is also called Insta Cure # 1 or Pink curing salt # 1 .
It contains 6.25 % sodium nitrite and 93.75 % table salt .
It is recommended for meats that require short cures and will be cooked and eaten relatively quickly .
Sodium nitrite provides the characteristic flavor and color associated with curing .
PRAGUE POWDER # 2 Section::::Prague Powder # 2 .
Also called Pink curing salt # 2 .
It contains 6.25 % sodium nitrite , 4 % sodium nitrate , and 89.75 % table salt .
The sodium nitrate found in Prague powder # 2 gradually breaks down over time into sodium nitrite , and by that time a dry cured sausage is ready to be eaten , no sodium nitrate should be left .
For this reason it is recommended for meats that require long ( weeks to months ) cures , like hard salami and country ham .
SALTPETRE Section::::Saltpetre .
Another name for potassium nitrate , saltpetre has been a common ingredient of salted meat since the Middle Ages , but its use has been mostly discontinued due to inconsistent results compared to more modern nitrate and nitrite compounds .
Even so , saltpetre is still used in some food applications , such as charcuterie .
It should not be confused with Chile saltpetre or Peru saltpetre , which is sodium nitrate .
SEE ALSO
* List of dried foods REFERENCES