CAMP MABRY
Camp Mabry ( ICAO : KATT ) is a military installation in Austin , Texas that houses the headquarters of the Texas Military Forces and the Texas Military Forces Museum .
Established in 1892 , Camp Mabry is the third - oldest active military installation in Texas , behind Fort Sam Houston and Fort Bliss .
It was named for Brigadier General Woodford H. Mabry , the Adjutant General of Texas when the camp was founded .
The camp was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1996 .
MILITARY FUNCTIONS Section::::Military functions .
Camp Mabry is the home to the Joint Force Headquarters of the Texas Military Forces , housing the office of the state adjutant general and the headquarters of the Texas Army National Guard , the Texas Air National Guard , and the Texas State Guard .
It also hosts the Texas Military Forces Museum .
The facility has served a variety of military purposes since its establishment .
It was used as a mobilization area during the Spanish – American War , as headquarters for the Texas Defense Guard during World War II , and as a training facility for the Texas DPS and the Texas Rangers until 1953 .
It has also hosted the Texas National Guard 's State Officer Candidate School since 1959 .
Camp Mabry currently hosts other branches of the Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces from the United States Army Reserve , the United States Navy Reserve Navy Operations Support Center ( NOSC Austin ) and the United States Marine Corps Reserve .
SITE Section::::Site .
Camp Mabry 's original site , overlooking the Colorado River three miles ( 5 km ) northwest of downtown Austin , was donated by the city to the state in 1892 .
It was initially a literal " camp , " a space in which the Texas Volunteer Guard encamped during the summers while hosting mock battles and demonstrations for the people of Austin .
In 1909 the camp was greatly enlarged by the addition of of land purchased by the federal government for use in training the state national guard .
Other land gifts brought the camp to its present size of around by 1911 .
The site now adjoins the west side of Mopac Expressway .
FACILITIES Section::::Facilities .
The first constructions at the camp were grandstands and a mess shed , funded by paid admissions to the historical reenactments and events held there .
In 1915 an arsenal became the first permanent structure built onsite , allowing military equipment and weapons to be moved out of storage in the capitol building .
During World War I the U.S. Army used the camp as a training site and built several barracks and administration buildings .
From 1935 to 1943 , the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) , under the sponsorship of the Adjutant General 's Department of Texas , completed a $ 130,000 improvement project , of which the WPA provided $ 92,000 for labor .
The WPA did necessary repairs and " other improvements to generally restore the useful value " of 15 buildings , built structures of native limestone that included rustic walls , entrance gates and guard post , a dam , arched bridges , drainage ditches , a flagpole base , cannon bases , workshops , warehouses and storage buildings .
Infrastructure features included limestone culverts , head walls , and limestone or concrete sidewalks .
They constructed roads and cleared , leveled , sodded , and drained the camp .
Other facilities include the 136th Regional Training Institute , state Combined Support Maintenance Shops , the armory of the 36th Infantry Division headquarters , a clinic , a parachute packing and storage facility , and additional storage buildings .
In 1992 the Texas Military Forces Museum opened on the site .
Prior to the September 11th attacks , Camp Mabry 's mile - long track that sits adjacent to Mopac was a popular destination for walkers and joggers , and the field within it was used by many youth sports teams .
The track and field are still available for public use , though adult visitors must present a state or federal ID at the gate .
WEATHER STATION
Section::::Weather station .
Camp Mabry has also operated an ICAO recognized weather station since 1898 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS