WHERE ARE YOU GOING , WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN ?
" Where Are You Going , Where Have You Been ?
" is a frequently anthologized short story written by Joyce Carol Oates .
The story first appeared in the Fall 1966 edition of Epoch magazine .
It was inspired by three Tucson , Arizona murders committed by Charles Schmid , which were profiled in Life magazine in an article written by Don Moser on March 4 , 1966 .
Oates said that she dedicated the story to Bob Dylan because she was inspired to write it after listening to his song
" It 's
All Over Now , Baby Blue " .
The story was originally named " Death and the Maiden " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The main character of Oates ' story is Connie , a beautiful , self - absorbed 15-year - old girl , who is at odds with her mother — once a beauty herself — and with her dutiful , " steady " , and homely older sister .
Without her parents ' knowledge , she spends most of her evenings picking up boys at a Big Boy restaurant , and one evening captures the attention of a stranger in a gold convertible covered with cryptic writing .
While her parents are away at her aunt 's barbecue , two men pull up in front of Connie 's house and call her out .
She recognizes the driver , Arnold Friend , as the man from the drive - in restaurant , and is initially charmed by the smooth - talking , charismatic stranger .
He tells Connie he is 18 and has come to take her for a ride in his car with his sidekick Ellie .
Connie slowly realizes that he is actually much older , and grows afraid .
When she refuses to go with them , Friend becomes more forceful and threatening , saying that he will harm her family , while at the same time appealing to her vanity , saying that she is too good for them .
Connie is compelled to leave with him and do what he demands of her .
CRITICAL REVIEW Section::::Critical review .
Considerable academic analysis has been written about the story , with scholars divided on whether it is intended to be taken literally or as allegory .
Several writers focus on the series of numbers written on Friend 's car , which he indicates are a code of some sort , but which is never explained :
" Now , these numbers are a secret code , honey , " Arnold Friend explained .
He read off the numbers 33 , 19 , 17 and raised his eyebrows at her to see what she thought of that , but she did n't think much of it .
Literary scholars have interpreted this series of numbers as different Biblical references , as an underlining of Friend 's sexual deviancy , or as a reference to the ages of Friend and his victims .
The narrative has also been viewed as an allegory for initiation into sexual adulthood , an encounter with the devil , a critique of modern youth 's obsession with sexual themes in popular music , or as a dream sequence .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The story was loosely adapted into the 1985 film Smooth Talk , starring Laura Dern and Treat Williams .
Oates has written an essay named " Smooth Talk : Short Story into Film " about the adaptation .
The short story is the inspiration and basis for The Blood Brothers ' song " The Salesman , Denver Max " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Complete text on Celestial Timepiece , an authorized Joyce Carol Oates Home Page