ANN INC .
Ann Inc. is an American group of specialty apparel retail chain stores for women .
The company headquartered in New York City and currently operates as a subsidiary of Ascena Retail Group .
The stores offer classic styled suits , separates , dresses , shoes and accessories .
The brand is marketed under five divisions : Ann Taylor , Loft , Lou & Grey , Ann Taylor Factory and Loft Outlet .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Richard Liebeskind , the founder of Ann Taylor , opened his first Ann Taylor store in New Haven , Connecticut in 1954 .
"
Ann Taylor " was the name of a best - selling dress at Liebskind 's father 's store .
Both the best - selling dress and the name Ann Taylor were given by the father to his son , Richard Liebeskind , for good luck .
Liebeskind decided to go with the name Ann Taylor because Ann was considered a very New England name , and Taylor evoked the image of tailored clothing .
The name supposedly created the ideal identity of classic women 's apparel .
In May 1991 , the company completed an initial public offering resulting in aggregate net proceeds of approximately $ 166.5 million .
In March 2011 , the company changed its name to Ann Inc. , from Ann Taylor Stores Corporation .
As of October 27 , 2012 , the total store count was 981 : of 278 Ann Taylor stores , 101 Ann Taylor Factory stores , 510 Loft stores , and 92 Loft Outlet stores , as well as online at AnnTaylor.com and Loft.com .
On May 18 , 2015 Ascena Retail Group announced a $ 2.16 billion acquisition of
Ann Inc. The buyout was completed on August 21 , 2015 .
Ann Inc. will operate as an Ascena Retail Group subsidiary going forward .
DIVISIONS
Section::::Divisions .
Ann Taylor is a chain of clothing stores for women .
Ann Taylor stores compete in the " better " category , with clothing targeted at affluent career women .
Ann Taylor was founded in 1954 .
Loft , originally Ann Taylor Loft , was established in 1996 as an extension of the original Ann Taylor brand , offers more relaxed fashions for work and home , in the " upper moderate " priced category .
The selection provided at Loft initially was a more casual replica to that of the regular Ann Taylor , however has developed into its own brand , and now carries a unique style to cater to a new and younger crowd .
Lou & Grey sells active - wear fashion .
Ann Taylor Factory , offers reduced prices , as well as Ann Taylor Factory merchandise .
The company is now moving away from Ann Taylor Factory clearance stores and are changing their stores to carry Ann Taylor Factory merchandise .
Loft Outlet , offers a Loft - based Outlet environment , similar to the current Ann Taylor Factory stores , with unique LOFT Outlet merchandise mirrored from popular and best - selling LOFT product .
There are currently 128 Loft Outlet stores throughout the U.S. SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
Section::::Special collections .
Ann Taylor Celebrations , was launched in August 2005 ; it is a signature collection featuring dresses , wraps , sashes , shoes , and bags .
Each piece in the collection is dyed to match .
The collection can be worn for occasions from wedding parties to black tie and special events .
In 2009 this line began being offered online only .
Ann Taylor Collections , was launched 2007 and consists of luxury apparel , accessories , and shoes made using Italian made fabrics and yarns .
The craftsmanship is of an elevated value and the price point is higher than other pieces .
Ann Taylor Beauty , consisting of fragrance and bath and body products , that were to be available in all Ann Taylor stores beginning late 2007 or early 2008 .
The Possibilities fragrance was released in November 2007 .
The body care line consists of body mist , lotion , and body wash , and comes in six scents .
The scents are Sugar Vanilla Orchid Bloom , Almond Vanilla Warm Fig , Peach Honey Sheer Musk , Orange Nectar Honeysuckle , Silver Tea citrus Flower , and Creamy Blackberry Sandal Wood .
Loft Maternity was released in Summer 2007 under the motto " Because you have a LOFT to expect .
"
While at first the LOFT Maternity line included only mid - range sizes , it expanded to include all Loft sizes ( 00–18 ) in Fall 2007 .
As of Summer 2010 , LOFT Maternity operates exclusively online , using the tag line , " Clothes so stylish and comfortable you 'll wish you could wear them for more than nine months . "
FLAGSHIP STORES Section::::Flagship stores .
Ann Taylor has two flagship locations : * Store 0362 : 645 Madison Avenue in New York City
* Store 0547 : 600 North Michigan Avenue in Chicago , Illinois on the Magnificent Mile
The company also has a Loft flagship store :
* Store 1614 : 1459 Broadway at Times Square in New York City REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website *
Ann Taylor Loft official website *
Ann Taylor Celebrations official website
* Ann Taylor SEC Filings
* WWD.com Profile :
Ann Taylor Stores