MIDDLETOWN – TOWN OF WALLKILL STATION
The Middletown – Town of Walkill station , often just referred to as the Middletown station , is a stop on the Metro - North Railroad 's Port Jervis Line serving Middletown and Town of Wallkill in Orange County , New York .
Service is to Hoboken , 71.9 miles ( 116 km ) ; travel time is an hour and 40 minutes .
Like all Port Jervis Line stations , this station serves commuters from a wide area .
Many commuters use nearby NY 17 to reach the station from communities in Sullivan County such as Wurtsboro and Monticello .
Two trains end at this station on weekdays , with one Hoboken - bound train departing Middletown as well .
The station is located in the latter municipality , along the Erie Railroad Graham Line off NY 211 near its exit with NY 17 and not too far from the Galleria at Crystal Run , a popular local shopping mall .
However , while the mall and other large retailers such as Sam 's Club are visible from the station , there is no provision for pedestrian traffic on any of the roads leading to them .
Middletown Station was originally built as an Erie Railway Station along the Erie Main Line on James Street .
Today the former Erie Depot is the Thrall Library .
The MTA recently concluded improvements to the station similar to those found at other Port Jervis Line stations to the east :
decorative lighting , an elevated platform for access by passengers in wheelchairs , and expanded paid parking .
In a switch from the other stations to receive this amenities , the platform roof at Middletown is green rather than red , platform light poles are brown instead of green and the wheelchair platform is not under the roof .
While other Metro - North stations such as Cortlandt and Southeast are named after the towns in which they are located , this is the only one to include " Town of ... " in its official name , to avoid longstanding confusion with the nearby hamlet in Ulster County .
STATION LAYOUT Section::::Station layout .
This station has one track and a low - level side platformPort Jervis Line toward Port Jervis Port Jervis Line toward Hoboken →
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .
Middletown train schedule