SWITZERLAND – EUROPEAN UNION RELATIONS
The relations between Switzerland and the European Union ( EU ) are framed by a series of bilateral treaties whereby the Swiss Confederation has adopted various provisions of European Union law in order to participate in the Union 's single market , without joining as a member state .
All but one ( the microstate Liechtenstein ) of Switzerland 's neighbouring countries are EU member states .
TRADE Section::::Trade .
The European Union is Switzerland 's largest trading partner , and Switzerland is the EU 's third largest trading partner , after the U.S. and China .
Switzerland accounts for 5.2 % of the EU 's imports ; mainly chemicals , medicinal products , machinery , instruments and time pieces .
In terms of services , the EU 's exports to Switzerland amounted to € 67.0 billion in 2008 while imports from Switzerland stood at € 47.2 billion .
TREATIES Section::::Treaties .
Switzerland signed a free - trade agreement with the then European Economic Community in 1972 , which entered into force in 1973 .
Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) , and took part in negotiating the European Economic Area ( EEA ) agreement with the European Union .
It signed the agreement on 2 May 1992 , and submitted an application for accession to the EU on 20 May 1992 .
However , after a Swiss referendum held on 6 December 1992 rejected EEA membership by 50.3 % to 49.7 % , the Swiss government decided to suspend negotiations for EU membership until further notice .
These did not resume and in 2016 , Switzerland formally withdrew its application for EU membership .
In 1994 , Switzerland and the EU started negotiations about a special relationship outside the EEA .
Switzerland wanted to safeguard the economic integration with the EU that the EEA treaty would have permitted , while purging the relationship of the points of contention that had led to the people rejecting the referendum .
Swiss politicians stressed the bilateral nature of these negotiations , where negotiations were conducted between two equal partners and not between 16 , 26 , 28 or 29 , as is the case for EU treaty negotiations .
These negotiations resulted in a total of ten treaties , negotiated in two phases , the sum of which makes a large share of EU law applicable to Switzerland .
The treaties are : Bilateral
I agreements ( signed 1999 , in effect 1 June 2002 )
* Free movement of people
*
* Air traffic * * Road traffic * * Agriculture * * Technical trade barriers *
* Public procurement
*
*
Science * Bilateral II agreements * Security and asylum and Schengen membership
*
* Cooperation in fraud pursuits * * Final stipulations in open questions about agriculture , environment , media , education , care of the elderly , statistics and services .
*
The Bilateral I agreements are expressed to be mutually dependent .
If any one of them is denounced or not renewed , they all cease to apply .
According to the preamble of the EU decision ratifying the agreements : This is referred to as the " Guillotine clause " .
While the bilateral approach theoretically safeguards the right to refuse the application of new EU rules to Switzerland , in practice the scope to do so is limited by the clause .
The agreement on the European Economic Area contains a similar clause .
Prior to 2014 , the bilateral approach , as it is called in Switzerland , was consistently supported by the Swiss people in referendums .
It allows the Swiss to keep a sense of sovereignty , due to arrangements when changes in EU law will only apply after a joint bilateral commission decides so in consensus .
It also limits the EU influence to the ten areas , where the EEA includes more areas , with more exceptions than the EEA has .
From the perspective of the EU , the treaties largely contain the same content as the EEA treaties , making Switzerland a virtual member of the EEA .
Most EU law applies universally throughout the EU , the EEA and Switzerland , providing most of the conditions of the free movement of people , goods , services and capital that apply to full member states .
Switzerland pays into the EU budget and extended the bilateral treaties to the new EU member states , just like full members did , although each extension requires the approval of Swiss voters in a referendum .
In a referendum on 5 June 2005 , Swiss voters agreed , by a 55 % majority , to join the Schengen Area .
This came into effect on 12 December 2008 .
In 2009 , the Swiss voted to extend the free movement of people to Bulgaria and Romania by 59.6 % in favour to 40.4 % against .
While the EU Directive 2004/38 / EC on the right to move and reside freely does not directly apply to Switzerland , the Swiss - EU bilateral agreement on the free movement of people contains the same rights both for Swiss and EEA nationals , and their family members .
By 2010 , Switzerland had amassed around 210 trade treaties with the EU .
Following the institutional changes in the EU – particularly regarding foreign policy and the increased role of the European Parliament – European Council President Herman Van Rompuy and Swiss President Doris Leuthard expressed a desire to " reset " EU - Swiss relations with an easier and cleaner way of applying EU law in Switzerland .
In December 2012 , the Council of the European Union declared that there will be no further treaties on single market issues unless Switzerland and EU agree on a new legal framework similar to the EEA that , among others , would bind Switzerland more closely to the evolving EU legislation .
José Manuel Barroso , the President of the European Commission , later affirmed this position .
However , a second referendum on Swiss EEA membership is n't expected , and the Swiss public remains opposed to joining .
SCHENGEN AGREEMENT Section::::Schengen Agreement .
In 2009 , Switzerland became a participant in the Schengen Area with the acceptance of an association agreement by popular referendum in 2005 .
This means that there are no passport controls on Switzerland 's borders with its neighbours though customs controls continue to apply . 2014
REFERENDUM Section::::2014 referendum .
In a referendum in February 2014 , the Swiss voters narrowly approved a proposal to limit the freedom of movement of foreign citizens to Switzerland .
The European Commission said it would have to examine the implications of the result on EU – Swiss relations since literal implementation would invoke the guillotine clause .
On 22 December 2016 , Switzerland and the EU concluded an agreement whereby a new Swiss law ( in response to the referendum ) would require Swiss employers to take on any job seekers ( whether Swiss nationals or non - Swiss citizens registered in Swiss job agencies ) whilst continuing to observe the free movement of EU citizens into Switzerland thus allowing them to work there .
SWISS FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS Section::::Swiss financial contributions .
Since 2008 , Switzerland has contributed CHF 1.3 billion towards various projects designed to reduce the economic and social disparities in an enlarged EU .
One example of how this money is used is Legionowo railway station , Poland , which is being built with CHF 9.6 million from the Swiss budget .
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK ACCORD Section::::Proposed framework accord .
Negotiations between Switzerland and the European Commission on an institutional framework accord began in 2014 and concluded in November 2018 .
On 7 December 2018 , the Swiss Federal Council decided to neither accept nor decline the negotiated accord , instead opting for a public consultation .
The negotiated accord would cover five areas of existing agreements between the EU and Switzerland made in 1999 : * free movement of persons *
air transport * carriage of goods and passengers by rail and road * trade in agricultural products * mutual recognition of standards Notably , the accord would facilitate EU law in these fields to be readily transposed into Swiss law , and the European Court of Justice would be the final and binding arbiter on disputes in these fields .
If the accord were accepted by Switzerland , the country would be in a similar position with regard to imposition of EU law ( albeit only in the above five fields ) as that in the other EFTA countries which are members of the EEA .
Further to matters of sovereignty , specific concerns raised in Switzerland include possible impact on state aid law on the cantonal banks , the potential for transposition of the Citizens ' Rights Directive into Swiss law ( and any resulting impact on social welfare for example ) and the possible impact on wages enjoyed in the country .
Accepting the accord is considered by the Commission to be necessary to allow Swiss access to new fields of the European single market , including the electricity market and stock exchange equivalence .
CHRONOLOGY OF THE SWISS VOTES Section::::Chronology of the Swiss votes .
Chronology of Swiss votes about the European Union : * 3 December 1972 : free trade agreement with the European Communities is approved by 72.5 % of voters * 6 December 1992 :
joining the European Economic Area is rejected by 50.3 % of voters .
This vote strongly highlighted the cultural divide between the German- and the French - speaking cantons , the Röstigraben .
The only German - speaking cantons voting for the EEA were Basel - Stadt and Basel - Landschaft , which border on France and Germany .
* 8 June 1997 : the federal popular initiative " negotiations concerning EU membership : let the people decide ! "
on requiring the approval of a referendum and the Cantons to launch accession negotiations with the EU ( « Négociations d'adhésion à l'UE : que le peuple décide !
» ) is rejected by 74.1 % of voters .
* 21 May 2000 : the Bilateral agreements with the EU are accepted by 67.2 % of voters .
* 4 March 2001 : the federal popular initiative "
yes to Europe ! "
( « Oui à l'Europe !
» ) on opening accession negotiations with the EU is rejected by 76.8 % of voters .
* 5 June 2005 : the Schengen Agreement and the Dublin Regulation are approved by 54.6 % of voters .
* 25 September 2005 : the extension of the free movement of persons to the ten new members of the European Union is accepted by 56.0 % of voters .
* 26 November 2006 : a cohesion contribution of one billion for the ten new member states of the European Union ( Eastern Europe Cooperation Act ) is approved by 53.4 % of voters .
* 8 February 2009 : the extension of the free movement of persons to new EU members
Bulgaria and Romania is approved by 59.61 % of voters .
* 17 May 2009 : introduction of biometric passports , as required by the Schengen acquis , is approved by 50.15 % of voters .
* 17 June 2012 : the federal popular initiative " international agreements : let the people speak ! "
( « Accords internationaux : la parole au peuple !
» ) on requiring all international treaties to be approved in a referendum launched by the Campaign for an Independent and Neutral Switzerland is rejected by 75.3 % of voters .
* 9 February 2014 : the federal popular initiative " against mass immigration " , which would limit the free movement of people from EU member states , is accepted by 50.3 % of voters .
Among these twelve votations , three are against further integration with the EU or for reversing integration with the EU ( 6 December 1992 , 4 March 2001 and 9 February 2014 ) ; the other nine are votes in favour of either deepening or maintaining integration between Switzerland and the European Union .
PROPOSALS FOR EU MEMBERSHIP
Section::::Proposals for EU membership .
Switzerland took part in negotiating the EEA agreement with the EU and signed the agreement on 2 May 1992 and submitted an application for accession to the EU on 20 May 1992 .
A Swiss referendum held on 6 December 1992 rejected EEA membership .
As a consequence , the Swiss Government suspended negotiations for EU accession until further notice .
It is thought that the fear of a loss of neutrality and independence is the key issue against membership among eurosceptics .
Switzerland has relatively little amount of land area with agriculture , on which a large part of the EU budget is spent .
The popular initiative entitled " Yes to Europe ! " , calling for the opening of immediate negotiations for EU membership , was rejected in a 4 March 2001 referendum by 76.8 % and all cantons .
The Swiss Federal Council , which was in favour of EU membership , had advised the population to vote against this referendum since the preconditions for the opening of negotiations had not been met .
The Swiss federal government has recently undergone several substantial U - turns in policy , however , concerning specific agreements with the EU on freedom of movement for people , workers and areas concerning tax evasion have been addressed within the Swiss banking system .
This was a result of the first Switzerland – EU summit in May 2004 where nine bilateral agreements were signed .
Romano Prodi , former President of the European Commission , said the agreements " moved Switzerland closer to Europe . "
Joseph Deiss of the Swiss Federal Council said , " We might not be at the very centre of Europe but we 're definitely at the heart of Europe " .
He continued , " We 're beginning a new era of relations between our two entities . " With the ratification of the second round of bilateral treaties , the Swiss Federal Council downgraded their characterisation of a full EU membership of Switzerland from a " strategic goal " to an " option " in 2006 .
The Swiss population agreed to their country 's participation in the Schengen Agreement and joined the area in December 2008 .
The result of the referendum on extending the freedom of movement of people to Bulgaria and Romania , which joined the EU on 1 January 2007 caused Switzerland to breach its obligations to the EU .
The Swiss government declared in September 2009 that bilateral treaties are not solutions and the membership debate has to be examined again while the left - wing Green Party and the Social Democratic Party stated that they would renew their push for EU membership for Switzerland .
In the Swiss immigration referendum , February 2014 , a federal popular initiative " against mass immigration " , Swiss voters narrowly approved measures limiting the freedom of movement of foreign citizens to Switzerland .
The European Commission said it would have to examine the implications of the result on EU – Swiss relations .
Due to the refusal of Switzerland to grant Croatia free movement of persons , the EU accepted Switzerland 's access to the Erasmus+ student mobility program only as a " partner country " , as opposed to a " programme country " , and the EU froze negotiations on access to the EU electricity market .
On March 4 , 2016 , Switzerland and the EU signed a treaty that extends the accord of the free movement of people to Croatia , something which lead to Switzerland 's full readmission into Horizon 2020 , a European funding framework for research and development .
The treaty was ratified by the National Council on April 26 on the condition that a solution be found to an impasse on implementing the 2014 referendum .
The treaty was passed in December 2016 .
This allowed Switzerland to rejoin Horizons 2020 on January 1 , 2017 .
EU membership continued to be the objective of the government and was a " long - term aim " of the Federal Council until 2016 , when Switzerland 's frozen application was withdrawn .
The motion was passed by the Council of States and then by the Federal Council in June .
In a letter dated 27 July the Federal Council informed the Presidency of the Council of the European Union that it was withdrawing its application .
A 2018 survey of public opinion in Switzerland found only 3 % considered that joining the EU was a feasible option .
FOREIGN POLICY Section::::Foreign policy .
In the field of foreign and security policy , Switzerland and the EU have no overarching agreements .
But in its Security Report 2000 , the Swiss Federal Council announced the importance of contributing to stability and peace beyond Switzerland 's borders and of building an international community of common values .
Subsequently , Switzerland started to collaborate in projects of EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) .
Switzerland has , contributed staff or material to EU peace keeping and security missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Kosovo , Macedonia and Aceh in Indonesia .
Close cooperation has also been established in the area of international sanctions .
As of 2006 , Switzerland has adopted five EU sanctions that were instituted outside of the United Nations .
Those affected the former Republic of Yugoslavia ( 1998 ) , Myanmar ( 2000 ) , Zimbabwe ( 2002 ) , Uzbekistan ( 2006 ) and Belarus ( 2006 ) .
USE OF THE EURO IN SWITZERLAND Section::::Use of the euro in Switzerland .
The currency of Switzerland is the Swiss franc .
Switzerland ( with Liechtenstein ) is in the unusual position of being surrounded by countries that use the euro .
As a result , the euro is de facto accepted in many places , especially near borders and in tourist regions .
Swiss Federal Railways accept euros , both at ticket counters and in automatic ticket machines .
Also many public phones , vending machines or ticket machines accept euro coins .
Many shops and smaller businesses that accept euros take notes only , and give change in Swiss francs , usually at a less favourable exchange rate than banks .
Many bank cash machines issue euros at the traded exchange rate as well as Swiss francs .
On 6 September 2011 , the Swiss franc effectively became fixed against the euro : the Franc had always floated independently until its currency appreciation became unacceptable during the eurozone debt crisis .
The Swiss National Bank set an CHF / EUR peg that involved a minimum exchange rate of 1.20 francs to the euro , with no upper bound in place .
The Bank committed to maintaining this exchange rate to ensure stability .
The peg was abandoned on 15 January 2015 , when renewed upward pressure on the Swiss franc exceeded the Bank 's level of tolerance .
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN SWITZERLAND AND EU MEMBER STATES Hungarian diaspora .
Consulates :
Basel , Chiasso , Geneva , Zurich .
Warsaw .
Bern .
Switzerland recognized Slovenia in early 1992 shortly after it gained independence in 1991 .
BernConsulates General :
Basel , Lausanne .
Consulates : Geneva , Lugano , Zurich . SEE ALSO
* Enlargement of the European Union ( Future )
* Enlargement of Switzerland
* Liechtenstein – Switzerland relations
* Foreign relations of Switzerland
* German immigration to Switzerland * Italian immigration to Switzerland * Schengen Area NOTES REFERENCES