FERMENTATION
Fermentation is a metabolic process that produces chemical changes in organic substrates through the action of enzymes .
In biochemistry , it is narrowly defined as the extraction of energy from carbohydrates in the absence of oxygen .
In the context of food production , it may more broadly refer to any process in which the activity of microorganisms brings about a desirable change to a foodstuff or beverage .
The science of fermentation is known as zymology .
In microorganisms , fermentation is the primary means of producing ATP by the degradation of organic nutrients anaerobically .
Humans have used fermentation to produce foodstuffs and beverages since the Neolithic age .
For example , fermentation is used for preservation in a process that produces lactic acid found in such sour foods as pickled cucumbers , kimchi , and yogurt , as well as for producing alcoholic beverages such as wine and beer .
Fermentation occurs within the gastrointestinal tracts of all animals , including humans .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
Below are some definitions of fermentation .
They range from informal , general usages to more scientific definitions .
* Preservation methods for food via microorganisms ( general use ) .
*
* Any process that produces alcoholic beverages or acidic dairy products ( general use ) .
*
* Any large - scale microbial process occurring with or without air ( common definition used in industry ) .
*
* Any energy - releasing metabolic process that takes place only under anaerobic conditions ( becoming more scientific ) .
*
*
Any metabolic process that releases energy from a sugar or other organic molecule , does not require oxygen or an electron transport system , and uses an organic molecule as the final electron acceptor ( most scientific ) .
* BIOLOGICAL ROLE
Section::::Biological role .
Along with photosynthesis and aerobic respiration , fermentation is a way of extracting energy from molecules , but it is the only one common to all bacteria and eukaryotes .
It is therefore considered the oldest metabolic pathway , suitable for an environment that does not yet have oxygen .
Yeast , a form of fungus , occurs in almost any environment capable of supporting microbes , from the skins of fruits to the guts of insects and mammals and the deep ocean , and they harvest sugar - rich materials to produce ethanol and carbon dioxide .
The basic mechanism for fermentation remains present in all cells of higher organisms .
Mammalian muscle carries out the fermentation that occurs during periods of intense exercise where oxygen supply becomes limited , resulting in the creation of lactic acid .
In invertebrates , fermentation also produces succinate and alanine .
Fermentative bacteria play an essential role in the production of methane in habitats ranging from the rumens of cattle to sewage digesters and freshwater sediments .
They produce hydrogen , carbon dioxide , formate and acetate and carboxylic acids ; and then consortia of microbes convert the carbon dioxide and acetate to methane .
Acetogenic bacteria oxidize the acids , obtaining more acetate and either hydrogen or formate .
Finally , methanogens ( which are in the domain Archea ) convert acetate to methane .
BIOCHEMICAL OVERVIEW Section::::Biochemical overview .
Fermentation reacts NADH with an endogenous , organic electron acceptor .
Usually this is pyruvate formed from sugar through glycolysis .
The reaction produces NAD+ and an organic product , typical examples being ethanol , lactic acid , carbon dioxide , and hydrogen gas ( H ) .
However , more exotic compounds can be produced by fermentation , such as butyric acid and acetone .
Fermentation products contain chemical energy ( they are not fully oxidized ) , but are considered waste products , since they can not be metabolized further without the use of oxygen .
Fermentation normally occurs in an anaerobic environment .
In the presence of O , NADH , and pyruvate are used to generate ATP in respiration .
This is called oxidative phosphorylation , and it generates much more ATP than glycolysis alone .
For that reason , fermentation is rarely utilized when oxygen is available .
However , even in the presence of abundant oxygen , some strains of yeast such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae prefer fermentation to aerobic respiration as long as there is an adequate supply of sugars ( a phenomenon known as the Crabtree effect ) .
Some fermentation processes involve obligate anaerobes , which can not tolerate oxygen .
Although yeast carries out the fermentation in the production of ethanol in beers , wines , and other alcoholic drinks , this is not the only possible agent : bacteria carry out the fermentation in the production of xanthan gum .
PRODUCTS ETHANOL Section::::Products .
Section::::Ethanol .
In ethanol fermentation , one glucose molecule is converted into two ethanol molecules and two carbon dioxide molecules .
It is used to make bread dough rise : the carbon dioxide forms bubbles , expanding the dough into a foam .
The ethanol is the intoxicating agent in alcoholic beverages such as wine , beer and liquor .
Fermentation of feedstocks , including sugarcane , corn , and sugar beets , produces ethanol that is added to gasoline .
In some species of fish , including goldfish and carp , it provides energy when oxygen is scarce ( along with lactic acid fermentation ) .
The figure illustrates the process .
Before fermentation , a glucose molecule breaks down into two pyruvate molecules .
The energy from this exothermic reaction is used to bind inorganic phosphates to ATP and convert NAD+ to NADH .
The pyruvates break down into two acetaldehyde molecules and give off two carbon dioxide molecules as a waste product .
The acetaldehyde is reduced into ethanol using the energy and hydrogen from NADH , and the NADH is oxidized into NAD+ so that the cycle may repeat .
The reaction is catalysed by the enzymes pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase .
LACTIC ACID Section::::Lactic acid .
Homolactic fermentation
( producing only lactic acid ) is the simplest type of fermentation .
The pyruvate from glycolysis undergoes a simple redox reaction , forming lactic acid .
It is unique because it is one of the only respiration processes to not produce a gas as a byproduct .
Overall , one molecule of glucose ( or any six - carbon sugar ) is converted to two molecules of lactic acid :
It occurs in the muscles of animals when they need energy faster than the blood can supply oxygen .
It also occurs in some kinds of bacteria ( such as lactobacilli ) and some fungi .
It is the type of bacteria that converts lactose into lactic acid in yogurt , giving it its sour taste .
These lactic acid bacteria can carry out either homolactic fermentation , where the end - product is mostly lactic acid , or Heterolactic fermentation , where some lactate is further metabolized and results in ethanol and carbon dioxide ( via the phosphoketolase pathway ) , acetate , or other metabolic products , e.g. : If lactose is fermented ( as in yogurts and cheeses ) , it is first converted into glucose and galactose ( both six - carbon sugars with the same atomic formula ) :
Heterolactic fermentation is in a sense intermediate between lactic acid fermentation and other types , e.g. alcoholic fermentation ( see below ) .
The reasons to go further and convert lactic acid into anything else are : * The acidity of lactic acid impedes biological processes .
This can be beneficial to the fermenting organism as it drives out competitors that are unadapted to the acidity .
As a result , the food will have a longer shelf life ( part of the reason foods are purposely fermented in the first place ) ; however , beyond a certain point , the acidity starts affecting the organism that produces it .
*
The high concentration of lactic acid ( the final product of fermentation ) drives the equilibrium backwards ( Le Chatelier 's principle ) , decreasing the rate at which fermentation can occur and slowing down growth .
* Ethanol , into which lactic acid can be easily converted , is volatile and will readily escape , allowing the reaction to proceed easily .
CO is also produced , but it is only weakly acidic and even more volatile than ethanol .
* Acetic acid ( another conversion product ) is acidic and not as volatile as ethanol ; however , in the presence of limited oxygen , its creation from lactic acid releases additional energy .
It is a lighter molecule than lactic acid , that forms fewer hydrogen bonds with its surroundings ( due to having fewer groups that can form such bonds ) , thus is more volatile and will also allow the reaction to move forward more quickly .
*
If propionic acid , butyric acid , and longer monocarboxylic acids are produced ( see mixed acid fermentation ) , the amount of acidity produced per glucose consumed will decrease , as with ethanol , allowing faster growth .
HYDROGEN GAS Section::::Hydrogen gas .
Hydrogen gas is produced in many types of fermentation ( mixed acid fermentation , butyric acid fermentation , caproate fermentation , butanol fermentation , glyoxylate fermentation ) as a way to regenerate NAD from NADH .
Electrons are transferred to ferredoxin , which in turn is oxidized by hydrogenase , producing H. Hydrogen gas is a substrate for methanogens and sulfate reducers , which keep the concentration of hydrogen low and favor the production of such an energy - rich compound , but hydrogen gas at a fairly high concentration can nevertheless be formed , as in flatus .
As an example of mixed acid fermentation , bacteria such as Clostridium pasteurianum ferment glucose producing butyrate , acetate , carbon dioxide , and hydrogen gas : The reaction leading to acetate is : Glucose could theoretically be converted into just CO and H , but the global reaction releases little energy .
MODES OF OPERATION Section::::Modes of operation .
Most industrial fermentation uses batch or fed - batch procedures , although continuous fermentation can be more economical if various challenges , particularly the difficulty of maintaining sterility , can be met .
BATCH Section::::Batch .
In a batch process , all the ingredients are combined and the reactions proceed without any further input .
Batch fermentation has been used for millennia to make bread and alcoholic beverages , and it is still a common method , especially when the process is not well understood .
However , it can be expensive because the fermentor must be sterilized using high pressure steam between batches .
Strictly speaking , there is often addition of small quantities of chemicals to control the pH or suppress foaming .
Batch fermentation goes through a series of phases .
There is a lag phase in which cells adjust to their environment ; then a phase in which exponential growth occurs .
Once many of the nutrients have been consumed , the growth slows and becomes non - exponential , but production of secondary metabolites ( including commercially important antibiotics and enzymes ) accelerates .
This continues through a stationary phase after most of the nutrients have been consumed , and then the cells die .
FED - BATCH Section::::Fed - batch .
Fed - batch fermentation is a variation of batch fermentation where some of the ingredients are added during the fermentation .
This allows greater control over the stages of the process .
In particular , production of secondary metabolites can be increased by adding a limited quantity of nutrients during the non - exponential growth phase .
Fed - batch operations are often sandwiched between batch operations .
OPEN Section::::Open .
The high cost of sterilizing the fermentor between batches can be avoided using various open fermentation approaches that are able to resist contamination .
One is to use a naturally evolved mixed culture .
This is particularly favored in wastewater treatment , since mixed populations can adapt to a wide variety of wastes .
Thermophilic bacteria can produce lactic acid at temperatures of around 50 degrees Celsius , sufficient to discourage microbial contamination ; and ethanol has been produced at a temperature of 70 ° C .
This is just below its boiling point ( 78 ° C ) , making it easy to extract .
Halophilic bacteria can produce bioplastics in hypersaline conditions .
Solid - state fermentation adds a small amount of water to a solid substrate ; it is widely used in the food industry to produce flavors , enzymes and organic acids .
CONTINUOUS Section::::Continuous .
In continuous fermentation , substrates are added and final products removed continuously .
There are three varieties : chemostats , which hold nutrient levels constant ; turbidostats , which keep cell mass constant ; and plug flow reactors in which the culture medium flows steadily through a tube while the cells are recycled from the outlet to the inlet .
If the process works well , there is a steady flow of feed and effluent and the costs of repeatedly setting up a batch are avoided .
Also , it can prolong the exponential growth phase and avoid byproducts that inhibit the reactions by continuously removing them .
However , it is difficult to maintain a steady state and avoid contamination , and the design tends to be complex .
Typically the fermentor must run for over 500 hours to be more economical than batch processors .
HISTORY OF HUMAN USE Section::::History of human use .
The use of fermentation , particularly for beverages , has existed since the Neolithic and has been documented dating from 7000–6600 BCE in Jiahu , China , 5000 BCE in India , Ayurveda mentions many Medicated Wines , 6000 BCE in Georgia , 3150 BCE in ancient Egypt , 3000 BCE in Babylon , 2000 BCE in pre - Hispanic Mexico , and 1500 BC in Sudan .
Fermented foods have a religious significance in Judaism and Christianity .
The Baltic god Rugutis was worshiped as the agent of fermentation .
In 1837 , Charles Cagniard de la Tour , Theodor Schwann and Friedrich Traugott Kützing independently published papers concluding , as a result of microscopic investigations , that yeast is a living organism that reproduces by budding .
Schwann boiled grape juice to kill the yeast and found that no fermentation would occur until new yeast was added .
However , a lot of chemists , including Antoine Lavoisier , continued to view fermentation as a simple chemical reaction and rejected the notion that living organisms could be involved .
This was seen as a reversion to vitalism and was lampooned in an anonymous publication by Justus von Liebig and Friedrich Wöhler .
The turning point came when Louis Pasteur ( 1822–1895 ) , during the 1850s and 1860s , repeated Schwann 's experiments and showed that fermentation is initiated by living organisms in a series of investigations .
In 1857 , Pasteur showed that lactic acid fermentation is caused by living organisms .
In 1860 , he demonstrated that bacteria cause souring in milk , a process formerly thought to be merely a chemical change , and his work in identifying the role of microorganisms in food spoilage led to the process of pasteurization .
In 1877 , working to improve the French brewing industry , Pasteur published his famous paper on fermentation , " Etudes sur la Bière " , which was translated into English in 1879 as " Studies on fermentation " .
He defined fermentation ( incorrectly ) as " Life without air " , but correctly showed that specific types of microorganisms cause specific types of fermentations and specific end - products .
Although showing fermentation to be the result of the action of living microorganisms was a breakthrough , it did not explain the basic nature of the fermentation process , or prove that it is caused by the microorganisms that appear to be always present .
Many scientists , including Pasteur , had unsuccessfully attempted to extract the fermentation enzyme from yeast .
Success came in 1897 when the German chemist Eduard Buechner ground up yeast , extracted a juice from them , then found to his amazement that this " dead " liquid would ferment a sugar solution , forming carbon dioxide and alcohol much like living yeasts .
Buechner 's results are considered to mark the birth of biochemistry .
The " unorganized ferments " behaved just like the organized ones .
From that time on , the term enzyme came to be applied to all ferments .
It was then understood that fermentation is caused by enzymes that are produced by microorganisms .
In 1907 , Buechner won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work .
Advances in microbiology and fermentation technology have continued steadily up until the present .
For example , in the 1930s , it was discovered that microorganisms could be mutated with physical and chemical treatments to be higher - yielding , faster - growing , tolerant of less oxygen , and able to use a more concentrated medium .
Strain selection and hybridization developed as well , affecting most modern food fermentations .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " ferment " is derived from the Latin verb fervere , which means to boil .
It is thought to have been first used in the late 14th century in alchemy , but only in a broad sense .
It was not used in the modern scientific sense until around 1600 .
SEE ALSO
* Acetone - butanol - ethanol fermentation
* Dark fermentation
* Fermentation in food processing
* Fermentation lock
* Gut fermentation syndrome
* Industrial fermentation * Non - fermenter * Photofermentation
* Aerobic fermentation
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Works of Louis Pasteur Pasteur Brewing .
* The chemical logic behind fermentation and respiration