KINGDOM OF ITALY ( HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE )
The Kingdom of Italy ( Latin : Regnum Italiae or Regnum Italicum , Italian : Regno d'Italia ) was one of the constituent kingdoms of the Holy Roman Empire , along with the kingdoms of Germany , Bohemia , and Burgundy .
It comprised northern and central Italy , but excluded the Republic of Venice .
Its original capital was Pavia until the 11th century .
In 773 , Charlemagne , the King of the Franks , crossed the Alps to invade the Kingdom of the Lombards , which encompassed all of Italy except the Duchy of Rome and some Byzantine possessions in the south .
In June 774 , the kingdom collapsed and the Franks became masters of northern Italy .
The southern areas remained under Lombard control as the Duchy of Benevento is changed into the rather independent Principality of Benevento .
Charlemagne adopted the title " King of the Lombards " and in 800 was crowned " Emperor of the Romans " in Rome .
Members of the Carolingian dynasty continued to rule Italy until the deposition of Charles the Fat in 887 , after which they once briefly regained the throne in 894–896 .
Until 961 , the rule of Italy was continually contested by several aristocratic families from both within and outside the kingdom .
In 961 , King Otto I of Germany , already married to Adelaide , widow of a previous king of Italy , invaded the kingdom and had himself crowned in Pavia on 25 December .
He continued on to Rome , where he had himself crowned emperor on 7 February 962 .
The union of the crowns of Italy and Germany with that of the so - called " Empire of the Romans " proved stable .
Burgundy was added to this union in 1032 , and by the twelfth century the term " Holy Roman Empire " had come into use to describe it .
From 961 on , the Emperor of the Romans was usually also King of Italy and Germany , although emperors sometimes appointed their heirs to rule in Italy and occasionally the Italian bishops and noblemen elected a king of their own in opposition to that of Germany .
The absenteeism of the Italian monarch led to the rapid disappearance of a central government in the High Middle Ages , but the idea that Italy was a kingdom within the Empire remained and emperors frequently sought to impose their will on the evolving Italian city - states .
The resulting wars between Guelphs and Ghibellines , the anti - imperialist and imperialist factions , respectively , were characteristic of Italian politics in the 12th–14th centuries .
The Lombard League was the most famous example of this situation ; though not a declared separatist movement , it openly challenged the emperor 's claim to power .
By the 15th century , the power of the city - states was largely broken .
A series of wars in Lombardy from 1423 to 1454 further reduced the number of competing states in Italy .
The next forty years were relatively peaceful in Italy , but in 1494 the peninsula was invaded by France .
The resulting Great Italian Wars lasted until 1559 as control of most of the Italian states passed to King Philip II of Spain .
The Peace of Westphalia , in 1648 , formally ended the rule of the Holy Roman Emperors in Italy .
But the Spanish branch of the Habsburg dynasty — the same dynasty of which another branch provided the Emperors — continued to rule most of Italy down to the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1701–1714 ) .
After the Imperial Reform of 1495–1512 , the Italian kingdom corresponded to the unencircled territories south of the Alps .
Juridically the emperor maintained an interest in them as nominal king and overlord , but the " government " of the kingdom consisted of little more than the plenipotentiaries the emperor appointed to represent him and those governors he appointed to rule his own Italian states .
The Habsburg rule in Italy came to an end with the campaigns of the French Revolutionaries in 1792–1797 , when a series of client republics were set up .
In 1806 , the Holy Roman Empire was dissolved by the last emperor , Francis II , after its defeat by Napoleon at the Battle of Austerlitz .
LOMBARD KINGDOM Section::::Lombard kingdom .
After the Battle of Taginae , in which the Ostrogoth king Totila was killed , the Byzantine general Narses captured Rome and besieged Cumae .
Teia , the new Ostrogothic king , gathered the remnants of the Ostrogothic army and marched to relieve the siege , but in October 552 Narses ambushed him at Mons Lactarius ( modern Monti Lattari ) in Campania , near Mount Vesuvius and Nuceria Alfaterna .
The battle lasted two days and Teia was killed in the fighting .
Ostrogothic power in Italy was eliminated , but according to Roman historian Procopius of Caesarea , Narses allowed the Ostrogothic population and their Rugian allies to live peacefully in Italy under Roman sovereignty .
The absence of any real authority in Italy immediately after the battle led to an invasion by the Franks and Alemanni , but they too were defeated in the battle of the Volturnus and the peninsula was , for a short time , reintegrated into the empire .
The Kings of the Lombards ( , singular ) ruled that Germanic people from their invasion of Italy in 567–68 until the Lombardic identity became lost in the ninth and tenth centuries .
After 568 , the Lombard kings sometimes styled themselves Kings of Italy ( ) .
Upon the Lombard defeat at the 774 Siege of Pavia , the kingdom came under the Frankish domination of Charlemagne .
The Iron Crown of Lombardy ( Corona Ferrea ) was used for the coronation of the Lombard kings , and the kings of Italy thereafter , for centuries .
The primary sources for the Lombard kings before the Frankish conquest are the anonymous 7th - century Origo Gentis Langobardorum and the 8th - century Historia Langobardorum of Paul the Deacon .
The earliest kings ( the pre - Lethings ) listed in the Origo are almost certainly legendary .
They purportedly reigned during the Migration Period ; the first ruler attested independently of Lombard tradition is Tato .
The actual control of the sovereigns of both the major areas that constitute the kingdom – Langobardia Major in the centre - north ( in turn divided into a western , or Neustria , and one eastern , or Austria and Tuskia ) and Langobardia Minor in the centre - south , was not constant during the two centuries of life of the kingdom .
An initial phase of strong autonomy of the many constituent duchies developed over time with growing regal authority , even if the dukes ' desires for autonomy were never fully achieved .
The Lombard kingdom proved to be more stable than its Ostrogothic predecessor , but in 774 , on the pretext of defending the Papacy , it was conquered by the Franks under Charlemagne .
They kept the Italo - Lombard realm separate from their own , but the kingdom shared in all the partitions , divisions , civil wars , and succession crises of the Carolingian Empire of which it became a part until , by the end of the ninth century , the Italian kingdom was an independent , but highly decentralised , state .
CONSTITUENT OF THE CAROLINGIAN EMPIRE Section::::Constituent of the Carolingian Empire .
The death of the Emperor Lothair I in 855 led to his realm of Middle Francia being split among his three sons .
The eldest , Louis II , inherited the Carolingian lands in Italy , which were now for the first time ( save the brief rule of Charlemagne 's son Pepin in the first decade of the century ) , ruled as a distinct unit .
The kingdom included all of Italy as far south as Rome and Spoleto , but the rest of Italy to the south was under the rule of the Lombard Principality of Benevento or of the Byzantine Empire .
Following Louis II 's death without heirs , there were several decades of confusion .
The Imperial crown was initially disputed among the Carolingian rulers of West Francia ( France ) and East Francia ( Germany ) , with first the western king ( Charles the Bald ) and then the eastern ( Charles the Fat ) attaining the prize .
Following the deposition of the latter , local nobles – Guy III of Spoleto and Berengar of Friuli – disputed over the crown , and outside intervention did not cease , with Arnulf of Eastern Francia and Louis the Blind of Provence both claiming the Imperial throne for a time .
The kingdom was also beset by Arab raiding parties from Sicily and North Africa , and central authority was minimal at best .
In the 10th century , the situation hardly improved , as various Burgundian and local noblemen continued to dispute over the crown .
Order was only imposed from outside , when the German king Otto I invaded Italy and seized both the Imperial and Italian thrones for himself in 962 .
IMPERIAL ITALY Section::::Imperial Italy .
In 951 King Otto I of Germany had married Adelaide of Burgundy , the widow of late King Lothair II of Italy .
Otto assumed the Iron Crown of Lombardy at Pavia despite his rival Margrave Berengar of Ivrea .
When in 960 Berengar attacked the Papal States , King Otto , summoned by Pope John XII , conquered the Italian kingdom and on 2 February 962 had himself crowned Holy Roman Emperor at Rome .
From that time on , the Kings of Italy were always also Kings of Germany , and Italy thus became a constituent kingdom of the Holy Roman Empire , along with the Kingdom of Germany ( regnum Teutonicorum ) and – from 1032 – Burgundy .
The German king ( Rex Romanorum ) would be crowned by the Archbishop of Milan with the Iron Crown in Pavia as a prelude to the visit to Rome to be crowned Emperor by the Pope .
In general , the monarch was an absentee , spending most of his time in Germany and leaving the Kingdom of Italy with little central authority .
There was also a lack of powerful landed magnates – the only notable one being the Margraviate of Tuscany , which had wide lands in Tuscany , Lombardy , and the Emilia , but which failed due to lack of heirs after the death of Matilda of Canossa in 1115 .
This left a power vacuum – increasingly filled by the Papacy and by the bishops , as well as by the increasingly wealthy Italian cities , which gradually came to dominate the surrounding countryside .
Upon the death of Emperor Otto III in 1002 , one of late Berengar 's successors , Margrave Arduin of Ivrea , even succeeded in assuming the Italian crown and in defeating the Imperial forces under Duke Otto
I of Carinthia .
Not until 1004 could the new German King Henry II of Germany , by the aid of Bishop Leo of Vercelli , move into Italy to have himself crowned rex Italiae .
Arduin ranks as the last domestic " King of Italy " before the accession of Victor Emmanuel II in 1861 .
Henry 's Salian successor Conrad II tried to confirm his dominion against Archbishop Aribert of Milan and other Italian aristocrats ( seniores ) .
While besieging Milan in 1037 , he issued the Constitutio de feudis in order to secure the support of the vasvassores petty gentry , whose fiefs he declared hereditary .
Indeed , Conrad could stable his rule , however , the Imperial supremacy in Italy remained contested .
STAUFER Section::::Staufer .
The cities first demonstrated their increasing power during the reign of the Hohenstaufen Emperor Frederick Barbarossa ( 1152–1190 ) , whose attempts to restore imperial authority in the peninsula led to a series of wars with the Lombard League , a league of northern Italian cities , and ultimately to a decisive victory for the League at the Battle of Legnano in 1176 , which forced Frederick to recognize the autonomy of the Italian cities .
Frederick 's son Henry VI actually managed to extend Hohenstaufen authority in Italy by his conquest of the Norman Kingdom of Sicily , which comprised Sicily and all of Southern Italy .
Henry 's son , Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor – the first emperor since the 10th century to actually base himself in Italy – attempted to return to his father 's task of restoring imperial authority in the northern Italian Kingdom , which led to fierce opposition not only from a reformed Lombard League , but also from the Popes , who had become increasingly jealous of their temporal realm in central Italy ( theoretically a part of the Empire ) , and concerned about the hegemonic ambitions of the Hohenstaufen emperors .
Frederick II 's efforts to bring all of Italy under his control failed as signally as those of his grandfather , and his death in 1250 marked the effective end of the Kingdom of Italy as a genuine political unit .
Conflict continued between Ghibellines ( Imperial supporters ) and Guelfs ( Papal supporters ) in the Italian cities , but these conflicts bore less and less relation to the origins of the parties in question .
DECLINE Section::::Decline .
The Italian campaigns of the Holy Roman Emperors decreased , but the Kingdom did not become wholly meaningless .
In 1310 the Luxembourg King Henry VII of Germany with 5,000 men again crossed the Alps , moved into Milan and had himself crowned with the Iron Crown of Lombardy , sparking a Guelph rebellion under Lord Guido della Torre .
Henry restored the rule of Matteo I Visconti and proceeded to Rome , where he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor by three cardinals in place of Pope Clement V in 1312 .
His further plans to restore the Imperial rule and to invade the Kingdom of Naples were aborted by his sudden death the next year .
Successive emperors in the 14th and 15th centuries were bound in the struggle between the rivaling Luxembourg , Habsburg and Wittelsbach dynasties .
In the conflict with Frederick the Fair , King Louis IV ( reigned until 1347 ) had himself crowned Emperor in Rome by Antipope Nicholas V in 1328 .
His successor Charles IV also returned to Rome to be crowned in 1355 .
None of the Emperors forgot their theoretical claims to dominion as Kings of Italy .
Nor did the Italians themselves forget the claims of the Emperors to universal dominion : writers like Dante Alighieri ( died 1321 ) and Marsilius of Padua ( c. 1275 – c. 1342 ) expressed their commitment both to the principle of universal monarchy , and to the actual pretensions of Emperors Henry VII and Louis IV , respectively .
The Imperial claims to dominion in Italy mostly manifested themselves , however , in the granting of titles to the various strongmen who had begun to establish their control over the formerly republican cities .
Most notably , the Emperors gave their backing to the Visconti of Milan , and King Wenceslaus created Gian Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan in 1395 .
Other families to receive new titles from the emperors included the Gonzaga of Mantua , and the Este of Ferrara and Modena .
AFTERMATH :
THE ' SHADOW ' KINGDOM Section::::Aftermath :
The ' Shadow ' Kingdom .
By the beginning of the early modern period , the Kingdom of Italy still existed but was a mere shadow .
Its territory had been significantly limited – the conquests of the Republic of Venice , which considered itself independent of the Empire , in the " domini di Terraferma " had taken most of northeastern Italy outside the jurisdiction of the Empire , while the Popes claimed full sovereignty and independence in the Papal States in Central Italy .
Nevertheless , the Emperor Charles V , owing more to his inheritance of Spain and Naples than to his position as Emperor , was able to establish his dominance in Italy to a greater extent than any Emperor since Frederick II .
He drove the French from Milan , prevented an attempt by the Italian princes , with French aid , to reassert their independence in the League of Cognac , sacked Rome and brought the Medici pope Clement VII to submission , conquered Florence where he reinstalled the Medici as Dukes of Florence ( and later , Grand Dukes of Tuscany ) , and , upon the extinction of the Sforza line in Milan , claimed the territory as an imperial fief and installed his son Philip as the new Duke .
This new Imperial dominance , however , did not remain with the Empire , in which Charles was succeeded by his brother Ferdinand , but rather was transferred by Charles to his son , who became King of Spain .
Nevertheless , the Imperial claims to suzerainty remained , and were actually called forth in the early 17th century when the Duchy of Mantua fell vacant in 1627 .
Emperor Ferdinand II used his rights as feudal overlord to prevent the heir , the French Duke of Nevers , from taking over the Duchy , leading to the War of the Mantuan Succession , a part of the much larger Thirty Years ' War .
In the early 18th century , during the War of the Spanish Succession , imperial claims to suzerainty were used again to seize Mantua in 1708 , which was now attached by the Austrian Habsburgs to the newly conquered Duchy of Milan .
This was the last notable usage of Imperial power , as such , in Italy .
The Austrians retained control of Milan and Mantua , and intermittently , other territories ( notably Tuscany after 1737 ) , but the claims to feudal overlordship had become practically meaningless .
The imperial claims to Italy remained only in the secondary title of the Archbishop - Elector of Cologne to be " Arch - Chancellor of Italy " and in the formal adherence of Emperor and Diet to various treaties resolving the succession of various northern Italian states which were still considered to be imperial fiefs .
During the French Revolutionary Wars , the Austrians were driven from Italy by Napoleon , who set up republics throughout northern Italy , and by the Treaty of Campo Formio of 1797 , Emperor Francis II relinquished any claims over the territories that made up the Kingdom of Italy .
The imperial reorganization carried out in 1799–1803 left no room for Imperial claims to Italy – even the Archbishop of Cologne was gone , secularized along with the other ecclesiastical princes .
In 1805 , while the Holy Roman Empire was still in existence , Napoleon , by now Emperor Napoleon I , claimed the crown of the Kingdom of Italy ( Napoleonic ) for himself , putting the Iron Crown on his head at Milan on 26 May 1805 .
The almost 850 years old Holy Roman Empire itself was abolished the next year on 6 August 1806 .
NOTES REFERENCES
*
Liutprand , Antapodoseos sive rerum per Europam gestarum libri VI .
* Liutprand , Liber de rebus gestis Ottonis imperatoris .
* Anonymous , Panegyricus Berengarii imperatoris ( 10th century )
[ Mon .
Germ .
Hist . , Script . , V , p. 196 ] .
* Anonymous , Widonis regis electio [ Mon .
Germ .
Hist . , Script . , III , p. 554 ] .
* Anonymous , Gesta Berengarii imperatoris [ ed .
Dumueler , Halle 1871 ] .
SEE ALSO
* King of Italy