ROB MCELHENNEY Robert McElhenney ( born April 14 , 1977 ) is an actor , director , producer , and screenwriter .
He is known for playing Mac on the FX / FXX comedy series
It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia .
He is also one of the developers , executive producers , and the creator of the show , which has provided him with writing and directing credits on various episodes .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
McElhenney was born in Philadelphia , the eldest of three children .
Both of his parents are of Irish descent .
He was raised Roman Catholic .
When he was eight years old , his parents divorced after his mother came out as a lesbian .
McElhenney was primarily raised by his father , but has said that his parents remained close after their divorce .
Through his father 's subsequent marriage , he also has a half - sister and stepsister .
One of his closest friends , Joseph Dougherty Jr. of Delaware County , suggested the idea for what later would become
It 's Always Sunny In Philadelphia .
He attended Saint Joseph 's Preparatory School in Philadelphia .
After graduating , McElhenney moved to New York City .
He audited several courses at Fordham University and temporarily lived on the campus with friends , but chose not to enroll .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
McElhenney scored his first major role with a small part in The Devil 's Own , followed by small parts in A Civil Action , Wonder Boys , and Thirteen Conversations
About One Thing , though his roles in The Devil 's Own and Wonder Boys were cut out of the final edits .
He later had more substantial parts in Latter Days and The Tollbooth , and a small role in the Law & Order episode " Thrill " .
At the age of 21 , a debut script by McElhenney was optioned with writer - director Paul Schrader attached to direct , before the project fell through after one year of edits and rewrites .
Initially based in New York City after his graduation from high school , McElhenney moved to Los Angeles at the age of 22 .
In 2004 , McElhenney was waiting tables between acting jobs , and had met friends Glenn Howerton through his agent , and Charlie Day in New York while shooting a horror film .
His idea for a sitcom , starring himself , Howerton and Day , was filmed on a budget of $ 200 and pitched to many cable networks .
After receiving offers from many of the stations , McElhenney chose to sign with FX as they allowed him more creative freedom .
McElhenney was contracted as It 's Always Sunny 's showrunner , and both Howerton and Day were listed as executive producers .
McElhenney claims that 50 weeks of each year are consumed by acting , producing , and writing for the show , but he did find time to appear in the third season of Lost in the episode " Not in Portland " .
This was a result of McElhenney meeting Lost co - creator and executive producer Damon Lindelof , who is a fan of
It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia .
McElhenney continued the role in Lost , featured again in the sixth season for a single episode .
McElhenney is a fan of Game of Thrones and was thrilled that the series ' writers , David Benioff and D.B. Weiss , asked to write an episode of
It 's Always Sunny .
He and his co - producers accepted the offer , resulting in the Season 9 episode " Flowers for Charlie " in 2013 .
On July 21 , 2015 , McElhenney was confirmed by Mojang as the director of the upcoming animated Minecraft movie , announced for 2019 .
He has since left the project .
In 2017 , he appeared as a guest in the acclaimed Fargo episode " The Law of Non - Contradiction " .
He received praise for his performance from critics , who saw his character as a reference to It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Before the first season of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia went into production , McElhenney hired actress Kaitlin Olson to play the role of Dee Reynolds .
He became romantically interested in Olson " around season 2 " of the series , believing her to be the funniest woman in show business .
They were married in California on September 27 , 2008 .
In 2009 , McElhenney and Olson announced their purchase of Skinner 's Bar at 226 Market Street in Philadelphia ( ) .
It was renamed Mac 's Tavern .
They had their first child , Axel Lee McElhenney , on September 1 , 2010 .
Olson went into labor at a Philadelphia Phillies game .
The couple 's second son , Leo Grey McElhenney , was born on April 5 , 2012 .
In preparation for the seventh season of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia , McElhenney put on 50 lbs of extra weight and let his beard grow out to give extra humor to his character and add a new comedic direction for the season .
His co - star Charlie Day described the weight gain as " disgusting " and said that the rest of the cast were " a little on the fence about it for his own personal health and safety " .
McElhenney subsequently lost 23 lbs in a month after the season was finished filming .
He lost more later in the year to film the next season .
Through his father , McElhenney is the first cousin of Olympic Medalist , attorney , and activist Marcus N. McElhenney .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS