COMPARISON OF ISLAMIC AND JEWISH DIETARY LAWS
The Islamic dietary laws ( halal ) and the Jewish dietary laws ( kashrut ; in English , kosher ) are both quite detailed , and contain both points of similarity and discord .
Both are the dietary laws of Abrahamic religion but they are described in distinct religious texts : an explanation of the Islamic code of law found in the Quran and Sunnah and a Jewish code of laws found in the Torah and explained in the Talmud .
As a rule of thumb , most Kosher foods not containing alcohol are also Halal .
However , there are some exceptions , and this article lists the similarities and differences between the two laws .
SUBSTANCE CLASSIFICATION
SIMILARITIES
* Swine is prohibited by both sets of beliefs .
* Many animals permitted in kashrut are also halal , such as bovines .
*
To be kosher , aquatic animals must have scales and fins .
Most Sunni schools of thought adhere to the interpretation that all creatures from the ocean or the sea or lake are considered halal .
Twelver Shia Muslims however consider that only sea creatures that have scales are halal , but make an exception with some crustaceans ; shrimps and prawns , but not lobsters .
This is similar to the Jewish law with the exception of fins .
*
Gelatin is only permissible if it comes from a permissible animal ( usually kosher gelatin comes from the bones of kosher fish , or is a vegan substitute , such as agar ) .
Judaism finds that only gelatin made from kosher animals and/or
kosher fish are in essence " kosher gelatins . "
* Almost all insects are prohibited by both sets of law , although of the Maliki school of Sunni Islam permits eating insects , with the condition of it being dead by any means .
The few kosher insects are specific types of locusts and grasshoppers ( see Kosher locust ) which are not eaten today in most Jewish communities , since it is unknown which species is permitted ( the exception being the Yemenite Jews , who claim to have preserved this knowledge ) ; however all types of locusts are considered halal in sharia .
DIFFERENCES
* For a substance to be halal , it must not contain alcohol of any kind .
However , there is a difference drawn between the addition of alcohol to foods , which is absolutely forbidden , and the small quantities that naturally become present – such as orange juice .
Except for grape wine and grape juice ( which must be manufactured under Jewish supervision ) , kashrut allows the consumption of any sort of alcohol , as long as it has kosher ingredients ( excluding any unsupervised grape extracts ) .
*
The list of animals forbidden by kashrut is more restrictive , as kashrut requires that , to be kosher , mammals must chew cud and must have cloven hooves .
Thus some animals such as the camel are halal , but not kosher .
* Kashrut requires strict separation of dairy and meat products , even when they are kosher separately .
SLAUGHTER Section::::Slaughter .
Shechita is the ritual slaughter of mammals and birds according to Jewish law .
Dhabihah is the method used to slaughter an animal in Islamic tradition .
Shechita requires that an animal be conscious and this is taken to mean the modern practice of electrical , gas , or percussive stunning before slaughter is forbidden .
Most Muslim authorities also forbid the use of electrical , gas , or percussive stunning .
However , other authorities state that stunning is permissible so long as it is not the direct cause of the animal 's death .
SIMILARITIES
*
Both shechita and dhabihah involve cutting across the neck of the animal with a non - serrated blade in one clean attempt in order to sever the main blood vessels .
*
Both require draining the blood of the animal .
DIFFERENCES
*
In Judaism , only one who has been specially trained and has learned and been tested on all the laws of shechita may slaughter Kosher animals .
However , dhabihah can be performed by any " sane adult Muslim … by following the rules prescribed by Shariah " .
All Islamic authorities , though , state that dhabiha can also be performed by Peoples of the Book-(Jews and Nazarenes ) .
* Dhabiha requires that God 's name be pronounced before each slaughter .
( see Islamic Concept of God ) .
Dhabiha meat by definition is meat that is slaughtered in the shariah manner and the name of Allah is said before the slaughter .
In Shechita , a blessing to God is recited before beginning an uninterrupted period of slaughtering ; as long as the shochet does not have a lengthy pause , interrupt , or otherwise lose concentration , this blessing covers all the animals slaughtered in that period .
This blessing follows the standard form for a blessing before most Jewish rituals ( " Blessed are you God ... who commanded us regarding [ such - and - such ] " , in this case , shechita ) .
The general rule in Judaism is that for rituals which have an associated blessing , if one omitted the blessing , the ritual is still valid [ see Maimonides Laws of Blessings 11:5 ] ; as such , even if the shochet failed to recite the blessing before shechita , the slaughter is still valid and the meat is kosher .
*
There are some restrictions on what organs or parts of the carcass may be eaten from a halal - slaughtered and dressed animal , as described in the Quran or Hadith .
Commonly known prohibitions include blood ( Qur'an 2:173 ) , penis , testicles , vulva , glands .
However , kashrut prohibits eating the chelev ( certain types of fat ) and gid hanosheh ( the sciatic nerve ) , and thus the hindquarters of a kosher animal must undergo a process called nikkur ( or , in Yiddish , traibering ) in order to be fit for consumption by Jews .
As nikkur is an expensive , time - consuming process , it is rarely practiced outside of Israel , and the hindquarters of kosher - slaughtered animals in the rest of the world are generally sold on the non - kosher market .
OTHER COMPARISONS
SIMILARITIES
*
After slaughter , both require that the animal be examined to ensure that it is fit for consumption .
Dhabiha guidelines generally say that the carcass should be inspected , while kashrut says that the animal 's internal organs must be examined " to make certain the animal was not diseased " .
*
Both sets of religious rules are subject to arguments among different authorities with regional and other related differences in permissible foodstuffs .
*
Strictly observant followers of either religion will not eat in restaurants not certified to follow its rules .
* Meat slaughtered and sold as kosher must still be salted to draw out excess blood and impurities .
A similar practice is followed in some Muslim households , but using vinegar .
This is done to remove all surface blood from the meat , in accordance with Islam 's prohibition of the consumption of blood .
DIFFERENCES
*
During the Jewish holiday Passover , an additional set of restrictions requires that no chametz ( sour - dough starter or fermented products from the five species of grains ) be eaten .
This requirement is specific to the holiday , and nothing to do with the laws of kashrut .
* Kashrut prohibits the mixing of meat and dairy products ; consumption of such products or profiting from their sale are also forbidden .
Halal has no such rules .
*
In Judaism , the permissibility of food is influenced by many secondary factors .
For instance , vessels and implements used to cook food must also be kept separate from non - kosher products , and not used for both dairy products and meat products .
( If a vessel or implement used to cook dairy products is then used to cook meat , the food becomes non - kosher and the vessel or implement itself can no longer be used for the preparation or consumption of a kosher meal . )
In general , the same policy extends to any apparatus used in the preparation of foods , such as ovens or stovetops .
Laws are somewhat more lenient for certain kitchen items such as microwaves or dishwashers , although this depends greatly on tradition ( minhag ) or individuals ' own stringent practices ( chumrot ) .
As a result of these factors , many Conservative and Orthodox Jews refuse to eat dishes prepared at any restaurant that is not specifically kosher , even if the actual dish ordered uses only kosher ingredients .
*
Likewise in Islamic food preparation , the permissibility of food is also influenced by many secondary factors .
Apart from the prescribed foods that can be consumed , all food must be halal and by this , all utensils and kitchens used to prepare food must also be deemed as halal .
Halal utensils and kitchens require that these utensils or food preparation surfaces do not get in contact with non - halal items .
For instance , cakes prepared using alcohol as an ingredient are considered non - halal .
In fact , food cooked in any type of alcohol ( even if the alcohol burns out during the cooking process ) is also deemed non - halal .
Kitchens which have been used to prepare non - halal food must be sanitized ( samak ) according to Islamic principles before they can be used to prepare halal meals .
Kitchens and utensils previously used to prepare non - halal meals are required to be fully sanitized in an Islamic fashion before they can then be used for halal food preparation .
SEE ALSO
* Islamic dietary laws
* Kashrut ( Jewish dietary laws )
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Difference Between Kosher and Halal
* Laws of Judaism and Islam concerning food