NORTH – SOUTH DIFFERENCES IN THE KOREAN LANGUAGE
The Korean language has changed between the two states due to the length of time that North and South Korea have been separated .
Korean orthography , as defined by the Korean Language Society in 1933 in the " Proposal for Unified Korean Orthography " ( ) continued to be used by the North and the South after liberation of Korea in 1945 , but with the establishments of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea in 1948 , the two states have taken on differing policies regarding the language .
In 1954 , North Korea set out the rules for Korean orthography ( ) .
Although this was only a minor revision in orthography that created little difference from that used in the South , from then on , the standard language in the North and the South gradually differed more and more from each other .
In the 1960s , under the influence of the Juche ideology came a big change in linguistic policies in North Korea .
On 3 January 1964 , Kim Il - sung issued his teachings on " A Number of Issues on the Development of the Korean language " ( Josŏnŏrŭl Paljŏn Siki'gi Wihan Myŏt ' Kaji Munje ) , and on 14 May 1966 on the topic " In Rightly Advancing the National Characteristics of the Korean language " ( Josŏnŏŭi Minjokchŏk T'ŭksŏngŭl Olge Sallyŏ Nagal Te Taehayŏ ) , from which the " Standard Korean Language " ( Josŏnmalgyubŏmjip ) rules followed in the same year , issued by the National Language Revision Committee that was directly under the control of the cabinet .
From then on , more important differences came about between the standard language in the North and the South .
In 1987 , North Korea revised the aforementioned rules further , and these have remained in use until today .
In addition , the rules for spacing were separately laid out in the " Standard Spacing Rules in Writing Korean " ( Josŏnmal Ttŭiyŏssŭgigyubŏm ) in 2000 but have since been superseded by " Rules for Spacing in Writing Korean " ( Ttŭiyŏssŭgigyujŏng ) , issued in 2003 .
South Korea continued to use the ' as defined in 1933 , until its amendment " Korean Orthography " ( ' ) , together with " Standard Language Regulations " ( ) , were issued in 1988 , which remain in use today .
As with the Korean phonology article , this article uses IPA symbols in pipes for morphophonemics , slashes for phonemes , and brackets for allophones .
Pan - Korean romanized words are largely in Revised Romanization , and North Korean - specific romanized words are largely in McCune - Reischauer .
Also , for the sake of consistency , this article also phonetically transcribes as for pan - Korean and South - specific phonology , and as for North - specific phonology .
HANGUL ( CHOSŎN'GŬL )
Section::::Hangul ( Chosŏn'gŭl ) .
The same hangul ( Chosŏn'gŭl ) letters are used to write the language in the North and the South .
However , in the North , the stroke that distinguishes ㅌ from ㄷ is written above rather than inside the letter as in the South .
In the South , the vowel digraphs and trigraphs ㅐ , ㅒ , ㅔ , ㅖ , ㅘ , ㅙ , ㅚ , ㅝ , ㅞ , ㅟ , ㅢ and the consonant digraphs ㄲ , ㄸ , ㅃ , ㅆ , ㅉ are not treated as separate letters , whereas in the North they are .
Some letters and digraphs have different names in the North and in the South . !
Letter !
North Korean name !
South Korean name ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
The names used in the South are the ones found in the Hunmongjahoe ( , 訓蒙字會 , published 1527 ) .
The names used in the North are formed mechanically with the pattern " letter + 이 + 으 + letter " .
Also for the tensed consonants , in the South , they are called " double " ( 쌍- ) consonants , while in the North , they are called " strong " ( 된- ) consonants .
SORTING ORDER
* Vowels * Consonants PRONUNCIATION Section::::Pronunciation .
The standard languages in the North and the South share the same types and the same number of phonemes , but there are some differences in the actual pronunciations .
The South Korean standard pronunciation is based on the dialect as spoken in Seoul , and the North Korean standard pronunciation is based on the dialect as spoken in Pyongyang .
CONSONANTS Section::::Consonants .
The following differences are recognised in the consonants .
In the Seoul dialect , ㅈ , ㅊ and ㅉ are typically pronounced with alveolo - palatal affricates , , .
In the Pyongyang dialect , they are typically pronounced with alveolar affricates , , .
Also , and can be pronounced without palatalisation as and in the Pyongyang dialect .
In Sino - Korean words , some of and all of that come in the beginning of a word are dropped in pronunciation and not written out in the South , but all initial and are written out in the North .
For instance , the common last name 이 ( often written out in English as Lee , seemingly staying true to the North Korean typography and pronunciation ) , is written and pronounced as 리 in North Korean .
Furthermore , the South Korean word 여자 , meaning woman , is similarly written as 녀자 in North Korea .
But as this latter pronunciation was artificially crafted in the 1960s , it is common for older speakers to be unable to pronounce initial and properly , thus pronouncing such words in the same way as they are pronounced in the South .
The liquid consonant does not come after the nasal consonants and .
In this position , is pronounced as rather than .
But in North Korea , before vowels , , , and can remain in this context . !
North !
South !
Hanja [ ]
chimnyak
侵略
[ ] hyeomnyeok
協力
singnyo
食料 cheongnyubyeok
淸流壁 VOWELS Section::::Vowels .
The following differences are recognised in the vowels .
The vowel ㅓ is not as rounded in the Seoul dialect as it is in the Pyongyang dialect .
If expressed in IPA , it would be or for the one in Seoul dialect and for the one in Pyongyang dialect .
Due to this roundedness , speakers of the Seoul dialect would find that ㅓ as pronounced by speakers of the Pyongyang dialect sounds close to the vowel ㅗ .
Additionally , the difference between the vowels and is slowly diminishing amongst the younger speakers of the Seoul dialect .
It is not well known if this is also happening with the Pyongyang dialect .
PITCH Section::::Pitch .
The pitch patterns in the Pyongyang and Seoul dialects differ , but there has been little research in detail .
On the other hand , in the Chosŏnmal Taesajŏn ( 조선말대사전 ) , published in 1992 , where the pitches for certain words are shown in a three - pitch system , a word such as 꾀꼬리 ( – Korean nightingale ) is marked as having pitch " 232 " ( where " 2 " is low and " 3 " is high ) , from which one can see some difference in pitch patterns from the Seoul dialect .
ORTHOGRAPHY INFLECTED WORDS 어 / 여 Section::::Orthography .
Section::::Inflected words .
Section::::어 /
여.
In words in which the word stem ends in ㅣ , ㅐ , ㅔ , ㅚ , ㅟ , ㅢ , in forms where -어 is appended to these endings in the South , but -여 is instead appended in the North .
In actual pronunciation , however , the sound often accompanies the pronunciation of such words , even in the South . !
Inflected word !
North inflection !
South inflection !
Meaning bloom take out count become
jump
white ㅂ-IRREGULAR
INFLECTIONS Section::::ㅂ-irregular inflections .
In the South , when the word root of a ㅂ-irregular inflected word has two or more syllables ( for example , 고맙다 gomapda ) , the ㅂ is dropped and replaced with 우 in the next syllable .
When conjugated to the polite speech level , the ㅂ-irregular stem resyllabifies with the 어요 -eoyo conjugation to form 워요 -woyo ( as in 고맙다 gomapda → 고마우 gomau → 고마워요 gomaweoyo ) , appearing to ignore vowel harmony .
ㅂ is not replaced with 우 in the North ( as it also was in the South before the 1988 Hangeul Matchumbeop ) .
The vowel harmony is kept in both the South and the North if the word root has only one syllable ( for example , 돕다 topta / dopda ) . !
Inflected word !
North inflection !
South inflection !
Meaning thankful near INDICATION OF TENSED CONSONANTS AFTER WORD ENDINGS
THAT END
WITH ㄹ Section::::Indication of tensed consonants after word endings that end with ㄹ.
In word endings where the final consonant is ㄹ , where the South spells -ㄹ까 and -ㄹ쏘냐 to indicate the tensed consonants , in the North these are spelled -ㄹ가 , -ㄹ소냐 instead .
These etymologically are formed by attaching to the adnominal form ( 관형사형 gwanhyeongjahyeong ) that ends in ㄹ , and in the North , the tensed consonants are denoted with normal consonants .
Also , the word ending -ㄹ게 used to be spelt -ㄹ께 in the South , but has since been changed in the Hangeul Matchumbeop of 1988 , and is now spelt -ㄹ게 just like in the North .
SINO - KOREAN
WORDS INITIAL
ㄴ / ㄹ ( 두음법칙 [ , DUEUM BEOPCHIK ] , " INITIAL SOUND RULE " ) Section::::Sino - Korean words .
Section::::Initial ㄴ / ㄹ
( 두음법칙 [ , dueum beopchik ] , " initial sound rule " ) .
Initial
ㄴ / ㄹ appearing in Sino - Korean words are kept in the North .
In the South , in Sino - Korean words that begin with ㄹ which is followed by the vowel sound or the semivowel sound ( when ㄹ is followed by one of ㅣ , ㅑ , ㅕ , ㅖ , ㅛ and ㅠ ) , ㄹ is replaced by ㅇ ; when this ㄹ is followed by other vowels it is replaced by ㄴ .
In the North , the initial ㄹ is kept . !
North !
South !
Hanja !
Meaning Yi Seong - gye practice fall
cold water
Similarly , in Sino - Korean words that begin with ㄴ and is followed by the vowel sound or the semi - vowel sound ( when ㄴ is followed by one of , , and ) , in the South , this ㄴ is replaced by ㅇ , but this remains unchanged in the North . !
North !
South !
Hanja !
Meaning priestess woman
These are thus pronounced as written in the North as ㄴ and ㄹ .
However , even in the South , sometimes in order to disambiguate the surnames 유 ( Yu ) and 임 ( I m ) from 유 ( Yu ) and 임 ( I m ) , the former may be written or pronounced as 류 Ryu ( ) and 림
Rim ( ) . HANJA PRONUNCIATION Section::::Hanja pronunciation .
Where a Hanja is written or in the South , this is written , in the North ( but even in the South , these are pronounced , ) . !
North !
South !
Hanja !
Meaning sad separation closure
Some hanja characters are pronounced differently . !
North !
South !
Hanja Also in the North , the hanja is usually pronounced as su , except in the word /원쑤
wŏnssu ( " enemy " ) , where it is pronounced as ssu .
It is thought that this is to avoid the word becoming a homonym with ( " military general " ) , written as wŏnsu .
COMPOUND WORDS SAI SIOT ( 사이 시옷 , " MIDDLE ㅅ " )
Section::::Compound words .
Section::::Sai siot ( 사이 시옷 , " middle ㅅ " ) .
When forming compound words from uninflected words , where the so - called " sai siot " is inserted in the South : this is left out in the North , but the pronunciation is the same as in the South . !
North !
South !
Pronunciation !
Meaning chopsticks ( tree )
leaf WORD STEMS IN
COMPOUND WORDS Section::::Word stems in compound words .
While the general rule is to write out the word stem from which the compound word is formed in its original form , but in cases where the etymological origin is no longer remembered , this is no longer written in original form .
This happens both in the North and in the South .
However , whether a compound word is seen to have its etymological origin forgotten or not is seen differently by different people : !
North !
South !
Meaning upright cherry blossom
In the first example , in the South , the part shows that the etymological origin is forgotten , and the word is written as pronounced as olbareuda , but in the North , the first part is seen to come from olt'a and thus the whole word is written olbarŭda ( pronounced the same as in the South ) .
Conversely , in the second example , the South spelling catches the word as the combination of beot and kkot , but in the North , this is no longer recognised and thus the word is written as pronounced as pŏtkkot .
SPACING Section::::Spacing .
In the South , the rules of spacing are not very clearcut , but in the North , these are very precise .
In general , compared to the North , the writing in the South tends to include more spacing .
One likely explanation is that the North remains closer to the Sinitic orthographical heritage , where spacing is less of an issue than with a syllabary or alphabet such as Hangul .
The main differences are indicated below .
BOUND NOUNS
Section::::Bound nouns .
Before bound nouns ( North : 불완전명사 : purwanjŏn myŏngsa/ " incomplete nouns " ; South : 의존 명사 : uijon myeongsa/ " dependent nouns " ) , a space is added in the South but not in the North .
This applies to counter words also , but the space is sometimes allowed to be omitted in the South . !
North !
South !
Meaning my thing to be able to do one thing ( counter word ) AUXILIARIES Section::::Auxiliaries .
Before auxiliaries , a space is inserted in the South but not in the North .
Depending on the situation , however , the space may be omitted in the South . !
North !
South !
Meaning to try to eat to seem to come to be reading to want to sleep In the above , in the rules of the South , auxiliaries coming after or an adnominal form allow the space before them to be omitted , but the space after can not be omitted .
WORDS INDICATING
A SINGLE CONCEPT Section::::Words indicating a single concept .
Words formed from two or more words that indicate a single concept in principle are written with spaces in the South and without spaces in the North like Japanese and Chinese . !
North !
South !
Meaning Korean dictionary state of economic recovery Faculty of Humanities of Seoul National University Note that since the spacing rules in the South are often unknown , not followed , or optional , spellings vary from place to place .
For example , taking the word gugeo sajeon , people who see this as two words will add a space , and people who see this as one word will write it without a space .
Thus , the spacing depends on how one views what " one word " consists of , and so , while spacing is standardised in the South , in reality the standard does not matter much .
EMPHASIS Section::::Emphasis .
In the North , names of leaders ' ( Kim Il - sung ) , ' ( Kim Jong - il ) and ( Kim Jong - un ) are always set off from surrounding text , typically by bolding the characters , increasing the font size , or both .
VOCABULARY Section::::Vocabulary .
The standard language in the South ( 표준어/ pyojuneo ) is largely based on the Seoul dialect , and the standard language ( 문화어/ munhwaŏ ) in the North is largely based on the Pyongyang dialect .
However , both in the North and in the South , the vocabulary and forms of the standard language come from Sajeonghan Joseoneo Pyojunmal Mo - eum 사정한 조선어 표준말 모음 published by the Korean Language Society in 1936 , and so there is very little difference in the basic vocabulary between the standard languages used in the North and the South .
Nevertheless , due to the difference in political systems and social structure , each country is constantly adding different words to its vocabulary .
DIFFERENCES DUE TO THE DIFFERENCE IN POLITICAL SYSTEM OR SOCIAL STRUCTURE Section::::Differences due to the difference in political system or social structure . !
align="center
" North ! align="center
"
South ! align="center " Meaning Korean Peninsula Korean War elementary school Friend
The word tongmu / dongmu that is used to mean " friend " in the North was originally used across the whole of Korea , but after the division of Korea , North Korea began to use it as a translation of the Russian term товарищ ( friend , comrade ) , and since then , the word has come to mean " comrade " in the South as well and has fallen out of use there .
DIFFERENCES IN WORDS OF FOREIGN ORIGIN Section::::Differences in words of foreign origin .
South Korea has borrowed a lot of English words , but North Korea has borrowed a number of Russian words , and there are numerous differences in words used between the two coming from these different borrowings .
Even when the same English word is borrowed , how this word is transliterated into Korean may differ between the North and the South , resulting in different words being adapted into the corresponding standard languages .
For names of other nations and their places , the principle is to base the transliteration on the English word in the South and to base the transliteration on the word in the original language in the North . !
align="center
" colspan="3 " North ! align="center
" colspan="3 " South !
align="center
" rowspan="2 " Meaning !
Korean ! !
Transliteration ! !
Origin !
Korean ! !
Transliteration ! !
Origin tractor stocking Poland OTHER DIFFERENCES
IN VOCABULARY
Section::::Other differences in vocabulary .
The other differences between the standard languages in the North and in the South are thought to be caused by the differences between the Seoul and Pyongyang dialects . !
align="center
" colspan="2 " North !
align="center
" colspan="2 " South !
align="center
" rowspan="2 " Meaning !
Korean ! !
Transliteration !
Korean ! !
Transliteration kangnaeng
- i oksusu corn talguji sure cow cart kesani geowi goose mach'i
mangchi
hammer puru sangchu
lettuce
u
wi on , above
Words like gangnaeng - i and u are also sometimes heard in various dialects in South Korea .
There are also some words that exist only in the North .
The verb masŭda ( to break ) and its passive form masajida ( to be broken ) have no exactly corresponding words in the South .
PROBLEMS Section::::Problems .
During the 2018 Winter Olympics , the two Korean countries decided to play jointly for the Korea women 's national ice hockey team .
This led to issues with the South Korean athletes communicating with the North Korean athletes since the former uses English - influenced words in their postwar vocabulary , especially for hockey , while the latter uses only Korean - inspired words for their postwar vocabulary .
The language differences also pose challenges for researchers and for the tens of thousands of people who have defected from the North to the South since the Korean War .
The defectors face difficulty because they lack vocabulary , use differing accents , or have not culturally assimilated yet so may not understand jokes or references to pop culture .
SEE ALSO * National Institute of the Korean Language ( South Korea ) * New Orthography for the Korean Language REFERENCES