JEOPARDY !
AUDITION PROCESS Jeopardy !
is an American television quiz show created by Merv Griffin , in which contestants are presented with clues in the form of answers , and must phrase their responses in the form of a question .
Throughout its run , the show has regularly offered auditions for potential contestants , taking place in the Los Angeles area and occasionally in other locations throughout the United States .
Unlike those of many other game shows , Jeopardy ! 's audition process involves passing a difficult test of knowledge on a diversity of subjects , approximating the breadth of material encountered by contestants on the show .
Since 2006 , an online screener test is conducted annually .
CURRENT ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS Section::::Current eligibility requirements .
As with all television game shows , there are rules in place for who is allowed to appear as a contestant on Jeopardy !
Competitors in the regular episodes must be 18 years of age or older ; contestants in the College Championship must be full - time undergraduates without any previous bachelor 's degree ; competitors in the Teen Tournament must be between the ages of 13 and 17 years ; and contestants in the Kids Week must be between the ages of 10 and 12 years .
Those ineligible to compete on Jeopardy !
include employees of Sony Pictures Entertainment and its subsidiaries ( including the show 's production company , Sony Pictures Television ) , distributor CBS Television Distribution , and television stations that broadcast Jeopardy !
and/or
its sister show , Wheel of Fortune , as well as family members , relatives , and acquaintances of such employees .
Also excluded are individuals who have appeared as contestants on a different nationally broadcast game show of any format , ( including dating shows , relationship shows , and reality shows ) within the past year , on three such shows within the past ten years , or on any episode of Jeopardy !
itself ( including Super Jeopardy ! )
produced since Alex Trebek became the host in 1984 .
HISTORICAL PRACTICES Section::::Historical practices .
In the original version , prospective contestants could call the Jeopardy !
office in New York to make a preliminary determination of eligibility and arrange an appointment to audition .
Approximately 10 to 30 individuals would audition at the Jeopardy !
office at once , the process lasting about an hour and a half , and usually involving a written test , a briefing , and a mock game .
Contestants invited to play on the show were generally invited within six weeks of auditioning .
When the current version of Jeopardy !
premiered in 1984 , prospective contestants were given a 50-question written test , with 35 being a passing score .
The original contestant tests were written by head writer Jules Minton , and were later written by the show 's writers .
Initially , 2 new contestant tests were compiled each year , and were given alternately ; later , the tests were refreshed every six months to accommodate frequent repeat test takers .
The makeup of the test was 15 academic questions , 10 lifestyle , 15 pop culture and 10 wordplay .
Beginning in 1987 , the number of pop culture questions was reduced to 5 and wordplay to 2 .
Those who passed the test at an audition were invited to play a mock game to evaluate their stage presence and colorfulness .
Initially , all auditions took place in Southern California , and anyone could call to make an appointment to take the test ; travelling contestant searches did not begin until after the second season of the show .
Local affiliates airing the show sponsored regional contestant searches , paying for the travel expenses and accommodations of the contestant coordinators .
Invitations to audition were awarded by postcard drawings and other types of contests .
A 10-question pre - test was first devised when contestant coordinators conducted a two - week East Coast search at Merv Griffin 's Resorts Atlantic City hotel and casino .
In order to test as many people as possible , hopefuls were invited to take the screener pre - test as often as once per day , and those with a passing score of 7 were invited to return to take the 50-question full test .
The 2-week Atlantic City auditions were held annually in February while the show was owned by Griffin , and the 10-question screener is still in use at traveling open auditions .
INTERNET SCREENINGS Section::::Internet screenings .
Once each year , a series of screenings for potential contestants are conducted on the Internet through the official Jeopardy !
web site .
Online tests are typically conducted over three days , which each day being targeted at a different time zone ( Eastern , Mountain and Pacific ) .
During the online testing , a 50-question qualifying exam is administered to pre - registered applicants , who have 15 seconds to answer each question .
and whatever has been typed into the answer bar at the end of 15 seconds is entered as the answer .
Unlike on the show , test takers are instructed not to respond in the form of a question .
Test takers do not receive their score .
A random selection of passers ( generally understood to be those who get 35 or more questions correct ) of this exam are later invited to participate in regional in - person auditions .
IN - PERSON AUDITION PROCESS ( REGULAR PLAY GAMES )
Section::::In - person audition process ( regular play games ) .
Tryouts for regular play games are administered to groups of 18 to 21 people at scheduled dates and times .
Upon arriving , contestant applicants are asked to fill out information sheets with their contact information , eligibility information , and availability , and are asked to provide five anecdotes that may be used during the contestant interview portion of the show ( a form is emailed in advance ) .
The first phase of the group audition process is divided into three parts .
* A contestant coordinator gives an introductory talk reviewing the rules and particularities of the game and providing some guidelines regarding energy , volume , and timing for the applicants .
Some sample clues are read aloud ( and displayed on a monitor or projection screen ) and applicants are called upon to raise their hands and give out the responses .
*
* Fifty Jeopardy!-style clues in fifty different categories are displayed on the screen at the front of the room and read aloud in a recording by a Clue Crew member ( previously , Johnny Gilbert , the show 's announcer , did the voice - over on this ) .
A potential contestant has eight seconds to write down his or her response ( no need to phrase in the form of a question here ) before the next clue is read .
*
* The contestant coordinators take the completed response sheets and grade them .
Though some sources state that a score of 35 ( 70 % ) is passing , the contestant coordinators refuse to confirm or deny any passing score number .
Exact scores are not disclosed .
* This is followed by a mock Jeopardy !
competition .
A game board is presented , and potential contestants are placed in groups of three to play the game .
The emphasis is not on scoring points , or even having correct responses ( though phrasing in the form of a question is required here , like the show ) ; the contestant coordinators know that they possess the knowledge to compete on the show , as they have already passed the test , and are looking for on - the - air - compatible qualities .
Auditionees are encouraged to display energy and use a loud , confident voice .
After playing a few clues , the contestant coordinators give each potential contestant a few minutes to talk about themselves .
The coordinators request that they finish by telling what they would do with any money they won on Jeopardy !
After the end of the tryout , all auditionees who have taken the online test and the in - person test are placed into the " contestant pool " and are eligible to be called to compete for the next eighteen months .
The show uses 400 contestants per season , and it is emphasized at the audition that test scores are the most important factor in determining who out of the thousands of applicants will be selected .
JEOPARDY !
BRAIN BUS
Section::::Jeopardy !
Brain Bus .
For Season 15 ( 1998–99 ) , the show introduced a Winnebago recreational vehicle called the " Jeopardy !
Brain Bus " , measuring , which travels 12 times per year to conduct regional contestant searches throughout the United States and Canada .
Those who impress the Brain Bus staff during the Brain Bus events and have passed the qualifying tests are invited to attend actual Jeopardy !
auditions in California .
The official Jeopardy !
website used to feature a section devoted to the Brain Bus starting during Season 21 ( 2004–05 ) ; by Season 26 ( 2009–10 ) , this section was taken down .
During the main events of the Brain Bus searches , known as " Pre - Test " events , attendees are given a 10-question version of the qualifying test ; the number of attendees at this event may not exceed 1,000 .
Attendees who pass the test are invited back to attempt the full 50-question qualifier the next day .
People who have passed the 50-question test move on to a final interview , during which show producers determine whether the contestant is someone by whom the TV audiences would be impressed .
In addition to the " Pre - Test " events conducted there , Brain Bus searches also feature an event where individuals not wishing to compete for a chance to appear on Jeopardy !
can play a " mock version " of the quiz show 's game hosted by one or more members of the " Clue Crew " , the program 's team of roving correspondents ; instead of cash , the attendees of this event play for various prizes , such as T - shirts , hats , mugs , water bottles , pens , and other merchandise related to the show .
During the " mock Jeopardy ! " events , the hosting Clue Crew members will occasionally interact with fans in attendance .
EPISODES
FEATURING CHILDREN
AS
CONTESTANTS Section::::Episodes featuring children as contestants .
Tryouts for Kids Week , Holiday Kids Week , and Back to School Week are slightly different in that the mock Jeopardy !
game is played before the thirty - question test is given .
During the mock game , coordinators sometimes open up triple stumper questions to the other potential contestants .
Potential contestants are called or notified by the station on which Jeopardy ! airs in that particular market .
Fifteen children who are between ten and twelve years old are chosen for each filming , along with one alternate .
WAITING PERIOD
Section::::Waiting period .
The mandatory waiting period after taking the online contestant exam is one year , although this may be adjusted by the show 's production team based on the test schedule .
Prospective contestants who have completed an in - person test and interview remain in the contestant pool for 18 months , only after the expiration of which
may they take the online test again and attend another in - person audition .
AUDITIONS IN THE ART FLEMING ERA Section::::Auditions in the Art Fleming era .
Tryouts for the original version were conducted somewhat differently .
In a classroom - type arrangement , potential contestants wrote their questions to the answers held up by the contestant coordinator , who used cards which had previously actually been used on the show .
While the exams were being scored , the staff explained that on any given day , the contestants who actually appear all scored the same number , ( or very nearly the same number ) on this tryout .
For the next day , the staff would select two new contestants who had scored a point or two higher than the winner that day , and so on day after day .
This typically resulted in a pattern in which almost no contestant was able to win 5 days in a row ( because she or he was subsequently competing with contestants who were probably better ) – until the scores escalated to the point at which all three contestants had scored at or near the maximum possible score .
When these high scorers , competing against each other day after day , eventually produced an undefeated champion , the contestant pool was " reset " back to scorers who barely passed with the minimum score .
Potential contestants were told that if their score was not in the range that they were seeking that particular day , their names and information would be put into a contestant pool , and that — if they lived near New York — they might be called to come to the studio at any time in the next several months when their " number " came up ( although this was , they made it clear , unlikely , due to the large number of contestants who had tried out ) .
Since potential contestants had no idea what the target score was for that day , they had no idea whether it would be a good thing to deliberately score lower than they were capable of scoring .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Jeopardy !
Web site – Contestant FAQ