REALD 3D
RealD
3D is a digital stereoscopic projection technology made and sold by
RealD.
It is currently the most widely used technology for watching 3D films in theaters ( cinemas ) .
Worldwide , RealD 3D is installed in more than 26,500 auditoriums by approximately 1,200 exhibitors in 72 countries as of June 2015 .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
RealD 3D cinema technology is a polarized 3D system that uses circularly polarized light to produce stereoscopic image projection .
The advantage of circular polarization over linear polarization is that viewers are able to tilt their head and look about the theater naturally without seeing double or darkened images .
However , as with other systems , any significant head tilt will result in incorrect parallax and prevent the brain from correctly fusing the stereoscopic images .
The high - resolution , digital cinema grade video projector alternately projects right - eye frames and left - eye frames , switching between them 144 times per second .
The projector is either a Texas Instruments Digital Light Processing device or Sony 's reflective LCOS ( liquid crystal on silicon ) .
A push - pull electro - optical liquid crystal modulator called a ZScreen is placed immediately in front of the projector lens to alternately polarize each frame .
It circularly polarizes the frames clockwise for the right eye and counter - clockwise for the left eye .
The audience wears circularly polarized glasses that have oppositely polarized lenses that ensures each eye sees only its designated frame .
In RealD Cinema , each frame is projected three times to reduce flicker , a system called triple flash .
The source video is usually produced at 24 frames per second per eye ( total 48 frames / s ) , which may result in subtle ghosting and stuttering on horizontal camera movements .
A silver screen is used to maintain the light polarization upon reflection and to reduce reflection loss to counter some of the significant light loss due to polarization filter absorption .
The result is a 3D picture that seems to extend behind and in front of the screen itself .
SEE ALSO
* Polarized 3D system
* List of 3D films
* Digital 3D * IMAX * Disney Digital 3-D * Panavision 3D * Dolby
3D
* XpanD 3D * MasterImage 3D * Lenny Lipton * 4DX REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Who is Lenny Lipton ?
About Inventor and Chief technical officer of RealD through 2008