MASSACHUSETTS EYE AND EAR Massachusetts Eye and Ear ( Mass. Eye and Ear , or MEE ) is a specialty hospital located in Boston , Massachusetts , United States , which focuses on ophthalmology ( eye ) , otolaryngology ( ear / nose / throat ) , and related medicine and research .
Founded in 1824 as the Boston Eye Infirmary ( BEI ) , it has also been known as the Massachusetts Charitable Eye and Ear Infirmary ( MCEEI ) , and Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary ( MEEI ) .
It is a teaching partner of Harvard Medical School .
Massachusetts Eye and Ear has earned an international reputation for its successful treatment of the most difficult diseases and conditions of the eye , ear , nose , throat , head , and neck , and for its outstanding contributions to medical research and education .
In 2018 , Massachusetts Eye and Ear has two adult specialties nationally ranked the " U.S. News Best Hospitals Rankings and Ratings 2018 - 18 , with the Department of Ophthalmology ranked number four in the U.S. and the Department of Otolaryngology placing number six in the nation .
The primary teaching hospital for Harvard Medical School in ophthalmology and otolaryngology , Massachusetts Eye and Ear trains more than 110 residents and fellows each year in its various sub - specialties , including cornea , neuro - ophthalmology , retina , eye pathology , pediatrics , glaucoma , ocular oncology , immunology , head & neck surgery , oncology , pediatric otolaryngology , facial plastics , otology and oto - neurology .
In addition to ophthalmology and otolarynology , the hospital provides patient services and conducts research and clinical training in audiology ( diagnostics , hearing aids and cochlear implants ) , balance ( vestibular ) , facial nerve , thyroid , voice and speech , and vision rehabilitation .
MAIN CAMPUS Section::::Main campus .
The hospital 's main campus is located in Boston 's West End , surrounded by various Massachusetts General Hospital ( MGH ) buildings .
MEEI and MGH are both Harvard Medical School teaching hospitals , the MGH departments of Otolaryngology and Ophthalmology are actually departments at MEEI , and both hospitals tend to refer patients to one another .
Despite this organizational and physical closeness , MEEI is a separate organization from MGH , with its own Board of Directors and executive team .
Notwithstanding this distinction , maps will often show the entire area labeled as " Massachusetts General Hospital " .
Consisting of a 12-story tower , the current main building was completed in 1973 .
It houses 42 inpatient beds .
The transit stop serving the two hospitals is " Charles / MGH " on the MBTA Red Line train .
The signs at the train station ( which was rebuilt and opened in 2007 ) have smaller printing reading "
Mass. Eye and Ear Infirmary " in addition to the prominent " Charles / MGH " signs .
C. Stephen Foster developed the first ocular immunology service at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary .
The main campus is also home to the Norman Knight Hyperbaric Medicine Center , which provides 24-hour emergency treatment for smoke inhalation , carbon monoxide poisoning , and diving injuries such as decompression sickness ( " the bends " ) .
Treatment for problem - wound healing is also conducted in the Center .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In a notice published on April 2 , 2018 , Massachusetts Eye and Ear 's President John Fernandez announce the finalization of the agreement to make MEE a part of the Partners HealthCare hospital and physicians network .
OTHER LOCATIONS
Section::::Other locations .
Massachusetts Eye and Ear has a total of 18 sites in the Greater Boston region , including locations in the Longwood Medical Area , Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston , and Braintree , Concord , Duxbury , East Bridgewater , Milton , Medford , Newton , Plainville , Providence RI , Quincy , Stoneham , Waltham ,
Weymouth .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary official web site