LIST OF FAMILY GUY CAST MEMBERS Family Guy is an American animated sitcom that features five main voice actors , and numerous regular cast and recurring guest stars .
The principal voice cast consists of show creator Seth MacFarlane , Alex Borstein , Mila Kunis ( who replaced Lacey Chabert after the first season
[ her last episode is " Holy Crap , " now marketed as the second episode of season two ] ) , Seth Green , and Mike Henry .
Recurring voice actors include Patrick Warburton , Adam West , John G. Brennan , Nicole Sullivan and Jennifer Tilly , and repeat guest stars include Phyllis Diller , Charles Durning , Rush Limbaugh , James Woods and Phil LaMarr .
Many cast members provide voices for multiple characters .
The voice actors , in portraying the various character personalities on the show , draw inspiration from celebrities and pop culture .
Family Guy characters have been played by more than one actor , after members of the show left the series or had conflicting obligations .
Kunis was nominated for an Annie Award for voicing Meg Griffin in the season 5 episode " Barely Legal " and MacFarlane has also won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice - Over Performance and an Annie Award for Best Voice Acting in an Animated Television Production , though no other cast member has won an award for their work on the series .
CURRENT CAST Section::::Current cast .
From seasons 1 to 4 , Family Guy had four main cast members .
Since season 5 , there have been five main cast members .
The casting of Meg Griffin changed after season 1 .
SETH MACFARLANE Section::::Seth MacFarlane .
Seth MacFarlane voices three of the show 's main characters : Peter Griffin , Brian Griffin , and Stewie Griffin .
MacFarlane chose to voice these characters himself , believing it would be easier to portray the voices he had already envisioned than for someone else to attempt it .
MacFarlane drew inspiration for the voice of Peter from a security guard he overheard talking while attending the Rhode Island School of Design .
Stewie 's voice was based on the voice of English actor Rex Harrison , especially his performance in the 1964 musical drama film My Fair Lady .
MacFarlane uses his own voice while portraying Brian .
MacFarlane also provides the voices for various other recurring and one - time only characters , most prominently those of neighbour Glenn Quagmire , news anchor Tom Tucker , Lois ' father Carter Pewterschmidt and Dr. Hartman .
He explained on the Graham Norton Show that the voice for Glenn Quagmire is based on 1940s and 1950s radio commercials .
He is the only cast member to be in every episode .
ALEX BORSTEIN Section::::Alex Borstein .
Alex Borstein voices Lois Griffin , Asian correspondent Tricia Takanawa , Loretta Brown and Lois ' mother Barbara Pewterschmidt .
Borstein was asked to provide a voice for the pilot while she was working on MADtv .
She had not met MacFarlane or seen any of his artwork and said it was " really sight unseen " .
At the time , Borstein performed in a stage show in Los Angeles , in which she played a redhead mother whose voice she had based on one of her cousins .
The voice was originally slower ( and deeper for the original season ) , but when MacFarlane heard it , he replied " Make it a little less fucking annoying ... and speed it up , or every episode will last four hours . "
MILA KUNIS Section::::Mila Kunis .
Mila Kunis voices Meg Griffin .
Kunis won the role after auditions and a slight rewrite of the character , in part due to her performance on That ' 70s Show .
MacFarlane called Kunis back after her first audition , instructing her to speak slower , and then told her to come back another time and enunciate more .
Once she claimed that she had it under control , MacFarlane hired her .
Kunis described her character as " the scapegoat " .
She further explained , " Meg gets picked on a lot .
But it 's funny .
It 's like the middle child .
She is constantly in the state of being an awkward 14-year - old , when you 're kind of going through puberty and what - not .
She 's just in a perpetual mode of humiliation .
And it 's fun . "
SETH GREEN Section::::Seth Green .
Seth Green primarily plays Chris Griffin and Neil Goldman .
Green stated that he did an impression of the " Buffalo Bill " character from the thriller film The Silence of the Lambs during his audition .
His main inspiration for Chris ' voice came from envisioning how " Buffalo Bill " would sound if he were speaking through a public address system at a McDonald 's .
MIKE HENRY Section::::Mike Henry .
Mike Henry is the voice of Cleveland Brown , John Herbert
The Pervert and various other characters .
A Family Guy writer and producer , he began acting on the show as part of the recurring cast repertory ( see below ) but was promoted to main cast member in 2005 .
Since the cancellation of The Cleveland Show , he also voices Cleveland 's step - son Rallo Tubbs on Family Guy .
RECURRING CAST Section::::Recurring cast .
In addition to both its main cast and guest stars , Family Guy utilizes a deep bench of regularly appearing supporting voice actors .
Some appear in nearly every episode each season , while others appear less frequently .
Some of these actors specifically play recurring characters , while others mainly play background citizens of Quahog or characters in cutaway gags .
The current supporting cast repertory includes the following actors : !
Actor !
Character(s ) !
No . of Episodes ( Out of 245 produced ) ! class="unsortable " Notes
In addition to the above , the following actors were formerly regularly recurring voice actors in the series : !
Actor !
Character(s ) !
No . of Episodes ! class="unsortable " Notes RECURRING GUEST VOICES Section::::Recurring guest voices .
The recurring guest voices include Adam Carolla as Death , Patrick Stewart as Susie Swanson , Scott Grimes as Kevin Swanson and Sanaa Lathan as Donna Tubbs Brown .
Previous recurring guests included Phyllis Diller in three episodes as Peter 's Mother , Thelma , and Charles Durning as Peter 's father , Francis .
Both characters have since died , but Durning returned once to play Francis as a ghost .
Early in the show 's run , Fred Willard and Jane Lynch had a recurring role as a family of nudists .
James Woods as James Woods .
CASTING CHANGES
* Lacey Chabert voiced Meg for the first production season ( 14 episodes ) , but , because of a contractual agreement , was never credited .
Chabert left the series due to time constraints with her acting role in Party of Five , as well as schoolwork .
* Norm Macdonald voiced the character of Death in a second season episode of Family Guy .
He was subsequently replaced by Adam Carolla in all other appearances .
*
Jon Cryer originally voiced Kevin Swanson in his first appearance , before the role was passed temporarily onto Seth MacFarlane .
The character was written out of the series for several years , with Scott Grimes taking over the voice when the character returned .
* Fairuza Balk was the original voice of high school bully Connie D'Amico until Lisa Wilhoit took over the character in the third season .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS SEE
ALSO REFERENCES Notes