DECAVALCANTE CRIME FAMILY
The DeCavalcante crime family is an Italian - American organized crime family that operates in Elizabeth , New Jersey , and surrounding areas in the state and is part of the nationwide criminal phenomenon known as the American Mafia ( or Cosa Nostra ) .
It operates on the other side of the Hudson River from the Five Families of New York , but it maintains strong relations with many of them , as well as with the Philadelphia crime family and the Patriarca crime family of New England .
Its illicit activities include bookmaking , building , cement , and construction violations , bootlegging , corruption , drug trafficking , extortion , fencing , fraud , hijacking , illegal gambling , loan - sharking , money laundering , murder , pier thefts , pornography , prostitution , racketeering , and waste management violations .
The DeCavalcantes are , in part , the inspiration for the fictional DiMeo crime family of HBO 's dramatic series The Sopranos .
The DeCavalcante family was the subject of the CNBC program Mob Money , which aired on June 23 , 2010 , and The Real Sopranos TV documentary ( first airdate April 26 , 2006 ) directed by Thomas Viner for the UK production company Class Films .
HISTORY BEGINNINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Beginnings .
The DeCavalcante family was not recognized as an autonomous crime family by The Commission until the regime of Simone DeCavalcante .
There were several bosses in North Jersey during the Prohibition era controlling transportation of alcohol and whiskey into New York City .
There were two Mafia families based in New Jersey : the Newark family headed by Gaspare D'Amico , and the Elizabeth family headed by Stefano Badami .
The New York City families had crews operating in New Jersey : the Masseria family 's New Jersey faction , and the Reina family 's Jersey crew .
There was also Abner Zwillman , a Jewish gangster operating in Newark and the Philadelphia crime family operating in South Jersey .
In 1935 , Vincenzo Troia , a former associate of Salvatore Maranzano 's , conspired to take over the Newark family and was murdered .
Two years later , in 1937 , D'Amico fled the United States after a failed assassination attempt on his life , ordered by Joseph Profaci .
The Commission decided to divide up his territory among the Five Families and Badami 's Elizabeth family .
Stefano " Steve " Badami became the boss of the Elizabeth - Newark family ; however , his reign proved to be very disruptive , as members of the Newark and the Elizabeth factions began fighting for total control of New Jersey .
Badami kept controlling the crew up to the 1950s , but he was suddenly murdered in 1955 in what appears to have been another power struggle between the two factions .
Badami 's underboss and fellow mobster Filippo Amari stepped up to run the illegal operations .
Filippo " Phil " Amari was a mobster recognized by US law enforcement as being heavily involved with extortion , labor racketeering , loansharking , and narcotics activities in Newark and New York City .
He was considered the new head of the New Jersey organization , but his reign proved to be very short , as there were multiple factions operating underneath who all conspired to take over .
While still in charge , he relocated to Sicily and was replaced by Nicholas " Nick " Delmore .
Delmore attended the infamous 1957 Apalachin Convention to represent the small New Jersey crime family , with underbosses of Elizabeth and Newark Frank Majuri and Louis " Fat Lou " LaRasso .
Delmore kept running the organization until he became ill in the early 1960s , and the rebellious times of New Jersey had ended .
He died in 1964 , and his nephew Simone DeCavalcante was installed as new boss of the officially recognized " DeCavalcante crime family " of North Jersey .
SIMONE DECAVALCANTE Section::::Simone DeCavalcante .
The official criminal organization began with Simone DeCavalcante , a diplomatic " old school " don known as " Sam the Plumber " and " The Count " .
He was born in 1913 and was a mobster involved in illegal gambling , murder , and racketeering for most of his life .
He died of a heart attack at the age of 84 .
Between 1964 , when he rose to power , and 1969 , when he was incarcerated , he doubled the number of made men within his family .
He owned Kenilworth Heating and Air Conditioning in Kenilworth , New Jersey as a legal front and source of taxable income , for which he gained the nickname " Sam the Plumber . "
Sam DeCavalcante also claimed to be of Italian royal lineage , so another nickname he bore was " The Count . "
He gained much respect because he won a coveted place on the infamous Commission , a governing body for the U.S. Mafia which included the Five Families of New York and the Chicago Outfit of the Midwest .
Mob representatives of Miami were also included .
DeCavalcante and 54 associates were charged and tried ; he pleaded guilty to operating a gambling racket turning over $ 20 million a year .
At the same time , a New York State report indicated that he and another Mafia family controlled 90 % of pornography stores in New York City .
DeCavalcante was sentenced to five years in prison and , upon his released , he retired to a high - rise condo in Florida and largely stayed out of Mafia business , although the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) believed that he was still advising the family into the early 1990s .
JOHN RIGGI Section::::John Riggi .
After DeCavalcante left prison in the mid-1970s , he appointed Giovanni " John the Eagle " Riggi as acting boss of the family while he stayed semi - retired in Florida .
DeCavalcante stepped down as boss officially in 1980 , passing leadership to Riggi , who had been a business agent of the International Association of Laborers and Hod Carriers in New Jersey for years .
Riggi was promoted to the position of official boss , and he reaped the enormous benefits of large labor and construction racketeering , loansharking , illegal gambling , and extortion activities .
Riggi also had the family maintain their old traditions , which Sam DeCavalcante saw as unnecessary .
Riggi used his power and influence to place subcontractors and workers at various construction projects around the state , and the DeCavalcantes were able to steal from union welfare and pension funds .
Riggi continued to run the family throughout the 1980s , with underboss Girolamo " Jimmy " Palermo and Stefano Vitabile as consigliere , after Frank Majuri died of health problems .
It was around the mid-1980s that Riggi fell increasingly under the influence of Gambino crime family boss John Gotti .
After Riggi 's conviction for racketeering , he appointed John D'Amato as acting boss of the family in 1990 .
D'Amato was later revealed to have participated in homosexual acts and was murdered in 1992 .
Riggi continued to run the family from his jail cell , but he appointed Giacomo " Jake " Amari as his new acting boss .
All was seemingly settled until Amari became ill and died slowly of stomach cancer in 1997 .
This caused a massive power vacuum within the family , with high - ranking members pushing to become the next boss of the DeCavalcante crime family .
THE RULING PANEL Section::::The Ruling Panel .
After acting boss Amari 's death , Riggi organized a three - man ruling panel in 1998 to run the day - to - day business of the crime family , consisting of Girolamo Palermo , Vincent Palermo ( no relation ) , and Charles Majuri , with Stefano Vitabile as the reputed consigliere and adviser to the three .
The Panel , however , infuriated longtime captain Charles Majuri , who had been a hardworking member of the family since his teens and felt that he was wronged when he was not selected as the only acting boss .
To gain complete control of the DeCavalcante family , Majuri decided that he should murder Vincent Palermo , leaving himself in charge of the family .
Majuri contracted soldier James Gallo to murder Vincent Palermo
; however , Gallo was a strong ally and friend of Vincent Palermo 's , and told him about Majuri 's plans .
In retaliation , Vincent Palermo decided to have Majuri murdered .
However , after one plot fell through , the murder was eventually called off .
INFORMANTS AND CONVICTIONS Section::::Informants and convictions .
Toward the late 1990s , the Ruling Panel kept running the DeCavalcante crime family with Giovanni Riggi still behind bars as the boss .
The downfall of the DeCavalcante family was precipitated in 1998 , when an associate named Ralph Guarino became an FBI informant , in an effort to avoid a long prison sentence in connection with taking part with two others in a heist of $ 1.6 million from the World Trade Center .
Guarino spent ten years undercover working for the FBI .
He wore a listening device and recorded conversations that mobsters would have about criminal business .
During Guarino 's time as an informant , fellow mobster Joseph Masella was gunned down on the orders of Vincent Palermo .
Using information provided by Guarino , US law enforcement launched a large scale arrest on December 2 , 1999 of over 30 members and associates of the DeCavalcante crime family .
Palermo realized they would likely spend the rest of their lives behind bars and decided to cooperate with the FBI in exchange for a lenient sentence .
This resulted in the arrest of 12 more men less than a year later .
This decimated the crime family 's hierarchy and put it on the brink of extinction .
Other top members , like Anthony Rotondo and Anthony Capo , also agreed to become government witnesses .
In 2001 , 20 mobsters were charged with racketeering , seven murders , 14 murder conspiracies , attempted murder , extortion in the construction industry , and stock fraud .
This was the fourth indictment of the family since 1999 .
Since then , several other top mobsters agreed to become government witnesses in exchange for being given lenient or no sentences at all .
US law enforcement even put Giovanni Riggi on trial , who was hoping to be released in 2003 , and he was sentenced to 10 additional years in prison .
CURRENT POSITION AND LEADERSHIP Section::::Current position and leadership .
Between 1999 - 2005 , about 45 men were imprisoned , including the family 's consigliere and seven capos .
With the decline of the DeCavalcante family , New York 's Five Families have taken over many of the rackets in North New Jersey .
It is unknown how much influence , if any , John Riggi had maintained in the family .
He was in jail since the early 1990s until his release from prison on November 27 , 2012 .
Riggi , the boss of the DeCavalcante crime family for 33 years , died in 2015 .
In March 2015 , the FBI arrested 10 members and associates of the crime family on charges of conspiracy to commit murder and distribution of drugs .
Members arrested include 71-year - old captain Charles " Beeps " Stango and 72-year - old consigliere Frank Nigro .
Associates Rosario Pali and Nicholas DeGidio were convicted on April 4 , 2017 , after pleading guilty to distributing more than 500 grams of cocaine .
DeGidio was sentenced to a year and a half in prison , and Pali was sentenced to over 6 years .
Luigi Oliveri was charged with the possession of contraband cigarettes .
In March 2017 , Stango was sentenced to 10 years in federal prison for conspiracy to commit murder .
Stango reportedly wanted Nigro and associate Paul Colella to get permission from the New Jersey hierarchy to kill Luigi Oliveri , however the murder was not carried out due to Stango not receiving a " yes - or - no " answer .
Prosecutors claimed Stango and his son had plans to open a high - end escort service in the Toms River area .
In 2016 , his son Anthony Stango Jr. was sentenced to 6 years in prison after pleading guilty to using a telephone in interstate commerce to conduct a prostitution operation , conspiring to distribute five grams or more of cocaine , distributing more than $ 70,000 worth of cocaine and possessing a shotgun as a convicted felon ; during an appearance before judge William H. Walls .
HISTORICAL LEADERSHIP
BOSS ( OFFICIAL AND ACTING )
* 1920s–1955 — Stefano Badami ( murdered ) * 1955–1957 — Filippo " Phil " Amari ( retired ) * 1957–1964 — Nicholas
" Nick " Delmore
* Acting 1962–1964 — Sam DeCavalcante ( became boss ) * 1964–1982 — Simone " Sam the Plumber " DeCavalcante ( retired ) * 1982–2015 — Giovanni " John the Eagle " Riggi ( died of prostate cancer August 3 , 2015 ) * Acting 1990–1992 — John " Johnny Boy " D'Amato ( murdered ) * Acting 1992–1997 — Giacomo " Jake " Amari ( died of stomach cancer ) * Ruling panel — 1997 - 1999 - Girolamo Palermo , Vincent Palermo and Charles Majuri
( members arrested )
* Ruling panel — 2000 - 2004 - Girolamo Palermo , Stefano Vitabile and Giuseppe " Pino "
Schifilliti
*
Acting 2005–2007 – Joseph
" Joe the Old Man " Miranda ( stepped down ) * Acting 2007–2016 – Francesco " Frank " Guarraci died April 14 , 2016
*
2016–present
— Charles Majuri UNDERBOSS ( OFFICIAL AND ACTING ) * 1920s – 1931 — Sam Monaco ( murdered on September 10 , 1931 ) * 1931–1955 — Filippo " Phil " Amari ( promoted to boss )
* 1955–1956 — Nicholas " Nick " Delmore ( promoted boss in 1957 ) * 1956–1957 — Francesco " Fat Frank " Majuri ( stepped down and became consigliere )
* 1957–1991 — Louis " Fat Lou " LaRasso ( murdered )
* 2007–present – Joseph
" Joe the Old Man " Miranda CONSIGLIERE ( OFFICIAL AND ACTING ) * 1920s–1957 — Unknown * 1957–1982 — Francesco " Fat Frank " Majuri * 1982–unknown - Stefano " Steve the
Truck Driver " Vitabile * Unknown - present - Frank Nigro ( arrested 2015 ) CAPOS Section::::Capos .
Northern New Jersey Faction
* Giuseppe " Pino " Schifilliti * Girolamo " Jimmy Dumps " Palermo * Acting Salvatore " Little Sal " Timpano * Gaetano " Corky " Vastola * Louis " Louie Eggs " Consalvo ( promoted in 2015 )
* Charles Stango
South Florida Faction
* Philip " Lou Metzer " Abramo CURRENT SOLDIERS * Jerry Balzano
- he served 2 years after being convicted of racketeering conspiracy in 2011 , other charges were selling untaxed cigarettes and the theft of a $ 15,000 tax refund check .
His first release violation would consist of Balzano admitting to the possession of a handgun and ammunition .
Whilst on supervised release in November 2016 , Balzano engaged in a road rage incident after another driver cut him off , which prompted him to assault and hurl verbal abuses at the driver .
He received 11 months in prison and 21 months of supervised release .
* James " Jimmy " Gallo * Louis " Louie Eggs " Consalvo - he confessed to murdering capo and underboss , Louis " Fat Lou " LaRasso in 1991 with Gregory Rago , after being indicted in 2000 and charged with loansharking , the operation of an illegal bookmaking business and conspiracy to commit securities fraud .
He was also accused of selling 8,000 shares of stock in a company called SC&T International .
He accepted a plea agreement and in 2002 , he was sentenced to 20 to 25 years in prison ; he was released in February 2012 .
Consalvo was a former acting capo of Philip Abramo 's crew .
In 2015 , he reportedly became official capo of the crew .
He was demoted to soldier due to Abramo 's prison release in 2018 .
* Anthony Mannarino *
Bernard NiCastro * Gregory Rago GOVERNMENT INFORMANTS
* Vincent " Vinny Ocean " Palermo - former acting boss during the 1990s .
He married the niece of Sam DeCavalcante during the early 1960s .
He was inducted into the DeCavalcante family in 1976 .
As a favour for Gambino crime family boss John Gotti , DeCavalcante boss Giovanni Riggi ordered a contract on Fred Weiss on 11 September 1989 .
Palermo and Jimmy Gallo shot Weiss 7 times .
Palermo allegedly orchestrated the October 1998 murder of his bodyguard and DeCavalcante associate Joseph Masella , who was found shot several times at a golf course in Marine Park , Brooklyn .
In December 1999 , he was arrested on murder , extortion , bookmaking , loansharking , illegal gambling , robbery , the sale of stolen property and counterfeit goods , and mail fraud charges , alongside 38 other mobsters from the DeCavalcante and New York crime families , including 2 DeCavalcante captain 's , Joseph Giacobbe and Anthony Rotondo .
He allegedly oversaw an illegal bookmaking operation with the New York Gambino and Colombo crime families .
He agreed to become a government witness in 1999 , several weeks after his arrest .
In October 2000 , Palermo pleaded guilty to 4 murders , 7 murder conspiracies , extortion , loansharking , gambling and obstruction of justice charges .
* Anthony " Tony " Capo - former soldier and hitman for the DeCavalcante crime family .
He served as the driver during the murder of Fred Weiss on September 11 , 1989 .
In late 1991 , Capo received information that DeCavalcante acting boss John D'Amato was a closet homosexual .
He testified in court that consigliere , Stefano Vitabile , ordered D'Amato 's murder .
D'Amato was lured to a parked car in Brooklyn and allegedly sat in the back of the car , Capo turned around from the passenger seat and shot him 4 times .
During one incident in the mid-1990s , he stabbed Gambino associate Renee " Remy " Sierra in his face and eye , for disrespecting him in front of a female in a Staten Island bar .
Another assault occurred in the late 1990s which consisted of him beating a parking lot attendant with a steel baton , a pipe and a baseball bat , after spraying him in the face with mace , as the attendant was accused of having a fistfight with DeCavalcante captain Rudy Ferrone .
In 1999 , he became a government witness .
He pleaded guilty to 11 murder conspiracies , participating in 2 murders , several assaults and many other crimes .
He also testified against the New York Colombo and Genovese mafia families .
Capo died in 2012 at the age of 52 from a heart attack .
* Frank " Franky the beast " Scarabino - former associate ( possibly soldier ) .
In late 1999 , captain Giuseppe Schifilliti was tasked to kill Scarabino after Vincent Palermo suspected him of being an informer .
* Anthony Rotondo - former captain .
His father , Vincent Rotondo , was also a DeCavalcante member and had ties to the Colombo and Bonanno crime families in New York , including to former Bonanno boss Rusty Rastelli .
He was proposed for membership in 1978 by his father and it is believed that he was inducted in 1982 by Sam DeCavalcante .
In 1988 , his father was killed and shot 6 times .
He became an informant in early 2003 .
In November 2004 , he testified against high - ranking Gambino members , Thomas " Huck " Carbonaro and Peter Gotti .
He admitted to participation in the murders of Fred Weiss in 1989 , a DeCavalcante associate and a captain , and acting boss John D'Amato 's execution in 1992 .
NOTES REFERENCES
* Deitche , Scott M. Garden
State Gangland :
The Rise of the Mob in New Jersey .
Lanham : Rowman & Littlefield , 2017 FURTHER READING BOOKS COURT PROCEEDINGS NEWS AND REPORTS