HARRY AND THE HENDERSONS ( TV SERIES )
Harry and the Hendersons is an American sitcom based on the film of the same name , produced by Amblin Television for Universal Television .
The series aired in syndication from January 13 , 1991 to June 18 , 1993 , with 72 half - hour episodes produced .
The series is about a family who adopts a Bigfoot called Harry .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Bruce Davison and Molly Cheek played the parents ( in the film , they were played by John Lithgow and Melinda Dillon respectively ) with Carol - Ann Plante and Zachary Bostrom as the children ( in the film , they were played by Margaret Langrick and Joshua Rudoy respectively ) .
Kevin Peter Hall played the role of Harry in both the film and TV series , until his death late in the production of the first season .
He was replaced first by Dawan Scott and then by Brian Steele in the third season
( Steele had filled in for Scott in the Harry costume for numerous scenes during season two , before taking over the role full - time ) .
Harry 's vocal effects were provided by Patrick Pinney where the vocal effects were previously provided by Fred Newman in the film .
In the series , George and Nancy were an upwardly mobile two - career couple , with the former working for a sporting goods company .
George eventually launched his own magazine , The Better Life , late in the second season .
Initially helping the Hendersons with Harry 's care , and Sasquatch research , was Walter Potter , a biologist working for the Department of Animal Control .
Also seen early on were the Glicks , neighbors of the Hendersons ; Samantha was a pretty , young single mother and reporter , and Tiffany was her precocious little girl , a classmate of Ernie 's who had an obvious crush on him .
Samantha , Tiffany , and Walter were all written out after the first season , but the aspect of having a girl next door who chased after Ernie was retained through a new character , Darcy Payne , for the 1991 - 92 season .
Darcy was more annoying than her predecessor , and spent all her waking hours trying to make the Hendersons ' young son hers .
However , she did catch on to the fact that the family was hiding a bigfoot , and had several close encounters with Harry ; fortunately , Darcy disappeared from the show before she could have exposed the secret about him .
Nancy 's younger brother Brett , a photographer , moved in with the Hendersons in the second season , and was also sworn to secrecy about Harry .
When George began The Better Life in the spring of 1992 , Brett was hired as the publication 's chief photographer and a financial beneficiary .
The following year brought many changes , as in the season premiere Harry 's existence was accidentally exposed .
Just as the Hendersons feared he would be captured by the government and possibly killed , he was rather embraced by the public and received overnight regional fame .
For a while , Harry had to adjust to a high - profile life full of exhibition and additional scientific studies , but at the same time the entire family got used to resting more comfortably now that they did not have to hide the big creature from view anymore .
Hilton , a friend of Ernie 's and the son of a local police chief , joined the cast in the third season .
The TV series credits contains an artistic representation of key scenes from the film .
EPISODE LIST SEASON 1 : 1991 SEASON 2 :
1991–92 SEASON 3 :
1992–93
CAST * Kevin Peter Hall - Harry ( 1991 )
* Dawan Scott - Harry ( 1991 - 1992 )
* Brian Steele - Harry ( 1992 - 1993 )
* N. Brock Winkless IV - Harry ( face performer , 1991 - 1993 )
* Patrick Pinney - Harry ( vocal effects , 1991 - 1993 )
* Bruce Davison - George Henderson * Molly Cheek - Nancy Henderson
*
Carol - Ann Plante - Sarah Henderson
* Zachary Bostrom - Ernie Henderson
* Gigi Rice - Samantha Glick ( 1991 )
* Cassie Cole -
Tiffany Glick ( 1991 )
* David Coburn - Walter Potter ( 1991 )
* Noah Blake - Brett Douglas ( 1991 - 1993 )
* Courtney Peldon - Darcy Payne ( 1991 - 1992 )
* Mark Dakota Robinson - Hilton Woods , Jr. ( 1992 - 1993 )
* Jared Henderson - Himself ( 1992 ) PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
Among the series ' directors were series star Bruce Davison , Scott Baio , Frank Bonner , Tony Dow , Richard Kline , Dwayne Hickman , and Donna Pescow .
The series ' theme song was " Your Feet 's Too Big " , performed by Leon Redbone .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS