MEXICO PAVILION
AT
EPCOT
The Mexico Pavilion is a Mexican - themed pavilion that is part of the World Showcase , within Epcot at the Walt Disney World in Orlando , Florida , United States .
Its location is next to the Norwegian pavilion .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
The Mexico Pavilion resembles a Mesoamerican pyramid with steps leading to entrance doors .
Visitors enter through a gallery display of Mexican artwork , the " Animales Fantásticos " art collection .
The central indoor area of the pavilion is themed as an outdoor twilight - lit Mexican village and marketplace , Plaza de los Amigos .
At the edge of the plaza , a restaurant , San Ángel Inn Restaurante , overlooks an indoor lagoon with a themed backdrop of another pyramid and smoking volcanos in the distance with themed lighting and smoke effects .
To the side of the plaza , a boarding area leads to a boat ride , Gran Fiesta Tour Starring The Three Caballeros which commences in the indoor lagoon area .
Due to the location and height of the outdoor structure of the pavilion , the nightly fireworks show " " is controlled from a small technical office atop the building .
ATTRACTIONS AND SERVICES ATTRACTIONS
* Gran Fiesta Tour
Starring
The Three Caballeros - April 6 , 2007 – present .
* Agent P World Showcase Adventure - June 23 , 2012 –
present .
FORMER ATTRACTIONS
* El Río del Tiempo ( The River of Time ) - 1982 to 2007 .
( Replaced by Gran Fiesta Tour in 2007 )
* Kim Possible World Showcase Adventure - January 28 , 2009 , to May 18 , 2012 .
DINING
* San Angel Inn Restaurante - an indoor table - service restaurant located in the central plaza of the pavilion , the restaurant is the sibling to Mexico City 's restaurant of the same name , which dates back to 1692 .
* La Hacienda de San Ángel - a lakeside indoor table - service restaurant , opened in September 2010 .
* Cantina de San Ángel - a lakeside counter - service location with casual outdoor seating .
* La Cava del Tequila - a tequila bar with a vast collection of tequilas , specialty margaritas and light Mexican appetizers , hosted by tequila " connoisseurs " that interact with park guests .
Located adjacent to San Angel Inn Restaurante .
* Choza de Margarita - an outdoor margarita bar with a wide variety of frozen margaritas , on - the - rocks margaritas and mexican snacks , opened in November 2017 LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
*
Mariachi Cobre
SHOPPING
* Plaza de Los Amigos , a Mexican marketplace that sells products such as sombreros , ceramics , musical instruments such as maracas , bajas and The Three Caballeros ' merchandise .
SEE ALSO * Epcot attraction and entertainment history
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Walt Disney World Resort - Mexico Pavilion
* Walt Disney World
Resort - Gran Fiesta Tour
Starring
the Three Caballeros * Walt Disney World Resort - San Angel Inn * Walt Disney World Resort - La Hacienda de San Angel
* Walt Disney World Resort - Mariachi Cobre