THE PRINCESS AND THE FROG The Princess and the Frog is a 2009 American animated musical film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures .
The 49th Disney animated feature film , the film is loosely based on the novel The Frog Princess by E. D. Baker , which is in turn based on the Brothers Grimm fairy tale " The Frog Prince " .
Written and directed by Ron Clements and John Musker , the film features an ensemble voice cast that stars Anika Noni Rose , Bruno Campos , Keith David , Michael - Leon Wooley , Jennifer Cody , and Jim Cummings , with Peter Bartlett , Jenifer Lewis , Oprah Winfrey , Terrence Howard , and John Goodman .
Set in 1920s New Orleans , the film tells the story of a hardworking waitress named Tiana who dreams of owning her own restaurant .
After kissing a prince who has been turned into a frog by an evil voodoo sorcerer , Tiana becomes a frog herself and must find a way to turn back into a human before it is too late .
The Princess and the Frog began production under the working title The Frog Princess .
It marked Disney 's brief return to traditional animation , as it was the studio 's first traditionally animated film since Home on the Range ( 2004 ) .
Co - directors Ron Clements and John Musker , directors of Disney 's highly successful films
The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) and Aladdin ( 1992 ) , returned to Disney to direct The Princess and the Frog .
The studio returned to a Broadway musical - style format frequently used during the Disney Renaissance , and features music written by composer Randy Newman , well known for his musical involvement in Pixar films such as A Bug 's Life ( 1998 ) , Monsters ,
Inc. ( 2001 ) , Cars ( 2006 ) , and the Toy Story trilogy ( 1995 , 1999 , and 2010 ) .
The film also marked the return of Disney animated musical films based on well - known stories since the Disney Renaissance .
The Princess and the Frog opened in limited release in New York and Los Angeles on November 25 , 2009 , and in wide release on December 11 , 2009 .
The film was successful at the box office , ranking first place on its opening weekend in North America , and grossing $ 271 million worldwide .
It received three Academy Award nominations at the 82nd Academy Awards : one for Best Animated Feature and two for its achievement in music ( Original Song ) .
It lost to Up and Crazy Heart , respectively .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1912 New Orleans , a girl named Tiana and her friend Charlotte La Bouff listen to Tiana 's mother read the story of The Frog Prince .
Charlotte finds the story to be romantic , while Tiana proclaims she will never kiss a frog .
Fourteen years later , Tiana has grown into an aspiring young chef who works as a waitress for two local diners , so she can save enough money to start her own restaurant , a dream she shared with her deceased father .
Prince Naveen of Maldonia arrives in New Orleans to better his financial situation .
After being cut off by his parents , Naveen intends to marry a rich southern belle , and Charlotte is the perfect candidate .
Eli " Big Daddy " La Bouff , a rich sugar baron and Charlotte 's father , is hosting a masquerade ball in Naveen 's honor .
Charlotte hires Tiana to make beignets for the ball , giving her enough money to buy an old sugar mill to convert into her restaurant .
Meanwhile , Naveen and his valet , Lawrence , meet the voodoo witch doctor Doctor Facilier .
Inviting them into his emporium , Facilier convinces them that he can make their dreams come true , but neither man gets what they are expecting ; Naveen is transformed into a frog , while Lawrence is given a voodoo talisman that makes him resemble Naveen , which Facilier intends to use to have Lawrence marry Charlotte , after which , he will kill La Bouff and claim his fortune .
At the ball , Tiana discovers she may lose the mill to a higher bidder .
Tiana then meets Naveen , who , believing her to be a princess because of her costume , asks her to kiss him and break Facilier 's spell .
In exchange for the money needed , Tiana accepts , but since she 's not an actual princess , when she kisses Naveen , she is turned into a frog herself .
A chase ensues , and Tiana and Naveen escape to a bayou .
In the bayou , Tiana and Naveen meet Louis , a trumpet - playing alligator , and Ray , a Cajun firefly .
Louis and Ray offer to lead Tiana and Naveen to the voodoo queen Mama Odie , whom they believe can undo the curse .
During the journey , Tiana and Naveen develop feelings for each other .
Meanwhile , Facilier makes a deal with the voodoo spirits , offering them the souls of the people of New Orleans ; in exchange , the spirits grant Facilier the services of a host of shadow demons , whom he orders to find and capture Naveen .
When the four find Mama Odie after escaping from hunters , she tells them that Naveen must kiss a true princess in order to break the spell .
They return to New Orleans to find Charlotte , who is the princess of the Mardi Gras Parade , but only until midnight .
Naveen tells Ray he loves Tiana and is willing to give up his dreams for her , but before he can tell Tiana , he is captured by the demons and brought to Facilier .
After Ray tells Tiana that Naveen loves her , Tiana goes to the parade to find a human " Naveen " marrying Charlotte ; but Ray rescues the real Naveen and steals the charm that disguises Lawrence .
Ray finds Tiana , gives her the charm and attempts to hold off the demons so she can escape , but Facilier manages to mortally wound him .
Facilier then offers to make Tiana 's restaurant dream come true in exchange for the talisman .
Realizing she would rather be with Naveen , and recognizing Facilier 's true intentions , Tiana destroys the talisman .
The angered voodoo spirits claim Facilier himself as payment for his debts to them and drag him into the spirit world , leaving a tombstone with Facilier 's name and horrified face on it .
As Lawrence is taken away by the police , Naveen explains everything to Charlotte , Tiana and Naveen reveal their love to each other .
Charlotte agrees to kiss Naveen so he and Tiana can be together as people .
The clock strikes midnight before she can do so , but the couple decide they are content to live together as frogs .
During a funeral for Ray a beam of light shines down and a new star appears next to Evangeline 's .
Tiana and Naveen are we d by Mama Odie ; and because of Tiana 's new status as princess , they are restored to human form after their kiss .
Later , the couple returns to New Orleans to legally get married and celebrate , and together they open their new restaurant .
CAST * Anika Noni Rose as Tiana , an African - American 19-year - old waitress and aspiring chef / restaurateur .
She is a smart , hard - working , and independent young woman , but one who works so hard that she often forgets important things such as love , fun , and family .
Originally , Tiana was supposed to be known as " Maddy " .
Mark Henn served as the supervising animator for Tiana in both human and frog form , making her one of several Disney lead female characters he has animated .
Henn declared that he attempted to make a character that could stand on its own " without repeating what I 've done on Belle , Ariel , and Jasmine " , with Tiana having a more cynical and grounded personality .
Rose 's performance influenced much of the animation , with the actress even suggesting to Henn for Tiana to be left - handed like herself .
* Elizabeth Dampier as Young Tiana * Bruno Campos as Prince Naveen , the prince of Maldonia .
Naveen is a 20-year - old ne'er - do - well and playboy who has been cut off from his family 's riches until he learns the value of responsibility .
Randy Haycock served as the supervising animator of Naveen in both human and frog form .
The directors described the fictional kingdom of Maldonia as " located in an East of the Sun and West of the Moon location " , however , the name Naveen ( meaning " young man " in Sanskrit ) is fairly common among men from the Indian Subcontinent .
Campos combined a French accent with his own Brazilian accent to make up a Maldonian accent .
* Michael - Leon Wooley as Louis , a friendly , neurotic , trumpet - playing alligator whose dream is to become human so he can join a jazz band .
His name comes from the famous jazz artist and trumpeter , Louis Armstrong .
Eric Goldberg , the supervising animator of Louis and other miscellaneous characters , won the Annie Award for Character Animation in a Feature Production for his work on the film .
* Jim Cummings as Ray , a Cajun firefly .
He and his vast family are close friends with Mama Odie , so he offers to help the frogs get to her .
Ray has an unrequited love for the Evening Star , which he believes is another firefly named " Evangeline " ( a reference to the 19th - century Longfellow poem ) .
Mike Surrey was the supervising animator for Ray .
Ray 's name comes from the blind pianist Ray Charles .
* Keith David as Dr. Facilier , also known as the Shadow Man , a voodoo bokor ( witch doctor ) .
He is depicted in the image of Baron Samedi and/or Ghede Nibo wearing a tailcoat and tophat .
Bruce W. Smith , supervising animator of Doctor Facilier , referred to the character as the " lovechild " of his two favorite Disney Villains :
Captain Hook from Peter Pan ( 1953 ) , and Cruella de Vil from One Hundred and One Dalmatians ( 1961 ) .
Smith was nominated for the Annie Award for Character Animation in a Feature Production for his work .
* Jennifer Cody as Charlotte " Lottie " La Bouff , a wealthy Southern débutante and Tiana 's best friend since childhood who dreams of marrying a prince .
Nik Ranieri served as the supervising animator of Charlotte as an adult and child .
Jennifer Cody won the Annie Award for Voice Acting in a Feature Production for her performance .
* Breanna Brooks voices Charlotte as a child .
* Jenifer Lewis as Mama Odie , a blind , 197-year - old voodoo priestess , who serves as the film 's " Fairy Godmother figure " .
Andreas Deja was the supervising animator for both Mama Odie and her pet snake , Juju , and was nominated for the Annie Award for Character Animation in a Feature Production .
* Peter Bartlett as Lawrence , Prince Naveen 's valet , whom Doctor Facilier recruits as a partner in his scheme by transforming him to look like Naveen using a blood charm .
Anthony DeRosa was the supervising animator for the Lawrence character , whose design was influenced by the Mr. Smee character from Peter Pan .
* John Goodman as Eli " Big Daddy " La Bouff , a very wealthy Southern sugar mill owner and father of Charlotte La Bouff .
While he spoils Charlotte with everything she asks for , he is a loving and generous man , and loves Tiana 's cooking .
Duncan Marjoribanks was the supervising animator for Eli " Big Daddy " La Bouff .
* Oprah Winfrey as Eudora , Tiana 's mother who wants to see her happy and worries that Tiana focuses too much on her dream of owning a restaurant .
Ruben A. Aquino animated both Eudora and her husband , James .
* Terrence Howard as James , Tiana 's father , who helped instill a strong work ethic in Tiana .
He served in World War I as evidenced by a dresser - top portrait photo of him in a World War I uniform .
The circumstances of his death were not stated in the film ; however , his portrait is accompanied by the Distinguished Service Cross , a US medal awarded to soldiers who demonstrated great heroism or risk of life in battle .
* Frank Welker as Stella , Charlotte 's pet dog who talks to Tiana during the film , when she is chasing Tiana and Naveen as frogs on the table .
She loves Tiana 's beignets and begs at Tiana when she wants one .
* Dee Bradley Baker as Juju , Mama Odie 's green pet snake .
* Corey Burton and Jerry Kernion as the Fenner Brothers , two real estate agents who eventually sell Tiana the sugar mill under duress after initially refusing because someone else was offering to pay for it in cash , and because they believed Tiana could not manage it because of her background .
* Ritchie Montgomery , Don Hall , and Paul Briggs as Reggie , Darnell , and Two - Fingers , three bumbling frog hunters who try to catch Tiana and Naveen as frogs .
Their resemblance to The Three Stooges has been noted .
* Kevin Michael Richardson and Emeril Lagasse as Ian and Marlon , the two alligators .
PRODUCTION
EARLY
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production .
Section::::Early development .
Disney had once announced that 2004 's Home on the Range would be their last traditionally animated film .
After the company 's acquisition of Pixar in 2006 , Ed Catmull and John Lasseter , the new president and chief creative officer of Disney Animation Studios , reversed this decision and reinstated hand - drawn animation at the studio .
Many animators who had either been laid off or had left the studio when the traditional animation units were dissolved in 2003 were located and re - hired for the project .
Lasseter also brought back directors Ron Clements and John Musker , whose earlier works include The Great Mouse Detective ( 1986 ) , The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Aladdin ( 1992 ) , Hercules ( 1997 ) , and Treasure Planet ( 2002 ) .
The duo had left the company in 2005 , but Lasseter requested their return to Disney to direct and write the film and had let them choose the style of animation ( traditional or CGI )
they wanted to use .
The story for the film began development by merging two projects in development at Disney and Pixar at the time , both based around " The Frog Prince " fairy tale .
One of the projects was based on E. D. Baker 's The Frog Princess , in which the story 's heroine ( Princess Emma ) kisses a prince turned frog ( Prince Eadric ) , only to become a frog herself .
The Princess and the Frog returns to the musical film format used in many of the previously successful Disney animated films , with a style Musker and Clements declared , like with Aladdin and The Little Mermaid , had inspiration from Golden Age Disney features such as Cinderella .
Musker and Clements thought that given all fairy tales were set in Europe , they could do an American fairy tale .
They stated that they chose New Orleans as a tribute to the history of the city , for its " magical " qualities , and because it was Lasseter 's favorite city .
The directors spent ten days in Louisiana before starting to write the film .
The Princess and the Frog was originally announced as The Frog Princess in July 2006 , and early concepts and songs were presented to the public at The Walt Disney Company 's annual shareholders ' meeting in March 2007 .
These announcements drew criticism from African - American media outlets , due to elements of the Frog Princess story , characters , and settings considered distasteful .
African - American critics disapproved of the original name for the heroine , " Maddy " , due to its similarity to the derogatory term " mammy " .
Also protested were Maddy 's original career as a chambermaid , the choice to have the black heroine 's love interest be a non - black prince , which upset opponents of on - screen interracial romance , and the use of a black male voodoo witchdoctor as the film 's villain .
The Frog Princess title was also thought by critics to be a slur on French people .
Also questioned was the film 's setting of New Orleans , which had been heavily damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , resulting in the expulsion of a large number of mostly black residents .
Critics claimed the choice of New Orleans as the setting for a Disney film with a black heroine was an affront to the Katrina victims ' plight .
In response to these early criticisms , the film 's title was changed in May 2007 from The Frog Princess to The Princess and the Frog .
The name " Maddy " was changed to " Tiana " , and the character 's occupation was altered from chambermaid to waitress .
Talk show host Oprah Winfrey was hired as a technical consultant for the film , leading to her taking a voice - acting role in the film as Tiana 's mother , Eudora .
WRITING AND THEMES Section::::Writing and themes .
The head of story , Don Hall , described the plot as a fairy tale " twisted enough that it seems new and fresh " , with a kingdom that is a modern city , a handsome prince that is a " knuckleheaded playboy " and a variation on the fairy godmother with Mama Odie .
Co - writer Rob Edwards also said The Princess and the Frog was " a princess movie for people who do n't like princess movies " .
As the writers thought Tiana 's character motivation of simply dreaming of having her own restaurant was not appealing enough , they expanded so it was her father 's as well , with the extra philosophy of " food bringing people together from all walks of life " .
Musker and Clements stated that while Tiana already starts as a sympathetic character , the events of the plot make her " understand things in a deeper level " and change people around her .
Both protagonists would learn from each other — Naveen to take responsibilities , Tiana to enjoy life — as well as figuring from Ray 's passion for Evangeline that the perfect balance is brought by having someone you love to share the experience .
Tiana became the first African - American Disney Princess .
VOICE CAST Section::::Voice cast .
On December 1 , 2006 , a detailed casting call was announced for the film at the Manhattan Theatre Source forum .
The casting call states the film as being an American fairy tale musical set in New Orleans during the 1920s Jazz Age and provides a detailed list of the film 's major characters .
In February 2007 , it was reported that Dreamgirls actresses Jennifer Hudson and Anika Noni Rose were top contenders for the voice of Tiana , and that Alicia Keys directly contacted Walt Disney Studios chairman Dick Cook about voicing the role .
It was later reported that Tyra Banks was considered for the role as well .
By April 2007 , it was confirmed that Rose would be voicing Tiana .
Three months later , it was reported that Keith David would be doing the voice of Doctor Facilier , the villain of the film .
ANIMATION AND DESIGN Section::::Animation and design .
Clements and Musker had agreed early on that the style they were aiming for was primarily that of Lady and the Tramp ( 1955 ) , a film which they and John Lasseter feel represents " the pinnacle of Disney 's style " . "
After that , everything started becoming more stylized , like Sleeping Beauty , 101 Dalmatians — which are fantastic films as well , but there 's a particular style ( to Lady and the Tramp )
that 's so classically Disney .
" Lady and the Tramp also heavily informed the style of the New Orleans scenes , while Disney 's Bambi ( 1942 ) served as the template for the bayou scenes .
Bambi was described as a stylistic reference for the painted backgrounds , as according to art director Ian Gooding
" Bambi painted what it feels like to be in the forest instead of the forest
" so The Princess and the Frog would in turn try capturing the essence of roaming through New Orleans .
The former trend in Disney 's hand - drawn features where the characters and cinematography were influenced by a CGI - look has been abandoned .
Andreas Deja , a veteran Disney animator who supervised the character of Mama Odie , says " I always thought that maybe we should distinguish ourselves to go back to what 2D is good at , which is focusing on what the line can do rather than volume , which is a CG kind of thing .
So we are doing less extravagant Treasure Planet kind of treatments .
You have to create a world but
[ we 're doing it more simply ] .
What we 're trying to do with Princess and the Frog is hook up with things that the old guys did earlier .
It 's not going to be graphic … " .
Deja also mentions that Lasseter was aiming for the Disney sculptural and dimensional look of the 1950s : " All those things that were non - graphic , which means go easy on the straight lines and have one volume flow into the other — an organic feel to the drawing . "
Lasseter also felt that traditional animation created more character believability .
For example , with Louis the alligator , created by Eric Goldberg , Lasseter said : " It 's the believability of this large character being able to move around quite like that . "
Choreographer Betsy Baytos was brought by the directors to lead a team of eccentric dancers that gave reference to make each character a different style of movement .
The character design tried to create beautiful drawings through subtle shapes , particularly for most characters being human .
For the frog versions of Tiana and Naveen , while the animators started with realistic designs , they eventually went for cutesy characters " removing all that is unappealing in frogs " , similar to Pinocchios Jiminy Cricket .
Toon Boom Animation 's Toon Boom Harmony software was used as the main software package for the production of the film , as the Computer Animation Production System ( CAPS ) system that Disney developed with Pixar in the 1980s for use on their previous traditionally animated films had become outdated .
The Harmony software was augmented with a number of plug - ins to provide CAPS - like effects such as shading on cheeks and smoke effects .
The reinstated traditional unit 's first production , a 2007 Goofy cartoon short entitled How to Hook Up Your Home Theater , was partly animated without paper by using Harmony and Wacom Cintiq pressure - sensitive tablets .
The character animators found some difficulty with this approach , and decided to use traditional paper and pencil drawings , which were then scanned into the computer systems , for The Princess and the Frog .
The one exception to the new Toon Boom Harmony pipeline was the " Almost There " dream sequence , which utilized an Art Deco graphic style based on the art of Harlem Renaissance painter Aaron Douglas .
Supervised by Eric Goldberg and designed by Sue Nichols , the " Almost There " sequence 's character animation was done on paper without going through the clean - up animation department , and scanned directly into Photoshop .
The artwork was then enhanced to affect the appearance of painted strokes and fills , and combined with backgrounds , using Adobe After Effects .
The visual effects and backgrounds for the film were created digitally using Cintiq tablet displays .
Marlon West , one of Disney 's veteran animation visual effects supervisors , says about the production ; " Those guys had this bright idea to bring back hand - drawn animation , but everything had to be started again from the ground up .
One of the first things we did was focus on producing shorts , to help us re - introduce the 2D pipeline .
I worked as vfx supervisor on the Goofy short , How to Hook Up Your Home Theater .
It was a real plus for the effects department , so we went paperless for The Princess and the Frog .
" The backgrounds were painted digitally using Adobe Photoshop , and many of the architectural elements were based upon 3D models built in Autodesk Maya .
Much of the clean - up animation , digital ink - and - paint , and compositing were outsourced to third - party companies in Orlando , Florida ( Premise Entertainment ) , Toronto , Ontario , Canada ( Yowza Digital Animation ) , and Brooklin , São Paulo , Brazil ( HGN Produções ) .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
During Disney 's 2007 shareholder meeting , Randy Newman and the Dirty Dozen Brass Band performed the film 's opening number , " Down in New Orleans " , with famous New Orleans singer Dr. John singing , while slides of pre - production art from the film played on a screen .
Other songs in the film include "
Almost There " ( a solo for Tiana ) , " Dig a Little Deeper " ( a song for Mama Odie ) , " When We 're Human " ( a song for Louis , Tiana and Naveen [ as frogs ] ) , " Friends on the Other Side " ( a solo for Doctor Facilier ) , and " Gon na Take You There " and " Ma Belle Evangeline " ( two solos for Ray ) .
Newman composed , arranged , and conducted the music for the film , a mixture of jazz , zydeco , blues , and gospel styles performed by the voice cast members for the respective characters while R&B singer - songwriter Ne - Yo wrote and performed the end title song "
Never Knew I Needed " , an R&B love song referring to the romance between the film 's two main characters , Tiana and Naveen .
Supported by a music video by Melina , " Never Knew I Needed " was issued to radio outlets as a commercial single from the .
The film 's soundtrack album , The Princess and the Frog : Original Songs and Score , contains the ten original songs from the film and seven instrumental pieces .
The soundtrack was released on November 23 , 2009 , the day before the limited release of the film in New York and Los Angeles .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered in theaters with a limited run in New York and Los Angeles beginning on November 25 , 2009 , followed by wide release on December 11 , 2009 .
The film was originally set for release on Christmas Day 2009 , but its release date was changed due to a competing family film , , scheduled for release the same day .
The Princess and the Frog enjoyed a limited re - release in AMC Theatres , lasting from October 6–12 , 2017 as part of the Dream Big , Princess campaign .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The Princess and the Frog was supported by a wide array of merchandise leading up to and following the film 's release .
Although Disney 's main marketing push was not set to begin until November 2009 , positive word - of - mouth promotion created demand for merchandise well in advance of the film .
Princess Tiana costumes were selling out prior to Halloween 2009 , and a gift set of Tiana - themed hair - care products from Carol 's Daughter sold out in seven hours on the company 's website .
Other planned merchandise includes a cookbook for children and even a wedding gown .
Princess Tiana was also featured a few months before the release in the Disney on Ice :
Let 's Celebrate !
show .
The film itself was promoted through advertisements , including one from GEICO where Naveen , as a frog , converses with the company 's gecko mascot .
A live parade and show called Tiana 's Showboat Jubilee !
premiered on October 25 , 2009 , at the Magic Kingdom theme park at Walt Disney World Resort in Florida , and on November 5 at Disneyland in California .
In Disneyland , actors in New Orleans Square paraded to the Rivers of America and boarded the park 's steamboat .
From there , the cast , starring Princess Tiana , Prince Naveen , Louis the alligator , and Doctor Facilier , would sing songs from the movie , following a short storyline taking place after the events of the film .
The Disneyland version 's actors actually partook in singing , while the Walt Disney World rendition incorporated lip - syncing .
Tiana 's Showboat Jubilee !
ran at both parks until January 3 , 2010 .
At Disneyland Park , the show was replaced by a land - based event called Princess Tiana 's Mardi Gras Celebration , which features Princess Tiana along with five of the original presentation 's " Mardi Gras dancers " and the park 's " Jambalaya Jazz Band " as they perform songs from the movie .
"
Tiana 's Mardi Gras Celebration " officially ended on October 3 , 2010 .
However , it returned to Disneyland from 2011–2013 as part of the " Limited Time Magic " family - fun weekends .
Tiana also appears in Disneyland Paris ' New Generation Festival .
Some of the characters appear frequently during World of Color , the nightly fountain and projection show presented at Disney California Adventure .
Disney announced on June 4 , 2009 , that they would release a video game inspired by the film and it was released on November 2009 exclusively for Wii and Nintendo DS platforms .
It has been officially described an " adventure through the exciting world of New Orleans in a family - oriented video game " , featuring events from the film and challenges for Princess Tiana .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Princess and the Frog was released in North America on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on March 16 , 2010 .
The film is available on DVD , Blu - ray Disc , and Blu - ray Disc combo pack editions ; the combo pack includes DVD and digital copies of the film , along with the Blu - ray Disc version .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc in Australia on June 2 , 2010 , and on June 21 , 2010 , in the United Kingdom .
As of December 2010 the DVD has sold 4,475,227 copies and has made $ 71.3 million in DVD sales , making it the ninth - best - selling DVD of 2010 .
As of 2018 , the film had earned $ 118.6 million from its home entertainment releases .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The financial and critical success of The Princess and the Frog persuaded Disney to green - light at least one new hand - drawn animated film to be released every two years .
However , the blog /Film noted in July 2014 with the release of hand - drawn concept art for the 2013 computer animated film Frozen , that any future hand - drawn animated films have been " killed " for the time being due to The Princess and the Frog failing " to ignite the box office " .
Two months later , however , many Disney artists announced they were working on a new independent hand - drawn animated film , Hullabaloo , as part of an attempt to bring back hand - drawn animation .
Despite such speculation , Walt Disney Animation Studios has continued to use both hand - drawn animation and computer animation in subsequent films .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
On its limited day release , the film grossed $ 263,890 at two theaters and grossed $ 786,190 its opening weekend .
On its opening day in wide release , the film grossed $ 7 million at 3,434 theaters .
It went on to gross $ 24.2 million over the opening weekend averaging $ 7,050 per theater , ranking at # 1 for the weekend , and making it the highest - grossing start to date for an animated movie in December , a record previously held by Beavis and Butt - Head
Do America .
The film went on to gross $ 104.4 million ( in the United States and Canada ) and $ 267 million ( worldwide ) , making it a box office success , and became the fifth - highest - grossing animated film of 2009 .
While the film did out - gross Disney 's more recent hand - drawn films such as The Emperor 's New Groove , , Treasure Planet , Brother Bear , and Home on the Range , it was less auspicious than the animated films from Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 1990s heyday .
Disney animator Tom Sito compared the film 's box office performance to that of The Great Mouse Detective ( 1986 ) , which was a step up from the theatrical run of the 1985 box office bomb The Black Cauldron .
Looking back on the experience four years later , Catmull acknowledged that Disney had made a " serious mistake " in the process of marketing and releasing the film .
Walt Disney Studios ' marketing department had warned Disney Animation that the word " princess " in the title " would lead moviegoers to think that the film was for girls only , " but the animation studio 's management insisted on keeping the " princess " title because they truly believed that the film 's excellent quality and beautiful hand - drawn animation would bring in all quadrants anyway .
In Catmull 's words , this belief " was our own version of a stupid pill . "
The marketing department turned out to be correct in their prediction that many moviegoers would and did avoid the film because they thought it was " for little girls only .
" This error was further compounded by the fact that the film opened a week before Avatar .
Looking back seven years later , Lasseter told Variety : " I was determined to bring back [ hand - drawn animation ] because I felt it was such a heritage of the Disney studio , and I love the art form … I was stunned that Princess did n't do better .
We dug into it and did a lot of research and focus groups .
It was viewed as old - fashioned by the audience . "
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received largely positive reviews from critics , praising the animation , characters , music and themes .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 85 % of 192 critics have given the film a positive review , with a rating average of 7.4/10 .
The site 's general consensus is that " The warmth of traditional Disney animation makes this occasionally lightweight fairy - tale update a lively and captivating confection for the holidays .
"
Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 0–100 from film critics , has a rating score of 73 based on 29 reviews .
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A " grade and applauded the film 's creative team for " uphold[ing ] the great tradition of classic Disney animation " .
Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised Walt Disney Animation for " rediscovering its traditional hand - drawn animation " and for " a thing called story " .
David Germain of the Associated Press wrote that " The Princess and the Frog is not the second coming of Beauty and the Beast or The Lion King .
It 's just plain pleasant , an old - fashioned little charmer that 's not straining to be the next glib animated compendium of pop - culture flotsam . "
Justin Chang of Variety was less receptive , stating " this long - anticipated throwback to a venerable house style never comes within kissing distance of the studio 's former glory " .
Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News gave the film 3/5 stars while saying " The Princess and the Frog breaks the color barrier for Disney princesses , but is a throwback to traditional animation and her story is a retread " .
Village Voices Scott Foundas found that " the movie as a whole never approache[d ] the wit , cleverness , and storytelling brio of the studio 's early-1990s animation renaissance ( Beauty and the Beast , The Lion King ) or pretty much anything by Pixar " .
Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times gave the film a positive review claiming that " the dialogue is fresh - prince clever , the themes are ageless , the rhythms are riotous and the return to a primal animation style is beautifully executed . "
Chicago Sun - Times film critic Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars and admired Disney 's step back to traditional animation , writing , "
No 3-D !
No glasses !
No extra ticket charge !
No frantic frenzies of meaningless action !
And … good gravy !
A story !
Characters !
A plot !
This is what classic animation once was like ! " , but stated that the film " inspires memories of Disney 's Golden Age it does n't quite live up to , as I 've said , but it 's spritely and high - spirited , and will allow kids to enjoy it without visually assaulting them . "
S. Jhoanna Robledo of Common Sense Media gave the film three out of five stars , writing , " First African - American Disney princess is a good role model " .
Saint Bryan of the NBC - TV Seattle praised the film and called it " The Best Disney Movie Since The Lion King " .
Upon its release , the film created controversy among some Christians over its use of Louisiana Voodoo as a plot device .
Christianity Todays review of the film cited its sexual undertones and use of voodoo , arguing that the scenes with Dr. Facilier and his " friends on the other side " contain many horror elements and that young children might be frightened by the film .
The film 's treatment of Louisiana voodoo as a type of magic instead of a religion also drew criticism from non - Christian factions .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and twice for the Academy Award for Best Original Song , but lost to Up and Crazy Heart , respectively .
It was also nominated for eight Annie Awards and , at the 37th Annie Awards Ceremony on February 6 , 2010 , won three . !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result
rowspan="3"2009 Satellite Awards
Best Motion Picture , Animated or Mixed Media
The Princess and the Frog rowspan="3 " rowspan="2"Best Original Song Randy
Newman(Almost There )
Randy Newman(Down in New Orleans )
rowspan="2"African - American Film Critics Association Awards 2009
Top
10 Films The Princess and the Frog rowspan="2 " Best Screenplay John Musker , Ron Clements and Rob Edwards — Tied with Geoffrey Fletcher for 2009
Producers Guild of America Awards
rowspan="9
" 2009 Online Film Critics Society Awards
Best
Animated Feature
rowspan="4"The Princess and the Frog 67th
Golden Globe Awards 2009
Chicago Film Critics Association
Best Animated Feature
rowspan="3"2009 Critics Choice Awards
Best Animated
Feature
Best Score rowspan="2"Randy Newman
Best
Song(Almost There )
rowspan="7"2009
Black Reel Awards
Best Film
The Princess and the Frog rowspan="3"Best Song , Original or Adapted
Ne - Yo(Never Knew I Needed ) Anika Noni Rose(Almost There ) Anika Noni Rose(Down in New Orleans ) rowspan="2 "
rowspan="2"Best Voice Performance
Keith David
Anika Noni Rose
Best Ensemble rowspan="2"The Princess and the Frog rowspan="2 " rowspan="8"37th Annie Awards
Best
Animated Feature Animated Effects James DeValera Mansfield Production Design in a Feature Production
Ian Gooding rowspan="2 " rowspan="3"Character Animation in a Feature Production Andreas Deja Eric Goldberg Bruce W. Smith rowspan="2"Voice
Acting in a Feature Production Jennifer Cody ( " Charlotte " ) Jenifer Lewis ( " Mama Odie " )
rowspan="10 "
rowspan="4"82nd Academy Awards
Best Animated Feature John Musker and Ron Clements rowspan="2 " Best Music , Original Song Randy Newman(Almost There ) Randy Newman(Down in New Orleans ) rowspan="2"41st NAACP Image Awards Outstanding Motion Picture Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture Anika Noni Rose 36th
Saturn Awards
rowspan="2"The Princess and the Frog 2010
Teen Choice Awards 2011
Grammy Awards
Randy Newman(Down in New Orleans )
Women Film Critics Circle
Best Animated Females
Anika Noni Rose ( Tiana ) , Jennifer Cody ( Charlotte La Bouff ) , Oprah Winfrey ( Eudora ) , Jenifer Lewis ( Mama Odie ) , and all other female characters in The Princess and the Frog .
LEGACY
*
Tiana made a guest - appearance on Sofia the First in the second - season episode " Winter 's Gift " .
* Tiana , Prince Naveen , Eudora and Dr. Facilier appear on the seventh season of Once Upon a Time .
Maldonia also appears as a realm in New Fairy Tale Land .
* Tiana ( voiced by Rose ) is featured in the 2018 film Ralph Breaks the Internet , alongside all the other Disney Princesses .
However , her appearance has changed to have a lighter skin tone , a narrower nose , and European features .
This led to several backlashes from the viewers on social media as these drew her appearance away from that expected of African - Americans .
As a result , Anika Noni Rose and the advocacy group Color of Change contacted Disney to redesign Tiana for Ralph Breaks the Internet to make the character look closer to her actual appearance , which was reintroduced in the second trailer .
SEE ALSO
* List of animated feature - length films
* List of traditional animated feature films * List of Disney theatrical animated features
* List of Disney animated films based on fairy tales REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS