DEBRA MORGAN Debra Morgan ( spelled Deborah in the novels ) is a fictional character created by Jeff Lindsay for his Dexter book series .
She also appears in the television series , based on Lindsay 's books , portrayed by Jennifer Carpenter .
In Lindsay 's novels , she first appeared in Darkly Dreaming Dexter , and was featured in every novel in the series .
CHARACTER HISTORY EARLY LIFE Section::::Character history .
Section::::Early life .
Debra was born to Doris ( Kathrin Lautner Middleton ) and Harry Morgan ( James Remar ) on December 7 , 1979 .
She later became foster sister to Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) .
A tough , foul - mouthed tomboy , she craved her father 's attention and envied Dexter for the amount of time Harry spent with him , unaware that Harry was training him to be a vigilante serial killer .
At the age of 16 , her mother died of cancer .
From then on , she decided to become a detective , like her father .
Debra learned to shoot taking her father 's gun .
Dexter found out and told Harry , who punished her .
Hurt , Debra told Dexter that she wished that Harry had never brought him home .
She was immediately remorseful for saying it , however , and apologized .
She was distraught at her father 's death and , inspired by his career , joined the Miami - Metro Police Department .
She spent three years in patrol and then another two years in vice before being promoted by Captain Tom Matthews ( Geoff Pierson ) ( a friend of her father ) , becoming a Homicide officer at the start of the first season .
Debra is characterized as smart and capable , yet unsure of herself , and so she relies upon Dexter 's seemingly limitless expertise on murderers to solve difficult cases .
Initially assigned to Vice , she is desperate to be transferred to Homicide .
After Matthews promotes her , she starts to grow self - confident , relying less on Dexter 's abilities and more on her own .
SEASON ONE
Section::::Season one .
Newly promoted to the homicide department , Debra 's first case is a series of murders committed by " The Ice Truck Killer " , who preys on prostitutes and leaves their dismembered bodies in refrigerated trucks .
She works hard on the case , but her progress is hampered by her own insecurity and her antagonistic relationship with Lieutenant Maria LaGuerta ( Lauren Vélez ) .
She starts dating , and eventually falls in love with , Rudy Cooper ( Christian Camargo ) ; unbeknownst to her , he is actually the Ice Truck Killer , and is only dating her in order to get close to Dexter .
At the end of the season , Rudy proposes to her and she accepts .
Rudy — who is actually Brian Moser , Dexter 's biological brother — then kidnaps her to reveal himself to Dexter .
He binds her to a table in the same manner that Dexter kills his victims , while Dexter and Brian discuss her fate .
Dexter ultimately saves her life , and reluctantly kills Brian to keep her safe .
SEASON TWO
Section::::Season two .
Debra is frail at the start of season two , still recovering from her ordeal with the Ice Truck Killer ; she feels that she is not a good detective because she did n't spot that her fiancé was a serial killer .
However , FBI agent Frank Lundy ( Keith Carradine ) reassures her otherwise
and they , mid - season , develop a romantic relationship , which ends when he is called away from Miami .
She stays in Dexter 's house while she deals with the trauma .
Debra is appalled when she finds out that Dexter is cheating on his girlfriend , Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) , with his Narcotics Anonymous sponsor , Lila Tournay ( Jaime Murray ) , of whom she is immediately suspicious .
Debra eventually threatens to have Lila deported upon finding out that she murdered her ex - boyfriend .
In the season finale , " The British Invasion " , she helps Dexter rescue Rita 's two children from a fire that Lila had started .
By the end of the season , she has regained her confidence , and she is more determined than ever to improve her career and get a detective shield .
SEASON THREE
Section::::Season three .
As season three begins , Debra has had her hair cut to shoulder length , and has " sworn off men , liquor and smokes " .
She is working with a new partner , Detective Joey Quinn ( Desmond Harrington ) , but has been approached by Internal Affairs officer Yuki Amado ( Liza Lapira ) , who tells her that her partner is being investigated for corruption .
She refuses to assist in the investigation , however .
She is originally part of the team investigating the murder of Miguel Prado 's ( Jimmy Smits )
brother Oscar ( Nick Hermz ) , but because of her lack of tact and people skills she is removed from the case by the newly promoted Angel Batista ( David Zayas ) .
The case she has been assigned to , the murder of a young woman , is eventually found to have been connected to the ongoing case of a serial killer called " The Skinner " ( Jesse Borrego ) , which she solves with the help of confidential informant Anton Briggs ( David Ramsey ) .
The two begin a relationship after she saves his life .
Because of her success on the Skinner case , Debra receives her detective shield at the end of the season .
SEASON FOUR
Section::::Season four .
At the beginning of the season , Dexter tells Debra that Harry slept with one of his confidential informants .
She investigates the files on Harry 's informants and interviews them , hoping to find the one Harry slept with .
One of the files is shown to be Laura Moser ( Sage Kirkpatrick ) .
Her relationship with Anton begins to suffer at this point , especially when Lundy returns to Miami to hunt the Trinity Killer ( John Lithgow ) .
They sleep together and renew their relationship , but the very same night they are both shot — Lundy fatally — by an unknown assailant .
Debra blames herself , and laments to Dexter that she is " broken " .
She puts aside her grief when she comes to suspect that the Trinity Killer was the shooter , and opens an investigation .
After consulting with forensics technician Vince Masuka ( C. S. Lee ) , however , Debra deduces that Trinity could not have been the shooter .
During a Thanksgiving dinner with Dexter 's family , Debra remembers a conversation she had with reporter Christine Hill ( Courtney Ford ) , and realizes Hill has knowledge of the shooting that no one outside the police department knew about , and concludes that she was the shooter .
This is proven true in a later episode revealing that Hill is Trinity 's daughter .
Hill confesses to Debra that she killed Lundy , moments before she commits suicide .
Debra then renews her search for Harry 's mistress , and finds out about Laura Moser , and the fact that Dexter and the Ice Truck Killer are brothers .
She tells Dexter the news ( which he already knew ) , and then tells him that he is " the one consistently good thing " in her life .
SEASON FIVE
Section::::Season five .
Debra begins an intimate relationship with Quinn while trying to support Dexter following Rita 's murder ( portrayed in the season four finale , " The Getaway " ) .
She and Quinn are assigned to the " Barrel Girls " case , in which 13 women were raped , tortured and murdered by a group of men , and left in barrels in a swamp .
The police find DVDs the killers recorded of the crimes , and Debra is assigned to study them .
She figures out that Jordan Chase ( Jonny Lee Miller ) , a prominent public speaker , is involved with the group of men killing the girls , but can not prove her suspicion because he never appears on the DVDs .
However , she is able to track him down by the end of the season , and finds his body , moments after Dexter and Lumen Pierce ( Julia Stiles ) - one of the Barrel Girl killers ' surviving victims and Dexter 's lover and " protegé"- have killed him .
She sees them at the crime scene through a wall of plastic sheeting , and tells them that she needs to call in the crime scene .
She gives them an hour head start because she sympathizes with Lumen , but she never finds out that Dexter was involved .
In the middle of the season , Debra finds out that Quinn , who believes that Dexter was involved in Rita 's murder , has been investigating Dexter behind her back .
Debra is very upset at Quinn and confronts him .
Quinn decides that his relationship with Debra is more important than his ( supposedly ) unfounded suspicions about Dexter , and stops his investigation .
At the end of the season , they have reconciled , and attend Dexter 's son Harrison 's birthday party together .
SEASON SIX
Section::::Season six .
At the start of the season , Quinn proposes to Debra , but she rejects him and ends their relationship .
The ensuing awkwardness is made worse when she is promoted to Lieutenant , thanks in part to LaGuerta 's political machinations .
Debra earns the respect of the office , but struggles with the idea of some people not feeling ' open ' to her anymore because of her new job .
The job is also very stressful in itself , and she comes to doubt whether she can handle the responsibility .
Her work and personal troubles weighing down on her , she begins to attend therapy .
Matthews attempts to make a deal with her about covering up his involvement in the death of a prostitute , but before she can take any action , LaGuerta tells Matthews ' superiors about his indiscretion and lets Debra take the fall for it .
At the end of the season , her therapist helps her realize that she has been in love with Dexter all along .
She finally makes peace with the idea — on the same day that she catches Dexter in the act of murdering " Doomsday Killer "
Travis Marshall ( Colin Hanks ) .
SEASON SEVEN
Section::::Season seven .
In the season premiere , Debra witnesses Dexter murder Travis Marshall .
Dexter claims that he went to collect evidence , and was surprised by Marshall ; he then says that he " snapped " and killed him on impulse .
Debra reluctantly helps him burn down the abandoned church where he killed Marshall , destroying the evidence of the crime .
Later , Dexter comes home to Debra , who is surrounded by Dexter 's victim 's blood slides , a pack of knives , and other tools that Dexter uses to kill .
Debra reluctantly asks Dexter if he is a serial killer .
Dexter , taken aback , replies yes .
Horrified , Debra recoils from Dexter as he admits that he is the " Bay Harbor Butcher " , and that Harry taught him how to get away with murder .
After reading Lundy 's files on serial killers , Debra says she wants to help Dexter , and make sure he does n't kill again .
Dexter agrees , even though he does n't really have a choice , as Debra ( probably ) would have arrested him .
Dexter slips away from Debra long enough to dispose of Ray Speltzer ( Matt Gerald ) , a serial killer she had tried and failed to send to prison .
Debra admits that she understands why Dexter takes the law into his own hands , and tells him that she will not stop him as long as he does not tell her about it or interfere with Miami Metro investigations .
She even compromises her own professional ethics by falsifying evidence to mislead LaGuerta , who is trying to reopen the Bay Harbor Butcher case .
Their truce is threatened when Dexter begins dating Hannah McKay ( Yvonne Strahovski ) , a serial poisoner who Debra is intent on arresting for the murder of Sal Price ( Santiago Cabrera ) , a writer she had feelings for .
Debra eventually confesses her feelings for Dexter in a moment of frustration .
Debra gets into a near - fatal car accident after a confrontation with Hannah .
She is convinced Hannah poisoned her , and Dexter is suspicious enough to order a toxicology screen on a bottle of water in Debra 's car .
The results prove that Hannah did indeed poison Debra , leaving Dexter with no choice but to give Debra evidence proving that Hannah killed Price .
Debra is on hand to arrest Hannah , as a heartbroken Dexter looks on .
In the season finale , Debra rushes to Dexter 's side when LaGuerta has him arrested for the Bay Harbor Butcher murders , and angrily confronts LaGuerta before being told to recuse herself .
Dexter is released , however , thanks to the evidence that Debra tampered with .
The next day , LaGuerta calls her into her office under the pretext of apologizing — and confronts her with circumstantial evidence that she was near the church at the time it was destroyed .
Debra talks her way out of immediate danger , but fears that LaGuerta will soon have definitive proof of what she and Dexter had done .
Later , at Batista 's New Year 's Eve party , she learns that LaGuerta has gone in pursuit of Dexter , who she fears is in the act of killing Hector Estrada ( Nestor Serrano ) , the man who ordered his mother 's murder .
She goes to the scene , where she finds Dexter poised to shoot an unconscious LaGuerta .
As she pleads with Dexter not to do it , LaGuerta regains consciousness and urges Debra to kill her brother .
Resigned , Dexter tells her to " do what you got ta do " .
Desperate to save Dexter , Debra shoots and kills LaGuerta , and breaks down in tears over her body .
SEASON EIGHT
Section::::Season eight .
Six months after LaGuerta 's death , Debra 's life has gone into a tailspin : She has quit her job , started abusing drugs and alcohol , and cut off all contact with Dexter .
Now working as a private investigator , she is chasing after — and sleeping with — drug dealer Andrew Briggs ( Rhys Coiro ) .
Dexter shows up at her hotel and tells her that an assassin named El Sapo ( Nick Gomez ) is coming to kill her and Briggs ; Debra responds that she does n't care .
When Briggs tries to scare Dexter off , Dexter kills him , and pleads with Debra to leave with him .
Debra refuses , however .
El Sapo finds Debra as she searches for Briggs ' stolen merchandise and beats her up .
In a state of shock , she shoots him dead .
When Dexter finds out what Debra has done , she asks him to cover up the crime , which he does .
Debra is arrested for drunk driving , and calls Quinn to bail her out .
Quinn tells Dexter what happened , and Dexter insists on taking Debra to dinner to talk to her .
At dinner , he shows Debra footage of her saving a man 's life and tells her that she is still a good person .
A few days later , Debra walks into Miami Metro , blind drunk , and confesses to Quinn that she killed LaGuerta .
Thinking she does n't know what she 's saying , Quinn calls Dexter for help .
Dexter arrives with Dr. Evelyn Vogel ( Charlotte Rampling ) , an old friend of Harry 's who knows that Dexter is a serial killer .
Just as Debra is about to tell Quinn the truth about LaGuerta 's death , Dexter renders her unconscious with the same tranquilizer he uses on his victims , and takes her back to his apartment .
There , he asks Vogel to help her .
Vogel tells Debra that she had no other choice but to protect Dexter , and shows her recorded interviews with Harry expressing his guilt over training Dexter to kill ; in these interviews , Debra learns the truth about her father 's death .
She reaches out to Dexter , asking him to take a drive with her so they can talk .
Once on the road , Debra seizes the steering wheel and plunges the car into the bay , intent on killing herself and her brother .
She is rescued , however , and saves Dexter 's life by swimming to the car and pulling him out .
Debra goes to a resentful Dexter for help when Vogel is kidnapped .
While the two of them track Vogel down , Debra tells Dexter that she had saved his life because she could n't imagine hers without him in it .
They find Vogel at the mercy of one of her former patients , serial killer A.J. Yates ( Aaron McCusker ) ; Dexter kills him to protect Debra .
Dexter and Debra admit they need each other , and they reconcile .
Debra and Dexter are both non - lethally poisoned by Hannah , who has escaped from prison .
Debra demands that Dexter get her out of their lives , and starts surveilling her .
When Dexter appears reluctant , Debra goes to her boss Jacob Elway ( Sean Patrick Flanery ) and offers to apprehend Hannah for a substantial reward .
She tries to capture Hannah , who says the only reason she spared her life was because she did n't want to hurt Dexter .
Debra reluctantly drops the case , and even allows Hannah to hide from the police in her apartment .
Debra stops by her old precinct , and Batista offers to reinstate her as a detective .
She wants the job , but she knows that she can not do it while harboring a fugitive and turning a blind eye to Dexter 's crimes .
To further complicate the situation , she and Quinn , who is now in a relationship with Batista 's sister Jamie ( Aimee Garcia ) , share a kiss .
Dexter tells her that he , Hannah and Harrison are going to move to Argentina .
Debra is saddened , but gives him her blessing when she sees how happy he is with his new family .
The following day , she takes the job at Miami Metro , and renews her relationship with Quinn .
In her first case , Debra helps Dexter catch Oliver Saxon ( Darri Ingolfson ) , a serial killer known as " the Brain Surgeon " .
Dexter ultimately decides not to kill him , however , and asks her to arrest Saxon .
Debra arrives just as Saxon is killing Deputy U.S. Marshall Cooper ( Kenny Johnson ) , and draws her weapon .
Saxon gets the drop on her , however , and shoots her in the abdomen .
In the series ' final episode , " Remember the Monsters ? " , Debra is taken to the hospital , where she tells Quinn she loves him and wishes Dexter a happy life .
Moments later , however , she suffers a massive stroke that leaves her in a persistent vegetative state .
After killing Saxon , Dexter goes to see her in the hospital as it is being evacuated in the midst of a hurricane .
He tearfully removes her life support , carries her body to his boat , and buries her at sea .
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Romantic relationships .
Debra is known to have very bad relationships with men .
Her first boyfriend on the series is a mechanic named Sean who turns out to be married .
She then has a relationship with Rudy Cooper , who ends up kidnapping her and trying to kill her twice .
In Season two , she starts going out with a man named Gabriel whom she met at the gym , and whom she suspects ( incorrectly ) of trying to use her notoriety following the Ice Truck Killer case to jumpstart his writing career .
After that ends , she goes out with Frank Lundy , a man 25 years her senior who has to leave Miami at the end of season two , although she resumes her relationship with him in season four .
She then starts a relationship with her Confidential Informant Anton Briggs .
She breaks up with him to resume her relationship with Lundy , who is murdered .
In the season five premiere she sleeps with her partner , Joey Quinn , who tries unsuccessfully to move the relationship into something more than purely sexual .
By the end of season 6 , she comes to believe that she is in love with her adoptive brother , Dexter — only to find out that he is a serial killer .
In season 7 , she has feelings for true crime writer Sal Price , but he is murdered as well .
DIFFERENCES FROM THE NOVELS Section::::Differences from the novels .
In the books , the character 's name is spelled " Deborah " , and she is described as " voluptuous " in contrast to her slim appearance on the TV show .
In the novel Darkly Dreaming Dexter , Deborah finds out that Dexter is a serial killer , and appears to accept it , although she is sometimes torn between her love for her brother and her duty as a cop .
In the TV series , Debra remains unaware of Dexter 's " hobby " until the final episode of season six , when she witnesses Dexter killing Travis Marshall .
At the conclusion of Dexter is Delicious , Deborah is pregnant by her boyfriend , Kyle Chutsky , and in Double Dexter we learn that she gave birth to a son , Nicholas , and raises him alone .
In Dexter 's Final Cut , Deborah disowns Dexter after he cheats on Rita and unintentionally allows pedophile Robert Chase to kill Rita and kidnap Astor .
In Dexter is Dead , Deborah takes custody of Cody , Astor and Dexter 's daughter Lily Ann after Dexter is imprisoned for Rita 's murder ; she knows that Dexter is innocent of that particular crime , but believes that he belongs in prison .
After Dexter is freed thanks to his brother Brian 's machinations , she refuses to let him see the children and communicates with him only to get him to sign the paperwork to finalize the adoption .
However , she is forced to rely on him when Cody , Astor and Nicholas are kidnapped by a Mexican drug lord who is out to get Brian .
The three of them team up to infiltrate the drug lord 's yacht and rescue the children , and Deborah and Dexter repair their relationship .
Deborah saves Dexter 's life by killing the drug lord just as he has her wounded brother at his mercy .
Moments later , however , Dexter is killed when the yacht explodes ; in his final moments , he sees Deborah trying to save him .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Jennifer Carpenter 's portrayal of Debra Morgan has received critical praise .
Australian journalist Jack Marx describing her portrayal of " cool and clumsy " Debra as " so perfect that many viewers appear to have mistaken the character 's flaws for the actor 's .
" For her portrayal of the character , she has been nominated for seven Saturn Awards for Best Supporting Actress on Television , in 2007 , 2008 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 , winning in 2009 for her performance in season three .
She has also been nominated four times as part of the ensemble cast for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS