GEORGE ROGERS CLARK MEMORIAL BRIDGE
The George Rogers Clark Memorial Bridge is a four - lane cantilevered truss bridge crossing the Ohio River between Louisville , Kentucky and Jeffersonville , Indiana , that carries US 31 .
It is known locally as the Second Street Bridge .
HISTORY Section::::History .
It was designed by Ralph Modjeski and Frank Masters with architectural details handled by Paul Philippe Cret of Philadelphia , and construction began in June 1928 by the American Bridge Company of Pittsburgh at a cost of $ 4.7 million .
President Herbert Hoover dedicated the bridge .
It was opened to the public on October 31 , 1929 as the Louisville Municipal Bridge and operated as a toll bridge .
The toll was 35 cents until December 31 , 1936 , when it became a quarter .
The last of the bonds that financed the construction were redeemed in 1946 , and the tolls were removed .
On January 17 , 1949 , the bridge was renamed in honor of George Rogers Clark , recognized as the founder of Louisville .
The bridge was rehabilitated in 1958 .
Muhammad Ali threw his gold medal from the 1960 Rome Olympics into the Ohio river while standing on the bridge .
There was a movement in the 1950s to restore tolls , as traffic on the bridge had reached capacity and funding was needed for an additional bridge , but a toll was opposed strongly by most residents .
Ultimately most of the funds for two additional bridges ( for motor vehicles only ) that carry interstate highways came from the federal government .
It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places on March 8 , 1984 , as the Louisville Municipal Bridge , Pylons and Administration Building .
In June 2010 , Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear and Louisville Mayor Jerry Abramson announced a new $ 3 million streetscape improvement project directly underneath the Clark Memorial Bridge , a three - block area from Main Street to River Road , which will be transformed into a plaza .
This includes a new decorative lighting system under the refurbished Clark Memorial Bridge , wide sidewalks , seats , new pedestrian and festival areas , and extensive plantings , making this an inviting promenade for the new KFC Yum !
Center .
The project was completed in time for the October 2010 opening of the arena .
CARMAN provided the landscape architecture and civil engineering services for the 2010 streetscape project .
The bridge was expected to see significant increases in traffic following the completion of the Ohio River Bridges Project near the end of 2016 .
The project included repurposing the John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge , which previously carried I-65 in both directions , for southbound traffic only ; building the new Abraham Lincoln Bridge for northbound I-65 traffic ; and building the Lewis and Clark Bridge to connect I-265 in the two states .
The two I-65 crossings and the I-265 bridge are now tolled to pay for the project .
One consultant who worked on a transportation study for the Kentucky government predicted that traffic on the bridge would increase by 25 % once tolling on the other bridges started , and the mayor of Jeffersonville expressed concern about the possible effects of increased traffic on the bridge 's structural integrity .
These concerns were heightened by the discovery of a cracked girder and other structural issues ( since repaired ) during a routine 2014 inspection .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
Locally , the Clark Bridge is known as the Second Street Bridge due to its direct alignment onto Second Street in Louisville .
There is a pedestrian sidewalk on each side of the bridge deck .
The Clark Bridge was previously the only regional Ohio River bridge open to non - motorized traffic , until the opening of the Indiana side of the nearby Big Four Bridge to pedestrian and bicycle traffic in May 2014 .
Since 1991 , the bridge has been used as " ground zero " for the annual Thunder Over Louisville event , when a waterfall of fireworks flows along the entire length of the bridge during the fireworks show .
This involves traffic being closed for much of the week .
This is criticized as it cuts off both the only non - interstate and , prior to the Big Four Bridge reopening , the only pedestrian route between Louisville and southern Indiana , which can impact local businesses such as bicycle couriers .
Future closures of the Clark Bridge will also cut off the only free vehicular crossing of the Ohio in downtown Louisville .
The bridge is featured in a scene from the 1981 movie Stripes in which Bill Murray drives his cab to the middle of the span , gets out of the vehicle and then tosses his keys into the river below .
SEE ALSO
* List of crossings of the Ohio River REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Clark Memorial Bridge at Bridges & Tunnels * Municipal Bridge Building and Pylons at Louisville Art Deco