1933 CHESAPEAKE – POTOMAC HURRICANE
The 1933 Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane was among the most damaging hurricanes in the Mid - Atlantic states in the eastern United States .
The sixth storm and third hurricane of the very active 1933 Atlantic hurricane season , it formed in the eastern Atlantic , where it moved west - northwestward and eventually became a Category 4 on the Saffir - Simpson hurricane wind scale .
A strong ridge over New England allowed a continued northwest course , bringing the storm south of Bermuda and later toward the middle coast of the eastern United States .
Advance warning allowed hundreds of people to evacuate ahead of the hurricane making landfall .
It did so in northeastern North Carolina on August 23 with winds of about 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) .
Soon after , the eye crossed over Norfolk , Virginia , the first time that happened since 1821 .
The hurricane weakened into a tropical storm over northern Virginia shortly before passing near Washington , D.C. , becoming the worst tropical cyclone there since 1896 .
Curving northward , the storm moved through Pennsylvania and New York before losing tropical characteristics on August 25 .
Now extratropical , the former hurricane moved across Atlantic Canada , dissipating on August 28 .
Across the eastern United States , the hurricane left widespread damage amounting to over $ 40 million ( equivalent to about $ billion in ) and causing 47 deaths .
Although the storm struck North Carolina , damage in the state totaled only about $ 250,000 , largely to crops and transport .
Along the Chesapeake Bay , the storm produced 100-year flooding from its storm surge , setting records that remained for over 80 years .
In Virginia , flooding covered downtown portions of Norfolk in the southeast and Alexandria in the north .
Damage in the state was estimated at $ 17.5 million .
Similarly heavy damage occurred in Maryland , including over $ 7 million to crops .
High waves along the coast eroded beaches and created a new inlet at Ocean City .
The highest rainfall associated with the hurricane was at York , Pennsylvania .
In the state , the rains flooded several rivers which forced thousands to evacuate .
In neighboring New Jersey , high waves wrecked boats and destroyed a fishing pier , while in New York , flooding caused traffic jams .
In Atlantic Canada , heavy rainfall assisted firefighters in combating wildfires , and the associated winds caused isolated power outages .
METEOROLOGICAL HISTORY Section::::Meteorological history .
On August 13 , a tropical depression developed near the west coast of Africa , southeast of Cape Verde , with an associated closed circulation .
Based on observations from a nearby ship , it is estimated the depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm while moving generally to the west - northwest .
For several days the storm continued this general trajectory , eventually shifting more to the northwest .
Based on interpolation of reports , it is estimated the storm intensified into a hurricane on August 16 while halfway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles .
The Weather Bureau began tracking the system on August 18 .
Later that day , a ship reported a pressure of , suggesting winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) .
This made the hurricane a Category 4 on the Saffir - Simpson hurricane wind scale .
Another ship report on August 20 indicated a pressure of while reporting hurricane winds , suggesting peak winds of .
After remaining near peak intensity for three days , the hurricane began steadily weakening while curving more to the west - northwest , a rare track for the region due to steering from a ridge over New England .
On August 21 , the storm passed about southwest of Bermuda .
At 1000 UTC on August 23 , the hurricane made landfall along the northern Outer Banks of North Carolina , near Nags Head , with a pressure of .
Based on the steady weakening , coastal observations , and a larger than normal size , landfall winds were estimated at 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) .
A few hours later , the hurricane made another landfall on the North Carolina mainland after crossing the Albemarle Sound .
While the hurricane continued to the northwest , the eye briefly moved over Norfolk , Virginia , for the first time since the 1821 Norfolk and Long Island hurricane .
Early on August 24 , the hurricane weakened into a tropical storm while passing near Washington ,
D.C. Curving to the north , the storm crossed Pennsylvania and into New York , where it weakened further into a tropical depression .
On August 25 , the former hurricane turned to the east near the Canada – US border , and after interacting with a cold front , became extratropical .
It emerged from Maine and briefly re - intensified , moving across southern Nova Scotia with gale - force winds .
On August 28 , the circulation dissipated to the south of Newfoundland .
PREPARATIONS AND IMPACT Section::::Preparations and impact .
The hurricane first affected Bermuda when it passed to the south .
Winds at St. George 's reached .
High waves along the coast prevented boats from docking .
Early on August 21 , the Weather Bureau issued storm warnings from Cape Hatteras to Boston , Massachusetts .
As the hurricane approached land , the warnings were extended southward to Southport , North Carolina .
In Norfolk , Virginia , most ships either remained at port or sought shelter due to advance warning .
Residents were advised to evacuate in Ocean View , Virginia Beach , and Willoughby Spit , and about 350 people left their houses in Virginia Beach .
Along the coast , the United States Coast Guard rescued more than 200 people , many of whom due to capsized boats .
A 1993 article published in the Monthly Weather Review considered the storm to have been " one of the most severe storms that has ever visited the Middle Atlantic coast . "
Flooding affected a larger portion of the northeastern United States than any other hurricane in the 1900s after Hurricane Agnes in 1972 .
The Federal Emergency Management Agency later used high water levels from the storm as a 100-year event for the Chesapeake Bay region .
The next storm to approach the storm surge levels was Isabel in 2003 , which was lower in most locations in Virginia , although higher in Washington , D.C. and Baltimore due to sea level rise .
This hurricane caused damage from North Carolina through New Jersey , due to the combination of high winds and storm tides , and left 47 people dead overall .
NORTH CAROLINA AND VIRGINIA Section::::North Carolina and Virginia .
When the hurricane made landfall in the Outer Banks , it produced winds of 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) at Cape Hatteras .
The winds caused crop damage as far inland as Granville County .
The four - masted schooner G.A. Kohler hailing from Baltimore and bound for Haiti was driven ashore at Hatteras by the high winds .
Across the region , the storm downed power lines , washed out highways , wrecked boats , and destroyed houses , and overall damage in the state was around $ 250,000 .
As the hurricane moved into Virginia , winds were as strong as 82 mph ( 131 km / h ) at Cape Henry , while Norfolk reported winds of 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) .
The latter city reported a record high tide of above normal at Sewell 's Point , which flooded the downtown section with of water .
Water levels were higher than any previous high water mark in Newport News and most of Fort Eustis was flooded .
In Hampton the storm surge flooded Langley Air Force Base , swamped homes and businesses , wrecked boats , and destroyed fishing piers .
Rainfall in Chesapeake reached about , and reached about in Norfolk .
Flooding near Norfolk damaged crops , and after its downtown section was flooded , residents were forced to travel by boat .
When the flood levels dropped , many fish were left behind in the streets .
High water levels of around along the York River destroyed buildings at Gloucester Point .
In Virginia Beach , the storm knocked down about 600 trees , many of them about 100 years old , and over 79,000 people lost telephone service .
Due to advance warning , there was minimal damage to shipping in the region .
However , high waves damaged the steamer Madison with 90 people on board and caused it to drift off Cape Charles , which necessitated rescue from the Coast Guard .
Inland flooding occurred along the James River as far west as Richmond , where damage was limited to downed trees and broken windows .
The pier of the Jamestown Ferry was washed out in Surry and a marina at Jordan Point near Hopewell was wrecked after the river reached the highest level on record .
A powerful storm surge moved up the Chesapeake Bay and flooded waterfront locations .
At Colonial Beach along the Potomac River , the surge flooded the town with of water and wrecked a local amusement park .
The Potomac in Alexandria was at its highest level since 1899 , causing floods deep along U.S. Route 1 , and flooding the Old Town section .
High winds in the city caused power outages , and flooding along the Cameron Run washed out a bridge .
The combination of rain and winds damaged crops in Fairfax and Loudoun counties , mainly to corn and peaches .
Statewide , the storm caused $ 5.25 million in crop damage , largely to corn and tobacco .
Damage in the state was estimated at $ 17.5 million , and there were 15 deaths .
After the storm , about 350 people helped clear debris from the streets of Norfolk .
MARYLAND AND THE MID - ATLANTIC Section::::Maryland and the Mid - Atlantic .
Farther north , it is estimated the storm produced hurricane - force winds in portions of Maryland .
Along the coast , high waves eroded about of beaches in Maryland and another in Delaware .
High waves created an inlet that turned Assateague into an island .
The storm damaged or destroyed several hotels in the region .
Power , telephone , and telegraph outages occurred from Cape Charles through Delaware .
In Baltimore , of precipitation fell in 24 hours , setting a record and causing flooding .
The storm surge wrecked a steamboat pier and promenade at Chesapeake Beach , and damaged or destroyed 70 houses in neighboring North Beach .
In Cheverly , flooding caused nine cars of a train to derail , killing four people .
Statewide , the storm caused about $ 7 million in crop damage , mostly to tobacco , tomato , and corn .
The high tides caused $ 3 million in damage to the fishing industry , having damaged or destroyed many boats and docks .
There was about $ 90,000 worth of damage to the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , after docks were damaged .
Throughout the state , the hurricane caused about $ 10 million in property damage , with another $ 1.1 million to federal properties , about $ 960,000 in transportation damage , and $ 364,000 in utility damage .
In neighboring Delaware , road damage was about $ 150,000 , after three bridges were wrecked along DuPont Highway .
Rainfall in the state reached in Bridgeville .
In Washington , D.C. , the storm dropped of rainfall , at the time the highest on record for a single day total .
High winds knocked down trees and destroyed the roofs of several houses .
Along the Anacostia River , flooding surpassed a seawall , and traffic was disrupted when the Benning Bridge was flooded with of water .
The Washington - Hoover Airport was also flooded .
Damage in the nation 's capital was the worst since a tropical storm in 1896 .
The highest rainfall associated with the hurricane was near York , Pennsylvania .
On August 24 , the minimum pressure in Philadelphia dropped to 996 mbar ( 29.40 inHg ) , which was the lowest on record in the month of August at the time .
Wind gusts in the city reached .
In the surrounding area , winds and rainfall caused $ 1 million in damage , mostly to crops and houses , and there were four deaths .
Rainfall caused the worst flooding in the Lehigh Valley since 1902 .
In York County , floods destroyed 47 bridges , while in York proper , about 3,000 people evacuated along the swollen Codorus Creek .
Hurricane - force winds potentially affected portions of Delaware and southern New Jersey .
In Atlantic City , New Jersey , winds reached 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) at a height of 171 ft ( 52 m ) , which is 67 mph ( 107 km / h ) at sea - level .
At the time , this was the highest wind report for the station in the month of August .
Rainfall in Atlantic City totaled , including that fell in an hour on August 20 , which was the monthly average .
Two people drowned along the Jersey Shore due to high waves , and the storm capsized nine boats .
The waves destroyed a long fishing pier in
Cape May. High winds damaged the boardwalk while streets were flooded in Atlantic City , and there was about $ 3 million in damage .
The storm spawned a tornado in Wildwood .
At Picatinny Arsenal , residents and members of the military helped prevent a dam from breaking .
Sustained winds of around 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) were observed across northern New York , while the top of the Empire State Building reported a gust of .
Heavy rainfall in the state increased water levels along streams , causing one person to drown at Mount Tremper .
After a dam broke , 190 people at Godeffroy were stranded until they were rescued by a fire crew .
A power outage during the storm caused the Statue of Liberty torch to extinguish for the first time since 1929 .
Streets and basements of New York City were flooded after the heavy rainfall .
The combination of flooding and fallen trees caused heavy traffic jams .
The former hurricane passed near southern Quebec as a tropical depression , and later crossed southern Nova Scotia as an extratropical cyclone .
Along Lake Ontario , winds reached 51 mph ( 81 km / h ) , and in Montreal , winds reached 21 mph ( 33 km / h ) .
After a dry summer , the storm 's accompanying rainfall was beneficial , reaching 4.4 in ( 112 mm ) in Fredericton , New Brunswick and 2 in ( 50 mm ) in Halifax , Nova Scotia .
The rains helped farmers in Ontario and assisted firefighters in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia .
In Montreal , 2.4 in ( 60 mm ) of rainfall flooded a tunnel .
Gusty winds knocked down power lines in portions of Quebec , Nova Scotia , and Nova Scotia .
Overall effects were minor , limited to some utility damage and delays for shipping .
SEE ALSO
* Hurricane Isabel * Hurricane Florence * List of North Carolina hurricanes
( 1900–49 ) * List of Delaware hurricanes NOTES REFERENCES