MIGHTY JOE YOUNG ( 1998 FILM )
Mighty Joe Young is a 1998 American adventure film based on the 1949 film of the same name about a giant mountain gorilla brought to a wildlife preserve in Los Angeles by a young woman who raised him and a zoologist to protect him from the threat of poachers until one seeks Joe out in order to take his revenge .
It was directed by Ron Underwood and stars Bill Paxton , Charlize Theron , and creature suit actor John Alexander as the title character .
In this version , the ape is much larger than in the original .
The film grossed $ 50.6 million in the United States against a production budget of $ 90 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
As a child , Jill Young witnesses the death of her mother , primatologist Ruth Young , and the mother of Joe , an infant mountain gorilla , at the hands of poachers led by Andrei Strasser , who loses his right thumb and trigger finger to Joe , swearing revenge .
Twelve years later , Jill has raised Joe , now grown to a height of and weighing .
As a result , other gorillas will not accept him and they are both now living in relative peace until a wildlife refuge director , Gregg O'Hara , convinces Jill they would be safer from poachers if they relocated to the United States .
The trio goes to Los Angeles , and win the hearts of the refuge staff at the conservancy , who put Jill in charge of Joe .
Jill is approached by Strasser , who is now running a fraudulent animal preserve in Botswana , while actually selling animal organs on the black market .
After seeing a news report about Joe , he is eager for revenge .
At first Jill does not recognize Strasser , since Strasser 's right hand is concealed in his coat pocket .
He attempts to convince Jill that Joe would be better off in his wildlife refuge back in Africa .
During a gala , Strasser 's henchman , Garth , uses a poacher 's noisemaker to scare Joe into a frenzy .
Joe trashes the gala , with the intention of attacking Strasser , but is captured , and imprisoned in a concrete bunker .
When Jill discovers that Joe may be euthanized , she accepts Strasser 's offer .
She and the refuge staff smuggle Joe out in a truck .
Before their departure , Gregg has fallen in love with Jill and kisses her goodbye .
On the way to the airport , Jill notices the half - glove covering Strasser 's missing fingers and recognizes him .
She fights Strasser and Garth , then jumps from the truck onto Hollywood Boulevard , leading to several automobile accidents .
Joe sees her and tilts the truck over onto its side and flees .
Gregg discovers that Strasser is a poacher and goes after Jill and Joe .
He finds Jill , who reveals to Gregg that Strasser killed her mother and now plans to kill Joe .
They track Joe to a carnival where he is playfully wreaking havoc .
Strasser arrives as well and attempts to shoot Jill , but Garth , appalled at Strasser 's ruthlessness , turns against him and saves Jill , causing Strasser to misfire at a spotlight , starting a fire and causing the Ferris wheel to break down .
After knocking Garth unconscious , Strasser attempts to kill Jill in person , but Joe sneaks up behind them and throws Strasser onto a power line over a transformer .
Short two fingers on the hand holding the wire , Strasser loses his grip and falls onto the transformer , where he is electrocuted to death .
Later , at the Santa Monica Pier , Joe attempts to save a child from atop the burning wheel , but the fire burns it down and Joe and the child fall to the ground , where Joe jumps off of the burning wheel , protecting the boy and knocking himself unconscious .
Joe survives the fall and awakens and Jill mentions that they need to raise money to open a preserve for him .
The young boy named Jason donates some change to Jill after hearing this , prompting the rest of the crowd to contribute .
Joe is returned to Uganda where Jill and Gregg open the " Joe Young Preserve " .
Finally free , Joe runs off into the jungle .
CAST
* Bill Paxton as Professor Gregory " Gregg " O'Hara , a zoologist who finds Joe in the wild and develops a relationship with Jill .
* Charlize Theron as Jill Young , a young woman who is Joe 's best friend and protecter after they were both orphaned by the same poacher .
* John Alexander as Mighty Joe Young , a mountain gorilla who due to a rare form of gigantism is 15 feet tall and 2,000 pounds and is the sacred guardian of the mountain .
He is Jill 's best friend since they were orphaned by the same poacher .
Joe was designed and created by special makeup effects legend Rick Baker .
* Verne Troyer as Baby Joe Young
*
Mighty Joe Young puppeteers , Mark Setrakian , Mike Elizalde , Jurgen Heimann , Steven Sherman
* Rade Šerbedžija as Andrei Strasser , a poacher who seek revenge on Joe after he bit off his thumb and index finger when he was an infant .
He is the poacher who murdered both Jill 's and Joe 's mothers .
* Regina King as Cecily Banks , a zoologist and Gregg 's friend working at the wildlife preserve who immediately befriends Jill and Joe .
* Peter Firth as Garth , Strasser 's right hand man who is n't as ruthless as Strasser .
* Naveen Andrews as Pindi , a local guide and employee of Strasser .
* David Paymer as Harry Ruben , the supervisor at the wildlife preserve that Joe is relieved to .
* Robert Wisdom as Kweli , a local African man who was friend of Jill 's mother and a surrogate father figure to Jill .
* Christian Clemenson as Jack * Scarlett Pomers as Charlotte
* Geoffrey Blake as Vern * Lawrence Pressman as Doctor Elliot Baker
* Linda Purl as Doctor Ruth Young , Jill 's primatologist mother who was murdered by Strasser .
* Mika Boorem as Young Jill Young * Cory Buck as Jason , a young boy who gets caught on the burning Farris wheel .
* Reno Wilson as Poacher * Judson Mills as Impatient Driver PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Cinematographer Donald Peterman suffered head injuries , a broken leg and broken ribs in a crane accident on the film set in 1997 .
His camera platform plummeted to the ground when the crane snapped .
A cameraman was also injured in the accident .
In most of the film , Joe was portrayed by creature - suit performer John Alexander , who wore a radio - controlled animatronic gorilla mask and full body suit created by
special makeup effects artist Rick Baker and his crew at Cinovation Studios .
To achieve those scenes , Alexander often acted on miniature sets surrounded by blue screen ; visual - effects house DreamQuest Images then composited him into footage shot earlier .
Joe as an infant was performed by Verne Troyer .
For certain scenes , the filmmakers used three full - sized animatronics ( one in quadruped , one sitting down , and one in a dead position ) also created by Baker 's crew .
For the digital Joe , visual - effects houses DreamQuest Images and Industrial Light & Magic worked on different scenes , using the same model provided by Baker .
Many of these performances were achieved by key - frame animation , but to portray the digital Joe running and jumping , motion - capture data from an infant chimpanzee were used .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The music for the film was composed and conducted by James Horner .
The soundtrack was released in December 1998 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film grossed $ 50.6 million against a production budget of $ 90 million .
and holds a rating of 52 % from Rotten Tomatoes based on 46 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus is : " Beguiling effects transcend a predictable plot . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , saying , " Mighty Joe Young is an energetic , robust adventure tale : not too cynical , violent or fragmented for kids , not too tame for adults .
After all the calculation behind " Godzilla " or " Armageddon , " it has a kind of innocence .
It 's not about a monster but about a very big , well - meaning gorilla that just wants to be left in peace . "
Despite giving the film positive reviews , he also pointed out that the romance scenes and villains were only average and by no means exceptional .
Common Sense Media gave the film 4 stars and said , " The 1949 RKO version of Mighty Joe Young is a tired monster film of the ape - runs - amuck variety that tried ( unsuccessfully ) to cash in on the popularity of King Kong .
This Disney version has plenty more to offer a young audience .
As Jill follows in her mom 's footsteps , this environmentally - friendly story provides serious food for thought .
It also provides plenty of comic relief .
Joe is a feat of technical wizardry ; he 's so life -
like that it 's hard to believe he 's a composite of animatronic and digital effects .
Children will warm to him , especially since Joe is particularly sweet to kids .
They will also enjoy Theron 's and Paxton 's engaging performances , and applaud ( as an 8 year - old viewer did ) when this couple inevitably gets together .
If the climactic sequence is too intense for small children , it certainly ends happily .
Mighty Joe Young turns out to be a heart - warming experience with an environmental message . "
Reelviews Movie Reviews gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , and generally positive reviews : "
Although Joe 's size makes him a monster , his disposition makes him cuddly .
Despite not being daring in style or story , Mighty Joe Young is nevertheless a charming and enjoyable adventure , and a rare remake that 's better than the original .
It may not have the box office punch to exceed the $ 100 million mark , but it 's good enough to entertain an audience .
" Colin Fraser of eFilm Critic gave it 3 stars , saying , " Strictly for ten - year - olds , Mighty Joe Young has its ample heart in exactly the right place .
After an opening sequence that will have kiddies reaching for Kleenex , the action soon picks up with many a thrill on the way .
This is not Jurassic Park however and does n't really deserve its Academy nomination for effects . "
Among those who criticized the film included Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide , who gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4 and said , " This is technology - driven spectacle : It 's too shallow to really work for adults , but so slow and relentlessly serious that kids are bound to get restless .
Joe himself is an amazing creation , less personable , to be sure , than the original lovelorn King Kong , but a far more fully realized character than any of the flesh and blood humans by whom he 's surrounded . "
Paul Clinton of CNN gave it negative reviews , saying , "
Great scenery , cartoonish villains , huges leaps of suspended belief , and mouthwatering shots of Charlize Theron are in plentiful supply in " Mighty Joe Young . "
And baby , can this boy travel .
He goes from Africa to L.A. in just one dissolve .
Then when he escapes he goes from Hollywood Boulevard , to the Los Angeles river , to the Pacific Palisades in seconds .
If you 're not familiar with L.A ...
trust me ... could n't happen . "
and " The gorilla is pretty impressive and expressive , but overall it 's much ado about -- not much .
I have a feeling this film will be fairly low on the food chain of " must see " holiday films . "
Stephen Holden of The New York Times gave the film generally unfavorable reviews , saying , " Mighty Joe Young , directed by Ron Underwood from a screenplay by Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner , is saddled with dialogue so wooden that Mr. Paxton and Ms. Theron almost seem animatronic themselves .
Little children wo n't notice .
In Joe , they can identify with the biggest , cuddliest simian toy a 6-year - old could ever hope to own . "
Dustin Putman gave it 2 stars out of 4 and a negative review , saying , " Mighty Joe Young is an agreeable time - waster for older kids ( it 's much too violent for the youngest viewers ) and perhaps some adults , but in a season when children could also choose to see the marvelous The Prince of Egypt , and adults could pick any number of far superior films , Mighty Joe Young simply pales in comparison .
Although you could certainly do much worse , there is only one really distinctive quality about the film , and that is Charlize Theron 's charismatic performance . "
Mighty Joe Young also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects , losing to What Dreams May Come .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS