ACOUSTIC - ELECTRIC GUITAR
An acoustic - electric guitar ( also called an electro - acoustic guitar ) is an acoustic guitar fitted with a magnetic pickup , a piezoelectric pickup or a microphone .
In electric - acoustic nylon string guitars , piezoelectric pickups and microphones are always used because magnetic pickups are not capable of picking up vibrations of non - magnetic materials .
The design is distinct from a semi - acoustic guitar , which is an electric guitar but with the addition of sound chambers within the guitar body .
Usually , acoustic - electric guitars are fitted with piezoelectric pickups , and hence require a preamplifier incorporated into the guitar body to amplify the signal before it travels to the main guitar amplifier .
These preamps may also come with tone controls of varying types , but usually equalizers with up to six frequency bands are used .
They are also referred to as a " plug - in acoustic guitar " , due to their ability to simply " plug in " to a speaker system without the need for microphones .
They are commonly used in a variety of music genres where the sound of an acoustic guitar is desired but more volume is required , especially during live performances .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Various experiments at electrically amplifying the vibrations of a string instrument date back to the early part of the twentieth century .
Patents from the 1910s show telephone transmitters adapted and placed inside violins and banjos to amplify the sound .
Hobbyists in the 1920s used carbon button microphones attached to the bridge , however these detected vibration from the bridge on top of the instrument , resulting in a weak signal .
Many of these amplified instruments could also be played unamplified .
Commercially produced jazz guitars from the 1940s on were most commonly hollow body guitars with pickups .
One significant acoustic - electric guitar was the Ovation Roundback developed by Charles Hancock Kaman in 2002 , built from fiberglass and based on his research as an aerospace engineer into the vibration of helicopter rotor blades .
He added electrical pickups to provide the option of amplification .
The Kaman Music Corporation , built on the success of the Roundback , became one of the largest music instrument manufacturers in the United States .
SEE ALSO * Electric guitar * Semi - acoustic guitar
* String instrument REFERENCES