DANGER ZONE ( SONG )
" Danger Zone " is a song , with music composed by Giorgio Moroder and lyrics written by Tom Whitlock , which American singer - songwriter Kenny Loggins recorded and released in 1986 .
The song was one of the hit singles from the soundtrack to the 1986 American motion picture Top Gun , the best selling soundtrack of 1986 and one of the best selling of all time .
According to Allmusic.com , the album " remains a quintessential artifact of the mid-'80s " and the album 's hits " still define the bombastic , melodramatic sound that dominated the pop charts of the era . "
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Film producers Jerry Bruckheimer and Don Simpson , along with music supervisor Michael Dilbeck , had over 300 songs to employ on Top Gun .
Testing compositions against the dailies of the opening scenes at the aircraft carrier , nothing satisfied them , and Bruckheimer asked soundtrack producer Giorgio Moroder to write something .
With the help of songwriter Tom Whitlock , he composed " Danger Zone " and had Joe Pizzulo record a demo .
With the approval of the producers , soundtrack distributor Columbia Records requested Moroder to have " Danger Zone " performed by an artist signed by the label .
The band Toto was originally intended to perform the track , but legal conflicts between the producers of Top Gun and the band 's lawyers prevented this .
Bryan Adams was approached to allow his song " Only the Strong Survive " on the soundtrack and perform " Danger Zone " , to which Adams declined any involvement , feeling that the film glorified war , and he did not want any of his work linked to it .
REO Speedwagon was also approached to perform " Danger Zone " , to which the group declined due to not being allowed to contribute any of its own compositions to the soundtrack .
Corey Hart was also approached to perform " Danger Zone , " to which he declined , preferring to write and perform his own compositions .
Eventually , the film producers agreed that " Danger Zone " would be recorded and performed by Kenny Loggins .
Whitlock went to Loggins ' Encino home , and once shown the lyrics , the singer added his own improvisations .
According to TMZ , Kenny Loggins has confirmed that " Danger Zone " will be featured in the upcoming .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Dann Huff , lead singer and guitarist of the 1980s hard rock group Giant , played guitar on the song .
The bass line is performed on a Yamaha DX7 synthesizer , with the drums being provided by a Roland S-50 keyboard , both instruments extensively used in 1980s pop music .
A tenor saxophone is added near the end of the song .
The song peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 for the week of July 26 , 1986 , kept from the top spot by Peter Gabriel 's " Sledgehammer " .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
A music video was released in May 1986 to promote the single .
The video was directed by Tony Scott and featured footage of Loggins singing , as well as clips from the film Top Gun , which Scott also directed .
According to the MuchMusic network 's program Pop - Up Video , the U.S. Navy described this video as " the most effective recruiting poster ever produced " .
PERSONNEL
* Kenny Loggins – vocals , guitar * Dann Huff – guitar * Giorgio Moroder – keyboards
* Tom Whitlock – synthesizer
* John Robinson – drum fills
* Tom Scott – saxophone CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 1986–87 ) !
Peakposition Canada ( RPM )
align="center"7 United Kingdom ( The Official Charts Company ) align="center"45 U.S.
Billboard Hot 100 align="center"2 U.S. Billboard Album Rock Tracks
align="center"7 YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts .
!
align="left"Chart ( 1986 ) !
align="left"Peakposition
align="left"US Billboard Hot 100 SALES CERTIFICATIONS IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
On September 21 , 1989 , the song was played in an episode of the American animated series
The Super Mario Bros. Super Show ! .
*
On November 21 , 1999 , the song was played in an episode of the American animated comedy series The Simpsons , *
On October 24 , 2005 , the song was played in an episode of the American comedy series How I Met Your Mother .
*
On July 27 , 2008 , the song was played in an episode of the Australian television travel series Postcards .
*
In 2009 , this song was played in the American comedy film 17 Again .
*
On July 20 , 2010 , the song was played in an episode of the British comedy series Mongrels .
*
On July 19 , 2012 , the song was played in an episode of the American television game show Take Me Out .
*
On October 13 , 2013 , the song was played in an episode of the British reality television series Rude Tube .
*
On November 11 , 2014 , the song was played in an episode of the American comedy series The Mindy Project .
*
On March 18 , 2015 , the song was played in an episode of the American comedy series
It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia .
*
On November 8 , 2015 , the song was played in an episode of the American animated comedy series Family Guy .
*
On September 17 , 2016 , the song was played in an episode of the British television game show Go for It .
*
On September 23 , 2017 , the song was played in an episode of the British television game show Cannonball .
*
On April 1 , 2018 , the song was played in an episode of the American animated comedy series Family Guy .
*
On April 4 , 2018 , the song was played in an episode of the American comedy - drama series Suits .
*
The song shall be heard in the 2019 film .
with Loggins singing a new version of the song .
*
The song is frequently referenced in episodes of the American animated comedy Archer .
Kenny Loggins himself sang the song in a country music - inspired duet with Jessy Lynn Martens in season 5 of Archer ( Vice ) :
Baby Shower , which first aired March 3 , 2014 .
*
The song is featured on the virtual radio show Los Santos Rock Radio hosted by Loggins himself , on the 2014 updated version of the video game Grand Theft
Auto V.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Kenny Loggins - Danger Zone - Official music video