CASS OLE Cass Ole ( March 6 , 1969 - June 29 , 1993 ) was a Texan - bred Arabian stallion .
Originally bred to be a show horse , he was National Champion in Arabian Western Pleasure in 1975 , National Reserve Champion Arabian Ladies Side Saddle in 1976 , and U.S. Top Ten Arabian English Pleasure in both 1975 and 1976 .
He won over 50 championships and over 20 Reserve Championships in his seven - year show career and was high point winner of the King Saud Trophy of the American Horse Show Association ( now United States Equestrian Federation ) .
He is best known for his role as The Black in the films
The Black Stallion and The Black Stallion Returns , in which he is credited as Cass - Olé .
THE BLACK STALLION Section::::The Black Stallion .
Horse trainers Glen Randall and his sons J.R. and Corky Randall began their international search for a black Arabian to play The Black in the upcoming film .
They found Cass Ole at his ranch in San Antonio , and his temperament and appearance suited him for the role .
His owners stipulated that he was not to be used in the running or swimming scenes , so three other horses were obtained for use in those shots , as well as for stunts .
Cass Ole and his fellow horse actors trained at a California ranch for several weeks before filming began .
He had sessions with the young actor in the lead role , Kelly Reno , so the two could become familiar and get used to working with one another .
Cass Ole was naturally a black - colored horse , but he had white markings on his pasterns and a white star on his forehead which were dyed black for his screen time .
( In the 2003 IMAX film , The Young Black Stallion , the horse cast for the role was actually a bay and his entire coat was dyed black . )
His mane as seen in the two movies was partially enhanced .
Like many American horses , Cass Ole had his mane trimmed into a bridle path .
While he did have a long mane typical for his breed , its natural length was about equal to the width of his neck , which is the average maximum length that a horse 's mane will grow when not specially groomed .
Therefore , to hide his bridle path trimming and to create the long flowing mane that was seen in the movie itself , hair extensions were stitched into his mane to provide a fuller and longer look on camera .
To grow a mane past its natural length requires it to be kept in braids , regularly conditioned , takes at least a year 's time to achieve significant length , and , like humans , some horses ' manes simply will not grow beyond a certain length .
LATER LIFE Section::::Later life .
After the two films had been released Cass Ole became a celebrity , showing up to be admired at fundraisers and special events .
In 1980 he won the Humane Society Award for The Prevention of Cruelty To Animals at the International Horse Show in Washington ,
D.C. He visited the White House and was present at the Inauguration of President Reagan .
He performed before audiences in Italy , Sardinia , Algeria , and Morocco .
His last performance took place in the Tacoma Dome in Tacoma , Washington .
His retirement show was under the direction of professional horse trainer George Gipson of Tenaha , Texas .
He stood at stud at his home ranch in Texas , siring over 130 foals .
None of them grew up to match his success .
Cass Ole was euthanized in 1993 after suffering from severe colic .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Movie : The Black Stallion