THE ROOSEVELT NEW ORLEANS
The Roosevelt New Orleans in New Orleans , Louisiana , is a 504-room hotel owned by AVR Realty Company and Dimension Development and managed by Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts .
The hotel was originally built by Louis Grunewald , a German immigrant , and opened in 1893 as " The Hotel Grunewald . "
HOTEL
GRUNEWALD
Section::::Hotel Grunewald .
The original hotel building was six stories tall and faced Baronne Street , encompassing street numbers 123 through 135 .
It was built after Grunewald 's Music Hall was destroyed by fire in 1862 .
The building housed 200 rooms and opened in December 1893 to be ready for the 1894 New Orleans Mardi Gras season .
The decision to build a hotel proved to be very sound as the other major hotel in the city , the St. Charles Hotel , was destroyed by fire soon after the Grunewald opened .
GRUNEWALD ANNEX Section::::Grunewald Annex .
As early as 1900 , Grunewald began plans and eventually construction of an ' Annex ' tower on the University Place side of the block .
The cost of the new tower was reportedly $ 2,500,000 and was considered one of the finest in the country .
The new tower was 14 stories tall and had 400 rooms .
Its grand opening was at Midnight , January 1 , 1908 .
This expansion was designed by the architectural firm , Toledano & Wogan .
Louis Grunewald 's son Theodore became the Director and Manager of the Hotel .
The lobby of the Annex featured a large Italian Marble staircase which reached an overlooking mezzanine level of the hotel .
The Annex Tower allowed the addition of several entertainment and dining facilities .
Among the new options were the Forest Grill , The Lounge , The Fountain Grill and the most famous , The Cave .
The Cave was designed to mimic a subterranean cave complete with waterfalls , stalactites , glass topped tables and statues of gnomes and nymphs .
Revues similar to the Ziegfeld Follies were presented on a nightly basis .
In 1915 , Theodore Grunewald became the sole owner of the hotel when his father died .
He retained ownership of the hotel until early 1923 when , on his doctor 's advice , he sold all of his business interests .
THE FIRST ROOSEVELT ERA Section::::The first Roosevelt era .
In 1923 , Theodore Grunewald sold the hotel to a business group headed by Joseph , Felix , and Luca Vacarro .
Immediately after the purchase , the new owners put forth plans to tear down the original hotel building .
build a new tower the same height as the Annex , and redesign the interior of the Annex .
The Vacarro group spent $ 500,000 in the redesign alone , mainly redecorating and updating designs .
The hotel was officially renamed the Roosevelt Hotel on October 31 , 1923 , in honor of President Theodore Roosevelt , whose efforts building the Panama Canal had been tremendous for the city of New Orleans , financially .
A ceremony was held in the Romanesque Room ( now known as the Blue Room ) to commemorate the name change .
On October 1 , 1925 , the new Baronne Street tower was opened .
It was 16 stories tall and once again gave the hotel space to add even more amenities .
The new tower added a barber shop , a coffee shop , and stores which faced the street .
By the end of 1925 , the Romanesque Room became the Venetian Room and was known as a premiere jazz venue .
The hotel began a tradition of decorating its block - long lobby for Christmas .
The tradition continues to this day and has become a local icon of the holiday season .
In 1933 , the Hotel was operated by Niagara Falls businessman Frank A. Dudley and the United Hotels Company .
until a group named the New Orleans Roosevelt Corporation began an effort to acquire the hotel from the Vacarro Group .
The group was headed by Seymour Weiss who had started his career at the hotel as the barber shop manager .
He was later promoted to the Head of Publicity and Conventions , Associate Manager , Assistant Manager , and eventually General Manager of the hotel .
In 1931 , he became the Vice President and Managing Director .
The sale of the hotel to Weiss 's group was finalized on December 12 , 1934 .
After the purchase by Weiss , major changes and upgrades began throughout the hotel .
The marble staircase in the lobby was removed and a ceiling was installed .
This allowed the hotel to create more meeting space on the mezzanine level .
The Grand Ballroom that was created at this was the largest meeting room in the city .
All of the hotel 's guest rooms were completely refurbished , and the Tip Top Club on the 12th floor was converted into guest suites .
The Venetian Room was closed and remodeled .
On December 31 , 1935 , the Blue Room opened and was , for decades , the premiere music venue in the city .
The performers in the earlier years of the Blue Room included Glenn Miller , Tommy Dorsey , Sammy Kaye , and Guy Lombardo .
On August 1 , 1938 , the Main Bar ( now named the Sazerac Bar ) opened .
Its mahogany bar , walnut - paneled walls , and Paul Ninas murals are still a focal point of the hotel .
On September 1 , 1938 , the Fountain Lounge opened .
Seymour Weiss was a confidant of Louisiana Governor and later U.S. Senator Huey P. Long .
During the 1930s , when he was a U.S. Senator , Long used a 12th - floor suite at the hotel as his Louisiana headquarters and effective New Orleans residence .
He was known to imbibe Ramos Gin Fizzes in the Main Bar and even had Sam Guarino , the head bartender , flown up to the New Yorker Hotel in New York City to teach the staff how to make them .
His ' Deduct Box ' was believed to be kept at the hotel .
The ' Deduct Box ' was where Long held all of the " contributions " from state employees and supporters .
The box has never been found ; a replica now stands in the lobby .
In 1949 , Weiss purchased the rights to use the name " Sazerac Bar " from the Sazerac Company .
The bar had previously been on Exchange Place before Prohibition and at 300 Carondelet Street afterward .
He renovated a store front on Baronne Street which had previously held a wine - and - spirits store and opened the Sazerac Bar on September 26 , 1949 .
As a sign of his marketing genius , Weiss announced through the news media that the new bar would abolish the previous ' men - only ' house rule and admit women .
Women from around the city flocked to the venue , and the event became known as Storming the Sazerac .
The anniversary is celebrated every year at the hotel with vintage costumes and libations .
In 1954 , the Shell Building was completed on Common Street , and Weiss negotiated to lease seven floors .
The addition of this space allowed the hotel to increase to 900 rooms and to build the International Room , which could accommodate as many as 2,200 guests for one event .
The International Room connected on the second floor with the other meeting rooms on the mezzanine level .
With the increase in meeting space , a brand new banquet kitchen was built in 1955 on the same level .
The kitchen to this day services all meetings and events in the hotel .
In 1959 , the decision was made to close the Sazerac Bar on Baronne Street and transfer the name to the Main Bar .
It is still named the Sazerac Bar today .
In 1964 Arthur Hailey resided at the hotel for two months .
He went on to use it as the basis for his best selling novel " Hotel " .
As Weiss grew older , he sought out a buyer for the hotel .
The Swig family , owners of the Fairmont San Francisco became the new owners in 1965 .
THE FAIRMONT NEW ORLEANS Section::::The Fairmont New Orleans .
The Roosevelt was acquired by Benjamin and Richard Swig on November 19 , 1965 .
In an effort to ease the transition , the Swigs first changed the name to the Fairmont - Roosevelt and then eventually to the Fairmont New Orleans .
The Swigs began to modernize the hotel over the years .
The initial renovations cost $ 1,500,000 and were mainly in the look and design of the hotel .
Updates to the Blue Room , both entrances and Dining Rooms were made .
Carpet was added in the lobby .
The Fountain Lounge was renamed the Rendezvous Lounge .
In the years later , the Rendezvous lounge was closed and renovated .
The space was renamed the Sazerac Restaurant to tie it in with the bar .
The restaurant featured Black Tie waiters and tableside preparations .
The Sazerac Bar was updated with carpeting and modern furniture and new lighting .
One of the store fronts on Baronne Street that originally housed the coffee shop became Bailey 's .
Bailey 's was the hotel 's casual dining room and was open 24 hours a day .
The restaurant had the unique reputation of having quality upscale food at any hour of the night .
It was very popular with its proximity to the theaters in the city .
Another extensive renovation occurred in the late 1990s with all of the guest rooms being renovated .
The Fairmont New Orleans was damaged during Hurricane Katrina August , 2005 and closed indefinitely .
While some repair work was done , work was suspended in an incomplete state in March 2007 after preliminary estimates of the damage were revealed to have been greatly underestimated .
THE SECOND ROOSEVELT ERA Section::::The second Roosevelt era .
On August 24 , 2007 , Sam Friedman , a son of the late Louisiana State Senator Sylvan Friedman of Natchitoches Parish , of Dimension Development Company from Natchitoches , Louisiana , announced the purchase of the Fairmont Hotel by First Class Hotels for $ 17 million from the owners , Roosevelt Ventures , LLC .
Also announced was the plan to spend $ 100 million to convert the hotel to one of Hilton 's premium hotels in their Waldorf Astoria Collection chain .
The entire hotel was completely renovated with modern systems .
The design of the hotel was a nod to the grand days of the hotel in the 1930s and 1940s .
The lobby was restored to the look of that period .
The carpeting in the lobby was removed and original was repaired .
The Sazerac Bar was restored to its look of the 1940s .
The space that housed Bailey 's was renovated and now houses John Besh 's Domenica Restaurant .
The other store front on Baronne Street was converted into the Roosevelt Emporium , the hotel 's Gift Shop .
The Rooftop Tennis Courts that the Fairmont had were removed and a brand new Pool Deck was constructed with shower facilities , a bar and kitchen .
The new owners remodeled the hotel and selected Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts to manage the property .
On reopening of the hotel in 2009 , the owners reverted the name of the hotel to the " Roosevelt " title it had held from 1923 to 1965 .
The Roosevelt Hotel reopened to the public at 3:00 PM on July 1 , 2009 with a ribbon cutting in the main lobby by the ownership group represented by Alan Rose , Sam Friedman , Jack Guenther , Neil Freeman , and Lod Cook .
The Roosevelt rolled out the red carpet for a historic grand - opening gala weekend October 23 , 2009 featuring world - famous New Orleans entertainers and the introduction of Chef John Besh 's restaurant Domenica and the acclaimed Guerlain Spa , benefiting area non - profits .
The current hotel holds 504 guest rooms of which 125 are suites .
The total meeting space is over 68,000 square feet with multiple rooms across three floors of the hotel .
SEE ALSO
* List of tallest buildings in New Orleans * List of tallest buildings in Louisiana REFERENCES * Milwaukee Journal , March 18 , 1906 EXTERNAL LINKS * Roosevelt New Orleans website
* Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts website * Hotel history on BestOfNewOrleans.com ( dead link )