SHORT RIBS Short ribs are a cut of beef taken from the brisket , chuck , plate , or rib areas of beef cattle .
They consist of a short portion of the rib bone , which is overlain by meat which varies in thickness .
There are two major types of cuts : The " flanken " , which is cut across the bone and leaves the bone just in length , and the " English " , which is cut parallel to the bone and leaves the bone up to in length .
English cut short ribs may be served individually , or three or four may be served connected to one another ( a style known as the " plate " ) .
Short ribs are popular in many international cuisines .
TYPES OF SHORT RIBS Section::::Types of short ribs .
Meatpacking executive Richard C. Banfield notes that the term " short ribs " comes from the fact that the cut of meat contains only a portion of each long beef rib .
Using American butcher 's nomenclature , short ribs may be taken from the brisket , chuck , plate , or rib areas of beef cattle .
The serratus ventralis muscle defines the area in the beef carcass from where short ribs come , and is the preferred muscle tissue for short ribs .
This muscle originates near the second rib , and covers most of the rib cage .
In the chuck area ( second through fifth ribs ) , the muscle is much thicker .
Moving toward the rump , the serratus ventralis becomes less dense , and may not cover the entire rib .
Outside of the chuck , the serratus ventralis covers the entire rib with a degree of thickness only in the plate area .
Over ribs nine through 12 , the serratus ventralis is too thin to properly create a true short rib , and meat here is usually turned into a " Royal short rib " or else stripped from the bone and used for ground beef .
The latissimus dorsi muscle lies atop the serratus ventralis muscle , and is separated from it by a layer of fat .
This muscle is generally found in the chuck area and the upper portion ( toward the spine ) of the plate .
It adds thickness to chuck and rib short ribs , but is less prized by chefs than the serratus ventralis muscle .
Chuck short ribs tend to be meatier than the other two types of ribs , but they are also tougher due to the more extensive connective tissues ( collagen and reticulin ) in them .
Plate short ribs tend to be fattier than the other two types .
Short ribs cut from the rib area near the spine ( the dorsal area ) are better known as " back ribs " or " dinosaur ribs " .
They consist of what remains of the rib in this area after the rib chop is removed .
Due to the thinness of the serratus ventralis here , the meat on these ribs is generally intercostal muscle ( e.g. , the muscle between each rib ) .
CUTS OF SHORT RIBS Section::::Cuts of short ribs .
Short ribs , by definition , are not the entire length of rib .
When the rib bone is cut into a length , left as a section of meat ( a " plate " ) containing three or four ribs or cut into individual ribs with meat attached , the short rib is known as an " English cut " .
They may also be known as barbecue ribs , braising ribs , or fancy cut ribs .
A section of short ribs from the plate ( ribs six through eight , with their intercostal muscle ) is known as a " short plate " .
Rib short ribs are almost always sold as a plate .
When the carcass is cut across the bone to create strips of meat with multiple rib bones , the short rib is known as a " flanken cut .
" These may also be known as crosscut ribs , Eastern European - style ribs , Hawaiian - style ribs , Jewish ribs , Korean - style ribs , or " kosher ribs " .
Flanken - cut short ribs incorporate at least two rib bones , and are often no more than thick .
Retail meat shops often do not differentiate between short ribs which come from the brisket , chuck , plate , and rib .
In the United States , short ribs from the plate are generally the least expensive cut , followed by medium - priced short ribs from the brisket and chuck , and premium - priced short ribs from the rib area .
Beef short ribs are the equivalent of spare ribs in pork , with beef short ribs usually larger and meatier than pork spare ribs .
" Boneless " short ribs are cut from either the chuck or plate , and consist of rib meat separated from the bone .
"
Boneless country - style short ribs " , however , are not true short ribs .
They are found primarily in the United States , and are cut from the chuck eye roll ( serving as a less expensive alternative to rib steak ) .
SHORT RIBS IN WORLD CUISINES Section::::Short ribs in world cuisines .
Short ribs are particularly popular in Chinese , Jewish , and Korean cooking .
Short ribs generally require long periods of cooking in order to break down the connective tissues in the meat and make the meat tender .
Methods of preparation include braising , stewing , and sous - vide .
Short ribs may also be barbecued , a popular method that subjects the beef to high heat in a relatively short period of time .
Pot - au - feu is a classic French method of cooking short ribs .
Flanken is a traditional Eastern European Jewish short rib dish , and serves as the origin of flanken cut of short ribs .
Flanken - cut short ribs are boiled in broth with onions and other seasonings until the meat is very tender and the broth is rich .
The stew is then served with grated horseradish .
In Korea , short lengths of rib are often further butchered by butterflying ( or using an accordion cut ) to unfurl the meat into a long ribbon trailing from the bone , or the meat can be removed from the bone entirely and cut into thin slices .
Short ribs marinated in ganjang ( a Korean soy sauce ) and then rapidly grilled are known as galbi .
Short ribs prepared in the galbi style , but slow - cooked or steamed along with spices and vegetables is known as galbijjim .
A specific type of short rib dish which originated in Hawaii is known as Maui - style ribs .
In this dish , flanken - cut ribs are marinated in soy sauce , brown sugar , and ginger , and then swiftly grilled .
The " Royal short rib " is a short rib dish prepared in Europe and the United States which uses ribs nine through 12 .
The membrane is removed from the inner side of an English - cut plate , and the plate sliced into its component ribs .
The bone is then pulled up from the meat , leaving meat attached at only one end of the rib .
The meat is then rolled backward and tucked under itself .
Tabiltas are Mexican - style flanken - cut short ribs that are marinated and then grilled .
SHORT RIBS IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Short ribs in popular culture .
Over the years , short ribs have been mentioned in numerous movies and television shows .
Examples include : *
In a 1948 Three Stooges short titled " Shivering Sherlocks " , Larry Fine has an argument with a customer about ordering either chicken soup or short ribs .
SEE ALSO
* List of beef dishes
* Ribs ( food ) REFERENCES Notes Citations BIBLIOGRAPHY