KERSHAW
KNIVES Kershaw Knives designs and manufactures a wide range of knives , including pocketknives , sporting knives , and kitchen cutlery .
Kershaw is a brand of Kai USA Ltd. , a member of the KAI Group , headquartered in Tualatin , Oregon , United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Kershaw Knives was started in Portland , Oregon in 1974 when knife salesman Pete Kershaw left Gerber Legendary Blades to form his own cutlery company based on his own designs .
Early manufacturing was primarily done in Japan .
In 1977 , Kershaw became a wholly owned subsidiary of the KAI Group .
In 1997 the U.S. production facility was opened in Wilsonville , Oregon .
Due to an expanding market , the facilities were moved to a larger production site in 2003 .
Currently , Kai USA manufacturing facilities are located in Tualatin , Oregon with some goods coming from their Japanese and Chinese factories .
Kai USA Ltd. has three lines of products ; Kershaw Knives brand of sporting and pocketknives , Shun Cutlery , handcrafted Japanese kitchen cutlery , and Zero Tolerance , a line of premium and professional knives .
Kershaw has collaborated with a number of custom knife makers over the years to produce ground - breaking knives .
Collaborations include working with Hall of Fame Knife Maker , Ken Onion on Kershaw 's SpeedSafe knives , Ernest Emerson , Grant and Gavin Hawk , Frank Centofante , Rick Hinderer , RJ Martin , and more .
In 2002 , Kershaw released a Steven Seagal model featuring stingray leather on the handle .
Kai USA Ltd. and its Kershaw , Zero Tolerance , and Shun brands have a history of garnering industry awards .
In May 2005 , Kai USA Ltd. won four of the top awards at the Blade Show in Atlanta , Georgia .
This was the first time in the show 's history that one company won this number of awards in one year : 2005
Overall Knife of the Year , 2005
Most Innovative American Design , 2005 Kitchen Knife of the Year , and 2005 Knife Collaboration of the Year .
In June 2007 , Kai USA won the Blade Show 's " Overall Knife of the Year Award " with the Kershaw " Tyrade " ( model 1850 ) , in which the company 's patent - pending Composite Blade technology using two different steels in the same blade was introduced .
The blade steels were D2 tool steel at the cutting edge , and a spine of 154CM stainless steel .
2009 brought a Kershaw win for the Speedform ( model 3500 ) .
In 2010 , Kershaw won " American Made Knife of the Year " for the Tilt ( model 4001 ) and Shun won " Kitchen Knife of the Year " for the Shun Premier line .
Zero Tolerance 's 0777 won " Overall Knife of the Year , " the ZT - Rick Hinderer 0560/0561 won " Collaboration of the Year , " and the Shun Fuji line won " Kitchen Knife of the Year " in the 2011 Blade Show .
Then in 2012 , Kai USA Ltd. repeated its four - win sweep of the Blade Show awards .
The Zero Tolerance 0888 won " Overall Knife of the Year " , while the 0600 won for " Collaboration of the Year " .
The Kershaw Cryo won 2012 's " Best Buy of the Year " and the Shun Taiyo was the 2012 " Kitchen Knife of the Year . "
PRODUCTS
* Kershaw Knives : Pocketknives and sporting knives designed for every day use , camping , hunting and fishing * Zero Tolerance Knives : Premium knives developed in loose collaboration with custom knife makers for the law enforcement and military markets .
*
Shun Cutlery :
Handcrafted kitchen cutlery
* Kai Housewares : Kitchen cutlery and household products ENTERTAINMENT Section::::Entertainment .
In the television show Person of Interest , the character John Reece ( played by Jim Caviezel ) is frequently seen using a Kershaw Blur .
SEE ALSO
* List of companies based in Oregon REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Kershaw Knives official site