ROO STEWART Ruth Martha " Roo " Stewart ( also Morgan ) is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Home and Away , played by Justine Clarke from 1988 to 1989 .
The character made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 20 January 1988 .
Clarke quit the role in 1989 and the character was written out .
In August 2010 , it was announced that Roo would return to Home and Away with Georgie Parker in the role .
The character returned on 29 October 2010 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In 1987 , Clarke auditioned for the roles of Carly Morris , Lynn Davenport and Bobby Simpson ; but was unsuccessful each time .
After the series had finished filming their pilot episode , producers changed their minds and invited Clarke to audition for the role of Roo , which she won .
Clarke told a reporter from TV Life that she was " really pleased " because she thought Roo was a " great character " .
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
CHARACTERISATION
Section::::Character development .
Section::::Characterisation .
Roo 's personality gained an unwelcome reception amongst viewers .
Clarke said that " everyone " hated Roo and revealed that people would " boo " at her while attending promotional appearances .
On one occasion Clarke had to leave a shopping centre because females were shouting " slut " at her .
Clarke said that Roo is " a cow " but defended her because Roo ultimately ends up suffering .
TEENAGE PREGNANCY Section::::Teenage pregnancy .
In the serial 's first season , Alan Bateman wanted Home and Away to tackle serious social issues and a few months later Roo became the first character to have a teenage pregnancy .
The production team felt that Roo 's pregnancy was " risque " because Home and Away was aired in an early evening time - slot .
Clarke said she did not know what it was like to be pregnant and had to carry out research .
While filming the storyline , Clarke was required to wear a bag filled with lentils beneath her clothing .
This was to give the impression that Roo was pregnant , and as her pregnancy progressed more lentils were added to the bag to maintain continuity .
Clarke remained unaware of how to portray a convincing birth scene .
The wife of the episode 's director had previously given birth during a complicated labour .
She helped Clarke with her research , which also included watching child birth videos .
Clarke said that while she had learned most aspects of labour , not experiencing the actual pain of birth resulted in her feeling unprepared for the scenes .
The birth scenes were filmed over the period of one day , consisting of more than fifteen shoots .
Clarke said the dramatic breathing left her " dizzy " and even caused her to hyperventilate .
DEPARTURE AND RETURN Section::::Departure and return .
Clarke played the role of Roo from 1988 , until the character was written out a year later after Clarke quit the show .
Clarke has been asked to return to the show and reprise her role as Roo many times , but she has never agreed .
In August 2010 , it was announced that Roo would be returning to Home and Away .
Producers decided to recast the role after Clarke became busy with other television shows and her career as a children 's singer .
Former All Saints actress , Georgie Parker was given the role and she began filming her first scenes in the same month .
Of her casting , Parker said " I 'm thrilled to be back at Channel Seven and to be part of Home and Away .
Working with Ray is a joy .
We are having a fantastic time together .
The whole cast and crew have been wonderful " .
Of the decision to bring the character back , series producer Cameron Welsh said " We had such a positive reaction to Emily Symons 's return as Marilyn ; we trust the fans will love having an original character such as Roo back in the Bay .
Securing Georgie Parker to bring her back to our screens is a real coup for the show " .
Parker called her " a colourful character who has a strong history with the origin of the show " .
Parker has said the grown up Roo is very different from the teenager .
She said " She was a colourful character when she left .
She lost her mother when she was very young , and I think that when girls lose their mothers , they can go off the rails - and that 's exactly what Roo did " .
Parker added that she gets to play the adult who may have learned from past mistakes .
During an interview , Meagher said the adult Roo is " still full of energy , bluff and bravado .
She 's had a few financial problems and is possibly running away from a bloke . "
He added that Alf has trouble getting her to tell him the truth , but he is " pleased to see her back in the Bay . "
MENINGITIS Section::::Meningitis .
In July 2014 , the character was diagnosed with meningitis .
After returning from an extended trip to Las Vegas to look after her injured aunt Colleen Smart ( Lyn Collingwood ) , Roo was very secretive about her times away .
Within a day , Roo started showing symptoms of an illness .
Parker explained " This illness hits her fast and hard .
She 's lethargic , but thinks it 's just jetlag .
She also has a splitting headache that affects her eyes , and she 's low on energy .
It 's all very out of character .
" Roo 's decision to keep quiet about her trip meant that nobody had any idea what was wrong with her .
Roo fell unconscious at home and the situation became very serious .
Roo was eventually diagnosed with meningitis .
Her condition later took a turn for the worse and she suffered a seizure .
In order to treat her , the doctors needed to know about her trip and her foster - daughter Maddy Osborne ( Kassandra Clementi )
found her passport , which revealed that she had been to Peru .
With the information , the doctors were able to treat Roo and save her life .
STORYLINES 1988–89 Section::::Storylines .
Section::::1988–89 .
Roo begins to resent her father 's relationship with Ailsa Hogan ( Judy Nunn ) out of loyalty to her late mother , Martha ( Alison Mulvaney ) .
Roo begins dating Frank Morgan ( Alex Papps ) and they start a band with Lance Smart ( Peter Vroom ) and Martin Dibble ( Craig Thompson ) .
Roo 's continued obsession with Ailsa drives a rift between her and Frank , despite nearly sleeping with him as an act of rebellion over Ailsa staying over .
Roo contacts her aunt , Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) , who is a judge and asks her to do a background check on Ailsa .
At Alf and Ailsa 's engagement party , Roo reveals Ailsa went to prison for killing her abusive father .
However , Ailsa 's friends and Frank , side with her .
Roo begins a feud with Bobby Simpson ( Nicolle Dickson ) , Ailsa 's friend .
Tired of her behaviour , Alf sends Roo to boarding school in Sydney .
Roo begins dating Brett Macklin ( Gerry Sont ) and she gets pregnant .
Brett 's reaction to this to book an abortion for her .
Roo returns to Summer Bay and tries convincing Frank that he is the baby 's father .
She pretends to accept Alf and Ailsa 's relationship so she will be allowed to stay .
Roo sleeps with Frank and arranges for Alf to catch them together .
She tells her aunt , Celia Stewart ( Fiona Spence ) , that she is pregnant with Frank 's baby .
Frank agrees to marry her and Roo tries to accept Alf and Ailsa 's marriage .
Brett turns up and tells Roo the mumps has left him infertile and that he now wants the baby .
She refuses to let him back into her life , so Brett goes to Morag , who tries to talk Roo into changing her mind .
In the middle of her wedding , she reveals that Frank is not the father of her baby .
Frank drives off in anger and swerves off the road to avoid Bobby and the car falls into a ditch , almost killing him .
The incident leaves Roo an outcast within the town .
Morag tries to persuade her to move to the city with her , but Celia talks her out of it .
Brett applies for custody , but Roo suggests they sort it out between themselves .
She begins helping Brett 's family as they set up a business in the Bay .
She is pleased when Alf and Ailsa 's differences over the development causes them to split up .
With Ailsa returning to town to be Christopher Fletcher 's ( Ashleigh Bell - Weir ) godmother , Roo fakes stomach pains to stop Alf attending the christening .
However , by hyperventilating she sends herself into premature labour and gives birth to a baby girl , who she names , Martha ( Burcin Kapkin ) .
She is pleased when Frank seems to take an interest , until she learns that he is dating Bobby .
Brett tries to force Roo into giving him custody of Martha .
He kidnaps the baby and Roo considered suicide , before she is informed that Brett had returned Martha .
Roo refuses to press charges and the couple realise that they can not raise Martha , so they give her up for adoption .
Roo then begins to accept Ailsa , when she and Alf reconcile .
Roo decides to take a break from the Bay and when she returns , she reveals that she has a new boyfriend , David Lee ( Anthony Wong ) .
Alf and Celia are slightly shocked as David is Chinese and they are uncomfortable with Roo being in a mixed race relationship .
Alf eventually gives the pair his blessing , but David later leaves town .
Frank and Bobby marry and Roo is stunned to learn Bobby is Morag 's daughter and thus her cousin .
Roo takes a job at the Macklin Corporation .
Her manager , Nicholas Walsh ( Robert Taylor ) , sends nasty letters to Ailsa and frames Roo , with help from Morag .
With Alf and Ailsa believing the letters are from her , Roo moves in with Celia and then with Morag .
When Alf discovers the truth , he apologises and Roo moves back in .
She then starts dating Simon Yates ( Christopher Saunders ) .
Ailsa becomes pregnant , which pleases Roo .
Alf and Tom Fletcher ( Roger Oakley ) go missing on a fishing trip and Ailsa goes into premature labour .
Roo stays as her half - brother Duncan ( Allana Ellis ) is born , shortly before Alf is found .
Roo finds herself working closely with Frank and when he is offered a promotion in the city , he celebrates by kissing Roo .
She feels guilty about the kiss and when Frank goes to the city without Bobby , everyone assumes he and Roo had an affair .
Roo is upset when Sally Fletcher ( Katie Ritchie ) blames her for the break - up .
Bobby tells her that she and Frank would have broken up anyway and gives them her blessing .
Roo then goes to the city to meet Frank and tells him she wants to give their relationship another go .
Frank and Roo marry , but they split by the time Frank returns to town .
Roo later moves to New York , where she is joined for a time by both Martha and Duncan .
In 2005 , Roo has a near fatal car - accident and Alf and Morag fly to New York to be with her while she recovers .
2010 –
Section::::2010–.
Five years later , Roo returns to Summer Bay .
Alf is shocked to see her and Roo tells him that she has come for a visit as a job fell through
and she had some frequent - flyer miles to use up .
Roo starts receiving texts and calls from her boyfriend , Tim , and her bank manager .
Colleen Smart is also shocked to see Roo and starts mentioning all the bad things she did in the past , until Alf tells her to stop .
Robert Robertson ( Socratis Otto ) questions Roo about Martha and Hugo Austin
( Bernard Curry ) for the Federal Police
and she states that she has not been in contact with them .
Roo later tries to persuade Hugo 's mother , Gina ( Sonia Todd ) , to give them the money Hugo left behind , but Gina is reluctant .
Gina runs a credit check on Roo and discovers that she is broke .
Roo denies wanting the money for herself .
Roo advises Alf to get a lawyer when rumours begin to circulate that he killed Penn Graham ( Christian Clark ) .
Gina gets Roo to take a job with John Palmer ( Shane Withington ) , who pays her with Hugo 's money .
Roo attends Bianca Scott 's ( Lisa Gormley )
bridal shower and wedding , before leaving for the States .
On her return , Roo finds Alf has gone travelling and her aunt Morag has been placed in charge of the caravan park .
Roo goes to the relaunch of Angelo Rosetta 's ( Luke Jacobz ) restaurant where she gets drunk and wakes up in bed with Miles Copeland ( Josh Quong Tart ) .
Angelo offers Roo a room at his place and tries to make a pass at her .
John hires Roo to organise sponsorship for the upcoming surf carnival .
Roo becomes close friends with Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) and Marilyn Chambers ( Emily Symons ) .
She also gets on well with Marilyn 's partner , Sid Walker ( Robert Mammone ) .
Roo supports Nicole during her pregnancy and she asks her to be present at the birth .
Roo also supports Romeo Smith 's ( Luke Mitchell ) attempts to start a charter business .
Laura Carmody ( Roxanne Wilson ) arrives in the Bay and reveals she and Roo are old friends .
Roo invites Laura to stay with her
and they work together on a hospital fundraiser .
Roo invites Romeo to accompany her on a business trip to Hawaii and he brings Indigo Walker ( Samara Weaving ) with them .
When they announce that they are getting married , Roo calls Sid and he flies over .
Sid kisses Roo , but she rejects him because he is with Marilyn .
However , she runs after his taxi , but fails to stop him leaving .
When she returns home , Roo is shocked to learn Marilyn and Sid have broken up .
She and Sid kiss again and agree to be a couple .
Roo and Laura organise a ball at Sid 's farm and Roo tries to make peace with Marilyn .
Bianca is raped at the ball and Roo criticises Laura for selling tickets to the River Boys .
Alf disapproves of Roo 's relationship with Sid , as he is worried about how he will treat her .
Roo and Marilyn eventually become friends again and Roo breaks up with Sid when she realises his family will always be a priority over her .
Roo takes over the running of the Diner due to staff shortages and she starts dating Harvey Ryan ( Marcus Graham ) , despite being warned not to by Romeo , Indi and Sid .
Roo and Harvey break up when she learns he sabotaged Alf 's boat .
Roo is disgusted when Harvey tries to blackmail John and she persuades Alf to stand against him during the council elections .
Roo later takes a job alongside Harvey and becomes jealous of him and his girlfriend , Fleur Simpson ( Alys Daroy ) .
Roo and Harvey later get back together
and she is surprised when his ex - wife , Mel ( Allison Cratchley ) , and daughter , Lottie ( Morgan Weaving ) , arrive in Summer Bay .
Sid tells Roo that Harvey had a young son who drowned and she becomes upset that Harvey did not tell her .
Harvey admits to Roo that he and the Mayor rigged the election , so he would win .
Harvey is arrested and Roo stands by him .
She later tells Harvey that she loves him .
Roo bonds with Lottie and agrees that she can move in with her and Harvey , when Mel goes to the city .
Lottie and Mel eventually leave the Bay and Harvey asks Roo to marry him .
Roo 's ex - boyfriend , Tim ( Jonny Pasvolsky ) , comes to the Bay and tries to win Roo back .
Harvey and Roo marry and they take in teen runaways
Maddy Osborne and Spencer Harrington ( Andrew Morley ) .
Harvey sails around the world with his best friend , Winston Markman ( John Batchelor ) .
Winston returns a few months later to tell Roo that he lost Harvey .
Roo holds a memorial service for Harvey and says goodbye .
Roo is delighted when Harvey eventually returns .
However , he can not cope being back in the Bay , causing problems with his marriage .
Roo decides the best thing for them to do is get divorced .
Harvey agrees and leaves the Bay .
When Colleen has an accident , Roo flies to Las Vegas to care for her .
On her return , she becomes ill and collapses .
She is diagnosed with meningitis and has to have fluid removed from her brain , but she shows no improvement .
Nate Cooper ( Kyle Pryor ) discovers
growths on her brain and her family learn that Roo went to Peru , where she had suffered a reaction to her inoculations .
Roo is given antiviral drugs and recovers .
Roo plans Marilyn and John 's wedding .
At the reception , she is informed that Maddy has stolen her credit card to buy clothes .
Maddy is later fired from the gym for stealing and Roo pays off her debt , preferring that Maddy owes her instead .
When Maddy learns that she has ovarian cancer , Roo supports her through her treatment .
Alf collapses during a school field trip to a war memorial and he is diagnosed with post traumatic stress disorder .
He experiences mood swings and Roo encourages him to speak to a therapist .
James Edmunds ( Myles Pollard ) returns to the Bay and offers Roo a job as a lecturer at the university .
She and James get on well and begin dating .
Roo and Maddy then move in with James .
He later proposes to her
and she accepts .
James and Roo try to get married quickly , but their wedding is stopped by Alf who thinks James lied about where he used to work .
James and Roo then decide to put the wedding on hold .
Roo later discovers James is already married with children , and has been lying to her all along .
She calls off their engagement , but continues her relationship with him .
After James confesses to Roo that he also lied to her about his parents being alive , she finally breaks up with him .
When Roo visits her brother Duncan in Hawaii , she meets James Mayvers ( Tim Ross ) and they begin a relationship .
Roo initially tries to keep the relationship a secret due to the age gap between them , but Morag soon catches them together .
Roo faints and is convinced by Morag that she is going through the menopause .
However , she soon learns she is pregnant .
James tells Roo that he does not want children and asks her to have an abortion , but she refuses and decides to the raise the child as a single parent .
James 's father David Mayvers ( Noel Hodda ) offers Roo $ 250,000 with the condition that she or her child does not contact James .
Roo turns the offer down .
While driving back from the pharmacy , she collapses in pain .
Nate and Tori Morgan ( Penny McNamee ) find her and diagnose a ruptured ectopic pregnancy .
She undergoes surgery , but loses the baby .
Roo leaves town to try and find Martha , but she is unsuccessful and returns home .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A writer for Ausculture named Roo fifth on their Top Ten Aussie Soap Villains list .
They called Roo " evil " for trying to break up Alf 's relationship with Ailsa , lying to and trying to marry Frank , leaving him at the altar and later having an affair with him .
They added " If she had n't already left town , I would n't have been surprised to hear that she was driving the speedboat that struck down Summer Bay 's beloved butch Bobby and killed her .
On the plus side , she does have the rather hilarious name of ' Roo ' . "
Andrew Mercado described Roo as Alf Stewart 's ( Ray Meagher ) "
Minxy teenage daughter " in his book
, Super Aussie soaps : behind the scenes of Australia 's best loved TV shows .
A TV Week columnist describe Roo as " Summer Bay 's original spoilt brat " who was never very far from drama .
A Holy Soap writer stated that Roo 's most memorable moment was " Bowling over her dad Alf by unexpectedly arriving back in Summer Bay after more than two decades away . "
The Herald Sun said Roo is " Manipulative , mysterious and returned from living what she claims was the high life in New York " , they predicted that her motives for returning to the Bay would puzzle viewers .
When she slept with Miles , The Sun television magazine Buzz said : " Will she ever give up her wild - child way ? "
Jaci Stephen writing for the Daily Mail highlighted the fact that Roo and Sid were fighting an attraction for one another .
She said she could guess they would give into their desires in a number of " days rather than weeks . "
Laura Morgan writing for All About Soap hoped Roo would not steal Sid from Marilyn and said : " Keep your hands off that Sid , Roo ! "
When Roo finds happiness with Harvey , Stephen predicted that it would take one week before Roo became unhappy again .
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Roo Stewart at the Official Home and Away website