THE COVENANT ( FILM )
The Covenant ( sometimes stylized as THE COVENAN+ ) is a 2006 American horror film written by J. S. Cardone , directed by Renny Harlin , and starring Steven Strait , Taylor Kitsch , Toby Hemingway , Chace Crawford , Sebastian Stan , Laura Ramsey , and Jessica Lucas .
The film , despite receiving very negative reviews , was a moderate box office success .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the town of Ipswich , four high school boys - Caleb , Pogue , Reid and Tyler , together known as the Sons of Ipswich - are the descendants of colonial witch families and thus wield magical abilities which first manifest on their 13th birthday and grow stronger until they Ascend at 18 .
The Power is linked to their life force ; the more they use , the faster they age .
This becomes more dangerous as , upon Ascending , their powers reach their full strength and become so addictive , seductive as they say , that some ca n't resist .
Caleb - who 's closest to his 18th birthday - exhibits restraint .
While attending a bonfire , Caleb meets Sarah , a transfer student from a public high school in Boston .
The Sons also meet Chase Collins , a new student at Spencer Academy .
Their meeting is cut short when cops appear to break up the party .
The boys escape by using their combined power .
After a student is found mysteriously dead near their campus , various paranormal occurrences take place , with Sarah and her roommate Kate being the focus of it .
Upset , Caleb suspects Reid - the most reckless of the warlocks - but he angrily denies any abusive usage of his powers .
Caleb and later Pogue see a " darkling , " a dead spirit and malicious omen .
Meanwhile , Caleb and Sarah quickly become romantically close .
During a swim race , Caleb notices Chase , who had befriended the group , displaying magic usage .
After researching , Caleb concludes that Chase descends from a fifth family , the bastard son of Goodwin " Goody " Pope , one believed long extinct , and that he is the true perpetrator .
As the Sons discuss this revelation , Pogue learns that his girlfriend was rendered comatose by a spell .
Enraged , he hastily challenges Chase , who swiftly hospitalizes him .
Caleb visits Sarah only to fall into Chase 's trap .
Chase reveals that he was unaware of his magic 's origin , having been adopted .
After locating his biological father , he learned of the price for ascension ; but it was too late and he has become too addicted to using magic .
His biological father then transferred power to him .
Chase wants to force other " ascended " witches to transfer power to him as well , starting with Caleb .
Despite Caleb 's warning that having more power does not save him from aging to death , Chase ignores him .
Before leaving , Chase threatens harm on Caleb 's family and friends if he does not get what he wants .
Caleb reveals the truth to Sarah and takes her to his father , a man of forty - four years with a decrepit old body , exhausted from magic abuse .
When Sarah suggests that one of the other three transfer their power to Caleb so he could evenly match Chase , Caleb immediately refuses , explaining that doing so will cost them their lives .
On the night of Caleb 's eighteenth birthday , he leaves to face Chase alone , and has Reid and Tyler safeguard Sarah in public .
However , Chase easily kidnaps Sarah .
At an old barn , the two confront each other .
Chase reveals a spellbound Sarah and gives Caleb an ultimatum of his life for hers .
Caleb declares he wo n't will his power away or let Sarah come to harm .
They duel and Caleb is clearly outmatched .
At the exact minute of his birth , he ascends , and his power fully matures , which allows him to mount an offensive .
However , as Chase has more than one magical share , he still proves superior and the temporary turn of tide does not last long .
Back at home , Evelyn , Caleb 's mother , begs her husband to save Caleb .
He sacrifices himself and transfers his power remotely to his son .
Once his father 's power is infused within him , Caleb hits Chase with a final blow that engulfs him in a ball of flame .
Sarah , Kate , and Pogue awaken , freed from their curses .
Firefighters arrive on the scene .
Caleb and Sarah wait until inspection of the barn 's wreckage is complete ; they are informed that a third person was not found , suggesting Chase somehow survived and escaped .
The pair get into Caleb 's car , and he casually uses magic to fix the busted windshield , which seems visibly unsettling to Sarah .
He reassuringly holds her hand , and they drive off .
CAST * Steven Strait as Caleb Danvers - the main protagonist ; one of the four Sons of Ipswich , he attends Spenser Academy along with the other Sons and is the oldest and most responsible of the four .
He is very cautious about using the Power , due to the effect it 's had on his father , and is the first to ascend .
* Taylor Kitsch as Pogue Parry - One of the four Sons of Ipswich who is close to Caleb and is dating Kate .
* Toby Hemingway as Reid Garwin - One of the four Sons of Ipswich and the most reckless of the four who often butts heads with Caleb .
* Chace Crawford as Tyler Simms - One of the four Sons of Ipswich who is close to Reid and usually takes his side .
* Sebastian Stan as Chase Collins - A new student at Spenser who befriends the sons of Ipswich .
He is later revealed to be the last of the Sons of Ipswich as well as being the one behind the supernatural occurrences , and is the film 's main antagonist .
* Laura Ramsey as Sarah Wenham - A new student at Spenser who transfers from a Boston public school and Caleb 's love interest .
She is the only one outside the Covenant who learns about the boys ' secret .
* Sarah Smyth as Kira Snider - A snobby student and Aaron 's girlfriend .
* Jessica Lucas as Kate Tunney - Sarah 's roommate and Pogue 's girlfriend .
* Kyle Schmid as Aaron Abbot - A pompous student and jock .
* Wendy Crewson as Evelyn Danvers - Caleb 's alcoholic mother who worries about her son ascending and becoming like his father .
* Stephen McHattie as William Danvers III - Caleb 's father .
* Kenneth Welsh as Provost Higgins - Head of Spenser Academy .
* Jon McLaren as Bordy Becklin * Steven Crowder as Party Kid RELEASE Section::::Release .
Despite a popular misconception , The Covenant is not based on a comic book title nor on any other book .
The confusion comes from the fact that Sony released a comic book of the same name , written by Aron Coleite , and created for the purposes of promoting the film .
Neither the authors of the comic - book miniseries nor Top Cow Comics are mentioned in the film 's credit sequences , so the comic - book miniseries is not regarded as source material by The Covenants producers .
In fact , the film originated from a spec script , and went through a number of drafts , by different writers , before J.S. Cardone eventually submitted the final draft .
Cardone received sole screenwriting credit .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Covenant received extremely negative reviews from critics , with a 3 % " Rotten " rating on Rotten Tomatoes , and the site 's consensus stating , " The Covenant plays out like a teen soap opera , full of pretty faces , wooden acting , laughable dialogue , and little suspense .
" The film also holds a place on the site 's " Worst of the Worst " , ranking 31st .
The film received a 19 out of 100 score on Metacritic , indicating " overwhelming dislike " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Upon its release in the United States , the film managed to top the box office charts , with a $ 8.9 million opening on what was called a " weak " weekend .
As of October 15 , 2006 , The Covenant has earned $ 23,292,105 in the U.S. ( $ 37,256,954 worldwide ) .
The film cost roughly $ 20 million to produce , not including marketing .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Covenant was released on DVD and Blu - ray on January 2 , 2007 .
It went on to sell 1,618,891 units , which translated to revenue of $ 26,578,576 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS