PET SUPPLIES PLUS Pet Supplies
Plus , founded in 1988 in Redford , Michigan in the United States , is a privately held pet supply retailing corporation with a major presence in the US .
As of 2005 , it was the third largest specialty pet food retailer in the US .
The company began adding franchise locations in the Midwest , expanding into the northeastern and southern states during the late 1990s .
In 2015 , Pet Supplies Plus store locations consisted of over 325 stores in 25 states .
The chain 's founders , Harry Shallop and Jack Berry , sought to bring grocery store convenience into the pet supply world .
The chain 's stores are owned by independent franchisees and company stores .
Measuring about , the stores are focused on being neighborhood pet supply " supermarkets , " stocking a very wide selection of pet food and supplies .
The stores also have limited livestock departments , and some have also recently added grooming services and self - serve dog washes .
The stores make it a point to welcome dogs , cats and other pets to its stores .
Pet Supplies Plus considers themselves to be " Americas Favorite Neighborhood Pet Store " In keeping with the neighborly feel , it displays biscuits at " nose level " so dogs can take samples while shopping with their owners .
Many locations sponsor adoption events with local animal rescue and humane groups .
Pet Supplies Plus currently has their own brand of natural dog and cat food called Redford Naturals .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Pet Supplies
Plus was founded in 1988 by Harry Shallop and Jack Berry , in Redford , Michigan .
Their store was designed according to the grocery stores model ; it was the first pet shop with wide aisles and neat well - stocked display shelves .
The stores featured overhead signs , large parking lots , convenient hours , everyday low prices , and helpful staff on the aisles .
This new pet retail concept was a success , and within five years after opening the first store , the founders had opened stores in 30 more locations .
Not long after , the two were joined by a third partner , Harvey Solway .
In September 2010 , the firm was sold to Irving Place Capital , a private equity group .
Day - to - day operations continue to be run by the management team in place before the sale and the company 's top managers continue to own a share in the company , while many of the stores are independently owned franchised sites .
CURRENT OPERATIONS Section::::Current operations .
As of mid 2017 , there are over 400 stores in 31 states , mainly in the eastern half of the United States .
Most of the stores are located in very convenient high - traffic sites with large parking lots .
Pet Supplies Plus stores in smaller cities have between 5,000 and while those in larger areas can have up to .
The limited square footage , as compared to general retail " big - box " store , gives the advantage of a better distribution system , and holds down costs .
Recently , many Pet Supplies Plus stores have added self - serve dog washes and grooming centers to their sites as a customer convenience .
Pets are allowed to walk through the aisles of the Pet Supplies Plus stores .
This store provides treats , chew toys and other such products which are located on low shelves making it possible for dogs to reach them .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Pet Supplies Plus