NATIONAL WOMEN 'S DAY National Women 's Day is a South African public holiday celebrated annually on 9 August .
The day commemorates the 1956 march of approximately 20,000 women to the Union Buildings in Pretoria to petition against the country 's pass laws that required South Africans defined as " black " under The Population Registration Act to carry an internal passport , known as a pass , that served to maintain population segregation , control urbanisation , and manage migrant labour during the apartheid era .
The first National Women 's Day was celebrated on 9 August 1994 .
In 2006 , a reenactment of the march was staged for its 50th anniversary , with many of the 1956 march veterans .
1956
WOMEN 'S MARCH
Section::::1956 Women 's March .
On 9 August 1956 , more than 20,000 South African women of all races staged a march on the Union Buildings in protest against the proposed amendments to the Urban Areas Act of 1950 , commonly referred to as the " pass laws " .
The march was led by Lilian Ngoyi , Helen Joseph , Rahima Moosa and Sophia Williams .
Other participants included Frances Baard , a statue of whom was unveiled by Northern Cape Premier Hazel Jenkins in Kimberley ( Frances Baard District Municipality ) on National Women 's Day 2009 .
The women left 14,000 petitions at the office doors of prime minister J.G. Strijdom .
The women stood silently for 30 minutes and then started singing a protest song that was composed in honour of the occasion :
Wathint'Abafazi Wathint'imbokodo !
( Now you have touched the women , you have struck a rock . ) .
In the years since , the phrase ( or its latest incarnation : " you strike a woman , you strike a rock " ) has come to represent women 's courage and strength in South Africa .
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
National Women 's Day draws attention to significant issues African women still face , such as parenting , domestic violence , sexual harassment in the workplace pornography , unequal pay , and schooling for all girls .
It can be used as a day to fight for or protest these ideas .
Due to this public holiday , there have been many significant advances .
Before 1994 , women had low representation in the Parliament , only at 2.7 % .
Women in the national assembly were at 27.7 % .
This number has nearly doubled , being at 48 % representation throughout the country 's government .
National Women 's Day is based around much of the same principles as International Women 's Day , and strives for much of the same freedoms and rights .
SEE ALSO
* International Women 's Day
* Public holidays in South Africa REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* National Women 's Day