ALL THE WORLD 'S
A STAGE
" All the world 's a stage " is the phrase that begins a monologue from William Shakespeare 's As You Like It , spoken by the melancholy Jaques in Act II Scene VII Line 138 .
The speech compares the world to a stage and life to a play and catalogues the seven stages of a man 's life , sometimes referred to as the seven ages of man : infant , schoolboy , lover , soldier , justice , Pantalone , and old age , facing imminent death .
It is one of Shakespeare 's most frequently quoted passages .
TEXT ORIGINS
WORLD
AS
A STAGE Section::::Origins .
Section::::World as a stage .
The comparison of the world to a stage and people to actors long predated Shakespeare .
Juvenal , the ancient Roman poet , wrote one of the earliest versions of this line in his " Satire 3 " : " All of Greece is a stage , and every Greek 's an actor . "
Richard Edwards ' play Damon and Pythias , written in the year Shakespeare was born , contains the lines , " Pythagoras said that this world was like a stage /
Whereon many play their parts ; the lookers - on , the sage " .
When it was founded in 1599 Shakespeare 's own theatre , The Globe , may have used the motto ' ( All the world plays the actor ) , the Latin text of which is derived from a 12th - century treatise .
Ultimately the words derive from ' ( because almost the whole world are actors ) attributed to Petronius , a phrase which had wide circulation in England at the time .
In his own earlier work , The Merchant of Venice , Shakespeare also had one of his main characters , Antonio , comparing the world to a stage :
In his work
The Praise of Folly , first printed in 1511 , Renaissance humanist Erasmus asks , " For what else is the life of man but a kind of play in which men in various costumes perform until the director motions them off the stage . "
AGES OF MAN Section::::Ages of man .
Likewise the division of human life into a series of ages was a commonplace of art and literature , which Shakespeare would have expected his audiences to recognize .
The number of ages varied : three and four being the most common among ancient writers such as Aristotle .
The concept of seven ages derives from mediaeval philosophy , which constructed groups of seven , as in the seven deadly sins , for theological reasons .
The seven ages model dates from the 12th century .
King Henry V had a tapestry illustrating the seven ages of man .
According to T. W. Baldwin , Shakespeare 's version of the concept of the ages of man is based primarily upon Palingenius ' book Zodiacus Vitae , a school text he would have studied at the Stratford Grammar School , which also enumerates stages of human life .
He also takes elements from Ovid and other sources known to him .
SEE ALSO
* The Seven Ages of Man ( painting series ) * Ages of Man * Riddle of the Sphinx
* Six Ages of the World * Solomon Grundy * Mere Oblivion ( short film ) * The Seven Doors of Danny ( musical theatre )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS