REGISTERED AGENT
In United States business law , a registered agent , also known as a resident agent or statutory agent , is a business or individual designated to receive service of process ( SOP ) when a business entity is a party in a legal action such as a lawsuit or summons .
The registered agent 's address may also be where the state sends the paperwork for the periodic renewal of the business entity 's charter ( if required ) .
The registered agent for a business entity may be an officer or employee of the company , or a third party , such as the organization 's lawyer or a service company .
Failure to properly maintain a registered agent can affect a company negatively .
THE FUNCTION OF A REGISTERED AGENT Section::::The function of a registered agent .
Most businesses are not individuals but instead business entities such as corporations or limited liability companies ( LLCs ) .
This is because there are substantive ( and substantial ) liability protections as well as tax advantages to being " incorporated " as opposed to being " self - employed " .
Most jurisdictions in the United States require that any business entity that is formed or doing business within their borders designate and maintain a " registered agent " .
This person may be known as the " resident agent " or " statutory agent " , depending on the laws of the individual jurisdiction in which the business entity is registered .
The purpose of a registered agent is to provide a legal address ( not a P.O. Box ) within that jurisdiction where there are persons available during normal business hours to facilitate legal service of process being served in the event of a legal action or lawsuit .
Generally , the registered agent is also the person to whom the state government sends all official documents required each year for tax and legal purposes , such as franchise tax notices and annual report forms .
It is the registered agent 's job to forward these suit documents and notices to the entity itself .
Registered agents generally will also notify business entities if their state government filing status is in " good standing " or not .
The reason that these notifications are a desired function of a registered agent is that it is difficult for a business entity to keep track of legislative changes and report due dates for multiple jurisdictions given the disparate laws of different states .
Penalties for not maintaining a registered agent generally will cause a jurisdiction to revoke a business 's corporate or LLC legal status as well as in some cases , assess additional penalty fees on the entity .
If a registered agent fails to perform their function , it can have dire consequences for the business entity .
For example , if a customer fell inside a store and sued the store , and the store 's registered agent failed to notify the business entity of a summons to appear in court to respond to the lawsuit , then when the case went to trial , nobody would appear to defend the store and the customer would win by a default judgment .
Additionally , the store would likely not be able to get the judgment overturned on appeal because they had been properly served .
This is one of the most common reasons that business entities generally will utilize a third party as their registered agent be it a commercial service company , an attorney , or in some cases , a CPA .
The person at the business entity that maintains contact with the registered agent is the corporate secretary or governance officer .
WHO CAN PERFORM THE FUNCTION OF A REGISTERED AGENT
Section::::Who can perform the function of a registered agent .
Different states have different requirements for registered agents .
Typically , the agent must be a natural person resident of the state in question or , in states that allow entities to serve as registered agents , an entity having a business office within the state and authorized to do business in the state .
In some states a business entity is legally allowed to act as its own registered agent , if at least one of its officers is a resident of the state , but other jurisdictions may require that a business entity designate a third party as its registered agent .
Because most states permit one business entity to serve as a registered agent for others , some businesses exist to serve that exact function , charging a fee to act as the registered agent for hundreds or thousands of businesses in a given state .
DESIGNATING
A REGISTERED AGENT
Section::::Designating a registered agent .
In most all cases , the registered agent for a business entity is assigned in the formation documents filed in a jurisdiction when the entity is originally created .
For example , a person forming a corporation in the State of Nevada or Delaware , would designate the registered agent along with the agent 's address on the articles of incorporation filed with the Nevada Secretary of State or Delaware Secretary of State respectively .
If the agent can not sign the articles to be filed , some states such as Nevada provide that the registered agent may be designated using a separate " Registered Agent Acceptance " form with the appropriate acceptance and signature .
A representative of the business or the individual accepting responsibility as registered agent must sign to accept the responsibility of acting as agent .
In most states it is a crime to knowingly file a false document with the office of the Secretary of State , although the penalties vary widely .
For example , in Nevada it is a Class " D " felony to forge this signature , but in Michigan it is only a misdemeanor .
CHANGING A REGISTERED AGENT Section::::Changing a registered agent .
For varying reasons a business entity might at some point wish to change their registered agent to another party after a registered agent has already been designated .
This is accomplished by obtaining a form from the secretary of state where the business entity is registered , completing said form , and filing it with that state office along with any requisite fees which may vary from state to state .
In some cases the required form may simply be a dedicated change of registered agent form , and in other cases , such as in Delaware , an actual amendment to the articles of the business entity must be filed .
REGISTERED AGENT INFORMATION Section::::Registered agent information .
Information about persons or entities that may be willing to act as registered agents / resident agents by state is usually maintained by the respective Secretary of State .
Most states also offer free access to their databases to find a business entity 's registered agent .
MODEL REGISTERED
AGENTS
ACT Section::::Model Registered Agents Act .
The Model Registered Agents Act ( MoRAA ) is an effort spearheaded by the American Bar Association Business Law Section and the International Association of Commercial Administrators ( IACA ) – Business Organization Section ( BOS ) to standardize business entity laws as they relate to annual reports , registered agents and other laws and forms used to file business entities .
The act also creates two distinct classes of registered agent : " commercial " and " non - commercial .
"
The National Conference of Commissions on Uniform State Laws ( NCCUSL ) organized a drafting committee composed of commissions , ABA , and IACA representatives who drafted the act 's language .
NCCUSL adopted MoRAA at its 2006 annual meeting .
It was amended in 2011 .
Eleven US jurisdictions ( Arkansas , District of Columbia , Idaho , Maine , Mississippi , Montana , Nevada , North Dakota , South Dakota , Utah , and Wyoming ) have since adopted the model act , and Delaware did not adopt the act , but did adopt the " commercial registered agent " provision .
The problem this effort seeks to alleviate is that disparate laws , filing requirements , and forms in all of the US jurisdictions where business entities are filed creates a quagmire for any company seeking to register to do business in those jurisdictions .
By adopting a common set of laws , the Model Registered Agents Act seeks to create a uniform and simple process of filing and maintaining a business entity in any jurisdiction adopting it .
GOVERNMENT LISTINGS Section::::Government listings .
Some state business entity laws name the Secretary of State 's office or business entity filing office as the registered agent of last resort , in the event the named registered agent ca n't be found .
By law , service may be made on the office if the entities registered agent can not be found .
However , the plaintiff must demonstrate that it made a good faith effort to service the registered agent before it may serve the Secretary of State .
The state laws vary in how to complete service on the Secretary of State and the amount of fees charged .
Some of the states that may have this statutory provision are listed below .
MoRAA eliminated this provision but some of the states that adopted MoRAA maintained this provision .
* Alaska * Arkansas
* California * Delaware * Idaho * Maine * Mississippi
* Montana * Nevada
* New Hampshire * North Dakota
* Pennsylvania * Wyoming SEE ALSO
* List of Secretaries of State , who in the United States provide information about available registered agents in each state REFERENCES