CALIFORNIA REDEMPTION
VALUE California Redemption Value ( CRV ) , also known as California Refund Value , is a regulatory fee paid on recyclable beverage containers in California .
The fee was established by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986 ( AB 2020 , Margolin ) , and since 2010 the program is administered by the Cal / EPA California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery ( CalRecycle ) ( previously administered by the California Department of Conservation , Division of Recycling ) .
The bottler pays CRV for beverages with aluminum , plastic , glass , and bimetal containers and anyone can receive the same amount in exchange for the container by bringing it to a recycling center .
The symbol on beverage containers eligible for reimbursement is " CA CRV " .
Currently , CRV is 5 cents for containers less than and 10 cents for containers or larger .
The state also allows recyclers to pay by weight , for which the state also sets a separate minimum price per pound ( kg ) .
When redeeming in quantities up to 50 containers , the consumer has the right to be paid by count on request .
In larger quantities , the recycler has discretion .
Recyclers have the right to refuse or offer a reduced price for contaminated materials .
It is illegal to bring in out of state cans or bottles to California to recoup the CRV and violators can be charged with fraud , a felony .
The charge for California Redemption Value is similar to bottle bill deposits used in other states , but is technically a fee imposed on the distributor of the beverage .
The fee tends to be passed along to the retailer and to the consumer via normal market forces .
Distributors and retailers usually break out the CRV as a distinct part of the purchase price in advertising and on receipts ( for example the charge for a 50-cent bottle of soda may appear on the receipt as " 45 cents plus 5 cents CRV " ) .
One way the difference between CRV and a system in which the consumer pays a deposit or tax shows up is that sales tax applies to the CRV amount , if the item is subject to sales tax .
If it were not part of the basic price of the product , sales tax would not apply to it .
Accordingly , when the State of California raised the CRV from $ .04 on 2 L bottles / $ .02 cans to $ .08 and $ .04 , respectively , then again to $ .10 and $ .05 , respectively , it was also raising California 's sales tax revenue gained on the imposed fee .
Other states have similar bottle bills / deposit laws , including Connecticut , Hawaii , Iowa , Massachusetts , Maine , Michigan , New York , Oregon , and Vermont .
TYPES OF BEVERAGES Section::::Types of beverages .
CRV is paid on the following types of beverages :
* Carbonated and noncarbonated water
* Carbonated and noncarbonated soft drinks , energy drinks , and sport drinks * Coffee and tea drinks
* Beer and other malt beverages * 100 % fruit juice in containers smaller than .
CRV is not paid on the following :
* Milk , white or flavored * Medical food
* Infant formula
* Wine * Distilled Spirits Coolers ( not distilled spirits ) * 100 % fruit juice in containers or more * 100 % vegetable juice in containers more than * Products not in liquid or " ready to drink " form
* Products not intended for human consumption
* Containers not made of glass , metal , or plastic SEE
ALSO
* Container deposit legislation in the United States
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Find a CRV recycling center by zipcode * " California 's Bottle & Can Recycling Law -- The Bottle " at " Californians Against Waste " * Program Info