TABBY CAT
A tabby is any domestic cat ( Felis catus ) that has a coat featuring distinctive stripes , dots , lines or swirling patterns , usually together with a mark resembling an ' M ' on its forehead .
Tabbies are sometimes erroneously assumed to be a cat breed .
In fact , the tabby pattern is found in many breeds , and is a genetic landrace common among the general mixed - breed population .
The tabby pattern is a naturally occurring feature that may be related to the coloration of the domestic cat 's direct ancestor , the African wildcat ( Felis lybica lybica ) , which — along with the European wildcat ( Felis silvestris silvestris ) and Asiatic wildcat
( Felis lybica ornata)—has a similar coloration .
A genetic study found five genetic clusters from tabbies to be ancestral to wildcats of various parts of the world .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The English term tabby originates from the translation of the French phrase " striped silk taffeta " , the root of which is tabis , meaning " a rich watered silk .
" This can be further traced to the Middle French atabis ( 14th century ) , which stemmed from the Arabic term attabiya .
This word is a reference to the neighborhood in Baghdad , Attabiy ( named for Prince Attab of the Umayyad Caliphate ) , where such silk cloth was first made .
Tabby is also comparable to the Spanish word ataviar , which means " to decorate or to dress or wear " and often implies luxurious clothing .
Usage of the term tabby cat , which means " one with a striped coat " , began in the 1690s and was later shortened to tabby in 1774 .
The notion that tabby is indicative of a female cat may be a reference to the feminine proper name Tabby , as a shortened form of Tabitha .
TABBY PATTERNS Section::::Tabby patterns .
There are four tabby patterns that have been shown to be genetically distinct : Mackerel , Classic , Spotted , and Ticked .
A fifth includes tabby as part of another basic color pattern .
The " Patched " tabby is a calico or tortoiseshell cat with tabby patches ( also known as " caliby " and " torbie " , respectively ) .
All those patterns have been observed in random - bred populations .
Several additional patterns are found in specific breeds .
A modified Classic tabby is found in the Sokoke breed .
Some are due to the interaction of wild and domestic genes .
Rosetted and marbled patterns are found in the Bengal breed .
MACKEREL TABBY Section::::Mackerel tabby .
The Mackerel tabby pattern has vertical , gently curving stripes on the side of the body .
The stripes are narrow and may be continuous or broken into bars and spots on the flanks and stomach .
An " M " shape appears on the forehead , along with dark lines across the cat 's cheeks to the corners of its eyes .
Mackerels are also called ' fishbone tabbies ' , probably because they are named after the mackerel fish .
Mackerel is the most common tabby pattern .
CLASSIC TABBY Section::::Classic tabby .
The Classic ( also known as " Blotched " or " Marbled " )
tabby tends to have a pattern of dark browns , ochres and black but also occurs in grey .
Classic tabbies have the " M " pattern on their foreheads but the body markings have a whirled or swirled pattern ( often called a " bullseye " ) on the cat 's sides .
There is also a light colored " butterfly " pattern on the shoulders and three thin stripes ( the center stripe is dark ) running along its spine .
Like the Mackerel tabby , Classic tabbies have dark bars on the legs , tail , and cheeks .
TICKED TABBY Section::::Ticked tabby .
The Ticked ( or Stripeless )
tabby pattern produces agouti hairs , hairs with distinct bands of color on them , breaking up the tabby patterning into a " salt - and - pepper " or " sand"-like appearance .
Residual ghost striping or " barring " can often be seen on the lower legs , face , and belly and sometimes at the tail tip , as well as a long dark line running along the back , usually in the spine .
SPOTTED TABBY
Section::::Spotted tabby .
The Spotted tabby is a modifier that breaks up the Mackerel tabby pattern so that the stripes appear as spots .
Similarly , the stripes of the Classic tabby pattern may be broken into larger spots .
Both large spot and small spot patterns can be seen in the Australian Mist , Bengal , Serengeti , Egyptian Mau , Arabian Mau , Maine Coon , and Ocicat breeds .
GENETIC EXPLANATIONS FOR TABBY PATTERNS Section::::Genetic explanations for tabby patterns .
The tabby patterns are due to three distinct gene loci and one modifier :
The agouti gene , A / a , controls whether or not the tabby pattern is expressed .
The dominant A expresses the underlying tabby pattern , while the recessive non - agouti or " hypermelanistic " allele , a , does not .
Solid - color ( black or blue ) cats have the aa combination , hiding the tabby pattern , although sometimes a suggestion of the underlying pattern can be seen ( called " ghost striping " )
This pattern is mostly seen in young cats that still have the baby coat .
The right pattern ( Classic , Mackerel , or Spotted ) will reveal itself then , because that is independent of whether it is tabby or solid .
However , the agouti gene only controls the production of black pigment , so a cat with an O allele for orange color will still have the tabby pattern .
As a result , both red cats and the patches of red on tortoiseshell cats will show tabby striping .
The primary tabby pattern gene , Mc / mc or Mc / Mc , sets the basic pattern of stripes that underlies the coat .
Mc is the wild - type tabby gene and produces what is called a Mackerel Striped tabby .
Classic tabbies are cats who also possess mc / mc , a recessive mutant gene that produces the blotched pattern .
The spotted gene is directly connected to the Mc gene ; it ' breaks ' the lines of a Mackerel tabby , turning it into spots .
The spotted gene is dominant as well , which means a Spotted will be Sp / sp or Sp / Sp together with Mc / mc and Mc / Mc and A / a and A / A.
The Ticked tabby pattern is on a different gene locus than the Mackerel and Classic tabby patterns , and is epistatic to the other patterns .
A dominant mutation , T / t , masks any other tabby pattern , producing a non - patterned , or agouti tabby , with virtually no stripes or bars .
If the Ticked tabby pattern gene is present , any other tabby pattern is masked .
Cats homozygous for the ticked allele ( T / T ) have less barring than cats heterozygous for the ticked allele .
When a cat of this genetic make - up is selectively bred for lack of barring and wide banding on the hair shaft , the resulting pattern is referred to as Shaded .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Since the tabby pattern is a common wild type , it might be assumed that medieval cats were tabbies .
However , one writer believed this to be untrue , at least in England .
Some time after the mid-17th century , the natural philosopher John Aubrey noted that William Laud , the Archbishop of Canterbury was " a great lover of Cats " and " was presented with some Cyprus - cats , i.e. our Tabby - Cats " .
He then claimed that " I doe well remember that the common English Catt , was white with some blueish piednesse ( i.e. white with grey parts ) .
The race or breed of them are now almost lost . "
However , most drawings or paintings of cats in medieval manuscripts do show them to be tabbies .
NOTABLE EXAMPLES Section::::Notable examples .
Well - known tabby cats include Freya , who belongs to former British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne , and Think Think , one of two cats belonging to the President of Taiwan , Tsai Ing - wen .
One of the first mass - produced stuffed toys , the Ithaca Kitty , was inspired by a tabby cat .
SEE ALSO
* Brindle * Calico cat
*
Tortoiseshell cat
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS