A PRIORI AND A POSTERIORI
The Latin phrases a priori ( " from the earlier " )
and a posteriori ( " from the later " ) are philosophical terms popularized by Immanuel Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason ( first published in 1781 , second edition in 1787 ) , one of the most influential works in the history of philosophy .
However , in their Latin forms they appear in Latin translations of Euclid 's Elements , of about 300 , a work widely considered during the early European modern period as the model for precise thinking .
These terms are used with respect to reasoning ( epistemology ) to distinguish " necessary conclusions from first premises " ( i.e. , what must come before sense observation ) from " conclusions based on sense observation " which must follow it .
Thus , the two kinds of knowledge , justification , or argument , may be glossed : * A priori knowledge or justification is independent of experience , as with mathematics ( 3 + 2 = 5 ) , tautologies ( " All bachelors are unmarried " ) , and deduction from pure reason ( e.g. , ontological proofs ) .
* A posteriori knowledge or justification depends on experience or empirical evidence , as with most aspects of science and personal knowledge .
There are many points of view on these two types of knowledge , and their relationship gives rise to one of the oldest problems in modern philosophy .
The terms a priori and a posteriori are primarily used as adjectives to modify the noun " knowledge " ( for example , " a priori knowledge " ) .
However , " a priori " is sometimes used to modify other nouns , such as " truth " .
Philosophers also may use " apriority " and " aprioricity " as nouns to refer ( approximately ) to the quality of being " a priori " .
Although definitions and use of the terms have varied in the history of philosophy , they have consistently labeled two separate epistemological notions .
See also the related distinctions : deductive / inductive , analytic / synthetic , necessary / contingent .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
The intuitive distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge ( or justification ) is best seen via examples , as below :
A priori A posteriori ANALYTICITY AND NECESSITY RELATION TO THE ANALYTIC - SYNTHETIC Section::::Analyticity and necessity .
Section::::Relation to the analytic - synthetic .
Several philosophers reacting to Kant sought to explain a priori knowledge without appealing to , as Paul Boghossian ( MD ) explains , " a special faculty ... that has never been described in satisfactory terms . "
One theory , popular among the logical positivists of the early 20th century , is what Boghossian calls the " analytic explanation of the a priori . "
The distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions was first introduced by Kant .
While Kant 's original distinction was primarily drawn in terms of conceptual containment , the contemporary version of the distinction primarily involves , as the American philosopher W. V. O. Quine put it , the notions of " true by virtue of meanings and independently of fact .
" Analytic propositions are thought to be true in virtue of their meaning alone , while a posteriori analytic propositions are thought to be true in virtue of their meaning and certain facts about the world .
According to the analytic explanation of the a priori , all a priori knowledge is analytic ; so a priori knowledge need not require a special faculty of pure intuition , since it can be accounted for simply by one 's ability to understand the meaning of the proposition in question .
In short , proponents of this explanation claimed to have reduced a dubious metaphysical faculty of pure reason to a legitimate linguistic notion of analyticity .
However , the analytic explanation of a priori knowledge has undergone several criticisms .
Most notably , Quine argued that the analytic – synthetic distinction is illegitimate .
Quine states : " But for all its a priori reasonableness , a boundary between analytic and synthetic statements simply has not been drawn .
That there is such a distinction to be drawn at all is an unempirical dogma of empiricists , a metaphysical article of faith . "
While the soundness of Quine 's critique is highly disputed , it had a powerful effect on the project of explaining the a priori in terms of the analytic .
RELATION TO THE NECESSARY AND CONTINGENT Section::::Relation to the necessary and contingent .
The metaphysical distinction between necessary and contingent truths has also been related to a priori and a posteriori knowledge .
A proposition that is necessarily true is one whose negation is self - contradictory ( thus , it is said to be true in every possible world ) .
Consider the proposition that all bachelors are unmarried .
Its negation , the proposition that some bachelors are married , is incoherent , because the concept of being unmarried ( or the meaning of the word " unmarried " ) is part of the concept of being a bachelor ( or part of the definition of the word " bachelor " ) .
To the extent that contradictions are impossible , self - contradictory propositions are necessarily false , because it is impossible for them to be true .
Thus , the negation of a self - contradictory proposition is supposed to be necessarily true .
By contrast , a proposition that is contingently true is one whose negation is not self - contradictory ( thus , it is said that it is not true in every possible world ) .
As Jason Baehr states , it seems plausible that all necessary propositions are known a priori , because " [ s]ense experience can tell us only about the actual world and hence about what is the case ; it can say nothing about what must or must not be the case . "
Following Kant , some philosophers have considered the relationship between aprioricity , analyticity , and necessity to be extremely close .
According to Jerry Fodor , " Positivism , in particular , took it for granted that a priori truths must be necessary ... "
However , since Kant , the distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions had slightly changed .
Analytic propositions were largely taken to be " true by virtue of meanings and independently of fact " , while synthetic propositions were not — one must conduct some sort of empirical investigation , looking to the world , to determine the truth - value of synthetic propositions .
Aprioricity , analyticity , and necessity have since been more clearly separated from each other .
The American philosopher Saul Kripke ( 1972 ) , for example , provided strong arguments against this position .
Kripke argued that there are necessary a posteriori truths , such as the proposition that water is HO ( if it is true ) .
According to Kripke , this statement is necessarily true ( since water and HO are the same thing , they are identical in every possible world , and truths of identity are logically necessary ) and a posteriori ( since it is known only through empirical investigation ) .
Following such considerations of Kripke and others ( such as Hilary Putnam ) , philosophers tend to distinguish more clearly the notion of aprioricity from that of necessity and analyticity .
Kripke 's definitions of these terms , however , diverge in subtle ways from those of Kant .
Taking these differences into account , Kripke 's controversial analysis of naming as contingent and a priori would , according to Stephen Palmquist , best fit into Kant 's epistemological framework by calling it " analytic a posteriori " .
Aaron Sloman presented a brief defence of Kant 's three distinctions ( analytic / synthetic , apriori / empirical and necessary / contingent ) in .
It did not assume " possible world semantics " for the third distinction , merely that some part of this world might have been different .
Thus , the relationship between aprioricity , necessity , and analyticity is not easy to discern .
However , most philosophers at least seem to agree that while the various distinctions may overlap , the notions are clearly not identical : the a priori / a posteriori distinction is epistemological , the analytic / synthetic distinction is linguistic , and the necessary / contingent distinction is metaphysical .
HISTORY EARLY USES Section::::History .
Section::::Early uses .
The phrases " a priori " and " a posteriori " are Latin for " from what comes before " and " from what comes later " ( or , less literally , " from first principles , before experience " and " after experience " ) .
They appear in Latin translations of Euclid 's Elements , of about 300 , a work widely considered during the early European modern period as the model for precise thinking .
An early philosophical use of what might be considered a notion of a priori knowledge ( though not called by that name ) is Plato 's theory of recollection , related in the dialogue Meno ( 380 ) , according to which something like a priori knowledge is knowledge inherent , intrinsic in the human mind .
Albert of Saxony , a 14th - century logician , wrote on both a priori and a posteriori .
G. W. Leibniz introduced a distinction between a priori and a posteriori criteria for the possibility of a notion in his ( 1684 ) short treatise " Meditations on Knowledge , Truth , and Ideas " .
A priori and a posteriori arguments for the existence of God appear in his Monadology ( 1714 ) .
George Berkeley outlined the distinction in his 1710 work A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge ( para .
XXI ) .
IMMANUEL KANT Section::::Immanuel Kant .
The 18th - century German philosopher Immanuel Kant ( 1781 ) advocated a blend of rationalist and empiricist theories .
Kant says , " Although all our cognition begins with experience , it does not follow that it arises [ is caused by ] from experience " According to Kant , a priori cognition is transcendental , or based on the form of all possible experience , while a posteriori cognition is empirical , based on the content of experience .
Kant states , "
[ … ] it is quite possible that our empirical knowledge is a compound of that which we receive through impressions , and that which the faculty of cognition supplies from itself sensuous impressions [ sense data ] giving merely the occasion [ opportunity for a cause to produce its effect ] .
" Contrary to contemporary usages of the term , Kant thinks that a priori knowledge is not entirely independent of the content of experience .
And unlike the rationalists , Kant thinks that a priori cognition , in its pure form , that is without the admixture of any empirical content , is limited to the deduction of the conditions of possible experience .
These a priori , or transcendental conditions , are seated in one 's cognitive faculties , and are not provided by experience in general or any experience in particular ( although an argument exists that a priori intuitions can be " triggered " by experience ) .
Kant nominated and explored the possibility of a transcendental logic with which to consider the deduction of the a priori in its pure form .
Space , time and causality are considered pure a priori intuitions .
Kant reasoned that the pure a priori intuitions are established via his transcendental aesthetic and transcendental logic .
He claimed that the human subject would not have the kind of experience that it has were these a priori forms not in some way constitutive of him as a human subject .
For instance , a person would not experience the world as an orderly , rule - governed place unless time , space and causality were determinant functions in the form of perceptual faculties , i. e. , there can be no experience in general without space , time or causality as particular determinants thereon .
The claim is more formally known as Kant 's transcendental deduction and it is the central argument of his major work , the Critique of Pure Reason .
The transcendental deduction argues that time , space and causality are ideal as much as real .
In consideration of a possible logic of the a priori , this most famous of Kant 's deductions has made the successful attempt in the case for the fact of subjectivity , what constitutes subjectivity and what relation it holds with objectivity and the empirical .
JOHANN FICHTE Section::::Johann Fichte .
After Kant 's death , a number of philosophers saw themselves as correcting and expanding his philosophy , leading to the various forms of German Idealism .
One of these philosophers was Johann Fichte .
His student ( and critic ) , Arthur Schopenhauer , accused him of rejecting the distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge : SEE
ALSO
*
Abductive reasoning *
A priori probability
* Deductive reasoning
* Inductive reasoning * Relativized a priori
* Tabula rasa
* Transcendental empiricism
*
Transcendental hermeneutic phenomenology *
Transcendental nominalism NOTES CITATIONS REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A priori / a posteriori — in the Philosophical Dictionary online .
* " Rationalism vs. Empiricism " — an article by Peter Markie in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .