THE MAN FROM SNOWY RIVER ( 1982 FILM )
The Man from Snowy River is a 1982 Australian drama film based on the Banjo Paterson poem " The Man from Snowy River " .
Released by 20th Century Fox , the film had a cast including Kirk Douglas in a dual role as the brothers Harrison ( a character who appeared frequently in Paterson 's poems ) and Spur , Jack Thompson as Clancy , Tom Burlinson as Jim Craig , Sigrid Thornton as Harrison 's daughter Jessica , Terence Donovan as Jim 's father Henry Craig , and Chris Haywood as Curly .
Both Burlinson and Thornton later reprised their roles in the 1988 sequel , The Man from Snowy River II , which was released by Walt Disney Pictures .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When Jim Craig and his father Henry are discussing their finances , a herd of wild horses called the Brumby mob passes by , and Henry wants to shoot the black stallion leader , but Jim convinces his father to capture and sell them .
The next morning the mob reappears and Henry is accidentally killed .
Before Jim can inherit the station , a group of mountain men tell him that he must first earn the right – and to do so he must go to the lowlands and work .
Jim meets an old friend called Spur , a one - legged miner .
Jim then gets a job on a station owned by Harrison , Spur 's brother , on a recommendation by Harrison 's friend .
Meanwhile , Clancy appears at Spur 's mine and the two discuss their pasts and futures .
Clancy goes to Harrison 's station to lead a cattle muster .
At dinner , Harrison tells Clancy that " he has no brother " when referring to Spur .
Harrison organises a round - up of his cattle , but Jim is not allowed to go .
While the others are gone , Harrison 's daughter Jessica asks Jim to help her break in a prize colt .
The mob appears again , and Jim unsuccessfully gives chase to the valuable horse .
When Harrison returns , he sends Jim to bring back 20 strays .
Later , Harrison learns of Jim 's actions and tells Jessica that Jim will be fired and that she will be sent to a women 's college .
Impulsively , she rides off into the mountains where she is caught in a storm .
Spur , meanwhile , finally strikes a large gold deposit .
Jim finds Jessica 's horse and rescues her .
She tells him that he 's going to be fired , but he still leaves to return the cattle .
Jessica is surprised at meeting Spur , her uncle , whom she had never been told about .
She is also confused when Spur mistakes her for her dead mother and refuses to tell her anything about his past .
After returning , Jessica learns that Spur and Harrison both fell in love with her mother , Matilda .
Matilda declared that the first to make his fortune would be her husband .
Spur went looking for gold , while Harrison bet his life savings on a horse race .
Harrison became rich overnight when the horse he bet on won .
Having made his fortune , Harrison we d Matilda , but she died while delivering Jessica .
Harrison is grateful to Jim for returning his daughter , but he becomes angry when Jim says he loves her .
As Jim leaves , a prized colt is let loose by a farmhand named Curly in the hope that Jim will be blamed .
Later , while camping out , Spur tells Jim that he will inherit his father 's share of the mine .
Clancy joins them and informs them of the colt , but Jim refuses to retrieve the animal .
Meanwhile , Harrison offers a reward of £ 100 , attracting riders and fortune - hunters from every station in the area .
Clancy does eventually show , accompanied by Jim , whom Harrison finally allows to join the hunt .
Several riders have accidents in pursuit and even Clancy is unable to contain the Brumby mob .
The riders give up when the mob descends a seemingly impassable grade .
However , Jim goes forward and returns the horses to Harrison 's farm .
Harrison offers him the reward but he refuses .
Having cleared his name , Jim would like to return some day for the horses and , looking at Jessica , " anything else that 's mine . "
He rides back up to the mountain country , knowing that he has earned his right to live there .
CAST
* Tom Burlinson as Jim Craig * Sigrid Thornton as Jessica Harrison * Kirk Douglas as Harrison /
Spur * Terence Donovan as Henry Craig * Tommy Dysart as Mountain Man * Bruce Kerr as Man in Street
* David Bradshaw as Banjo Paterson
* Jack Thompson as Clancy * Tony Bonner as Kane * June Jago as Mrs. Bailey
* Chris Haywood as Curly * Kristopher Steele as Moss
* Gus Mercurio as Frew * Howard Eynon as Shorry * Lorraine Bayly as Rosemary Hume PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
According to Geoff Burrowes , the idea to make the film came at a dinner party when someone suggested the poem would make a good movie .
Burrowes developed a treatment with George Miller then hired John Dixon to write a screenplay .
All three men had worked together in television ; another former TV colleague , Simon Wincer , became involved as executive producer with Michael Edgley and succeeded in raising the budget .
The screenplay contains numerous references to Banjo Paterson , aside from using his poem " The Man from Snowy River " as the source material and his inclusion as a character in the film .
For example , the numerous references to the late Matilda are likely a reference to the song " Waltzing Matilda " , which was written by Paterson .
In addition , the melody for " Waltzing Matilda " can be heard near the end of the film .
A Bible Passage from Genesis 30:27 , which talks about cattle , goats , and sheep is read aloud in a scene in the middle of the film .
The film was not shot in the actual Snowy Mountains but in the Victorian High Country near Mansfield , Victoria , where Burrowes ' wife 's family had lived for several generations , which was logistically easier .
Burt Lancaster and Robert Mitchum were considered for the dual role of Harrison and Spur before Kirk Douglas was cast in the roles .
Tom Burlinson has confirmed that it was definitely him who rode the horse down the side of the mountain for the " terrible descent " during the dangerous ride — commenting that he had been asked about this numerous times , and that he became known as " The Man from Snowy River " because of his ride .
Burlinson had ridden a horse only a few times before being cast in the film .
He was taught to ride by mountain cattleman Charlie Lovick , who owned the buckskin horse Burlinson rode in the film .
Gerald Egan doubled for Burlinson for several riding shots in the film , including the jump into the " terrible descent " .
Other moments in the film such as when Jim is thrown over the fence into the path of the brumbies were performed by professional stunt men .
Nevertheless , Burlinson did much more of the action riding in the film than an actor normally would , including all the profile shots of the downhill ride .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film " was released to a fair degree of critical acclaim " and " moviegoers found it to be a likable and highly entertaining piece of filmmaking that made no effort to hide its Australian roots , despite the presence of American star Kirk Douglas in one of the principal roles .
" The film has a rating of 80 % on film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes .
One review of the movie comments stated , " The Australian film industry has been responsible for many decent films for decades ( and some utter crap , of course ) , but the percentage with international appeal is quite small .
That is changing , and it is films such as The Man From Snowy River that have ensured ongoing interest .
The film was inspired by the ' Banjo ' Paterson poem of the same name , and stars numerous respected local talents and a Hollywood big name star in Kirk Douglas , playing two roles .
" The two standouts of this film are the majestic mountain scenery , and the final chase scenes with that awe - inspiring horse ride down the mountainside .
The film stars many big names and familiar faces including Gus Mercurio ( Paul 's father ) , Lorraine Bayley ( The Sullivans ) , Tony Bonner ( Skippy ) and Chris Haywood .
The sets and costumes are also great , the script is strong , and the various threads that run through the film are well handled . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Bruce Rowland composed the music for both the film and the sequel .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Man from Snowy River grossed $ 17,228,160 at the box office in Australia .
Kirk Douglas later sued Burrowes for a share of the profits .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
* Won 1982 AFI Award for Best Original Music Score—(awarded to Bruce Rowland )
* Won 1982 Montreal World Film Festival Award for Most Popular Film—(awarded to George T. Miller )
* Won 1984 APRA Award for Best Original Music Score—(awarded to Bruce Rowland )
* Nominated for 1982 AFI Award for Best Achievement in Sound * Nominated for 1983 Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film Australia
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
As indicated by its box office takings , The Man from Snowy River gained a very large audience , popularising the story and Banjo Paterson 's poem .
Since 1995 the story has been re - enacted at The Man From Snowy River Bush Festival in Corryong , Victoria .
Jack Thompson who played Clancy in the film has released recordings of a number of Banjo Paterson poems including Clancy of the Overflow and The Man from Snowy River on the album
The Bush Poems of A.B. ( Banjo ) Paterson .
The Craigs ' Hut building was a permanent fixture created for the film .
Located in Clear Hills , east of Mount Stirling , Victoria , the popular 4WD and hiking landmark was destroyed on 11 December 2006 in bushfires .
The hut has since been rebuilt .
The film was selected for preservation as part of the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia 's Kodak / Atlab Cinema Collection Restoration Project .
For the 2000 Summer Olympics Rowland composed a special Olympics version of The Man from Snowy River " Main Title " for the Olympic Games , which were held in Sydney .
The CD of the music for the Sydney Olympics includes the Bruce Rowland 's special Olympic version of the main title .
Rowland composed special arrangements of some of the film soundtrack music for the 2002 musical version of The Man from Snowy River , .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Man from Snowy River on australianscreen
online
*
The Man from Snowy River at the National Film and Sound Archive
*
The Man from Snowy River Fan Site at manfromsnowyriver.net
* The Man from Snowy River at Oz movies