TEDDY ALTMAN Theodora " Teddy " Altman , M.D. is a fictional character from the ABC medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , portrayed by actress Kim Raver .
She was an attending cardiothoracic surgeon at Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , the fictional institution where the show is set .
She leaves the show in the 8th - season finale after it is revealed that she has been offered a chief position with Army Medical Command , but has turned it down out of loyalty to Dr. Owen Hunt .
In order to liberate her from the hospital where her husband died , Hunt fires her from Seattle Grace .
Teddy returns for a few episodes in season 14 where she reveals to a patient in the finale she is pregnant .
In season 15 she is promoted once more to a series regular .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Teddy attended the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center .
She completed her surgical residency at George Washington University Medical School and her fellowship at the Mayo Clinic in Florida .
As an attending physician , Teddy worked at Columbia , but after her best friend was killed during the collapse of the second tower on September 11 , 2001 , she left and joined the army , meeting trauma surgeon Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) during her tour in Baghdad .
Owen brings Teddy to Seattle Grace Mercy West hospital to mentor his girlfriend , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) .
Teddy admits that she is in love with Owen , but he tells her that he loves Cristina .
When Teddy assigns Cristina a difficult surgery for her first solo cardiothoracic case and refuses to assist , Owen questions Teddy 's motives .
Teddy decides to leave Seattle Grace ; Cristina pleads with her to stay , even offering to break up with Owen if Teddy will continue to teach her .
Although Teddy agrees to stay , Owen convinces Cristina to stay with him , and Teddy briefly removes her from her service .
Teddy develops a friendship with pediatric surgeon
Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , who sets her up with plastic surgeon Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) .
They have a brief relationship , which they both enjoy despite knowing that neither wants the other — Teddy still wants Owen , and Mark is in love with Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) .
The two separate amicably when Teddy walks in on Mark sleeping with resident Reed Adamson ( Nora Zehetner ) .
Towards the end of season six , Teddy has to fight for her job as Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery .
Cristina asks Owen to put in a good word for Teddy ; he does the opposite by telling Chief of Surgery Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) that she would land on her feet .
Ultimately another candidate refuses to take the post and Teddy receives a full - time contract .
Teddy later learns of , and is hurt by Owen 's betrayal .
Teddy has a brief relationship with Dr. Andrew Perkins , whose service at the hospital is temporary .
Before his departure , he suggests that Teddy has a tendency to fall for people who are either otherwise engaged or only in town for a month .
She later meets Henry Burton , a patient with the rare genetic condition Von Hippel - Lindau disease , who can no longer afford to pay for his medical care .
Teddy marries him so that he can use her health insurance , and only comes to appreciate the gravity of this decision when Henry suffers a near fatal complication of his illness .
Teddy discovers that he has listed her as his emergency contact and is forced to make a life - or - death decision regarding his care , not as his doctor but as his wife .
Though the newly - weds both maintain that theirs is a simple marriage of convenience , and Teddy continues to date other men , Henry later confesses that he has feelings for Teddy .
She tells him she does not feel the same way .
Teddy again removes Cristina from her service when she performs a surgery despite Teddy 's opposition .
She tells Owen that Cristina 's over - abundance of confidence makes her dangerous , and that she will keep Cristina off her service until she feels she is ready to return .
When Andrew returns and asks Teddy to move to Germany with him , she accepts , and agrees to divorce Henry .
However , in the seventh season finale , Teddy changes her mind and tells Henry that she is falling in love with him .
The two begin their married life properly , but in season eight , Henry dies , leaving Teddy distraught .
She blames Owen because she was n't told that Henry had died until after her surgery on another patient .
Feeling that he put the hospital before her , she breaks off her friendship with him , causing problems with them being able to work together that are later made worse by Cristina 's own relationship troubles with Owen ( During this time , Cristina tells Owen that he has to grant Teddy her anger , to which an enraged Owen lashes out the hypocrisy in the situation , given that when Cristina discovered she was pregnant with Owen 's child , she told him that keeping the pregnancy was non negotiable and wanted to pursue an abortion , despite Owen 's desire to have a child , and his pleas to keep the pregnancy , points out that Cristina never " granted him any anger " over what he thought was her selfish decision ) .
After a particularly bad case , Dr. Bailey sternly tells Teddy that what happened with Henry was not Owen 's fault and that Teddy knows this and needs to get over it , which pushes Teddy to behave more civilly towards Owen , but she finally lets go of her anger after she desperately begs Owen to convince Cristina ( who by this point has broken up with him ) to not transfer away from Seattle and is left shocked and silent when Owen furiously tells her he will not do that because he and Teddy are only co - workers and , as she made very clear , not friends
and therefore she has no right to ask him for any help or favors .
She and Owen eventually make up in the season finale .
Owen finds out she was offered a job at the United States Army Medical Command , but turned it down because she wanted to be there for Owen , if he and Cristina were to separate .
He ultimately fires her and she does take the military job , and tells her that he 'll be okay as they part having restored their friendship .
Teddy and Owen make up and hug each other goodbye as he wants her to take the job offer , which would be good for her .
Teddy was later mentioned in season thirteen episode " True Colors . "
Army officers knocked at Owen 's door stating that his sister Megan is believed to have been found alive ten years after her disappearance .
At first , Owen is not sure what to believe , but his wife Amelia Shepherd mentioned to Owen that Teddy saw Megan and recognized her .
This seemed to be the first time Teddy was mentioned after her departure .
Until Amelia tells Owen in season 14 that he was in love with Teddy .
He flew to Germany to be with her .
Teddy and Owen sleep together
but , Teddy told Owen he was scared to be alone and sent him on is way , it was revealed in the season 14 finale that she is pregnant .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
In October 2009 , it was reported that actress Kim Raver would play the character and have a recurring role on the show 's sixth season .
In January 2010 , Raver was promoted to a series regular .
On May 18 , 2012 , the day after the season eight finale , Grey 's Anatomy creator , Shonda Rhimes , announced that it was Raver 's decision to leave the show , " I know this season 's finale had some surprises for viewers and the exit of Kim Raver was one of the big ones .
But Kim 's series option was up and she was ready to give Teddy Altman a much - needed vacation .
It 's been a pleasure working with someone as talented and funny and kind as Kim ; everyone is going to miss her terribly .
I like to imagine that Teddy is still out there in the Grey 's Anatomy universe , running Army Medical Command and building a new life . "
When the news of the character 's departure was released , Raver wrote on her Twitter , " I 've had one of the best times of my creative career working on Grey 's with Shonda , Betsy and the best cast on Television , " she wrote , adding : " I feel fortunate and grateful to have worked with such an amazing team at GA
[ Grey 's Anatomy ] .
[ I ] am going to miss everyone ! !
And to the GA [ Grey 's Anatomy ] fans , you guys rock !
I am sure S9 [ season nine ] will be great ! "
On June 20 , 2017 , it was announced that Raver would be reprising her role as Teddy Altman for a guest arc during the show 's 14th season .
After recurring in Season 14 , it was announced that Raver would once again be a series regular in Season 15 .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
We see Teddy as a person who is willing to do whatever possible to make herself a much appreciated doctor and friend at Grey Sloan .
Teddy is referred to as the " Desert Barbie . "
In Season 14 's premiere , " Break Down the House " , Teddy and Owen Reunite after long times away from each other .
Teddy comforts Owen after he is on the verge of having a meltdown .
Is this just the beginning of a newly discovered friendship between the two after so much time away from each other ?
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky found Altman had not been given a good storyline until the arrival of Henry : "
I think Kim Raver has always been rather under - used on this show , until more recently . "
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General
EXTERNAL LINKS * Teddy Altman at ABC.com