SPLIT PEA Split peas are an agricultural or culinary preparation consisting of the dried , peeled and split seeds of Pisum sativum , the pea .
HARVESTING
Section::::Harvesting .
The peas are round when harvested , with an outer skin .
The peas are dried and the dull - coloured outer skin of the pea removed , then split in half by hand or by machine at the natural split in the seed 's cotyledon .
There are green and yellow varieties of split pea .
Gregor Mendel studied the inheritance of seed colour in peas ; the green phenotype is recessive to the yellow one .
Traditionally , the genotype of purebred yellow is " YY " and that of green is " yy " , and hybrids of the two , " Yy " , have a yellow ( dominant ) phenotype .
Split peas are high in protein and low in fat , with one gram of fat per serving .
Most of the calories come from protein and complex carbohydrates .
The split pea is known to be a natural food source that contains some of the highest amounts of dietary fibre , containing 26 grams of fibre per 100 gram portion ( 104 % DV based on a diet ) .
The Indian toor dal ( split pigeon peas ) and chana dal ( split yellow gram , desi chickpeas ) are commonly also referred to as peas , although from other legume species than Pisum sativum .
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
Green and yellow split peas are commonly used to make pea soup or " split pea soup " , and sometimes pease pudding , which was commonly prepared in medieval Europe .
In western Asia and particularly in Iran it is known as Lappeh , and it is the main ingredient of a famous stew called Khoresh - e Gheymeh .
In north India , they are generally known as matar ki daal , sometimes used as a cheaper variation for the very popular chhole on stalls offering it .
Yellow split peas are most often used to prepare dhal in Guyana , Suriname , Mauritius , South Africa , Trinidad and Tobago and Fiji .
Referred to as simply dhal , it is prepared similarly to dhals found in India , but also may be used in a variety of other recipes .
Yellow split pea is the main ingredient of the Iranian food " khoresh gheymeh " , which is served on the side of white rice in Iranian cuisine .
It is also an important ingredient in the famous Tabriz köftesii , a kofta speciality from northern Iran .
Yellow split peas are used to make a sweet snack in Beijing cuisine .
Wandouhuang ( 豌豆黄 ) is a sweetened and chilled pease pudding , sometimes flavored with osmanthus blossoms and dates .
In Europe , the Greek " Fava " is a dish made with yellow split peas pureed to create an appetizer or meze .
In the Caribbean split peas are a key ingredient in many Indian dishes .
Split peas were used for an unusual non - culinary purpose during the Second World War .
Great efforts were made to optimise the manufacture of the British Supermarine Spitfire fighter aircraft , speeding and cheapening manufacture while maintaining or enhancing performance .
Flush - headed rivets were used on a prototype for the smoothest possible surfaces , but this made it more difficult , expensive , and slower to produce than using the usual dome - headed rivets .
Rather than the cumbersome alternative of comparing actual rivets , split peas were glued over all the flush rivets to simulate dome heads .
This reduced the speed by , which was unacceptable .
Split peas were then progressively removed to determine which rivets really needed to be flush ; the results were applied to production aeroplanes .
The aircraft was later repurposed for recreational use , most commonly birthday joy flights .
SEE ALSO
* Dal * Horsebread
* Marrowfat peas ( type of dried whole pea )
*
Pigeon pea * Split pea soup REFERENCES