HERCULES ( DC COMICS ) Hercules ( also known as Heracles and Herakles ) is a fictional Olympian god in the DC Universe based on the Greek demigod and hero of the same name .
Hercules first appears in All Star Comics # 8 ( December 1941 ) as part of a Wonder Woman story , and was created by William Moulton Marston and Harry G. Peter , in the first of several incarnations .
Later versions appeared in Superman # 28 ( May 1944 ) , created by Jerry Siegel and Ira Yarbrough , Wonder Woman # 105 ( April 1959 ) and Hercules Unbound # 1 ( October 1975 ) created by Gerry Conway and José Luis García - López .
FICTIONAL CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY PRE - CRISIS ON INFINITE EARTHS Section::::Fictional character biography .
Section::::Pre - Crisis on Infinite Earths .
In the Golden Age he was mentioned in the origin of the Amazons as having enslaved them by tricking Hippolyta ( spelled ' Hippolyte ' in the original issue ) into giving him her golden girdle on the bequest of Ares ( spelled ' Mars ' ) who hated the Amazons .
Hercules was shown as an archetypal muscle - bound man wearing a lion - skin , and only appeared in flashbacks .
A picture of him , during Wonder Woman 's time , shows him as the God of Strength with black hair and a beard .
In the universe of DC Comics , Hercules was used on several occasions before Crisis on Infinite Earths .
One of his first appearances is in December 1941 in the pages of All - Star Comics#8 , where he appears alongside several characters from Greek mythology in the first appearance of Wonder Woman .
Hercules is depicted as a brutish ' hero , ' who represented masculine violence , and one of his 12 labors is deconstructed as a treacherous act to enslave the Amazons under Queen Hippolyte .
" In the days of Ancient Greece , " relates Hyppolyte to her daughter , " we Amazons were the foremost nation in the world .
In Amazonia , women ruled and all was well .
Then one day , Hercules , the strongest man in the world , stung by taunts that he could n't conquer the Amazon women , selected his strongest and fiercest warriors and landed on our shores .
I challenged him to personal combat -- because I knew that with my MAGIC GIRDLE , given me by Aphrodite , Goddess of Love , I could not lose .
And win I did !
But Hercules , by deceit and trickery , managed to secure my MAGIC GIRDLE -- and soon we Amazons were taken into slavery .
And Aphrodite , angry at me for having succumbed to the wiles of men , would do naught to help us !
Finally our submission to men became unbearable -- we could stand it no longer -- and I appealed to the Goddess Aphrodite again .
This time not in vain , for she relented and with her help , I secured the MAGIC GIRDLE from Hercules .
With the Magic Girdle in my possession , it did n't take us long to overcome our masters , the MEN -- and taking from them their entire fleet , we set sail for another shore , for it was Aphrodite 's condition that we leave the man - made world and establish a new world of our own ! "
Subsequently , in Wonder Woman ( first series ) # 1 , cover - dated Summer 1942 , the episode is recapped .
Hercules is written as " The God of Strength " who " was half - mortal and half - God !
When a mere child , he strangled two fierce serpents sent to slay him .
He performed twelve labors requiring prodigious strength and upon his earthly death , was taken to Mount Olympus to dwell among the Gods ever after . "
( Wonder Woman # 1 , 1942 ) .
Thus , in his first appearance , Hercules has already finished his heroic deeds and has ascended to the status of a god .
The same issue reiterates Hercules ' deception and subsequent enslavement of the Amazons , this time being said to have been spurred on by the God of War , Mars , whose swordsmen " slew their weaker brothers and plundered them " and sold women as slaves " cheaper than cattle .
" When Aphrodite creates her race of Amazons to overcome Mars ' slaves , the God of War " inspired Hercules , strongest man in the world , to make war on the amazons .
" This Hercules is portrayed as a drunken brutish warrior in his lion - skin , as mentioned above , who is determined to " take the magic girdle " of Hippolyte , challenging the Queen of the Amazons in personal combat .
Upon being defeated by Hippolyte , he is given the chance " to return home and leave " but he conspires to " make love to her and steal the magic girdle " instead .
Hercules feigns surrender and woos Hippolyte with his promise of " eternal friendship " while his comrades make merry with the Amazons .
Once he seduces Hippolyte to remove the magic girdle , he and his men proceed to bind the prisoners and loot Amazonia and enslave the Amazons .
It is not until the intervention of the Goddess Aphrodite that Hippolyte is able to recover her girdle and best the brutish ' hero ' of man 's world .
She takes her Amazons and leaves the world of men to form Paradise Island .
Thus , this original appearance of Hercules subverts the heroic archetype , whose machoism is used to deconstruct traditional stories about heroism .
' Hercules ' is also used several times in allusion in both Superman and Wonder Woman comics to allude to feats of strength .
In Action Comics # 7 , cover - dated December 1938 , Superman is said to be " A Modern Day Hercules " ; while in Sensation Comics # 2 , cover - dated February 1942 , he is mentioned to compare Wonder Woman 's strength , along with other gods and goddesses from Greek Mythology : " As lovely as Aphrodite -- as wise as Athena -- with the speed of mercury and the strength of Hercules , WONDER WOMAN brings to America a new hope and salvation from old world evils , conquest , and aggression ! "
In other comics , Hercules is used as a foil to Superman .
In these Silver Age books , Hercules usually appears as a giant , and frequently tests his strength with the Bible character Samson and another giant named Zha - Vam , to whom he granted strength , as well as with Superman .
In one story he is transported to the 20th century by Lex Luthor , and , in the guise of reporter Roger Tate , falls in love with Lois Lane .
He gains power from other gods and puts Superman into a 100-year sleep with the pipe of Apollo , saying he will only revive Superman if Lois marries him .
However Venus realizes what has happened and wakes Superman up .
After this Hercules is tricked into flying back in time with the sandals of Mercury , and loses his memory of the events .
In 1975 , DC produced a comic book series titled Hercules Unbound , featuring the adventures of Hercules in a post - apocalyptic future .
This Hercules looked different from the other DC interpretations - he had long black hair and no beard .
The series lasted 12 issues .
It made use of characters and concepts , such as The Atomic Knights and the intelligent animals from Jack Kirby 's Kamandi series as an attempt to tie in some of the future series .
It was later hinted that this version of Hercules was actually part of a dream suffered by Gardner Grayle , but was later shown to have existed somewhere in the Multiverse and was eliminated during the Crisis on Infinite Earths .
José Luis García - López drew the first six issues and Walt Simonson drew the remainder of the series .
Wally Wood inked several issues .
POST - CRISIS ON INFINITE EARTHS WONDER WOMAN Section::::Post - Crisis on Infinite Earths .
Section::::Wonder Woman .
After the reboot of the DC universe in Crisis , Heracles — the Greek spelling — appeared in the pages of Wonder Woman .
George Pérez , putting Greek mythology at the center of Wonder Woman 's world , relates the tale of Heracles ' and his men 's conquest of the Amazons and his rape of Queen Hippolyta , and their revenge upon him .
During Diana 's Challenge of the Gods storyline , she discovered that Heracles was transformed into a colossal stone pilar within Doom 's Doorway , and was supporting Themyscira 's weight for several millennia .
In this stone state he was tormented and scarred by various mythological creatures , feeling the pain inflicted by them but not being able to do anything about it .
This was the punishment given to him by his Olympian family for his past transgressions .
Gaining his original form back , he begged the Amazons for forgiveness .
Though some of the Amazons still harbored hatred for their past rapes and humiliation , most of them were moved by Heracles ' newfound humility , and Queen Hippolyta asked her people to search their hearts for the strength to forgive , which they eventually did .
Doing so herself , Hippolyta not only forgave Heracles , but shared a brief romance with him before he left the mortal realm to return to his father in Olympus .
Later , John Byrne did an inconclusive storyline in which Heracles appeared in the contemporary world and schemed to take revenge on the Amazons by seducing Wonder Woman .
He did this by making an agreement with a mortal Golden Age superhero named Harold Champion .
In exchange for his identity , Heracles gave Champion admission into Olympus .
Once this was agreed upon , Heracles used the Mirror of Circe to alter his appearance into that of Champion .
He proceeded to befriend Wonder Woman as a " new " friend , helping her deal with such problems as a confrontation with a duplicate of the monstrous Doomsday .
Heracles ' identity was eventually revealed and he resumed his life on Olympus .
WAR OF THE GODS Section::::War of the Gods .
In the post - Crisis DC Universe , the Roman Gods existed separately from the Greek ones after Darkseid tricked them into splitting up so they could be worshipped by two different cultures at the same time ; only after the " War of the Gods " did the two versions merge again .
So in effect , both Heracles and Hercules existed , and they merged into one being during John Byrne 's run on the comic .
ONE YEAR LATER Section::::One year later .
A revamped Hercules reappears during the events of One Year Later .
Now shaven and bearing an updated version of the armor worn in the Hercules Unbound series , his place in the Wonder Woman comic has been renewed as a fellow agent of Olympus , who occasionally aids Diana and even replaces her in battle .
He is referred to as " Wonder Man " by Cheetah and Nemesis .
He temporarily sets up base in the Greek Embassy .
Wonder Woman v3 # 4 reveals that Hercules lied about his reasons for returning to Earth .
As one of the inhabitants of Olympus who rejected Athena 's decision to remove themselves from the mortal realm , Hercules journeyed to Tartarus in hopes of recruiting Ares to aid him in returning to Earth .
Instead , he found Circe who , upon hearing Hercules ' story and not wanting to spend eternity in limbo with Athena , decided to partner with Hercules instead .
However , this did n't last long , as Circe betrayed him .
The two part as enemies once Circe magically binds him to a rock .
Some time before the events of Wonder Girl , but after the events of " Who Is Wonder Woman ? "
, Hercules encounters and battles Gog ( who is killing gods and those who claim to be gods ) .
After suffering a blast from Gog 's staff , Hercules is incapacitated and encounters Superman and his Earth-22 counterpart .
He enters into combat with the two of them , but is ultimately defeated .
Hercules ' physical appearance here is closer to the one seen in " Who Is Wonder Woman ? " .
In addition , he is described as a " god " ( and not a demigod , as in Wonder Girl ) and wears gold bracelets instead of the gray shackles Zeus will place on him as punishment .
WONDER GIRL Section::::Wonder Girl .
A being claiming to be Hercules ' father Zeus eventually frees Hercules from his prison and informs him that he must partner with his half sister Cassie Sandsmark .
Together Hercules and Cassie try to discover who is attacking the remaining Olympian gods .
Soon into their search they are attacked by the Female Furies .
Hercules stops the fight by explaining that he 's allied with the Furies in hopes of rescuing the gods , or , failing that , starting a new pantheon with them .
The Furies have their own plans , though , and are only using Hercules to get to Cassandra .
The Furies soon betray Hercules , with Bloody Mary using her bite to gain power over Hercules , forcing him to do what the Furies want .
The Furies then kidnap Cassandra 's mother to lure her into a trap .
Aided by the Olympian , Cassandra goes into battle , being forced to fight her own brother .
The Teen Titans and Wonder Woman herself show up to help out , which evens the odds .
After Bloody Mary is murdered by the New God killer , Hercules is freed from her spell and immediately saves his sister from being kidnapped by the fleeing Furies .
After being questioned by Wonder Woman , Hercules tells her he was freed by Zeus and sought his closest relative — Cassandra — for help .
He explains that Zeus freed him to help stop " the Great Disaster , " which Hercules does not know much about .
However , there were two conditions for his release : he must always wear his gauntlets to remind him of his punishment ( similar to the punishment the gods placed on the Amazons ) and he must give up his godhood , becoming a demigod again .
Rather than being upset , Hercules is happy to be human again and having his mother 's blood flowing through his veins .
Although Wonder Woman is initially skeptical , Cassandra vouches for Hercules , telling Diana that he 's saved her life twice .
Hercules is allowed to remain free , to complete his " labors " and make up for the things he 's done .
The series mentions several important facts about Hercules , including his cycle of crime , punishment , and redemption ; gods and other beings ( Hera and Circe being mentioned by name ) using him to commit great evil ( such as the death of his family ) ; and his uneasy relationship with the Amazons and Wonder Woman in particular .
The Hercules that empowers the Marvels is apparently different from this Hercules , sharing only his name .
He is one of the Lords of Magic and possesses superhuman strength .
POST - FLASHPOINT Section::::Post - Flashpoint .
In the newest continuity , Hercules is reintroduced in the pages of Aquaman as a maddened prisoner alongside the monstrous children descended from Titans called Giant Born .
It was revealed that thousands of years ago the son of Zeus sacrificed himself so that Atlan , King of Atlantis of the bygone era , could trap them within a hellish penal dimension opened using the Maelstrom .
An extra - dimensional translocation gateway which enabled the Atlanteans of old to traverse the world as well as to other worlds .
When accidentally released from their Tartaran prison by a misguided archaeologist , these fiends of old are intercepted by Aquaman and sent in their former jailer ; whose mind had been corrupted by their torment and dark magics over the years to do battle with him while they made their escape .
After a lengthy battle between him and the sea king , Hercules was bested when he tried to drown Arthur who dragged him into the sea beating him into unconsciousness before sending him back through the Maelstrom into a maze of the minotaur like dimension .
Hercules is later seen living a quiet , peaceful life as a human in the mountains outside Oregon .
He is confronted by Darkseid 's daughter , Grail ( DC Comics ) who kills him and steals his life force in order to feed it to an adolescent Darkseid .
OTHER VERSIONS * A Golden Age superhero , Joe Hercules , had adventures in Quality Comics 's Hit Comics from issue # 1 ( July , 1940 ) through # 21 ( April , 1942 ) .
Joe Hercules was an ordinary man from the " North Woods " imbued with superhuman strength who became a circus strongman and crimefighter , not a god .
This character was purchased , along with Quality 's other characters , by DC Comics .
He makes a cameo appearance in the 1993 " Elseworlds " miniseries The Golden Age .
Joe Hercules is first referred to in a canonical DC Universe story in Starman , Vol . 2 , # 35 ( October , 1997 ) .
He is mentioned in a conversation between Ted Knight ( formerly the Golden Age Starman ) and Sentinel ( Alan Scott , a.k.a . Green Lantern ) and is said to be suffering from Alzheimer 's disease .
*
During the Marvel / DC crossover JLA / Avengers , Wonder Woman believed the Marvel Comics ' Hercules to be a villain , assuming he had raped his dimension 's Hippolyta ; however , Marvel Comics ' Hercules had simply had a consensual relationship with Marvel Comics ' Hippolyta .
Ironically , the Marvel Universe version of Hercules is a hero while Hippolyta is a villainess .
However , this presents some continuity problems as Diana and her mother had already accepted his forgiveness , and Wonder Woman had not yet reverted to any previous incarnations .
It is possible she was using the incident to fuel her rage , but she was still threatening approaching Asgardian gods that she would harm a subdued Hercules at the end of the fight .
It may also be possible that Wonder Woman ( who , like most of the JLA , did n't believe good was championed sufficiently in the Marvel Universe ) was too disgusted at the idea that this Hercules had never been punished for what he did to the Amazons to think straight .
IN OTHER MEDIA
* Hercules appeared alongside Captain Marvel 's friend and ally Isis in the TV series The Freedom Force , which was part of Tarzan and the Super 7 .
This version of Hercules had earlier appeared in Space Sentinels .
*
In 1982 , several of the characters from the Warlord series received action figures in a line called " Lost World of the Warlord " from Remco .
Despite his not being related to the Warlord series , Hercules ( from the Hercules Unbound era ) was one of the figures in the line .
* Joaquin Phoenix ( credited as Leaf Phoenix ) appears on the Superboy television series in the season one episode titled Little Hercules as Billy Hercules .
His character is a boy genius that teams with Superboy after an attempt at impressing his crush ( by implanting a love poem as a virus within the Navy 's missile system ) goes awry .
COLLECTED EDITIONS
* Showcase Presents :
The Great Disaster featuring the Atomic Knights includes Hercules Unbound # 1 - 12 and DC Comics Presents # 57 , 576 pages , June 2014 ,
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Hercules I , II & Unbound at Cosmic Teams
* Hercules Unbound index * Supermanica : Hercules , details Herc 's encounters with the Superman family of characters ( before the Crisis on Infinite Earths ]