FLORIDA IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Florida had joined the Confederate States of America in advance of the Civil War , as the third of the original seven states to secede from the Union , following Lincoln 's 1860 election .
With the smallest population , nearly half of them slaves , Florida only sent 15,000 troops to the Confederate States Army .
Its chief importance was in food - supply to the south and support for blockade - runners along its long coastline full of inlets that were hard to patrol .
At the outbreak of war , the Confederates seized many of the state 's army camps , though the Union retained control of the main seaports .
There was little fighting in Florida , the only major conflict being the Battle of Olustee near Lake City in February 1864 .
However , wartime conditions made it easier for slaves to escape , and many of them became useful informers to Union commanders .
As southern morale suffered , deserters from both sides took refuge in Florida , often attacking Confederate units and looting farms .
In May 1865 , Federal control was re - established , slavery abolished , and the state governor John Milton shot himself in the head and died .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Following the election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860 , a convention was called by Governor Madison S. Perry to prepare for secession from the Union .
Delegates were selected , and met in Tallahassee on January 3 1861 .
Secession was declared January 10 , 1861 , and , after less than a month as an independent republic , Florida became one of the founding members of the Confederacy .
The first six states to secede had the largest population of slaves among the Southern states .
Although the vote to secede passed 62 - 7 , there was a Unionist minority in the state , an element that grew as the war progressed .
The secession ordinance of Florida simply declared its severing of ties with the federal Union , without stating any causes .
Afterward , the Florida secession convention formed a committee to draft a declaration of causes , but the committee was discharged before completion of the task .
Only an undated , untitled draft remains .
Florida sent a three - man delegation to the 1861 - 62 Provisional Confederate Congress , which first met in Montgomery , Alabama , and then in the new capital of Richmond , Virginia .
The delegation consisted of Jackson Morton , James Byeram Owens , and James Patton Anderson , who resigned April 8 , 1861 , and was replaced by George Taliaferro Ward .
Ward served from May 1861 until February 1862 , when he resigned and was replaced by John Pease Sanderson .
According to historian William C. Davis , " protection of slavery " was " the explicit reason " for Florida 's declaring of secession , as well as the creation of the Confederacy itself .
EARLY CONFEDERATE YEARS
Section::::Early Confederate years .
As Florida was an important supply route for the Confederate army , Union forces operated a blockade around the entire state .
Union troops occupied major ports such as Cedar Key , Jacksonville , Key West , and Pensacola early in the war .
Confederate forces moved quickly to seize control of many of Florida 's U.S. Army forts , succeeding in most cases , with the significant exceptions of Fort Jefferson , Fort Pickens and Fort Zachary Taylor , which stayed firmly in Federal control throughout the war .
Governor John Milton , an ardent secessionist , throughout the war stressed the importance of Florida as a supplier of goods , rather than personnel .
Florida was a large provider of food ( particularly beef cattle ) and salt for the Confederate Army .
The 8,436-mile coastline and 11,000 miles of rivers , streams , and waterways proved a haven for blockade runners and a daunting task for patrols by Federal warships .
However , the state 's small population ( 140,000 residents making it last in size in the Confederacy ) , relatively remote location , and meager industry limited its overall strategic importance .
Milton worked to strengthen the state militia and to improve fortifications and key defensive positions .
Overall , the state raised some 15,000 troops for the Confederacy , which were organized into twelve regiments of infantry and two of cavalry , as well as several artillery batteries and supporting units .
Since neither army aggressively sought control of Florida , many of Florida 's troops were sent to serve in Virginia in the Army of Northern Virginia under Brig .
Gen. Edward A. Perry and Col . David Lang .
The " Florida Brigade " fought in many of Robert E. Lee 's campaigns , and twice charged Cemetery Ridge during the Battle of Gettysburg , including supporting Pickett 's Charge .
In early 1862 , the Confederate government pulled General Braxton Bragg 's small army from Pensacola following successive Confederate defeats in Tennessee at Fort Donelson and Fort Henry and the fall of New Orleans .
It sent them to the Western Theater for the remainder of the war .
The only Confederate forces remaining in Florida at that time were a variety of independent companies , several infantry battalions , and the 2nd Florida Cavalry .
They were reinforced in 1864 by troops from neighboring Georgia .
AFRICAN AMERICANS Section::::African Americans .
By 1840 the Anglo - American population became the majority among people of European descent , influencing the development of the culture .
It became more racist and based on a binary division of white and non - white , into which latter group the Muscogee ( Creeks ) and other Indians were classified .
They were relegated to a status below the free people of color and above slaves .
White Floridians concentrated on developing the territory and gaining statehood .
The population had reached 54,477 people , with African - American slaves making up almost one - half of it .
Steamboat navigation was well established on the Apalachicola and St. Johns rivers , and railroads were planned .
By 1861 , the slave population in Florida had reached 61,000 .
Their labor accounted for 85 percent of the state 's cotton production .
Confederate authorities used slaves as teamsters to transport supplies and as laborers in salt works and fisheries .
Many Florida slaves working in these coastal industries escaped to the relative safety of Union - controlled enclaves during the American Civil War .
Beginning in 1862 , Union military activity in East and West Florida encouraged slaves in plantation areas to flee their owners in search of freedom .
Some worked on Union ships and , beginning in 1863 , more than a thousand enlisted as soldiers in the United States Colored Troops or as sailors in the Union Navy .
Escaped and freed slaves provided Union commanders with valuable intelligence about Confederate troop movements .
They also passed back news of Union advances to the men and women who remained enslaved in Confederate - controlled Florida .
Planter fears of slave uprisings increased as the war went on .
FINAL CONFEDERATE
YEARS Section::::Final Confederate years .
Growing public dissatisfaction with Confederate conscription and impressment policies encouraged desertion by Confederate soldiers .
Several Florida counties became havens for Florida deserters , as well as deserters from other Confederate states .
Deserter bands attacked Confederate patrols , launched raids on plantations , confiscated slaves , stole cattle , and provided intelligence to Union army units and naval blockaders .
Although most deserters formed their own raiding bands or simply tried to remain free from Confederate authorities , other deserters and Unionist Floridians joined regular Federal units for military service in Florida .
Though numerous small skirmishes occurred in Florida — including the battles of Natural Bridge , Gainesville , Marianna , Vernon and Fort Brooke — the only major engagement was at Olustee near Lake City .
Union forces under General Truman Seymour were repulsed by Florida and Georgia troops and retreated to their fortifications around Jacksonville .
Seymour 's relatively high losses caused Northern lawmakers and citizens to question the necessity of any further Union actions in militarily insignificant Florida .
Many of the Federal troops were withdrawn and sent elsewhere .
Throughout the balance of 1864 and into the following spring , the 2nd Florida Cavalry repeatedly thwarted Federal raiding parties into the Confederate - held northern and central portions of the state .
In January 1865 , Union General William T. Sherman issued special orders that set aside a portion of Florida as designated territory for runaway and freed former slaves who had accompanied his command during its March to the Sea .
These controversial orders were not enforced in Florida , and were later revoked by President Andrew Johnson .
In early May 1865 , Edward M. McCook 's Union division was assigned to re - establish Federal control and authority in Florida .
Governor Milton committed suicide rather than submit to Union occupation .
On May 13 , Col . George Washington Scott surrendered the last active Confederate troops in the state to McCook .
On May 20 , General McCook read Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation during a ceremony in Tallahassee , officially ending slavery in Florida .
That same day , his jubilant troopers raised the U.S. flag over the state capitol building .
Tallahassee was the penultimate Confederate state capital to rejoin the Union .
Austin , Texas rejoined the next month .
RESTORATION TO UNION Section::::Restoration to Union .
After meeting the requirements of Reconstruction , including ratifying amendments to the US Constitution to abolish slavery and grant citizenship to former slaves , Florida 's representatives were readmitted to Congress .
The state was fully restored to the United States on June 25 , 1868 .
As part of the Compromise of 1877 , in which Southern Democrats would acknowledge Republican Rutherford B. Hayes as president , had the understanding that Republicans would meet certain demands .
One affecting Florida was the removal of all U.S. military forces from the former Confederate states .
At the time , U.S. troops remained in only Louisiana , South Carolina , and Florida , but the Compromise completed their withdrawal from the region .
BATTLES IN FLORIDA
* Battle of Fort Brooke * Battle of Ballast Point * Battle of
Cedar Creek ( Jacksonville ) * Battle of Fort Myers * Battle of Gainesville * Battle of Marianna * Battle of Natural Bridge ( South of Tallahassee )
* Battle of Olustee * Battle of St. Johns Bluff * Battle of Santa Rosa Island * Battle of Tampa * Battle of Braddocks Farm ( Crescent City )
* Battle of Station Four ( Cedar Key ) * Skirmish of the Brick Church
* Battle of Palatka * Affair at New Smyrna
* Artillery Duel at Pensacola * Affair at Crooked River ( Carrabelle )
* Skirmish at Mayport Mills ( Jacksonville )
* Skirmish at Township Landing ( North of Yulee )
* Affair near St. Augustine
* Skirmish at Jacksonville
* Skirmish at Barber 's Place
* Skirmish at ( one mile east of ) Lake City
* Battle at McGirts Creek ( Camp Milton , Jacksonville )
* Skirmish at Palatka * Skirmish at Palatka *
Skirmish at Cow Ford Creek ( Pensacola )
* Skirmish at Jacksonville
* Affair at Welatka * Affair at Saunders
* Affair at Jackson 's Bridge ( Pensacola )
* Skirmish at Pierce 's Creek ( Milton )
* Skirmish at Camp Finnegan ( Jacksonville )
* Skirmish at Trout Creek
( Jacksonville ) * Raid on Baldwin
* Skirmish at South Fork of Black Creek ( Green Cove Springs )
* Skirmish at Pine Barren Ford ( Pensacola )
* Skirmish at Mitchell 's Creek ( Pensacola ) * Sinking of the US Transport Maple Leaf at Jacksonville , April 1 , 1864
* U.S. Transport General Hunter was sunk in the St. Johns River , April 16 , 1864 , close to where the Maple Leaf was sunk .
SEE ALSO
* List of Florida Confederate Civil War units
* List of Florida Union Civil War units * Compromise of 1877 REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Brown , Canter .
Tampa in Civil War & Reconstruction , University of Tampa Press , 2000 . .
* Eicher , John H. , and Eicher , David J. , Civil War High Commands , Stanford University Press , 2001 , .
* Johns , John Edwin .
Florida
During the Civil War ( University of Florida Press , 1963 )
* Murphree , R. Boyd . "
Florida and the Civil War : A Short History " State Archives of Florida .
* Nulty , William H. Confederate Florida : The Road to Olustee ( University of Alabama Press , 1994 )
* Revels , Tracy J. Florida 's Civil War : Terrible Sacrifices ( Mercer University Press , 2016 ) .
xx , 197 pp
* Taylor , Paul .
Discovering the Civil War in Florida : A Reader and Guide ( 2nd edition ) .
Sarasota , Fl .
Pineapple Press , 2012 .
* U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies , 70 volumes in 4 series .
Washington , D.C. : United States Government Printing Office , 1880 - 1901 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cannonball at A History of Central Florida Podcast * Florida and the Civil War , open access digital collection of materials from the PK Yonge Library of Florida History
* Florida Memory Project - State Archives
* National Park Service map of Civil War sites in Florida Section::::External links .