EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH ( 2006 FILM )
Employee of the Month is a 2006 American comedy film directed by Greg Coolidge , written by Don Calame , Chris Conroy , and Coolidge , and starring Dane Cook , Jessica Simpson and Dax Shepard .
The main plot revolves around two shop employees ( portrayed by Cook and Shepard ) who compete for the affection of their newest co - worker .
The film was shot primarily at the Costco in Albuquerque , New Mexico located at 1420 N Renaissance Blvd NE .
The film was released on October 6 , 2006 and grossed $ 38 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
For years , Zack Bradley has been working at the local " Super Club " as a box - boy .
He lives with his grandmother and spends his free time with co - workers Lon Neilson , Iqbal Raji , and Russell Porpis - Gunders .
Despite his slacker - like ways , he is kind - hearted , popular and supportive .
His co - worker Vince Downey earns the Employee of the Month title for the 17th time in a row .
Vince is egotistical and rude towards his co - workers , including his box - boy Jorge Mecico , whom he berates constantly .
When new cashier Amy Renfro is hired , Zack and Vince fall for her and compete for her affection .
Zack is told that Amy slept with the Employee of the Month at her last job , so he decides to win the title .
Amy has dinner with Vince , but is repulsed when he puts the move on her .
Vince does not realize how Amy feels , thinking they had a good kiss , and continues pursuing her .
Zack steps up his act and begins going to work on time and working harder , giving Vince competition for the title .
He also goes on a date with Amy , which takes place entirely in Super Club .
Within a few days , with Vince still winning the daily star , Zack realizes that getting Employee of the Month is not as easy as he thought .
With Iqbal 's encouragement , Zack finds his groove and , to Vince 's horror , wins the star the next day .
A war of attrition begins , as Vince tries everything he could think of to derail Zack 's string of stars , even breaking into his house one night to reset the clocks ; the sabotage causes Zack to arrive a minute late the following day , but with Iqbal 's help , Zack 's attendance card indicates that he arrived on time , causing Vince 's scheme to fail .
Zack takes Iqbal 's shift on the day of a championship slow - pitch game against rival chain Maxi - Mart .
However , he leaves to play in the game and Iqbal is fired .
Frustrated at Zack 's new attitude , his friends tell him he is turning into Vince and feel his attempt at getting the title is a result of trying to have sex with Amy .
Amy overhears the conversation and is disgusted at Zack for his true intentions , prompting her to compare him to her last boyfriend , also an Employee of the Month with whom she indeed had sex but could not stand his attitude , which was why she requested a transfer .
At month 's end , Zack and Vince are tied .
On the day of the tie - breaking competition , Zack quits , gets Iqbal his job back and tells him he took responsibility for what happened , making a heartfelt apology to Lon , Iqbal , and Russell .
Zack tells them he plans to win the competition , not for recognition or to make an impression , but for pride .
When the store manager is about to announce Zack 's resignation , Zack , Lon , Iqbal , and Russell show up claiming Zack never filed the resignation papers .
It is revealed that Russell bribed the human resources manager with a Butterfinger .
Zack tries to reconcile with Amy , giving a heartfelt apology and telling her that no matter what , he is a better man because of her .
Despite Vince 's protests , the competition , for the fastest checkout , is held .
The Employee of the Month Award will be granted to the person who finishes the task first .
Vince beats Zack by seconds but , during the award ceremony ,
Semi , the security guard , brings a surveillance video of the competition that shows Vince throwing store products behind his back and onto the conveyor belt without scanning them .
Vince denies the allegations of under - ringing , But the store 's assistant manager , who had just completed an audit of the tills used in the competition , proved the surveillance video was right about Vince giving customers free merchandise and has been doing this for the past 18 months , costing the store thousands of dollars .
As a result , Vince is fired , Zack ends up winning the competition , and his relationship with Amy is rekindled .
Six weeks after being fired from Super Club , Vince is on probation and working at Maxi - Mart .
Jorge finally learns to assert himself and treats Vince the same as he was treated by him .
He is still willing to give Vince a ride to the bus stop , knowing that this would put him outside the range of his probation ankle monitor .
CAST
* Dane Cook as Zack Bradley , a box boy at Super Club * Jessica Simpson as Amy Renfro , a new cashier * Dax Shepard as Vince Downey , Super Club 's head cashier * Tim Bagley as Glen Garry , the manager of Super Club * Andy Dick as Lon Neilson , Zack 's co - worker , the myopic eyeglasses stand attendant * Brian George as Iqbal Raji , Zack 's co - worker , from the electronics department * Harland Williams as Russell Porpis - Gunders , Zack 's good friend and co - worker .
* Efren Ramirez as Jorge Mecico , a box boy and Vince 's wingman .
* Sean Whalen as Dirk Dittman , the assistant manager of Super Club * Marcello Thedford as Semi , Super Club 's scatterbrained security officer .
* Danny Woodburn as Glen Ross , Glen Garry 's older brother BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Following its release , the film became the # 1 most requested film on AOL .
The film managed open to nearly $ 12 million in its opening weekend , debuting at # 4 just behind Open Season .
The film was made on a $ 12 million budget , and has earned a little over $ 28 million in the United States .
In the United Kingdom the film debuted at # 4 opening with over £ 1,000,000 in returns .
The film has grossed $ 34 million worldwide .
Cook posted the following on his official website in regard to the film 's box office success : PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
The film received heavy promotion from not only TV stations such as MTV , which aired sneak peeks of the film every night after the " 10 Spot " , but a variety of websites including sites such as Perez Hilton , Myspace , and YouTube promoted the film .
Jessica Simpson also appeared on many TV shows such as The Tonight Show , The Today Show , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , and MTV 's Total Request Live , where she was joined by Dane Cook to promote the film release .
Dane Cook appeared as the host of the 2006 season opener of Saturday Night Live to promote the film , though no mention of the film was made during his opening monologue or the subsequent sketches .
Dane and Jessica hosted the 2006 Teen Choice Awards in order to promote the film .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes offers a score of 20 % based on reviews from 91 critics — an average rating of 4 out of 10 , which provides the consensus , " Employee of the Month features mediocre performances , few laughs , and a lack of satiric bite .
" The film also has a score of 36 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 24 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Robert Koehler of Variety saw some positives in the film saying " Camaraderie in cast is a key to pic 's enjoyment , delivered by the charismatic Cook , alongside his buddies , played by Brian George , Andy Dick ( for once , not manic ) and Harland Williams , with Bagley , Ramirez and Woodburn in hilarious standout turns " .
Jessica Simpson earned a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Actress for her performance in the film , but lost out to Sharon Stone for Basic Instinct 2 .
HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
The DVD was released on January 16 , 2007 and opened at # 2 at the sales chart , selling 603,711 units which translates to $ 10.2 m .
As per the latest figures , 1,315,439 DVD units have been sold , bringing in $ 20,942,856 in revenue , exceeding its budget .
This does not include Blu - ray sales or DVD rentals .
The 2007 region one DVD release of the film contains two commentaries : one featuring the director ( Greg Coolidge ) on his own , giving more technical information about the film ; the second commentary features the director and star Dane Cook , who spends more time pointing out the origins of gags and actors throughout the film .
The disc also contains extra improv scenes by actors Andy Dick and Harland Williams , an alternate opening with Eva Longoria showing Vince and Zack 's first day on the job watching a video tape for new employees , an " At Work with Lon " feature showing Dick in character attempting to help to customers at Super Club , plus trailers for other Lionsgate films .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS